The Herbal OF DIVINITY: OR, The DEAD arising From the Dust, To Confute the
Heretics of these Times, That say, There is no Resurrection.

IN SEVERAL SERMONS.

By John Simpson, an unworthy Publisher of Gospel Truths in London.

The Resurrection is one of the Twelve Signs in the Christian Zodiac.

LONDON: Printed for Sa: Speed, at the Printing-Press in Paul's Churchyard.
1659.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
IT being appointed to all men once to die, Heb. 9.27.
God has so provided, that as the wicked shall be no more remembered; Job 24.20.
so the Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance; Psalm. 112.6.
and his Memorial shall be blessed. Pro. 10.7.


Blessed be the Lord, Ruth 2.20.
that has not left off his kindness to the living, nor to the dead; That he
has in this Age, as out of Zebulun, raised those that handle the Pen of the
Writer, Judge. 5.1.
whereby he accomplisheth that for them, that Job wished for himself, Job 19.23.
Oh that my Words were written, and that they were printed in a Book!

Many and worthy, indeed, are the Labors of Others, that are extant upon this
Argument; and indeed, so many, that the acceptance of this Treatise may be
doubted: but hoping hereby to raise up more Children unto Abraham, I have
adventured to publish it. Read and consider: and that it may take deep rooting
in thy heart, is the earnest prayer of

Thine In the common SAVIOR.

SERMON I.
ESAIAS 26.19. Thy dead men shall live, (together with) my dead body shall they
arise, awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust: for thy dew is as the dew of
herbs, and the earth shall cast forth her dead.
THE belief of the resurrection is a present comfort in the midst of misery.
Resurrectio mortuorum, fiducia Christianorun, Tertul. The resurrection of the
dead is the joy, confidence, and boasting of Christians. And therefore when the
people of God had made a sad complaint of their low condition, in the words
preceding my Text: our Evangelicall Prophet, for their comfort, and
consolation, does from the mouth of God present them with this sweet and
precious promise of a glorious resurrection of their bodies. Let poor Saints
be full of complaints, let the billows of misery, and trouble be ready to
overwhelme their souls; and let God but break in upon their spirits, and give
them assurance of a blessed resurrection by his grace; and all their trouble,
all their discomforts, all their miseries, by the light of this Sun, will
presently vanish away.

You may read the complaint in the precedent verse, where the Church complains
that she had been like a woman with child, in great pain, verse 17. Like as a
woman with Child that draws near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and
cries out in her pangs; so have we been in thy sight, O Lord; We know the
pains of a woman in travel, are the greatest pains; and the Church to set
forth her trouble, compares it to the pains and pangs of a woman in travel.

But that which does heighten the trouble and misery of the Church is this,
that though she were thus like a woman in travel, and pain; and expected to
bring forth some great thing, and to do something in the world which might be
left as a lasting monument to the praise of God: and be a refreshment to her
self after her throws and languishment. She finds that all was a false
conception; therefore she says in the next verse, ( verse. 18.) We have been
with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought forth the wind.
She swelled big with expectation, and thought she should have brought forth
some glorious birth into the world: but alas all that she has brought forth,
has been but as it were wind; we see nothing but a false conception, We have
not wrought any deliverance in the Earth, neither have the Inhabitants of the
world fallen, ver. 18. Here we see the sad complaint of the Church.

And in the words I have read to you, you may likewise read the Prophet laying
down that which might comfort, and cheer the sad and drouping spirits of the
people of God, in this sad, and lamentable complaint of theirs; And that is
drawn from a sweet promise, that God makes to them of a resurrection: as if
the Prophet had said, let it never trouble you, though you be the poorest,
vilest, and miserablest creatures here upon the Earth: look beyond the Earth,
look for the accomplishment of Gods promise beyond this present life; and then
you shall see as much cause to rejoice, as you apprehended cause of mourning
before; What though you do no great thing for the present on Earth; what
though your Enemies prevail over you; what though their cursed devices,
Counsels, and Machinations do take effect against you: what though you fall
by their hands, and can do no great things to set up Trophies of glory below?
remember this, Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they
arise, etc. Thus you see what coherence these words have with the context.

In the words be pleased to take notice of these parts.

First, here is a promise made to the people of God, of a blessed resurrection.
Thy dead men shall live.

Secondly, the confirmation of this, that is, (as some interpret it) from the
resurrection of the Lord Jesus. My dead body shall rise, therefore they shall
not lie long in the dust: together with my dead body shall they arise, or else
thus, if we leave out [ together, and with,] which are not in the Original,
then this is the meaning. Thy dead men shall live, my dead body shall they
arise; at the resurrection, they shall rise as my very dead body. I have
consulted with the Hebrew text, and I find no more but that, I see no reason
we should put in together with, seeing it is not found in the first copy.

Thirdly, the nature of the resurrection is expressed to us, Awake. The Saints
do (as it were) awake out of their sleep: Death is nothing but sleep to the
people of God. The Prophet here to take away the sharpness and bitterness of
death, compares it to a bed, wherein a man sweetly reposeth himself, and after
he is refreshed rises out again: so after the Saints have layne a while in
their beds, in their graves, they awake, as the Psalmist says, As for me, I
will behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake with
thy likeness, Psalm. 17. ult. that is, at the resurrection; when I awake, then
I shall be satisfied with thy likeness; I do not enjoy so much of thee here
as I desire to do: but then when I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy
likeness.

Fourthly, here is the great joy set forth that shall be when the Saints do
arise, and that is expressed in that they are bid to Awake and sing: When the
Saints are raised, they are to have a song in their mouths, of joy, and the
glory of God in their hearts; awake, and sing. But it is otherwise with wicked,
and ungodly ones; they must awake, and houle; they must awake, when they had
rather sleep an everlasting sleep, and wish it might be a continual, and an
ever enduring midnight to their poor souls: but for the Saints, they are to
awake and sing.

Fifthly, we have the Saints set forth to us in their low condition, before this
resurrection; so they are called the Inhabitants of the dust, Awake and sing ye
that dwell in the dust.

Sixthly, we have a further proof, that there shall be such a glorious
resurrection, and that there shall be such great joy in the hearts of these
Inhabitants of the dust, when they are raised by the power of Heaven from death
to immortal life; and that is, from the heavenly dew, the Lord Jesus Christ,
which shall be as dew from the Father upon them, to quicken them to life after
death: For as we see the dew of Heaven falling upon the herbs after they are
withered, and almost dead by the parching heat of the Sun, they again wax
green, and flourish: so when we have lain withering in the grave, the Lord
Jesus Christ shall be as the dew of Heaven upon us; he shall come down in his
power, and put a new life into us, and after death we shall be raised to a life
of glory: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs.

Then in the next place he proves it from the willingness of the Earth, to be
disburthened of her charge when God calls for it, the Earth shall presently
give up the carcasses that she has received in. The earth is Gods Chest, in
which he locks up the dust of his Saints for a short time: but when God calls
for this treasure again, the earth shall presently be willing to yield what
was entrusted to her bowels. And the Earth shall cast up her dead. These are
the parts of this text: which is as clear a promise concerning the
resurrection of the dead, as we find in all the Old Testament, though others
do otherwise expound it concerning the Jews deliverance, with whom I have not
time now to contend.

I did make choice of this text for these Reasons.

First, because I did consider, that though there be many that make profession
of Christ, and of a resurrection; yet there are few that believe in Christ, or
that believe the truth of the resurrection: Durst men live in all wickedness,
ungodliness, and impiety? durst they venture to carry the load of their sins
with them to the grave when they come to lie on their deathbeds? and never be
troubled for their sins, never be troubled for their goods unjustly gotten?
were it possible that men could live thus, and die in this sottish and
senseless condition, did they indeed, and in truth believe there were a
resurrection?

Secondly, because I have met with perverse people in the City, who do with
boldness oppose the truth of the Doctrine of the resurrection. Truly we need
not go to Jerusalem, we need not travel to the holy Land to find out a
generation of Sadduces: the Lord knows my heart has bled within me, when I
have considered the multitude of Sadduces that are here in London; Sadduces of
all sorts: Episcopal Sadduces, Presbyterian Sadduces; separated Sadduces, dipped
Sadduces, seeking Sadduces; yet all agree in this notion, that it is a mere
fancy of man, a notion of some idle brain, that there shall be a resurrection
of bodies at the great day of the Lord Jesus. I believe that the truth of this
is so generally known, that there is not one thinks that I speak an untruth in
this place at this present. For impiety has gotten such a brazen face, that it
comes forth in the light, and though men have professed Christ, and Religion,
and the Doctrine of the resurrection so long: yet how many are there now that
deny that ever Christ came in the flesh? or that there shall be a resurrection
of bodies at the great day? Therefore I thought I was bound in Conscience, (if
I would deal uprightly in employing that small talent God has given me) to
manifest my dislike of these men, and to witness against them in the behalf
of the Lord Jesus.

Thirdly, considering the subtle practices, and indefatigable labors of these
people who under a vizard of Religion, deceive poor, weak Christians; for
their sakes and for the satisfying of the weak, I did resolve with my self to
speak something, concerning the Doctrine of the resurrection: And seeing God
has pressed me to the handling of this point; knowing it may be for the good
of diverse poor weak Christians; I hope it will not be displeasing to any who
are truly spiritual, and know the Lord Jesus Christ in a true and spiritual
way, and wait upon him for the resurrection of their bodies. I shall therefore
without any further Preface address my self to the words of the Text.

Thy dead men shall live.
Where we are to take notice, that though in this place here is nothing spoken
concerning the resurrection of wicked men, but only of the dead men of the
Lord Jesus, yet in other places it is sufficiently held forth. Those that dye
in the faith, are in a special manner called the dead men of God and of
Christ, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord: and these are called in this
respect (...), Luc. 20.36. the sons of the Resurrection: for these are they
only, who are heirs of glory, and the resurrection. It were better for others
that there never were any resurrection: it were better for them that the
mountains might cover them, and that they might sleep in verlasting oblivion,
then to be brought forth before [(...) Chrysostom.] the dreadful Tribunal of the
Lord Jesus Christ, to give account for all their thoughts, words, and actions;
yet you shall see other places clearly holding forth the resurrection of the
ungodly and wicked, as well as of the Saints, though here the Prophet speaks
only of the resurrection of those that die in the Lord Jesus. I will give you
but one place, and that is in Joh. 5.28, 29. It is the speech of our Savior,
Marvel not at this (says he) for the hour is coming, in the which all that
are in the graves shall hear my voice, and shall come forth; those that have
done good (...), unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil
unto the resurrection of damnation, Jo. 5.29. So that there is a twofold
resurrection, of life, and of damnation, though the Prophet speak only of the
former in this place.

Secondly, Thy dead men shall live, that is, all those Saints who die, and
whose bodies are laid in the dust, all those shall rise; God has not
appointed, that all the Saints shall die: this the Apostle shows, We shall not
all die, but we shall all be changed, 2 Cor. 15.51. And speaking of those that
shall live when the Lord Jesus Christ shall appear from Heaven, he says, then
we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the
clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so we shall ever be with the Lord, 2 Thessalonians. 4.17. So that when he says, Thy dead men shall live, that is, all those
Saints that shall die, shall live again by the power of Christ, who shall be
their life.

Thirdly, Thy dead men shall live. The Prophet does not speak here of a
resurrection of souls: but when he says Thy dead men, he means only the
bodies of the Saints. As our age has been fertile to bring forth all monstrous
tenants and opinions that other ages have exploded; so it has brought forth
this abominable error which many Heathens by the dim light of nature have
opposed, that the soul is mortal. They that are acquainted with people here
in this City, will meet with some that will affirm, that the soul as well as
the body is mortal; and this is one of the places that they make use of, Thy
dead men. Now they say man is a compositum of soul, and body: therefore seeing
dead men must live, it follows that the soul, or humane spirit as well as the
body must die.

But consider, this is against other places of Scripture; does not the wise man
tell us of the body returning to the dust, and the spirit returning to God that
gave it? Eccles. 12.7. Does not Paul desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ? Phil. 1 23. It is evident therefore that he had a persuasion, that as
soon as his spirit did take leave of his body, his Spirit should be happy in
the enjoyment of the Lord Jesus. Does not our Savior tell us that as soon as
Lazarus died, the Angels carried him into Abraham's bosom, he came presently to
the enjoyment of some happiness in the enjoyment of God. Therefore we are to
know here in this place, that God speaks unto us (...) after the manner of
men, God speaking to men, speaks unto them in the language of men. And as we
ordinarily call the carcass of the dead, a dead man: so God when he says, thy
dead men shall live, his meaning is not, that there shall be a resurrection of
spirits, as though the soul of man were mortal like the soul of a beast, and
did die with the body, but the meaning is, that the dead bodies of the Saints
shall arise. Thy dead men shall live. For the proof of this I will present you
with places taken out of the Scripture of truth, Hosea 13.14. there the Spirit
by the Prophet speaks most plainly of the resurrection, I will ransom them
from the power of the grave, I will redeem them from death; O death, I will be
thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction, etc. which the Apostle 2 Cor.
15. cites, and proves that this Promise shall be fully accomplished to the
people of God at the general resurrrection.

So likewise God teaches his holy servant Ezekiel this lesson in a holy
vision, Ezekiel. 37. The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the
Spirit of the Lord, and set me down in the midst of the valley which was
full of bones, and caused me to pass by them round about, and behold there
were very many in the open valley, and lo they were very dry. And he said unto
me, Son of man can these bones live? And I answered, O Lord God thou know,
Again he said unto me, Prophecy upon these bones, and say unto them, O ye
dry bones hear the word of the Lord. Thus says the Lord God unto these
bones, Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live. And I
will lay sinews upon you, and bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with
skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live, and ye shall know that I am the
Lord. Ezekiel. 37.1. Here the Prophet does speak of the resurrection, and shows
that a Spirit of life, and power shall come upon the dry bones and dust of the
Saints, and that they shall live again in the presence of God.

What was Jobs Faith and confidence in the midst of his sufferings, but in
the resurrection? Job. 19.25, 26. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he
shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth; and though after my skin worms
shall destroy this body, yet in my flesh I shall see God. Here is a plain
place, in which the Doctrine of the resurrection is held forth to us. He
professes that he believed the resurrection of the dead, and speaking by the
Spirit of Christ, who is eternal life, the wisdom of the Father made flesh,
he says I shall see him; with what eyes? with these eyes and no other; with
these very eyes.

I urged this place to two men, and I had two several Answers from them. One
that denied the resurrection gave this Answer, (I might tremble to speak it)
Job spoke as a crazie old man, he knew not what; and therefore this was no
solid place to prove the resurrection. The second said, he did not speak of the
resurrection; because he says in my flesh I shall see God, now God is not
seen with fleshly eyes.

But the Answer to this is easy: be speaks of Christ, as God-man: so we are
said to see God when we see God in Jesus Christ, as it is Rev. 1.7. Behold he
comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced
him: And all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. With bodily eyes
we may see the Lord Jesus Christ in his body, and with that spiritual eye, and
in that spiritual body which we shall have given unto us at the resurrection;
with that spiritual eye, and in that spiritual body, we shall be able to see
that spiritual body, that the Lord Jesus Christ has; so seeing Christ, we see
God: because Christ is God manifested in the flesh as the Apostle calls him, 1 Timothy 3.16.

The places are infinite almost in the New Testament, nothing being so much
preached by the Apostles as the Doctrine of the resurrection; Paul comes to
Athens among the Epicures and Stoics, great Scholars, that were fools and
ignorant in Religion, he preaches the resurrection, that God would judge the
world by the man Christ Jesus: so they were to be witnesses of the
resurrection, and to preach Christ risen from the dead; to give evidence and
assurance to men that they should rise likewise as well as the Lord Jesus. In
the 1 Cor. 15. there were men crept into that Congregation, that denied the
resurrection; therefore what strong Arguments does Paul lay down to prove the
resurrection? He shows that Christ dyed in vain, and that all Religion is in
vain; that the Apostles were impostors and liers, who preached that Christ was
risen, and that the Saints by the power of Christ should rise, if there were no
resurrection. So in 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. The Apostle speaks of the same subject, and
shows the manner of the resurrection, and how Christ shall come from Heaven,
The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first, (
verse 16.) Here you see he holds forth this, that Christ who is that mediator
between God and man, and true man now in Heaven; this Jesus Christ shall
descend from Heaven, and that the Saints shall rise from the Earth to meet him
in the air. So the Angels told the Apostles, Act. 1.11. when they looked up to
Christ, when he ascended, this same Jesus shall so come from Heaven, as you now
see him ascend into Heaven: the same Christ shall descend from Heaven, and the
Apostles shall see him in the same manner with the very same eyes, with which
they saw him ascend into Heaven, with the same eyes they shall see him descend
from Heaven. the Scripture is so full, that I need not take more pains to give
you more places for the opening of it: unless you will please to take one
place more out of the Old Testament, (that you may know that they had a clear
knowledge of this in the days of the Law, as well as we have now in the days
of the Gospel) Dan. 12.12. And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great
Prince which stands for the Children of thy people, that is, the Lord Jesus
Christ, who always stands for his people and there shall be a time of trouble,
such as never was since there was a Nation, even to the same time: and at that
time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in
the book. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake,
some to everlasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting contempt. And they
that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that
turn many to righteousness as the Stars for ever and ever. Here you see the
same thing held forth.

Though I will not trouble you with many reasons to confirm this doctrine of
the resurrection: for the truth is, it is a Doctrine above Reason. I call here,
not so much for reason, as for Faith, to believe what is above Reason, and what
seems contrary to carnal reason: yet give me leave to give you a reason or
two drawn from the sacred truth of Gods word.

The first is drawn from the truth of God, God is true, therefore there will
be a resurrection, he should deceive, and delude his people, were there not a
resurrection of bodies. Does he not often tell us of a resurrection? And does
not our Savior tell us that he will raise those at the last day who are drawn
unto him by the Father? ( Joh. 6.44.) And therefore unless we will make the
great God (which is blasphemy to think) a liar; and Christ his Son a Preacher
of the resurrection, the greatest impostor in the world; and all his Ministers,
Servants, and Messengers, cheaters, juglers, and deceivers of the people, we
cannot but acknowledge a resurrection: for God has spoken of it, and has
revealed this to them that there shall be such a resurrection, and they preach
it in his name: therefore the God of truth should be found a liar, if there
should not be a resurrection of bodies according to his word.

Secondly, the justice, and mercy of God seem to call for a resurrection.

If we look upon wicked, and ungodly men, so God in Justice must send his Son
Jesus Christ to raise the dead, and to judge the world, or else how should the
justice of God shine clear and bright before the eyes, and saces of men? This
is the Argument that the Apostle lays down, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6. where he speaks
of the sufferings of the Saints, and of the wickedness of their persecutors,
who wrong them for making profession of the truth of the Lord Christ; which is
(says he) a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, it is a
demonstration, (...), an evident, infallible sign, that there will be a
judgment day, and a resurrection; because else God should not be just, it is a
righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you. It
is just with the God of justice to punish the vessels of wrath, disobedient
and wicked men, who never did flee to his grace for life, and salvation: it is
just with him to pay the persecutors of his people their wages after they have
done their work. Now if there were not a judgment day, if there were not a
resurrection, where should God give them their wages for persecuting, and
troubling them that make profession of his name? How should God that is the
Judge of the world appear to be just? Here is the first Argument that God is
just to wicked, and ungodly men; and God could not appear to be just, if there
were no judgment day, no resurrection, therefore there shall be a
resurrection. Now the same things fall alike to the just and unjust; we see
wicked, and ungodly men thrive, and prosper in the world; they live in
pleasure, there are no bands in their death, as the Psalmist speaks, they
spend their days in mirth, and die upon their beds without sorrow. How should
God appear to be just, unless there be another day, when God will call these
men to a reckning for all the sins, and iniquities which they did commit
against him when they lived upon the Earth?

Secondly, if we look to the mercy of God And this is the Argument that our
blessed Savior makes use of, Matthew. 22.31. When the Sadduces came to him, who
said there was no resurrection, nor spirit, nor Devil, (as our Sadduces do)
who say there is no Devil but our own evil thoughts, nor good Angels, but
the good motions of our own spirits, nor any resurrection of the body. See
what Argument he uses to prove the resurrection, as touching the resurrection,
have ye not read that which was spoken to you by God saying, I am the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living: God professes himself the God of dead Saints in a
special manner; therefore these must live again and be made happy by this
God, that professes himself to be their God, while their bodies lie rotting
and putrefying in the earth; God in his never failing faithfulness ownes them
in the dust, keeps their ashes in safety, by which Christ does ascertaine us
that there will be a resurrection of bodies at the last day.

So that you see if this truth be denied it will overthrow the Scriptures,
which acquaints us that some are vessels of honor, some of dishonor, that
some are vessels of grace, and some are vessels of Gods fury, and indignation;
if there be no judgment, day no resurrection; there cannot be vessels of
wrath, and vessels of mercy: If there be no resurrection, we are of all men
most miserable, etc. 1 Cor. 15. therefore a resurrection must be granted, that
Saints may appear the vessels of Gods mercy.

1. Use. Confut.
That which has been spoken confutes the blasphemous and Diabolical opinion
of those that do oppose this Doctrine of the resurrection. There are two sorts
of these, First, such who do plainly deny the resurrection, as Porphyrius and
others whom we read of. And secondly, such who will not seem to deny a
resurrection, but will pretend that they are risen already, spiritually risen.
And they know no other resurrection.

The first of these are like those that are mentioned in the 2 Cor. 15. that
say there is no resurrection. The latter are like those 2 Timothy 2.18. Hymeneus
and Philetus that said the resurrection was already past. The latter of these
are the more dangerous. Come, and ask them, is there a resurrection? Yes, we
are risen, it is past, you understand the Scripture carnally, and not
spiritually; you look on the history of the word; whereas all the Scripture is
mystical, and allegorical. Thus these in a more plausible way deny the truth
of God, and overthrow the Doctrine of the resurrection. But these places of
Scripture, and sanctified reasons drawn from the word of truth, sufficiently
confute, and overthrow this damnable cursed opinion of theirs, that strikes at
the very root, and raseth the foundation of all Religion.

This point of the resurrection is so clearly held forth in Scripture, that
those that deny it, either deny the Scripture to be the word of the Lord
Jesus, or else by their allegories, and diabolical interpretation of the word,
they pervert the truth of it.

Now the latter of these are the most dangerous: for they seem to carry a
great deal of glory, spirituality and truth with them, and make those that are
not acquainted with their solecismes believe that they are very spiritual,
that they have some light, and knowledge, that men have not ordinarily attained
to: Whereas, when you have studied well the depth of their notions, you shall
find this to be all, if they acknowledge a God: (for I know that there are some
of these that absolutely deny that there is a God:) that God was from all
eternity, and God shall endure to all eternity; and that being that they had
in God from all eternity, that being they shall have in God to all eternity;
but the body, and the humane spirit shall die, and be lost, and come to
nothing. So all the happiness they have, is that eternal, and everlasting
being, concludunt spiritum ad essentiam Dei redire, eique jungi ita ut unicus
spiritus maneat. As Calvin reports of those Libertines which denied the
resurrection in his time. They conclude (says he) that the Spirit shall
return to the essence of God, and shall be joined to him, so that one spirit
shall only remain: as if they should say, there is a God that was for ever,
and shall endure for ever, but all the creatures shall come to nothing: when
the body dies it shall return to its dust never to be raised, and the spirit
shall vanish away, as the soft air, as those miscreants in the book of
Wisdom speaks, ( Wisd. 2.3.) which if it were a truth there should be no
happiness for the humane spirit of man, or for the body after this life. And I
am confident that this is all their new Light affords to us and glorious
spirituality, or rather infernal spirituality (as Calvin calls it,
Infernalem spiritualitatem,) they boast of. And this I gather by their own
discourses, and words; and likewise by searching their writings, and reading
their books, that have formerly been written, and that lately are brought into
the world.

But me thinks there is one objection for the present comes to my mind, which
does call for an answer before I proceed.

Object. If there be such a generation of men as you speak of, that deny the
Doctrine of the resurrection, and pervert the truth of God, then we may see by
this what inconvenience would follow, if liberty should be granted to men to
practice according to their own judgments, which are contrary to the
judgments of the civil Magistrate in the worship of God. Therefore it seems
there is a necessity laid upon Civil powers, that men may be kept from these
errors, and damnable opinions, to make strict Laws, and impose them upon all
people. And all sorts of professors to enforce them to come in, and profess
Christ in their way, or else to confiscate their goods, to banish them out of
the Country, or (if need be) to take away their lives.

Answ. I answer, this does not follow, there were such in the time of the Lord
Jesus, we find him often disputing with the Sadduces: yet we see the Lord Jesus
Christ did not intend to overthrow the Sadduces (that denied the resurrection)
by such means, but dealt with them only by Scripture, and reason, as we see
Matthew. 22. And when James and John producing the example of Elias desired
Christ to command fire to come from Heaven to destroy the discourteous
Samaritans that refused to entertain them; He denies their request with a
reproof, Luke 9.55. He rebuked them and said, Ye know not what manner of
spirit ye are of: and I think it is safe for us to imitate the Lord Jesus
Christ.

But in the next place, let me tell you that no Laws, Statutes, constitutions
or forms imposed by men, or Directories, or any thing you can think of,
Discipline, or Government; can extirpate this out of the hearts of these men.
For I assure you, that few that are of this judgment, will lose any thing for
their Conscience. Some of them if you bring in Popery, before they will lose a
hair of their head for that which they maintain, they will be professed
Papists. We may see the picture of these men in Quintinus, who was the devils
Ambassador in Calvin's time, to divulge Familisticall tenants, of whom he thus
speaks, si hodie Quintinus vinctus teneretur, sive a Christianis, sive a
Papistis, and staretur ipsius confessioni, non multum esset anxius. Certus enim
esset de sua liberatione quod tum horum, tum illorum voluntati assentiretur. If
Quintin were now imprisoned by Protestants, or Papists, and should be freed or
condemned by his own confession, it would not much trouble him: for he would
be confident of his freedom. Because he would assent to the will of either of
them.

Calv. in his Instrue: Adver: Liber: c. 8. If you threaten them that they shall
suffer any thing, they will presently tell you that they were overtaken with a
fault, and they will be of your mind, if you have any power to punish them for
what they profess. Like him in the Comedian; Ais? aio; negas? nego. Do you
assert it? I assert it too; do you deny it? I deny it too.

And why should a man be so foolish as to lose any thing for that which he
professes in his Conscience, when he thinks there shall be no resurrection?
He has no reason; he were mad that would part with Earth, and earthly things,
that is not sure of Heaven; he is a madman that will lay down his life, that
is not persuaded there will be a life after death. Therefore I assure the
Presbyterian Party if liberty of Conscience be not granted to Saints, most or
all these will fall in to them: And before Liberty was thought of, there were a
great many of these in the City, and they conformed to that which was then
practiced, and they will conform to any Government which shall be set up by
the power of man. It is not any Discipline, or Government that can extirpate
these cursed opinions out of the hearts of these men. And though there be
Discipline, Government, and strict Laws, yet in secret ways they know how to
insinuate poison into the hearts and spirits of men, to corrupt them from the
truth and simplicity of the Lord Jesus Christ. I know some of these that do
and have preached publicly undiscovered, and some have now places, and are
turned Presbyterians, who professed these tenants in the City of London, that
are now gone from the City, and have Parochial Congregations, and are looked
on as Presbyterians, and Orthodox men, and none speak against them, they know
how to cover their opinions well enough. This mystery of iniquity is not
easily discovered: so that this objection makes nothing against Liberty of
Conscience. I think it were better if it were the Lords will, that these men
of this wicked, ungodly spirit might be known, that so they may not draw many
people into their sin, but that the truth of God may be held forth against
them to overthrow their errors: for nothing will overthrow error but truth.
It is not a prison, it is not the Sword, it is not the power of man that can
overthrow error, and root up false opinions out of the hearts of men: it is
only the power of the truth of the Lord Jesus. As Dagon fell before the Arc,
so these cursed opinions must fall before the Arc of truth, by the power of
the Lord Jesus. For if you threaten them that they shall suffer any thing, they
will presently tell you that they were overtaken with a fault, and they will be
of your mind: If you have power to punish them for what they profess. But
lastly, this should not be brought as an Argument to prejudice those in the
enjoyment of their Liberty, who are truly conscientious. For it will have no
more force then this. Thieves and rogues swarm and abound in the
Commonwealth, while Liberty, Privileges and immunities are granted to honest
men, and they are countenanced. Therefore suffer not honest men to live in the
Commonwealth.

Thus having removed an objection which lay in my way, which I perceived might
be drawn from the licentiousness of these wicked men, to the wronging of the
true Saints and children of the most High, in reference to their Lib^^^^es, I
shall now come to answer the Objections of these adversaries to the
resurrection.

And first, they that absolutely deny the resurrection, do thus argue, Do you
think that this body after it is resolved into its first elements, and that
part of it is ourned in the fire, a part exhaled into the air, a part
converted into water, and a part of it turned into earth, that the same
numericall body shall be raised again? Let a man, one that you call a Saint,
be torn in pieces, let the bird have her prey out of him, let the fish have
her share, let the devouring beast likewise have his belly full of his flesh,
let the Caniball come, and have his dinner out of another limb; and shall we
believe after all this that this man shall rise again? What will you bereave
us of reason? you profess to be rational men; how can you subscribe to such a
thing, that a man should be burned in the fire, his ashes cast into the sea,
And after these changes, and transmutations, that this man, this same man, the
same body of this man should be raised again? how can any man that has not
put off all reason believe it? Thus they contend by their carnal reason
against the truth of the resurrection.

But let me answer, though I grant all this which they say, that the bodies of
the Saints may be resolved into the first Elements, out of which they were
made; yet for all this there shall be a resurrection of the very same
numericall body.

For look to God, he that has promised to do this, he is omniscient, he
knows the dust of his Saints, though it be carried into the Sea; if a piece of
the body of a Saint be in the belly of a fish he knows it there, as well as he
knew his servant Jonas in the belly of the Whale. If it be resolved to dust,
and burned to ashes; he knows the dust of his Saints. We know the Alchymist
can convert one thing to another, and afterward reduce it to the thing that
formerly it was. So shall not God (though he suffer the bodies of his Saints to
undergo a hundred mutations, and changes, into fire, and water) after reduce
us again to the same bodies in which formerly we were?

God knows where the dust of his people lies as well as the Citizens of China
know where their earth lies that they lay up for some hundreds of years, that
they may make the purer vessels of it. God does but bury us a while in the
earth, that at the resurrection he may bring us forth as vessels of his own
praise and glory: and God knows where he has hid and laid us. If one limb be
in Africa, another in Asia, another in Europe, another in America, the Lord
knows how to bring limb to limb, and bone to bone; he is an omniscient God.

And as he is omniscient, and knows every part of his people, and the dust of
his Saints, and treasures up the dust of his Saints, and keeps it in safety: So
he is a powerful God, and able to raise the bodies of his Saints. As he knows
what dust and bones belong to a body, so he is able to bring it again to the
same body which it was; and to change it into a more glorious body. He is able
to change that same numericall mortal body into an immortal body.

And though we can find nothing in nature that can evidently prove this truth:
yet we find many sweet figures, shadows and resemblances of this in nature.
Does not the day die into night, and afterward night rise again into the day?
does not Summer die into Autumn, and Autumn into Winter, and then the Spring
brings the Summer in glory to us again? Are not some creatures which lie dead
in Winter, restored to life when Summer appears? Do we not see the seed that
is buried in the earth, and put into the furrows again to spring to a new
life, and to come forth with greater glory then when it was sown in the earth:

If you take notice of the Goldsmiths you shall find that he keeps his fylings;
and his dust, and though we look on it as a heap worth nothing: yet he knows
by the Art of the refyner to bring a choice and precious veffell out of that
dust. So though the bodies of the Saints have lain as a heap of dust, and we
see no glory in it; yet God the refyner of Heaven, by the power of his Arm is
able to extract the filings and dust of his Saints out of the hearth, and to
restore their dust, to an immortal, spiritual, and glorious body; Look to
the power of God, nothing will be impossible. Therefore when the Sadduees
cavilled against the Doctrine of the resurrection, our Savior strikes at the
root of their error, which was this, because they questioned the power of God
concerning this: Ye err, says he, not knowimg the Scriptures nor the power of
God, ( Mat. 22.) Qui potest facere potest reficere, etc. says Tertullian, he
that was able to make the body out of nothing, is able to remake it; he that
was able to give a being out of no being, is able to give a being out of that
that has a being: It is easier to make a thing out of that that has a being,
then out of that that has no being, God has done the first, why should we
distrust him concerning the second?

Therefore you shall find the Apostle when he preached this Doctrine, that we
shall be raised, and in our bodies made like the glorious body of our Lord
Jesus Christ; and knowing that there would be carnal objections, arise in the
spirits of men against this Doctrine, he presently fits and shapes an answer
for it, from the power of God, Phil. 3. ^lt. we look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto
his glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is able to subdue even
all things to himself. Here that the mouth of unbelief and carnal reason may
be stopped, he tells us that he will make our bodies like unto his glorious
body: and question not but he will do it: for he will do it by his mighty
power, by which he is able to subdue all things to himself; thus far in
answer to the first sort of Adversaries.

The objections of the spiritual Enemies, or rather diabolical Enemies
(though they pretend to spirituality) are drawn from Scripture. And this is no
wonder, for their Father the Devil does quote Scripture sometimes too. The
first place which they allege, is in the 1 Cor. 15.50. Flesh and blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does corruption inherit incorruption: from
whence they conclude that our corruptible and fleshly body shall not be raised:
And therefore that there is no such resurrection to be expected which we wait
for; But that the Apostle in this Chapter and all other places speaking of the
resurrection, does treat of it spiritually and allegorically; And that he never
did hold forth such a carnal and gross resurrection, as we in our muddie
brains do grossly apprehend he did.

In answer to which objection, we shall grant that the Apostle in sundry
places, does speak of a resurrection figuratively. As in the 3. Col. 1. If ye
be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where he speaks of
a resurrection to a new life in the spirit by faith. And in this sense we grant
that Saints are already risen. There being no happiness for such at the second
resurrection hereafter, who are not first raised here, and made partakers of
the first resurrection. Yet this does not weaken our assertion, nor overthrow
our Faith. And therefore give me leave to put in an answer to their objection.

First, It is true, flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. What
does he mean? he means, sinful flesh, and blood shall not inherit;
whatsoever is sin, and flesh, in this respect, shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God.

Secondly, flesh and blood may be taken for the weaknesses, and infirmities
that cleave to our bodies for the present, and flesh and blood, our bodies of
flesh and blood if we look on them in their frailties, infirmities, and
weaknesses, so they shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. But otherwise it is
certain, these bodies which are flesh and blood, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God. For as our Lord Christ is now in glory, in the same body, though it be a
spiritual glorious body in Heaven, in which he suffered on the Cross, so we
who believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, shall be raised, go to Heaven, and enjoy
God in happiness in these very bodies that we carry about us, we shall see
God with these eyes and no other, we shall have the same feet, hands and
members, etc. And though there shall be no sin, frailty, weakness or
infirmity, no imperfection, lamenesse, deafness, or blindness, yet the same
numericall body shall be raised again. And if God would but open their eyes to
read and understand what is spoken, they shall have an answer from the pen of
him whom they through their blindness do misunderstand in the 53. verse of
the same chapter, This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal
must put on immortality. The same mortal body, by him who is immortal must be
made immortal and incorruptible.

This was the confession of the African Churches, Credimus resurrectionem
carnis hujus: we believe the resurrection of this flesh: which is consonant to
the truth delivered by Paul, 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. The same
persons must appear, we that confist of a material body and spiritual soul,
must appear in the same body and soul, or else it is not we that shall
appear but some body else which shall appear, which is contrary to the mind
of God, and his Apostle in this place. The second objection which they bring is
this, that we that profess Christ and a resurrection by him, in this way are
carnal, and know Christ after the flesh, whereas the Apostle says in the 2
Cor. 5.16. That he is to be known so no more. To which I answer, that this is
one of the (...), one of the things hard to be understood in Paul which Peter
speaks of 2 Pet. 3.16. which they being unstable, wrest as they do other
Scriptures, unto their own destruction. Paul has no such meaning, which they
carnally draw from the letter of the word, which will appear, if we consider
the Christ which he preached, who was made of the seed of David according to
the flesh, Romans 1.3. crucified in the flesh for our sins, 2. Cor. 13.4. risen
from the dead for our Justification, Romans 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.20. ascended in our
humane nature in which he suffered and descended into the lower parts of the
earth, 4. Ephesians. and in that humane nature does make Intercession for us at his
Fathers right hand, as our Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5. If he means that which they
draw from his words, he knew Christ after the flesh in all his Sermons, and his
Faith was a knowledge of Christ after the flesh. And therefore that which they
wrest from his words is not his meaning.

Secondly, Paul's meaning is this, that Christ is not to be known after the
flesh. As though any men should conceive that they should have any privilege
or prerogative above another in Christ, because they are his kinsmen or
Contrymen according to the flesh, or of the same stock with Christ, being
descended from Abraham or David according to the flesh. Thus Christ is not to
be known after the flesh. It will avail men nothing that they are near to
Christ in the flesh by their natural birth, unless they be near to Christ,
and one with Christ by their new birth: So that the Apostle does in this place
take away the difference which some might apprehend, to be between the Jew and
the Gentile. It is parallel to that place Gal. 3.28. There is neither Jew nor
Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for
ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And this is evident by the precedent verse,
where he says that Christ died for all, for Gentiles as well as for Jews, so
that a Jew may as soon be saved by Christ as a Gentile, if he rest upon the
grace of the Father through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus his Son
for Justification and Salvation. It will likewise appear to be the plain and
naked meaning of the Apostle, if we consider the subsequent words, where he
does publish forth the same thing, and explaineth his meaning, telling us that
God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them. The sinful Gentiles who are called the world in
opposition to the Jews, that were Gods peculiar and selected people, gathered
out of the world from other Nations. God is reconciled to this world, to
sinful Gentiles, as well as to Gods own people the Jews. And therefore
Christ is not to be known among Christians in any carnal or fleshly
relations, as though he were a Savior more to the Jews then to the Gentiles.
This were to know Christ after the flesh, but we that know him spiritually know
him so no more, for in the Spirit we see the partition wall which was between
Jews and Gentiles pulled down; and know Christ the common Savior both to
Jews and Gentiles, which shall believe in his name. And thus I have given you
an answer fully satisfactory to their second objection.

The third place from which they frame an objection, is in Eccles. 3.19. That
which besalleth unto the Sons of men, befalls beasts, even one thing
befalls them: as the one dies, so dies the other, yea they have all one
breath, so that a man has no pre-eminence above a beast.

To this I thus answer, that Solomon here does not propose this as his own
judgment, but rather does represent unto us the opinion of carnal men, who
have no greater light then the dim eye of reason. And does acquaint us with
their folly and ignorance, by communicating his own experience unto us. I said
in my heart, ver. 18. He spoke this in his heart, when the darkness of his
spirit did as a thick cloud hide the light of the Spirit of God from him. He
does not speak this from his heart and spirit enlightened with the truth of God.
But from his heart under a mist of error, being surrounded with great
temptations. And this will appear by many passages which he utters in this
book, which do wholly contradict that which they would gather from these
words, as the meaning of Solomon, for the overthrowing of the Doctrine of the
resurrection and the day of judgment. For instance Ecc: 11.9. How does he
labor to draw young men from the pursuit of the worlds pleasures and vanities,
by putting them in mind that God will bring them unto judgment? And what a
plain place is that against Sadduces, Familists and Libertines, that deny a
judgment day and a resurrection, with which he does put a period to this
book, Ecc: 12. and the last. God shall bring every work into judgment with
every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. I shall not
trouble you with any more of their Arguments. Because they are of the same
nature with those which have been brought already. And the same Answers which
have been given unto these will give sufficient satisfaction to any other
objections, which may be brought against this truth.

2. Use from this error.
Again, since the truth of God appears so clear in Scripture, that there
shall be a resurrection of body, and of the same body; let us abhor, and
abandon the gross fanaticall conceits of all that we meet with, that profess
themselves open enemies to the Doctrine of the resurrection. Brethren, I
beseech you, loath, abhor, and detest this hellish diabolical Doctrine. For
as Christians are to embrace the truth of God with all zeal and affection of
spirit: so we are to detest and abhor all errors that oppose the truth of the
Lord Jesus Christ, with all zeal, and fervency of spirit: though these are
much offended with the zeal and sharpness of the Saints: supposing that such
heat and holy anger is inconsistent with the spirit of meekness, and
therefore, if a man (though in the Spirit) witness against these conceits, and
atheistical opinions of theirs, presently they say, that though he pretend to
be the servant of Christ, and to have the Spirit of Christ; yet he has not the
Spirit of Christ, because he is so sharp in his speech.

But consider, how our blessed Savior often in his preaching, and discourses
thunders, and lightens in the faces of men that opposed the truth. Did he not
call the Scribes and Pharisees, a Generation of Vipers, and Adulterers to their
faces? and has not Paul, and Peter expressions to this purpose? Peter tells
Simon Magus, he was in the very gall of bitterness? Did not Paul call Elymas
the child of the Devil and enemy of all righteousness? Act. 13.10. and our
Savior tells the Hypocrites that he preached to, Joh. 8. Ye are of your father
the Devil. Therefore know, that as Christ, (though he had the holy Spirit in
him, yet) he made use of such sharp and bitter speeches, so a man may have such
speeches in his mouth, and yet he may be in the spirit of God, and speak to
Gods glory when he thus speaks. The Angel of the Church of Ephesus is
commended, that he could not bear with those that were evil. And that he
hated the works of the Nicolaitans himself, and our Savior does profess his
hatred to the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans. And why should a Christian be afraid
to imitate his Savior, though these will censure him for it? If this be to be
vile and without love, to speak bitterly against such bitter enemies of Christ,
should not a zealous Christian say as David said to Michal when she scoffed him
for his devotion to his God, 2 Samuel 6.22. I will be yet more vile then thus?
Therefore let me desire you, that you will abhor these tenants and opinions
of theirs, which do overthrow the whole Doctrine of the Lord Jesus Christ. If
this that they hold be a truth, which we deny; there is no truth in this book
that we hold; if this be a truth that they profess, there is no truth in Jesus
Christ that professes himself the way, the truth and the life. And as the
Apostle preaches 1 Cor. 15. The Apostles shall be found false witnesses of
God, for they preached that Christ, though he suffered on the Cross, his body
was raised, and in it he ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of
the Father, and mediates, and intercedes as an Advocate for us. If Christ be
not risen, then we are false witnesses of God, 1 Cor. 15.15. because we have
testified that he raised up Christ whom he raised not up; if the dead rise not,
and if they shall be found false witnesses, and Imposters, who then are the men
that we must look on as Divine men, as knowing understanding men? we must
look on these as a Generation of liers that have deceived us, and made us
believe that Christ is risen, and that we shall rise by his power, and there is
no such matter, who are to be eyed as men of truth? we must look on Lucian,
that in his Dialogues and other books jeeres those that expect happiness
after this life, or fear misery; and calls our blessed Jesus (...), the
Sophister that was hanged upon a Cross. We must look on him as an Orthodox
man, as a Divine writer. Pliny that writes of the souls immortality, and
denies the resurrection of the body, we must look on him as Canonical. Julian
the Apostate must be admired for his wisdom. To throw away our Bibles, or
burn them, as those in the 19. Acts 19. did burn their Books of curious
Arts, will be a point of wisdom and discretion. It will be no impiety to deny
the truths that Peter, Paul, and other servants of the Lord Jesus Christ have
preached and sealed with their bloods.

O Brethren take heed of this hellish, hellish Doctrine, take heed of these
seducers, Beware of these Wolves that come in sheeps clothing. See how this
tenent plants its Ordnance to batter down all goodness, all the hope of
Christians, and strength of Christianity.

3. Use.
The belief of this truth may bring in streams of joy to our souls, and
spirits in the midst of the greatest troubles, and miseries that can come
upon us. Therefore the Apostle when he had laid down this point, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1.
see what use he makes of it in the 18. ver. for their consolation, bidding them
to comfort one another with those words. In your weaknesses and sickness
consider that these bodies that are frail, mortal, and must after a while
moulder into dust, shall at the resurrection be made like unto the glorious
body of Christ, Phil. 3. last. Is death approaching, does the King of fears (
Job 18.14.) knock at the doors of your cottages of clay? Let the fear of
death be killed by the meditation of this, that the Lord Jesus by his death and
resurrection, has abolished our death, and brought life and immortality to
light through his glorious Gospel. 2 Timothy 1.10. Christ (cujus victoria nostra
est) whose victory is ours, has overcome sin, the grave, Death, Hell; and he
arising as a public person, his glorious resurrection may be a pledge unto us
of our future resurrection in glory.

Our bodies are called in Scripture the Temples of God. Let me tell you that
God will not pull down his Temples, unless he intended to build them up
again: He will set up these Temples in glory, which he pulls down and lays in
the dust with dishonor. I remember what a divine Poet says, speaking of the
resurrection: Pellite cord metum mea membra, and credit vosmet,
Cum Christo reditura deo --
-- Atra sepulera respuite --
Prudentius. My limbs, drive away from you the fear of death, ye shall with
Christ return to God. slight the blackness and horror of the grave: which
does sweetly accord with the divine rapture of Paul, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. O
death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? The sting of death is
sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks be to God which gives
us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord. The full persuasion of this, is that
which has filled the spirits of Christians with joy and fortitude in their
sufferings. The heavenly company of Martyrs that sacrificed their lives for
Christ, do deserve rather to be registered in the Catalogue of fools, then to
be dignified, or innobled as Saints with the Crown of Martyrdom, had they
suffered and questioned the truth of the resurrection. This has made their
sufferings comfortable to them, and glorious to us as our pattern and example
for imitation. This has made them so willing to hazard their lives for the
truth of Christ. It is this that has made them so prodigal of their blood;
that I remember it is reported of one of the heathen persecutors, that he said
he thought the Christians delighted in torments, they seemed to slight all
punishments and tortures, that the witty malice of their adversaries could
invent, or their cruelty inflict. This carried them forth in that height of
spirit, that they rejoiced in the midst of tortures. It was this that cheered
the heart of a Martyr, that was troubled a little before his suffering, the
Comforter coming and assuring him of happiness at the resurrection. Gregorius
Nazianzenus in his third Oration tells us of Theclas and some other Martyrs
that were observed by the spectators ((...)) to be very merry in the extremity
of torments. Marcus of Arethusa when the bloody persecutors had exercised his
Faith and patience with several sorts of tortures, and did afterward draw him
through draughts, and other noisome places, he accounted it ((...)) rather his
pomp and glory, then his misery and calamity. Women have discovered masculine,
and heroical spirits when they were called to suffer for the Lord. (Nostri
pueri and mulierculae tortores suos taciti vincunt, and exprimere illis gemitum
nec ignis potest) Lactantius says, that the Christian children and women did
by their silence overcome their tormentors, and the flames of fire could not
make them weep. Austin tells of a poor weak maid that went to suffer for
Christ (tanquam ad epulas invitata) as though she had been invited to a
banquet. We read of some, when they came to lay down their lives, they were
sorry that they had no more lives to lose for the Lord Jesus. Tertullian
says, that the Christians were so ready to suffer, that they were as willing
to be devoured by the Lions, as the people were desirous of their destruction
by the Lions. Eusebius tells us that when as the Proconsul exhorted Germanicus
to relent, admonishing him of his tender years, praying him to pity his own
case, being now in the flower of his youth: he without intermission enticed the
beast to devour him. Eusebius fourth book of the Eccl. Hist. What steeled the
spirits of these men, and carried them above carnal reason, and the weak
principles of nature, but a strong and powerful persuasion in their spirits,
that they should have a glorious and joyful resurrection at the appearing of
the Lord Jesus Christ?

This is that that the Apostle proves to us, Heb. 11.35. Some were tortured,
not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection. He
informs us that when deliverance was offered, they would not accept of it.
What was the reason? they expected a resurrection; Threatenings could not
terrify them from the truth, nor promises draw them to error, because they
were without wavering persuaded of a resurrection. This was that that made
Polycarpus the Martyr so willing todie for the Lord Jesus Christ, which
appears by his speech when he was tied at the stake, I thank thee that thou
have graciously vouchsafed this day, to allot me a portion among the number of
Martyrs, among the people of Christ unto the resurrection of the everlasting
life, both of body and soul, etc. Eusebius: This was that likewise that made the
Saints to be so merry, and cheerful upon their deathbeds. When Hilarion lay
sick, and in his flesh did feel a little fear of death, he presently reproves
himself, and breaks forth into these words. Egredere, egredere anima, go
forth, go forth my soul, have thou served Christ so many years, and now art
thou afraid to die?

What difference could there be between the death of Saints, and of wicked,
profane, unbelieving men, if there were no resurrection of the dead at all?
and therefore as you desire to live comfortably, and to die happily in the
bosom of Christ, rejoicing upon your deathbeds, live constantly in the
assurance of the truth of this Doctrine of the resurrection; and while others
that have seduced ignorant and poor people, into Familisme with a brazen face
all their days, shall tremble upon their deathbeds, being afraid of death,
and dreading a judgment day which they have denied, like the Emperor Hadrian.

Animula vagula, blandula, --
Quae nunc abibis in loca? --
Pallidula, rigida, nudula.
Poor, wandering, pale, quivering soul, whither shall thou go? ( Platina in
the lives of the Popes.) You shall call for death, and not look on death, as a
way to the infernal prison, but as a passage to immortality in Heaven; ye
shall see the Lion death slain, and find nothing but honey in the carcass:
you shall rejoice in confidence that your bodies shall be raised while they
shall tremble for fear of a resurrection.

For I would have you to take notice that God seldom suffers men that are
grown to this height of unbelief, and ungodliness, to deny the resurrection,
and Christ's coming in the flesh, to die without galled and troubled
consciences. As it is observed by some, of many that were professed Atheists,
who when they came to their death beds, though they in their health, and
strength, swimming in a world of pleasure and contentments, asserted that there
was no god, yet when they came to lie on their deathbeds, none seemed to be
more afraid of a God, and to tremble so much at his power as these men: so none
are more afraid of death, Hell, and a resurrection, then some of these that
have denied that there is any Hell or a resurrection. I remember the speech of
Zeno the Philosopher, if I would persuade any man from Atheism, said he, I
would lead him to the deathbed of an Atheist when he is gasping out his last
breath. So, if I had not sufficiently persuaded you that there shall be a
resurrection of the body, by what I have brought out of the word of truth, if I
knew where any of these did lie sick I would carry you to their deathbeds, and
you might see some of them troubled, and galled in their conscience that have
blasphemously professed that there is no Christ come in the flesh, and that
there shall be no resurrection of the body hereafter. I shall not need at the
present to add many more words, for I hope better things of you, and such
things which accompany salvation, I hope there are few such spirits as these,
in this Congregation, yet I know the Devil is so subtle, that where he thinks
people are most spiritual, and know God most, and are acquainted with Christ,
he sends his imps, his Sadduces to trouble, and assault them: he does not set
so much upon any people to draw them away, as upon those that make profession
of the Gospel of Christ. The Devil knows such whom he has safe within his
own command, and many of these are not assaulted by these imps, but when men
seem to be heirs, and boast of the Lord Jesus, and profess themselves to be
in the spirit of glory and adoption, and to have their names written in Heaven,
and that none are able to separate them from the love of God; the Devil sends
his evil Angels to such men as these. Therefore knowing that you should meet
with such spirits, I thought good to speak somewhat before that being
forewarned you might be fore-armed, (praemoniti praemuniti) that you may go on
in the power of God, and the strength of his might: though the Devil may
buffet you for a time by these wicked instruments, and cast his fiery darts
into your hearts, and spirits to persuade you that there is no resurrection,
and may certainly know that if there be any truth in the history of the Gospel,
this is a truth, concerning the resurrection. And it is the desire of my soul
that ye may live continually and constantly in the confidence and assurance of
the resurrection of your bodies, which being joined with a lively Faith in
Christ's death and resurrection, will sweeten your lives and crown your deaths
with happiness. Death which came in upon men as a legal curse, shall be
turned into a blessing unto you, it shall not be your fear, but desire, with
Paul ye shall desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. But this Doctrine
being laid aside as of no worth, or value, Christ will appear unto you but a
shadow, fancy, and forged Chymera of man's brain: As the wicked Pope was
persuaded, who did thus glory in his riches, What great riches have we gotten
by this fable of Christ! Wherefore as you desire to breath forth your souls
with joy into the bosom of the Lord Jesus, live in the comforts of the
resurrection through Christ. That will make you say in the midst of the pangs
of death with Simeon, Lord let thy servant now depart, for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation. Or else such music will be in your hearts, as was in Stephens
when he prayed, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; ye shall have peace at the last,
which shall be everlasting. The life of grace shall be lengthned out with an
eternity of glory, which God and the Father grant unto you in the riches of his
grace, through his son our blessed Jesus and Redeemer, Amen.

Christ's Title to the dead bodies of Saints maintained.
SERMON II.
CHrist is a Christians shield and buckler, so that none can strike at a
Christian but through the sides and loins of his Savior; We cannot wrong
Saints unless we injure the King of Saints, Christ and his people have the
same Enemies. This is evident in the opposers of the resurrection, who as they
are enemies to Christians, so they are to Christ; and they do not so much
wrong to his people, as they offer violence unto him: as they would bereave his
members of the happiness of their resurrection, so they would rob him of his
limbs, members and glory. And therefore as I have pleaded against the living
adversaries of dead Saints, so I shall now plead the cause of Christ against
those enemies of Christ, who in denying the resurrection, deny the raising of
his mystical body, which does fight against that truth which does next present
it self unto us in the text, in these words, My dead body shall they arise.

I must speak something for the exposition, something by way of amplification
of that which I apprehend to be the truth of God, mainly pointed at in the
words,

Together with my dead body shall they rise.
So it is in our translation, and those that carry it thus, they make this to
be the meaning of the words, that the bodies of the Saints shall be raised
together with the body of the Lord Jesus. And if the Holy Ghost did point at
this, then the first thing that should be observed would be this, that

Christ Jesus had a body, a natural body. If it do not clearly appear from
this place, yet it does from others: for it is said, he was made of the seed of
David according to the flesh. And likewise Joh. 1. The word was made flesh.
And, great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy
3.16. which will overthrow that which some Familisticall spirits dare to assert
in our times, that the Lord Jesus Christ never had any natural body,
allegorizing the whole history of the incarnation, life and death, resurrection
and ascension of the Lord Jesus.

But secondly, if it be thus expounded as some learned men do expound the
words, the next observation will be this, that

This body of Christ was a dead body. Revel. 1.18. I am be that lives and was
dead. The true Christ in his body was once dead; his body was a crucified body;
He his own self (says Peter) in his own body bare our sins upon the Cross,
1 Pet. 2.24. He was wounded for our iniquities, his body was bruised for our
transgressions, Isa. 53. Thirdly, that

The dead body of the Lord Jesus was raised, with my dead body they shall rise,
it is supposed, that this dead body spoken of shall arise, and this is that,
that is so frequently preached by the Apostles, who were witnesses appointed by
God, to testify that the Lord Jesus did rise from the dead.

The Devil knew what a truth this was, how much life, glory, sweetness, and
power there is in it; therefore he employed his instruments the Scribes and
Pharisees to do what they could to smother this truth of the resurrection of
the Lord Jesus: What lies did they not make? what stones did they, not turn?
what pains did they not take that they might possess the people with this
persuasion, that the Lord Jesus Christ did never rise out of the grave: but
that his Disciples came and stole him away?

But (brethren) Christ is risen, and those that rightly understand this, do
find what sweetness, and consolation comes to their hearts, by believing this
point. There is so much in it, that Paul professes, he desired to know nothing
but Christ, and him crucified, Phil. 3.10. the power of his resurrection, and
the fellowship of his sufferings. And Peter, 1 Pet. 1.3. says, that God has
begotten us again to a lively hope through the resurrection of the Lord Jesus.
The hope of the Disciples was almost dead, and extinguished, when the Lord
Jesus lay in the grave; but now Christ is risen, and has discovered his power
in vanquishing his, and all our enemies, now we have a lively hope in us that
believe the resurrection of Christ: for in the believing of his resurrection we
have a sweet, and comfortable assurance of our own resurrection from the dead.

Fourthly, with my dead body shall they rise. Christ (as I hinted before) did
all things, and suffered all things as a public person: he died not for his
own but for our sins. Qui non habuit propria, portavit aliena, Full. He that
had no sins of his own, did bear the sins of other men: he rose not so
much for his own, as for our Justification: He died for our sins, Romans 4.
the last, and he rose for our Justification. So that when Christ did rise, we
rose. And he that believes this in the spirit, sees that he himself is risen
with the Lord. There is is a twofold resurrection.

A resurrection by Faith, when we do believe that we are risen in Christ, our
King, head, and leader; and there is a resurrection in our own persons, when
we shall be raised in our own bodies. Christ did rise for the good, and in the
behalf of all his people, and Christ keeps possession of Heaven after his
resurrection for us, in whose person we are already risen, and in this respect
it may be said, that together with his dead body we shall arise.

Fifthly, with my dead body shall they rise. Some interpret it thus: by the
power of the Lord Jesus Christ they shall rise, that is, there shall come at
the last day, a power from the Lord Jesus Christ, to raise up the Saints to
enjoy glory with the Father. But because I do not find these two words in the
Hebrew, Together, nor with: therefore be pleased to let me pass by, these
observations, and to give you what I do apprehend to be the plain meaning of
the text; and to read the words thus.

My dead body shall they rise.
They are the words of the Lord Jesus, delivered by him for the comfort of his
people, assuring them that they shall be raised as his body. And though some
do understand them concerning the restoration of the Jews, and the bringing
in of them unto to Christ: yet I apprehend that this is the true, spiritual
meaning of God in the words which I have opened to you this day. The point then
will be this, the dead bodies of the Saints which shall be raised, are the dead
bodies of Christ himself.

(...) cadaver meum resurgent. They shall arise as my carcass or dead body:
which I shall enlarge by some considerations. First consideration, Christ and
his members are one: therefore the Saints shall be raised as the body of the
Lord Jesus Christ. The members of the body, are the members of the head: Christ
Jesus he is the head of the body; therefore the bodies of the Saints being
raised, they are raised as the body of the Lord Christ. Ephesians. 5.30. We are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. The body of a Saint is the
body of the Lord Jesus, the flesh of a Saint is the flesh of the Lord Jesus;
and the spirit of a Saint is one with the spirit of Jesus. Paul persecuted the
Saints, and cast their bodies into prison; Christ calls to him from heaven, Why
persecutest thou me? When the body of a Saint is imprisoned, Christ is then
shut up in prison; so when the bodies of the Saints are raised, the body of the
Lord Jesus Christ is raised: As the Animal spirits lie in the head, by which,
motion is conveyed to the members: so the spirit of power lies in the Lord
Jesus Christ, by which we are moved, by which we are raised; in which spirit we
both in body, and spirit are made one with the Lord Christ.

This Doctrine of our union with Christ is likewise set forth by Paul, 1 Cor.
6.15. Know you not (says the Apostle) that your bodies are the members of
Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of a
harlot? As the hand or foot of a man, may be said to be part of the man, so the
bodies of the Saints may be said to be part of the Lord Jesus. For as the head
and all the members of the body make one natural body in that one spirit that
is in them all, and acts in them all; so Christ and all believers make one in
flesh and spirit, by that one spirit which dwells in the flesh of Christ; and
in the flesh, and spirit of every true believer. 1 Cor. 12.12. As the body is
one, and has many members, and all the members of that one body being many,
are one body: so also is Christ: Here you see that the Apostle calls the
members of Christ, Christ mystical, so also is Christ says he, he gives the
Church the name of Christ, by reason of this near union which is between
Christ Jesus, and all his members.

Again, the Saints they are married to the Lord Jesus, and as the body of the
wife may be said to be the husbands: so the bodies of the Saints as well as
their souls belong to the Lord Jesus, and are one with him. And as Adam, when
Eve was brought to him, said, This is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh:
so Christ when the dead bodies of the Saints shall be raised, raises his own
body, and will say, This is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, then shall
be the great marriage of the Lamb; then it shall be solemnized in a most
glorious manner; and then Christ shall own all those who were given to him by
the Father; and there in a solemn manner shall he marry them to himself, he
shall own them all for his own wife, and they all shall be looked on as one in
him. Likewise, the bodies of the Saints that are raised, are the body of
Christ, as the sprigs of a tree, or the branches of a vine, may be said to be
part of the tree, or part of the vine. Our Savior sets forth this similie to
us, Joh. 15. where he compares himself to a vine, and all believers to branches
in this vine: Christ shall be as the great vine in the resurrection, and all
believers shall be branches, and sprigs sprouting out of this vine from that
life, power, and spirit that God shall put forth through the body of the Lord
Jesus. This union is not by the confusion of things which are united, as the
ignorant Familists do fondly conceive, but by the union of things which are
different in their personal beings, and individual natures, which will
appear by the similitudes, which God does make use of for the illustrating of
this truth unto us. As of body and members: though all the members do make but
one body, yet every member does retain its proper place, office and being in
the body; so that the hand is not the foot, nor the foot the arm, or head: so
it is between Christ and his people, Christ still remains in his own person
as head, and they as several members belonging to that head. The spirit and
body make one man, yet the spirit is not the body, nor the body the spirit. The
vine and branches are one, yet the vine is not the branch, nor the branch the
vine: The Husband and wife are one, yet the Husband is not the wife, nor the
wife the Husband.

The second consideration for the amplifying of this point may be this, because
that whatsoever he did or suffered, was that he might bring all believers to an
oneness with himself, and the Father, and this is that he prays for, Joh.
17. The glory that thou gave me, I have givent hem, that they may be one, as
we are one: Christ did therefore bear our sins, Christ did therefore put
himself under all the curses due to us for our enormities; he did therefore
man fest himself as a conqueror over all the Enemies that opposed us, that
all things that might be any hindrance to our union, or hinder our spiritual
communion with God, being removed in him, Ephesians. 12.14. we might be brought to an
oneness, and see our selves as one body, and one spirit with him. Our
happiness lies in our oneness with Father, Word and Spirit, which are but
one. Man made himself miserable by disuniting himself from God, who is but
one, Mar. 12.29. and Christ does make him happy by bringing him back again to
that oneness which he had with God. It was the office and employment of
Christ, to bring all things from disunion, to union and oneness with himself,
and the Father, which he has effected for us, and therefore they shall be
raised, as the body of the Lord Jesus Christ, My dead body shall they rise.

The third consideration is this, they shall rise as his dead body, because
they shall rise as the proper goods, possession, and inheritance of the Lord
Jesus. Ask of me, and I will give thee the beathen for thine inheritance, and
the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession; they shall be raised as the
body of Christ; because Christ shall have a right, propriety, and Interest in
them. Ye are not your own, ye are bought with a price, your bodies as well as
your spirits are Gods, etc. 1 Cor. 6.20. the Apostle gives this reason, why
Christ died, and revived, and rose again, that he might be Lord, of the quick
and dead, Romans 14.9. that as a servant is more his Masters then his own: so
Christ being the Lord of the resurrection, we shall be more his then (...)
own: we shall be raised as those in whom Christ has a propriety, and
Interest: we shall be looked on as the inheritance of the Lord Jesus, he shall
be King and Lord over us all, and rule over us: His Scepter of glory shall be
set up in every heart; and his Throne shall be exalted in every spirit. Thus;
My dead body they shall rise. They shall rise as mine: they are my dead men,
and they shall be my living men. Here you see that Christ will own them for
his when they are in the dust. There are some that shall speak to Christ at the
resurrection, as though they were familiarly acquainted with him, whom he will
not own, saying, Depart from (...) I know you not ye workers of iniquity.
But Christ will own his Saints, Mal. 3.17. They shall be mine, says the Lord
of Hosts, when I make up my Jewels or special treasure, and I will spare them
as a man spares his own son that serves him. As men will not part with
their Jewels, so Christ will not lose the bodies of his Saints, they are part
of his special treasure.

The fourth consideration is this; the bodies of the Saints that shall be
raised may be called the body of the Lord Jesus, for this reason: because
Christ in the Spirit shall be the life, soul, and form that shall give life
and being to the bodies of the Saints at the resurrection. As the body is
called, the body of the Spirit that dwells in it, so Christ Jesus dwelling in
the bodies of his Saints by his Spirit, their bodies may be said to be his
body. And as a man may say, this is my body, it belongs to that humane spirit
in me: because his humane spirit moves, lives in it, and does as a Divine power
act in it: so our bodies being raised, may be said to be the bodies of Christ,
because he shall act as the Spirit, form, and soul in them. Christ shall be
the soul which shall give life and being to all Saints which shall be raised
by him.

The fifth consideration. Death cannot dissolve the union which is between
Christ and a believer. The love of the Father is the urne in which the ashes of
dead Saints are preserved, Romans 8.38, 39. I am persuaded, says Paul, that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come; nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. Man does consist of a natural body and humane spirit. And death cannot
make a separation between Gods love and our bodies, no more then it can make a
separation between his love and our souls. Among the things which God has
bestowed upon us in Christ, the Apostle does reckon up death, 1 Cor. 3.22.
which shows that it is not a curse; but a blessing to Saints. It would be a
curse unto us, did it bring an irrecoverable ruin and destruction to our
bodies. Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord. Deaths
disability to cast our bodies out of Gods love and protection is that which
does convert death through Christ into a blessing unto us. Paul calls Saints
in respect of their bodily death, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. (...), Those that sleep in
Christ. As sleep does not bereave men of life, so death does not take away from
Saints their life which is in Christ. As a Philosopher told a tyrant he might
kill him but not hurt him; so death may kill but cannot hurt a Saint, because
the union between God and him is indissolvible, Romans 14.8. Whether we live or
die, we are the Lords. And therefore it may be truly said,

My dead body shall they arise.
Sixth consideration. The bodies of Saints are sanctified by Christ, and
therefore he cannot but own them. Sanctification is the mark or seal of
Christ. As merchants do set their seals and marks upon their goods which
they will own, so Christ will for ever own that upon which he has set the
seal and mark of his sanctifying Spirit. The spirit dwells in the body as
well as in the Spirit of a Saint, and Christ will never cease to own his own
house, and the place which he has chosen for his habitation. God does not only
honor our bodies by calling them his house, but calls them his Temple, 1
Cor. 6.19. Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Spirit? It is
not a paradoxe then in Divinity, that Christ at the resurrection should own
them as his own.

Seventh consideration. Christ should be incomplete; A man that wants a
member is incomplete and imperfect; so Christ should be imperfect and
incomplete, were he defective in any of his members at the resurrection. And
therefore all the bodies of the Saints must be raised as his body. It is an
Argument that some of the Schoolmen make use of, to prove the necessity of a
resurrection of bodies, from the incompleatnesse of the soul, when it is
separated from its proper body which it did inform; and with which in union it
made one compositum. So the bodies of Saints must be raised, that Christ may be
complete in his mystical body, as he is in his own person. The Church is
called (...), the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 1. last, because as a body is not
full and complete in his being that wants a member, so Christ should not be
complete if any part of him were wanting. And therefore the bodies of all
Saints must be raised, that Christ may appear in his glory and compleatnesse
at the resurrection.

And thus having opened this Doctrine, and illustrated it by these
considerations, I shall draw some useful conclusions from it.

Use 1.
Seeing Christians shall be one body at the resurrection, this should teach us
to be one here in the bond of love. That one member should oppose and fight
against another member, is against nature. And that one Christian should fight
against another, or take his fellow-member by the throat, is against the
principles of grace. In the 13. of Genesis and the S. ver. Abram does thus speak
unto his brother Lot, Let there be no strife I pray thee between me and thee,
for we are Brethren. Christians should not strive, or contend one against
another, because they are fellowmembers. It is reported of John, that in his
old age being unable by weakness to speak long unto the Congregation, he
would stand up, and in stead of a long Sermon ingeminate this Precept, Diligite
filioli, diligite, Little Children, love, love one another. There can be no
stronger Argument to love then the consideration of our union, Col. 3.15. Let
the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called in one
body. War among members is unnatural, that love and peace may reign and
rule in the hearts of Christians, God does make them all, one body; so the
Apostle in the third of the Ephesians. 6. does teach us that Jews and Gentiles are
(...), Parts of the same body. One that desired to moderate between the
Calvinists and Lutherans, wishing them not to be so bitter the one against the
other, made use of this Argument, telling them that Luther and Calvin were
reconciled in love together in heaven. Let not strife, hatred, malice, and
bitterness prevail among you Christians, for ye shall sweetly agree together
as one body in one Spirit at the resurrection.

Use 2.
There being such a glorius union between us and Christ, it should engage the
spirits of Saints to be much in the contemplation of it. As the blood and
spirits do run through the body, so this Doctrine of union does run
through the whole body of Christian Religion. Our Justification in the person
of Christ, and our own Justification in our own persons by Christ cannot be
clearly understood, if we be totally, ignorant of union with Christ. As the
Philosopher says, that all moral virtues are linck'd together in justice, so
all the points of Christianity are concatenated and joined together in this
doctrine of union.

As the Star did lead the wise men to Christ, shining over the place where
Christ was, so this Doctrine of our union with Christ, shinnig among other
truths of Christ in the Scripture, does hold forth unto us a light to direct us
through the grace of God, into a perfect, and comfortable knowledge of all
other truths. As it does in an especial manner beam forth light unto us, to
confirm us in the Doctrine of the resurrection. For you see that the bodies of
the Saints are to be raised, because they are united to Christ, and one with
him. Therefore this may strengthen the Faith of every one of us concerning the
certainty of the resurrection: What says the Apostle? No man yet ever hated
his own flesh, but nourished it, and cherished it, Ephesians. 5.29. The Lord Jesus
Christ cannot hate his own flesh, nor forget his own body, the bodies of the
Saints, but in love will raise them; even while they lie in the dust they are
his body. Our propriety in a thing does draw out our affection to the thing.
Our bodies belong to the Lord, and are in his heart and affections, even while
they moulder in the dust; therefore let this truth nierce your understandings,
and sink deep into your memories, and be fully persuaded that your bodies
shall be raised: because they are not so much your bodies as the body of the
Lord Jesus. The Scripture, as you have heard, speaks so gloriously of that
union, which all the Saints have with Jesus Christ in that one Spirit which is
in Christ, and in every Saint, that it seems to hold forth Christ as
incomplete, till he have gathered all his members into one body. And certainly,
Christ will not appear incomplete in his body at the resurrection, which he
should do, should he not by his power command the bodies of the Saints to
come out of the earth. Therefore he will not suffer any part of himself to lie
in the dust, he will not appear at the general resurrection, without a limb,
not without a hand; not without a finger; not without the least member. Thou
that art the meanest Christian, that apprehendest thy self to be but as the
toe of Christ, may be strongly persuaded of thy resurrection, for I tell thee
wh^^ Christ shall appear at the great resurrection, he will not be without a
toe; not without the lowest, and most inferior member of his body. He will
appear in his fullness, and all the Saints gathered together and made one with
him in body and spirit, are his fullness and compleatnesse. The King when he
rides in triumph, or to his great Counsel, he rides in his Royal Robes and in
all his glory. When Christ shall appear the second time, he will ride in
Triumph as a Conqueror of all Enemies, and will ride to his great Counsel or
Parliament of Saints, who are to judge the Delinquents of the world. And the
Saints are his glory, 2 Cor. 8.23. and therefore they must be raised that he
may be in his full glory.

If thou look upon thy self, and thy body, and consider how thou have
dishonored God in thy body; (it may be) thou may be startled in thy spirit;
and have such sad thoughts as these; Will Christ ever raise this body as his,
that I have abused to sin? shall this body be glorified which I have
dishonored by base and filthy lusts? but when thou have any such thoughts as
these, in which the Devil appears to thee as an Angel of light, to make thee
question the truth of the glorious resurrection of thy body; then look beyond
thy self, beyond the sins that thou have committed against God in thy body,
and spirit. And think thus with thy self; This body, though I have abused it
by lust and intemperance: though I have dishonored God by the sins which I
have committed, and acted a^ it were upon a stage in this body, and flesh of
mine; yet now the property is altered; I am not now to look on it as my body,
I am to look on it as the body of the Lord Jesus: it is that body, that he has
washed from all sin in his own blood; it is that body, that he died for,
that he might cleanse it from filthiness, and uncleanness; it is his body, he
has right to it, and a propriety in it: it is his, and none of mine. Christ
will not lose that which belongs to himself and therefore it shall be raised
in glory. We see how unwilling men are to part with that which is their
possession, and inheritance. We know how Naboth answered Abab, who would have
had his Vineyard, 1 King. 21.3. Should I give the inheritance of my Fathers
unto thee? we are the inheritance, the possession of the Lord Jesus; and he
will not lose any part of his inheritance. This Argument is of sufficient
strength to silence carnal reason, if it were thoroughly weighed by us in the
balance of the Sanctuary. For if a man look on himself as out, of himself,
and the being which he has in the first Adam, and behold himself as one, with
the Lord Jesus, in a spiritual oneness, seeing himself as such a part of
Christ, as a hand, or a foot may be said to be a part of the body; and
knowing Christ has undertaken to provide for his body, and to own it for his
own: this will establish him in an unshaken considence, that the Lord Jesus
Christ intends to raise his body, and to assure and ascertaine us that he will
raise us, he himself is risen in his own person: If the head be above the
water, the whole body may be drawn out of the water without drowning; Christ
our head is above water, above the billows that overwhelmed him; is above
sin that was charged on him; is above the curses of the Law that came upon
him, when he was made a sacrifice for finne; above the temptations of Satan;
above the weakness of the flesh. Death could not hold him as her prisoner: and
this may ascertaine us, that we his members shall be drawn up out of the
water; we shall be above all things that we may call finne in our selves,
above the reach of Satan's fiery darts, we shall be above Death: that will be
fulfilled which is spoken in the 1 Cor. 15. Death is swallowed up in victory:
Christ has already fully conquered Death in his own person, and will conquer
it, in the person of all those that are his members, enabling them to believe
in him.

Christ does infuse spirit, and fortitude into all his soldiers by enabling
them to look on him their General. Respice ad Ducem, Look unto your Captain,
was the old Roman word of Command, to the common soldiers, to stir them up
to imitate the valor and fortitude of their Commanders. And Christian
soldiers are made truly valiant, by looking upon the fortitude and conquests
of him who is the Captain of their salvation. Heb. 2.10. And knowing their
union with him, they see their head and Captain risen, whose they are, which
makes them Conquerours of death, as his valiant soldiers by a strong
persuasion from him, and in him of a suture resurrection.

In the next place you see, that the bodies of Saints shall be raised for heaven
as his body. Therefore this may teach us to glorify God in our bodies and
spirits while we are here below: If the Lord Jesus Christ will raise our
bodies as his own body: it is consonant to reason, that we should use our
bodies as the bodies of Christ. This consideration (if God go along with it)
will be mavelous powerful to teach us to be holy, not only in our spirits,
but in our bodies, confidering that they are the bodies of the Lord Jesus.
Christ will raise thy body at the last day as his own, it is his body, and not
thine; his spirit informs it, he is owner, and possessor of it, thou art not
thine own, thou art bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20. Thererefore glorify God
in thy body and in thy Spirit, which are Gods. Seeing Christ will raise thy
body as his body, when it is dead, therefore behave thy selse toward thy body,
as the body of Christ while thou art alive.

This is that that the Apostle presses from this confideration, 1 Cor. 6.15.
Shall I take the members of Christ, and make them the members of a harlot? a
Christian would not misdemeane himself toward his body, if he did consider
what his body is, it is the house and Palace of the Lord Jesus, the Temple of
God. It was accounted a great fault for any man to misbehave himself in the
Temple of Solomon, which was a place then, by Gods appointment more holy then
other places. Our bodies are spiritual Temples: therefore defile not the
Temple of the Lord. Bring not in, the abomination of desolation into the holy
place: bring not the filth of sin into it: suffer not lust to lie in thy
body: suffer not pride in thy flesh: sin not against thy own body in any
kind: take heed of riot, and drunkenness; take heed of those fins that are
sins against the body: because by them thou sinnest against the Temple, and
house of God, thou sinnest against that, that is not thine own, but is the
Lord Jesus Christ's.

Our bodies should not be like the Egyptian Temples, that were stately Edifices
and buildings, but in them there was nothing, but some noy some, and filthy
beasts. Thy body is a stately Edifice: O set not up thy beastly lusts as Idols
to be worshipped there. Galen that great Physician, when he came to anatomize
man's body, he stood in admiration of the workmanship; wondering at the skillful
hand, and finger of him that was the maker of it. Thou must not only look on
thy body as it is a natural Edifice: but as it is a building for the Lord
Jesus, as a Temple that Christ has made choice of; a Temple for the Holy
Spirit to dwell in. Therefore suffer not Crocodiles, and noisome beasts to sit
there: stoup not to lusts: fall not down on thy knees before thy corruptions;
sacrifice not to uncleanness; Suffer not any sin to reign in thy mortal
body; Romans 6. thy body is the body of the Lord, it is under the power of
Christ; therefore let Christ only reign in it. Sin shall not have dominion
over you; because you are not under the Law, but under grace, Romans 6.19. As ye
have yielded your members servants unto uncleanness, and to iniquity unto
iniquity: even so now yield your members servants to righteousness unto
holiness.

If men did but consider the glory of their persons; the glory that God has
put upon their spirits, in making them one spirit with his own; and the glory
that God has put upon their bodies, in making them his houses, Temples, and
places of glory to dwell in: through the goodness of God it would restrain
them from sin. That the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, should
come and dwell in these humble, and low cottages of ours. That the God of glory
should come and dwell in houses of clay, in houses of mud, in houses that
presently must be pulled down, and lie in the dust. O how should the serious
and spiritual meditation of this, put bounds and limits, yea, a period to our
corruptions.

As Luther does report of one, that being tempted to any sin by the Devil,
would answer, that she was Christian. Thy body is Christ's by conquest, he has
dispossessed the Devil of the strong hold which he had in thy body, and
therefore suffer not the Devil to rule there as he did when he was Lord of
thee. If the Devil come, and tempt thee to commit any sin, which is a finne
that thou may act with thy body: answer him thus; Satan away, my ears cannot
be open to thy temptations, I cannot listen to thee to commit this sin, my
body is not mine own, but the body of the Lord Jesus Christ.

And when thou find thy self in thy body, at any time unwilling for the
service of Christ, confider with thy self, my body is not mine own, it
belongs to the Lord Christ, he will have a care of it at the resurrection, he
will not lose my earth or ashes, he will preserve my dust, and keep it as a
precious Diamond in the casket of his own love. Therefore be willing to serve
Christ in thy body; he ownes the bodies of Saints here, and will own them
hereafter; he has a special care of the bones of his Saints, and though the
limbs of their bodies be carried from one end of the world to the other, and
scattered in several places and climates, yet by his power he will bring one
limb to another: therefore glorify Christ in your bodies, who has promised to
quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit which he has given unto you, Romans
8.11.

In the next place, another use may be this, to make us willing to sacrifice
our bodies, for the maintaining of the truths of Christ, if Christ be pleased
to call us to suffer for him. We do not know but this point may be very
seasonable; we know not how soon Christ may call for our bodies to lie in
prison, for some truths he has discovered to us which he has not made known
to others; why should we be unwilling that Christ should suffer in his own
body? Consider, that the body which shall lie in prison, it is not thy body,
thou art not able to raise it, it is the body of Christ. Therefore if it be the
mind of Christ that this body shall lie in prison, say not, My will, but thy
will be done; and if Christ will lead thee further, if he will not only lead
thee to be imprisoned in thy body for the profession of the truth: but if he
call thee to give up thy life to loose it for him, that thou may find it
again in him: let this consideration make thee willing to be a martyr, and
sufferer for the Lord Christ; why should not he do what he will with his own?
If he will lead thee to a pillorie, to an hot Iron to receive a mark in thy
body for him, to an halter, fire, and faggot, be contented. And be confident,
that if Christ ever call thee to suffer, he will give thee power, and strength,
for to suffer in thy body; because he cannot forget to be mindful of his own
body. We know how Christ threatens those that are ashamed of him, and his
word, in an adulterous, and sinful generation, Mark 8.38. Of him says he,
shall the Son of man be ashamed when he shall come in the glory of the Father,
with power and great glory. As Christ will not own but be ashamed of wicked,
ungodly, and unbelieving men, that make profession of his name in words,
without his power in their hearts: so Christ will own the bodies of his
Saints, and such who truly believe in him, and have laid down their lives for
him, and they shall find their lives again at the resurrection of the dead.
Therefore let this make us willing to suffer.

I am the more willing to press this point, because I see a spirit of
baseness, and cowardlinesse in Christians; I find not that courage in the
hearts and spirits of Christians that should be in them. The complaint of
Jeremiah may justly be taken up in our times; he says, Jer. 9.3. None were
valiant for the truth. There is scarce a man that appears for truth in the
height of zeal. Men will rather sin against Conscience to comply with the
world, then oppose themselves against the corruptions of the world: they will
rather swim down with the tide, and stream of the world, then oppose the
wicked stream of worldly corruptions.

And it is to be feared, that many professors have their eye so much upon the
Civil Magistrate, from this corruption and unsoundnesse in their hearts, they
will be of the same Religion with the Civil Magistrate, because they will not
suffer any thing for the Lord. They look on Christ in their apprehensions, as
precious: but when they are told of a crucified Christ, of a persecuted Christ,
of a Christ hanging on a tree; a Christ to be spit upon, condemned, and
persecuted, to suffer in the world: with the young man in the Gospel, they go
away sorrowful from such a Sermon; they would have Christ and the world
together; but if they cannot have Christ, but they must leave the world, they
had rather part with Christ then with the world. They are like Joseph of
Arimathea, that took Christ, and left the Cross behind him; So, delicate
Professors in our time, they will take Christ, but they will be sure to leave
the Cross, they will be wise in their way, they will profess Religion no
further then they may hold the world, and Religion together.

One reason of this cowardice and baseness of spirit is this, because they do
not confider, that the bodies of Saints are under the care and in the
possession of Jesus. And that we cannot glorify God more then by lying in
prison, in love to Christ; or dying for him; if it be his pleasure to call us,
to seal his truths with cur blood: And if we did confider, what a holy flame,
and Heavenly spark was in the hearts and spirits of primitive Christians, in
believing this truth, that they accounted it their greatest honor, to be
dishonored for Christ, their greatest credit to be discredited by the world
for him, their Liberty to be imprisoned, their life to die at a stake, for
professing this glorious truth of Christ discovered to their souls, Phil.
1.21. it would put fire and spirit into us: and this lethargy that is upon us,
would speedily be cured: Indeed we are a lukewarm people; the discretion and
prudence of politic professors in our times, has swallowed up zeal; In the
times of Popery, there was zeal without knowledge in this Kingdom; and now
we have knowledge without Zeal. And the ground of this, is this, because
either we do not meditate on this truth, or else, because we are rather cold,
and formal, then truly spiritual in the meditation of it, which should engage
us as we tender the glory of Christ, to be more frequent and serious in our
contemplations, concerning it, for the future. I find that Christians made much
use of this point in former days, (though I do not wholly justify their
practice) for as it is our custom to salute one another, when we meet, so it
was the custom of some Christians, when they met one another to utter these
words, Christus resurrexit, Christ is risen. They apprehended it sa a point,
that came with such power on their spirits, to enable them to be willing to
suffer for the Lord, that this was their salutation in the time of persecution,
assuring themselves that he which was risen in his own person as head, would
arise in all Saints as his members. And this was that, that made them so
willing to jeopard their lives for the name of the Lord Jesus. We read of Paul,
Act. 21.13. that when they exhorted him not to go to Jerusalem, because the
Spirit in Agabus had made it known, that he should be persecuted and bound
when he came thither, Why do you weep and break my heart, says he? I am not
only willing to be bound at Jerusalem; but to die there for the name of the
Lord Jesus: It was a heartbreaking to Paul, to tell him that he should not
go to suffer at Jerusalem, as if it were his greatest suffering, not to suffer
for the Gospel; But we have learned this point by roate, and it is a thing few
understand; we talk of it, in a Parrat-like way, and we have mumbled it over
in our Creed (I believe the resurrection of the body;) but few have dived into
the bottom of it, or sucked the sweetness and spirituality which lies in it,
or else we should not be so lukewarm in the cause of Christ, but for the
future, let us look up to God; that he may give us spiritual and Heavenly
wisdom, that so we may have a more Divine and spiritual knowledge of it. He
that is the resurrection, and the life of Saints, is the only teacher of the
Doctrine of the resurrection. It is reported of the Pelican, that her young
being poisoned by the Serpent, she does give them life, by her own death and
blood; so Christ does quicken us his members to a life of immortality, by his
own death and blood. And does give us the knowledge of life in the knowledge
of his death, bloudshedding and resurrection, which does enforce the necessity
of our resurrection from his who is our head: And this is the persuasion of
true Saints. And as it is reported of the Phoenix, that when she is to die, she
brings spices into her nest, which being set on fire, she her self is burned
in the fire, and turned to ashes; and out of her ashes comes a new Phoenix; so a
true Christian knows, that though he may be burned, and turned into ashes,
yet out of his own ashes, his body shall be raised again to a new life of
glory, which does arm him against the fear of death, and persecution in the
cause of Christ.

Again this does discover what enemies they are to Christ his Spirit, and
members, who by their wiles, subtilty and hellish Logic would destroy the
Doctrine of the Refurrection: They would rob Christ of his members, who does
here lay claim to the bodies of dead Saints. They would make the Spirit a
lier, who does seal up Saints unto the day of Bedemption, Ephesians. 5.30. And in
whom they wait for the redemption of their bodies, Bom. 8.23. They would rob
Saints of their comfort, which God does give them, in the believing of the
resurrection of the same body, which is committed unto the earth. I am the more
earnest against these men, because I know these factors for Antichrist, are
both active and subtle; as the Serpent did endeavor to beguile Eve, 2 Cor.
11.3. so these endeavor to undermine men, and to draw them from the simplicity
of the Gospel. One, and a chiese part of Christ's simple Gospel is the Doctrine
of the resurrection of our bodies, by the power of Christ: when Paul preached
this at Athens, the Stoics and Epicures did look upon him as a babbler. And
this piece of the Gospel was always accounted foolishness to the learned
Greeks.

And as the Apostle was jealous of them, for fear they should be drawn from
the simplicity of the Gospel: so am I jealous over poor Christians, knowing
that you shall meet with men, that pretend to be spiritual, men of great
light, wisdom, knowledge, and deep understandings; and when you have dived
into the bottom of their spirits, this is all you shall find in them, which
they will labor to draw you to assent unto, to wit, that there is no
resurrection but in the spirit, no corporal resurrection of the body at all.

These are like those, of whom the Apostle speaks, in his time, that corrupt
or deal deceitfully with the word of God. The metaphor is borrowed from
cheating Vintners, or cousening Merchants that adulterate their commodities to
make them vendible, as Beza does well observe: so these, that their horrid
opinions and blasphemies may be vendible, they endeavor (...), to sophisticate
the word, and adulterate it from the plain and simple meaning of the
Holy Ghost. Therefore let me in love to your souls, once more desire you,
that you would be watchful, that none of these draw you away from these
truths, of God, and the Lord Jesus, which have been discovered to you, and
have been sealed upon your hearts and spirits by his own blessed Spirit. The
Devil does sow the tares of Familisme in men's hearts while they sleep. But I
am confident, that you shall believe them, though for a time you may be drawn
to question them and the resurrection, as those in the 1 Cor. 15. and may be
deluded by Familisticall fancies, and notions, as some good Christians have
been, yet if God has laid hold on you, and drawn you to him in Christ, he
will not totally leave you to these damnable opinions: If it were possible,
these Serpents would deceive even the Elect: but Christ intimates, that it is
impossible, that they should ever deceive the Elect. And the Apostle, when he
speaks of such men as these, 2 Timothy 2.19. says that the foundation of the
Lord stands sure, having this seal, of his everlasting election, the Lord
knows who are his. Therefore let not men deceive you, but live in the light
of the Gospel, and in that Spirit that is given forth in the Gospel. Take heed
of these Impostors, hug not the Devil in Samuels mantle: suffer not the Devil
to devour you in a sheeps skin: but walk in the plain simple path of the
Gospel of the Lord Christ. And that you may do this, give me leave to give you
some few directions, for the preserving you in the truth, and the securing of
you from this infection of Familisme.

First, I wish you to apply your selves to the reading of the Scriptures, which
are able to make you wise unto salvation, through Faith which is in Christ, 2 Timothy 5.15. When these men come unto you, it may be they will present you with
books written in a strange Language, stuffed with swelling nonsense, and
affected phrases that none understand, but those that are acquainted with their
blasphemous, horrid, and damnable opinions. And will endeavor to lead you from
the Scriptures; and if yous oppose the truth of Scripture against their
delusion, some of them will affirm, that Peter, and Paul, when they wrote
their Epistles, had but a little light, were but children; they are enlightened
men, grown up unto the stature of perfection, laboring to prove that the
bright star of truth does shine no where so gloriously as in the old Popish
Authors, and new Familisticall scriblers, which they will present unto you.
Therefore that you may not be drawn away by these, keep to the Scriptures; and
know that there is no book in which there is more light then in the Scripture;
or from which you may expect more light, if you look to God for his spirit, to
open the mind of God in the reading of it.

Dulcius exipso font bibuntur aquae.
Waters are sweetest at the wellhead: Antruthes do present themselves most
sweetly unto us, in the Scripture, which is the Well and Fountain, from which
other Writers do fetch the truths, which we find in their writings. He that
addicts himself more to the reading of men's writings then the Scriptures, is
like one, that leaving the Fountain where the waters are pure, had rather
drink in the channel where they are impure and muddy.

Truly, if you grow in grace, you will grow in liking, and approving the holy
Scripture, though it be written in a plain style, and though there be not that
humane Eloquence, and Rhetoric in it, which you shall find in the preaching of
some men, who preach themselves rather then the Lord Jesus, and the simplicity
of the Gospel.

That man is a good proficient in the School of Christ, that every day grows
more, and more in love with the blessed, and holy Scripture. I remember what an
Orator speaking in the commendation of Cicero says, he is a good proficient in
Oratorie, that delights to read the Orations of Cicero; so he is a good
proficient in Christianity, that in believing, delights in the holy Scriptures
of the Old, and New Testament. Therefore you shall find, that men that fall off
to these opinions, presently they slight the Scripture, and either wholly deny
the word of God, or else they overthrow the truth of it by allegorizing those
things that have a plain, simple, historical meaning in them. That is the
first Rule.

Search the Scriptures, and there you shall see no such sancies, and fond
notions as these men have.

The second direction is this, take heed of those that preach not the Gospel in
a plain familiar way, you may know some Familists by their bombastick
language: they speak not in the language of Canaan, in their Sermons: but they
have an affected language of their own: (that few understand, but those that
have applied themselves much to the study of their writings, and are well
acquainted with their opinions,) And by their chymicall dark expressions, and
fond notions, they ^^lude poor souls that think they are spiritual men, and
that great things are revealed to them which are not discovered to other
Saints; when there is nothing but horrid Antichristianisme, or Atheism, lies
at the bottom of their hearts, which shall be evident, when according to the
truth of God, 2 Timothy ^.9. Their folly shall be manifest unt all men. Paul
says, when he came to preach at Corinth, 1 Cor. 2.4. That it was not in the
excellency of speech, nor in the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
plainness of speech, in demonstration of the Spirit and power. And it is the
command of God, that if any man speak, he should speak as the Oracles of God,
1 Pet. 4.11. The (...), or As does relate to the manner of speaking, as well as
to the matter which is to be delivered. Men are to speak, as the Oracles of
God, speaking nothing but truth; and as the Oracles of God for plainness of
speech. St. Paul speaking of true Gospel-Preachers, says, we use great
plainness of speech. The Scripture is in a plain, familiar style, the Sermons
of our Savior are plain, familiar Sermons, adorned with plain similies. And
the Apostles were not ashamed to imitate their Master: so should our discourses
be with all plainnes of speech and demonstration of the spirit and power, that
the glory may be given not to the Eloquence of our tongues, but to the power of
Christ in converting of souls. Therefore take heed of those, that lead you
from the plainness of preaching, hiding their cursed errors in a thicket and
cloud of dark works, and unscripture-like expressions, not holding fast the
form of sound words according to Gods precept, 2 Timothy 1.13. 2 Cor. 3.12. Look
on the Scripture, and see how Paul speaks of Justification, of remission of
sins, of the resurrection, and so let us preach the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the truth of Christ. But those that have language not like the language of
Scripture suspect them, they make a fair show, there is great glory, and
outward pomp in their words: but latet anguis, there is a snake that lies
under these fine green herbs: take heed of such men, and look mmore for the
inward power and Spirit of God in the speaking of men, then for fine words,
phrases, notions, and similies, that men may make use of, to win you to the
approbation of their errors.

The third direction which I shall present unto you is this, take heed of
spiritual pride: for one reason why so many fall off from the truth to these
horrid opinions, is from a principle of spiritual pride; some of these thought
that they had a great deal of knowledge, wisdom, and understanding, and that
they understood as much of the Doctrine of Christ, and mysteries of the Gospel
as was necessary; that they had heard as much of the Doctrine of Justification
as any could preach of it, and of the resurrection, as any could speak: they
knew as they supposed what this man spoke, and what the other preached, what
this man's judgment was, what Authors did write, and they knew perfectly as
they imagined whatsoever lies in the Scripture to be embraced for truth. And by
their pride did surfeit of their knowledge, supposing that they knew all points
of the Gospel, when in deed and in truth, they knew nothing of the Gospel
savingly, spiritually, or practically: so that as the people of Israel came to
loath Manna, and lusted after other food: so these being puffed up with
spiritual pride, begin to loath the Heavenly Manna of the Gospel, and
disesteeme it for the plainness, and simplicity that is in it. And nothing now
will please them but new fancies: therefore they must have Sermons dressed in
another fashion, new cooked, new notions; and new conceits, and anything that
is new pleases them better then the old and ancient truths of the Lord Jesus.
But when God teaches a man to understand the Gospel aright, the more he knows
the Gospel, the more he sees his ignorance of the Gospel: that man sees, he
never learned the Doctrine of Justification fully; that man sees that he has
not sufficiently learned the Doctrine of Sanctification: this man looks not on
his knowledge merely as it is speculative, but as it is practical, when he
sees any unbelief in his heart, he says within himself, I have not
sufficiently learned the Doctrine of Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ: when he
sees any hatred in his spirit, to that which is good, and any inclination to
that which is evil, he wisely concludes, I have not sufficiently learned the
Doctrine of Sanctification; when he finds sadness in his spirit, O says he,
there is more in the Gospel concerning the spirit of joy, and consolation, then
I have attained to; when he reads sundry enigmaticall, and difficult places, of
the Prophets, and in the Revelation, and has nor attained to the spiritual
meaning of them, O (says he) I am not sufficiently acquainted with the truths
which lie hidden in the word: though I may have knowledge enough to carry me
to Heaven, yet I am very ignorant of many truths of Christ. Thus a man that
truly lives the life of Faith, he is not puffed up, as these are, that fall to
these hideous, and blasphemous notions, and opinions. Hab. 2. He that is lifted
up, his heart is not upright: but the just shall live by his Faith. You shall
find that Familisticall spirits are puffed up with a conceit of their
knowledge, notions, and speculations, when indeed they are wholly carnal, and
understand not the deep things of Gods grace in the face of Jesus Christ. But
he that truly walks with God faithfully, that man walks humbly with his God.

True Faith as it exalts us, and shows us our privileges, and honor by the
grace of God in Christ; so it humbles us by the sight of what is in our selves.
The light of grace will as well discover, what we are in our fleshly part, as
what we are by the grace of God in the spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ. And
these that are thus enlightened shall never fall totally and finally from the
pure and simple Gospel of Christ: the Spirit in them does assure them that they
shall abide in him, John 2.27. Therefore beware of pride, the bane of Angels,
and the ruin of men, and the mother of Familisme. But grow in humility;
conceit not that you are full when you are empty. As long as the Widow had
empty vessels, the oil did still run, so, as long as there is an empty vessel
in thy heart, the oil of grace shall flow in unto thee.

The fourth Direction. Take heed that thou do not embrace the Doctrines of
free will, and falling away from grace, some of the Familists of the City, have
been great sticklers to uphold these points, and to revive Arminian Tenets
among Professors, before they did arrive to the top and height of Familisme.
That man will not stand long, who has no strength, but his own legs to uphold
him. Neither will that man stand long for Christ, who stands more by the
strength of his own will, then by the power of Gods grace. Adam standing in
his own strength, lost his happiness when he was wise and righteous; and
can thou maintain thy self in an happy condition by thine own strength,
when thou art unrighteous? True Saints are kept by the power of God through
Faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. The word is (...), which signifies a keeping
of any thing as by a Guard. Gods grace is a guard, by which he does keep all
his, in the way of salvation, so that it is impossible they should fall away
from his grace. It is no wonder then, if they fall away from grace, to
Familisme, who do maintain that Saints may fall away from grace.

The fist Direction. Be not loose or licentious in life, or neglective of
Sanctification under the profession of the Doctrines of Free Grace and
Justification. Many of the professed Familists which we meet with have been
loose Professors of the Doctrine of Grace. The Libertine does live next door to
the Familist, and Libertinisme is the broad road, and highway, or beaten-path
to Familisme.

Lastly, take heed of vain janglings, and disputings in matters of Religion.
Religion is more in practice, then Controversies or speculation. Be more
conscientious to practice what thou know, then curious in disputing about
things that thou know not. And let thine ear be rather open to those that
will instruct thee, then to those that will dispute with thee.

The Disputes and Controversies of the times have made many Atheists and
Familists, in these times. Origin speaking of these words in the 21. Exodus 22.
If men strive and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her,
etc. does thus allegorize them. The woman with child says he, are weak
Christians, who are with child and ready to bring forth truth. The men that
strive are Professors, that with bitterness and violence do contend for their
opinions, and while they strive in heat and bitterness for their opinions, the
Christian miscarries, and does not bring forth truth. How many who did seem to
have Christ almost formed in them, have miscarried and fallen to Familisme, by
the strivings and contentions of Professors; that thou may therefore learn
wisdom by their folly, and stand more steadfastly by their fall, treasure up
the truths which have been delivered, and imprint them upon your memories, and
because reasons, precepts, exhortations, and Rules do little advantage us to
preserve us in the Profession of the Truth, without the power of him who is
truth, look unto him to preserve you in the Faith of your union, with
himself, and his Father in the Spirit, and to ascertaine you of your
resurrections as part of his body; and to enable you as his members to glorify
him, and his Father, in the Spirit for evermore. Amen.

The great Joy of Saints in the great Day of the Resurrection.
SERMON III. Preached on a Thanksgiving DAY.
ISAIAH 26.19. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the
dew of herbs, and the Earth shall cast forth her dead.
I Have showed unto you, that these words are a present comfort, or cordial,
given by God unto his people, for the refreshment of their languishing spirits,
and sad hearts in the midst of their afflictions. And have proved that the
bodies of the Saints shall arise, and that they shall arise as the body of the
Lord Jesus. He is their head; they shall rise as his members. He dyed to bring
his people to a spiritual oneness, with himself, and his Father. They are
his possession, and inheritance. And as a body may properly be called the body
of that soul which does inform it: so Christ shall be the spiritual form,
and soul to those that shall be raised at the great day of the general
resurrection. By these and other spiritual considerations, I did evidence this
truth, that the bodies of the Saints shall be raised, as the dead body of
their blessed Savior. My dead body shall they rise.

I shall now by the Assistance of Gods grace, briefly open unto you, the words
that follow in the Text, and make choice of one proposition from them, which
may heighten your spiritual joy this day, upon which I shall enlarge my self,
and so shall commend you and what I shall deliver to you, to the blessing of
the Almighty.

The next word which does present it self to us in the Text, is this. Awake,
which does afford us this observation, that Death is but a sleep. It is night
for a time with the Saints, while they sleep in their graves, but they shall
awake at the morning of the resurrection.

The grave is a bed of rest, perfumed, and made sweet to all Saints by the
death of the Lord Jesus Christ, who has taken away whatsoever is bitter, and
unpleasant in it. It is no longer a curse to the Saints, but rather a part of
their happiness, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, Rev. 14.4.13. As
the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 17. When I awake I shall be satisfied with thy
likeness, that is, at the great day of the resurrection; after I have had a
long sleep in the dust, when the night is past, and the day of the resurrection
shall shine, I shall awake, and then I shall be satisfied with thy likeness,
Isa. 57.2. The Prophet has an expression that runs this way; speaking of
righteous and merciful men, (says he) they shall enter into peace; they shall
rest in their beds. And when Stephen was stoned to death, the Holy Ghost
tell^^^ us that he fell asleep, Act. 7.60. And the Primitive Christians called
the places where they buried their dead (...), sleeping places. The Earth to
every Saint is but a sleeping place. Jesus Christ shall come down from Heaven
with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God.
And this great Trumpet being blown, the dead in Christ shall awake and rise. He
that dies in Christ, and is one of his dead men, does not dye but sleep. And
at the resurrection shall in a moment awake out of his sleep. When the Father,
Word, and Spirit did make the Fabric of the world, all things were speedily,
and suddenly made; for the making of any thing, there was but verbum and
factum; the word spoken, and presently the thing was made. Let there be Light,
and there was light, let there be a firmament, and there was a firmament: so
when the Lord Jesus Christ shall speak the word, and bid us awake; in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, those that are dead in the Lord, shall
awake out of the sleep of death.

And here by the way, let me give you another observation. You see at the great
day that the dead that lie in the dust shall be raised by the command of
Christ, who shall bid them come out of the dust. Now, as no rational man would
conclude from this place, that the dead (who it may be, have their dust lying
in several places, in every part of the world a portion of their dust,) have
any power to raise themselves, though they are bid to awake: eve so when God
speaking to souls that hear the word preached, does command them to believe,
repent, live holily, and rejoice, we cannot conclude, that there is any power,
strength, and ability in the creature to do what they are commanded to do; no
more then the dead can awake of themselves, though Christ commands them to
awake. As when Christ did bid Lazarus come forth of the grave, he did presently
come forth; though he had not any power in himself to come forth; but that
power that bid him come forth, enabled him to come forth; so, though Christ
exhort us in the Gospel to believe, and to do good duties, we have no power in
our selves to do good duties, but that power that bids us do good duties,
must enable us to do them, or else we are never able to do them: which moved
Augustine to pray thus; Da domine quod jubes, and jube quod vis, give Lord what
thou command, and command what thou will. Again, in the next place take
notice, that those who shall be raised are called the inhabitants of the dust,
ye that dwell in the dust, the dust for a time is a habitation for the Saints:
in Eccles. 12.5. It is said, Man shall go to his long home. The grave is a
home, or house for a time, which may assure us of the resurrection of the same
bodies which are entrusted to the dust, that which dwells in the dust, and no
other thing in stead of it, must be be raised out of the dust.

Thirdly, here is a reason laid down in the next verse to assure us of our
resurrection. Thy dew is as the dew of Herbs.

The Lord Jesus, in the power of his Spirit, shall be as a heavenly dew, upon
the dead bodies and dust of the Saints, to raise them up, and quicken them to a
new life. Christ in the power of his Spirit may be compared to dew for three
reasons; first, because as the dew coming down upon the earth, the earth
brings forth grass without the help, and labor of man, Mich. 5.7. so,
without the labor, and strength of the creature, the Lord Jesus, the dew of
Heaven, coming down upon the dust and ashes of the Saints, shall quicken them
to a life, and make them flourish after they have layen rotting, and moldering
in the grave.

Secondly, as the dew does come down speedily, and suddenly upon the earth, as
you may gather from that expression of Hushai, in that speech of his to Absalom
concerning David, 2 Samuel 17.12. We will come upon him, in some place where he
shall be found, and light on him as the dew falls upon the ground. As the dew
falls suddenly, and unexpectedly, so we will surprise David. So the Lord Jesus
will come in the twinkling of an eye; suddenly upon the bodies of the Saints.
Therefore he compares his coming to the coming of a thief in the night; and
to lightning, which we know is darted through the midst of Heaven with great
volubilitie, and swiftness. In the third place; Christ shall be as dew:
because as dew does make the herbs on which it falls to be fruitful, and to
wax green and flourish, after they have seemed to be dead: So the Lord Jesus
Christ, shall quicken the dead carcasses of his Saints, and put a life into
their dust. Thus Moses, the holy servant of God, speaking of his Doctrine in
reference to the flourishing of it, Deuteronomy. 32.2. (says) that his Doctrine shall
drop as the rain, and his speech shall distill as the dew, as the small rain
upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass. As the dew of Heaven
makes the things upon which it falls, fruitful, and fertile: so the Lord Jesus
Christ, falling down upon the dust, and ashes, upon the rotten bones,
putrifyed carcasses, and skuls of the Saints, shall cause them to flourish, and
to spring up, and they shall have a new life put into them by his coming down
upon them.

Fourthly, the Prophet says, that the earth shall cast out her dead; from
whence we may strongly conclude, the resurrection of the same body which is
cast into the earth, That body which was dead and buried in the earth, shall be
raised out of the earth. But I have sufficiently spoken of these points, in my
former discourses. So that if I should speak from all these particulars, I
should rather repeat what I have said, then present you with new matter. The
thing therefore that I shall open unto you to day, for the furtherance of your
joy shall be this; to show you, what great joy there shall be, at the
resurrection of the dead, which is held forth in these words.

Awake, and sing.
I do make bold to finish this subject here among you this day, because I know
not whether I shall have an opportunity to speak to you again from these
words. And seeing I have handled the two former parts in this place, I had a
desire to finish my discourse from this Text among you.

Another reason was, because I did find some Familisticall spirits here, that
were troubled with what I delivered: being enemies to that Christ, who came in
the flesh, and dyed on the Cross, and was raised from the dead, and enemies to
the Doctrine of the resurrection, which is to be wrought by his power; and that
you may see, how little I regard the speeches of these enemies of Christ, and
the glorious resurrection of Saints, I would not seem for their sakes to
desert my discourse: therefore I did resolve to go on with it this day.

Then thirdly, I apprehend it may much further the work of the day; for if we
have remembered God aright in our praises; having made mention of his goodness
to the Land, and Nation, we have done it spiritually, and have more rejoiced in
spiritual then temporal mercies. And if our joy should end in rejoicing only
for temporal mercies, we should rejoice rather carnally then spiritually.
Therefore having in the beginning of the day rejoiced for the mercies that God
has showed to the Land, I think I shall do well, if I raise you in your
spirits by what I shall speak from these words, and from the sight of
National mercies, and temporal deliverances take occasion to draw your eyes
to behold by Faith, how you and all Saints shall rejoice when you are delivered
from all enemies at the resurrection: that so I may sublimate your joy, by
carrying you higher in the spirit, to rejoice in the spiritual things spoken
of in the text.

Awake, and sing.
Ye know we express our joy by singing, as we may gather from that place,
Psalm. 126.1. when the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion, we were like
them that dream: then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with
singing. Singing in Scripture, is an expression of great joy, If any be merry,
let him sing, says James. So, my Evangelicall Prophet, to show what great joy
there shall be at the resurrection, when the bodies of the Saints shall be
raised, he bids us awake and sing. So that this is the point, there will be
great joy at the resurrection. For the amplifying of which point, I shall show
you what cause of rejoicing, there will be at the resurrection.

The spirits, and the bodies of the Saints will then be reunited together
again, which were disunited for many years. And as the Spirit does with some
regret, grief, and unwillingnesse leave the body, having a natural desire,
and appetite (being planted into it, by the hand of the Creator) after union
with the body, so, the spirit cannot but rejoice when it is united again to
the body. Therefore you shall find the spirits of Saints under the Altar, (in
the Revelation 6.10.) crying, How long? holy and true, intimating their desire
to be reunited to their bodies. And in 2 Cor. 5.4. The Apostle there shows us,
that though the Saints be willing to live with the Lord Jesus Christ, yet there
is an unwillingnesse in them to leave their bodies: therefore they had rather
have immortality swallowed up of life, then to lay down their bodies in the
grave, if it were the will of God. We that are in this Tabernacle (says he)
groan, being burdened; not for that we would be uncloathed, but clothed
upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life. There seems in these words
to be held forth an unwillingnes in the Saints, to be uncloathed of their
bodies, to put off the clothing of the flesh. We observe in Philosophy, that
there is a natural appetite in the soul, or form to be united to that body
that it once informed: and as it leaves the body with some unwillingnesse, so
there is a desire of reunion when they are parted, so that reunion will be a
cause of joy. For as there is joy at the meeting of friends, so the body and
soul that were long together in this world, shall rejoice when they shall meet
together again. This is one ground of joy from their meeting: the body and
the spirit shall meet together, there shall be a reunion after there has been
a disunion between them.

But in the next place, there will be a cause of great joy: because there will
be an absolute perfection, both in the body, and in the soul. God shall be
perfection in the Spirit in every faculty of it, and God in his glory shall
dwell likewise in the body.

The soul shall be full of God: here we have but an imperfect knowledge of
God: there the soul shall be free from all ignorance, having the full vision
of God. Here we see as in a glass, darkly, (...), enigmatically, as the
Apostle speaks; there we shall see face to face. Here we do but as it were see
the back parts of God with Moses. As the Kings of Persia in State used to keep
themselves from the sight of the people. God does as it were hide his face
here, in comparison of the full discovery which he will make of himself
hereafter. We do but sip of the cup of spiritual joy here; but there we
shall be filled with the rivers of the pleasures of God. Here we have, as
Austin says, guttulas but little drops of joy: but there we shall be filled
with joy. Here we have a sight of God which does not fully satisfy; but still
we desire to know more of God, and more of the Lord Jesus Christ; but there we
shall be satisfied with the likeness of God, as the Apostle says Col. 3. v.
4. When Christ which is our life shall appear, then we also shall appear with
him in glory. The Apostle says, 1 John 3.2. Yet it does not appear what we
shall be; it is not evident to us what glory there shall be in our
understandings; how our affections shall be ravished, and enamoured with the
love of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ; it does not appear what shall be in our
spirits: but we know that when be shall appear, we shall be like him: for we
shall see him as he is. O, what tongue of Rhetoric can express this! what it
is to be like the Lord Jesus Christ, to see him as he is! there is more in it
then the Eloquence of Angels can set forth unto you.

As they shall have such unspeakable glory in their spirits, so likewise there
shall be a glory on their bodies. Alas, our bodies now are but vile bodies;
weak bodies: but what says the Apostle? Phil. 3. ult. God shall change our
vile bodies and make them like his glorious body; or to his body of glory: for
so it is in the original. As the body of the Lord Jesus Christ at his
transfiguration was changed, and his face did shine, and his whole body did
shine with heavenly brightness, and Celestial glory; so the bodies of the
Saints, shall be bodies of glory: there shall be a heavenly brightness on
them. Therefore Daniel speaking of the Saints at the resurrection, he says,
Dan. 12.3. that they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the Stars of Heaven.
As the Stars are glorious creatures, and the brightness of the firmament is
a great glory to our eyes; so there shall be a Celestial, Star-like glory upon
the bodies of the Saints; they shall not be gross, lumpish, and heavy bodies
as they are now: but spiritual bodies, as swift as a Seraphim. The body is
now a clog and weight to the soul, it is ergastulum animae as the Platonists
say, it keeps the spirit under, and presses it down with the weight of it,
but then the body shall be a spiritual body: so that in this body the Saints
shall ascend into the air, as in a Chariot of triumph, and glory, to meet the
Lord Jesus. As Elias was carried up to Heaven; so shall the Saints in these
bodies of theirs rise in glory, to meet the Lord Jesus Christ in the air. Now
they are subject to diseases: then they shall be freed from all diseases; now
they are subject to death; then death shall be swallowed up, and every Saint in
his own person shall appear as a Conqueror of death, and of the grave; every
Saint shall have this (...), this song of triumph in his mouth, O death, where
is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and
the strength of sin is the Law; but thanks be unto God who has given us the
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Our bodies then shall be incorruptible,
wholly like the body of Christ; therefore the Apostle says, that the body it
must be (...), Phil. 3. last, conformable in likeness, to the glorious body
of the Lord Jesus Christ himself: you see what perfection there shall be in
the bodies of the Saints; though they be vile now, they shall be honorable,
and glorious then: though they be now as pieces of earth, they shall be then
more bright then the Stars of Heaven, or the Sun in the firmament. This
glory God will put upon the bodies of the Saints, and being thus made happy in
their bodies and spirits, when they shall see themselves in this happy
condition, filled in their bodies, and spirits with the glory of God, it cannot
but cause great joy.

If a man lie sick a long while, and have a weak, distempered, crazie body;
when he is restored, he rejoices that he has health, and strength, and is
freed from the weakness that was upon him: shall not there be great joy then,
when the Saints shall rise? when they that had weak, crazie, and vile, mortal
bodies here, shall see themselves in bodies of glory, in bodies as glorious as
the body of the Lord Jesus?

Again, there will be great cause of joy to these Saints, when they shall be
thus united in their bodies, and souls, and shall meet the Lord Jesus Christ,
because they shall have great dignity put upon their persons; they shall be
raised as no mean persons. As wicked, ungodly, and unbelieving men shall be
raised as slaves, and vassals, and be brought forth in chains and fetters,
before the dreadful tribunal of the Lord Jesus Christ: so the Saints shall
all come forth as Kings; every one of them shall be dignified with the glory,
and Majesty of a King. This is that, that is spoken of, in the Revelation,
where it is said, that Christ has made us Kings and Priests, and we shall
reign upon earth. We shall reign in our bodies. As an Ambassador said of the
Senate of Rome, that he apprehended that there were as many Kings as Senators
in the Senate House, (Quot Senateres tot Reges:) So, there shall be as many
Kings, as Saints at the resurrection; and every one shall have Kingly glory,
and Majesty; every one, together with the Lord Jesus, reigning as a King upon
the earth, Rev. 5.10. Therefore if men rejoice in the enjoyment of earthly
Kingdoms and Crowns which are lined with cares, that a King professed, that
if men knew the troubles, which attended upon a Crown, no man would stoop to
who it up; what joy will there be, when we shall reign as spiritual, and
heavenly Kings with the Lord Jesus?

Again, there will be great joy: because all things that may occasion any
sorrow or sadness shall be quite removed away: all tears must then be wiped
from the eyes of all the Saints, Rev. 7.17. there must be no more sighing; no
more grief; no more sorrow. All earthly infirmities and weaknesses, which are
accompanied with grief and pain, shall be removed: for our bodies shall be
Celestial bodies, (1 Cor. 15.40.) raised up in incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.42. And
there shall be no more blindness or blackness upon our spirits. Here so long
as we carry sin about us, though we know it is pardoned, though we know it
shall be remembered no more, Heb. 8.12. though we know in point of
Justification, that it may be sought for, and cannot be found, Jer. 50.20. yet
so long as we feel it opposing the Spirit of glory, and holiness in us by
the filthy nature of it, so long it will occasion sorrow, grief, and some
trouble to the soul: but at the general resurrection, as sin is now
completely taken away in our Justification to those that believe in the Lord
Jesus (such being those blessed ones spoken of in the 32. Psalm. whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered;) So then sin shall be
wholly taken away to our own sense, feeling, and apprehension, by the Spirit
of Sanctification. There shall be no corner then in the soul, spirit, or body
for any lust, or uncleanness, and consequently no place for sorrow. Sin is
like the evil spirit that possessed Saul, that made him melancholy and sad,
and afflicted him in his spirit. But when the Lord Jesus Christ shall appear,
then all sin shall be done away to our sense, and feeling, as it is done away
now in our Justification. Then we shall be as perfectly sanctified throughout,
both in body and spirit, as we are now perfectly justified. Now the life that
we live in the flesh is by Faith in the Son of God, by seeing how completely
we are justified from sins, lusts, corruptions, those enemies to the Lord
Jesus Christ that we carry in our bosoms: but then we shall be as perfect
in respect of the life of sanctification, as we are now perfect, and complete
in respect of our Justification. So that the cause of sorrow, and trouble shall
quite be taken away.

There shall be no place then left for Evangelicall sorrow; the sorrow that now
is wrought in the Saints is Evangelicall, not Legal; but the joy, and glory
which does remain for the Saints hereafter shall be so great, that there shall
be no place then left for Evangelicall grief for any sin, that we have
committed. And as sin shall not then bring any sorrow upon us, so neither shall
the Devil, who is the troubler of the Israel of God, be able to afflict us.
Here he is permitted to afflict us, as he did Job, for the trial of our Faith
and patience; and though for the present, when we look on Christ in his
person, we see that we are conquerours over the Devil in him, yet we meet
with the Devil, his fiery temptations, darts and arrows, which he shoots
into our spirits: so that he oft-times causes us to walk something sadly,
occasioning troubles, which Jerome calls (tempestates mentis) the tempests of
the mind. As Paul tells us, that he was buffeted by the messenger of Satan. But
then this wicked Fiend shall be so chained up, that he shall never be let loose
upon us again. Then he shall be so under our feet that he shall never have any
liberty given him to tempt us any more.

The accuser of the Brethren is cast out of heaven, Revelation 12.10. His
accusations and complaints against them cannot be heard by the ear of God, to
prejudice their Justification, but he does persecute the woman upon the earth,
Rev. 12.13. He afflicts the Church and brings much trouble oft-times to the
Saints: but at the general resurrection, we shall be freed wholly from the
Devil, from all temptations, from all troubles, all enemies that can be
thought upon: so that then things shall be fully accomplished, and completed
for our good. The Apostle though he tells us that Christ for the present has
abolished death and sin to us, 2 Timothy 1.10. and destroyed him, who has the
power of death, who is the Devil, Heb. 2.14. yet he informs us that the
promises of God made to us in Christ are not fully accomplished, completed,
and perfected till the resurrection; as we may see by that place, 1 Cor.
15.54. then shall be fulfilled that saying, speaking of the resurrection day,
Death is swallowed up in victory, then it shall be said, O death where is thy
sting? O grave where is thy victory? (...). Then shall it be, that is, it shall
be, in the full accomplishment; we have now what is there promised, in the
promise of God by Faith; then we shall have what is in the promise, in the
actual fruition of the thing promised. So that in this respect, there will be
great joy: because then every Saint shall ride in a Chariot of triumph, as a
Conqueror of all enemies in his own person. And as Christ in his own body,
and Spirit did ride to Heaven, and triumph over the power of Hell, Death,
sin, curse, and condemnation; and as the life that we live for the present,
is by beholding this victory of the Lord Jesus Christ with the eye of Faith: so
at the general resurrection all the Saints shall imitate the Lord Jesus
Christ, and in their own persons shall ride as Conquerours triumphing over all
enemies, and shall live the life of vision, seeing the same thing done in their
own persons, which now by Faith they see done for them in the person of Jesus.
So that all cause and occasion of trouble, and sorrow being taken away, there
must needs be great joy at the resurrection of those, who are raised by the
Lord.

In the next place, as the occasions and causes of all sorrow shall be taken
away; so likewise all things, all objects that may move spiritual joy shall be
presented to the Saints, to raise their spirits to a spiritual joy, who shall
be raised and made happy with the Lord Jesus: whatsoever it be that can be
thought upon that can make any one happy, that the Saints shall enjoy: they shall
enjoy God in a full measure, and the Lord Jesus. Sweet streams of joy will
flow into their spirits, because God will make himself the Author and worker
of their joy. Sing O daughter of Sion, says the Prophet, Zeph. 3.14. Be glad
and rejoice O daughter of Jerusalem. But why must Zion sing and shout? behold
the reason in the 15. verse, The Lord is in the midst of thee, and in the 17.
ver. He will rejoice over thee with singing. There is the chief ground of
their joy laid down. So the 12. of Neh. 43. it is said, the people rejoiced,
for God made them rejoice with great joy. So at the resurrection, God shall
make them to rejoice, they shall be always then at the Fountain, at the
Wellhead, In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand (says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 17.11.) there are pleasures for evermore. All the Saints shall
then be in the presence and at the right hand of God, where there shall be
pleasures for evermore: they all shall be in the glory of the Lord Jesus. God
shall empty himself, and the rivers, and streams of joy which are in
himself, into their hearts and spirits; so that they shall be swallowed up,
into those streams and rivers of joy, and pleasure which are in the enjoyment
of a God. Macarius speaks of ((...)) the ebriety of the Spirit. They then
shall be inebriated with the fullness of a spiritual joy.

If there be such rejoicing here in the spirit of a Saint, when he has a light
from God to see something of God in the face of Christ; what spiritual joy
shall there be when our joy shall be at the full. If there be such joy in the
ebbing of the Spirit here, what joy will there be when we shall enjoy the
hightyde of the Spirit in the vision of Gods grace, and glory hereafter; when
we shall eat of the tree of life; when we shall drink our fill of those
rivers of pleasures which run in the Paradise of God? And if there be so much
sweetness in spiritual joy here; what tongue can express, or heart conceive
what there shall be in that joy that shall be hereafter? Great, glorious and
high are the expressions by which Saints do set forth the joys that they
feel here, but no Saint can tell what the joys shall be hereafter at the
resurrection. Psalm. 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy
comforts delight my soul; the delight is such here, that David had rather have
the light of Gods countenance, in a Spirit of joy upon him, then to enjoy all
the glory and great things in the world. Thou have put greater joy into my
heart, then when the corn and wine of wicked men is increased, Psalm. 4. and in
Psalm. 84. One day in thy house is worth a thousand. If there be such joy in the
presence of God here, in the beholding of his grace, in the kisses of his
mouth, in the embraces of his Son, when he does now sprinkle us with his
grace; O what joy shall there be, when God shall pour out the Spirit of grace,
and sweetness into our souls? when he shall open all the treasures of his
Spirit and love; when he shall more freely and fully show us the things, that
neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man to conceive what they are? 1 Cor. 2.

We have seen great things in the world; Crowns, Scepters, riches, worldly
pomp and glory, but what are all these things? they do not shadow forth the
things that we see here in the Spirit, and shall more plainly see hereafter.
Our fancies, and Imaginations, work beyond our eye, we fancy greater things,
then we behold: but what eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, nor has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive, what they are, we darkly see here,
and shall fully enjoy hereafter.

The Poets in their fancies, have fancied golden Mountains, and great things;
the earth does not afford such things as they have fancied and minted in their
poetical brains: but the things that shall then be discovered to us, go
beyond the cogitation and thought, and workings of man's heart, and spirit; and
these things shall be gloriously revealed to us by the Spirit of God; and the
Spirit shall show us that all these things are ours. We shall see God ours,
and Christ ours, and all the glory of Heaven ours, and see our selves in the
Kingdom of Heaven. So that there shall be the presence of all things that
shall make us happy, the confluence of all good things that can bring any
bliss, tranquillity, and joy to the spirit, and soul of man. So that it is
evident there will be great joy, if we consider that there will be every thing
wanting, that may make us sorrowful, and every thing present that may make us
joyful: there will be the absence of all evil, and the presence of all good:
there will be God himself, who is the summum bonum, the chief good; and this
God will unvaile himself, and show forth his love, and shine forth in his
glory, beauty, and excellency on the spirits of his people; and seeing
themselves in this happy, and blisfull condition; they cannot but sing and
rejoice at the resurrection. Here the Saints in believing do rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory. 1 Pet. 1.8. How glorious then and unspeakable
will be the joy of the resurrection?

Again, you may take notice that there will be cause of great joy, if you
confider that all the joy which we have here is but a shadow of that joy which
the Saints shall have hereafter. Nay, all the joy in the world here cannot
shadow forth that joy that shall be hereafter. Consider for what men do
rejoice here, and you shall see that they have the same cause to rejoice for
the same things in a full manner hereafter. The resurrection day is the Saints
Coronation day, and their wedding day. Rev. 19.7. Let us be glad and rejoice
and give honor to him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has
made her self ready. It is Gods and their harvest day. Among men, the time of
harvest is a time of joy. They shall rejoice before thee according to the joy
of harvest, Isa. 9.3. The resurrection is Gods harvest for the gathering in of
Saints. When a man sowes his seed, he sowes it in expectation of a harvest. So
God sowes his seed, he sowes the bodies of the Saints in the earth, he lays
them in the surrowes; he does it in expectation of a harvest. And the people of
God were commanded to rejoice before him, in the time of harvest: which did
typifie the spiritual joy that the Saints shall enjoy at the general
resurrection, which shall be their harvest; when their bodies shall spring and
come out of the dust, in their glory and excellency.

Again, that I may bring you back to remember what the work of the day is,
and enlarge my self upon that, at which I pointed even now; we know that we
use to have great joy for great deliverances; When God has suffered us, even
to come to the brinke of ruin, and destruction, and then does pull us from it,
and save us, there is joy with shouting. We know how near we were to ruin,
we had almost been destroyed by the enemies that rose up against us: but the
Lord has delivered us: and seriously considering this deliverance we cannot
but be thankful and joyful for the mercy. And our joy for the mercy of this
day, may imperfectly shadow forth, and represent unto you the joy which shall
be in Saints at the resurrection. For we that were compassed about with so
many enemies in the world; that had all the Devils in hell against us, and all
the wicked men in the world, holding forth their hands, to draw us and lead us
into the broad way that leads to destruction: and a base malignant party that
we carry about us, within our selves joining with the Devil, the world, and
wicked men against our selves: by the power of God shall we be preserved from
all these enemies, and made more then Conquerours over all our enemies through
Jesus Christ, that loved us. And so shall have cause to rejoice in our
preservation and deliverance.

Truly we are not able fully to apprehend our deliverance here, and that is
the reason that Saints rejoice so little in the God of grace and his mercies.
We cannot apprehend fully what it is to be freed from sin, that has laid
the foundation of Hell. We apprehend not, what it is to be in the hands, and
jaws of the Prince of darkness, and then to be pulled out of his hands, and
jaws by Christ; as David recovered his Lamb out of the mouth of the Lion, 1 Samuel 17.34. We do not apprehend what it is to be by nature children of wrath,
and yet to be crowned with grace, glory, and immortality, through the goodness
of God; but then we shall fully apprehend our great deliverances by the grace
of God, and the power of the Lamb, and shall sing for joy. In the 15. of the
Rev. the 3. it is said of Saints that they sing the song of Moses, we sing it
here in the spirit, in part, believing with Zacharias that we are delivered
out of the hand of our enemies; but then we shall sing it fully, in the
fullness of spiritual joy. It is called the song of Moses, because it shall be
a song for their deliverance out of the hand of all enemies. As Moses, when the
Israelites were delivered from Egypt called the people to play upon Music, and
sing praise to God, so that the Heavens answered, and ecchoed to their singing,
and the joyful noise, that they made to God for their deliverance: So when we
shall apprehend that the Lord by his mighty power has delivered us from the
Egyptian Pharaoh, the Devil; from the house of bondage, the Iron furnace of
Egypt; from the sting of sin, from the power of darkness, from all curses,
and condemnation; from temporal, spiritual, and eternal death; being fully
apprehensive of this deliverance, we cannot but be filled with joy in singing
praises to him who is our deliverer.

When by the cruelty of Haman, the people of Israel were appointed for
slaughter and destruction; and God had given in a glorious deliverance to them;
we read how they kept the day with joy, Hester 9.22. The day was called a day
wherein the Jews rested from their enemies, and the month which was turned
unto them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a good day; that they
should make them days of feasting, and joy, and of sending portions one to
another, and gifts to the poor. The Devil like Haman had appointed the Israel
of God to slaughter, and destruction; he thought to have swallowed them up, and
to have made them as miserable to all eternity as he himself shall be: but by
the goodness, and power of God they are delivered from this spiritual Haman.
The Lord has raised up a Mordecai, the Lord Jesus, who has given us a
deliverance from him. As Mordecai did speak peace to his people, Hest. 10.3.
So Jesus Christ our spiritual Mordecai shall speak peace to us, bring
deliverance to his people, discover the plots, and machinations of our enemies,
by which they would have wrought our ruin, and destruction, and the Saints
that were as sheep appointed for the slaughter, by cruel Haman the enemy of
mankind, shall escape out of the hands of this bloody Lion, out of the snare of
this cruel hunter; which will afford plentifully matter of great joy, and
singing to the Saints.

But in the next place there is cause of great joy, when people are not only
delivered from their enemies, but their enemies are likewise put under their
feet, (as God by his goodness seems to do ours this day: who are brought to
a low and helpless condition, unless the Devil help them with a new plot,
and make them as strong as formerly they were) so it will be with Saints at the
resurrection; we apprehend it matter of joy to us, that God has not only
delivered us from the hands of our enemies; but has given us the necks of our
enemies likewise: so that we are Conquerours of them that hoped to conquer us;
they are under our command, that thought to have made us slaves, and vassals to
the commands of their imperious, and cruel lusts. So there will be rejoicing
at the resurrection, because as Joshua put the enemies of Gods people under
their feet, so Christ shall then put all our enemies under our feet; Shall we
now see cause of rejoicing, because God has weakened the strength, and
enfeebled the forces of our enemies? and shall there not be greater cause of
rejoicing at the resurrection, when the Saints shall see all powers against
them brought to nothing? Hell, sin, the world, man and Devils being trampled
under their feet. Christ is filled with praises and joy, because his Father
has given him the necks of his enemies, that he may destroy them that hate
him, Psalm. 18.40. So the Saints shall be joyful in glory, because, they shall
execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishment upon the people. Binding
their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron, Psalm. 140.7.8.
For the Saints shall sit together upon the bench with the Lord Jesus to judge
them that unjustly judged them upon earth. Wicked, and ungodly men, that for
the profession of truth, have brought Saints before judgement-seats; and have
jeered, and scoffed at them, making them their pastime and merriment, shall be
brought before the Saints, and the Saints shall fit upon the Judgement-seate
with the Lord, and pass a sentence of condemnation upon them. When the Lord
delivered the Israelites, and avenged himself upon their enemies in the time
of Barak and Deborah, Judge. 5.1, 2. they sung a song of praises unto the Lord.
So the Saints shall rejoice, because God at the resurrection shall avenge
himself upon the implacable enemies of his glory. Therefore when the Judgment
is passed upon Babylon; the Heavens are commanded to rejoice; Rejoice over thou
Heaven, Rev. 18.20. That is, ye Saints who are Inhabitants and Citizens of
Heaven, for God has avenged you on her; so that we shall have the same causes
of joy, and rejoicing at the general resurrection, which we have here, this
joy which we have here, in these things, being but as it were the shadow and
figure of the joy which we shall have hereafter.

Then in the next place; another thing that will heighten the joy of the Saints
at the resurrection, will be the eternity of their joy. Eternity, is the hell
of hell; there is no torment that makes hell to be such a place of torment as
it is, as the eternity of the torments of Hell: so the eternity of the joys
of Heaven, is the very Heaven of Heaven, and this eternity of joy is the
eternal portion of Saints. The joy that the Saints shall have, is not for a
moment; as our joys are here, vaishing, and transitory; Joy appears to us in
the morning, and sorrow comes in the evening, that we have more cause to weep,
and mourn before night, then we had to rejoice in the day. It shall not be so
then, there shall be joy that shall be lengthned out to eternity; joy that
shall have no period, nor end: when we have rejoiced many hundred thousands of
years; we shall rejoice then, and our joys shall be so new and pleasing unto
us, as though we had never rejoiced before: we shall never be weary of our joy.

We find we are weary of joy and recreations here, and therefore there must be
variety of joy, and recreations by the enjoyments of diverse things, or else
they will not give us content: but here shall always be the same joy, the same
cause of joy, and the same joy always new; The song which we shall sing shall
always be a new song. The Kingdom that is promised, is a Kingdom that cannot
be moved, Heb. 12.28. The righteousness that shall be in it shall be an
everlasting righteousness, the salvation of it shall be an everlasting
salvation, Isa. 45.17. The joy of it shall be everlasting joy, Everlasting joy
shall be upon their head, Isa. 51.11. The Crowns that we shall wear shall be
Crowns of glory, that shall never fade away, 1 Pet. 5.4. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. We
shall be ever with the Lord; we shall always enjoy the vision of Gods glory,
and so shall always have cause of joy, and rejoicing in him.

The transitory, and momentanie continuance of earthly joys, pleasures and
contentment is that, that imbitters all the sweetness of these earthly joys,
and contentments; so that, that shall sweeten the joy of the Saints at the
resurrection, will be the eternity of their joy, it shall be joy that shall
never have an end: so the Psalmist says, at thy right hand there are pleasures
for evermore. They are lasting joys, everlasting joys, they shall be like God
himself, they shall have no end: but the Saints that are raised in joy, shall
be happy in that joy for evermore.

But why do I spend so much time to set forth these joys? Truly I cannot give
you a full relation of them. Sheba's Queen, when she had seen the glory of
Solomon's Palace, his servants and attendance about him, and the glory, and
pomp of his earthly Estate, she confessed that the fame in her own Country,
was nothing to that she had seen with her eyes, 1 Kings 10.7. I believed not
the words until I came, and mine eyes had seen it, and behold the half was
not told me: thy wisdom and prosperity exceeds the fame which I heard. Fame
commonly exceeds the thing which is reported; but Solomon's glory exceeded the
fame of it. So, we hear of great and glorious things which shall be at the
resurrection; the joy and glory that the Saints shall have, and we take pains
to illustrate it by earthly joys and spiritual comfort, which is the best
thing to shadow it. But all that can be said is far short of setting forth to
the full, the glory, and joy of it. And therefore seeing that the thing far
exceeds the discourse and apprehension of any man; seeing words cannot set
forth, what glory, and joy this is: I will not lay down any more
considerations to shadow forth to you this joy, which I profess I want
language fully to express. Wherefore give me leave to make a little use, and I
shall put a period for the present of speaking of this joy which is unspeakable.

In the first place, seeing there will be great joy at the resurrection,
therefore we should rejoice in it before hand: God will not fail in giving
you of any thing that he has promised: you will find the joy a hundred
thousand times greater then any man on earth is able to express it to you.

As God, when he promised the people of Israel the Land of Canaan, that flowed
with milk and honey, he did not fail of any thing he had promised to them, all
came to pass, as you have the story, Joh. 21.45. So God has promised a
heavenly Canaan of glory, an everlasting Kingdom; a City which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11.10. Palaces that shall
stand fast, and firm upon their basis and foundation to the days of
Eternity. He has promised to put Scepters into our hands, Crowns of glory
upon our heads. And he that has promised these things to his people will not
fail in performance; he is just, and faithful, he is not like man: he cannot
lie, he cannot repent of the good he intends to do for his people. Therefore
you that are his people rejyocein your portion, and inheritance. As the young
Ward in his nonage or minority, when little is allowed him for the present,
does rejoice in foreseeing what large possessions he shall be master of for the
future, when the time of his Wardship shall be expired. So, let us who are the
Heirs of Heaven, happiness and giorie here, though we shall not have the
fruition of it until hereafter, rejoice here as though we were in the full
enjoyment, and possession of it.

Suffer not any wicked, unbelieving spirits, to bereave you of your joy and
comfort, by leading you into error, concerning the resurrection. O what
enemies are these people to the spiritual joy of Gods people, that go about
to sow this seed of false Doctrine among them, by persuading them that there
shall be no resurrection of the body, but only a spiritual resurrection
here? How do these with specious shows of truth bereave people of that
spiritual joy, comfort, and contentment that they might take in believing the
Doctrine of the resurrection?

Beloved, you meet with many Arguments against the resurrection that baffle
carnal reason: I profess that if I should follow carnal reason, I know there
are such strong Arguments against the resurrection, that I should easily yield
the bucklers, and contend no more for the point; but conclude that there would
be no resurrection of the body: but when I look upon the power of him that
has promised; when I consider that God has said it; it answers all objections
of carnal reason. Therefore show your selves children of faithful Abraham,
stagger not at this promise, he believed above hope, and against hope. It is
above hope, and against the hope of natural reason that this body should be
raised: yet give God the glory of his power, God has said that this body
shall rise, and rise as the body of his Son; that we shall awake and sing,
and the Earth shall cast forth her dead. ( Considera authorem and toll
dubitationem Ter.) Consider the power of the agent, and all doubting will be
removed. He that has promised it, is power, love, and faithfulness: he will
do what he has promised for his people, what they expect, and beyond their
thoughts, desires, and expectations; therefore 1 Thessalonians. 4. ult. Comfort your
selves with these words. There is no Doctrine that brings so much spiritual
consolation to the soul as this: it is the spring of spiritual joy in the
hearts of the Saints. Take away the Doctrine of the resurrection of bodies, and
take away all spiritual joy, and comfort. And then look no longer upon the
Saints as glorious, and happy creatures; but as the most miserable abjects
that you behold upon the face of the earth. If there be no resurrection of the
dead, says the Apostle, We are of al men most miserable. Saints profess
themselves the most happy and joyful people in the world, and rejoice in their
portion, and bless themselves in their happiness, and inheritance. But take
this Doctrine away, let it be granted that there shall be no resurrection, let
it be granted that Christ is not risen in his humane body, and that the
Saints shall not rise in their humane bodies as Christ did, and be happy in
their humane bodies: it will damp all the joy of the Saints presently, it will
quench the Spirit of joy in the people of God. For there can be no cause of
rejoicing to the Saints but in this assurance, that their sins are pardoned,
that they are in Covenant with God, that God having loved them from eternity,
will love them to eternity, and preserve them in happiness with himselse.

Therefore you that truly believe this Doctrine rejoice in it, and suffer not
the scoffing enemies of this Doctrine to draw you from it, and so from the
comfort that will flow into your hearts while you believe it. Take heed lest
there be in any of you a heart of unbelief, to depart from the living God. And
if there be any poor weak Christians here that have been misled by these
miscreants, and ungodly men, let them look up to God, beholding his power, and
faithfulness in their Redeemer, that they may see all those objections of
carnal reason (by which they have been deluded, and misled) easily answered;
that so their former joy, and consolation may return to them, by believing the
Doctrine and joy of the resurrection.

And let me add this also, that as this is a Doctrine of great joy; so it is a
Doctrine that obliges us to great holiness. The Doctrine of Christ in every
part, and branch of it leads to holiness. If thou meet with any tenent or
opinion that furthereth not holiness, look on that opinion as an error: for
whatsoever is the truth of the Lord, it is a truth that leads us to holiness
of life, and conversation: So does this Doctrine of the resurrection; for if
we consider seriously that the body shall be raised, and we shall be happy
at the resurrection in enjoying of God; will not this raise up the spirit of a
man to thankfulness? and where there is true thankfulness, will not that
thankfulness be legible in obedience?

Therefore seeing God intends to glorify thee with himself in body, and in
spirit, since thou shall be ever happy with him, should thou not glorify
this God, while thou art here, in thy life and conversation? As the Apostle
says, 2 Pet. 3.13, 14. We according to his promise look for new Heavens, and
a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. What is the use of this?
Wherefore beloved seeing ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be
found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless. A true assurance of
salvation given by the Spirit of grace, does not make us negligent in the
performance of good duties; it does not make us loose and licentious in our
lives: but that assurance that is a right assurance, which is wrought in us by
the Spirit of grace, will as well teach us to be holy as assure our hearts that
we shall be happy. Lucian speaking sceffingly of the zeal of Christians and
their readiness to help one another, does give this as the reason of it,
[(...).] These miserable men says he, believe that in body and soul they
shall be immortal. The scoffing Atheist did speak truth in this, and found
out the true cause of the zeal which was in primitive Christians. There can be
no holiness without a perfwasion of happiness for men after this life: If
there be no resurrection, says Paul, Let us eat and drink, 1 Cor. 15. But
when a man is persuaded of this, He will purify himself as Christ is pure, 1 John 3.3.

Again, this shows the different condition between a Saint, and a sinner;
Look upon Saints, and sinners; eye them only with a carnal eye in respect of
the present condition, and it may be you shall apprehend a sinner in a better
condition then a Saint. God oft-times gives temporal blessings to them, which
he denies to his own people, they are the worlds happy creatures. But look
on Saints in this condition, and then you shall see a vast difference between
the condition of a believer, and of a man that is an enemy to Christ, the one
shall awake, and sing. He shall awake at the resurrection to be filled with
joy; to be crowned as a King, with immortal glory. The other shall awake and
houle: As Agag when he thought, and was persuaded that the bitterness of death
was past, was hewn in pieces: so Epicures, and profane men that sing away
sorrow, fear of Hell, and damnation, spending their days in mirth, in a
moment they go down to the grave, Job 21.13. and are raised from thence to
suffer torments to eternity. But the Saints sleeping for a while in the grave
are raised to felicity. This is elegantly set forth in the book of Wisdom, 5.
Chap. We fools thought their lives madness, and their end without honor, and
behold they are become the children of God, speaking of the Saints, verse. 6.
And in the 8. v. speaking of themselves, they do thus complain: What has our
pride profited us? what has our pomp and riches brought unto us? The time will
come that wicked men shall wish that they had never been, else that some
mountain would be so propitious as to fall on them, that they might never come
into the presence of God, and his Son Jesus Christ, that shall fit upon the
Throne. O what a doleful noise will it make in the ears of wicked and ungodly
men, when they shall be called forth to the resurrection of Damnation; while
the Saints shall be bid to awake to the resurrection of life! Who would be
envious at wicked men, that grow rich, and prosper, and flourish in the world;
that get great estates, and leave their estates and houses to their heirs, if
they did but consider, that at the resurrection they shall be enforced to take
hell as part of their purchase, and shall be drawn and dragged as slaves to
eternal torments?

I remember what the Heathen said; It is a miserable thing for a man to have
been happy; Fuisse faelicem miserrimum est, Boeth. It grieves a man when he
comes to poverty, to remember that he was once rich; when a man is in a
disgraceful condition, to think with himself, I was honorable; this is
double misery. Remember (says Abraham) to the rich man, that thou in thy life
time did enjoy riches, and poor Lazarus lying at thy gate was denied the
crummes falling from thy Table. This was the aggravation of the rich man's
misery, to be put in mind that he had been happy, and rich upon the earth.
Consider this, and you shall plainly see, that rich and great men, without
Christ, though they live happily to the eye of the world, yet they are in a
miserable condition; and the meanest Saint is in a far better condition then
they. The wicked rich men shall awake to howling, and screeching, to misery,
and torment eternal; the poor Saint to joy, rejoicing, and happiness for
evermore.

Wicked men are like the Persians slave, who for a day was feasted, and had all
things provided to delight him, that they used to provide for the Emperor, and
at night he was put to death. So wicked men, God feasts them as slaves here,
they have furnished tables, and servants, children, and music: but poor
wretches, night comes upon them, and death takes off their heads, and they are
miserable to eternity. Therefore James says, They are nourished as against
the day of slaughter. God does but fat them, as men use to fat beasts for
sacrifice, or slaughter; so God suffers them to swim in pleasures, to live in
vanities, to get riches, to grow fat in the earth: but it is to destroy them:
they are fatted for the day of damnation. In this glass, or mirror, see the
difference between Saints and sinners.

Then in the next place, seeing it is thus that the people of God shall be made
partakers of such happiness at the resurrection, let me exhort you to wait in
expectation and desire of it. A Ward that knows that when he shall live beyond
the days of his wardship, he shall have his Lands and possessions in his own
hands, he desires that the time may be expired that he may have all in his own
hands, that now is in the hands of his Guardian, who (it may be) keeps him to
a short allowance, though he be an heir to great possessions. We are Wards,
as ye heard even now, and we are under a guardian; though we are rich in
reversion, happiness, and heaven, and all things being ours, yet God keeps us
low here. Let us desire that the time of our wardship may be expired, that we
may come to that happiness which he has promised; that we may awake, and
sing, and be happy in a more full enjoyment of God; and this is the desire of
those that are truly faithful. When Christ says, He will come, and appear;
What do the Saints answer? Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Rev. 22.2.

If a natural, carnal man, should speak forth that which lies at the bottom
of his heart, when Christ says, He will come; he would say; O Lord never come,
I am not conformed to thine Image; I am not made a new creature by hearing of
thy Gospel; O let me never see the face of Christ. But the man that knows the
love of God, and truly understands he everlasting Gospel, when he hears Christ
say, I come; presently there is this echo, by which he answers the Lord
Christ in his own Spirit; Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

When the Judges are in their circuits, malefactors tremble and quake; but an
innocent man that has a good cause, expects and de^^res to have it heard, and
is glad that they are ^ome: so wicked and ungodly men, who are thieves,
robbers, murderers, and malefactors, guilty of all sins, and lie in
im^risoned and shackled in their own consciences, when they hear that the Lord
Jesus shall ride is circuit, and appear as a Judge, (unless they have seared
consciences) they cannot but tremble and quake. But the other, when Christ
shall be as a Judge to the wicked, he shall be as a Savior to them, therefore
they cannot but desire the coming, and appearing of the Lord. Wherefore let us
desire the appearing of the Lord Jesus; let us not live as the men of the
world, that are afraid, and tremble and quake, when they hear of a Judgment
day, and Christ coming to judge every man according to his works: but let us
continue in the assurance of Gods grace, believing that our sins are
pardoned. Let not the coming of Christ be our fear, but our desire; let us
desire (...), to wait, as one does upon one that he would speak with, for the
Son who shall deliver us from the wrath to come, and shall put a Crown of
glory on our heads, which he has promised to all those that love him.

Again, that I may draw to a conclusion, let this sweeten all miseries,
troubles, and afflictions that we shall meet with here below. If we meet with
persecution, with imprisonment, with hatred in the world, with reproaches from
men, let this be sufficient to sweeten all. Consider the day is coming, it is
at hand, Christ is at the door, Jam. 5.10. and you shall awake and sing, while
these that now rejoice shall howl and lament.

Beloved, Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is to try
you, as though some strange thing happened unto you. But rejoice in as much as
ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed,
ye may be glad also with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4.13, 14. God leads his people
to happiness by straits. Heaven is a Palace of glory, a spacious place; but
the way to it is narrow, the gate is strait, by which we must enter in unto
it. Let the joys provided for us at the end of our journey, sweeten unto us
the troubles and difficulties of the way. God intended to make Job a great man,
but before God brings him to his full height of greatness, God first brings
him to the dunghill. So God will bring us first to the dunghill, he will lay us
in the dust, and then make us such glorious creatures, as you have heard the
Saints shall be at the resurrection.

Joseph was to be ruler in Egypt; but first he must be laid in prison: so God
lays his first in prison, he brings them to a low condition, to be nothing in
the world; and afterward lays them in the prison of the grave, and then he
raises them to be Kings, Priests, Rulers, and Judges with the Lord Jesus
Christ. Wherefore let this meditation of the resurrection sweeten trouble, and
perfume the grave unto us.

And let it likewise sweeten all the comforts that we enjoy here, by looking
upon them as pledges of the joy which we shall have at the resurrection: Let
it sweeten the mercies of this day, which will have little relish in them
without this. Alas; what is it to look on National deliverances, mercies,
victories, and conquests over our enemies; unless you see your happiness in
the Lord Jesus? What is it if the Land have peace, if thou have not peace of
conscience by believing? What is it, if the enemies of thy body, of the State
and Kingdom be wholly routed, and put under the feet of those that desire to
stand for the liberties of the Subject; if in the mean while thou be a
vassal, and a slave to the Prince of darkness? What is it for thee to be free
from corporal enemies, and yet to be under the power, and led captive by the
enemy of thy soul? What is it, if thou be a freeman in thy body, and a slave
in thy soul, to all lusts, filthiness, and ungodliness? What is it, to keep
such a day as this, and to rejoice in a carnal way for outward mercies, when
thou do not spiritually rejoice in the first place, that God has freed thee
from the enemies of thy eternal salvation? Rejoice not only as a Heathen may
for national blessings, but rejoice as a Christian, seeing God reconciled to
thee in the Son of his love; let the joy of the resurrection both sweeten thy
troubles, and add spiritual fuel to the flame of thy joy for temporal
mercies.

Truly, we then rejoice in temporal things, and in creature comforts and
mercies aright, when we rejoice in them in a spiritual way, when we see all
sweetened to us in the Lord Jesus. Therefore improve to the full this doctrine,
for the heightening of your joys this day. Let there not be an evil heart of
unbelief in any, to keep him from rejoicing. Though there were great plenty
of Corn in Samaria, yet the Lord that would not believe what the Prophet said,
though he saw it, he did not taste of it, 2 Kings 7.19. I tell you of great
plenty, and happiness, I have set it before your eyes, as God has enabled
me; but unless you believe, you shall never taste of this heavenly Manna; you
shall never drink of these rivers of pleasure. Here is a cup of salvation, you
that have the lips of faith drink, and your souls shall be refreshed and
comforted in the enjoyment of it: but if you lie in unbelief, you may want the
joy, and comfort, that you might have of it here, and you may want the
enjoyment of it to all eternity. Therefore believe what has been spoken, what
God has promised, and rejoice in it here, being confident that thou shall
enjoy what God has promised. And what thou have (in spe,) in hope here, thou
shall hereafter have (in re,) in full fruition; serving God cheerfully,
joyfully, and comfortably in the assurance of happiness by Jesus Christ at the
resurrection: thou shall be happy with God, and with Jesus Christ at the
resurrection, in body, and spirit. Which God of his infinite mercy grant unto
us all, Amen.

Man's, legal righteousness, is no cause or part of his justification.
EPHESIANS. 2.8, 9. For by grace are ye saved, through faith; and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God.

Not of works, lest any man should boast.


THERE are two things which men ought chiefly to know; Their misery by sin; and
their happiness by the grace of God in Christ. And by the wicked
unfaithfulness of our memories we are more apt to forget these two things,
then to forget any other points whatsoever. [(...)] Know thy self, is a lesson
as difficult, as it is old and common. How hard a matter is it for a man to
remember himself, as to know what he is in himself? The King of Macedonia
thought it needful, that his Page should every morning put him in remembrance,
that he was a mortal man. And every spiritual man does find it necessary,
that the Spirit daily should become his remembrancer, to put him in mind that
he is a sinful man. So likewise it is a hard matter, without the power, and
assistance of the Spirit, always to know, the rich, full, and free grace of
God, as it is held forth in the Gospel to poor sinners. The last of these, as
it is the most sweet and excellent lesson, so with the greater difficulty it
is retained in our memories. This is a Doctrine, which if it were preached unto
us every day, we should forget it every day. The daily teaching and hourly
learning of it, cannot wholly free us from the ignorance of this truth. But as
far as we are carnal and fleshly, we are strangers to the knowledge of it.
So that he that thinks he perfectly knows the doctrine of justification by
faith alone, I dare profess to that man, that he knows nothing of this
doctrine of justification as he ought to know. As long as we live upon the
earth, we may be learners of this doctrine. Paul after he had been a scholar,
and an aged teacher in the school of Christ many years, did then profess,
that he endeavored to forget his own works, and legal righteousness, in
reference to his justification, and pressed forward to know more of the mystery
of Christ, laboring to be found in the righteousness which is of God by
faith, Phil. 3.10.

Therefore though I have sormerly spoken of the chief point that lies in
these verses; yet I know it is needful and necessary for me to speak of it
again, that you that have heard it opened, may hear more of it, as well as
for those, who have not heard the point so clearly and fully unfolded unto
them; to whom God may make my discourse beneficial, if he accompany me with
his presence. Wherefore I have pitched upon this subject at this present: in
which, the sum of all divinity is comprised. For faith and love is the sum
of all that we preach: Faith toward the Lord Jesus, and love toward God, and
all those that are united to him in the same Spirit with our selves. And the
Apostle lays down both these in these verses: showing first clearly the
doctrine of justificatio^ through faith alone without works; and then showing
that though we are justified without works, yet how in the Spirit we are
carried forth to perform all good works; for, he says, We are created the
workmanship of God unto good works, ver. 10.

In these words, these particulars present themselves to your best attentions.

First, that salvation and justification is by grace, that is, by the free
favor of God; Ye are saved by grace. Secondly, He shows how we are saved by
grace; in a way of believing, not working; Ye are saved by grace through
faith. Many pretend that they look on grace, but it is thorough the spectacles
of their own works: but he that does truly eye grace, he looks on grace in an
act of believing, and not through working. Thirdly, The Apostle discovers the
nature of true faith, which is the unfeigned faith of the Elect. First,
negatively he informs us, that this faith is not of our selves; There is not
a fountain in our selves, from whence a true and lively faith springs; it
flows not from the natural, carnal, or rational principles of the first
Adam, but from the power of the Spirit of grace. Secondly, affirmatively he
informs us concerning the nature and original of it; it proceeds from God,
and is bestowed upon the creature as a free gift: It is not of our selves, it
is the gift of God. Fourthly, He shows that as it is by grace, so it is not by
works; as it is by believing, so it is not by working: Not of works. Fifthly, He
gives the reason why it is not by works; Least any man should boast. If a man
could say, that God has justified, and saved him for his endeavors, labors,
pains, or good works, then a man might boast. When he meets with one that
is without Christ, he may say, I have done this good work, and the other good
work for Christ, I shall be saved, and thou shall be damned. But the true
child of God, if he meet with a reprobate, he sees no cause to boast; it is by
the grace of God that he is saved, when the other is damned. Not by works,
least any man should boast. It is the design and intention of God, in
justifying a sinner by grace without works, to keep men from pride and
boasting. Man did fall from happiness by pride; there is no way to attain
happiness, but by humility, and faith; the true way to humility is by
believing; for believing empties the creature of all works, and righteousness,
and shows that he is nothing in himself, and that all his treasure, glory,
happiness, riches, and perfection, lies treasured, and laid up in another.
(Fides hominem vacuum Deo adducit, ut Christi bonis impleatur) Faith brings a
man in a poor and beggarly condition to Christ, that he may be enriched by
Christ.
Lastly, The Apostle declares, that though we are saved by faith without
works, yet we shall not be unfruitful, in bringing forth good works. We are
the workmanship of God by a new creation. And the end of our creation in
Christ, is this, that being in him we may be active to love and good works.

First, I shall endeavor to prove negatively, that there is no justification
by works. And then show how it is by grace; and then how it is in a way of
believing; and so come to distinguish true faith, which is given by the Spirit,
from the false faith of hypocrites, and Libertines, which flows only from a
principle of humane wisdom, and not from the powerful operation of the Spirit
of God.

At this present, I shall observe this method.

First, I will show that we are not saved by works, I mean, by the works of
the Law.

Then I shall show, that we are not saved, and justified by works, which are
the fruits of faith, or done under the Covenant of grace.

Thirdly, I shall show, that we are not saved by works, in which we yield
obedience to any Gospel Ordinances, though they be Ordinances appointed by the
Lord Jesus Christ himself to be practiced by the Saints. I take in this,
because I have found in my own spirit, and in many that I have dealt with, a
secret and subtle kind of Popery, by which we are apt to attribute something
to the practice of Ordinances, in reference to our justification. And hence it
is that people are so ready to run into every new way of worship, which is
brought to light, thinking that unless they find out the right discipline,
and government of Jesus Christ, the right Baptism, and Ordinances, they are
not true Saints, nor sufficiently justified. Therefore I shall take in this
too, to show, that as we are not justified by more inward, and spiritual
works; so neither are we justified by any outward observation of Ordinances,
or submitting to any command of the Lord Jesus Christ, but only by our
obedience to the first and principal command of the Gospel, by which we
believe justification by grace through Christ without works.

For the first of these heads, I shall briefly show, how it is not by works,
passing by many things that I have formerly spoken of, and I shall only lay
down four or five considerations for the confirming of this, that we are
saved, and justified before God, and in the Court of our own conscience,
without any works whatsoever.

The first consideration may be this; We cannot be justified by works, or by
the Law: because there was never any man had a legal righteousness, but the
man Christ Jesus. This is Paul's undeniable conclusion, laid down in Romans 3.23.
All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. The devout Jew as well as
the profane Gentile, is brought in, before the tribunal of God, as a guilty
sinner, coming short of such a glorious righteousness, which the Law does
require of him, that he may be justified under it. The Gentile never walked
according to the written Law of nature, which is written in his heart, nor the
Jew, according to the Law of his Maker, written in Tables of stone.

All the works of the Law may be reduced to two heads.

The first are those works that we do in obedience to God, to show our love
to him.

Secondly, The works that we do, to show our love to our neighbor.

Now if we take works, in either of these two respects, I shall show, that all
the men and women in the world, come short of such a legal righteousness, and
perfection, that the holy, just, and pure Law of God requires.

It will be clear, that no man ever loved God as he ought. God does command
us, that we should love him with all our heart, and with all our strength,
with the whole stream of our affections. But what man did ever love God in
that manner? Suppose a wife should entertain many thousand lovers besides her
husband, could any say, that that wife loved her husband? So many fins as we
have, so many lovers we have, so the Scripture calls them, Jer. 3.1. Thou have
played the harlot with many lovers: that is, thou have followed many sins and
lusts, base and vile corruptions. Now it is thus with all the men in the world;
we have all gone a whoring from our God; so that though all men, yea even
Turks and Heathens pretend to love God, the great God that made them, yet there
is no man that ever loved God as he ought. That man that thinks that he ever
loved God as he ought, and as the Law requires, he is very blind, and not
enlightened to this day, to see the purity, and spiritualitie of the righteous
Law of the just and high God.

Suppose a Subject should always contrive rebellion, and conspire against the
person of his King, as defirous to take away his life, and to pull the Crown
from his head; will any say, that this Subject loves the King, Thus it is with
all men; we are all traitors and rebels against the King of Heaven; if we had
strength, we would take the Crown from the head of God, and set it upon the
head of the Devil. If it were in our power, God should not reign, and be King
in the world, but the Devil. This is in the heart of wicked flesh, it brings
forth nothing else; it loves it self, and the devil, but hates, loathes, and
abhorres God, and had rather that the Devil should sit on the throne, then God
the Father, and the Lamb at his right hand. So that a man being unable to obey
the Law of God, God cannot justify him by his Law, but must pronounce him a
rebel; for sin is rebellion, and spiritual high treason against God. In Ezekiel.
2. when God sent the Prophet to teach the people, he tells him what people he
should meet with, he says they were such as would not hear him, such as would
slight him, and would not endure to hear sound and good doctrine, and calls
them rebels. And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee to the children of
Israel, to a rebellious Nation, that have rebelled against me, even to this
very day. You see, sin is called rebellion in the Word of God.

But some will say, certainly, I was never such a rebel as you make me; I
apprehend not that I ever hated God in such a manner.

Answ. If thou do not see how thou abhorrest God, and how in the flesh thou
love the Devil more then God, thou have not to this day, a sight of the just
and pure will of God. For it is not enough that thou abstain from gross sins
and profaneness, that makes a man scandalous to the eye of the world; but
thou must abstain from every sin, from every vain thought, or else the Law
will pass the sentence of condemnation on thee as a rebel. If it were
possible that a man could so live on earth, that he should never dishonor God
in any action; that he should never dishonor God by any word of his mouth; but
all his words should be to the glory of that God that made him, and to the
glory of that wisdom of the Father, by which he made all things: yet if this
man should have but a sinful ungodly rising in his heart against God, the Law
would take no notice of all the good deeds of this man, and all the good words
that he has spoken to the glory of God, but the Law would condemn him for
that sinful thought in his spirit. Therefore you shall find that not only
sinful words and actions, are called traiterous words, and rebellious actions
in Scripture, but evil thoughts concerning God, are treason against God; the
Law of God reaches the heart and spirit of a man, so that if there be a
sinful thought, the spiritual, and holy Law of God condemns a man as a
rebel for that thought. Jer. 5.23. This people has a revolting, and
rebellious heart. The Law does not condemn a man only for rebellion in words
and actions, but for rebellion in the heart. It is not enough for us outwardly
to conform to what the Law requires, but we must have obedient hearts; if there
be any rebellion in the heart, we are condemned, as though we had sinned
against God in words and actions.

The Law does not only condemn a man for adultery, by which he defiles his
neighbors wife. A man may be an adulterer, and yet an Eunuch; if a man have
but an adulterous glance with his eye at the sight of a woman, if he have but a
sinful thought arising in his heart, the glorious Law of God thunders in the
face of that man, and lightens in the countenance of that man, and will utterly
destroy him for his sin. The Law is like the Priest and Levite, Luke 10. that
past by the man which was robbed and wounded by thieves. It is Christ alone who
powers in the oil of his Gospel into the wounds of sinners, for to heal and
refresh them. The Law rightly and spiritually understood, is a Ministry of
death ( Languorem ostendi, non anfer, Aug.) It is the Gospel which is the
Ministry of life and salvation. And if we thus look upon the Law of God, and
rightly understand it, it is clear and evident, that there was never any man
that loved God. Sin is a hatred of God, so many sins as thou committest, so
much hatred of God thou discoverest. Our love is showed by keeping the
Commandments of God; so by breaking the commandments of God, we discover and
manifest that hatred that is in us against the most holy God. So that if you
consider this, that you never loved God yet; you cannot comfort your selves in
your love to God; but must abase your selves for your neglecting of the
doctrine of justification. When God shall give you light to see himself, and
his Son, you will find, that that which you call love to God, (in your blind
ignorance,) is hatred of God, and rebellion against him.

Secondly, Consider, that there is no man that ever loved his neighbor as he
ought. The Law of nature, and the written Law of God require, that every man
should do to others, as he would that they should do to him: But there was
never any man that did so. If it were possible for a man to live so, as that he
should never wrong his neighbor, or his brother, by any unjust action, or by
any word spoken against his brother. But where is the man that can stand forth,
and truly affirm it? yet he may be charged by the Law, if he has had any evil
thoughts against him in his heart. For the Law is spiritual, the Law reaches
the heart; and the Law will condemn this man, as a man that hates his brother;
for the Law takes notice of this, in this particular: As you shall find, Zech.
7.10. Oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, nor the poor, and let none
of you imagine evil in your hearts against his brother. The Law forbids
imagining evil against our brother in our hearts. So that if once in all the
days of thy life, thou have had but one uncharitable thought of any man, when
thou had no ground at all for it, thou have imagined evil in thy heart
against thy brother, and art a transgressor of the Law; for thou walk
contrary to thy rule and light.

I appeal to thee, would thou have a man think evil of thee, when he has
no just cause? Thou will say, I would have no man think evil of me, or
harbor an uncharitable thought in his breast against me: so then if thou have
an uncharitable rising in thy spirit against any man or woman in the world,
thou come short of the righteousness, holiness, and perfection of the Law,
and so there is no salvation for thee by the Law: If a man consider what the
Law is, he shall find no comfort in the world by looking upon himself, and his
best performances in the glass of the Law; but he shall find that all have
sinned, are haters of God, fighters against God, haters of his children, and
enemies to their neighbors. That as Christ said to the Scribes and Pharisees,
Joh. 7.19. Did not Moses give you a Law, and none of you keep it? So I may
speak to all men and women in the world; the just and righteous God, as the
creator that may require obedience from his creature, has given us a just and
holy Law; all that he commands is consonant to reason and equity. Thou can
not deny, but that it is equal that thou should do to all men, as thou
would that they should do to thee. But we have all sinned, and have broken
this just and righteous Law of God; therefore by this it appears, that there
is no justification for a man by the Law, or his own works.

Thirdly, Another Consideration may be drawn from this; it is not any whit
necessary, that any man should have any works at all, to bring with him unto
God for his justification. There is a fullness and sufficiency in the grace of
God, and in Jesus Christ, so that there is no need of any works that we should
bring for our justification.

The robe of Christ's righteousness, is such a complete garment, that there
needs no patches of our own to be sowed to it. You shall find God speaking of
his own grace in Isaiah, Isa. 43. For mine own Names sake, I will forgive thy
sins, and will remember thy iniquities no more. It is not for our works sake,
if it be only of his grace. He says, His arm is mighty and strong. As the
arm of Gods justice, is a mighty arm, by which he crushes, and breaks in
pieces all wicked, and ungodly men; so his arm is mighty to bring salvation.
And he has laid help upon one that is mighty, Psalm. 89. Seeing the
mightinesie of Gods arm is to bring salvation to his people, he is mighty to
save, Zeph. 3.17. and he will save to the utmost, the worst, and chief of
sinners, without any righteousness, or holiness of their own. Therefore it
follows, that it is not needful, nor necessary, that a man do good works,
that he may be justified, and saved.

We have a rule in Philosophy, that it is vain and frivolous to do that by
many things, that may be done by few; seeing God has discovered an
alsufficiency in his own grace, it is vain therefore to seek justification by
many things. Psalm. 130.7. There is mercy with God, and plenteous redemption: No
need therefore of man's righteousness.

If thou have been a slave to many sins, to vile lusts, and base corruptions;
pride, vaineglory, hypocrisy, swearing, and uncleanness, etc. There is
plenteous redemption. God can redeem thee from all thy sins, that thou have
been accustomed unto many years. He is able to redeem thee out of the hands
of all thy corruptions, that hold thee fast in bondage and slavery. Wherefore
there being such a sufficiency in grace, it is not needful or necessary, that
a man do good works, that he may be justified.

The fourth consideration may be this; Almighty God does not require us to do
good works that they should justify or save us. I confess in the letter of
the Word, God seems to require them. When he speaks in the language of the
Law, he says, Do this, and live, etc. But in the Ministry of the Gospel, which
is the only Ministry of salvation, God does not require thee to do any thing
that thou may be saved, or justified. The Law sets thee to work, and is never
satisfied; but the Gospel bids thee do nothing at all. This is the tenor of
the Gospel, Believe in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and be confident to be
justified only by his Name. The Apostles when they preached, endeavored to
beat men off, from their own works and performances, in the point of
justification. When the Jailer said; What shall I do to be saved? Paul bids him
not to work, but to believe in the Lord Jesus. So in Isai. 55.3. God reprehends
men that spend their time for that, which is worth nothing, laying out so much
time in acting, and doing, for justification, and salvation, and in the mean
while, neglecting the glorious and precious Gospel of grace by his Son.
Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? Wherefore do ye
spend the strength of your bodies and spirits in working, laboring and tyring
out your days under the spirit of bondage, that ye may be justified, and
saved? You spend your money for that that is not bread; you shall never have a
piece of bread from the Law for this; you shall never satisfy the Law, it will
not give you a crumb of comfort, work, and do what you can. Hearken unto me,
and eat that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness.
Foolish, and ignorant people, they take pains to satisfy their spirits, and
to get comfort, by making long prayers, and observing fasting days, and giving
alms to the poor, endeavoring to love God and Saints, that they may be
saved; but they labor for that that will not profit, for that, that is not
bread.

If duties could satisfy, why did Christ die? If we could be saved by the Law,
why was the Gospel made known? Therefore he points them to the Gospel; Hear,
and your soul shall live. That is, hear the Word of Gods grace, believe that
God will pardon your sins for his Name sake, and not for any works or
righteousness in your selves. Believe that Christ came to save sinners,
ungodly sinners, the worst of sinners, the chief of them: believe this, and
your souls shall live. If any bid thee work, that thou may be justified; to
get love to the brethren, to get a good conscience to God, and men; he sets
you upon a labor that will not profit you. The voice of God is, Hear, and
your souls shall live; Believe that which is reported concerning this Christ,
who was borne of a woman, though the eternal Son of God, and was manifested in
the flesh, and has borne the sins of sinful flesh; and has made an end of
all iniquity, and brought in, everlasting righteousness. In believing this
doctrine, we are assured of his love. And this God bids us preach, and nothing
else for justification, ceasing from our selves, our works, our righteousness,
our performances, resting on his love, setting foot on his grace, disclaiming
our doings, not coming to him in the sight of our works, and our love, but of
his goodness, as it is displayed in Christ.

Fifthly, It is positively forbidden, and God reproves men for it; he shows
them that they undo their souls to eternity, if in a secret way they rest
upon their own works. Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness,
has not attained to the Law of righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought
it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law, Romans 9.31, 32. He does
not say, that they did directly seek salvation by the Law, but indirectly,
((...), sed tanquam operibus legis,) as it were by the works of the Law. Works
are not only not required, but forbidden. God does not bid us to work, but he
forbids us to work for justification. It is not he that works, that is
justified, but he that works not, but believes in him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is accounted for righteousness, Romans 4.5. When the Apostle
presses men to believe, and persuades them to entertain the doctrine of
grace that he preached; in those Exhortations there is a vertuall forbidding of
working for life. When he bids them only to believe, Act. 16.3. it is as much
as if he had bid them not to work. Consonant to that speech of his; A man is
not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Christ, Gal. 2.16.
He excludes works, that he may establish men in the doctrine of faith, and
prohibiteth working for justification.

Lastly, We are not to desire the presence of good works that we may be
justified. A man is not only to go thus far, to be convinced that he is not
justified by works; but he is to be convinced of this, that the presence of
good works are not needful and necessary to him when he comes to God for
justification. I am not only to profess, that my works have no influence into
my justification, or are the cause of it, but that good works in the presence
of them, are not needful and necessary to justification.

Good works are inefficatious to justification, and not needful to be present,
in the person that is to be justified. Here some fly off from the truth, they
acknowledge that we are not justified by works, yet they require the presence
of good works in the person who is to be justified. But God when he
efficatiously works upon us, convinces us, that not only our good works have
no causalitie in justification, but likewise convinces us, that there is no
necessity for the presence of good works in us before justification. And this
is clear, because when the Spirit comes, he shows us that we are to come to
the throne of grace, not as men already made righteous, and holy, but as men
unrighteous, and unholy, to be made holy by Jesus Christ. So that good works
are not necessary as a qualification, or disposition in the person to be
justified.

This is that glorious Gospel, which carnal reason cannot apprehend, man's
learning cannot reach, which the worlds wisdom accounts foolishness, and
which the Devil and worldly men will always oppose, and persecute. What says
the zealous Pharisee, Will the God of love justify him that hates him? Will
the God of justice sitting upon the throne pronounce the sinner guiltless? Yea
Pharisee he will. What says the Scripture, He justifies the ungodly. What is
an ungodly man, but he that hates God, that is an enemy to God, that does not
for the present love God? And when a man looks to his grace, he must look on
himself as an unrighteous, as an unholy, ungodly man; He is not bound to come
as the Pharisee, but as the Publicane; He is not to come thus qualified, I love
God, and the people of God, I desire to obey God, I am thus qualified,
therefore I shall be justified, and no sinful man, that has not these
qualifications to fit him for justification. God bids sinners while they are in
their blood to live, Ezekiel. 16.6. Christ comes to call sinners to repentance or
changednesse of heart by the discoveries of grace. For God does not command us,
to come as men loving him, or loving his people, that we may be justified; but
when we see our selves sinners, ungodly, and the chief of sinners, then he
commands us to come to the throne of grace, and offers justification, and
salvation to us freely without works: as Paul says; This is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners, of whom I am chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. ((...)) I am the first of
sinners; so it is in the Greek (Primus non tempore, sed malignitate) The first
not in time, but in sin and malignitie. This is the truth, which Paul preached,
and which he accounted, not only worthy of acceptance, but all acceptance,
for the sweetness and excellency of it. If other truths are worthy of
acceptance, this is worthy of all acceptance. If a man sees that he has a
heart that will not suffer him to love God, that he hates the people of God,
yet hears the Gospel preached, that there is grace offered to sinners, to the
chief of sinners; if this man believe, if he come and trust the grace of God,
he has as good an assurauce for heaven, as heaven can give, as God gives to
any that he intends to save, and make happy with himself to eternity.

By this we see, that we are not to bring good works, because their presence
is not necessarily required. Though we see all evil present with us, and all
good absent, we may rest upon the promises of grace for justification, which
is the plain direct way to true and perfect holiness.

Now in the next place, I shall give you considerations, to prove that we are
not justified by works that are done after conversion. This will appear as
clearly as that which I have delivered concerning the neediesnesse of the works
of the Law, for our justification before our justification.

The first reason which I shall lay down is this; Those things are not the
cause of justification which follow justification and true faith: but good
works follow justification and true faith; therefore good works are not the
causes of justification. The cause precedes the effect; good works are the
effect of justification; right reason therefore will teach us, that they cannot
precede justification. The work of the justification of a sinner, is done and
completed, before works are done, and therefore works can have no hand in our
justification. That old rule is as old as the doctrine of justification, and as
true as it is old, (Bona oper a non praecedunt justificandu^, sed sequuntur
justificatu^;) Good works do not precede in the person who is to be justified,
but follow the person that is justified. From which it will follow, that a man is
not justified for good works that follow faith, because he is justified before
he has those good works: good works in order of nature, following true faith;
true faith working by love, Gal. 5.6. I am not to love that I may believe, but
I must believe Gods love, that I may love God. Joh. 4.19. We love him, because
he first loved us. We are first purged from dead works by believing, and then
we serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. God has sworn that justification shall
go before sanctification, Luke 1.73. He first delivers us from our sins,
our souls deadly enemies, and then we serve him without fear in holiness
and righteousness, as Zachariah being filled with the holy Spirit, does
sweetly power forth the holy water of this soule-refreshing truth. Luke 1.74,
75. Redemption does antecede purification: He has redeemed us from all
iniquity, to purify us to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
Faith which looks upon the grace of him who is invisible, is the mothergrace,
(Radix bonorum operum fides,) Faith is the root, good works are the fruit,
there must be the root before the fruit.

But some man may say, may we not see the fruit before we see the root? as
we see some fruit upon trees, while the root lies hid; and from the beholding
of the fruit, may we not very rationally conclude, that there is a root: so
from the beholding of our good works, the fruit of true faith, may we not
conclude, that there is faith, though it be not in it self visible unto us.

To this I answer; That this similitude proves not the thing; for though it be
a truth, that good works may appear first to men, yet faith is first visible
to us in our own spirits; and it is impossible that I should see the truth of
good works, except I first see the truth of faith. Evident sanctification does
evidence unto us the truth of our justification, but sanctification is not
evident, our justification being not evidenced to us in the first place. If it
be manifested in our spirits to us, that our works are good, it will presently
be manifested unto us, that we have true faith. But this is not manifested in
our spirits, that our works are truly good works, and such which cannot be done
by an hypocrite, until the truth of our faith be manifested unto us.

I will make this evident by this reason; A man must see his good works, as
done either under the Law, or under the Gospel, and look upon them, either in
the glass of the Law, or the glass of the Gospel; if a man look upon them in
the glass of the Law, and do rightly and spiritually understand the Law, he
shall be so far from drawing an assurance of his justification from them,
that he shall behold himself cursed and damned, with all his good works. For
the Law curses every man that continues not in the doing of all things which
are commanded by God. It is indeed a divine looking-glass, in which things to
be done, or avoided, are discovered. ( Lex est divinum speculu^ in quo facienda
and fugienda refulgent, Aug.) but it will sentence us to death for the least
spot or wrinkle which it does discover; so that it is impossible, that a man
should see himself justified in the glass of the Law.

But thou will say, he may look upon his love, sincerity, and works, in the
glass of the Gospel.

And to this I answer, that if he look upon them in the glass of the Gospel,
which is Jesus Christ, then he must put himself under the Gospel, and look
upon himself, as a man in Christ, that so he may see his works good by Jesus
Christ; which he will never be able to see without the eye of faith, which
sees things invisible, Heb. 11. and by which we look upon Christ, 1 John 2.1.
dwell in Christ, Ephesians. 3.17. Live in Christ, Gal. 2.19. And do living works,
acceptable to God by the life of Christ in us, Heb. 11.4. By faith with open
face we behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord, and are changed into the
same Image, from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. and see that our good works are
the effects of Christ's love, discovered in himself and in his Gospel to our
souls. And therefore when John does inform us, that we shall know that we
know him, if we keep his Commandment. He does propose believing, as the first
Commandment of God, without which we cannot assure our selves, that we are
obedient to his other commands, 1 John 3.23. This is his commandment, that we
believe in him whom he has sent. Good works after a man has faith, are not
the cause of justification, but the consequent; they follow a man's
justification; they do not precede the act of justification; they neither
precede the act of Gods grace, by which he justifies a sinner, neither do
they precede justification in the Court of Conscience: But being justified by
faith, we have peace ( Romans 5.1.) in our Consciences. This was the doctrine
which was frequently preached by those heavenly Carpenters, which did first
strike at the horns of the beast, Vt dilectio oriatur, necesse est praecedere
fidem hoe est fiducia misericordiae) It is necessary, says Melancthon, that
faith, which is a confidence of Gods mercy, do precede love. And in another
place, (Non nititur fides nostra dilectione, sed tantum misericordia promissa,
ut constat, nec existere dilectio potest nisi sit apprehensa remissio) Faith is
not grounded upon our love, but the promised mercy of God, so that it is
manifest, that there cannot be true love, unless remission of sins be first
apprehended.

Another reason is from the imperfection of works wrought by a man after he is
justified; If any man that is justified, look on his works, and do not behold
them in the glass of the Gospel, he shall read his own condemnation for his
works. There is an imperfection in our works, seeing we do not love God so
perfectly as we should, with all our heart, all our mind, and all our spirit:
but while the regenerate part, through the power of the Spirit runs after God,
and loves God; the fleshly part runs after sin, and hates God. Therefore
seeing there is such imperfection in the works that we perform, that the best
of us are unprofitable servants, and that the most holy amongst us, do that
for which he may be damned every day, if God should not deal with us in the
Gospel, but in the Law; it will follow, that a man cannot be justified by the
works that he does after he has faith, and is converted, and does works which
are wrought by the Spirit of grace.

It may here be objected, that the good works of Saints are perfect.

For an answer to this, I refer the Reader to what shall be delivered from
those words; That he which is borne of God sins not.

I come now to the next Consideration, which is this; That we are not
justified by the practice of any Gospel Ordinances, which are commanded by the
Lord Jesus Christ. There are some, who it may be, are convinced that they are
not justified by works, yet I know not what new kind of Popery they have found
out; for they think to please God by submitting to Ordinances, and finding out
the true Discipline and government of Christ's Church; therefore you shall find
a kind of spirit of bondage in them, if they be not satisfied concerning the
true discipline, government, and Ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore
I shall endeavor to demonstrate this, and show clearly, that as we are not
justified by works before, or after conversion, so we are not justified, and
saved, by the submitting to any Ordinance of the Lord Jesus Christ. Salvation
is not in these, there is nothing to be found in these availeable to
justification. Forms of government and Ordinances, do not make men
Christians, but a lively faith in the Lord Jesus. When Caius Marius Victorinus
told Simplicianus, that he was turned from Heathenisme to Christianisme, and he
replied, that he would not believe him, unless he saw him in the Congregation
of Christians: He wittily thus reprehended the rashness of his speech, (Ergone
parietes faciunt Chrisiianos?) Do your walls then make Christians? So to those
that say, men are of the world, until they are under this or that form of
government, and ordinance, I may thus speak; do these things make Christians?
Presbytery (all government) is nothing, Independency is nothing, dipping is
nothing, but faith which works by love. The Apostle clearly proves this point,
Gal. 5.3. I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a
debtor to do the whole Law: Christ is become of none effect to you; he shall
profit you nothing. We know that Paul circumcised Timothy; after he was a
preacher of the Gospel, and submitted himself to many of the rites and
Ceremonies of the Jews; shaved his head, and put himself under a Jewish vow,
yet here he says, if a man be circumcised, he is a debtor to the whole Law.
His meaning is this; that if a man submit to circumcision, as thinking it will
any whit avail him to his justification, and salvation, that man shall not be
saved by Jesus Christ, but he is a debtor to the whole Law; he is not under
grace, but under the curse of the Law. Act. 15.1. When some preached that there
was a necessity for men to be circumcised, and keep the Law of Moses, that
they might be justified; see how the doctrine was disrellished by the Apostles;
Peter calls it a tempting of God, and laying a yoke upon the necks of the
disciples, which they nor their fathers were able to bear. Paul, though as a
spiritual man, he could become all things to all men, to the Jew, as a Jew, to
the Gentile as a Gentile, 1 Cor. 9.20, 21, 22. That by all means he might save
some, yet how does he thunder and lighten in the face of those that laid too
much upon the practice of outward things, denying unto them any salvation by
Christ. And as he said, If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing;
so if any man be baptized, I may say, Christ shall profit him nothing. If any
man to satisfy his conscience, desire one to dip him, or join himself as a
member to any Congregation, thinking by pleasing God, and Christ, to further
his salvation in this way, he is a stranger to Christ, and unacquainted with
his Gospel.

Faith is inconsistent with any thing in this sense; says will not suffer any
thing to be joined with it in point of justification; and if we will join any
thing with faith for justification, that faith is nothing worth at all. If we
will do one thing that we may be justified, we must do every thing. If thou will be a member of a Church, as they speak, that thou may be comforted,
justified, and saved, thou art bound to fulfill the whole Law.

The Law is well compared by one to a chain, which is linked together, and if
we take one linck of it, the weight of the whole chain will be upon us: So, if
we do any thing that we may be justified, we lay our selves under all the
bondage and slavery of the Law, and are tied to do every thing in the Law,
that we may be justified. He that is circumcised, is a debtor to do the whole
Law, Gal. 5.3. But in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love, ver. 6. By Circumcision,
he means all the outward privileges of the Jews; these do nothing avail to
salvation; and by uncircumcision, the privileges of the Gentiles, Baptism,
and the Supper. All outward privileges and prerogatives, do nothing avail to
justification. The kingdom of Heaven is not in these things, not circumcision,
or uncircumcision, or any outward Ordinances. The Kingdom of Heaven is within
you.

Another reason may be drawn from the consideration of the nature of
Ordinances, and our submitting our selves to them. There is not so much in that
outward obedience that is given to outward Ordinances, as in that obedience
that is given to the moral precepts of the Law, Mark. 10.19. Our Savior
commends the Young man for acknowledging that obedience to God, loving God and
his neighbor, were more then all burnt Offerings and Sacrifice; There is more
in internal obedience, then in obedience to external Ordinances. From which
Conclusion thus I argue; If those things that are of a more excellent nature,
as, love to God, and love to our neighbor, and relieving the poor, be
altogether unprofitable, inefficatious, and unavaileable to justification, and
salvation; then these outward works of obedience, in submitting to outward
Ordinances, are much less availeable. This is an argument a majore ad minus,
from the greater to the less. If the greatest works advantage nothing for
justification, and salvation, then certainly the doing of in seriour works, the
suffering a man to dip me, and to make me a member of his Church, cannot
advantage me. These things are works in their own nature far inferior to the
great works of the Law, love to God, and to the people of God, and to the poor
Saints of the Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore if these works be altogether
unavaileable, if they can nothing further my justification; nay, if they hinder
me in point of justification, if I lay any weight upon them; then certainly
these infericur works can nothing further my justification, and salvation. And
if a man do not practice them, according to the Commard of Christ, through
ignorance, it is no way prejudicial to his justification, and salvation. It
did not prejudice the thief that he dyed without Baptism, that he did not
receive the Supper of the Lord, that he was not admitted a member of a visible
Church; it did not prejudice him that he had no fellowship with the Saints. A
man may be justified and saved, not only without the works of the Law, and
works after conversion, but he may be saved, though he do not submit himself
to the practice of outward Ordinances.

Therefore if any say unto you, you must be baptized, or you cannot be saved, I
cannot look on you as a Saint, except you be baptized, you must be members of a
Church, or else you cannot be members of Christ, I cannot acknowledge you as a
brother, rather pity their ignorance, then yield to their exhortations. What a
sad thing is it for men to place Saintship and Religion in these things, when
the Scripture plainly and punctually in this respect overthrows them? Romans
14.15. The Kingdom of God is not in meats and drinks, (concerning which there
were many controversies and janglings in those times) but in righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

Since the Scripture requires nothing to make a man an heir with Christ, but
faith. What abominable Popery is it to say, that a man cannot be a Saint, if he
do not submit to outward Ordinances.

I cannot but commend what I find in Luther, who was zealously carried forth
against some in his time, that made a rent from him in a Legal way, because
they differed from him about external thing and Ordinances, which are no just
ground why Saints should divide themselves from one another; who says, That
they had brought in another kind of Popery, and more dangerous then that which
he had overthrown by his preaching; for as for gresse Popery, saich he, men's
eyes begin to be enlightened, to see the absurdities of it. But these men come
in a subtle way, and pretending a necessity of submitting to forms,
institutions, and Ordinantes, do pervert the pure and simple Gospel of Christ,
laboring to persuade men, that if they do not submit to the Ordinances of the
Lord Jesus, he would not acknowledge, and confess them before his Father, and
that unless they were under his government, they should not be under him for
justification.

Therefore we are to be rightly informed concerning these things, and if we
do submit to outward Ordinances, we should not do it from legal principles,
for it were better not to practice them, then to practice then from these
principles, to the ruining of our souls. And they that draw Disciples after
them by such rigid and Gospel destroying principles, will find, to their
shame, that those that they have brought in by these principles, will fall away
from them to their shame and infamy; For God is dishonored, Christ is robbed
of his Grace, and the free Spirit loses his glory.

Suffer me now to make a little use, and so I shall commend you, and what has
been delivered to the blessing of God.

You have seen that we are saved by believing the Gospel, without any works
going before justification, or any submission to the Ordinances of the Gospel,
which may follow it. This does bring four forts of people under a just
reproof.

First, Such as are grossly Popish, maintaining justification by their own
works and righteousness, or affirming that a man is not justified by faith
only, but by faith and works together. These deny justification by the Grace
of God, and the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ through faith, and set
up a justification by inherent righteousness in themselves, holding that we
are then justified from sin, when it is removed out of our sight, sense,
feeling, lives, spirits and conversations.

The strongest Argument, which they bring for the confirming of their
assertion, and in which they do most triumph, as though they had obtained a
victory over the truth of Gods Grace; is in the 2 Jam. 24. Ye see then how
that by work's a man is justified, and not by faith only. Does not James, say
they, lay down our assertion in so many words, joining faith and good works as
con-causes of justification.

Some to escape the edge of this Argument have denied this Epistle to be
Canonical, like him who being unable to unty the Gordian knott, did cut it in
pieces. Thus Lucius Osiander proposing this objection of his Antagonists does
think that he has for ever cut it to pieces by their answer.

But secondly, others, yea most of those, whom we call Protestant writers, for
the reconciling of James to Paul, and his fellow. Apostles, with one consent
give in, this answer to this objection; distinguishing of a twofole
justification: First, a justification before God; secondly, a justification
before men. Paul, as they apprehend, does speak of the former of these, James
of the latter; supposing this to be the genuine sense and meaning of James,
that we are justified by works, that is, declaratively before men.

But with respect and due reverence to the piety and learning of these men who
give in this answer, give me leave, being not sworn (in verba magistri) or
obliged to justify what any man, or many men, though godly and learned, have
apprehended to be the meaning of a place, to show my reasons, why I dissent
from them; and secondly, to give in mine own answer to the place.

First, I apprehend that James does not speak of a justification before men,
because his proof is from Abraham's being justified by works, when he offered
up his son Isaac, as it is evident by the preceding words; which action of
Abraham's would not have justified him before men. They would have looked upon
him rather as a cruel malefactor, then a Saint in offering up his only Son.

Secondly, This business was so transacted between God and Abraham, that it
was not visible to men, that they should justify him for it; When he went to
perform this act of obedience to his God, he left his servants behind him, and
carried no man with him, but his Son who was to be sacrificed.

Thirdly, If we view the place, Genesis 22.11, 12. out of which James does prove
his Argument, it will be evident, that it proves not a justification toward
men, but toward God. And the Angel said, Lay not thy hand upon the Lad, for
now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son,
thine only son from me. This Angel was Christ, as it does appear by his
calling of himself God; and he is justified by him, as a man that feared him.
And in the 16, 17, and 18. verses; By my self have I sworn, says the Lord,
because thou have done this thing, that in blessing I will bless thee, and in
thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. It is clear by this,
that the justification spoken of, is not a justification before men, but before
God.

Lastly, I shall therefore give in what I do conceive to be the meaning of the
holy Spirit in these words: James does not speak of justification, as it is
taken properly, and used by Paul, but does speak of justification as it is
taken improperly. He speaks not of it as an act by which we are reconciled,
and our iniquities pardoned, but he speaks of it as an act by which God does
approve a man to be justified by his works which he does after his
justification. Abraham was a justified man by faith, before Isaac was borne;
now God does bear witness to the works and fruits of his faith, and does
justify him by his works in this sense, that is, he does approve him, to be a
man that fears and loves him. And this is the Answer which is given by the
learned Melancthon, [Non intelligatur verbum justifieari pro reconciliari, sed
ut alias saepe dicitur, pro approbari. Justificatur homo ex operibus: id est;
habens justitiam operum, approbatur, placet Deo] The word justification is not
to be taken for reconciliation, but approbation: man is justified by his works,
that is, having a righteousness of works (or samctification) God does approve
him, his works do please God. And as when we see good fruit upon a tree, we
use to say, this is a good tree. Not that the good fruit does make the tree
good, but the tree being good does bring forth the good fruit: So God, having
made us good trees by justifying of us by his Grace, does enable us to bring
forth good fruit, and speaking ((...),) after the manner of men to us men, does
approve us to be good trees, bringing forth good fruit. And thus much for the
reproof of these men, and in answer to their objection.

Secondly, This does serve to discover and reprove such, who would seem to be
no Papists, who yet in a more refined and subtle way, do preach forth the same
doctrine which the others do maintain, and prefer some Popish books, which
are wrought with a fine and curious thread, before any books which have been
published, by any who have been eminent for the knowledge of Gods Grace in
Christ through faith for justification. These are they who, if it were
possible, would deceive the very Elect; laying siege against the Gospel, and
the doctrine of justification, while they pretend that they are fighters for
it. And these preach that we are not to look so much upon a Christ without us
for justification, as a Christ within us. And that we are not justified by a
Christ that is in heaven, but by Christ within us; which Christ of theirs is
nothing else, when ye are well acquainted with him, but the workings of their
own spirits in zeal and love to God, and when they have high thoughts of God,
their will is conformable to the will of God, and they think the same things
that God thinks, and submit to God in their ways. They look upon these
workings as their perfection and justification; and this is Christ within them.
Such kind of Doctrines as this is, are the first rudiments and principles by
which the Politic and Civilized Familists do leaven their pupills, leading
them from the plain and simple doctrine of the Gospel. The spirit of error and
delusion which was in H. N. (the first father of the Familists, which have
lived of late, or are yet living) did work mightily in him to pervert the
Gospel, and to bring in Antichristianisme in this way of flaming zeal, love,
and holiness. And if he were now alive, he would wonder at his numerous
offspring, and progeny, which he has now amongst us. But that you may avoid
this first rock, before ye be engulfed into the deep and bottomless pit of
Familisticall Atheism, and Antichristianisme, let what has been spoken to
reprove them, establish you in the truth of the Gospel, and look upon the best
piece of Familisme but as upon refined Popery.

For we are not saved by Christ working in us, and making us obedient to his
Fathers holy will: but we are saved by the righteousness of Christ, who has
shed his blood for us. And though we deny not, but that we have Christ within
us, and the Spirit of Grace to subdue our sins. Yet this is denied, that the
workings of the Spirit are our justification; for we are justified before we
have these workings: which we feel within us. We are not justified because
we love God and Christ, and desire to walk in sincerity to glorify God: but
because we apprehend the Grace of God in Christ; and therefore we love God and
Christ, and destre in sincerity, to walk in all the ways that God has made
known to us in Christ. We are not justified by the conformity of our will to
Gods will, or the oneness of our will with his; but we are justified by
faith, before any of those works are wrought in our hearts by the Spirit of
Grace.

He that denies this is ignorant of Christ and the Gospel, and is not an
honourer of Christ, but a Minister of Satan and Antichrist, and a deluder of
the people.

Thirdly, This is for the reproose of the hypocritical Protestant, who
professes the doctrine of justification by faith without works with his
tongue, but denies it with his heart; not daring to trust his soul in the
arms of a Savior, unless he brings good works along with him to procure his
welcome and entertainment.

This man stumbles at the thresh-hold of the door of Grace, being never able
to enter into the house of love; because he will not adventure his salvation
upon the promises of Grace which are made to sinners, that have no works, or
righteousness inherently in themselves. He will not go to God, or close with
a promise of Grace, unless he have the sight of righteousness in himself in
the first place. He will tell you, that good works are not the matter of our
justification, and yet he will not conclude that he is a justified man, until
he see good works in himself. This man following the law of righteousness,
does not attain to the law of righteousness, because he seeks it not by
faith, but as it were by the works of the Law, Romans 9.31, 32.

The Apostle speaks against this pharisaicall opinion, when he says, We are
justified by Grace through believing; not through working. I am not bound to
love God, and the brethren, that I may be beloved of God: but I must believe,
that I may love God, and my brother.

The preposterous preaching of sanctification before justification for the
evidencing of justification, is that which keeps many poor creatures in
bondage for many years, and ruins many souls.

How many are gone to Hell, who thought they were going to Heaven? deceiving
themselves with false and unsound assurances. And fetching their comforts from
the sight of their own works, and not from the Grace of God in Christ, by a
pure act of believing. If this were the right path to justification, we should
not be justified in believing, but in loving, and working. For I seeing my love
to God, should conclude Gods love to me; But, herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that God loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for
our sins, 1 John 4.10. And true love is wrought in us by the sight of Gods
free love to us, in an act of believing.

Therefore if thou have no assurance of the love of God, but that which thou
have gotten from the sight of thine own works, and from the conclusions of
thine own base and deceitful heart; as the ordinary way of some has been,
thou have no assurance at all.

When thou shall lie under a great temptation, thou will find no comfort in
this assurance: And thou shall find at the great day, when thou shall appear
before God and Christ, that this assurance will not be worth a Rush.

This building upon thy love to God, and not upon Gods free love to thee, is to
build upon a sandy foundation; and not upon Christ by faith. And if the Lord
convince thee of thy folly, thou will lay a better foundation of joy and
comfort then this can be unto thee. For other foundation can no man lay then
that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.

Though a spiritual man can make a good use of marks and signs, as of love to
God and Saints, when he sees them in the light of the Spirit, as fruits
proceeding from faith, as the root; yet by drawing a conclusion from the sight
of such things, which we apprehend to be in our selves, of our happiness and
good estate before God, we shall not so truly comfort, as certainly deceive
our selves.

Fourthly, This is for the reprehension, of blind, and ignorant Formalists, who
place Religion rather in conformity to outward forms of Government, and
submission to external Ordinances, then in the faith of the Gospel, which is
operative by love. Justification does not lie in our obedience to the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, but in Jesus Christ. We are not made Saints, by
being made members of any Church or Congregation, but by faith in the head of
the Church. Woe to him that makes his obedience and submission to any
Ordinance the ground of his comfort, as too many zealous Formalists do, who run
from Congregation to Congregation, from one Ordinance to another, to get solid
comfort to their souls, apprehending that they are undone creatures, and
cannot be true Saints, unless they be under the true practice of all
Ordinances: whereas it is a plain truth, revealed in the Gospel of truth, that
neither submitting to an Ordinance can make a true Saint, nor the want of
Ordinances un-saint any man that is made one with Christ in believing. He is
not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision, which is
outward in the flesh. But he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision
is that of the heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose praise is not
of men, but of God, Romans 2.28, 29. So he is a true Saint, who is not a visible
member of a Congregation; but he whose life of faith is hidden in Jesus Christ.
He is baptized, not whose body is washed with water; but, whose soul is washed
in the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21. He is a good Communicant, and breaks
bread, who does not break bread outwardly, but by faith does inwardly feed
upon the bread of life. We are not justified by works of the Law done before
or after justification, nor by yielding obedience to any command concerning
outward Ordinances, but by our submitting in our Judgments to the truth of
Gods Grace in Jesus Christ for justification without these.

I would not here be mistaken, as though I did speak against any Saints, or
any who are spiritual and faithful in the observation of any external
Ordinances; But against zealous Formalists, who do make Saintship and
fellowship to depend upon these things, and are not spiritually acquainted with
the truth of Gods Grace, but are perverters of the Gospel.

In the next place, here lies Consolation for all that hear me this day, in
that which I have delivered, if God shall give unto them believing hearts.

Have thou never done any good work? have thou hated the ways of God, and his
people? have thou never looked after the discipline, government, and ordinances
of Christ? Yet here is a ground for thee to come in unto Christ: we are
justified by grace through believing, not through working. Therefore let it be
supposed, that thou art without works, yet thou have good ground to take
comfore in that which has bin delivered; believe and thou art in a happy
condition, though thou have never done a good work. Thou art not to come to
Jesus Christ as a righteous man: But thou are to come unto him, that thou may
be made a righteous man. If thou see thy self a vile sinner, cast thy self
into the arms of the grace of the Father by Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
made the righteousness of God in him 2 Cor. 5.

Promises of Grace are left by God upon record in the Scripture of truth for
sinners, for ignorant sinners Isa. 29.24. They that erred in Spirit shall come
to understanding; For sinners that murmr against him, his ways, truths, and
Prophets, as it follows in the same verse. They that murmured shall learn
Doctrine. For backsliding sinners Hosea 14.4. I will heal their back slidings,
I will love them freely. Him that comes unto him he will in nowise cast out
(...). Here are two Negatives in the Greek, which do strengthen the Negation.
John 6.37. By which speech our Savior does assure poor sinful creatures,
that if in truth they come unto him, they shall not be rejected by him; or
ejected from the arms of his love and mercy.

Christ's invitation is to all sinners, All that will, may lay hold of him, not
only the righteous, but the unrighteous. If thou can not love God, thou may
look on the Grace of God, and take comfort that God loves thee, Christ came
not to call the righteous, but sinners, the chiefest and vilest of sinners to
repentance. Therefore come as a sinner, as the chiefest of sinners, come I say,
and welcome. The Lord Jesus keeps open-house for all comers, the blind, the
lame, shall not find the doors shut upon them. They shall be well-come as
sinners, that cannot be entertained as Saints.

It is reported of Romes first Founder, that wanting Subjects, he sent forth
some, to make known his will to all people, who lived about him, that if any
malefactors, or such who were oppressed in the places where they lived, did
come in unto him, they should live peaceably in his Kingdom, and he would
protect them against any that should pursue them, and by this means he became
suddenly the King of a numerous people. So Christ does send forth his
Proclamations to assure sinners, and vile malefactors, that if they will come
under his Scepter, they shall live peaceably under his Government, and that he
will safeguard them from all their enemies, which shall pursue them, and by
this means his dominions are enlarged from Sea, to Sea, and sinners do
rejoice in the King of Sion. This doctrine if it were received, would answer
all the objections which are raised in the hearts of men, against their
happiness by Jesus Christ.

Is there any sad, comfortless soul, which would not be comforted if this
truth were received? What can thou object against thy self to bereave thy
self of peace, which would not be removed if this were thoroughly believed. Art
thou a sinner? Christ offers himself to sinners. Art thou an old sinner? An
old sinner is but a sinner. Have thou bin a Pharisee like Paul, persecuting
Christ and the doctrine of Grace? A persecuting Pharisee is but a finner. And
Paul was received to mercy, that such might not be without hope of mercy, 1 Timothy 1.16. Art thou an Hypocrite? An Hypocrite may come as a sinner to Christ.
Bring what objection thou can, and a persuasion concerning the truth of Gods
grace shall answer it, and if thou do believe, thou have as good an
assurance as any is in Heaven, and which will hold good, when the hope of the
Hypocrite will come to nothing.

Let no objection keep thee from comfort, but believe what thou have heard: if
thou art a sinner conclude not, that Christ belongs not to thee, because thou
art a sinner: but say, I am a sinner, therefore Christ belongs to me, Christ
came to save sinners.

As the bright beams of the Sun dispell all mists, and clouds: so the truth of
this doctrine, if thou understand it in the light of the Spirit, will dispell
all thy doubts and objections of unbelief. They will vanish, and thou that
came hither under a spirit of bondage, shall go away with a spirit of
adoption, and assurance. The true Gospel believed will quickly bring true
comfort to thy soul. If any of you want comfort and assurance, it is because
you believe not. Christ does knock at the door of our hearts, and if by
believing the door be opened, He will feast with us. It is unbelief which
does bolt the door, does keep him out, and does keep joy from us. The gates
of Heaven are shut upon workers, and open to believers: shut to those who come
with money in their hands; but open to those who are content to enter without
paying any thing for their entrance: The gift of God is eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6. ult. Whosoever will, may drink of the waters of
life freely, Rev. 22.21. But if we will not drink without money, we shall
not drink one drop of the water of life. We see that at a playhouse they will
not open the door and let people in without they give money. But it were a
disgrace for a King, if none should see his Palace but such who would give
money. If we think to enter into heaven by doing good works, that we may be
saved by what we do, we make heaven like a playhouse: but if we look on
heaven as the Palace of the great King of heaven and earth, let us know that
we may enter without money. It were a disgrace to the King of heaven if he
should suffer none to come within his doors, to come into his Palace, but
those that would give something to come into it: if we have nothing to give
for heaven, we have as much as God demands, if we do nothing, we do as
much as God requires.

(Manifest beati sunt quibus sine labor, vel opere aliquo remittuntur
iniquitates, et peccata teguntur. Nulla ab his requiruntur paenitentiae opera,
nisi tantum ut credant, Ambrose) It is plain that they are blessed, unto whom
without any labor or pains, sins are remitted, and iniquities covered. No
works of repentance are required of these, this is only required of them,
that they do believe. For he that works not, but believes in him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness Romans 4.5. So
much for this time.

Salvation is only by Gods grace.
SERMON. II.
Ephesians 1.8. For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves etc.
I proved the last day that there is no salvation for any man by any works, or
righteousness of his own, I shall now proceed in the next place to prove;
that We are saved by grace only.

By grace, in this place we are to understand the free favor of God to his
poor undeserving creatures. That which is translated grace here, in other
places is translated favor; So it is said that our blessed Lord and Savior
increased in wisdom, and stature, (...), and in favor with God and men, Luke
2. ult. So it is said that Joseph found favor in the sight of Pharaoh King of
Egypt, Act. 7.10. And it is said that David found favor before God, ver. 46.
The grace of God is the same with his favor, This grace, or free favor of God
to poor creatures, is held forth to us in Scripture.

First, as it is in God; and so it is set forth to us, as that grace, and
favor of his which is as eternal, as himself. And in this respect we are
said to be saved from eternity, in this eternal grace, and favor of his as
the Apostle sets it forth, 2 Timothy 1.9. where he says that we are saved not
according to our works; but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given us in Christ Jesus before the world began. This grace is the primary
cause of our justification. God justifies, and saves none in time; but those
who were justified and saved before him from eternity. It is said of Abraham,
that he was the Father of many Nations, Romans 4.17. He was not then the father
of many nations, if we look upon his progeny, and posterity: for he had not a
grandchild then: but he was the Father of many Nations before him whom he
believed, even God that quickenth the dead, and calls things that are not as
if they were. So we were saved before God in the eternal grace of God, before
we had a being among the creatures. In the same sense that God is said to
determine the times, and the bounds of all men's habitations from eternity, Act.
17.26. So we are said to be saved by the grace of God. Because God from
eternity loved us in Christ, and saw us in his own eternal grace and favor.
Otherwise we should make God like unto the creature, which sees things when
they are done, and are visible among the creatures: but God he foresaw things
from eternity: He speaks of things as being, when indeed they have not a being
among the creatures, but have a being in his own eye. And so we had a being
in the grace of God, and in the eye, and sight of God, before we had a being
in our selves, and a being among the creatures.

And we are in this grace of God from eternity, not for any works that God
foresaw would be done by us: God did not love us from eternity because he
foresaw, that we would be industrious, painful, and zealous to glorify his
name. There was nothing at all in the eye of God from eternity that moved God
to set his grace, and favor upon us but his grace. It is contrary to truth
which is affirmed by some, that God foreseeing that some men would be
industrious, painful, do good works, and live holily and righteously, did
therefore make choice of them, and set his grace on them. And that foreseeing,
the idleness, sloth, profaneness, ungodliness and impenitencie of others,
he rejected them. God, as he loves us in his grace from eternity: so this
grace was placed upon us without any foresight or prevision of our own works.
The Apostle does clear this plainly to us in the forementioned place, where he
says, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace; intimating thus much to us, that it was only the eternal grace of God,
which moved God to be good and gracious to us in Christ. And so the Apostle
says, Tit. 3.5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us; that is, according to his eternal mercy,
and grace, he showed favor and compassion to us, and pardoned our sins. And
the expression of the Apostle is worth observing, Epes. 1.4. where speaking of
the eternal grace of God, he says, That God placed his grace upon us that
we should be holy, and without blame before him, in love. He does not say that
God elected us, because we would be holy, and without blame; but He elected us
that we might be holy, and without blame before him in love: good works are
not the cause but the consequents of Grace.

Nay, I add more, that as God did not foresee our good works; so, not our
faith neither: faith is not the cause of grace, but grace is the cause of
faith. God therefore enables us to believe in time, because God loved us from
eternity.

The Apostle speaking of them of Achaia says, that they believed through
grace, and Apollos helped them much that believed through grace Acts 18.27. It
is by grace that we believe, it is not by faith that we are made partakers of
Grace.

Thus we are saved by grace in the purpose of God, from eternity in the eye and
sight of God, who sees all things absent as if they were present, and speaks
of things before they are done, as if they were done.

In the next place, grace in Scripture is considered, not only as it is in
God, and as it is as eternal as God himself; but the Scripture speaks of the
grace of God, as it is manifested forth to us in Jesus Christ; and so we are
saved by Grace; God discovering his grace to us in his Son Jesus Christ. So
the Apostle speaking of grace, 2 Timothy 1.10. says: But now is manifested to us
by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and
has brought life, and immortality to light through the Gospel. He speaks
first of grace, as it is in God, and as it is as eternal, as God himself:
then he speaks of eternal grace, manifested to us in the Gospel of his dear
Son. It is by the preaching of the Gospel that the eternal grace of the
Father, in the Son, is made known to us.

And this grace is called sometimes the Grace of God the Father, Romans 1.7.
Sometimes it is called the grace of Jesus Christ; and sometimes the grace of
them both: because Jesus Christ is God, one God, in one divine essence with his
Father.

And as God in his grace is said to forgive sins, Mica. 7. who is a God like
unto thee that pardons sin? says the Prophet. So Jesus Christ is said to
forgive sins: the Apostle bids us to forgive one another, as Christ has
forgiven us, Col. 3.13. As there is grace in the Father to forgive sins; so
there is the same grace in the Son. The Apostles doubted not but that they
should be saved by the grace of Christ, as well as those that were circumcised,
Act. 15.7. And by this grace we are saved. God discovering now his grace to us
in his Son Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of the eternal Father.

This grace in Scripture is made known to us, as the sole cause of our
justification and salvation. Grace is so held forth for justification, that all
things, besides grace are excluded. We are justified by grace, exclusively;
all other things being shut out. When God justifies a man, he eyes that man,
only in his own grace: and when God justifies a man in the Court of his own
Conscience, he strips him of all his own works, of his own love to him, and
to the brethren, and gives him only a sight of own grace.

This grace does exclude all merit: if there were any merit in the creature,
man could not be saved by Grace; the Apostle cleares it to us by that passage
Romans 4.4. To him that works the reward is not reckoned of grace, but of debt.
If a man could work, or merit any thing toward his justification, and
salvation, then it were not of grace, says the Apostle: the reward is not of
grace, but of debt. If a man work, then he expects wages as due to him, he may
by right, and justice claim what he deserves: so if we did work for
salvation we might require God to bestow, and give us what we had wrought
for. But true grace shuts out all merit, and works in the creature: if we
could bring any merit of the creature to join with his grace, grace should be
no more grace, as the Apostle, Romans 11.6.

If we look upon Grace as it is in God; so, before God we were saved in his
eternal thoughts; he in his own purpose and Grace, having elected us to
justification, and eternal salvation in Glory by his Son Jesus Christ. Yet
he never holds forth his Grace to us; but in the countenance of his Son Jesus
Christ; in whom the glory of his justice shines bright, with the glory of his
grace. He shows us that he has laid all our sins on his Son: that his
justice has received full satisfaction from the sufferings of his Son for
all our sins, and so comes to discover his grace to us in the pardon and
forgiveness of our sins.

Thus Christ, and the Apostles constantly in their preaching, discovered the
grace of the Father in the Son. As our Savior to Nicodemus: God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him
should not perish, Joh. 3. And the Apostle to his Corinthians; God was in
Christ, reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5.

God does not make known his love for the forgiveness of sin, but by Jesus
Christ. I confess that we are saved by grace in respect of God, before we
know the Grace of God in Jesus Christ. But we cannot see this grace, until
we behold it in the face of the Lord Jesus. We behold the love of God in
giving the Lord Jesus to be the atonement, sacrifice, and propitiation for our
sins, before we can read the everlasting love and favor of the Father to us
in his Son. Eternal love is the primarie cause of our salvation and
justification; but it cannot be apprehended by us, until we apprehend, in the
first place our Redemption in Jesus Christ. And when Christ is embraced as a
Savior in the Arms of Faith, we rise higher in our thoughts, by the power of
the Spirit, and are brought to look upon the eternity of love. And have liberty
to read every line in his eternal volume, which does concern our eternal
life and salvation: and are fully confirmed in the point of Gods eternal
election, without the prevision of good works, which should be wrought by the
Creature. As the Apostle does prove at large in the 9th to the Romans: And if
any man will dispute or rather cavil against this truth: I shall say with the
Apostle, Romans 9.20. Oman! who art thou that reply against God: who has
mercy on whom be will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens. And though
men, unacquainted with this truth, may account this rather a shift or evasion,
then an answer to their carnal objections against election, and reprobation,
yet I shall not be ashamed of my answer. It is an excellent Speech of Augustine
(Christ's great Champion against Antigratians in his time) Absit ut pudeat nos
hoc respondere, quod respondisse videmus Apostolum. Far be it from us to be
ashamed to give the same answer, which was given by the Apostle: Who art thou
that reply against God, etc.

In the next place we are to consider, that in Scripture, salvation is taken
either negatively or affirmatively.

And take salvation in either of these acceptions. And it will be evident, that
we are saved by grace.

In the first place, if we take salvation negatively; as it is a deliverance or
freedom from all evil; and in this sense we are freed from evil, only by
grace. It is a true rule: Gratiam Christi nihil praecedit humani: Nothing in
man does precede, or prevent the Grace of God. The light and beams of Grace,
do dispell the clouds of our sins. Not for our sakes, but for his Name sake, he
covers our sins. It is Gods prerogative to free us from sin by Grace, and to
remove them far from us, Psalm. 103.12. As far as the East is from the West, so
far he removed our transgressions from us. He only can remove sin against whom
it is committed. He only can cast sin into the depths of the Sea, who has an
Ocean of Grace in himself, in which he swalloweth them up. Micah is
spiritually transported beyond himself, in admiring this incommunicable
prerogative of the God of Grace. Micah 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that
pardons iniquity, etc? And who can think that he will part with this
privilege, which is his delight? For so it follows in the same verse: He
retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy.

Secondly, If we take salvation affirmatively, for the instating of men into a
condition and enjoyment of all happiness, and felicity, so we are saved by
grace. We are made happy, brought from a cursed condition, into a blissfull
condition, from horror to joy, from hell to heaven, from the state of nature,
to the state of Glory, only by the grace of God. It is only by Grace that we
are what we are. By Grace our sins are pardoned: by Grace we have an
inheritance with the Saints: by Grace we are the high born sons of the great
King of heaven and earth: by Grace we are blessed and loaded with all
spiritual and temporal blessings in Jesus Christ, and are brought to the
enjoyment of eternal felicity, happiness, and blissfulnesse. Thus we are
saved by grace, and by grace alone.

One of the Ancients does speak excellently to this purpose; (Nemo se palpet,
de suo Satanas est, de deo beatus est, quid est enim de suo nisi peccatum
suum?) Let no man boast of himself, for of a man's self he is a Devil; by God
a man is made happy. What is a man of himself, but sin? Ye are saved by grace.

Again, salvation in Scripture is taken for salvation before God in the Court
of heaven. And it is taken for the saving of a party, in his own spirit and
conscience: if we take it in the first sense, a man is saved in the Court of
heaven, only by grace. What is the Reason that (the accusing mouth of the Law
being stopped) no Bill, no enditement can be brought against the Elect in the
Court of Heaven? Is it not this, because God in his grace justifies them? This
is the Apostles argument, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods Elect? It is God that justifies them. (...)? who can implead, or bring an
action against them before God for breaking his Law? He that is the Judge of
the Elect is their justifier. Grace has cast out of Heaven the accuser of the
Brethren, which accused them before God night and day, Rev. 12.10. The accuser
can bring no enditement, complaint, or accusation against the Saints there.
There is no sin in our consciences that can be heard to accuse us in heaven,
because there is grace for our justification: God beholds his Son Jesus
Christ before his eve, upon whom he has laid all our sins. The blood of Christ
does, with powerful and undeniable arguments, plead for those for whom it was
shed. The straying and straggling sheep, which are within the reach of Gods
eternal Grace, cannot be condemned; because the good Shepherd has given his
life for the sheep. Joh. 10.11. God knows that he has received satisfaction
before hand for their sins, by the hand of the Lord Jesus, who is not now to
pay any thing, but has already made payment for all their debts: and is become
the Mediator of the new Covenant of Grace, which is sealed in his own blood:
under which Covenant upon this consideration, there can be no remembrance of
sin, Heb. 10.14. God beholding his Elect in their propitiation; and always
hearing the sweet voice of their wrath-appeasing advocate, making an heavenly
melody in his ears. And always beholding our happiness before himself in
heaven, lying wrapped up in his own grace; does acquaint us in his word of truth;
That we are saved by grace.

Secondly: If we take salvation in the other sense; for salvation in our
spirits and consciences; and in this sense we are saved by grace. There can be
no salvation brought home to our hearts, but by the sight of grace. If we had
the sanctification of all the Saints which have lived since the fall of Man,
and should look upon it all as ours, to give comfort to our souls, and to
assure us that we are in a state of salvation; and should not look above it,
to behold Gods grace, and our sanctification in it, and from it, it would not
give us any solid comfort, or assurance of our salvation. Nothing can shine in
the heart to give it any comfort, but what does shine and give light, in the
light and beams of this grace. We never come to see our selves in a condition
of safety, till we see the grace of God. Look unto me and be saved, all the
ends of the earth; for I am God, and there is none else, Isaiah 45.22. None but
God can save us, and nothing but the sight of God can bring salvation to us.
Still we have some objection or other against salvation, and justification,
till God silence all objections by the sight of his own grace. There is that
only in God, and in Jesus Christ, that will silence all objections.

If our conscience fly in our faces, and tell us that we have committed many
thousands of sins more then we can reckon or number up, yet when God gives us
a sight of himself, his son, and grace, the mouth of conscience is stopped,
and we see all our sins swallowed up in his love. Show us the Father, and it
suffices us, says Philip. Joh. 14.8. When God shows us himself, our
spirits are at rest.

When Grace is discovered, and Gods light does shine upon the soul, Sin,
death, and damnation cannot terrify the soul. But they are filled with a
spirit of joy, in believing their free justification; who before through fear
of death were subject to bondage, Heb. 2.15. Grace appears greater and
stronger to bring salvation, then sin powerful to bring damnation. Our sins,
and the sins of all the men of the world, being the acts of creatures are
finite; but grace that justifies us, is the grace of an infinite God, and is
boundless and infinite. Men are unassured of their salvation, unless this
Grace be presented to the eye of their spirits. And men and Devils cannot
prevail against us, to enforce us to question our justification, and
salvation, when we look upon it. That peace which the world cannot take from
us, nor give unto us; that joy which neither the Law, nor the works of the Law
can convey unto us, nor bereave us off: that salvation which damned Feinds can
never rob us of; is communicated to us by the beholding of Gods grace in the
face of the Lord Jesus. The soul, when it has a sight of this grace, it
stands with boldness at the Throne of Grace, and though it feel hellish sin
in it self, yet, it is able to dispute with all the Devils in Hell, and to
maintain the freeness, fullness, and compleatnesse, of its own justification
from all sin, by the grace of God in Jesus Christ.

If the Devil shall then suggest this to a man, that he is a sinner. The
believing soul will make this answer. It is true, I am a sinner; but I am not
terrified to desparation, because I am ungodly; but I rejoice in this that God
justifies the ungodly by his grace, Romans 4.5. If the Devil shall reply: But
thou art a great sinner, and there is a great damnation. The believing soul
will return, I am not tormented by the great damnation prepared for great
sinners, but comforted by the great salvation; (Heb. 2.3.) which is for the
greatest and chiefest of sinners by Gods grace in Jesus Christ (1 Timothy 1.15.)
If the Devil shall still assault a man, to persuade him that he is a damned
soul, having misspent his time and strength in the service of sin, having no
good works to commend him unto God, that he may find favor from him. The
believing soul will be easily able in the strength of God, when it is upon the
mountain of his Grace, to silence the Accuser, by lying down in the lap of
that God, who makes him the object of his Grace, who works not for
justification (Romans 4.) but beleiveth in God who justifies sinners in his
Grace, without works. And because we are justified and comforted in the Court
of our own Consciences by grace: The spirit which is given forth in the
Ministry of the Gospel is called a spirit of grace: It being the work of the
Spirit to reveal the grace of the Father for the comfort of his children;
according to that of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16, 17. Our Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and God even our Father, which has loved us, and given us
everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts.
Here the Apostle shows us that the Saints have consolation, and that this
consolation is everlasting, and that this everlasting consolation is only by
grace. Go to all the true Saints in the world, and ask them how they received
the Comforter, whether by the observation of moral precepts, or by the doctrine
of grace, and they will inform you that they received him, by the Gospel of
grace, and not by the law of works: Some Saints are able to acquaint you with
their own experience, and can tell you, how they labored for holiness, to
bring them to happiness; to love God, that they might assure themselves, that
they were in the love of God, and that they found darkness instead of expected
light, death instead of life, horror and bondage instead of joy and liberty,
until they were enabled to come unto God as sinners, without works,
disclaming their own righteousness, deserts and endeavors, and laying the
head-stone of their peace and happiness in the free favor of God, crying
Grace, Grace, Zech: 4:7. Exalting the free grace of God in their justification,
and overthrowing and overturning their own works and legal righteousness. It
is grace, and grace alone, which brings salvation. Tit: 2.11. and therefore
not our works. Grace and works are inconsistent in this point of
justification: they can no more stand together, then the Ark of God and Dagon.
Let grace stand up in its glory, and works will quickly be overthrown, and set
up works, and ye destroy the doctrine of grace. By eternal grace we were
elected, and made vessels of mercy from eternity; by grace we were saved
before God in heaven, in the presence of the Lord Jesus: by grace we were
saved in the person of Christ before faith. By the revelation of grace unto us
through faith we are saved (in foro conscientiae) in the Court of our own
consciences. By grace salvation is inchoated here, and completed, and
perfected hereafter. Romans 6. ult: The gift of God is cternall life through Jesu
Christ our Lord. The word is (...), which signifies a gift flowing from Grace,
or free favor. In these several acceptations of the word grace, we are saved
by grace.

I might now lay down many reasons, for the proof of this point, but those,
which I gave to prove, that we are not justified by works, will be
sufficient for the confirmation of this. And when I shall handle the doctrine
of belelving some reasons will fall in which will more fully illustrate this
truth. I shall therefore for the present only present unto you a reason or
two, and hasten to the use.

1 Reason. First, it being supposed that man is a sinner, it is impossible that
man should be saved by any thing, but by the knowledge of Grace.

The Law in this particular, would not deal with us, considering what good
has bin done by us, but what evil. And therefore when the Apostle had proved,
Romans 3.23. that devout Jews, as well as profane Gentiles, had sinned, and come
short of the glory of God: he takes it for granted, as a thing undeniable and
unquestionable, that we are justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ. And if we could bring our selves into a
state of perfection, after we have once sinned, we could not be justified by
that perfection in us, which is required by the Law, but should be condemned
for our sins, and imperfections in breaking of the Law.

If a man have done good service for the Commonwealth; and yet be found guilty
of high Treason against the State, the Law will condemn him for the Treason,
his good service not being availeable to make satisfaction, to the justice of
the Law for this Treason. So if it were possible for us to keep the Law for a
time, we should be condemned, if it can be proved that we have broken it at
any time. Acts of obedience will not make satisfaction for acts of
disobedience. We cannot satisfy the justice of the Law, by doing what the Law
requires, if we have once broken it. If we could sometimes do what the Law
requires us, we should not be able to free our selves from the guilt and
punishment for doing that, which it forbids us at all times; because it
requires obedience from us, at all times. And it is unreasonable to think
that God, if he deal with us as under the Law, and not under Grace, should
give us a pardon of our disobedience, in consideration of our obedience.

If a wife live honestly, as becomes a wife, some few years; if her huband
find that she committed Adultery some years before the time of her honesty
and obedience, the Law takes no notice at all, that she has lived in her
latter time as became a wife: but condemns her; and she must be divourced from
her husband for her adultrous act committed before her obedience.

So if it were possible that we could keep the Law, and do what is required
in it, and live under the obedience of it, in every branch and point of it, yet
if we have once broken the Law, the Law, taking no notice of our obedience
would condemn us for our disobedience. What the Roman hystorian says of the
Roman Law, that it is (dura et inexorabilis) severe and inexorable, it is true
of Gods Law. The Law hears no cry or begging for mercy. No man shall find
favor or pardon from the Law, by any acts of obedience to the Law, who has
once disobeyed the Law.

The paying of a new debt will not make satisfaction to a man to whom an old
debt is owing: so if we could pay the debt that the Law requires for the
present, it makes no satisfaction at all for our breaking it before, for our
old debt.

By this consideration, in the first place, it will be evident to every man who
has any spiritual knowledge of the purity, and justice of the Law, that it is
impossible for sinful man to find out any way, but the good old way of Grace,
to happiness and salvation.

Secondly, we are justified by grace; that God may have the glory of his
grace. Man fell by pride, therefore God will not estate him in happiness but
by humbling him, by bringing him upon his knees to the Throne of Grace, that he
may have the glory of his grace. Naturally we are full of pride, and would rise
by that, by which we fell: we would be made happy by works, as we are made
unhappy by works. Every man that sees himself, sees how that the whole
stream of corrupt nature runs this way: man will be doing, working, and acting
that he may be justified. But God will not suffer sinful man to glory, before
him in his own works, least he should loose the glory of grace, Romans 4.2. and
therefore there is no salvation for us, until we lie down at the door of
grace. If God enter into judgment no man living shall be justified in his
sight, Psalm. 143.2. God does stop up all other ways to salvation, but the way
of grace, that he may have the glory of his grace in justifiing the objects and
vessels of his grace. God does not so much intend man's salvation by grace, as
his own glory and praise. He forms his people for himself, that they may be
happy in himself, and with himself, and they may show forth his praise, Psalm.
43.21. It is the mind and pleasure of God that every man should glory in
himself; therefore he justifies and saves us only by that Grace which is in
himself. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall
glory. And the Apostle when he had dicoursed of the grace of God in our
election predestination, and adoption, does sweetly acknowledge that grace does
stream forth unto us in all these particulars, that it may be to the praise of
the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1.5, 6. He makes us objects of grace that he
may receive from us, and we be enabled to give unto him, the glory of his
grace. All the Saints are brought forth standing before the Throne, and singing
forth this truth, Rev. 7.10. Salvation to our God which sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb. They ascribe salvation not to their own works,
merits, deservings, or worthynesse, but to the grace of God and blood of the
Lamb.

As earthly and gross bodies cannot mount up to Heaven, which is a place of
purity and perfection, but they fall down by their own weight to the earth,
unable to ascend thither. So our works, fall down to the ground, as unable to
ascend up to the place of Gods purity and glory to justify us in his sight;
that salvation may be attributed only to his own grace. And he will not
justify us in the court of our own consciences, we shall not read our names
written in heaven, till he bring us from our own works, righteousness,
performances, and endeavors, to rest upon the strong arm of his grace that we
may give him the glory of his grace, in our free justification and salvation.

Thirdly, God saves us by Grace, because if it were not by grace, it had been
needless that the Lord Jesus Christ should have been given to us: If it had
been possible for man to have wrought out his own salvation by his own works,
there had been no need that the Son of God should have disroabed himself of
his glory, and been made man like us. Why should he have lived a life of
sorrow, and died a death of shame, had it been possible for us to have gotten
salvation by our own works? Therefore the Apostle concludes, that if
righteousness had been by the Law, then Christ had dyed in vain. And thus
have I opened to you, and showed you the reasons why we are saved by grace. In
aword now to make a little use of it, and so I shall conclude for the present.

In the first place, that which I have delivered concerning the eternal grace
of God, sufficiently confutes that error which is in the spirits of many men,
who think that works and actings of the creature is the cause of Gods love to
the creature. God does not love us, because we love him, but we love God,
because he first loved us from eternity. God does not begin to love us, when
we are made new creatures, but God loves us that we may be new creatures.
Faith is not the Antecedent cause, but consequent of election, Tit. 3.5. Not by
works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us, by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the holy Spirit. By
this passage it is evident, that mercy does precede regeneration, and is the
cause of spiritual renovation. Vocation and justification by faith do follow
predestination, if Paul speak the truth, Romans 8.30. Whom he did predestinate,
them he also called: and whom he called them he also justified, and whom he
justfied them he also glorified. God loved us when we had no beings in our
selves, or among any creatures, to assure us that he did not love us for any
thing in us, there being nothing at all in us when God first loved us.

The love of God is not like the love of man, man loves something which he sees
lovely but God sees nothing in the object which he loves, but all the motives
and arguments lie in the bosom and breast of God, which move him to love his
creature. Man cannot love before he have some lovely object proposed to him,
but God loves before we have either being or holiness: We believe in God,
love him, and are made lovely before him in time, because he loved us before
all time. The man spiritually wise does see his happiness wrapped up in the
eternal bowels of Grace; and laid up in the everlasting bosom of
unchangeable love for him. Fond therefore is there conceit, shallow there
apprehension, and understandings dull, who believe that any thing done, or
believed by the creature in time, can be the primary cause of the creatures
salvation, to whom grace was given for salvation from eternity 2 Timothy 1.2. etc.

This doctrine of free grace does overthrow and annihilate the wisdom of the
wise, the learning of the learned, the righteousness of him who is most
righteous, and a stranger to grace. The natural man with his best sight sees
not a righteousness beyond the righteousness of his own righteousness. As
the wisdom of the spirit, is foolishness to the natural man; so the wisdom
of the flesh is foolishness with God. Though there be a spirit in a man by
which he may have great knowledge and understanding in the things of nature and
reason, yet it is the spirit of the Almighty which gives understanding, Job.
32.8. Until this spirit and power from above come upon us, we call light
darkness, and darkness light; sinfulness purity, purity imperfection. But
when this does enter into us, all our righteousnesses appear as filthy rags,
and we are made willing to rest upon that grace for righteousness, which was
given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began. 2 Timothy 1.9. Then we clearly
see the wisdom of God in showing mercy on whom he will show mercy, and having
compassion on whom he will have compassion: Then we cannot but acknowledge,
that it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy. Then the objections of carnal reason are fully answered, the
acute arguments of the wordly wise and learned, against free grace, are
dissolved, the Sophismes of the Antigratians are sufficiently confuted, and we
are saved and satisfied with the glorious discoveries of Gods eternal grace in
Christ Jesus.

Again, this should engage us all, that know this saving grace to exalt and
extol this grace of our heavenly Father. Grace apprehended by us does oblige
us unto thankfulness. It is fit that they should glorify God for his grace,
who see themselves glorified by grace. The Prophet Isaiah sets forth this
unto us Isa. 45. last, In Jehovah shall all the seed of Israel be justified,
and shall glory. He that is justified in the grace of Jehovah will certainly
glory in the grace of Jehovah. Let us therefore glory, not in our selves, not
in our labors, sufferings, actings or endeavors, but in this grace of the
Father, according to the advice of the Prophet Jeremiah, 9.23, 24. Thus says
the Lord; Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man
glory in his might: Let not the rich man glory in his riches: But let him that
glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me; that I am the
Lord, which exercise loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the
earth. Let our holy boasting be in this righteousness; Let the resolution of
the sweet Singer of Israel be the resolution of every one of us Psalm. 71.16. I
will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only. God forbid, says
Paul, that I should glory in any thing, save in the Cross of the Lord Jesus
Christ. So let every good Christian say, God forbid that I should glory save in
the grace of God; Let Pharisees and Hypocrites boast of their own works and
legal righteousness. But let true Saints boast only of the grace of the
merciful and favorable Jehovah. What is ingenuously acknowledged concerning
himself, by Paul, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God I am what I am; may be
acknowledged by all Saints. By grace we are what we are, and therefore glory
is to be given to grace. Gods gracious love was placed upon us before we were
lovely, Jer. 31.3. He loved us with an everlasting love. He loved us when we
were unlovely, when he saw us polluted in our blood, then was the time of his
love, Ezekiel. 16.6.8. His grace and love has made us lovely: what cause then is
there, that we should glory in this grace and love? It is an excellent speech
of Bernard to this purpose (Tibi illibata maneat gloria, meum been agitur si
pacem habuero.) Take thou all the glory, it is enough for us, that we have the
peace. In Psalm. 130.3. the Psalmist professes that if the Lord should mark
iniquities, no man should be able to stand before him. If thou Lord should
mark iniquities: O Lord who shall stand? The interrogation is equivalent to a
negation, who shall stand? that is, no man shall stand. We, that should
quickly fall to ruin, had we no better ground to stand upon then our own
works, what reason have we to bless God for grace, who only stand by grace?

If we could stand before the judgment Seat of God, standing clothed in the
menstruous rags of our own works, righteousness and performances, there
were some ground for us to glory in our own works: but seeing it is thus, that
if God enter into Judgment, and deal with us by the Law, we cannot stand
before him, therefore, let us glory only in him. With heart and tongue give
him praise for what he has done for thee by his grace, who have cause to be
ashamed for what thou have done against his grace. A King of France thought
himself bound to praise God, that God had made him a King and not a beggar.
What cause have we to praise him for his grace, who of sinners has made us
Saints. If devout Bradford, when he saw a blind or a lame man, did take
occasion to bless God for the use of his limbs, and eyesight, is it not
consonant to reason, that we should publish forth the praises of Gods grace,
who has bestowed spiritual life, light, and operations upon us.

The Apostle has an high expression to raise our spirits, to this purpose, 2
Cor. 2.14. Now thanks be to God, which always causes us to triumph in Christ.
When men triumph there is great joy, rejoicing and showting. We are not only
to rejoice, in his Grace, but we should triumph in it. A Christian may ride in
a Chariott of triumph every day; he may see his sins, curse, hell, and
damnation subdued, and overcome, when he beholds God, in the looking glass of
his own grace. What though we have many sins? yet for all this we may
triumph, because the grace of God has saved us from our sins by Christ. What
though we have no works? yet we may triumph if we know grace, there is
enough for us in the fullness of grace. There is no way to peace here, or glory
hereafter, but by grace. Let grace therefore be thy glory. As the Apostle does
double his exhortation when he exhorts them to rejoice, that they might
double their diligence and care in practice of their duty, Phil. 4.4. Rejoice
in the Lord always: and again, I say rejoice. So suffer me to double and treble
my exhortation. Ye have nothing to boast in but grace, boast therefore: and
again I say boast in the grace of God.

God seems, in the Prophet Isaiah, to speak to an Hypocritical proud people,
and he bids them bring forth their arguments, and put him in Remembrance, if
there were any thing to be brought before him, for which they should be
justified, Isa. 43.26. Let us plead together, declare thou that thou may be
justified: As if he should have said. If you have any works; bring them out?
use all your arguments, skill and Rhetoric, say what you can for your selves
to plead your justification. But, to convince them that they could not stand
before him with their works for justification, he puts them in mind of their
sins, Thy first Father has sinned, and thy Teachers have transgressed
against me, ver. 27. to this end and purpose, that they should believe what was
promised in the 25th verse, that he would blot out their sins for his own
sake. So it is with us (Brethren) as we have heard. We cannot bring forth
sufficient reasons and arguments to make good our salvation by our works. If we
have nothing to comfort us but our own works, we shall have no comfort at all
in his presence. Let us therefore as we are engaged, Trumpet out the praise of
God, for the manifestation of his rich and precious grace to us in the face of
Jesus, for justification and salvation.

Thirdly, Let me exhort you to abide in the profession of grace to the end of
your days Hypocrites may profess grace for a time, but true Saints shall hold
fast the doctrine of grace to the end, Joh. 8.31. If ye continue in my word
then are ye my Disciples indeed. Paul and Barnabas exhorted the religious
Proselites of Antioch, Acts 13.43. (...), to continue, or abide in Grace, Look
up to God for grace and power according to his promise to enable you, to hold
fast the truth of his grace. Let not the wise and learned of the world, cried
up for godliness, Religion, and devotion, draw you from this grace of God.

We live in dangerous, in perilous times, and there were never such underminers
of grace, as have appeared in these sinful days, some that deny the Lord that
bought them: But let us not be discouraged, because some, who have professed
grace, have fallen from their profession, to fancy frothy Notions,
Antichristian absurdities, and Familisticall speculations. Consider rather
what the Apostle affirms 1 Cor. 11.19. that there must be Heresies, (...), it
is needful that there should be such, that they which are approved may be made
manifest. The Devil has his Chapalines, as well as God his Ministers and
Ambassadors. As some shall be sent of God to hold forth grace for the
conversion of sinners, to the righteousness of the just: So some will vent
there blasphemous conceits and cursed impostures to pervert men to destruction.
If the good God sow good seed, the wicked one will sow Tares among the wheat.
Mat. 13.24.

When the Gospel is preached with, power there are multitudes come to the
profession of it, but after a while many of these fall to philosophical
fancies, foolish dreams, vain fables, and idle speculations, loathing the
plain Gospel, the heavenly Manna, as the Israelites did the Manna that came
down from Heaven, this we begin to find by experience: But let not this
shake us from our steadfastness in the profession of the Gospel. God has
appointed it to be so. Paul was confident that after his departure from the
Congregation in Miletus, grievous wolves would enter in among them, not sparing
the flock, and that of their own selves should men arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw away disciples after them. Act. 20.29. If the Apostle were
confident in his time that it would be so, when he saw them under the pure
Discipline and Government of Christ, under the charge of those Ministers,
Teachers, and Officers, whom the Lord Jesus Christ appointed over them, filled
with those gifts of the Spirit, which were the fruit of his Ascension; what
wonder is it, if we meet with the Devils, Hee-Apostles, and She-Apostles in
these sinful times; who vomit forth boldly to their own shame, and Gods
dishonor, hellish and pestiferous Doctrines; for the most high spiritual
Truths of the Lord Jesus? if we consider what confusion and disorder is among
the best of Saints now, and are enlightened to see our want of many spiritual
gifts, and favors which they enjoyed, which for the present God does not
bestow upon us?

Again, Let not the Abusers of grace cause you to dislike grace, or the
Doctrine of grace. By this the Devil may take great advantage against thee for
thy hurt, thou may have injurious thoughts of the grace of God, when thou
eyest some who abuse grace: but continue thou in grace, fall not from thy
profession, nor dislike the preaching of it, because thou observest some who
abuse the grace of God, turning it into wantonness.

Remember that in the times of the Apostle, some Gospel Professors did walk so
contrary to the Gospel, that tender-eyed Paul could not speak of them without
tears in his eyes, whose end was destruction, whose God was their belly, whose
glory was there shame, who minded earthly things: Phil. 3. Yet these vile
wretches would talk of grace, and the Doctrine of Christ, knowing nothing
rightly of grace, or Christ; And Jude does acquaint us with some in his time,
that were crept in unawares, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness.
And he says that they, were ordained to this condemnation, ((...),) written
down long before to this condemnation, so the word signifies: for as God has
appointed some to salvation, so he has appointed some to damnation; and these
ungodly men are of the number of the damned. We wonder to see a generation of
men sprung up among us, that make nothing of Christ or the Father: we wonder
to see men undervaluing and vilifying the grace of God, neglecting all
Christian duties, and denying the word of God to be the word of God. But it was
so in the Apostles times, there were such crept into their Congregations: and
why should it seem a strange thing unto us, that it is so now in these days
of Babylonish confusion and Egyptian-darknesse, seeing it was so in the bright
days of light, in which the Apostles lived, who Prophesied that in these
latter days perilous times should come, and men should depart from the faith?
That we may not stumble in our Christian race at these abusers and
scandalizers of grace, let us know that grace is grace though men abuse it:
think not, that grace is not grace because it is abused: but know that the true
doctrine of grace may and must be abused by wicked and ungodly men. As the
spider sucks poison where the Be sucks honey: So where the Saints suck
sweetness and honey, the wicked and ungodly men suck poison. Where the godly
fetch all their joy and comfort, delight and refreshment, there wicked men meet
with their ruin and destruction.

The ways of Gods truth and grace are right, and the just and faithful shall
walk safely in them but the transgressors shall fall therein, Hosea. 14.9.
Mark the place and what God speaks. In the same way in which the Saint does
walk to salvation the wicked shall stumble and fall into condemnation.

A Libertine hearing the doctrine of Grace sucks nothing but his bane from it.
Though the word be the savor of life unto life to them that believe; yet is it
the savor of death unto death to some, 2 Cor. 2.16. I remember one says of
Medicaments, that if they be given by a skillful Physician, they are the
helpful hands of God (auxiliares dei manus) but if by one that is unskilful,
they are poison. So the doctrine of grace, when it is skilfully applied, when
the Spirit of God teaches us to make a right use of it, it is the power of God
to salvation, as the Apostle says, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ,
which is the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes, Romans 1.16.
But when it is unskilfully applied, when the flesh only makes use of this
doctrine of grace, and there is not the spirit of God to teach us to make a
right use of it, we turn it into venom and we are poisoned to our
destruction. But let us not be offended at the doctrine of Christ for this. It
has bin so formerly, it is so and will be so. Nevertheless let us continue in
the grace of God, and look up to God that we may continue in it.

I have one word now to speak unto those, who for the present are not
apprehendors and partakers of this grace, and shall conclude for this present:
You see it is only by grace that you are saved; it is only grace that brings
salvation to the sons and daughters of men: Therefore, if God has convinced
you that you are sinners; now is the day of grace: now is the day of salvation.
I will show a short and compendious but a true way to happiness, happy are all
you that believe what is brought to your ears this day concerning Gods free
grace. God promised to meet his people at the mercy-Seate Exodus 25. which was a
type of Christ, and we can never meet with God to the salvation of our souls,
but by meeting with his grace in the Lord Jesus. The Law is the ministry of
death, it is the Gospel of grace which is the ministry of life and salvation;
Look therefore beyond the Law, which is a ministry of condemnation, 2 Cor.
beyond thy own righteousness, which is impurity to the eye of Justice,
beholding thee under the Law: beyond thy self, who art an object of misery,
horror and confusion, and by a spiritual eye of Gods own making, behold his
grace in Christ for lost and undone sinners. Hearken to what God speaks to
thee, he invites thee, exhorts thee, and beseeches thee to be reconciled: he
tells thee that thou can not be justified by thine own works, but by his
free grace, that thou art not to be saved by what thou have done, but by what
Christ has done and suffered. Though thou have broaken the Law: Jesus Christ
has kept it. He is the end of the Law for righteousness, for every one that
believes in and by the grace of God. Behold God standing at the door of thy
heart in the Ministry of the Gospel of grace and salvation, let the door of
thy heart fly open unto him by believing, and he will feast thy soul. As
Christ said to Zacheus, so I may say to thee, who beleevest what I speak, this
day salvation is come into thine house. God is the God of grace, therefore
think not to please him by any thing but by eyeing of his grace: Christ is the
Son of grace, he came to reveal the grace of his Father: If thou would
with Simeon take Christ and salvation in thine arms, graspe not thine own
works for justification, but believe what is proclaimed forth to the world
concerning salvation only by grace. The Spirit is the Spirit of grace, and if
thou believe thou shall be assured of, and sealed to redemption by grace. There
is no salvation but by grace, and no apprehension of grace but by believing,
which is the next thing presented in the Text to our consideration. Salvation
is not by working but believing: ye are saved by grace through faith. But we
must be enforced to let alone the fuller enlarging of this point, until God
shall give us another opportunity. For the present I have done.

(*)

Salvation only by Believing.
SERMON. III.
Ephesians 2.8, 9. etc. For by grace ye are saved through faith, and that not
of your selves, it is the gift of God.
IT has already been proved unto us; that good works cannot save us. And
likewise, the grace of God, for the salvation of sinners without works has
presented it self, unto us, with the strength, sufficiency, and glory of it.
It may now be questioned by some, by what means the Grace of God in Christ may
be applied unto our selves, and apprehended by us? Our Apostle does fully
satifie us concerning this, affirming that it is not through working, but
beleiving: Ye are saved by grace through faith.

The Apostle does not affirm that we are saved ((...), propter fidem) for our
faith; for the worth, merit, dignity, or excellency of it: But ((...), per
fidem) through faith; faith being the gift of grace, by which grace is
revealed, and applied unto us. Grace is the principal cause of our
justification, faith is the Organ or instrument, given unto us by God, for the
discovery and application of his grace unto our own souls. As no rational man
(when he reads those words of our Savior to the woman, who was diseased with
an issue of blood, Mat. 9.22. Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made
thee whole;) would conclude, that because our Savior says that her faith did
make her whole, that therefore she was not made whole by Jesus Christ as the
principal cause. So no spiritual man should conclude, that we are not saved
by grace as the principal cause, because the Apostle says, we are saved
through faith. Desireing therefore that that crown may stand fast, which God
has set upon the head of his own grace. I shall endeavor so show you, that
we are saved by faith, or through faith. We are not saved in a way of working
but believing. Thus God saved and justified, the Father of the faithful; to
teach his sons in what way they are to expect salvation. God in a vision
informs Abraham that he was his shield, and exceeding great reward Genesis 15.6.
And he believed in the Lord and he counted it to him for righteousness. This
was the Oracle of truth which Habakkuk, standing upon his watch, received from
the Lord, Hab. 2.4. Behold his soul, who is lifted up in him, is not upright,
but the just shall live by faith. It is by believing, and not by working, that
we are made just. (Fides justos ab injustis, non operum sed ipsa fidei lege,
discernit. Aug.) Truth does make a difference betwixt the just and the unjust,
not by the Law of worker, but by the law of faith. The natural man knows no
righteousness but what is by his own works. The spiritual man does see
himself righteous in believing. Thus our Savior directed the ignorant Jews
to the right way of righteousness when they asked him what they should do that
they might work the works of God, Io. 6.28 This is the work of God, says he,
that ye believe on him whom he has sent. If any enquire after salvation let
him know it is not by works. The plain way to salvation and justification, is
only by believing. Tit. 2. The grace of God brings salvation, teaching us to
d^ny all ungodliness, and wordly lusts. He does not say that grace in the
first place, teaches us to deny ungodlines and worldly lusts: but in the first
place it brings justificatio^ and salvation through believing, and then
secondarily the same grace teaches us, to deny ungodlines and worldly lusts.
After we have believed for salvation, the holy spirit is given Ephesians. 1.13. In
believing we enter into our rest, Heb. 4.3. keep the year of Iubile, and see
our selves instated in happiness, and keep a christian Sabbath. It is only in
believing that we are brought to the enjoyment of that felicity, which is by
the grace of God, in Jesus Christ.

The Apostles, in their Epistles, do not hold forth any truth more frequently
then this. Gal 5.6. In Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing,
nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by Love. And To. 5.1. Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. When
the Keeper of the Prison asked Paul and Silas, what they should do to be
saved, suppofing salvation was only attainable by working, they did at one
discover unto him, his error, and blindness; and acquainted him with the soul
saving truth of the Gospel, assuring him, that if he believed on the Lord
Jesus, he should be saved Acts ^6.31. We find not rest in our spirits by the
^^ght of our works, love, sincerity, labors, and envours; but by the sight of
Gods grace in Christ

Having by these places of Scripture, confirmed to you this truth: I shall now
amplyfie it, by showing unto you more fully, how it may be in truth affirmed,
that we are saved through faith. In the first place, it is by faith, and by
faith alone, not by faith joined with works, but by faith without works. I
deny not, but where true faith is, works will follow: yet salvation is through
faith without works. When we are brought into the bosom of the Lord Jesus,
we enter not into the bosom of his love, by our love and faith together, but
by faith which produces Love. Our eyes are shut to the beholding all things in
our selves, and the eyes of our spirits are enlightened, to behold what is in
Gods Grace, and the Lord Jesus. Consonant to this, is Paul's sweet and
comfortable conclusion Romans 3.28. We conclude that a man is justified by
faith, without the deeds of the Law. Love to God and his people, is a work
commanded by the Law; but according to Paul's conclusion of truth, we are
justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law: therefore we are justified
by faith, without love to God, or his people.

When God discovers his Grace to a man, for his justification, he shows him,
that, as his evil works, cannot bring damnation unto him, so his good works
cannot be availeable for his justification. That assurance of Gods love, which
some professors have got, by the sight of their own works, being never
illuminated in their understandings, to behold Gods Grace, in the light and
beams of Grace; is not the true assurance of the gospel, but the deceit, and
lying divination of their own spirits, concerning their own happiness; for
salvation is by faith without works. God does not require us to do good
works for salvation in the conscience, but does positively and absolutely
exclude them, as things, which have no influence at al upon that first
assurance, which he does give unto his people of his love, which is by a pure
simple unmixed act of faith.

The spirit of Grace is never given to comfort us, until God has stripped us
of our own righteousness, works, and performances, and has brought us to
the Throne of Grace, to be justified by free Grace, without any thing in our
selves, that may make us fit for justification, and salvation.

The Apostle does lay down this, as a truth seconded by his own experience,
and the experience of all true Saints, Gal. 2.16. asserting, that, a man is not
justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ: even we
(says he) have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the
faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law, for by the works of the Law
shall no flesh be justified. It is not (as the Papists say) that faith, which
has love joined with it, which they make the form of faith, by which we are
justified, but it is by faith without any works at all, by which we are
justified and have peace of conscience. Augustine does plainly lay down his
judgment in this point according to truth (Noli presumere de operibus ante
fidem, quia peccatorem te fides invenit: etsi te fides data, facit justum,
impium invenit, quem faceret justum.) Presume not upon thy works done before
faith, because faith finds thee a sinner, faith has made thee just, it found
thee wicked, whom it should make just.

The second reason why it is thus by faith alone, is, because it is by grace:
unless we were justified by faith, we were not, we could not be justified by
Grace This reason the Apostle lays down Romans 4.16. Therefore it is of faith,
that it might be by Grace: As if he should have said, unless you hold, that
there is a justification by faith alone without works, you deny Grace: if you
will be justified by faith and works conjoined, you destroy Grace. Therefore
it is by faith alone that it may be by Grace. When we have a true sight of
Grace, we see a sufficiency in that Grace, to do us good for our
justification, and salvation, so that there is nothing needful, and necessary
besides grace. In which respect Luther says, that works are not necessary to
justification, but pernicious to salvation: the gospel requiring faith only;
according to that of the Apostle Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of faith: the law
has nothing to do with believing, that doctrine which bids a man to believe
that he may be saved, that is the doctrine of the gospel, the law bids us
not to believe, but the man that does it, shall live in it. The law bids us
work, but the Gospel bids us believe, not work, and believe, but believe
only.

We confound the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of Grace, if we press
an absolute necessity of doing good works for justification. This was the
Divinity of the bloodsucker, Bishop Bonner, who in a Sermon propounding this
quest. How grace is to be applied to us for justification, does answer, by
believing rightly, and living uprightly, joining faith and holiness, for
justification by grace: whereas by the Scripture of truth, it is manifest that
faith alonedoth lay hold of Christ, and does appropriate him unto us: And that
holiness does flow and stream from the apprehension of our free justification
by grace, through faith alone; though faith is not alone, but is accompanied
with other fruits of the Spirit which follow it. This must be well understood,
or else we shall nullify the grace of God: wherefore God enableth true
believers to see this truth plainly, and clearly. (Vilesceret redemptio
sanguinis Christi nec miserecordiae dei humanorum operum praerogativa
succumberet, si justificatio, quae sit per gratiam, meretis precedentibus
deberetur. Ambros:) Redemption by the blood of Christ would be vilified, the
prerogative of man's works would not stoop to Gods mercy, if justification,
which is by grace, were due to preceding works.

A man that truly beleives, he sees not any holiness, or qualification in
himself, that makes him more worthy of salvation then another man, he sees
that he has deserved damnation as well as any one, who is now in the place of
torment, and yet, he sees that such is the Grace, the unspeakeable grace of
God to his poor soul, that though he deserve to lie as low in hell as Judas,
for his sin, yet he shall be raised as high as heaven, by the grace of the
father, made known to him in Jesus Christ.

Brethren, if upon examination, you find that your joy, comfort and assurance,
have, in the first place, proceeded from any works, which you have in your
selves, which make you conclude that you shall rather be saved then another
man, your assurance is not a right assurance: But if your assurance be right,
it is by believing that which is reported concerning the grace of God; that so
salvation may be by grace.

It is possible for men to deceive themselves, in obtaining an assurance of
Gods love, and their happiness, (therefore I will a little digress to open
this to the ignorant.) It may be thou take comfort to thy self, by looking
on works wrought by thy self, and not by looking on Christ: it may be thou
conceivest, that thou love God, and from thence concludest, that God loves
thee, though thou have not seen his free love to sinners, this is a bastardly
assurance, brought forth by thine own lying spirit, and not the true assurance
of the Spirit of grace in believing. In a true assurance by faith, God has the
glory of his grace. But in this kind of assurance, God has not the glory of
his grace, therefore it is not a true assurance. Another deceives his soul,
and thinks he is in a good condition, because he rests upon a promise of
God. Christ says Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. A man does apprehend himself to be heavy
laden, and from the sight of his burden, does conclude he has rest, and is
in a good condition: but he deceives himself with a false persuasion; for
the promise is not made to the qualification of weariness, but the promise is
made to the comers to Jesus Christ. Cain was heavy laden with his sin, and it
lay so heavy on him that he concluded that the punishment was greater then he
was able to bear, or else that his sin was greater then it could be forgiven,
and yet died miserable without mercy. We find that the sin of Judas lay so
heavy on him, that he repented that he had shed innocent blood, yet for all
this he went to his own place.

Therefore if thy comfort, and assurance come from a sight of what is in thy
self, and not from the discovery of grace, as it is laid forth in the Spirit
of grace, thy assurance will not advantage thee in the day of wrath. Though God
has convinced thee of sin, and there may be some legal repentance, and
reformation wrought in thee, and something which thou may miscall a true love
to God, thou can not from the sight of these things rightly conclude that
thou art in the love of God; before a discovery of free love be made forth to
thee a sinner. For God does not apply his grace or his Son to any man for
justification but through believing, that justification may evidently appear
to the sons of men to be by his own grace. Which will appear, if in the
third place, we do more fully consider, that God does save us through
believing, that he may have the glory of his grace.

God, as he is glorious in his grace, by which he justifies sinners, so he
will be glorified in the hearts and consciences of those who are justified by
grace, that he may have the full glory of his grace, when he has justified
them. ( Non est quo gratia intret, ubi jam meritum occupavit. Bern.) There is
no room for the glory of Gods grace, where the worthiness of our works has
filled up the place. Where the creature may have glory in his own works;
there God loses the glory of his grace. Where God does any thing for the
creature by grace, there it is not of our works, otherwise grace is no more
grace. If it be of works, then it is no more of grace, otherwise work is no
more work. Romans 11.6. Therefore God, will not justify us in doing the works
of the Law, in giving us a sight of any thing, that may make us more worthy of
justification then other men; but he makes known his grace to us in a way of
believing.

The property of faith is to empty the creature, and to discover the fullness
of the Creator. Our own works, they puff us up, but faith empties us. If we
could be justified and saved by that which we have done, we might boast and
rejoice in it before God Romans 4.2. But because God will humble us, bring us
low, lay us upon our backs, and tumble us in the dust, that we may see our
selves nothing, and see his grace all in all to us for our justification,
therefore God justifies us only in believing. Faith lays the creature low,
and sets the grace of God on high; that we may go to heaven admiring the
grace of God to such sinners, such base and vile wretches as we are: therefore
God will not justify and save us in the court of our own Consciences, by the
sight of our own works, but only by the sight of his own grace: thus it is
said of Abraham, that he staggered not at the promise of God by unbelief, but
being strong in faith, he gave glory to God Romans 4.20. When God comes down
upon us, and works faith in our hearts, and we stagger not at the promises of
Grace by unbelief; but give credit to what he has spoken and promised: God
has that glory from us, that he will have from all those, whom he intends to
save. Unbeleife robs man of his comfort, and God of his glory. By faith the
creature is comforted, and the Creator exalted: through faith man is emptied of
selfe-confidences, and filled with God and his praises; therefore for this
reason are we saved through faith.

Again, Fourthly it is by faith, because it is only by believing that we
behold the grace that is in God, by which he forgives sin. Man's happiness for
the present does not lie in the not having of sin, but in the grace of God not
imputing sin. (Nostra justicia est dei indulgentia) Gods favor and indulgence
is our righteousness. Thus the Psalmist does describe the Blessed man, Psalm.
32. Blessed is the man, whose iniquities are paraoned, and whose sins are
covered. Hierome does sweetly paraphrase't upon those words (Quod tegitur non
videtur, quod non videtur non imputatur, quod non imputatur non punietur) that
which is covered is not seen, that which is not seen is not imputed, that which
is not imputed, shall not be punished. But by what is it, that man beholds
himself in this happiness? It is only by believing, and therefore we are
saved through faith. We cannot see a nonimputation of sin by the grace of God,
but by the work of the spirit, in an act of believing; by which we are
assured, that it shall go well with our souls to all eternity. And the great
controversy is decided and determined in the spirit of a man, whether he shall
be saved, or whether he shall be damned. No other foundation can be laid, then
the grace of God in Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 3.11. And we cannot see this
foundation, that we may be built upon it, but by beleiving. Moses by faith saw
him that was invisible. Abraham by faith saw the day of Christ, and was glad.
As by the eye of the body we see material objects; so by the eye of faith,
we see spiritual objects. The Philosopher says, that prudence is ((...),)
the eye of the Moral man, so faith is the eye of the spiritual man. By which
alone God, and the things of God, are beheld. ((...) Justin. Martyr.)

The Sun was not changed when the blind man in the Gospel, that never saw
before, received his sight, and beheld it. It was the same before, and after
his blindness: so Jesus Christ, the Sun of righteousness, is the same,
yesterday and to day and for ever in himself, and unchangeable in his love, in
reference unto us. The change is only in us by faith, whom now we see, though
formerly we beheld not his beauty, and because the righteousness and
salvation of God is revealed by faith, Romans 1.17. therefore we are saved by
faith.

Fifthly, we are saved by grace, through a work of believing: because if it
were not only in an act of believing, the people of God could not have that
firm, constant, and unquestionable assurance of their salvation which now they
enjoy in a way of believing. When a man is to go unto a place by many several
ways, which are not found out, without some difficulty, he does often doubt
whether he is in the right way, or whether he is out of his way; but when he
is to go in one plain way, he is confident that he is not out of his way: So
when a man goes by the way of the Law, and works for justification, he is in
doubt, whether he is in his right way for justification, the Law pointing out
many ways, and requiring many duties of him, that would be justified under it,
but the Gospel points only at Christ, and faith in him, for justification,
so that those who walk in this way for justification, are confident that they
are in the right way. The Apostle does lay down this plainly, Romans 4.16. where
he says, it is by grace, and that by faith, to the end the promise might be
sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the Law, but to that that
is of the faith of Abraham, the Father of us all. God has not made the promise
of salvation to the seed under the Law, or that do any works of the Law: But
he has made the promise to be gracious to poor sinners, in believing without
the works of the Law, to the end the promise might be sure. If there had been
any thing else required beside faith, the soul would be always restless and
unsatisfied. If God should tie justification to works, men would be
unsatisfied, because they would doubt whether some works were not undone, and
then they would doubt of their justification; Therefore God has not promised
justification to any man, who does good works, or submitts to any outward
Ordinance, but only unto him who closes with his grace, in a pure act of
believing. For God knows, that, so long as there is any thing joined with
faith for justification, we shall be ready to question our justification: we
may observe that such professors who are not acquainted with the Gospel, are
unsettled in their spirits, when they doubt which is the true Government, or
external Ordinances of the Lord Jesus. If they doubt whether they are baptized
in a right way, or manner, they doubt whether they are justified; their
comforts and assurance do vanish away, when they are not fully assured, that
they know, and are obedient unto all the Commandments of the Lord Jesus.

The cause of this legallnesse in their spirits is, because they do not see
salvation firmly settled upon him that believes. The spiritual man beholds
justifing grace in believing, without his obedience to commands for external
worship, and good works: and does live joyfully and comfortably in the sight
of his justification, though he knows that it is possible, that he may be
ignorant of many things; which other Christians may have the knowledge of. And
in these days of darkness, contention, confusion, and disorder, what man can
have solid, and lasting joy, who is ignorant of free grace for justification?
If it were necessary to the assurance of justification, to know whether the
Episcopal, Presbyteriall, or Independent Government, were the Ordinance of the
Lord Jesus? whether sprinckling of Children, or dipping of professing
believers, were the institution of Christ, in the Labyrinth of the
controversies of our times? how few would attain to an assurance of their
justification? How would poor creatures be perplexed, and disquieted in their
consciences? not certainly knowing in which of these ways they should walk
for their justification and salvation. But that the promise might be sure to
all the seed, Romans 4.16. To those, who lived in the times of the Law, as well
as to those, who live in these times of the Gospel, salvation is promised not
to workers, but believers, to all true believers in all ages, and places, to us
who live in the time of the Babylonish. Apostasy, as well as to those who were
hearers of the Apostles, and Members of those Congregations which were gathered
and governed by them.

Sixthly, By faith the grace of God in Christ, is applied unto us, and we are
justified by it, as the spiritual instrument, formed by God in the Spirit, for
the application of Christ's benefits to our consciences. A man that lived in the
time of the Law, looking upon the blood of his sacrifices, did behold himself
purged, purified, and sanctified in his flesh by it, Heb. 9.13. So a sinner
looking upon the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ is applied unto him, and his
conscience is purged from dead works, to serve the living God. ver. 14. Faith
though it be called a work 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. ((...),) yet we are not justified
by it, as it is a work, or gracious quality, but as it is the hand of the
Spirit, by which we receive, and are made partakers of those treasures of
grace, which are freely given unto us in Christ Jesus. Christ has already
done, what is to be done by way of satisfaction to the justice of his Father,
and has already, made peace by the blood of his Cross Col. 1.20. what he does
in us now, is to satisfy our consciences concerning our full redemption by
him, that you in believing may be filled with peace of Conscience; being
persuaded that we are of the Father in the Son, who by the Father is made unto
us, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor.
1.30. Faith being nothing but a light, coming from God and Christ, discovering
God and Christ to our spirits, and uniting our spirits to God in Christ. By
faith we believe what is recorded concerning the grace of God in Christ; As the
Prophet, to my apprehension holds it forth, in those expressions of his Isa.
53.1. Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? In the latter part of these words, the Prophet does interpret the
former part, he believes the report of God, to whom the arm of God, that is,
his Son Jesus, is revealed: And when a man believes in Christ, Christ is
revealed to that man; Faith being the first thing that is wrought in the spirit
of a man, whom God does justify in his own conscience, by which the grace of
God in Christ, is revealed unto him for his justification: Justifying faith,
when it is wrought by the powerful operation of the Spirit in the heart, does
remove prevailing doubts concerning our justification; the faithful beholding
the all-righteousnesse of free grace, and applying to his conscience the
clensing virtue of the blood of the Lord Jesus. Faith is a gift of the Spirit
establishing the soul, Isa. 7.9. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be
established. The soul can never be firmly settled and quieted, but by
believing. Unbeleife does question and doubt of the promises of free grace for
justification: But when, in the power of faith, we are carried above it, with
Abraham Romans 4.20. we stagger not at the promise through unbeleife: but the
spirit is fixed, and stands immoveably upon the truth of grace: God says in
the Covenant of his grace, Heb. 8.12. I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more.
He that believes does set his Seal to the truth of God, in believing, the
promise, John 3.33. He is confident that God is faithful, who has made this
promise to the children of men: and by believing the great and precious
promises of grace, he is made partaker of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. By an
heart of unbeleefe, we depart from the living God, Heb. 3.12. but by faith we
draw near to God, and apply Christ to our selves, (Faith being contrary to
unbeleife, as in the nature of it, so in its operations) An unbeleever does not
give credit to the truth of the general promises of Gods grace, and so
remains unjustified in his conscience; A believer in faith, nothing wavering
James 1.6. does give credit to what is reported. And the Gospel comes to him
not in word only, but in power, and the holy Spirit, and in much assurance, 1.
Thessalonians 1.5.

Object. But some may be ready here to object this, against what I have
delivered, that though I do acknowledge that by faith, grace in Christ is
applied unto us, yet in effect I say no more, then what I delivered before,
when I proved, that by faith, the grace of God in Christ is first manifested,
and made over unto us.

Answ. They misapprehend me, when they conclude that I make faith, only an
assurance of, because I do maintain that it is the first evidence and
witness of our justification. Faith does assure, but it does not only assure
us of Christ, but does apply Christ, and makes a difference between assurance
and application, which I illustrate by this similitude. Suppose one should lie
in Prison for debt, his debts being paid and he not knowing it, and afterward
knowing that his debts were paid, he should rejoice in the news and enjoy his
liberty: this man does not by the news, which he hears, enjoy only comfort,
but his liberty: so it is with us, before we believe, we lie in prison, and yet
our debts are paid by Jesus Christ, when the news is brought by the spirit to
the ear of the soul, we rejoice in hearing the news, but besides this
presently we enjoy our liberty, and all those riches which our surety, who
has paid our debts, has bestowed upon us, so that by faith, though we are
assured of Gods love in the first place, yet we are not only assured, but
likewise, Christ is applied unto us, we are united unto him, and do enjoy all
things in him, and receive all good things from him.

Seventhly. We are saved by faith, which is so to be understood, that by the
misunderstanding of it, we may not detract from the glory of Gods grace, and
from that everlasting righteousness which we have in Jesus Christ, who is
Jehovah our righteousness. Ier. 23.6. Abraham when he believed, and his faith
was counted unto him for righteousness, had a vision of God, and his word did
inwardly appear unto him Genesis 15.1. and he beheld God as his shield and
exceeding great reward, and supreme righteousness; so a believing man does so
look upon faith, as his righteousness that he does then behold God in Christ,
as his supreme righteousness, for his justification. Isa. 45.25. 1 Cor: 1.30.
As Adam when he was justified by his righteousness, and true holiness, did
so look upon his own righteousness for justification, that he did at the
same time, behold God as his chief good and righteousness: so a believing man
does so look upon faith as his righteousness, by which he is saved, that he
does at the same time, behold God in Christ as his chief righteousness:
Though he acknowledges faith his righteousness in its place, yet he
accounts it as nothing in comparison of that righteousness which he has in
God, and his Son Jesus Christ; And says with the psalmist, Psalm. 71.16. I will
go in the strength of the Lord God: I will make mention of thy righteousness
even of thine only. He does not by this undervalue the righteousness of
faith, he prizeth it above the world and all things in it; which carnal men
do value at so high a rate. But according to the mind of him whose gift faith
is, he sets the gift in his heart, and esteem below him, who is the giver of
it. He sees salvation to be more from the giver of faith, then faith it
self. He looks upon faith, not as the cause of justifiing grace, but
looks upon justifiing grace through Christ, as the cause of that faith by
which he is justified and saved; And does know, that his juificaticaon is
perfected by grace, and in the person of the Lord Jesus, before it is completed
and effected in him by faith. He well understands that Christ and the soul
are betrothed by faith, and yet he is not ignorant that he is betrothed to God
for ever, in righteousness, and in loving kindness, and in mercy. Hosea 2.19.
He is enlightened to see a reconciliation by grace in the person of Christ
before God, before his reconciliation by faith in his spirit. He considers
that when he was an enemy, he was reconciled to God by the death of his Son.
Rom: 5.10. Which reconciliation was before his faith, and yet denies not
reconciliation by faith. He knows that what he believes concerning Gods
grace and his redemption, and justification by the blood of Christ was true
before he believed it, and yet he believes that faith is his righteousness
for justification. He confounds not the righteousness of faith, with the
righteousness of God in Christ, by whom he is justified. But gives unto God and
Christ what is to be attributed to God and Christ, for justification; and
likewise attributes to faith what is due to faith: not looking upon faith as
his righteousness without the object of it, but always looks upon faith for
his justification, as it has reference and relation to its object; which is
the favor of God in Jesus Christ. And if he shall be asked, whether he be
more righteous by grace and Christ, or by faith? He will acknowledge, that he
is rather justified by grace, and the blood of Christ. To. 5.19; Seeing more
righteousness for him, in the object o^ faith, then in faith, by which he
beholds the object, and yet still maintains that faith is his
righteousness for justification, according to the mind of the Apostle, We are
saved by faith.

Eighthly, We are saved by faith, not for the purity, and holiness of it, as it
is a gift of the sanctifiing spirit. For then, upon the same ground, we should
take in Love, and other fruits of the spirit, which the Apostle does shut out,
as having no influence upon us, for our justification. which the Apohle does
prove in the following words, where he says that we are saved, not of works;
Because we are Gods workmanship, created to good works Good works are not
the causes of our new creation, and justification, but the consequents of our
new creation through faith; So that it is clear, that we are justified before
sanctification is wrought in us, or good works done by us. We are justified by
faith without them. By which it is evident, that faith, as an holy gift or
quality, does not save us. We are saved therefore by faith, as that
righteousness by which we do at the first lay hold upon his grace in his Son
for justification, by which we are united unto God, and are made one with him.
Ioh. 17.21. are puryfied from the guilt of sin in our hearts. Act. 15.9; And
have peace with him through our Lord Jesus. Romans 5.1. Whom we see and embrace
by faith, as the Apostle setteh forth the nature of faith, Heb. 12.13. And he
that thus believes, shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned.

Ninthly, We are saved by faith; Because by faith we are not only enabled to
believe the general truth of the gospel, concerning his grace to those who
believe in him; but because through faith we are enabled, to give credit to
Gods truth, and to rest upon it, in reference and relation to our selves: Thus
Abraham, who for the excellency and exemplarinesse of his faith, is worthily
styled the father of the faithful, did believe what God did speak unto him,
not only as a truth which might be beneficial unto others, but he looked upon
Christ in reference to himself Gen: 15. And saw his day, and seeing of it was
glad: He looked upon God not only as a shield and great reward, but his
shield and great reward.

By true faith we receive Chrst, and his benefits for our selves. Paul does
inform us, that his life in the flesh was by faith in the Lord Jesus, who
loved him and gave himself for him. Faiths sweetness does lie in this, that
by it we do not believe Christ to be a Savior, and righteousness, but our
Savior, and righteousness: Therefore Luther affirmed that the sweetness of
Christianity lay in pronounes. When a man can say my Lord and my God, and my
blessed Jesus. This was the faith which the Apostles preached, which will be
manifest unto us, if we consider their intentions, when they exhorted men to
believe. They did not intend that their hearers should believe in general,
that Christ was the Savior of the world, but that he was a Savior to them.
Thus Paul preached to the keeper of the prison. Act. 16.31. Believe on the Lord
Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thy house. As when they preached the
doctrine of repentance (or changednesse of the mind) their meaning was, that
every man ought to be changed; so when they urge believing for salvation, their
meaning is that we should believe for our own salvation in particular. The
general truth of faith and repentance is to believe, by a power enabling us in
particular for our selves, to believe and repent.

Lastly, We are saved through faith. Because by faith we hear the inward word
of salvation. The word which sounds to the outward ear, without this inward
word, brings no salvation. As the Philosopher told him, who reprehended him
for publishing and divulging a book of philosophy, that he had published it,
and he had not published it, his meaning was this, that it was so dark and
mystical, that though it were published, yet it was not published to the
ignorant, and unlearned: so the Gospel in the letter is published to men, and
not published; they hear, and do not hear, they see and do not see: But by
faith we so hear, that our souls live by hearing, Isa. 55.3. The dead, says
our Savior, shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear
shall live: Fidei oculi sunt spiritus, per quem spiritualia videntur, Cypr:)
The Spirit is an eye to a believing man, by which he sees, and enjoys
spiritual things: we receive not the Spirit, by hearing the Law, or doing the
works of the Law, but by the hearing of faith, Gal. 3.2. Eternal life, and
Salvation is by hearing the inward word of life, salvation, and grace: God bids
the Prophet Ezech: 38.5. to prophecy over the dry bones, that they might
live: The Lord Jesus is the great invisible Prophet, who prophesies over dry
bones, and dead-hearted sinners, and by hearing inwardly the inward word of
this Prophet, they live in hearing, and believing: And therefore it is said,
that we are saved by faith.

Having by these particulars, acquainted you with my Judgment, concerning our
salvation, through faith; I shall now by the same assistance of Gods grace,
draw some useful conclusions, from the premises, and so put a period to my
discourse for the present.

First, this does discover unto us the usefulness, and excellency of the
unfeigned faith of the elect: As Noah was preserved from the destruction which
came upon the old world, by going for his safety into the Arc, so by the foot
of faith we walk into our Arc, Christ Jesus, for the Salvation of our
souls. The world of sin is a dismal wilderness, full of fiery Serpents; by
faith we eye Jesus Christ, as our brazen Serpent, and set footing in the
heavenly Canaan of gods grace, while the sinful Sodom of the world, is
destroyed with the rain of fire and brimstone; by faith like Righteous Lot,
we escape out of it: when with Peter, we are ready to sink and perish in
the Sea of sin, by Faith we touch the saving arm of the Lord Jesus, and are
preserved, when we drink the deadly poison of finne; by faith we take in
Jesus Christ, as (...), or antidote, and the deadly poison does not hurt us;
but we are miraculously preserved. Faith beholds Christ crucified before us,
Gal. 3.2. and evidently set forth, who has nailed the Law of works, our sin
and death to his own cross, and we who deserved damnation, are saved through
grace. Christ is the man, who is an hiding place from the wind, and a covert
from the tempest. Isa. 32.2. sin is a noxious and a destroying wind; as wind in
the cavernes of the earth, is a cause of an Earthquake; so finne is the cause
of destroying Earthquakes in the earthly hearts of men, but Christ is our
hiding place, in which through believing we are safe. The Devils infernal
winds and blastes destroy many a soul, with which he fills it with hellish
errors, and impieties to its destruction, Acts 5.3. Christ fills his people,
by breathing upon them in the Spirit of grace for their salvation; but Christ
is a shelter from the infernal blastes of Satan: And while carnal, and
unbeleeving men are, as a ship under sail, and the Devil unto them, is as a
powerful wind, violently blowing them to destruction, Acts 26.18. Christ by
enabling his people to believe, does blow them with the pleasant gales of his
sweet spirit, to the havens of peace and safety. Though there are infectious,
and destroying winds upon earth, yet there are none in Heaven, so though the
men of the earth, are infected with the winds of sin, and Satan, to their
ruin; yet they who live in the Heaven of Gods grace by faith, Jesus Christ is
a defense unto them. When darkness and tempests are in the Spirits of men,
from the Law, which they have broken, Christ, who rebuked the tempests of the
Sea, Mat. 8.2. does rebuke (tempestates mentis, Hier:) the tempests of our
troubled minds, and consciences; and by believing there is a great calm in the
soul. Sin in the soul is like Jonah in the ship, which brings a tempest
with it, but Christ through faith, does cast this Tempest-raiser into the sea
of his Fathers grace, and the soul is quieted, and filled with joy, and peace
in believing. The Philosopher says, that Logic to a rational and learned
man, is the instrument of instruments. ((...)) without which he shall make
little proficiencie, in other Arts, and Sciences. So faith is the Organ, or
instrument to the spiritual man, by which he is made partaker of the wisdom
and spirit of the Lord, in which he is to do all things, and without which he
can do nothing.

Secondly, this discovers the reason, why the Devil and his agents do so much
oppose the Doctrine of faith, and the preaching of it. He is an enemy to man's
salvation, and therefore he is an enemy to the Doctrine of faith, through which
we are saved. The Devil does what he pleases to those, who are without
faith, as being unable to resist him. Unbeleeving men are like the Israelites,
without a shield, or Spear to defend themselves. Jude 5.7. And the Devil does
lead them captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. ((...)) as wild beasts are
mastered, and ruled by those, who have taken them in a snare, or net, (so the
word fignifieth) but when we believe to Salvation, we are furnished with power
to oppose him, who seeks our damnation; when we believe we are armed against
his encounters, and fitted against his opposition. Faith is the souls
defensive Shield, by which all his fiery darts are quenched. Ephesians. 6.16. and
therefore it is that he does always raise opposition, persecution, and
reproaches against the Doctrine, and prosessors of Faith.

Thirdly, seeing salvation is by faith, examine thy self concerning thy
salvation, by trying thy faith. Men that are not in the faith, who have not
Christ in them, are not approved Christians. 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not your
own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates; The
word is (...), except ye be unapproved. It is possible that a man may be in a
state of unbelief, and yet no reprobate: But he, that cannot prove that he
has faith, cannot prove himself to be a Christian; or in a state of
Salvation. Querie it in thy soul, whether thou have such a faith, as we have
spoken of. Ye have heard that we are saved through faith, which is a
supernatural gift of the Spirit, by which those things, which the natural man
cannot apprehend concerning salvation, are made plain to the soul.
Supernatural things cannot be known, but by something which is supernatural:
As the things of nature are known by the light of nature, things of reason by
the light of reason: So the things of eternal life and salvation, by the
supernatural gift of faith, which is the evidence, of the supernatural things
of the Gospel, which are invisible, Heb 11.1. Abraham believed against hope,
Romans 4.18: So a spiritual man believes the things of Glory, and eternal
life, which the short line of natural reason cannot reach, or fathom, and
which naturally he cannot hope for, or expect. Is thy faith, who do Profess
thy selse a child of Abraham, such a faith as Abraham's faith was, who is the
Father of the faithful.

Secondly, true believers see their salvation by faith alone. Though a man have
many seeds together in his hand, yet he may know the various, and diverse
natures of those several seeds: So though a justified man have many precious
seeds of the Holy Spirit in his heart, yet he knows the several natures of
them all. Though he has love to God in his heart, as well as faith in God, yet
he knows the nature of Faith, which alone is avaylable to Justification.
Try whether thou have been enabled to fly to the strong Tower of Gods grace
for safety, against Hell, sin, and Devils, by the silver wings of Faith,
without the help of works for Justification.

Thirdly, a believer sees justification cannot be by grace, if works and
faith were to be conjoined for justification: Gratia non est gratia ullo modo,
si non sit gratuit a omni modo.) Grace is not Grace in any way, unless it be
free and undeserved; every way Grace is not free and undeserved, unless it be
reached forth, without any consideration of our own works, which is only
through faith: try whether God has taught thee this lesson of truth.

Fourthly, faith does take the glory of justistification from the creature, and
gives it unto grace. Have thou learned to sing the new song of the Saints, and
redeemed ones before the Throne; crying, Salvation only to God, who sits
upon the Throne of grace, and to the Lamb.

Fifthly, art thou fully persuaded of Gods power, and faithfulness, who has
left Promises of grace upon record, for the salvation of poor sinners? Art
thou with Abraham fully persuaded of the truth of Gods Promises of grace, in
reference to thy self? I remember what one of the Ancients says. That to
profess Christ without assurance, is to be without faith, living in the
household of faith. ( Fidem in dome fidei non habere, Cypr.) A spiritual man is
that which he believes himself to be. (Id esse incipit, quod se esse credit.)
He believes that he is positively and negatively righteous in Christ, freed
from finne, and made a partaker of a glorious righteousness for his
justification; and so he is of a Leper, by believing in an instant made whole.
He believes that he owes nothing to his creditour, and his creditour
believes so too.

Sixthly, A believing man is bone of the bone, flesh of the flesh, and one
spirit with the Lord Jesus. There is a close and near union and application of
Christ to the soul by faith. Do thou in believing see thy self a member of
Christ, as thy hand or foot is a part of thy body. Is Christ the quickening
spirit of thy spirit? to enliven that as thy spirit, is the spirit which does
enliven thy body,

7ly. Do thou so live by faith, that thou look upon Christ as thy life,
and righteousness more then faith? Not suffering any persuasion which thou
call thy righteousness, to sit in the uppermost room of thy heart, to the
prejudice of Gods glory in Christ? A spiritual heart is ((...) Mac:) the
throne of the Deity, where God in Christ is exalted as the chief
righteousness of the soul, is it so in thine? John 14.1.

8ly. Have thou by faith as an instrument touched the hem of Christ's garment,
for the healing of the bloody issue of thy own soul? He that is wise and
good, is wise and good for himself. And if thou art truly wise and good, thou
art wise in applying Christ to make thy self wise and good.

Lastly, Is thy faith such a faith, through which Christ has inwardly
discovered himself unto thee, formed and created himself in thee, Job 32.8?
The inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding. If thy faith be true, it
is by inward inspiration.

Quer. But must we have such a faith, if we will be the children of believing
Abraham?

Answ. Every true believer has such a faith, for the nature of it, though not
for the perfection of the degrees of it: There is a perfect and fair copy of
faith, in those who have been presented unto thee. Thou art to have the same
copy written forth upon thy heart, though it may not be so fairly written forth
at the first: But if it be a true copy of faith, thou have no cause to question
thy assurance, though thou do find it very weak at the present. A
palsey-shaken hand may receive a gift; and a weak faith may receive the grace
of God in Jesus Christ. A Dwarf is a man as well as a Giant, though not so
tall, and one who is but a dwarf, and low in Christianity, by the weakness
of his faith, may be a Christian as well as those who are of a taller stature
in the School of Christ.

Thirdly, this which has been delivered, may be for the strengthening of the
faith, and the increasing the comforts of those who have laid hold of salvation
by a lively faith on Jesus Christ. Comforts are increased by the same means,
by which they are wrought at the first. And therefore the Apostle prays for
the Romans, that the Lord would fill them with all joy and peace in believing,
Romans 15.13. Our comforts are low, because our faith is weak. Comfort flows
in, by renewed acts of faith. Satan would rob us of our comfort, by wresting
faith, which is our shield from us, Ephesians. 6.16. And this is one way in which
he does labor to weaken the faith of the Saints, by suggesting this unto the
Saints, that Salvation is not only through faith. But against this temptation,
and all his other fiery darts; we may hold forth this buckler of truth: That
we are saved by grace through faith. Answer him therefore from this truth, and
he will be silenced; Resist him in believing this truth, and hec will flee
from thee, Jam. 4.7. And the spirit will fly into thy soul to comfort thee.
So long as Abraham lived, he lived as a justified man by faith. So long as Paul
lived, he lived by faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2. We dye rather then live,
when we are not under the power of the spirit, enabling us to believe. We lie
down either in the bed of carnal security, or Familisticall
Antichristianisme, or fall under the bondage of the Law, when we step aside from
the plain Doctrine of salvation by faith in our Lord Jesus. And therefore the
flesh and the Devil, the great enemies to a Saints comfort, do join
themselves together to oppose the doctrine of faith. Satan knows that faith
and works are inconsistent in point of justification. And when he observes
that we are in some measure convinced, that salvation is by faith; he
endeavors to persuade us, that it is by faith and works. And would divide our
Justification between faith and works. As the harlot cried out, 1 King. 3.26.
concerning the child, Neither mine nor thine, but divide it: So the Devil
would have us divide our Justification, and attribute half of it to faith, and
give the other part to works. But the believing man sees that there is
salvation in Christ, and not in any other, and that no other name under heaven
is given among men whereby they must be saved, Acts 4.12. And that we rest upon
this name for salvation only by faith. In Christ we have boldness and access
with confidence by the faith of him, Ephesians 3.12. ((...)) We are manuduced
and lead by the hand, as it were, with persuasion of Christ's goodness to us by
faith in Christ. Continue in that faith by which Paul was justified, who
believed that Christ loved him, and gave himself for him, and thy comforts and
peace shall be continued unto the. It it Melancthons observation, that the word
(...) which we translate faith, does most usually signify a firm assent unto
a thing ( usitatissimum est (...) pro firma ascensione dicere) doubting is that
which is contrary to faith, Jam. 1.6. Believe therefore strongly, and thou
shall have a strong peace, Romans 5. Believe that there is no remission of finne
but by Gods indulgence, but believe this with all, that by him thy sins are
forgiven thee ( sed add ut credas et hoe. quod per ipsum peccata tibi
donantur. Bern.) This is the faith which brings peace and consolation to the
soul.

By this we are brought from sin, to Christ's righteousness, from mount Sinai,
to mount Sion, from the dominion of the Law, to the region of grace, from
bondage to liberty, from death to life, from the fear of hell, to the
assurance of heaven and happiness. Archimedes was so delighted in the study of
the Mathematiques, that when the enemy who besieged the place where he lived,
broke in unto it, he heard not the noise and shouting of the soldiers, nor the
cries of the people. So the soul that by faith lives in Jesus Christ, shall
be carried above the noise and troubles of the world, and shall enjoy peace in
Jesus Christ. Let us therefore wait in the heavenly Jerusalem for more of the
spirit by faith. This lesson will appear to be very necessary for the Saints,
if we consider that the spirit of grace may be so quenched in Saints, that
they may not for the present be able to go into the presence of God as Saints,
but as poor sinners. And by the belief of this Doctrine a Saint does easily
get out of temptation. For he is taught of God in the Gospel, to come unto
him as a sinner without works, when he cannot come as a Saint. And in this way
his joy, with all the gifts of Gods grace are restored unto him. And when they
are restored he does keep them, by the resting upon God, who saves sinners
by grace through faith. And therefore the Apostle Peter, when he exhorted
Saints to grow in grace, does add, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, 2
Pet. 3.18. By which he does seem to inform them that there can be no growing in
grace, unless there be a growing in faith, which is the knowledge of Christ,
and the love of his Father in him.

In the last place, here is a foundation of Salvation, for all that have ears
to hear, and hearts to entertain the report, which you have heard of Gods
grace, which is manifested to sinners through faith. Let not any man go away
with a heart of unbelief: but the Lord open your ears and hearts as he did
Lydia's, that you may believe what is reported: For truly if you believe what I
have delivered, you may go away rejoicing, and assured of Gods grace,
beholding your names written in the book of life. The true Gospel believed
will remove all objections against your peace, and all doubtings out of your
spirit. If as children of Abraham, ye believe as he did: Salvation will lie
down in your bosoms, and the true God in Jesus Christ will give you an answer
to whatsoever you can object and bring against your own salvation and
justification. It is not the sight of sin that shall take away your comfort:
but you shall rejoice that Jesus Christ did dye for sinners: It is not the want
of works that shall send you away without assurance or justification, but you
shall see, that you have good right, to lay hold upon Jesus Christ, though you
have no works: because he justifies none but those that have no works before
justification. The true God is not a justifier of the holy and righteous, but
of the ungodly. God knows that the wisdom of the proud flesh, does strongly
persuade sinners, to seek salvation in themselves, and their own works. The
Jaylors question, Acts 16. What shall I do to be saved: and the Rulers quaere,
Luke 18.18. What shall I do to inherit eternal life; is in the heart of every
natural man, who is persuaded that there is an eternal life. Man thinks
that as he became miserable by his evil works, that so he must be made happy
by his good works. And therefore God has given his Law which requires
perfection, to bring down the pride of the flesh ( ad domandam Superbiam,
Aug.) and confidence in our own works; and discovered his free favor to the
worst of sinners in the Gospel. God has blocked and stopped up all other ways
to life, besides the way of his grace in Christ: and has left this way open
for the worst of finners to turn in unto it for salvation. So that as good
works cannot save us without Christ, (being but glittering and gilded sins) so
evil works cannot prejudice the salvation of him who comes to Jesus Christ:
as David in the cave Adullam, 1 Samuel 22.2. Entertained all such who were in
distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented,
and became a Captain over them. So Jesus Christ, of whom David was a type,
does entertain all distressed consciences, indebted sinners, ^^^contented
malfactors, and becomes the Captain of their Salvation, Heb. 2. He knows
how unwilling impurity is to come to him, who is purity: what enemies we are to
our own salvation: what fools we are to run to those who cannot help us; like
Ephraim, who when he saw his sickness, went to the Assyrian who coul pnot
heal him, Hos. 5.13. and therefore he publishes proclamations of his Fathers
grace to poor helpless sinners: And brings sinne-wounded miscreants out of
the wilderness of sin and misery, to the heavenly Canaan of peace and
holiness through faith in his Name. He sees that we are ready to catch hold
of the Law and our own works, like unto men who are ready to sink in the
water, who will get hold of rushes or strawes or any thing upon the surface of
the water, which cannot save them: and therefore he reaches forth his strong
arm of salvation for to help us, and bids us to hold fast by him, and assures
us of life and salvation.

He keeps open House, and inviteth all sorts of sinners so lay hold of the
grace of his Father in him. He beseeches us to be reconciled to his Father, 1
Corinthians 5.20. He assures sinners, that whosoever will, may drink of the
waters of life freely, Rev. 22.17. He compares himself to a running River,
out of which every poor Traveller may drink freely, no man demanding or
requiring any thing for what he takes. He does set Captives sree, not for price
or reward, Isa. 45.13. not for their works. Though we have sold our selves for
naught, yet he assures us that we shall be redeemed without money or price,
Isa. 52.3. He having paid (a (...)) the price or money for our redemption: and
assuring us now in his word of truth, that there is salvation for us without
our merits by faith in him. Therefore let those who want joy and comfort, come
to the promises, and take Christ in a promise: such who have been mislead, and
not set in the right way to salvation and justification; let them be convinced
that this is the right way: be assured of salvation by grace; Christ dying not
for the righteous, but for the ungodly: be persuaded that Jesus is not a
Physician for the whole, but for the sick, Mat. 9.12. Sin is the souls
sickness; thou art a sinner, art sick, and may come to Christ not as one that
is well, but as one that is sick. Christ is a Chyrurgion that is able to cure
the greatest wounds: therefore he has set up his bills, and bids all to come,
and he will reject none. We may with the woman in the Gospel, spend all that
we have upon other Physicians, and be nothing profited. There is health for
us, only by coming to Jesus Christ. Therefore if other Physicians have been
Physicians of no value, while they have bid you seek Justification and
assurance in the sight of your own works, and not in the sight of Gods grace:
hear this day what the Lord Christ says to your souls, he professes that he
calls not the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Hear him: Hear I say,
and thy soul shall live, Isa. 55.3.

I remember that some Physicians have been highly commended that have been
able to cure their Patients speedily and safely, and without any great torment.
Now the Lord Jesus Christ is a most admirable Physician in these three respects.

1. He can speedily cure and heal us, whatsoever our wounds are: if there were
but one wound and sore, from the crown of the head to the sole of the soote, if
we were made up of nothing but sin, the Lord Jesus Christ is able to cure us
speedily; he is excellent in this respect. Touch him, and the bloody issue of
thy soul is immediately cured. He can say to thee as once he said to Zacheus:
This day salvation is come to thy soul. If he lay the plaster of his Fathers
grace upon thy sinful soul, thou shall be immediately cured.

Secondly, Christ cures safely, there is no danger in taking that which Christ
prescribes. If Christ tell you that his Father justifies ungodly ones; and that
he is the Savior of sinners; you may believe him, and put your life in his
hand: he will not cozen and cheat as some Mountebanks, that give that which
kills, when they confidently promise health. If Christ promise to heal, he will
give that physic which shall effectually help us. He will not give that unto us
which shall hurt us. If he had thought the doctrine of grace would have hurt
men, he would never have commanded the Doctrine of grace to have been
preached. If he had thought that the Doctrine of grace would only have opened
a door to Libertinisme and licentiousness, he would not have given his
Apostles commission to preach the Gospel to every creature. Though men in
their carnal apprehensions think there is danger in the medicines of Christ.
Those who have had experience of him, can assure you that he is a matchles
Physician: there is no danger in that which he gives: there is no way to
salvation but by believing without working, Use this physic of his, apply
this plaster to thy soul, and thou need not to fear, whom he cures, he
cures with abundance of safety: I dare assure thee, that he will heal thee.

In the third place, Physicians are commended, that cure without tormenting
their Patients much: and such a physician as Jesus Christ. He comforts our
hearts with Gospel Cordialls while he cures us. There is sweet comfort in the
healing of the Lord Jesus Christ: he so heales thy wounds and diseases, that
thou shall have delight and comfort while he heales thy soul, and gives a
plaster to thy putrified rotten spirit. The Lord Jesus Christ does not
prescribe a tormenting remedy that is worse then the disease: but when Christ
heales, he comforts, he so cures, that he ravisheth the soul with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory. Wherefore come to Christ, you who have spent
all, and suffered much; and have lain under a spirit of bondage 20. or 30.
years, here is healing, look to the Physician the Lord Jesus Christ; he will
cure you speedily and safely, and with delight to you. In brief: it is an easy
and compendious way to heaven, when God gives you believing hearts, and yet the
hardest thing in the world to believe without him: but when God enables us, the
work is easy. When Christ resolves to be the Physician, health quickly will
be given in. Some affirm that generation is (in instanti) in a moment: It is
unquestionable concerning spiritual regeneration by faith in Christ. Therefore
look up to the Father, and to the Son, that this work may be wrought in us.
Think not that the work of faith can be wrought by any power which is in our
selves it is given to us to believe by the grace of God communicated, and
extended to us in the Lord Jesus Christ: And this is the next thing that lies
in the words to be handled. Ye are saved by grace through faith, and that not
of your selves, it is the gift of God.

But I must leave that to some other time. In the mean while look unto the
Father of Lights, for it is his gift, we cannot bestow it upon our selves.

Faith is not from our SELVES.
SERMON. IIII.
EPHESIANS. 2.8. By grace ye are saved through faith, not of your selves, it is the
gift of God.
FAith is a work as difficult as it is glorious; and as much beyond the
creatures strength, to work it in himself, as his merits to deserve it, of
himself. Therefore the Apostle having acquainted us with the excellency of
faith, through which we are saved, does now inform us concerning the power by
which it is wrought in us. It is not of our selves, but it is the gift of God.

First, he shows negatively that it is not of our selves.

And then 2ly affirmatively, that it is the gift of God.

When God does effectually work upon a man, to make him happy in his Son; he
works two things in a man; he does take him from himself, and confidence in
his own strength, and does carry him into his own strength, and goodness,
from whence he receives all strength. And this is expressed here by Paul, who
when he says, that faith is not of our selves, but that it is the gift of God.
I shall by the assistance of grace, speak of the first of these, and endeavor
to prove this Proposition: That true saving faith is not of our selves.

When the Apostle Peter made a glorious profession of the Lord, acknowledging
him to be the Son of God; Jesus answered and said unto him: Blessed art thou
Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father
which is in heaven, Mat. 16.17. Here our Savior bears witness to the truth
of his faith: and to show him that he professed not this only in word and in
tongue, but that he professed it from the truth of faith which was in him:
therefore he acknowledges that it was not from flesh and blood, but by the
Father, which had revealed it to him. Where we may find our position clearly
confirmed to you; that those that truly believe, who have the unfeigned faith
of the people of God, it is not a faith wrought in them by themselves, it does
not flow from any natural principle: but it is the immediate work of the power
of God in their hearts.

As we did not, nor could not make our own hearts: so we cannot make our
heart new hearts, Jerem. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, who are accustomed to do evil.
By which the Prophet does clearly hold forth this truth; that sinners can no
more by their own strength make themselves saints, which is by faith, then a
Blackmore can change the color of his skin, or the Leopard his spots. An
Ethiopian may be painted white, so an hypocritical sinner may be a painted
Sepulcher, appearing righteous and sound to men, when he is full of
rottenness within. But God alone does change and purify our hearts by his
gift of faith, which is not of our selves.

For the amplifying of this point to you. I shall lay down some subsequent
considerations, by which I shall prove this to you; that he, that truly
believes, does not believe by any power, strength, or ability in himself, by
which he is in any measure fitted and enabled for this great work of true
justifying faith.

The first consideration shall be drawn from the nature of faith, as it is held
forth to us in the word of God, which faith is the work of God upon the spirit
of a Saint, by which the grace of God in the Lord Jesus Christ is discovered to
him; and by which he in his heart ( Romans 10.9.) is made willing to receive
Christ, and to rest upon him and his righteousness alone for his
Justification, Romans 10.4. Thus the Scripture speaks of faith.

First, it speaks of faith as it is a light of God in the understanding: so
we are bid to look to the Lord Jesus, and we shall be saved, Isa. 45.22. And
it is said of the faithful, that by faith they saw the promises afar off, Heb.
11.13. They saw Christ, not as we see him, who behold him as he has been
offered up as our sacrifice, and has made an end of our sins, Dan. 9. But they
beheld him as one that was to come, and was to make a propitiation for the sins
of the world: And if we thus look upon faith as it is a beam from God,
enlightening us in our understandings, to see Gods grace in his Son; we shall
find that faith is not of our selves.

Which will appear if we consider what our own understandings are, before
God does give us the true knowledge of the Lord Jesus. I shall acquaint you
here with Scripture expressions, which do sufficiently and clearly hold forth
this unto us. The first expression is, that men without the Lord Jesus Christ
are darkened in their understandings. The Apostle speaking of the Gentiles that
knew not Christ, he says, Ephesians. 4.18. That they have their understandings
darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in
them. There is a mist, and cloud of darkness upon the understandings of all
carnal and unbelieving men. As the Apostle Paul when he had scales before his
eyes, was not able to behold the light of the Sun: so while the scales of
natural darkness and ignorance are upon the hearts and spirits of men, they
are not able to behold the sun of righteousness. They may hear Christ
preached: they may hear the Doctrine of justification freely and fully
handled: but they are not able to behold any thing of God or Christ, because
they have their understandings darkened, being not enlightened by the spirit of
Christ to see Christ.

2dly. The Scripture does not only tell us that they are darkened in their
understandings: but it tells us, that they sit in darkness, Matthew. 4.16. The
people which sat in darkness saw great light. Here is the condition of all
men without Christ set forth to us; they are men that sit in darkness. And
Zacharias in his Song, speaking of the Lord Jesus, says, Luke 1.79. That he is
the day spring from on high, to give light to them that sit in darkness, and
in the shadow of death. Though a man have eyes, yet if he sit in a dark
dungeon, he can see no visible object. It will therefore be evident, that
carnal men cannot see of themselves, because they are not only darkened in
their understandings, but they sit in the dark dungeons of their own spirits,
being not able to behold the invisible things of Gods grace, which are not
discovered and made visible unto us, until we believe in Jesus Christ.

But in the 3d place, the holy spirit speaking of natural men without Christ,
does not only inform us, that they are darkened, and have their seats in
darkness, but they love darkness, they are pleased with their present state and
condition of darkness; they are unwilling to have any light break forth upon
them. So our Savior says, John 3.19. This is the condemnation, that light is
come into the world: but men love darkness. They love unbelief and ignorance:
they had rather be the Devils prisoners in dungeons of darkness, then enjoy
their liberty in Christ's mavelous light. They are so far from being unable to
make themselves happy in believing, that they are in love with their own
unhappiness. They will not come to Christ, that they may have life; they are
unwilling that Christ should reign over them, though he does offer salvation
unto them. They say unto God, depart from us, for we will not have the
knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14. Like the Gadarens, they do desire Jesus to
depart out of their Coasts. They are the slaves of sin, and free from
righteousness, Romans 6.20. When they are disobedient to the commands of
righteousness, they do account it their liberty and freedom. As the service
of Christ is liberty to a Saint ( cui servire regnare est, Aug.) so the service
of sin is accounted liberty by a carnal man. They are like the servant that
was to be bored through the ear, upon his profession that he loved his Master,
and would not go out free, Exodus 21.5.

This is the condition of every man out of Christ; he professes that he loves
his Master, he loves the Devil, and the works of the flesh, are sweet and
pleasing to him: he had rather live as a Swine, and wallow in the filth and
mire of sin, then taste of those joys and pleasures which are at Gods right
hand: he had rather do the Devils drudgery, then enjoy that perfect freedom
that the Lord Jesus Christ has purchased for the Saints. It is against his
heart, and the whole bent, frame, stream, strength, and current of his spirit
to be desired, entreated, and beseeched to give entertainment to Christ. He is
rather contented to live as a slave with Satan, then to rule as a King with
Christ. He is an evil tree, and cannot bring forth fruit to make himself good.
( Homo extra Christumest mala arbor, Hier.) As an evil tree cannot bring forth
good fruit to make it self good, so an evil man, being an evil tree, all his
thoughts, words and actions are evil fruits, by which he cannot make himself
good. He cannot therefore of himself bring forth the good fruit of faith.

Again, the Scripture rises higher in spiritual expressions, to set forth
unto us the sad and woeful condition of an unbelieving man. He is not only a
lover of darkness, and seated in darkness: but he is darkness it self in
the abstract. The Apostle speaking of the Ephesians before their conversion,
says, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness. Consonant to which words is
that speech of John, John 1.5. The light shined in darkness that is, in the
dark hearts of unbelieving men, but the darkness comprehended it not. There
does lie more in this expression then in the former; It is more to be
darkness, then to be darkened; now we are not only darkened in our
understandings, but our understandings are nothing else but darkness. Men
without Christ may think that they have a great deal of knowledge and
wisdom; but truly the holy Ghost tells us that all their light and
understanding is nothing but darkness; There is as much contrariety between
the spirit of God and the spirit of a natural man, as there is between light
and darkness. By reason of which the natural man cannot of himself obtain
the knowledge of Christ, Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God: for
it is not subject to the Law of God, neither can be. The Apostle does not only
say that it is not subject: but he says that it cannot ((...)) He makes it a
thing impossible. According to that which he himself delivers, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness to him. The word is very emphaticall in the Greek (...) The man
that has a soul, look upon him in his best part, in his rational soul,
which he has as a man, and in that and by that he cannot receive the things of
God.

Look upon the rational man with his morality, with humane learning, Arts and
Sciences: with his literal knowledge of the Law and Gospel; look upon him as he
is sublimated in his intellectualls, and as he has made the highest
improvement of his learning, parts, gifts, and endowments, as he is the worlds
delight for his worldly wisdom, as he is admired by men for his prudence and
eloquence; with all this, he is blind to the all-seeing eye of God, and cannot
receive or aprehend the glorious things of Gods grace in Jesus Christ. He is a
fool with his wisdom, and an ignorant man with his learning: a wretched
sinner with all his good works and moral virtues. And no more able to open the
blind eyes of his soul, that he may see the sun of the Gospel, which shines
in the spirits of the Saints; then a man who is borne blind, is able to give
himself sight and bodily eyes to hehold the Sun which shines in the world.

He is not able by the acuteness of his reason, the sharpness of his
understanding, nor the largeness of his parts, gifts, endowments, natural or
acquired, to attain unto the saving knowledge of things of the Gospel: but
they are mere foolishness unto him. So that by this consideration it will be
evident, that if we look on faith as it is a light in the understanding, that
then a man is not able to bring this light into his own understanding: but
whatsoever is in his understanding opposes the glorious light of Gods grace,
and that therefore it is impossible upon this account, for a man to believe of
himself.

But in the second place if we look on faith, not only as it is the light of
God in the understanding: but if we look on it as it is the work of God upon
the will, so we shall find that we believe not of our selves; and that no man
ever in his own power and strength, or improvement of his free will, was ever
able to believe what God has reported concerning his own grace in his Son
Jesus. For as a man is darkness in his understanding, so he is nothing but
rebellion in his will. As the darkness in his understanding opposes the light
of Christ, and the beams of Gospell-truths; so likewise the strength, force,
and prevalency of the rebellion in his will, fights against all the
discoveries, that may be made of Jesus Christ to him.

This is set forth most plainly to us by John, John 1.13. where speaking of the
Saints, he says, They are borne, not of blood, nor of the will of flesh: not
of the will of man, but of God. It is not of the will of the rational man,
spiritually and truly, to will his own regeneration. Let a man make the best
use he can of his will; let him put forth himself to the best resolutions he
can make; let him resolve to do nothing but seek Christ, and study to know
him: yet if a man be only in the strength of his own resolutions, he shall
never be able to find out the Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostle Paul is plain in
this point, Romans 9.16. It is not of him that wills, or of him that runs:
but of God that shows mercy. A man may have some weak resolutions of
himself, and to seek Christ, and the things of Gods Kingdom: but unless he
be carried out with a higher principle, and a greater power then his own will,
to Christ, he will never be able to effect, what he seems to desireto have
effected and wrought in him.

In libero arbitrio nulla est libertas sed servitus) Free will is not free, but
a slave; there is nofreedome, but slavery in it. It is not free to good,
unless it be freed from sin by grace ( si stare non potuit humana natura adhuc
integra, quomodo potest resurgere, jam corrupta, Bern.) If man in the state of
integrity, could not stand of himself, how shall he of himself in his state
of corruption, be able to rise now he is fallen. Unless God come down with a
mighty power and force us against our natural will to receive Christ, we
shall never be made partakers of Christ. No man (says Christ) can come to me
except the Father draw him, Joh. 6.44. (Nolentes trahimur) you know when a man
is drawn, he is drawn against his will. I need not draw a man that is willing
to come after me. If we were willing to go after God in our conversion, we
should stand in need of no drawing: But ye see that God must compel us to come
in to Jesus, or else we will never come in unto him, nor submit unto his will.
I would not here be mistaken; I do not think that when a man does take Christ,
that he is unwilling to take him: but he receives him willingly. Yet it is
not by the strength of the natural will, that a man is made willing, but by
the power of grace. (Ex nolentibus volentes facit) God makes us, who are
unwilling to entertain his Son by nature, willing to entertain him by
grace: and the will acted by the strength of supernatural grace, does act in a
contrary way to it self, when it acts in the strength of corrupt nature. By
which it is plainly proved, that the will of a natural man is insufficient of
it self, to bring about the salvation of a natural man. We are changed into
the Image of the Lord by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. From whence one
does draw this rational conclusion; that if we are changed by the strength of
the spirit, that then it is not by the strength of free will. (Si a domini
spiritu, jam non a libero arbitrio.) And we may draw the same conclusion from
the words of Paul, Phil. 2.13: where he affirms that it is God that works
in us both to will and to do, of his own good pleasure. If God does work in
us to will what is good, then we do not work it in our selves. By which it is
clearly demonstrated, that if faith be looked upon as a work in the will, by
which it is made willing to receive Christ and his righteousness for
Justification; that then faith cannot be looked upon as from our selves, but it
is the gift of God.

A second argument, for the confirmation of this may be drawn from the
considering the disability of men, already converted, to do any good of
themselves: And thus I frame my argument.

If men already converted, are not able to think a good thought, or to put
forth one act of faith of themselves; then men unconverted are not able to
believe of themselves before conversion: But men already converted are not able
to think one good thought, or to put forth one act of faith of themselves:
Therefore unconverted men are not able to believe of themselves.

There is that strength in the first proposition, that I suppose no man
pretending to be a Scholar in the School of the spirit, will question the
truth of it. For should a man question it, he should by his questioning of it,
attribute a greater strength to unconverted then converted men, which is such
an absurdity in Divinity, that I think no spiritual man would be guilty of it.
And for the minor, or second Proposition, it is backed with such plain
authority of Scripture, that it is in vain for any man to deny it. How plainly
does Paul deliver self in this point, 2 Cor. 3.5. Where speaking of Saints, he
says, That we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves: but our sufficiecy is of God. What spiritual act is more easy then to
think a good thought? It is easier to think well, then to speak well, or do
well: we often think good thoughts, that never come out upon the tongue, or
appear in the action. Yet holy Paul is not afraid to profess, that the best
of us all cannot think any thing as of our selves. Which may be a sufficient
proof of that which follows in the same proposition, where we say that he
cannot put forth one act of faith. In believing our spirits are placed and
fixed upon God, and we are filled with high thoughts of his grace in his Son,
to his glory; and therefore if we cannot think well, certainly we cannot
believe well. And that we cannot believe of our selves after we do believe;
will be evident by the Petition of the Apostles, Luke 17.5. Lord increase our
Faith. What necessity was there, that they should have prayed to their Mr. for
the increasing of their faith, if by their own strength they could have
believed when they had pleased?

And thus I have at once both proved my argument, and the point in hand, that
true faith is not of our selves. This argument is ( a majore ad minus, as we
speak in Logic) from the greater to the less: if the greater can do
nothing, the less cannot; if converted men be able to do nothing toward this
excellent work of faith, then unconverted men are able to do nothing. Men who
have a life in Christ, can do nothing of themselves; therefore such who are
dead in sins and trespasses can do nothing of themselves, but God must do all
in us by his grace.

The third argument may be drawn from this consideration, that if there were
any thing in the reason or understanding of man which might further him in this
work of faith; then it would follow, that those men who are the most acute men,
the most learned men, the wisest and most rational men, would prove the best
Christians, and the most faithful men: but we find it quite contrary. There
are none commonly more ignorant of Christ then they who are most learned. The
worlds wiseman is Gods fool.

It were an easy matter to prove this, by running over the several ages of
the world. It was the complaint of a good man long since. The unlearned (says
he) do arise and take heaven by force, while we learned men are cast into
hell, (surgunt indocti and rapiunt coelum, dum nos docti detrudimur ad
gehennam) but I shall confine my self to Scripture. This is proved, 1 Cor.
1.26, 27. You see your calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. But God has chosen the
foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, and the weak things of the
world, to confound the things which are mighty. The wise men and great men of
the world have not generally embraced Christ: but rather the worlds fools have
been made wise by the knowledge of him. The learned Pharisees did reproach
Christ and his Doctrine with this, Ioh. 7.48. Have any of the Rulers or
Pharisees believed on him? but this people who knows not the Law are cursed.
They looked upon his followers as a cursed company of ignorant people,
unacquainted with the Law, which they taught for Justification; and supposed
that the Rulers and Pharisees had so much wit, wisdom and learning, that they
would give no credit to his Doctrine. Therefore seeing those who are most
learned, wise, and acute by rational parts, gifts, and abilities, are commonly
most averse and opposite to the knowledge of the Gospel, it follows, that it
is not by any thing that is in the reason, or understanding of man, by which
one man is made more capable of faith then any other man; but God gives the
gift of faith freely to whom he pleases.

The fourth may be drawn from the consideration of persons before their
conversion, as they are descyphered to us, and characterized forth in the word
of truth. The Scripture calls them dead men; they are rather Carcasses then
men; they have the shapes of living men: but they are but dead men. No more
then a Carcass is a man, no more is an unconverted man a man in the scriptures
sense. As a dead man is able to do nothing to regain life, so we, who are dead
in sins and trespasses, are able to do nothing toward our own conversion.
This phrase we have in the precedent words, Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened that
were dead in sins and trespasses. And the same Apostle says, Coll. 2.13. That
when we were dead in sins and the uncircumcision of our flesh, that then God
quickened us with his Son, having forgiven us all our trespasses. A dead man
hears nothing, sees nothing, there is no motion in him at all: so it is with a
man that is dead in sins, he hears not the things of grace; he hears, but he
hears not: he sees not the things of grace; he sees and he sees not: he is
not able to move one foot by faith toward heaven and happiness.

Unbelieving men are dead, if we view them in reference to the principle of
life, or the faculties of a living man, or the operations of life. Christ is
the principle of life, Colos. 3.3. When Christ, who is your life, shall
appear, then ye also shall appear with him in glory. They are without
Christ, and therefore without a principle of life.

2ly. In reference to faculties which are in living men, they are dead.
Faculties are known and distinguished by their acts and operations. (Potentiae
distinguuntur, et cognoscuntur per actus.) And therefore we may speak of these
two jointly, and together. As in a living man there are faculties and
operations of life; So there are faculties and operations of life in a man who
is spiritually alive. He is nourished, 1 Pet. 2.2. grows, Psalm. 22.6.
hears, sees, smells, Cant. 1.3. tasieth the sweetness of Christ, and the
like: but it is not so with one dead in sin and unbelief: he has no
spiritual faculties and operations of life: he lies rotting in the grave of
sin without these. If we play upon Instruments of Music, or shoot off guns
in his ears, he hears it not. If God thunders from sin in the Law, or
comes from Zion with the music of the Gospel, he hears it not: Refusing
to live to God by faith in Christ, he is dead. ( Qui tibi recusat vivere
mortuus est, August.) Men without Christ, take them in their best estate, and
thus it is with them: with his moral embellishments, and ornaments, he is but
like a dead body stuck with flowers, or an embalmed carcass. The whole world
of unbelievers is but a Golgotha, or Charnel-house of dry bones. The man that
wandreth out of the way of understanding, shall remain in the Congregation of
the dead, Pro. 2.6. Though thou art a professor of Christ, yet without Christ
thou art dead, 1 Timothy 5.6. The Widow that professes Christ, living in
pleasure, is dead while she lives. As Seneca passing by the house of an
Epicure, said (Hic situs est) He that lives here, is dead, and buried here. So
we may say of all profane men, ignorant men, civilized men without Christ,
formalized professors, they are there dead where they live. And being dead, who
will so far lay aside his reason, to affirm, that they are able to quicken
themselves to a spiritual life.

Again as the Scripture sets them out to us as dead men; so the Scripture
presents them to us as men that are in a sleep. We have this expression,
Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light. The knowledge that a man has of Jesus Christ before his
conversion, it is rather as the dream and fancy of a sleeping man, then the
true knowledge of a waking man. A man may dream he is a King, and thinks that
he has all the riches in the world: but when he awakes he has nothing,
because he did but dream that he was rich. So it is with men that have a
knowledge of Christ, but not wrought in their hearts by the operation of the
spirit; they may be in a dream, and have false persuasions that Christ is
theirs, and that heaven is theirs, with all the glorious things of eternity:
but they are but beggars and poor slaves all the while. They are likewise
compared to mad men, who may think that they are Monarchs, and in a Palace,
when they are miserable creatures chained in a Bedlam. So carnal men may have
false persuasions concerning their happiness: but true faith is only wrought
by the spirit of truth. And as men out of their wits cannot restore to
themselves the use of reason, so men spiritually mad cannot bring themselves to
the light of grace. By which expressioons it is plain that faith is not of our
selves.

My last argument to prove that true faith is not of our selves, is derived
from the Word, in which it does acquaint us with the wickedness and
deceitfulness of man's natural heart. Our hearts are deceitful and
hypocritical, and therefore unfeigned faith cannot come from them, and no
credit is to be given to the persuasions of them: our spirits they will
deceive us, therefore we are not to give any credit to any persuasion that
comes from them; a persuasion that is a persuasion merely of our own spirit,
is not a true faith or persuasion, Who will believe a common cheater, cozener,
liar, or impostor, that cares not what he says or speaks. The heart naturally
is like unto such an impostor or deceiver, according to that of Jeremiah, Ier.
17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can
know it. That faith therefore cannot be true which proceeds from a natural
heart; and that comfort cannot be sound which springs from such a faith. By
which, and the preceding arguments, it does appear, that the true faith of the
Gospel is not of our selves.

Give me leave now in a few words to make some deductions from this, and so I
shall commend what I have delivered, and you to the blessing of she Almighty.

In the first place, this may confute the Doctrine of Papists, Arminian^, and
Popish protestants, that conceive that a man is able to do something to the
furtherance of his own justification and salvation. This that has been
delivered, being seriously weighed in our spirits, is sufficient to overthrow
this lying Doctrine, which would attribute any thing to man, or to the
strength, wisdom, understanding, will or affections of the natural man, in
point of conversion, justification, and spiritual renovation.

One of the Ancients, who was more enlightened by the spirit then any of his
fellows, for the beholding of the truth of GODS grace, does as boldly, as
truly assert, that whosoever shall pull down the Doctrine of free grace, by
exalting man's free will, is deceived with an ^aereticall spirit, ( Haeretico
fallitur spiritu. Aug.) And who will suffer himself to be so far blinded, as
not to see that magnifiers of free will do overthrow the Doctrine of Gods
grace and mercy, which Paul preached; when they shall hear him plainly
concluding against all the free willers in the world, Romans 9.16. That it is not
in him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy.
The free grace and mercy which the Scripture acquainteth us with, is
inconsistent with man's free will to do good of himself. As Dagon was tumbled
down, when the Arc, which was a type of Christ, and Gods grace in him, was
brought into the place where Dagon was set up; so when Gods grace by the power
of the spirit appears, it tumbleth down, and overthrows the dagonish
conceits, and Idolatrous apprehensions, which men have of the strength which is
of themselves, to make themselves happy. The spirits of men truly persuaded of
the strength of grace, and their own weakness, disclaim their own
strength, and sel^e-confidences, for the making of themselves good. And cry
out with those in the Prophet, Lam. 5.2. Turn thou us unto thee O Lord, and we
shall be turned.

But that these men may not say that we deal unjustly with them in condemning
them and not hearing what they can say for themselves; let us hear what they
do usually think for themselves, that so their mouths may be stopped by the
truth of God. And thus light may shine more gloriously by the dispelling those
mists, foggs, and clouds of error, which would darken it.

The Scripture that some of them object against this truth, is, Revel. 22.17.
The spirit and the Bride say, come. And let him that hears, say, come. And
let him that is a thirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of
life freely. From whence they conclude, that there is a power in free will to
take Christ, and that if a man will he may take the water of life freely.

To this I thus answer, that they draw more from the words, then the words do
hold forth: The words say, whosoever will, may take the water of life freely:
but the word does not tell us, that any man is able to will this of himself.
It is true, whosoever will may take the water of life freely: but it is as
true, that a man of himself is not willing. God alone enabling us to be willing
to take this water of life freely, Phil. 2.13. And thus ye see, that if this
argument be well weighed in the balance of the San ctuary, it will be found
too light to prove that for which it is alleged.

But they are ready to reply again, and to demand of us the reason why God
does find fault with men for unbelief, reproving them for not coming unto
Christ, if they are not able of themselves to believe, and come to Christ?

Answ. Why should these men thus cavil against the goodness of God? May not
God with good reason, and without offense, inform us of our sin, though we
are not able of our selves to forsake it; It is a conclusion spiritually
irrational, to say that we have power to amend our fault, because God does
reprove us for our fault. In these reproves and the like, God shows unto us
his goodness, in reproving us for our conviction; he does not inform us of our
ability, savingly to believe for our conversion.

But me-thinkes I see them returning upon us again, and making a new assault
by another argument, with which they thus oppose us, or rather the truth and
power of Gods grace. Why does God command, entreat; and beseech the creature to
believe, if the creature have no power of himself to believe?

Ans. Passages to this purpose which we fiind in Scripture, do acquaint us with
Gods goodness to the creature in his revealed will, and the creatures duty
toward God; they do not acquaint us with the secret, effectual, and
irresistible, Rev. 9.19. will of God concerning the salvation of a creature,
nor of the creatures power in himself, to believe of himself. The conclusions
of these men from such precepts, exhortations, and entreaties, are very absurd
and irrational; If we shall seriously weigh them in the scales of right and
sanctified reason. God say they, does command, exhort, and entreat men to
believe, therefore men are able of themselves, by some power in themselves, to
believe. May they not upon as good grounds conclude that a carnal man may
sulfill the whole Law, and be saved by doing of the Law, seeing he is
commanded in Scripture to fulfill the whole Law, and exhorted, and entreated to
do it. I shall shut up this use with a sweet speech of a devout and spiritual
man; seeing man without the grace of God could not keep that salvation which
he received, how shall he be able without grace to regaine that salvation
which he has lost. ( Cum igitur sine gratia dei salutem non posset Custodire
quam accepit, quomodo sine gratia dei potest reparare quam perdidit. Aug. in
Epist.

Secondly, It may be for the convincing of men of their disability to will
their own justification and salvation. What God accounts wisdom, that when man
looks on it by the eye of reason, he accounts it nothing but folly and
madness. How can a man be desirous of Christ, who apprehends that the things
of Christ are nothing but foolishness? A profane Pope sporting himself, and
rejoicing in the great riches he had gotten by professing the Gospel in a
carnal way, uttered these words; What great riches have we gotten to our
selves by this fable of lesus Christ. (Quantus divitias lucrati sumus ex hac
fabula Christi.) So men that are not enlightened by the spirit of truth, to
behold the word of truth, do conceive the truths which men preach concerning
Christ are mere fancies, fables, madness and that foolishness; and that
there is no truth at all in which is spoken in the word of truth.

I will instance but in one or two particulars to show you how carnal reason
opposes grace. Grace tells us, that God will have mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and whom be will he hardens, Romans 9.18. Consider how carnal
reason opposes this truth of God; suppose, says carnal reason, that a King
would hate some of his Subjects, because he would hate them, and love others,
because he would love them, and should give no other reason of his actions, but
his own will: were not such a King more fit to live among beasts, then to
reign over men. And shall we then think that the wise God does love and
elect some because he will love them, and hate and reprobate others, because he
will hate them. Thus carnal men measuring the actions of God by the rule of
their own reason, they see nothing but folly and madness in that, by which God
discovers his greatest wisdom to those that are enlightened to behold the
riches of his grace.

Secondly, God in Christ does present himself as having a sufficiency of grace
for the salvation of the greatest of sinners without works: but how does
carnal reason strongly and vigorously fight against Gods goodness, concluding
that if there were any truth in this Doctrine, that the law and good works
would presenly be destroyed. A natural man cannot believe that God is so
gracious as Gospel Ministers would persuade the world that he is. As the
unbelieving Lord, when the Prophet told him of the great plenty in Samaria,
said, If God should open windows in Heaven could this this thing be? 1 King.
7. So a natural man, when Christ is offered to sinners without any works
(unless God give grace to believe) he is ready to say, If the windows of
Heaven were opened, and all the grace and mercy in Heaven should come down
upon us, if God should let out all the bowels of his pity and compassion to
poor sinners, it cannot be so as you say, and speak concerning free grace to
sinners, and ungodly ones. So that if a natural man should do nothing, but
hear Sermons, and although Angels or Christ himself should come down from
heaven to preach unto him, he would be as able of himself to keep the whole
Law for justification, as to believe truly and savingly in the Lord Jesus.

But some will say, that if it be thus that a man may as easily in his own
strength, keep the Law as believe the Gospel; why does not God then rather
enable us to keep the Law that we may be saved, then bid us to believe the
Gospel?

To this I answer; that God saves us, by enabling us to believe the Gospel, and
not by enabling us to keep the Law for Justification, because God will have
the glory of his grace in our Salvation. God will not save us in a way of
working, but in a way of believing, that all the glory may be given to him. The
Apostle gives this as a reason, why it is by faith and not by works, that no
man might boast, ver. 9. Not of works, lest any man should boast. By which
argument he proves that the Father of the faithful was not justified by
works, Romans 4.2. If Abraham were justified by works (says he) he has
whereof to glory. As we may observe it in some people, who are built upon legal
principles like the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. They are boasting, that they are not
as other men, as though their good works had made the difference between them
and others. This frame of spirit does rob God of the glory of his grace, who
will not that any flesh should glory in his presence: but that he that glories
should glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.29.3. And therefore we are saved by grace
through faith in the word made flesh, and not by the works of the Law.

But secondly, some will object, why does God take this pains with men in the
Ministry of the Word? if they are able to do no more to their own
conversion, then a dead man to his own resurrection.

To this objection I have already given an answer, yet give me leave to add
this to what has been already spoken, for the fuller satisfaction of those
that are weak. Though we are able to do nothing of our selves, yet God
entreates, exhorts, and beseeches us to be reconciled to him in Jesus Christ,
because in exhorting, entreating, and beseeching of us to believe, he puts
forth his power and his own strength to enable us to believe; while Paul
exhorted the Jailer to believe in the Lord Jesus that he might be saved, God
enabled the Jailer to believe. Life and power is conveyed to the soul in
Gospel commands and exhortations. When Christ raised the son of the Widow of
Naim to life, Luke 7.14. he speaks to him; Young man I say to thee, arise. No
man who has not lost his reason, will conclude from hence, that it was by the
power of the young man that was dead, by which he was raised from the dead,
but by the power of the Lord Jesus, who did bid him arise. So, though God speak
in the Ministry of the word to those that are dead in sins and trespasses,
and bids them arise from the dead that he may give them light; yet we cannot
conclude from thence, that it is by the power of men by which they do believe:
but it is by the power of the spirit conveyed in the preaching of the Word.
Christ commanded Lazarus to come forth, but he came not forth in his own
strength, but in the power and strength of him that commanded him out of the
grave; So we command men to come forth out of the grave of sin: but they
come not forth in their own strength, but in the power and strength of that
spirit that commands them from the grave of sin to the land of the living.
While Ezekiel prophesied over the dead bones, breath came into them, and they
lived, Ez^k. 37.10. So while the Prophets of the Lord do preach over their
sinful impenitent hearers, who are like the Prophets dry bones; the breath of
Heaven, the spirit of the most High in the Ministry of the Gospel, enters in
into them, and not by working, but believing they are made new creatures, and
see the Kingdom of God.

In the next place, you see faith is not of our selves, it is not in any thing
in man, or in man's wisdom that man is enabled to believe what is reported
concerning Gods grace in Jesus Christ. Therefore this may convince us that that
faith which is of our selves is a false faith, and not the true justifying
faith of the Saints. The good fruit of faith cannot grow out of a wicked heart.
And the heart of a man naturally, is wickedness, and every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart is vanity, and only evil continually, Genesis 6.5. Psalm.
94.11. When God looks down from Heaven upon the children of the first Adam,
he sees that there are not any that do understand and seek God. They are all
gone aside, they are all become filthy, there is none that does good, no ^ot
one, Psalm. 14.2.3. And the Lord Jesus dyed for us when we were enemies unto
him, and without strength to do any thing for our own salvation, Romans 5.6.
That faith therefore which is wrought by the strength of nature, is not that
true faith of the Gospel which is only wrought by the spirit of the Gospel.
According to that of the Apostle, where he affirms, that the Saints are
justified by the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6 11.
Therefore if thy faith be a working or persuasion of thine own spirit; If it be
framed and hammered by thy self upon the anvile of thy own spirit, it is a
counterfeit persuasion, and will not be able to advantage thee in the great day
of the Lord Jesus.

As we read in the Prophet Jeremiah of the visions of a man's own heart, and
the visions of God. So there is a twofold faith; there is the faith or
persuasion of a man's own heart, and a persuasion of the Spirit of God. And as
the visions of a man's own heart are false dreams, lies and deceits, and are
justly reprehended by the Prophet, Jerem. 23.26. So the persuasions of a man's
own heart, they are false dreams and lying persuasions, we are to give no
credit to them. As we should not believe a commonlyer: So we are not to
believe the persuasions of our own hearts.

The same Prophet in the 28. ver. compares lying Prophesies to chafe, and the
Prophesies of truth to wheat, what (says he) is the chafe to the wheat. So
true faith is like unto wheat, and faith of our selves is like unto chafe. As
the wind drives away the chafe, Psalm 1.4. So the blasts of Gods wrath, and
the winds of temptation will blow away the chaff of a false faith, while true
faith shall be preserved by God, and we through it shall be preserved unto the
day of redemption.

Wherefore brethren, we are to try whether or no we do truly believe. Examine
your selves says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.5. Whether ye be in the Faith. As we
have a touchstone to try gold, so God has left a spiritual touchstone by
which true faith may be tried. As there are counterfeit pieces of gold, which
can be hardly distinguished from true gold, until they are brought to the
touchstone; so there is a counterfeit faith, which can hardly be distinguished
from true faith, until it be brought unto the spiritual touchstone. Therefore
it will be the wisdom of every one of you, to try what faith you have. It is
not enough to be persuaded that you shall be saved, and that Christ is yours,
and that your names are written in heaven. Alas, there are false persuasions as
well as true. There are multitudes of Libertines, who turn the grace of God
into wantonness, and make their bellies their Gods, and mind earthly things,
Phil. 3. And yet have strong persuasions that they are in the grace and favor
of God. There are Pharisees who are persuaded that they are in the love of God
the Pharisee had an assurance, and gave God thanks for it too, Luke 18.11. God
I thank thee I am not as other men are. And yet he was but an hypocrite all
the while, deluded with the proud conceits of his own righteousness. The
unbelieving Jews professed with a great deal of boldness and confidence that
God was their Father, John 8.41. We have one Father, even God. And yet our
Savior tells them plainly, that though they had these strong persuasions that
God was their Father, yet in truth the Devil was their Father. Ye are (says
he) verse. 44. of your Father the Devil.

A man may be persuaded that Christ will save him, and go to hell and be
damned with that persuasion.

We see by experience, that many Apostates, who have made a profession of
Christ, and have had strong persuasions of the love of God, have fallen from
the Gospel to profaneness, Arminianisme, and diabolical Familisme.

Our blessed Emanuel does plainly prove this truth unto us, by acquainting us
with some, who, when they shall be brought before his judgement-seate, shall be
confident of their interest in him, whom nevertheless he will not own to be
his, Matthew. 7.21, 22. Not every on that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven.
Many shall say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
Name? and in thy Name have cast out Devils? and in thy Name done many
wonderful works? Yet you see what Christ will profess unto them; I never
knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. As if he had said, It is
true, you had a strong persuasion that you should be heirs in my Kingdom; it
is true, you thought that you should be saved if any in the world were saved,
but I tell you for all that, I know you not, depart ye workers of iniquity.
Wherefore it concerns all men to know whether their faith be a right faith.
Self-ish faith is no right faith: if it arise from no higher a fountain, then
our own natural reasons, wisdoms, and understandings; our faith is from our
selves; and we may carry it to hell with us, and find as good faith there in
the Devils, as this is. Though this which I have spoken concerning the trial
of faith, does chiefly concern such who are deceived with a false faith, of
their own making: yet it will be very advantageous for the true Saints
likewise to try their faith. Wherefore before I press this farther upon such
who are under a spirit of delusion, I shall speak a word unto the Saints unto
this purpose. Consider that that man who has true faith, may likewise have
much false faith. There may be a great deal of dead faith in him, who has a
living faith. Where there is true gold, there may be much dross; and in that
Professor in whom there is the golden faith of the Gospel, there may be a
great deal of drossie faith, which is nothing worth. A Christian has two
contrary natures in him. He has flesh as well as spirit. And as there are
persuasions in him flowing from the spirit, so there may be persuasions flowing
from the flesh. Saints sometimes, when they are in a lukewarm and backsliding
condition, are apt to please and content themselves with the workings and
persuasions of their own spirits. And they may find that much of their joy
and comfort does not proceed from true faith wrought by the operation of God,
but from the lying, cheating, counterfeit working, and operation of their own
spirits. Will you know one principal ground and reason why some true Saints
are so unfruitful, deadhearted, formal and lukewarm in the profession of the
Gospel? it is because the Devil cheats them with the workings and persuasions
of their own spirits.

When God persuades the heart of his love, our hearts are inflamed with an holy
love to God, and are willing to do or suffer for the glory of God: but when
we content our selves with the working of our own spirits, there is
idleness, sloth, neglect of Christian duties, coldness, formality, and
lukewarmness; so that there is little difference between us and others. Again
it concerns you all to try your persuasions: For if any of you cozen and cheat
your selves with the persuasions of you own spirits, the time will come that
you, who kindle these sparks, and walk in the light of your own fire, and in
the speaks that ye have kindled; This shall ye receive from the hand of the
Lord, ye shall lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50.11.

When you expect heaven, you will be cast down to hell; when you shall be
confident that Christ is yours, and shall be ready to plead the goodness of
your cause in the face of Jesus, you shall find that you were deceived by the
false persuasions and workings of your own humane spirits. A faith of your
selves, by which ye have been persuaded of those things, which ye have received
by the relation of thing to the ear, will not save you; but that faith which
is wrought by the Spirit, giving an heavenly revelation of Christ to the heart.
Therefore try whether your faith be from your own humane spirits and natural
understandings, or whether it proceed from the power and spirit of the most
high God mightily working in you for the salvation of your souls.

But you will say, How shall we be resolved in our spirits that our faith has
not proceeded from our own spirits, but that it is a work of God in us?

1. When God works faith, he gives an evident light by which we see the truth
of our faith: and thus the faithful are in the first place assured of
salvation in believing. The just does live by faith, Heb. 2.4. and has his
life and righteousness by faith. If any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. The special presence of Christ in the soul does make a
man a new creature, and by faith the new creation in us is discovered unto us,
and therefore Christ is said to be formed in us by faith, Gal. 4.19. So many
as receive him by faith, are born not of flesh, nor of the will of (...), but
of God, and have power to be the sons of God, 1 John 12, 13. By faith we are
the children of God, Gal. 3.26. and know that we are the children of God, 1
John 5.10. He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in
himself. By which words it appears how true faith differs from a wavering
opinion ( unde apparet quantum differat a fide fluxa opinio; Marlor.) It is the
office of faith to bear witness to the certainty of our salvation, and to
give in a testimony of our happiness by Christ Jesus. The blood of Christ does
purge the conscience from dead works, Heb. 9.14. By faith we drink this blood
of the Son of God, John 6.53. and look upon him who is invisible to the eye
of reason, by this eye of faith which is the evidence of things not seen, Heb.
11.1. Christ is set forth as a propitiation and object of our justification by
the Father, Romans 3.25. And by faith we look upon him who is set forth us to
us to be looked upon. It is life eternal to know the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent, John 17.3. And true faith is nothing else but the
true knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ. ( Fides quid aliud est quam
vera de de^ cognitio? Cyr.) He that believes on the Son has everlasting
life, and he that believes not shall not see life, John 3.36. In which words
our Savior does seem to put a difference between a believer, and an
unbeliever. The unbelieving man sees not eternal life: but the believing man
sees eternal life, and has eternal life abiding in him, by which he knows
that he is freed from the death of sin, and from the temporal and eternal
death for sin, and shall not come into condemnation: For when a man truly
believes, heaven is opened unto him, and he has a spiritual discovery of
Christ made unto his soul. But it is not so with a man, who has a persuasion
formed in himself by himself. As John said, that what he had seen, he
declared unto them, 1 John 1. so every spiritual man may say that he has
seen Jesus Christ. With Stephen by faith he sees God, and his Son Jesus
standing on his right hand. Christ is so perfectly presented to the eye of
faith, that the believer does by faith look upon a crucified Christ, as though
he were present before him, Gal. 3. The Apostle to prove the effectual
calling, and justification of the Thessalonians, does affirm, that the Gospel
came unto them in much assurance, 2 These. 1.5. Enquire now in thy own spirit,
whether thy faith is such a faith as this, which the Scripture does call the
unfeigned faith of the elect; and if it be such a faith, it is not of thy
self, but it is the gift of God.

2ly. The Kingdom of God being not in word, but in power, thou that do truly
believe have found the word of salvation to come unto thee with a mighty power.
This was an evidence to Paul of the truth of the conversion of the
Thessalonians, because the Word came in power unto them, 1 These. 1.5.

Thou that have trusted to a persuasion of the grace and favor of God to thee
in Christ, wrought in thee by thy own spirit, thou have had no heavenly power
in this persuasion: But he that has faith wrought by the spirit of God, there
is a mighty power of God comes down upon him when he is enabled to believe.
Thou that have a false faith apprehendest it an easy thing to believe, because
thou did never feel a power from above coming upon thee to enable thee to
believe. Whereas the true believer knows that it is a difficult thing to
believe. Because the work of faith is the work of omnipotency; According to
that of our Savior, Io. 6, 29. This is the work of God, that ye believe in him
who he has sent. Therefore if upon examination thou do find that thou art
only persuaded concerning the mysteries of Christ, and the grace of God as thou
art persuaded of natural things in a natural way, and have not felt the power
of heaven enabling thee to believe, thy faith is a false faith. For where there
is true faith, a man feels the power of God enabling him to believe the
testimony that God gives of his Son Christ. I will give you a plain place to
confirm this, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. where he praying for them that they might see
the mighty power, by which they were enabled to believe, does make use of many
very emphaticall expressions; that ye may know says he what is the exceeding
greatness of his power to usward who believe: according to the working of his
mighty power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead.
There he speaks not only of a power, but the greatness of power, and not
only the greatness of power, but the supereminent greatness of his power
((...)) And as though he had not spoken enough to set out the Almightinesse of
the power by which we are enabled to believe; he does inform us that such an
operation of the power of the virtue of God, (for so the words may be
translated) by which Jesus Christ was raised from the dead, and declared to be
the Son of God, is put forth for the enabling of us to believe. Thou that
have not this power in thy soul, thy persuasion is wrought in thy spirit, not
by the spirit of grace and truth, but it flows from thy own natural and
carnal spirit; and it is a persuasion that will never do thee good: it will
never bring thee true comfort: A man that has not a better persuasion than
this, shall never see the face of God with joy.

3dly. Faith which is not of our selves, does carry us out of our selves. A
faithful man has his life not in himself, but in Jesus Christ. He lives not
by the principles of the first, but second Adam. He has his spiritual being
in the Father, and in his Son Jesus Christ. He is joined to the Lord, and is
one spirit. He sees the Father in the Son, and the Son in him, and the
Father in him through his Son. According to the promise of our Savior, John
14.20. Ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you. Paul
speaking of the spiritual Thessalonians, affirms that they are in the
Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 1.1. By faith we enjoy the glory
of union. The glory which thou have given me, I have given them, that they be
one, even as we are one, John 17. Though we have not the glory of equality
((...)) yet we have the glory of likeness, (...)) Though we are not united to
the Father so immediately as Christ is, by himself, and in himself; yet we
are united to him (mediante Christo) by the means and mediation of Christ
Jesus. This is the honor which is given to those who trust by a lively faith,
in the name of the Son of God.

4ly. Faith which is not of our selves, does carry us beyond the world. A
believer looking upon Christ overcomming the world for him, does through faith
overcome the world by him, 1 John 5.4. Whatsoever is born of God, overcommeth
the world: and this is the victory that overcommeth the world, even your faith.
Therefore the Saints are said to be clothed with the Sun, and to have the Moon
under their feet, Rev. 12. Because being through faith clothed with the
righteousness of Christ who is called the Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4.2.
They trample upon all sublunary things as worth nothing in comparison of Jesus
Christ.

Fifthly, He that truly believes in Christ, is anointed with the spirit of
Christ, and assured of his abiding for ever in Christ, 1 John 2.27. The
anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you, and as it has taught
you, ye shall abide in him. God should lose his earnest if it were possible for
us, to miscarry to the losing of our souls after we have this earnest from
him, which binds him to bring us to heaven and happiness. This spirit
persuades us that we are the sons of God, and that God will lose none of his
sons. He that has this spirit, knows that no man that has the spirit can
speak what he feels from the work of the spirit of adoption in his own
heart. He admires grace when he looks on God reconciled in Christ to
sinners, and looks on himself reconciled to God in believing; and when he
feels the spirit of God witnessing with his spirit that he is the child of
God: he can go boldly to the Throne of grace, knowing Christ as his elder
brother, and God his Father in him.

Selfe-deceiving hypocrite, do thou not begin to be convinced, that thy faith
is not the true faith of the Gospel, by that which has been spoken concerning
this faith which is not of our selves, but the gift of God?

6. As I told you even now, There is never true faith, but true love follows
it. Love is an ndividual companion of faith. Therefore such as have faith, and
never have love accompanying of it, may be confident that their persuasion
concerning the grace and goodness God in Christ, is but a carnal, and not a
spiritual persuasion. True faith works by love; therefore if mine work not
by love, it is a false faith: this is an undeniable argument.

Brethren, mistake me not in this point unto which I now am speaking,
mis-apprehending my meaning, as if I bid you love God, and the brethren, that
you may believe, and be justified; no, but I tell you now that where true,
lively, and justifying faith is, there love will follow. When we do in the
light of the spirit apprehend Gods love to us, and the love of Christ in giving
himself for us, we cannot but love God again, and love Christ who has loved
us, and given himself for us. So that where there is no true love, there is no
true faith. If it be truth, that where fire is, there will be heat: it will
necessarily follow, that where there is no heat, there is no fire: So if where
true faith is, love will follow, it will necessarily follow, that where true
love does not follow, there true faith did not precede, 1 John 4.19. We love
him, because he first loved us. He that loves not God, has not apprehended
Gods love to him. As far as thou believe in a spiritual way, the love of
God shall constrain thee to love God. (Tantum diligimus, quantum scimus) love
is answerable to the measure of our faith or knowledge. He that has Paul's
faith, shall have his love. We say that love is the lodestone of love (magnes
amoris amor.) So Gods love does draw forth our hearts in love to God. God in
Christ, when he is presented unto us for our justhification, does appear to us
as such a lovely object, that we cannot but love him. The greek proverb is,
that loving is wrought by seeing. ((...)) so when by faith we see the love of
God in Jesus, we cannot but love God. And therefore John says, 1 John 4.8.
That he that loves not, knows not God, for God is love. Wherefore that
faith, by which thou art persuaded of the love of God to thy soul, which
carries thee not back again in love to God. I dare speak it in the presence of
God, that that persuasion is not wrought by the spirit of grace, but is the
work of thine own carnal and natural heart. If any man, says the Apostle,
love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22.
Let him not be accounted as one (inalbo fidelium) in the list of the faithful.
Let him be excommunicated, look not upon him as a true Christian. Peter though
he had denied Christ not long before, yet he was confident that he loved that
Christ whom he had denied, when Christ asked him, Simon, son of Jonas love
thou me? he says unto him, yea Lord thou know that I love thee, John 24.15.
When Christ the second and third time proposed the same question unto him, he
remained still confident of his love: And appeals to Christ the searcher of all
hearts, as to one who knew the truth of his love, v. 17. He said unto him,
Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. I shall but add
one thing more, because I shall (God willing) have an opportunity to enlarge my
self in this point, when I shall prove unto you affirmatively, that true faith
is the gift of God.

Lastly, where the grace of the Father in the blood of his Son, is apprehended;
for the covering of sin, there is a forsaking of sin. When God does discover
this, that he will heal backsliding, love freely, and turn away his anger.
Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with Idols, Hos. 14.8. When God
pardons sin by his grace, he will subdue sin by his grace, Mic. 7.8, 19. That
man who has true faith wrought in his heart, he shall seele the power of grace
apprehended for his justification, engaging his spirit to deny ungodliness,
according to that of the Apostle, Tit. 2 11, 12. The grace of God that brings
salvation has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and
wordly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world. First, (...) soberly, in reference to our selves. 2. (...) justly, in
our relation toward men. 3. (...) piously or religiously in reference to God.
Grace will not suffer us to live gracelesly, because we are justified by grace:
but will thoroughly acquaint us with our duty toward God, toward men, and
toward our selves. If the grace that thou professest teach thee not to deny
ungodliness, but thou live in a graceless way, dishonouring Christ,
discrediting the Gospel by thy wicked, scandalous, and evil life, thou do
not in deed, and in truth apprehend the Gospel.

If God discovers himself to Abraham as Alsufficient, he will command him to
walk before him, and be upright, Genesis 17. Sin shall not have dominion over us,
if we are not under the law, but under grace, Romans 6. Christ will present
himself unto us as the pattern for sanctification, if he reveal himself as
the object of our justification. Every man who has a sure and lively hope of
salvation by Jesus Christ, purifieth himself as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. He
that truly expects happiness hereafter, studies purity here. True Saints do
desire, not only to know, but to do the will of God, Psalm. 143.10. Teach me
to do thy will O Lord (says the man after Gods own heart) thy spirit is good
lead me into the land of uprightness. The spirit of the Gospel will not lead
us into the land of profaneness, but into the land of uprightness. Gods
goodness to us will make us in love with holiness. They shall fear and
tremble for all the goodness, and for all the prosperity that I procure unto
them, says the Lord, Jer. 33.9. The golden chain of mercy, let down from
heaven to draw us up unto God, does bind us and oblige us to the service and
obedience of God.

If thou art an old professor of the Gospel and doctrine of grace, and live
gracelesly, unacquainted with the sanctifying spirit, and yet have a strong
persuasion that God is thy Father, and Christ thy Savior: thy persuasion is
not worth one farthing, it will do thee no good: Where there is no desire of
purity, there is no work of true faith: for when thou have a true, and a lively
faith, and thou see God gracious, loving, and merciful, believe it, thy
spirit will be carried forth in desires to be made like unto Christ in
holiness. We all (says the Apostle) with open face, beholding as in a glass
the glory of the Lord; are changed into the same image from glory to glory, 2
Cor. 3.18. I thou by the lively operation of the spirit have seen the glory,
grace, beauty and holiness in Christ, for thy Justification, thy spirit will
be so enamourd with the beauty of holiness and perfection in Christ, thou will
desire to see the image, and picture of holiness, and perfection which is in
Christ, to be drawn forth upon thy own heart and spirit. There may be some
that may think that this is strange Doctrine which I have delivered, to wit,
that a man may have strong persuasions concerning his interest in God and
Christ, and boast much of it, and yet be but a hypocrite and reprobate all the
while. I shall therefore add one place of Scripture to those which I have
delivered for the proof of this, and so for the present I shall conclude. Ye
shall find it in Micah. 3.11. The heads judge for reward, and the Priests teach
for hire, and the Prophets divine for money; yet for all this will they lean
upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us.
See here a base, vicious, and covetous people, that sell Justice, and the Word
of God; and yet are confident that they belong to God; they would not preach
without money in their hand; like many of our Priests, no penny, no
paternoster; no money in hand, no Sermon, no preaching, that will not open
their mouths further then it is opened with a key of gold or silver, yet they
profess they are the people of God, and make a great show of Religion, and
blind the eyes of poor ignorant people that conclude they are the only zealous
holy men in the world, though their covetousness, baseness, and vileness in
running after Livings and great preferments, may appear evidently to children.
Ye see by this that people may lean upon God, desire to be accounted his
people, and be confident that he is their Father, Ioh. 8. And yet may have no
true faith, but may be self-imposters, deceiving themselves with the
persuasions of their own spirits, whereas true faith is only from God,
bestowed upon us by him as a free gift, which let the good God work in our
hearts by his grace through Christ, Amen.

SERMON. V.
Faith is the gift of God.
EPHESIANS. 2.8. By grace ye are saved through faith, not of your selves, it is the
gift of God.
THere is nothing does lay the creature lower in the presence of God, then a
clear apprehension of the Creators favor, and goodness, in giving all things
freely to the creature. The Apostle to beat down the pride of man in spiritual
gifts, does make use of this quaere, 1 Cor. 4.7. What have thou, that thou have
not received. As if he had said, if thou do but seriously consider, that thou
enjoyest no spiritual gift, but it has been freely given unto to thee, thou
wi^t not see any cause why thou should be proud of it. And in these words,
for the humbling and abasing of man, and for the exalting of Gods grace in
Jesus Christ, he does set down this in the last place, That true faith is the
gift of God.

I shall illustrate this two manner of ways.

First, I will show you that it is the gift of Gods power: For this the Apostle
drives at here; when he opposes faith, as the gift of God, to what he had said
before, maintaining that it was not of our selves. Man being not able to
believe of himself, it will necessarily follow, that it is only the power of
Almighty God, that is able to enable a man truly to believe in his grace
through Christ.

In the second place I shall show you, that faith is the gift of Gods grace. As
God alone by his almighty power is able to enable a man to believe: so God
alone can give us this excellent and precious gift of faith, by which we are
made partakers of the divine nature, and carried to heaven, to behold the glory
of our God, in the face of Jesus Christ.

First, faith is the gift of the power of God, and therefore Isaiah 53.1. we
read of the arm of God, which is to be put forth, for the enabling of men to
believe the Gospel. Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of
the Lord revealed. The strength of a man does usually lie in his arm,
wherefore God to show that few do believe, John 12.38. does prove it by this,
because his arm or strength is revealed to few. The arm, power, and strength
of God must be put forth and revealed to men, or else men will never be able
indeed, and in truth to believe what God has related, and reported concerning
his glorious grace in Jesus Christ.

This will appear by some few considerations.

First, it is the prerogative of Gods powerful will to show mercy, by giving
faith for salvation, to whom he will, and therefore it is not in the power of
sinful man; effectually to will his own salvation, Romans 9.18. Jam. 1.18. Of
his own will be begot us. God is the God of salvation, and therefore the
creature cannot be a Savior to himself. Save me, says the Psalmist, for thy
mercy sake, Psalm. 31.16. Why should the Psalmist have prayed unto God, to save
him, if he had been able to save himself, by working faith in his own
heart, we are all sinners, saved by obtaining a Psalm of mercy. And it is God
that grants us a psalm of mercy for the saving of our lives, and gives us
learning, by which we are enabled for to read it. The will of God is the
supreme ruler, and governor in all things, and therefore in this, for the
giving of faith unto whom he pleases, for salvation. Man lies under unbelief
many years, when God once comes and speaks the word to command light to
shine, then presently we are enlightened. He created light by the word of his
power, and made the heavens; so by the same omnipotent word, and power of his,
he is pleased to create, and set up new light in the understandings of those
whom he intends to save, giving to them the knowledge of the sweetness of his
grace and glory in the countenance of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, It is the gift of his irresistible power. His will and power cannot
be resisted, Romans 9. If there were not such an irresistible power in grace, no
man could ever be made a partaker of grace. All the strength of the natural
man does fight against grace, and takes up arms against Jesus Christ; so that
if God did not work irresistably, there would never be wrought the work of
grace in the heart of any man. If God will persuade Japhet he shall dwell in
the tents of Shem, Genesis 9.27. I will work, says God, and who shall let it,
Isa. 43.13. That is, none shall let it. All the Devils in hell cannot hinder
the work of faith, when God intends to work it. As many as are ordained unto
eternal life shall believe, Acts 13.48. All Christ's sheep shall hear his
voice, Ioh. 10.16. The gathering of the people shall be unto Shilo, Genesis 49.10.
God has determined the thing to be done, before it is done. And all his
counsels of old are faithfulness and truth, Isa 25.1. He should be
unfaithful, if his determinations should not come to pass. The Apostle in the
Ephesians. 1.11. says, that the Saints have obtained an inheritance, being
predestined according to the purpose of God, who works all things according
to his own will. And if we consider the eternal Counsel and determination,
forgiving faith to some particular person, we shall find, that it is
impossible, that these men should not believe, in that moment in which God has
appointed to work faith in their heart, and therefore the Apostle does
acquaint us with the immutability of this counsel, Heb. 16.17. And James
says, Jam. 1.17. That with God there is no variableness, nor shadow of
turning. Wherefore seeing God does dispense the gifts of his grace unto his
people, according to his unalterable decrees, and unchangeable counsels, it
will be evident, that he works upon men irresistably. God should err in his
prescience or foreknowledge of things, if he should foresee and determine,
that a man should believe, and that man at the same time should remain in
unbelief. As an Astrologer would be deceived, if he should foresee and
foretell, that a thing should come to pass, and the thing foretold should not
come to pass. It must be granted therefore, that Gods decrees are certain
irrevocable, and immutable, and that God working according to these decrees,
does work irresistably, and therefore faith is his gift, because it proceeds
from his irresistible power according to that of our Apostle, It is the gift of
God.

Thirdly, Darkness cannot create light. Faith is a spiritual light, and
therefore it cannot come from our darkness, but must have its birth and
beginning from some heavenly light. And God is the powerful light, from whom
faith is beamed into our hearts. Five things are required to seeing, 1. A
visible object. 2. The organ of sight. 3. A light to discover this object. 4. A
medium through which this object is to be seen. 5. That the organ be in a
living and waking creature. And these things are likewise requisite to seeing a
thing spiritually by faith, which all are from the power of God. 1. It is God
does present unto us the spiritual object, which is to be looked upon for
salvation. 2. It is God gives us spiritual organs or eyes. 3. Spiritual
light to discover spiritual things. 4. A medium, Jesus Christ, through whom
we look upon him. 5. A spiritual life and being. It is a thing proper and
peculiar to God, to create a thing out of nothing, and it is his prerogative
and power in believing, to make us new ereatures. By which it will appear, that
true faith cannot be of our selves, but it is the gift of God.

Fourthly, That which stablisheth Saints in the faith, that power does at the
first, work faith in them: but God by his power does stablish Saints, Romans
16.25. The Apostle does make it a privilege proper to the power of God to
stablish Saints in the faith, and therefore it is proper to his power to bring
us to the faith.

Fifthly, The promises of God in giving Christ to open the blind eyes, Isa
42.6, 7. His engagements to teach us to know him, according to that of the
Prophet, All thy children shall be taught of God. His covenant in Christ, that
we shall know him, Heb. 8. does sufficiently demonstrate, that nothing below
the omnipotent power of God, is sufficient for the enabling of us to rest upon
his own grace for salvation. I need not spend many words in proving this,
because the argument laid down to prove the negative part of the Text, will
reach the affirmative. For if not of our selves, it will unquestionably follow,
that it is of God that we are enabled to believe.

In the next place I shall prove, that as it is the work of his power, so it is
the work of his own free grace. When he enableth a man to believe, he puts
forth not only the power of his omnipotency, but the power of his grace: he
does not look upon any thing in the creature to move him to give faith to the
creature: but he looks upon his own grace, and he sees no other motive or
argument to move him to give faith to men, but those that lie in the bosom of
his own grace from the days of eternity.

I shall prove this first by Scripture, and then by some considerations. First,
you have it proved by Scripture, Phil. 1.29. To you it is given not only to
believe, but to suffer. Hence I gather, that it is the gift of Gods grace to
enable a man to believe: As it is the free gift of Gods grace to call forth a
man to suffer for him. So in 2 Timothy 2.25. The Apostle bids Timothy with
meekeness of spirit to endeavor to recover those that opposed the doctrine and
truth which he held forth and preached. If peradventure God will give them
repentance for the acknowledging of the truth. You see then God must give
repentance, or changednesse of mind, by which he is enabled to believe truth
to the glory of God. Now as I have cleared it by Scripture, so I shall clear it
by some considerations;

The first shall be drawn from the promises of God. The promises as they do
prove, that man cannot do any thing by his own power, but that all is done
for us by the power of God, so they prove that all is done for our spiritual
good by grace. For promises of the new Covenant do not only acquaint us with
the power, but grace of God.

If Adam had been preserved in his obedience, and never had fallen, he had
been preserved by the power of God; but not by the grace of God; as grace is
strictly taken in the Covenant of grace: so that as we have proved, that faith
is not of our selves, but from the power of God by leading you to the promiser;
so, now we shall prove, that we are saved by grace through faith, by bringing
you back again, to look upon promises, as they are the streams and flowings
forth of Gods grace unto us. What need God promise to do that which we are able
to do of our selves? Therefore seeing we have the promise of grace for it, we
may conclude that it is by grace, and not by any power in our selves. Romans
15.12, we have a promise for faith, In him (speaking of Christ) shall the
Gentiles trust. So likewise in Jerem. 24.7. We have a promise of God, that he
will give us the knowledge of himself. I will give them an heart to know me,
that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God: and
they shall return unto me with their whole heart. Here God has promised to
give us a heart that we shall know him.

Now seeing God has promised to give us a heart to know him: therefore I
conclude we are not able to give such a heart to our selves. God has promised
to circumcise our hearts, to take away the foreskin of our spirits, therefore
we are not able to circumcise our selves. God has promised to turn us,
therefore we are not able to turn our selves. Turn us O Lord and we shall be
turned, Lam. 5.21. Intimating thus much, that we cannot come toward him, till
heeturne the face and countenance of his favor toward us, answering to that in
Jer. 31.18, I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, thou have chastised
me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: turn thou
me, and I shall be turned. And therefore God does usually mix promises with
exhortations, that man should not conclude from Gods exhortations unto him,
that there is a sufficient power in him to do what he is exhorted to do, as
in Hosea 14. when he had exhorted Israelto return unto the Lord, he presently
adds, verse. 4. I will heal their backesliding. All the Prophets do
subscribe to this truth, Jona 2.9. Salvation is of the Lord by promise. He will
teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths, says Micah, Mic. 4 2. and
Zeph. 3.12. I will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people,
and they shall trust in the name of the Lord. God will fill his spiritual
house or Temple with glory; And I will give peace, says the Lord of hosts.
Hag. 2.9. God will be the glory in the midst of the spiritual Jerusalem,
Zech. 2.9. And he will remove the iniquity of the land in one day, v. 3.9. All
these promises are plain demonstrations of Gods powerful grace, and man's
weakness.

Secondly, we have not only the bare promise, but the Covenant of God, and this
Covenant confirmed and bound by an oath, Mic. 7.20. Thou will perform the
truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn unto our
Fathers; therefore it is not by any power or work in our selves. If it be the
fruit of the covenant of grace, and God has covenanted in his grace to do it
for us, then certainly we are not able to do it our selves. But God has
covenanted to do it for us; he has covenanted to write his law in our hearts:
The law of faith, as the Apostle calls it, Romans 5. Therefore we are not able to
work faith in our own spirits. Why should God tie himself in a Covenant, and
bind this Covenant with an oath to do this for us: if we were able to do it
our selves, why should God do any thing for his own names sake, if the
creature can do enough to make it self happy by his own strength. In vain is
a Covenant of grace promulgated for man's salvation, and for discovery of this
salvation; If man can find out the way of salvation by his own wisdom, why
must Christ guide our feet into the ways of peace, Luke 1. if of our selves
we can find out these ways of life and peace. God has made it his work, and
therefore it is not our work wrought by our own strength. God has promised
says as a gift freely to be bestowed upon undeserving man, therefore man by the
improvement of his parts and labor, cannot purchase it as the reward of his
endeavors.

Thirdly, God works faith in time according to his eternal purpose, and
decree before time. But the eternal purpose of God, is the purpose of his
grace, therefore God works faith according to his purpose of grace. The first
of these propositions has been already proved, the second is evident from 2 Timothy 1.9. So that it is evident that faith flows from eternal grace; and
therefore it is not of our selves, but it is the gift of God.

Fourthly, There is nothing can merit or deserve faith in man, before faith is
wrought, and therefore it is given as a free gift. This is plain by Romans 9.16.
It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy, John 1.13. There may be as much in one that shall be damned, as in him
that shall be saved before his conversion. Peter did no more to merit, or
deserve his first faith, then Judas did. Gods grace is his rule by which he
works, in giving faith unto any man, and therefore faith is the gift of God.

Fifthly, Gods design in justifying a sinner through faith, as has been
formerly proved, is the magnifying of his own free love unto the creature in
Christ; and therefore he does acquaint us, that faith is the free gift of his
grace, that so he may divest the creature of glorying in himself, or in any
thing from himself. If the Father should justify us by grace through faith,
and we should apprehend that our faith were of our selves, there would be
some glorying in our selves. And therefore he does justify by grace, through
faith, as a fruit, effect, and free gift of his own grace. So proud we are
naturally, that though we were convinced that we were saved by grace, as a
gift given unto us; (as alms unto a beggar) yet we should be proud, if we
knew that of our selves we had an hand to receive it, and therefore God does
not only in his grace give us the gift of eternal life, but the hand by which
we receive it. Thus we are saved by grace through faith, which is the gift of
God.

Sixthly, The Apostle says, that no man can say that Jesus is the Christ, but
by the holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.3. But by faith we confess that Jesus is the
Christ, and therefore it does plainly follow, that it is from the holy Spirit
of grace.

The Spirit does show, that all things are freely given us of God, 2 Cor. 3.12.
And therefore faith is freely given us of God. If every thing, then faith.
Every good and perfect gift comes down from the Father of lights, if we will
believe James, Jam. 1.17. And therefore we must grant that faith is given unto
us of God, or else deny it to be a good and perfect gift.

Obj: But some may say, if faith be a gift, why does our Savior bid us to buy
gold tried in the fire, that we may be clothed, that the shame of our
nakedness may not appear, Rev. 3.18.

Answ. This word buying is taken properly, and so it signifies the purchasing
of something, by some considerable price which is given for it.

There can be no buying of a thing without some price. ( Nulla exemptio sine
pretio esse potest. Justinian in stit. lib. 3. Tit. 24.) And in this sense we
cannot buy faith or Christ, having no considerable price to pay for Christ,
before we enjoy Christ.

2ly. Buying is taken improperly, Isa. 55.1. Buy wine and milk without money,
and without price. And if faith be to be bought, it must be thus bought by us,
we have no money or price to part with for faith. And what is thus bought by
us, is freely given unto us; So that this objection is too weak to weaken the
truth which has been delivered. It stands still unshaken, and unmovable
upon its own Basis, Faith is the gift of God.

Having proved it sufficiently by these considerations, that faith is a gift, I
shall draw some useful conclusions from them, and put a period to my discourse.

First, This overthrows the meritoriousnesse of the righteousness of our
own works qualifications or preparations before faith for the deserving any
thing at the hand of God to engage him to give us faith. What we receive as a
free gift, cannot be given us in consideration of our merits or deservings.

I shall but touch this, because I have formerly taken pains to beat down
the Antichristian monster of Free Will, and merit of works: which like two
twins of the same womb, do live and dye in the same moment. It is the Lord
Jesus must seek us, before ever we can find him. And we cannot as we ought
desire faith, until faith be freely bestowed upon us. Gods free grace does
prevent man's free will. And if God leave us to our selves, and to our own
labors, endeavors, actings, duties, and performances, and do not come in by
the power of his grace upon us, we shall never be able truly, and spiritually
to understand any thing of free grace. Away then with the foolish conceit of
those who cry up the strength of man's will, and his precedent qualifications of
righteousness and holiness, for the making of some men worthy to close with
Christ in a promise of free grace, rather then great sinners.

2ly. This may inform us, that such shall certainly believe, whom God will
enable to believe through grace, Acts 18.27. An infinite power is of such
strength, that a finite power is not able to resist it: but whatsoever power
there is in the creature, by which it may resist the work of Gods grace, it is
but finite, and the grace whereby we are enabled to believe, is infinite,
therefore we are not able to resist the infinite power of the grace of God, by
which we are enabled to believe. Take the Devil, and all the powers of hell,
with all that is in the heart of man, all his sins, ignorances, and
corruptions, conjoyning their forces to hinder the work of faith in the spirit
of a man, all these together are but a finite power: but when God comes, he
comes with an infinite power, to enable us to believe. Therefore I conclude,
that we are not able to resist the power of God, when he is determined to
give us faith. Faith being the gift of his Almighty power.

But some may here object with the Arminiaus that place of Stephen, Acts. 7.51.
Ye stiffenecked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye have always resisted
the holy Spiri. Here (say they) you see that men have resisted the holy Spirit;
therefore God does not so work upon men by the power of his grace, that he
leaves them altogether unable to resist.

To this I answer, that there is a twofold power that God puts forth. An
ordinary power in the preaching of his Word; when by entreaties, beseeching,
and promises, and the like, he allures, and enticeth men in the preaching of
the Word, and knocking at the doors of their hearts for entrance. This common
work of the spirit may be resisted, and so all wicked and ungodly men in this
sense resist the Spirit of God, and reject the Lord Jesus Christ.

But there is another power of the spirit, and that is that inward spiritual
power, by which God comes on those whom he intends to save; thus he comes, not
only in the preaching of the Word in the language of man, but in the power of
heaven. And though the former work of the Spirit may be resisted, this latter
cannot be resisted. Though we may reject the Word of God preached in the
letter, and some common workings of the spirit in our own hearts, and not give
entertainment to Jesus Christ when he knockes at the door of our hearts in
the preaching of the Word; yet when it comes down with power to open the
heart, as he did Lydia's; we are not able to prevail against him, when God
intends powerfully to open the door of our spirits, we are not able to keep
it locked: he will sweetly force us to open the door, and by his spirit and
grace break in upon us, and not suffer us to shut him out of our hearts: and
we are bound to bless God that it is so; for unless it were so, no man in
the world should ever be saved, no man in the world should ever receive Christ,
unless God did come with an infinite power, and pleasing violence force him to
believe.

If it were not thus that God did work this unresistable way in those whom he
intends to save, there must of necessity be an uncertainty whether ever any man
or woman should ever be saved by Jesus Christ: For if every man and woman in
the world had power to resist grace offered, and not to believe at all, then
this must follow, that it might be impossible after the fall, that never a man
or woman in the world should ever be saved by Christ. And this absurdity will
follow from it, that God after man's fall, could not be certain that any man
should be saved by Christ, and so it would take away the foreknowledge of God,
because he could not know, but that every man in the world might resist and
reject Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, This may give in some support to some trembling hearers, who are
convinced by the spirit of unbelief, and are not able to believe in Jesus
Christ. Thou art ready to despair, when thou apprehendest, that it is
impossible for thee truly to believe of thy self, but let thy spirit be upheld
with this consideration, that God is able to give thee faith while I am
speaking of faith, and showing thee the worker of it. It may be thou think
that thou shall never have joy, comfort, and assurance of salvation, but by
believing, and yet thou are not able to believe, and therefore comfort thy
self in this, though thou can do nothing, God is able to enable thee to do
all things, Phil. 4.13. As the Martyr when some told him that when he came to
suffer, he would rather deny his tenets, then burn. It is true, said he, I of my
self should do so: but God is able to enable me. So though thou know that
thou of thy self can not believe, know that God is able to enable thee
presently to believe. Thou that have had experience of thy unbelieving heart,
and of that mountain of infidelity that lies upon thy spirit, and that thou
art able to say, I shall never be able to believe of my self while the world
stands: know that God is ablde in this momentt to give thee faith.

Fourthly, This may inform us concerning the nature of true faith; by which it
may be distinguished from the faith of hypocritical Formalists. The hypocrite
not being acquainted with his own disability, for the working of saving faith
in his own heart, does apprehend that he can do the work of God by himself
in his own strength; (like the carnal hearers of our Savior, John 6.28. What
shall we do, that we may work the work of God) And when he apprehends,
that he does believe he gloryeth more in his own actings, labourings, and
endeavors, (by which he conceives that he has obtainned faith) then in the
grace of the Lord Jesus; having no spiritual knowledge of that faith which is
wrought by the Almightines of Gods powerful and irresistible grace. But if it
is otherwise with a true son of Abraham, his faith is of another nature,
having a spiritual, and heavenly tincture in it, from that spirit, by whom it
is wrought. He prizeth not his faith of the natural spirit, but the faith of
his heavenly spirit. He can set his seal to that truth, of our Savior, John
6.65. That no man can come unto him except it were give a unto him of his
Father; he is not proud of his faith, because he looking upon it in the glass
of Gods free grace, does account it rather Gods work then his own. According
to that of our Savior, John 6. This is the work of God, that ye believe. Upon
which words one of the Ancients has this observation. (Non dixit hoc est opus
vestrum, sed hoc est opus Dei.) He said not, this is your work, but the work
of God. Our Savior speaking to his Disciples, Mar. 4.11. To you (says he) it
is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God; but unto them that are
without, all those things are done in parables. The Gospel of the Lord Jesus
is a mystery and parable unto many, until the Lord does give us the precious
gift of faith, by which we understand these mysteries of God: so that he that
truly understands the mystery of the Kingdom, does look upon his spiritual
knowledge as a gift. What is complete and perfect faith? but the gift of God,
by which we believe, that all our spiritual good things, and faith it self is
freely given unto us by God. ( Quae est plena et perfecta fides? Quae credit ex
Deo et omnia bona nostra, et ipsam fidem. Aug.)

Fifthly, This may convince those of their error, who being convinced of
sin, do refuse to turn into the true way of salvation by believing,
supposing in the pride and ignorance of their hearts, that this is too short
and near a way to Justification and happiness. These will first do good
works, get strength against all their corruptions, be made holy and sanctified
men, and then they think that they may safely make bold to lay hold of some
promise of grace for justification and salvation. It was thus with me, when God
did at first begin to awaken my conscience with the dreadful sight of my sins,
and course of profaneness, in which I had lived, and some months I went in
this way; never in the spirit, considering that the object of Gods justifying
grace was an ungodly man and a sinner, and not knowing that spiritual
regeneration is not by the works of the Law, but the doctrine of the Gospel,
though I could then in a carnal way (as many blind Protestants now can) have
spoken and preached more gloriously with thetoricall words and flourishing
expressions of justification by faith, without works, then now I can, or will.
But as God, who from all eternity, had singled me out unto salvation by Jesus
Christ, was pleased to convince me of my ignorance, and to bring me to rest
upon his grace in his son, as a poor wretched sinner, enabling me to believe
that my sins were blotted out for his own Names sake, though my sins did
testify against me. So these who are in the same condition, in which I then
was, if they are in the number of those, whom God has given unto his son
Jesus Christ, shall be convinced, that by faith through Christ we have access
to the Throne of grace with boldness, and that faith is not given in
consideration of any preceding acts of holiness, or sanctification, but as the
free gift of our heavenly Father. That they who have thus erred in spirit, Isa.
29.24. may come unto understanding, and such who have murmured against the
truth of Gods grace, may learn doctrine. Give me leave briefly to lay down
some convincing considerations, which may bring to your remembrance those
things which we have more fully handled.

1 Consi. The word and promises which we do enjoy, are free gifts of Gods
favor. What reason can we give, why we should enjoy the outward means of
grace, rather then Americans, but his own free grace, Psalm. 147.19. He
shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel. It is
the Lord that brings the external means and word of grace as a gift (more
worth then the whole world) unto a people. According to that sweet promise of
God, Ezekiel. 29.21. I will give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of
them. The great and precious promises by the believing of which, we are made
partakers of the divine nature, are freely given unso us, 2 Pet. 1.4.

2 Consi. The power of God does make the difference between men who do enjoy
the outward means, 2 Pe. 1.3. His divine power has given us all things, that
pertain unto life and godlinsse, through the knowledge of him who has called
us to glory and virtue. If God did put forth that omnipotent power in all,
which he does in some, who hear the Gospel, all as well as some should
believe, 1 Cor. 3.7. Neither he that planteth is any thing, neither be that
waters: but God that gives the encreasse. Upon which words one gives us
this observation. As all things which are planted and watered, do not spring
up, thrive, and prosper, but those whom God does bless; So all men who are
planted in the Church of Ghrist, and watered by the preaching of the Word, do
not truly believe, but those upon whom God bestows faith. (Nec omnium est
fides, qui audiunt verbum, sed quibus deus partitur mensuram fidei, sicut nec
omnia germinant quae plantantur, et rigantur.) But I have touched upon this
before.

3. Consi. Gods good grace does prevent man's good works in his justification.
God in his grace must give us a new creation and heavenly being in his word
made flesh, 1 John before good works can be wrought by us. ( Sicut creatore
opus habemus ut essemus, sic salvatore, ut revivisceremus. Aug.) As it was
necessary that we should have a Creator to give us beings, as creatures, so it
is necessary that we should have a Savior to make us new creatures through
faith.

4 Consi. Gods grace does not only prevent our works, but faith it self: Faith
is an effect of Gods grace, and therefore God is gravious before we believe. It
is a blessing of the new Covenant, and therefore in this respect it may be
truly said, that we are under the new Covenant before we do believe. By which
we may plainly see that faith is a free gift. Mercy is showed unto the
faithful, and it is showed unto us to make us faithful. ( Fideli datur quidem
miser ecordia, sed data est etiam, ut esset fidelis. Aug.) One says that mercy
was showed unto Paul, not only because he was faithful, but that he might be
faithfufull. The Apostle to prove the freeness of grace in bestowing faith as
a gift upon us, has these three expressions within the limits of three verses,
Romans 5.15, 16, 17. ((...)) calling faith a gift, and a gift of grace, and a
gift of grace for righteousness.

5. Consi. There is no way to happiness for thee, but by grace, and no closing
in any sure or comfortable way with grace, but through faith. We are all
condemned by the Law, and there is no escaping for us, but by that pardon which
the King of Heaven in the prerogative of his grace does give unto us, and no
way for us to be able to read our pardon, unless God teach us. And therefore
God has promised, Isa. 14.3. To give us rest from our sorrow, fear and hard
bondage, with grace, Psalm. 84.11. knowledge, Ezekiel. 29.21. Faith, Romans 11.26.
Strength and peace, Psalm. 29.11. Wherefore let us be willing to receive Christ
by faith, and to receive faith as a gift. God must cloth thee with his Son,
and give thee faith to put him on. Refuse not this glorious garment, because
God will give it thee freely. But be contented to be made partaker of Christ
and faith, according to Gods own pleasure. Think not with Simon Magus, to buy
the gifts of the Spirit, faith is a free gift. God will not sell a Diamond for
dung. Faith is a precious Diamond in a Christians crown, works before faith,
but dung, Phil. 3. Cease then from thinling by thine own works to purchase
that faith, which God does intend freely to give unto men, because men can give
no considerable price for it. Make no more words in bargaining with God for
faith. He will give unto him that is athirst, of the fountain of the water of
life freely, Rev. 21.6. Let no man be kept back by his old age, or sins, from
hoping to obtain salvation through faith. While we are in this world, no
repentance is too late; there is a way to mercy. ( Nec quisquam aut peccatis
retardebitur aut annis ad salutem consequendam. In isto adhuc mundo manenti,
paenitentia nulla sera est. Patet ad indulgentiam additus. Ciprian.)

Object. But if faith be such a free gift, why does not God give the same
measure of faith unto all believers.

Answ. He may do what he will with his own. He may give him the greatest
measure of faith, who deserves faith lest, Ephesians. 4.7. Unto every one of us is
given faith, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. As a man that
gives measures of wheat freely to beggars, may give one more, and another
less, without doing any wrong. So God may measure forth faith unto us largely,
according to his own will, without wronging those who have done more for him,
and receive less. We have no cause to complain or murmr against God,
because he is abundantly gracious to whom he pleases; but should rather
admire his free grace. And seeing faith, with every act and degree of it, is a
gift of unmerited grace, let us who do believe, wait for the increase of
faith, as a gift, ceasing from our own works, understanding, and abilities.
Yet here lest I should be mistaken, let me add this caution. That we should
not neglect Gospelduties, by hearing of Gospel-promises. Promises should not
prove occasions of sloth to to the faithful, but should be arguments and
incentives to spiritual activity, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having these promises, let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiuesse, etc.

Seventhly, Let us prize faith as a gift; we prize gifts, because there is
usually some preciousnesse and goodness in them, or else for the givers sake.
Faith is precious in it self, 1 Pet. 1.1. Gods gifts have something of his
own goodness in them, and faith is to be prized because it is from him. It is
said of Elkanah that he gave portions to Peninnah, and her sons and
daughteas: but unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion, for he loved her, 1 Samuel
1.4, 5. So God does give portions to the men of the world, but his worthy
portion of love to his Saints, through faith, and therefore prize it. Imitate
those blessed souls, who have showed unto us by their good examples, how they
prized faith, who were contented to part rather with their honors, pleasures,
riches, preserments, yea their own lives then the faith of the glorious Gospel
of Christ. They loved not their lives unto the death, Rev.

8ly. Faith is a great gift, which if thou have it, thou know that thou have
freely received it. ( Fides magnum aliquid est, quam sihabes profecto,
accepisti. Aug.) And therefore look up unto God, for wretched, unbelieving
creatures think that they may receive faith as a gift which they will never be
able to deserve as a reward. This may strengthen faith much when we are before
the Throne of grace, begging faith for poor sinners, if we consider that
faith is a free gift. Jeremiah made use of such an argument to strengthen his
faith, Jer. 14.7. Though our iniquities do testify against us, do for thy
Names sake. O the happiness of those who are acquainted with free grace, they
may expect all things for themselves and others, as free gifts to be given unto
them, though they can expect nothing as deserved wages.

Lastly, Give glory to God for his unspcakable grace in giving faith unto thee.
My faith O Lord, says one, has called upon thee, which thou have given unto
me, and which thou have inspired into me. ( Invouavit te domine, fides mea
quam dedisti mihi, quam inspirasti mihi. Aug. Cons.) So bless God with that
faith, and for that faith which God has freely given thee. The Son of God
has given us an understanding to know God, 1 John 5.20. And this knowledge is
the gift of faith. ( Quid aliud est fides, quam vera de Deo cognitio. Cyp.) And
therefore bless God in the Son for this faith. Thou might have lain in
the dark dungeon of an unbelieving heart to this day, and thou art brought
into the wonderful light of the liberty of the Gospel through faith. The Soune
has made thee free, and thou art free indeed by believing. Be free in rendering
largely the tribute of praise to him, who through faith has knocked off the
shackles and fetters of bondage from thy soul. Give thy self to him who has
given himself and his Son to thee through faith. And begin to live the
heavenly life of glory, in giving glory and praise to him, who has given thee
the glory of union with himself in his Son, through faith, Joh. 17. Give
praise to the King of Zion, who has redeemed thee to God by his own blood, and
made thee a King and Priest, and has assured thee that thou shall reign upon
the earth. Say of faith, and all the gifts of his Spirit, as Jacob of his
children, these are children which God has graciously given unto his servant.
Ascribe nothing to thy self, but all to him from whom are all things. Cry
with a loud voice; Salvation to our God which sits upon the Throne, and to
the Lamb; and sing in faith with all Saints who love Christ in sincerity,
Revel. 6.12. Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thankesgiving, and Honor,
and Power, and Might, be unto our God for ever and ever, Amen.

SERMON VI.
The Heaven-borne man sins not.
1 JOHN 3.9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin: for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.
GOd in his grace has shined into my spirit, by reading of these words, which
has inclined my spirit to speak from these words. The truths of Christ are
likely to prove powerful upon the hearts of the hearers, when they are
seconded with the experience of the speaker. I am therefore emboldned to
acquaint you with the truth, which is wrapped up in these words: though I know
that there are many adversaries and opposers of this truth, 2 Cor. 4.13. We
believe, and therefore we speak, says the Apostle. So I do in spirit belive
what I shall speak, and therefore I am resolved to speak it forth plainly,
and you are engaged to hear me patiently.

The words are a conclusion drawn from preceding premises. In the precedent
words the Apostle delivered two propositions.

First, That he, that commits sin is of the Devil.

Secondly, That Christ has appeared to destroy the works of the Devil; from
whence he concludes, that he which is born of God cannot sin, not having his
being in the Devil; but in Christ, who destroys sin.

In this verse, there are these particular observations, which at the first
view may present themselves unto us.

1. A character of a true Christian. He is one who is borne of God. 2. The
property of this man who is borne of God. He does not commit sin. 3. A reason
why he cannot commit sin, to wit, because his seed remains in him. 4. His
purity. He does not only, not commit sin, but he sins not at all. 5. This
asserted by laying down the impossibility of his sinning, (...). He cannot
possibly sin. 6. This is further proved by his excellent and glorious
condition. He cannot sin, because he is borne of God.
First. From the person who is here spoken of, The man who is borne of God. We
may take notice of the folly and Bedlam-madnesse of some, who would be
accounted professors and Preachers of a spiritual Gospel, whose Gospel and
mystery of error does make the man born of God, to be God. Confounding the
glorious nature of the Father, Word, and Spirit, with the new Creature. The
Apostle does plainly overthrow this Bedlam-Divinity by these expressions. In
which he does make a difference between God, and the man who is born of him.
That which is born of God, is borne in time. But God is from eternity. And
therefore that which is born of God cannot be God.

The place which they pervert is in the 1 Cor. 6.17. He which is joined to the
Lord is one spirit.

Answ. Christ, and the man joined unto him are one, not by confounding of the
person of Christ, with the person of a Believer, but by the union of these two
in the Spirit. As the members are one with the head, and yet the head is not
the members, nor the members the head.

Secondly, In this objection as they destroy the personal being of a Believer,
so they destroy the personal being of Christ; as he is the Word made flesh.
There Christ is nothing but God; they apprehending that Christ has offered up
his humane nature, wisdom and righteousness, as things of the first
creation; and that he has no being now but in spirit, which they call Christ
in the Spirit, the spiritual man, or God. I shall therefore in few words
deliver the truth of God, concerning the man who is born of God.

This phrase is taken first largely, and so every Creature may be said to be of
God, because every creature is the workmanship of God, and has its being from
God. And in this sense all wicked men are called the Offspring of God, Acts
17.28. (...)

Secondly, It is taken strictly. And so it is to be understood not of those who
have their being from God by creation, but by spiritual regeneration. And thus
it is here taken, and in other places, John 3.5. Except a man be borne of water
and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. John 1 13. In this
sense neither God, Christ, or the Spirit are the new man, or the man born of
God. But the special and gracious presence of God through Christ by the spirit
does make a man a new Creature, 1 Cor. 1.30. John 1.13. 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man
is in Christ, he is a new Creature. He does not say that if any man is in
Christ, that then he is Christ, or that Christ is the new creature, but that
man who is in Christ, he is the new creature. Having showed you who the new
man, or the man born of God, is, who is here spoken of, and freed the Text from
famelisticall blasphemies. I shall desire that you may be acquainted with this
truth.

Every true Saint is a man born of God.

1 Consid. It will not advantage a man to make a profession of Christ, and to
submit to all the outward Ordinances of Christ, unless a man be made a new
creature by Christ, Gal. 6.15. In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails
any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. We must be borne again, or
else it had been better for us never to have been borne. Christ will not own
any for his, or approve them as his Disciples, whatsoever profession they do
make of him, unless he be formed in them, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be unapproved. They are the Devils children, who
are not borne of God, John 8.44.

2 Consid. God has engaged himself in the Covenant of grace, that those who
are his, shall be borne of him, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart will I give you, and a
new spirit will I put within you, and will take away the stony heart out of
your flesh, and give you an heart of flesh. As a Carver when he makes an
Image, does begin at the outside of the Timber, and cuts and shaves and smooths
that. So hypocrites do begin at the outside, and do smooth themselves in
their outward conversation to men-ward. And so there is but an image instead of
a new creature. But true Saints are made new inwardly. Some say that the heart
is the first thing which has life. (Cor est primum vivens.) It is true, in the
new creation, God does give unto the vessels of his grace new hearts, Romans
10.10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness. Jer. 32.39.

3. Consid. Men who are not borne of God, cannot have fellowship with God. If
we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, welye, 1 John
1.6. But true Saints have fellowship with the Father, and his Son Jesus
Christ, 1 John 1.3. And therefore they are borne of God.

4 Consid. God is to be known, served, and worshipped by true Saints: but we
cannot truly know him, serve or worship him, so long as we are old creatures,
in the state of nature, and therefore it cannot be denied, that true Saints are
borne of him. An old creature is spiritually dead, and cannot see God. A dead
creature cannot perform the actions of a living creature. And a sinner cannot
serve the living God, and perform that spiritual worship which God does
require of those who are quickened to spiritual worship by Jesus Christ.

5. Consid. The new Heaven and the new Earth is only provided for new
creatures: but it is provided for Saints, and they expect it, 2 Pet. 3.13. And
therefore they are borne of God. Mat. 19.28. Our Savior says, that such who
have followed him in the regeneration, shall sit upon Thrones. The Saints are
translated out of the Kingdom of the world into the kingdom of grace, by
spiritual regeneration, and therefore they shall be translated from the
Kingdom of grace, into the Kingdom of glory. By these considerations it is
evident, that true Saints are borne of God.

Use. Let us not try our Saint-ship by our large professions of Christ, and
subjection to such things which we apprehend to be his Ordinances for external
worship; but by our new creation. It concerns every man to be thoroughly
assured of his heavenly birth, who would make his claim good for heaven and
glory; and be assured that he shall escape the damnation of Hell. As our
Savior said of Judas, Mat. 26.24. That it had been good for him, he had not
been borne. So it had been good for us that we had never been borne, if we
shall live and dye professors of the knowledge of God in Christ, and not dye
possessors of God in Christ by the new creation. Consider therefore.

1. That every change or alteration which may be wrought in a man, does not
make him a Son of God by spiritual regeneration. Moral principles may make
a great change in a man. And Pharisaicall principles may make a man seem to be
very religious, to himself and others. But the Pharisees proselite is far
enough from a true Convert. And except our righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we cannot enter into the Kingdom
of God. We may walk far in the way of the Law, and performance of duties, to
make our selves new creatures, and the Sons of God by our own righteousness
and legal reformation, and may at last stumble at Christ, and never come to
know what it is to be borne of God. 2. A man may take a long walk in the pa^^
of the Gospel, and may after a sort escape the pollutions of the world by
Gospel-principles and may taste of the powers of the world to come, and in the
conclusion may sit down short of a new creation here, and glory hereafter, 2
Pet. 2.20. Hebr. 6. Never truly knowing what it is to have the Spirit in him,
and himself in the Spirit, God in him, and himself in God, Christ in him, and
himself in Christ.
Quer. But by what means is a man born of God may some one say, seeing it
concerns us to know that we are born of God, and it is so easy to be
mistaken.

It is not by the law, by that thou may have a knowledge of sin, Romans 7. but
can never receive a new life. The law brings forth servants, not sons,
Ishmaelites, not true Israelites, Gal. 4.

Secondly, Those who are borne of God, are children of the Gospel, not by the
works of the law, but by the hearing of faith we are made new creatures. In
this Ministry God by his Spirit through faith in his Son makes new
creatures. Nothing in nature can beethe cause of it self, so nothing in the
new creation can be the cause of it self. There must be a Father before there
can be a Son. God therefore through faith in his Son is the cause of this
new creation. In this Ministry God does not speak only by letters and
syllables, but by his eternal Word and Spirit. Our souls are purified in the
obedience of the truth of the Gospel, unto unfeigned love of the Brethren, 1
Pet. 1.22, 23. And are borne again not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the Word of God which lives and abides for ever. In this
Ministry of life and salvation, we have an eye to see the old man crucified in
the suffering of Christ, Romans 6.6. That benceforth we should not serve sin. In
this Ministry we see Christ as that new man which makes all things new, 2
Corin. 5. The old Adam stood as a public person to bring shame, sin, and
sorrow upon his posterity; so Christ the second Adam, public person, and new
man, by whom we are renewed, does bring holy boldness, righteousness, and
joy. Adam communicated his sinful nature to us, so Christ does communicate his
divine nature unto us, with those fruits and effects of the spirit, which are
contrary to the nature of the old man; Uniting us unto himself, and becoming
a principle of life to us and in us. And as one says of generation, that it
does not consist in the production of a new form, but in the union of the form
to the matter. (Generatio non consistit in prodactione sed unitione formae, cum
materia) So spiritual regeneration is not by the production of a new form, but
by the union of the form to the matter. By uniting Christ, who is as the form
to man who is the matter of the new creature. And as we say that the
generation of one thing is the corruption or destruction of another thing; so
in spiritual regeneration the old man is destroyed, Gal. 5.24. They that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. O how is the
man placed in the uppermost room of honor, and highest seat of happiness,
who is spiritually acquainted with this truth. He overcommeth the world by
believing that Jesus is the Son of God, 1 John 5.1. He admireth the
inexpressible love of God, by which be is become the Son of God, 1 John 3.1.
He is borne to possess the unsearcheable riches of Gods grace. He is born to
inherit large possessions, and a golrious inheritance, being joint heir with
Christ, To. 8.17. He is bigher by his birth, then the Sons of Kings and
Emperors. Christ and he are of one, and therefore he is not ashamed to call him
Brother, Heb. 2.11. And now he begins to resolve to live like himself, to
live answerable to his condition of glory and honor, unto which God of his
grace has brought him. He will live as one who has hopes full of immortality.
He will put on Christ in his conversation, as he has put him on in his free
justification. A King will not stoop to the earth to take up farthings, as a
beggar will, nor meddle with such mean businesses and employments, in which men
of mean condition do exercise themselves. So he will not stoop in spirit to
the love of the things of the world, which are but as a farthing to the things
of glory and eternity. He will not follow worldly business, as though he had
no other employment. His conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3. He is one of the
Chosen generation, and royal Priesthood, boly Nation, and peculiar People, and
therefore is resolved to show forth the praises of him who has called him out
of darkness, into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. from impurity to
holiness, from a disgraceful and reproachful condition, to honor and
favor; from vassalage to a kingdom; from fear of death, to assurance of
eternal life; from hell to heaven; from horror of conscience, to joy in
believing; from a dunghill, to a Throne; from everlasting wrath, to
never-ending glory, and immortality. I might speak more fully of this,
concerning which no man can speak sufficiently. But my intention was not to speak
of this, but rather of that which is principally intended in the words, to show
you the sinlesse condition of the man which is borne of God. And therefore give
me leave, to leave this point, that I may briefly open the words which follow
in the Text, that so I may draw the marrow and substance of them into a short
conclusion, the illustration, confirmation, and amplification of which, by the
grace of God shall be the subject of my ensuing discourse. I do find that the
godly-learned do not agree in their expositions of these words. I shall
therefore acquaint you with their several expositions, and shall enlarge my
thoughts in the amplifying of that which I do apprehend in truth, to be the
meaning of the Apostle in these words.

First, Some say that he cannot commit sin. That is (Non potest operam dare
peccato.) He cannot make sin his work, trade, or employment, and this is a
truth. The rode of profaneness and wilful sinning, has never been the way in
the which the Saints have walked. Their path is the path of purity and
uprightness. But this does not seem to be the meaning of the Spirit in this
place. For the Apostle does not only say, that he cannot commit sin; but he
cannot sin.

Secondly, Others say, that he cannot commit sin, as a servant of sin. As
though our Saviors words were a sufficient exposition of these, Joh. 8.34.
Whosoever commits sin, is a servant of sin. ((...)) He does not do sin as
his work, as a servant does work by the appointment and commandment of his
Master. I question not the truth of this. Sin shall not have dominion, where
Christ is Lord and Master in the soul. He takes our souls in unto himself
by conquest, and will not suffer those who commanded us before his conquest to
rule over us, now he has subdued them. As a conquering King will not suffer
conquered Rebels to command his Subjects. But the Apostle does not seem to
drive only at this, because as it has been observed, he says afterward, that
he cannot sin.

Thirdly, Some say that he cannot sin, because he cannot commit the
unpardonable sin. And these go as far as the end of the Epistle, for an
exposition, Chap. 5.17.18. All iniquity is sin, and there is a sin not unto
death. We know that whosoever is borne of God sins not, But he that is
borne of God keeps himself and the wicked one touches him not. Thus they
affirm that he sins not, because he sins not unto death. This which
they say is likewise an undeniable truth in it self: but not all, that the
Apostle intends in these words. Which will evidently appear if we look
seriously upon the precedent words. Where the Apostle does set down the
Antithesis and opposition, between the man borne of God, and the natural man.
And does make this the characteristical difference between the man borne of
God, and the man of the Devil, verse. 6, 7, 8. That the one does sin, and the
other does not sin. Every one that abides in him sins not; and he that
sins has not known him, or seen him. And as no man will say that the
difference in this place between the carnal and spiritual man is this. That
the one does not commit the unpardonable sin, and the other does. For then
this absurdity will necessarily follow, that every carnal man does commit the
unpardonable sin. For the Apostle says, that every carnal man is of the
Devil, and sins, (that is, against the holy Ghost, if we take their
exposition.) So no man may affirm that this is the meaning of these words
(which are laid down in way of opposition to the precedent) that he that
commits not sin, does not commit the unpardonable sin, for then this
absurdity will follow that every man who commits not the unpardonable sin,
is born of God. And this is evident by the subsequent words, where he says,
verse. 10. That in this the children of God, and the children of the Devil are
manifessed. To wit, that the one does not commit sin, and the other does commit
sin. Take the words according to their exposition, and this is the sense of
them. In this the Saihts and carnal men are distinguished, that the Saints do
not commit the unpardonable sin, and that all carnal men do commit the
unpardonable sin. Of the absurdity of which tenet, contrariety to Scripture and
daily experience. I leave the spiritual man a judge.

4. Others say that he sins not. That is in his justified state and
condition he sins not. Because he is free from sin, and the condemnation of
the Law. And this is a truth likewise full of comfort and sweetness. That the
believer or man borne of God does not sin in reference to justification. Their
meaning is, that there is no sin from which a believer is not justified. But
the Apostle does not speak only of this, for he speaks of his working of
righteousness by love, in this place, and through the whole Epistle, as well
as of believing. And of such works which Saints are to do, by which they may
be justified before men; as these men do grant themselves, and therefore this
is not to be taken so strictly in reference to our justification through faith
only. As these words do declare it sufficiently. Every one that works not
righteousness, is not of God, and he that loves not his brother, verse. 10.

Does he pray for such, whom he thought were no where to be found, or for all
true Saints whom he did know did love the Lord Jesus in corruption.

Reply. If they be considered as they ought to be done, so they are not evil:
but as they be done by us. So the holy Ghost is not afraid to call them
menstruous rags, even our very righteousness, not our old man only, Isa. 64.6.
from the better part. And therefore the Scripture does call us Saints, or holy
men, Ephesians. 1. (...) because we are spiritually regenerated or made new
creatures, though much of the flesh does remain in the best of us. And this I
do apprehend to be the meaning of God in this place. So Cajetan upon the
words: He does (says he) understand it formally, that is in as much as he is
borne of God; for our new creation from God does not suffer us to sin.
(Intelligit formaliter, hoc est, quatenus ex Deo natus. Nativitas enim ex Deo
non dat peccare.) So likewise that faithful Martyr Tyndall speaks in the
opening of these words. God and the Devil are two contrary Fathers, two
contrary fountains, two contrary causes; the one of all goodness, the other
of all evil. And they that do evil are borne of the Devil, and are first
evil by that birth, before they do evil. And on the other side, they that
do good, are first borne of God, and receive of his nature and seed, and by
the reason of that nature and seed, are first good, before they do good by the
same rule. And Christ who is contrary to the Devil, came to destroy the works
of the Devil in us, and to give us a new birth, a new nature, and to sow new
seed in us, that we should by reason of that birth sin no more. And he has a
parallel place to this in the same exposition of this Epistle. As there is no
sin (says he) in Christ the stock, so can there be none in the quick members
that live and grow in him by faith. Calvin in his instruction against the
Libertines, bringing in this place of John as an argument of theirs, to prove
that they do never sin, does answer them by this exposition of the words.
John's words do signify nothing else but this; That a man as far as he is
regenerated of God, cannot sin. (Johannis verba nihil aliud significant, quam
hominem, quatenus regeneratus est a Deo, non peccare.) I might multiply
Authors, speaking sometimes to this purpose: but for my part I do not approve
this way of Preaching, or frequent quoting of Authors in Sermons (yet sometimes
I am necessitated unto it: and for the hardness of hearts of hearers, do
think that something may be done in this way for the gaining of them in unto
truth. As Amesius does deliver his judgment in his cases of conscience. But
secondly, I must profess ingenuously, that most men whom I might bring in, to
speak to this truth, do seem to contradict in other places of their
writings, what they have delivered concerning this truth. And therefore I shall
only bring Scripture to prove what I do desire to defend for the truth of God,
knowing that Scripture is sufficient of it self for the confirmation of truth.
And that the judgments and opinions of all the learned men that ever were, or
shall be, are nothing at all without it. As David said of the sword of Goliath,
1 Samuel 21.9. There is none like that. So no sword or bow of men is like unto
the Scripture, by which error is hewn down, and truth exalted. Wherefore I
shall give you more fully my plain and naked meaning in this point, and then
shall show you what Scripture will come in, to bear witness to the truth
which I have received from the Lord.

First, We are to take notice, that man in Scripture is considered physically,
as he has a rational spirit joined to an humane body. And when we thus speak
of man, we do acknowledge that every man sins, Lot, David, Peter, Paul,
and the like; according to that of James, Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend
all.

Secondly, We may look upon man theologically. And if we thus consider him,
(...) shall find that in a spiritual sense; every Christian man has two men
in him, a new man, and and an old man: and these two of contrary natures and
operations. And as sometimes we speak of a man as having two physical beings
in him, and do attribute unto him what is proper to his corporal and
spiritual part, as when we say a man hears, sees, walks, understands,
and the like, And then again, do distinguish these two, attributing to the
body what is proper to the body, and to the soul what is proper to the soul.
So sometimes the Scripture does speak of man as having two contrary natures, and
then does again attribute that to the new or divine nature, which is proper
unto that, and that unto the sinful and fleshly nature which is proper unto
it. In the old and unregenerated nature there is nothing but sin, and the seed
and spawn of all filthiness and uncleanness. And in the regenerated part or
new man, there is nothing but purity and holiness. In this nature he does not
sin, nor cannot sin, as he cannot do good in the other nature. So that I
apprehend that the man borne of God is not sinful in his nature, or in any of
his actings, workings, or operations. He is light in his understanding, holy
in his will, pure in his thoughts, sanctified in his affections. It is well
observed by Bullinger, That God does allude to the nature o^ seed; the nature
of which is retained by those things which spring out of it. (Alludit ad
seminis naturam, quam ea referunt, quae ex eo nascuntur.) The seed being holy,
that which arises from it is likewise holy, as our Savior does inform us,
John 3.6. That which is borne of theflesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of
the spirit i^ spirit. Not that the newborn man is wholly turned into the
eternal spirit, and is nothing else but the spirit, as some deluded, and
deluding soiries have affirmed: but the abstract is taken for the concrete,
which manner of speech is very frequent in Scripture. That which is borne of
the Spirit, is said to be spirit, because it is made spiritual by the presence
of the holy Spirit in it.

Having acquainted you with my meaning, and given you the spiritual
interpretation of the words. I shall draw the marrow and substance of the
particulars which I named, into one Conclusion, which I shall endeavor to make
good by spiritual arguments which I shall draw from Scripture and spiritual
reason. The conclusion is this.

The spiritual man, or the man born of God, in his spiritual and godly nature,
motions, and actings toward God in Christ, does not, nor cannot sin.

Arg. 1. His seed is holy in him, therefore his fruit is holy; this is the
argument of the Apostle. His seed abides in him, and therefore he cannot sin.
Christ is the seed in us, 1 Pet. 1.23. Every true Christian can say with Paul,
Gal. 2.20. That Christ lives in him; and Christ in us does not suffer us to
live sinfully, but makes us to live holily, he becoming the principle of an
holy life and sanctification in us. A Christian is powerfully acted by an holy
principle, and therefore his actings are holy. Christ is a pure fountain of
holiness in us, as well to fill our souls with the streams of holiness by
the Spirit, as to wash away the uncleaness of our souls in our Justification.
And this fountain cannot send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter,
Jam. 3.11. The streams do retain the pure nature of the fountain from whence
they flow.

( Reader, I must inform thee, that since I Preached this Sermon, I received
objections from my learned friend Mr. R. L. against my arguments, which I
thought good to print with my Arguments.)

Ob. Against this argument this is objected. The argument from the seed to the
fruit will not follow, unless the soil be also answerable, otherwise sorry
fruit may come from good seed.

Answ. As there is good seed, so there is a good soil, the spiritual heart,
and therefore the argument will follow. This I prove, Ezekiel. 36.26, A new heart
will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away
the stony heart out of your flesh, and will give you an heart of flesh. And I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments, and do them. The new heart of flesh is a good
soil. And because God does promise his Spirit, and a new heart, therefore see
what shall follow? the good fruit spoken of: We shall keep his judgments, and
do them.

Arg. 2. God cannot be the Author and worker of that which is sin: but God does
profess himself to be the Author of good works wrought in the Saints, and
therefore these works are not sin, Isa. 26.12. The Saints do profes that God
has wrought all their works in them. And this likewise is the argument of the
Apostle, who does prove that doing of evil is sin, because it is of the
Devil; and that working of righteousness is good, because it is of God.

Object. These things are not sin in their whole moral nature: but (per
accidens) by accident through the defect of some circumstance.

Answ. Every moral action commanded or forbidden of God, is either good or
evil; If these are good, and no sin, then I have what I contend for; If
evil, acquit God from being the author of evil, who does profess himself to
be the Author of these things, in opposition to Satan, and his works. If you
say that they are neither good nor evil, or both good and evil, and prove it
by Scipture, I shall hearken unto you: But you say they are sin by accident;
and if they are so by accident, they are sin, and still you make God the Author
of sin; but I affirm that they are neither sin in their nature, nor by
accident, but good, and therefore until you prove what you say, I do not see
but that my argument is unshaken by this objection.

Object. 2. Faith and love in their whole moral abstract nature are not sin,
but considered in the Concrete, and acted by us.

Answ. The Apostle does speak of them in the Concrete as acted by us, and does
bid us try our selves by our faith, love, and working of righteousness, and
says, verse. 19. That hereby we assure our selves before God, therefore this
distinction is of no validity in this place, though some think that it will
answer all our arguments.

Argu. 3. The old man, and the new man are distinguished by their contrary
natures and operations. But if the new man were sinful, and his operations
sinful. The new man would be confounded with the old man, who is sinful in
himself and his operations: but this is contrary to Scripture. The old man is
corrupt according to deceitful lusts: but the new man after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.22.24. And speaking of these in the
Concrete, as in us, Ephesians. 5.8, 9. he says to them; Ye were sometimes darkness:
but now are ye light in the Lord, walk as children of the light. For the fruit
of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth.

Argu. 4. Those works which are commended by Jesus Christ for good works, are
good works: but the works of the Saints are commended for good works,
therefore they are good, Revel. 2.2. Our Savior says, that he knows the
works of the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, and his labor and patience; that
is, he approves or commends his works, and so Rev. 3.8. It would be a
disparagement to the judgment of Christ to commend sin or sinful works, for
good works: And therefore I conclude, that they were good works. And by
consequence that the works which are wrought by a man borne of God, are good
works.

Obj. They were washed from their pollution in the blood of the Lamb.

Answ. When we speak of the new man and his works, we look not upon him or his
works, but in Jesus Christ. And thus he is washed from all the sins of the
flesh, and the works of God in us are well pleasing unto God the worker,
through Jesus Christ, through whom he did work them in us.

Arg. 5. Christ does not present that which is sin or sinful to the Father
to be accepted: but he presents our works, 1 Pet. 2.5. We offer up
spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. If Christ did present
any work that were sinful, he might present our sinful works. It is evident
therefore, that there is something which is good which is presented, as well as
something in us which is sinful, which is forgiven. (Malum ex quolibet
defectu.) The less defect does make a thing evil; and if there be such a
defect in the work of the man who is born of God to make it sin and evil; what
reason can any man give from Scripture, why every sin should not be presented
and accepted as well as those sins which they call good works.

Arg. 6. The Scripture calls the works of the man born of God neither sinful
or sin: but works of righteousness. Faith is called righteousness, Romans 4.
and Romans 5. and the last. Paul calls the sincerity which was in him, speaking
of it in the Concrete, godly sincerity, 2 Cor. 1.12. Paul prays that grace
may be with all them who love the Lord Jesus in corruption ((...))

Does he pray for such, whom he thought were no where to be found, or for all
true Saints whom he did know did love the Lord Jesus in incorruption.

Reply. If they be considered as they ought to be done, so they are not evil:
but as they be done by us; so the holy Ghost is not afraid to call them
menstruous rags, even our very righteousness, not our old man only, Isa. 64.6.

Answ. The Prophet does not speak here of the righteousness of a man underthe
Covenant of grace, considered under that Covenant. For in the precedent verse,
he does acknowledge that the righteousness of such a man is not as a
menstruous ragge. Thou meetest him that rejoyeth, and works righteousness.
But he speaks of men as looked upon under the old Covenant, and of their
works as done under, and to be judged by that Covenant which appears by the
following words. Our iniquities like the wind have taken us away. And there is
none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee.
For thou have hid thy face from us, and we are consumed because of our
iniquities. We must not judge of this truth by expressions which holy men have
made use of in confessing the sins of the whole nation of the Jews, in the
language of the Jewish national Covenant: but by those passages of Scripture
in which God does speak of a man as under the Covenant of grace, with his
works wrought by the spirit of grace.

7 Arg. God does remember the works of his Saints, Heb. 6.10. God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love, says the Apostle. He will
remember the good works of men borne of God, at the great day of judgment. The
good works of some are manifest beforehand, and they that are otherwise
cannot be hid, 1 Timothy 5.15. They cannot for ever be hid, because God will make
mention of them at that day. But he has engaged himself by oath, to remember
our sins and sinful actions, Hebr. 8. And therefore the works of the
spiritual man are not sin or sinful.

Arg. 8. There is no law against the works of a spiritual man, or the fruits
of the spirit of grace; and therefore they are not sin, because where there is
no law, there is no transgression. But there is no law against these. This is
plain by that passage of the Apostle, Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the spirit is
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance; against such there is no law.

Object. They are here considered as they are precisely the fruits of the
spirit, and as they ought to be done by us, and so they are no sins: but
consider them as acted by us, even with the spirits assistance, and so they are
defective and sinful.

Answ. The Apostle does not speak of the fruits of the spirit, as Tully of his
Orator, Plato of his Commonwealth, and Moor of his Utopia, as of things no
where to be found. But he speaks of the spirit as in us, and the fruits of it
as in us. And does plainly tell us, that if we are led by the spirit, we are
not under the law; and that there is no law against the fruits of the spirit.
But I shall have occasion hereafter to speak more fully of some places where
the Apostles and servants of God, do speak plainly of these works as done in
us, that so I may break the neck of this distinction, which is made as a
Catholicon, or salve for every sore.

Arg. 9. God does give a testimony concerning his Saints, that they are
righteous and holy, which is spoken in reference to their spiritual nature and
actings; and therefore they are righteous and holy. The judgment of God is
according to truth, he being the God of truth. Does not God give this
testimony of Job, Job 1.1. That he was a perfect man, and upright, one that
feared God, and eschewed evil. And though man may oppose this, yet it seems
by Gods speech to Satan, that the Devili could not contradict it, Job 2.3. And
the Lord said unto Satan, have thou considered my servant Job, that there is
none like him in the earth, a perfect man, and upright, one that fears God,
and escheweth evil. Did any thing which was sin or sinful procure this
honorable title to David, that he was a man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel
13.14? Does not the Scripture of truth inform us concerning Zacharias, and
Elizabeth his wife, that they were both righteous before God, walking in all
the Commandments of God blameless, Luke 1.6? They did not only walk in the
great Commandment of God concerning faith for Justification: but in all the
Ordinances and Commandments of God. Is not Lot called a just and righteous
man, who was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet. 2.7? And
was his sinful soul vexed with their evil deeds? or his righteous soul?
speak in the language of Gods Word, and ye must acknowledge that it was his
righteous soul, verse. 8. God is not like unto some indulgent parents, who by
their fond indulgency do account that to be a virtue, which is the fault of
their children, and them to be virtuous who are vile. God calls nothing
righteousness, which is sin or sinful. Nor those to be perfect and upright,
which are not so indeed; and therefore seeing God does call his children
righteous, holy, and perfect; we may not be afraid to call them so, unless
we will be afraid to follow his judgment.

Object. They were righteous before God by Justification, and before men by
holy walking.

Ans. We deny not their justification before God by faith: but withal we
affirm that they were righteous before him, by their holy walkings, As these
places do sufficiently prove with others, which we shall hereafter speak of.
Let us not delude ous souls to think that righteousness and sanctification is
to the eye of men only. The purest sanctification of a Saint is not so visible
to men as unto God. Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is
this, to visit the fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and to keep
himself unspotted from the world; which will be further manifested by our next
argument.

Arg. 10. Almighty God is a God of pure eyes, who cannot behold any iniquity,
any sinful thing, or sin with an eye of approbation. But this God, who cannot
approve what is sin, and sinful; this God approves and professes that he is
well pleased with the performances of his Saints: therefore the performance of
the Saints cannot be sin, or sinful. The Apostle in Philip. 4.18. Professes
that the work of the Philippians in sending to relieve his wants, was an odor
of asweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God. God has pure
eyes, and pure nostrils, and therefore if it had been sin, or sinful, it could
not have pleased his eye, nor have been an odor of a sweet smell unto his
nostrills.

Object. They are so, but not in their own nature.

Answ. If they be not so in their own nature, they are filthy and odious in
their own nature, and yet accepted by grace. If one thing which is filthy and
odious in its own nature be accepted, why should not other things which are
filthy and odious in their own nature be accepted for good works. If this can
be made good, Whoredom and Adultery will prove good works; which has been
asserted by some who have said that the filthiness of whoredom being done
away, the action is well-pleasing to Almighty God as well as any good work.

Arg. 11. One end and intention of God in electing of us, was, that he might
make us holy, that he might make us good trees to bring forth good fruit.
Though God does not elect us because we do believe, or because we do love;
yet he has elected us that we may believe, and that we may love. So that we
frustrate one end that God has in electing us, if we do not grant that God
gives us a new nature, and new hearts. According to that of the Apostle, 2
These. 2 13. We are chosen unto salvation through sanctification of the Spirit,
and belief of the truth. And in Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him, that we
should be holy, and without blame before him in love.

Object. We do apprehend our election imperfectly, which is the cause of the
sinfulness of our works.

Answ. By reason of that which is in the flesh, we cannot so perfectly see our
election, as we shall do hereafter: Yet in the spirit for the present we do
so fully apprehend it, that by Gods grace in the apprehension of it, we are
made unblameable, and holy before him in love, which is all that I contend for.
I may add this, that if God had chosen us to love, joy, sanctification, and
the like, which are sin, and sinful, that then he had chosen us to sin, or to
something sinful; which conceit in my apprehension does carry such an
absurdity in the face of it, that it needs not a Confutation.

Object. They are not sin in their moral nature, as they ought to be done, but
they are so as done by us.

Answ. God has not chosen us unto them as they are considered only in his
command. But he has chosen us unto them, as they are to be acted and done by
us, as it is plain by the words of the Text, and therefore this objection has
no strength in it to weaken our argument.

Arg. 12. If the new creature were sinful, and his works sinful or sin, it
would nullify Gods intention in our Justification, who does justify us when
we are unholy, that he may make us holy, Ephesians. 2.10. We are his workmanship
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained that
we should walk in them. We are not ordained to walk in any thing which is
sin or sinful; but to walk in good works. We are redeemed from sin, that we
might be purified unto himself a peculiar people. And grace teaches us to
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; not sinfully, but
righteously. God makes us good trees by justification, and then enables us to
bring forth good fruit. There must be a root before there can be fruit: So God
gives us a root, or seed of holiness, before we can bring forth holy fruit,
and righteous actions. And when the good seed is sown in good ground, it cannot
but bring forth good fruit, Mat. 13.23. which place may give more light for the
clearing of that objection, where it was said, that there could not be good
fruit, though the seed were good, because the ground is not good.

Arg. 13. God does free us from the law of works, and does bring us under the
covenant of grace, that we may by grace be enabled to do those works, which we
are not able to do by virtue of moral commands. The covenant of grace and
Gospel-promises should be as ineffectuall for sanctification as the law, if all
that were wrought in us under that covenant were sin or sinful. And therefore
it will follow that a man under grace has a purity of sanctification in him.
God brings us from Moses who was the Lawgiver, and delivers us from the
Covenant of works in giving us to Jesus Christ who is the giver of grace, that
he may make us holy in a gracious life and conversation.

The Apostle sets this forth unto us, Romans 7.6. But now we are delivered from
the law, that being dead wherein we were held: that we should serve in newness
of spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the letter. We are freed from the service
of God in the law of works (under which we serve as slaves till we be brought
to Christ,) that we may serve as sons in obedience to all moral commands,
under the sweet, gracious, and glorious government of the Lord Jesus Christ,
who is as well a Lawgiver, Isa. 33.22. to write his laws of faith and love in
our hearts, Hebr. 8. As a Savior to save us from our sins. And to cut off all
objections against this argument, we may take notice, that the fruits of the
spirit are not only called good and holy, as they are in the promise or
command: but they are good and holy, and called fruits of righteousness, as
they are wrought in us and by us, with the omnipotent help and assistance of
the holy Spirit. We are called the trees of righteousness, Isa. 61.3. and
fear and love are fruits of righteousness as wrought in us, Jer. 31. Hebr. 8.

The 14th Argument may be drawn from the oath of God. If God should not
perform this for the Saints, God should be perjured (which is blasphemy to
speak.) The oath of God binds him. God in his word (which is the character of
his mind) has discovered his hatred of perjury and false swearing: we cannot
think that God who hates perjury in others, should forswear himself: but we
have not only the promise, but the oath of God for this; so that unless we
will say that God for-sweares himself, we must subscribe to this truth, to
wit, that God gives his Saints his Spirit, and in the Spirit, holiness and
righteousness. I will give you a place for this, Lu. 1.73, 74. The oath which
he swear to our Father Abraham. What has he sworn? That he would grant unto
us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies; here is our
Justification; we are delivered out of the hands of sin, death, and the Devil.
But is this all? No, He has delivered us out of the hands of our enemies, that
we might serve him without fear, that is, without slavish fear, in holiness
and righteousness before him all the days of our life.

Some acknowledge that the people of God shall live holily and righteously, to
menward, as they speak: but that the righteousness of sanctification is not
to Godward.

This place overthrowes this distinction; he says not that we shall walk
holily and righteously before men only, as hypocrites may: but he says that we
shall serve in holiness and righteousness before him. We shall not do such
works which Luther and others have called vices (vitia) affirming that all the
works of the regenerated man are vices, nor such works which are sinful,
(vitiata) as some others speak: but such works which God who cannot lie, calls
righteous works, nay righteousness in the abstract; we shall serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness: not only in the sight of men: for
oft-times they look on good works, as though they were bad, but good in the
sight of God; they come from a sweet fountain, therefore the water cannot be
bitter, or brackish, from the fountain of his own Spirit in his Saints. If
the works of the Saints were nothing but sin or sinful, how could the Oath of
God be fulfilled that they shall serve him in holiness and righteousness all
the days of our life?

Object. Before him in this place, as in other places, does mean under his
protection, Genesis 17.1.

Answ. Though it may be granted that sometimes before him, may signify under
his protection; yet it does not appear that it should be the meaning of the
holy Ghost in this place. But he does rather inform us how Saints do approve
themselves before God by sanctification. As Paul labored in godly sincerity,
to have his conscience void of offense toward God and toward men. According
to that speech of Hezekiah, Isa. 38.3. Remember O Lord, how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight. But suppose we should grant you this, it does still stand
true, that our service is in holiness and righteousness. And can any man be
so blind, to think that a man shall serve in righteousness under Gods
protection, and that he should not see the righteousness which is wrought
under his protection? and if it be righteousness which he sees, then it is
righteousness before him, or in his sight.

Arg. 15. To deny the purity of the man born of God, is to deny one end for
which Christ dyed; for Christ dyed to bring us to be partakers of a pure and
Divine nature; in which pure nature we are to live, move, and act holily. The
place by which I shall confirm this, is in Heb. 9.14. The blood of Christ, who
through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, shall purge
our consciences from dead works to serve the living God. We are therefore
washed from sin in our Justification, that we may serve God by Sanctification.
And what spiritual man will call that the service of God, which is sin or
sinful? For to do that which is sin or sinful, is to do the Devils service,
or else I am to learn that which we need not be taught, to wit, what it is to
do the Devils service.

Arg. 16. The resurrection of Christ does teach spiritual men to act purely in
their new nature to the glory of their Father, Romans 6.4. As Christ was raised
from the dead by the glory of the Father; so we should walk in newness of
life. To walk in newness of life, is it to walk in the oldnesse of that which
is sin or sinful? let any Spiritual man judge.

Arg. 17. We may draw another argument from the Kingly office of Christ. He as
a King has a command over his Subjects: but he has not the command over us,
when we do that which is sin or sinful, and therefore we do something good
as his Subjects in obedience to his commands (bona been.) Good things must be
done well. And therefore Christ does not only enable us to do that which is
righteous, but he does enable us to do it righteously. Why is Christ King,
but that we should live under his commands? Why are we his subjects, why are we
his servants, but because we are under his commands, and under his laws? You
know; the Jews said they would not have Christ to be their King: but the voice
of every Christian is to cry up Christ, to proclaim him King, and to own him
only as their Ruler. And Christ being King, rules and reigns in the hearts of
his people by laws and commandments, and precious statutes, worthy of such a
King.

Now Christ gives us not a law, as Moses gave a law, that was grievous to those
that heard it: but Christ gives a law of love, a law of sweetness, by which
he rules in the midst of his enemies in our hearts; what is in the flesh in
us, is an enemy to Jesus Christ: but Christ Jesus sitting upon his Throne as
King, in our renewed, regenerated, and enlightened spirit, rules in the midst of
our sins his enemies which oppose him.

Christ is not such a King as other Kings; other Kings make laws, and add
penalties to their laws for those that break them: but they have no power to
enable their Subjects to keep them. But here is the privilege and prerogative
of our King; when Christ makes laws, he does not only give us laws, and bid
us keep them: but he has power in himself by which he enableth us to do that
which he commands us to do. If Christ should command us to love, and should
not enable us to do that which he commands, he should be such a Lawgiver as
Moses, that gave a Law, but gave no power to do it: But Christ is not such a
Lawgiver as Moses. As he is not a rigid Lawgiver, to bid Saints do it upon
penalty of damnation, or to work for life, and salvation; so neither is he
like Moses, who could give them no power: but there is a power and strength
goes with Christ's commands, to enable us to do what Christ the King commands.

Therefore if any of you give Christ the glory of his grace by believing that
he has abolished all your sins by his death, be not dismayed at the sight of
your corruptions. Fight the good fight of faith. Greater is he that is in you,
than he that is in the world. Christ that commands you to obey his Father, will
enable you to obey his Father. Christ reigns in the hearts of his people, not
only by making known to them the covenant of his own grace, but by supplying
them with strength to do his will. Lord give what thou command said one,
and command what thou will. Christ commands us what to do, and gives us power
to do that which he commands. Such a King is Christ, that frees his people not
only from the condemnation of sin, but from the power and dominion of sin in
their spirits, lives, and conversations. Blessed be God (says the Apostle)
that ye were the servants of sin. Are they so still, now they are under grace?
No, but being made free from sin, ye are the servants of righteousness? sin
shall not have dominion over you; why? ye have a new King; ye are under grace,
ye are under King Jesus.

If a Tyrant should tyrannize over Subjects, and depose their lawful King; if
this King afterward should overthrow this Tyrant, and deliver his Subjects
from tyranny and bondage, by overcomming the Tyrant, would he suffer this
Tyrant to tyrannize over them, or his people to be under the laws of the
Tyrant? We were under Satan the Tyrant, under his laws and commands, under the
law of sin and concupiscence: but Christ comes, and overcomes the Tyrant that
ruled tyrannically in our hearts; and will he suffer that Tyrant still to rule
us by those commands, which he gave us when we were in bondage to him? No, we
shall not be under the bondage of the flesh, if we understand the liberty of
grace, and of the Spirit. The Apostle says, that we do not live, nor eat,
nor drink, nor do any shing to our selves, because Christ dyed, and rose and
revived, that he might be Lord of quick and dead, Romans 14.8, 9. Christ dyed,
and rose, that he might be Lord and King, and reign, and set up his Scepter of
holiness in the hearts of his people.

This was prophesied in Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of
thy power. When Christ as King comes with power, his people shall be willing.
Christ bids them believe, and they believe, he bids them love, and they do
love; they run through fire and water, they lay down their honors and riches
at his feet, and love not their lives unto the death.

Object. The enabling of Christ in working is not of the same extent with his
command.

Answ. In the spiritual and regenerate part, the power of Christ is as large
as his command. The failing is not from the new, but the old man. The whole
man or person is under the command: so that a man, yea, every man does sin,
because he does not do in his person as he is a man, what is commanded. Charge
the fault where it is to be charged upon the flesh, which is the cause of a
man's sin, and then look upon grace which has abolished sin, and you shall
find the new man conformable to the will of God, and the man good and holy in
part, to wit, in his regenerated part. It is further objected, that Christ
bids us to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,
which no man does. It is granted, and therefore we deny not, but that every man
sins, if we take him physically. But as far as we are in the Spirit, we
are cleansed from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; so that the new man does
fulfill it, and Christ does reign in him, though the flesh prove a Traitor, and
rebellious against his commands.

Arg. 18. Another argument may be brought from the consideration of the Image
of Christ. If this were true, that all the works of the Saints were in their
formalitie sin; this would follow, that the Image of Jesus Christ were an
Image of unholinesse, and sin. I ground my argument upon that place of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as by
the Spirit of the Lord. Here the Apostle shows that the Saints are changed
into the Image of Christ. Now if there were nothing but sin and unholinesse and
sinfulness in those who are looked upon as spiritual (as some conceive) it
will follow that the Image of Christ into which they are changed, must be an
image of unholinesse. If my love be unholinesse, I am changed to that image of
love which is in Christ, and so it would follow, that the Image of Christ does
consist in unholinesse.

Object. If there be perfect sanctification in the new man, then we may be
justified by it.

Answ. I deny that, it does not follow. We shall have perfect sanctification at
the resurrection; and yet you will not say, that we shall be acquitted from our
sins by it, which we have committed upon earth: but by the grace of God in
the blood of Christ.

2. We are justified before sanctification, and therefore it will not follow
that we are justified by it. Because that is done before the other is wrought
in us.

3. That a man may be justified by his sanctification. It is necessary that a
man should be so wholly sanctified, that there should be no sin in the man. Our
good works will not make satisfaction for our bad works. A Traitor for an act
of treason might be condemned by his Prince, though he has done him much good
service. If a man would seek justification by the law, who is sanctified in
part, the law would condemn him for his sin, in his unregenerated part, taking
no notice of any sufficiency in his sanctification, to free him from
condemnation for his sin in the unregenerated part.

Arg. 19. This opinion that the good works of the justified man are sin, or
sinful, do make diverse places of Scripture irreconcilable. Men shall never be
well able to reconcile many places of Scripture who swallow this as a truth;
that whatsoever works are now done in the Saints, are nothing but sin, or
sinful. For instance in one place, we are bound to disclaim our works, and to
account all our righteousnesses as filthy rags, to believe in him that
justifies the ungodly; And in another place we are said to be redeemed from
all iniquity, that we might be zealous of good works, Tit. 2. And we are the
work-manship of God created in Christ Jesus to good works, Ephesians. 2. By what I
have delivered, they are easily reconcilable. To wit, by distinguishing, as
the Scripture does concerning good works thus. That all the works of man under
the Law, are but splendid and shining sins: and that the spiritual works of a
spiritual man, are good, and not sin or sinful in their nature. Not that the
Scripture makes these good works that flow from the spiritual man, the cause,
or the matter of our justification: but the fruits of the Spirit, and the
consequents of our justification. It is a speech of Luthers, worthy to be
written in letters of gold, that the whole world, with all the riches of it,
are of no worth in comparison of good works flowing from faith, and wrought by
the Spirit of God in the hearts of his people. Which how it can be made good, I
know not, if that be true, which he and some other Protestant Writers affirm,
that (Omne bonum secundum judicium dei est mortale peccatum) every good work
of a regenerate man according to the judgment of God is a mortal sin. That
which is morally evil, is not so good as any thing which is not morally evil.
That being the greatest evil which is morally evil.

I have known some professors of the Gospel who have fallen to Familisme and
Atheistical opinions: and being asked why they did leave the Gospel? they have
answered, that they could never reconcile the Scriptures concerning works, to
other places, while they were professors of the Gospel. Their meaning is, while
they were professor upon these principles, by which they were taught to look
upon the works of the spirit in them as sin, and sinful. That which is
frequently afferted by some (Mr. Eatoon Honycomb and others) that they are good
to men-ward, will not make up the breach. The Apostle Peter speaking of a meek
and quiet spirit, which is the ornament of the hidden man of the heart, says,
that it is of great price in the sight of God, 1 Pet. 3.4. The Apostle speaking
of his fincerity in preaching the Gospel, is not afraid to bring it into the
sight of God, 2 Cor. 2.17. And John says, 1 John 3.22. That whatsoever we ask
we receive of him, because we keep his Commandments, and do those things
which are pleasing in his sight. And that he does not mean believing only, is
plain by the next verse, where he says, That this is his Commandment, that
we believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another. And to
stop the mouth of the objection which is usually brought against this truth, to
wit, that he speaks of doing as in Gods precept, or command, and not as done
by us. He says, that we receive what we ask, because we do what is pleasing
in his sight. I must profess to the glory of God, that this distinction has
given me a great light in the understanding of the Scripture. And by this I am
informed, that I am justified without holiness or sanctification, and yet that
without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.

Arg. 20. This opinion that the good works of a man born of God are sin, or
sinful, does overthrow the distinction which is warranted by many thousand
places of Scripture between good works and bad works, and does draw a curse
upon the doer of it. Can evil be good, or good evil? Woe unto them that call
evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, Isa. 5.20. What
else do they do, who plainley aver that every good work is evil?

Object. Do we deny the difference between white and black, because we say
that in most white bodies, there is a mixture of some blackness with the
whiteness, etc.

Answ. If it could be proved that there were a mixture of that which is of the
spirit, and that which is of the flesh, that that which is spiritual should be
made fleshly by it: there would seem to be some strength in this objection.
But until that such a mixture be proved by plain Scriptures, we shall think
it sufficient to affirm that such similitudes which have not their foundation
upon a principle of truth, do prove nothing.

Arg. 21. It takes away the difference between a sanctified and unsanctified
man, which is a distinction which does stand firm upon the basis of the
Scripture of truth. The Apostle does plainly lay down this distinction, 1 Cor.
6.11. Where he informs us of the condition of the Corinthians, before
conversion, to wit, that they were thieves, adulteresses, and the like, such
were some of you; and then sets forth their blessed condition after
conversion. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified. And does second this
truth with his own experience, acknowleding that there was a real change
wrought in himself after conversion by sanctification, 1 Timothy 1. I was (says
he) a persecuter, a blasphemer, injurious: but the grace of our Lord was
exceeding abundant with (...) love, which is in Christ Jesus, not with (...)
but love also.

If God has pulled you out of the fire of sin, and drawn you as firebrarnds
out of Hell, and brought you into the glorious kingdom of his Son, ye are able
to profess the same sanctified change in your selves. It is a dead faith which
is not accompanied with sanctification and good works. As soon may a dead horse
carry a man, as a dead faith save him.

Object. This is a slander, we do not deny sanctification.

Answ. If ye acknowledge sanctification, and a sanctified change, ye
contradict your selves. For how can that make a sanctified change in us, which
is nothing else but sin or sinful. I shall be glad if you will stand to an
inward change by love and sanctification. But some there are, who have affirmed
that the distinction, between a regenerated an and unregenerated man, is but a
legal distinction.

Arg. 22. The holy Spirit which is promised to us, and dwells in us, does
plainly demonstrate this point. For as the Spirit is holy formally in it self,
in its own nature, essence, and being: so it is effectively holy, because it
makes that man holy, who was formerly sinful. If thou be nothing but
darkness, if God convert thee, thou will have a glorious light (...)
understanding: if thou have nothing (...) ^^linesse in thy will, if the Spirit
of God live in thee, it will be a Spirit of holiness a Spirit that will show
thee what is of the flesh, and what is of the spirit: a spirit checking thee,
if thou step aside into the way of the flesh, and a spirit leading thee into
the paths of holiness. As the Psalmist says. Thy Spirit is good, lead me into
the land of holiness and uprightness. Therefore those that do not find that
Spirit leading them into the paths and ways of holiness, those men have
received a counterfeit spirit to delude them, and not the true Spirit of the
Lord Jesus.

Object. The spirit is good, but our actions are evil by the adherence of
sin in us. That holy things may be defiled, is plain by Exodus 28.36.38.
Aaron having his plate upon his forehead, was to bear the iniquity of the holy
things.

Answ. 1. Though sin and holiness be in the same man, yet I deny that sin by
any adhering to holiness in us, does change holiness into the nature of it.
But what is of the Spirit in us, does retain its spiritual nature, and what
is of the flesh, does retain its fleshly nature.

2. The Scripture produced, does prove, that in doing of holy duties, we sin,
and that Jesus Christ does bear those sins, which we have granted unto you
before. But that the fruits of the Spirit in us, are those sins cannot be
proved from this place of Scripture, nor from any other Scripture which I know
this still does remain to be proved.

Arg. 23. There may be another argument drawn from that place of the Apostle,
when he says, The Spirit bears witness with our spirits, that we are the
children of God, Romans 8.16. The Spirit cannot bear witness to our old, dark,
profane spirits: for the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit,
for they are foolishness to him; therefore it must be to our spirit
enlightened, renewed, and filled with the Spirit of God. And therefore there is
something in a Saint besides that which is sin and sinful.

Object. This is true, but we are not renewed perfectly, which is the thing to
be proved.

Answ. Perfection in Scripture is opposed to that, which is more perfect. And
in this sense we do not affirm that a man is so perfectly renewed as he
shall be, 1 Cor. 13.

2. Perfection is opposed to that which is sinful, Luke 1. And in this sense
we say, that he is perfectly renewed; that is, he is holily, and not sinfully
renewed.

Arg. 24. I do ground my next argument upon the words of the Apostle, Romans 14.
last. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. And therefore that which is done in
faith, is not sin. If we deny this we shall take away the difference between
doing good works in faith, and doing good works without faith, if both of them
be alike sinful or sin. And therefore I conclude that the work of the Spirit
which is done in faith, is not sin. Without faith it is impossible to please
God; and therefore by faith it is possible to please him by doing good works.

Arg. 25. Another argument may be drawn from that place, 2 Cor. 13. where the
Apostle makes the comparison between faith, hope, and love, and prefers love
before faith and hope for this reason; because love is more permanent, and of
longer continuance than faith, and hope; when a man comes to heaven, he
cease to live the life of faith; for then he shall live the life of sight,
and vision: he cease to hope, for he enjoys that, which he hoped for: but
love shall continue. Therefore he says, that love, (that is the fruit of
faith) is greater than faith in respect of its continuance. That which remains
and endures after this life in the Saints in glory, is not sin: but love shall
remain, and endure after this life, therefore it is not sin.

Object. But some say, if you look on this place, and take notice of this
character and description of love, you will scarce find any man in the world
that has such a love; and by your argument no true faith. For he says that
love suffers long, it envieth not, it vaunteth not it self, it is not puffed
up, behaveth not it self unseemely, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the
truth: bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures
all things. Love never fails.

Answ. Every man that is borne of God has such a love as far as he is born
of God. I say not that he has it in the flesh, in the old man, but in the new
man. We have a new man, as we have an old man; and as we are sometimes acted
by the new man, so sometimes by the old man. As we are acted by the old man,
we do nothing but that which is contrary to this love: but as far as we are
acted in the Spirit by the new man, by the power of God, and the grace of
Christ; so far we have such a love as is here set down. Therefore if any man
has not such a love, and has been persuaded that he has true faith, I dare
preach it in the name of Christ, that that man never had true faith: for true
faith works by such love as the Apostle describes here. And he positively
says, that if a man have other gifts, and such a faith by which he can remove
mountains, and has not this love, that he is nothing.

I would not trouble weak Christians by this, I speak not of them in the flesh,
but in the spirit; as far as thou art spiritual, and live, and walk in
the Spirit, thou have such a love. And if upon examination thou shall find
that thou have not such a love, I say thou art a stranger to God: For he that
knows God walks in love. He that says be knows God, and walks not in
love, he knows not God. God is love, and he that dwells in God, dwells in
love, 1 Ep. John.

If I should preach the Doctrine of Justification, and write volumes of it, yet
if I find after all this, that I am without this love, I am nothing. If I
speak with the tongue of men and Angels; If I could prophecy, and had all
faith to remove mountains, yet if I have not love, I am but as sounding
brass, and a tinckling Cymball. He that loves God, by apprehending Gods love,
he cannot but love God again, and his neighbor, yea enemy, for Gods sake.
Therefore if a man say, I have been a professor of the Gospel, but find not
love to God and Christ, and my enemies for Christ's sake. It is as if he should
say, Sir I have been a professor of grace many years, and have been looked on
as one that knows Christ: but I know him not, for I have not true love that
accompanies true faith.

Arg. 26. God speaking of faith, love, fear, zeal, and the like, as in us, does
promise to be the worker of them in us; and therefore if these should be sin,
the fault would be chargable upon him. I would have this argument to be well
weighed, because it answers the ordinary objection, to wit, that these fruits
are good, and no way faulty as in the precept of God, but not as wrought in us.
God is the Author of them by promise, as they are wrought in us, which will
make him the Author of sin, if they be sin or sinful. If faith and love is
sin, then he has Covenanted to work sin in thee: for he has covenanted to
work fear and love in thee. But far be it from us to have such a thought of
our holy God. If God work fear in our hearts, that fear shall not be sin, or
sinful. We know the excellency of the Artificer, or workman, by the aedifice
or building; and do judge what worke-man God is by his glorious work in the
spirits of the Saints: and if God work only sinful things in us, what
worke-man would we conclude him to be? Paul says, by the grace of God, I am
what I am, 2 Cor. 15. It is by grace that I love, it is by grace that I fear
with a filial fear; it is by grace that I am zealous for God: If this love
were sin, if this fear were sin, if this zeal were sin, we might lay the
fault upon the worke-man; It is Gods work, not ours, but his. (Non mea, sed tua
sunt.) Aug. speaking of good works, says, They are not miue, but thine;
Unless we will disparage and undervalue the grace of God, we may not look on
these things as sin, or sinful, but ought to look on them with a spiritual
eye, and to see them, as God does, to be spiritual and good.

Object. Our works as they are from God, are good: but as they are from us, so
are they sinful and defiled. As walking, as it comes from the soul, it is
upright and free from lamenesse: but as it is acted by a lame leg, so it is
lame and halting.

Answ. This objection will appear to be a lame objection, if it be made
evident unto us, that the holy foot given unto us by God, is not a lame foot.
Was it with a lame foot that David will run the ways of Gods Commandments?
Is it with a lame leg that God has promised, we shall run, and not be
weary, and walk, and not faint, Isa. 40. last.

Use 1. This may be sufficient for the confutation of those, who do not
distinguish between the regenerated, and unregenerated part in man (as the
Scripture does distinguish) laying the bastardly brats of the flesh at the
door of the Spirit; confounding the works of the flesh, with the good and
perfect gifts of the spirit, Jam. 1.17. and not considering, that though, there
is the flesh, and the spirit in the same man, that yet they are distinguished
in their natures, workings, and operations. The spirit, and the things of the
spirit like oil swimming upon the surface of the waters, does not change it
self into the nature of the flesh. Their usual similitude does not prove what
they would maintain; to wit, that the work of the spirit is like clear water
poured into a dunghill, which though it be clear and pure in the basin, yet
running through the dunghill, does become as impure and filthy as the
dunghill it self. For though these two are in the same man, yet they do not
mingle themselves the one with the other, that any of them should lose their
own beings. But because these men are furnished as well with arguments, by
which they desire to prove what they contend for, as with objections by which
they endeavor to weaken the strength of the arguments, which have been laid
down for the confirmation of the truth. Give me leave to give an answer to
their arguments, as I have already presented unto you answers to their
objections.

Arg. 1. Paul was a regenerated man, yet he confesses that he was not able to
perform that which is good, Romans 7.18. Therefore no regenerate man is able to
perform that which is

Answ. Paul does give a sufficient answer to this objection in the preceding
words of the same verse, where he says, in me (that is in my flesh) dwells
no good thing, by which it is evident that he speaks of himself in reference
to his flesh. And this is a truth, which with all the faithful I willingly
subscribe unto. But when he plainly speaks of a man in the spirit, freed
from the clouds of temptations, and power of the flesh, in the last verse of
the same Chapter, he says, With the mind I my self serve the law of God; but
with the flesh the law of sin. It is good to serve the law of God: but Paul in
the Spirit had attained unto this, and therefore Paul was enabled to perform
that which is good. According to that of the Apostle, Phil. 2.13. It is God, wh
works in us to will and to do of his own good pleasure.

Arg. 2. There is none that does good, no not one, Romans 3.9, 10, 11. which is
meant as well of the regenerate, as unregenerate, as is evident by verse. 23, 24.
because it is meant of all who are justified freely by his grace, as appears
further by the instances of Abraham and David, which were regenerated, Chapter
4.2.6. Therefore no works of the regenerate are without sin.

Answ. It is plain that the Apostle speaks here of a man under the law, and
of an unregenerate man, by the things which are spoken of him. He says, that
none seeks after God; can you affirm this of a regenerated man? when the
same Prophet, who in the 14. Psame does give us a character of a wicked man:
out of which this is taken in the 24. Psalm, does give us this character of a
man truly godly, that he is one of the generation of those who seek God. 2.
The Apostle says, that there is none that understands. But blessed be God,
the son of God is come, and has given us an understanding that we may know
him, 1 John 5.20.3. They are all gone out of the way. But we can bless God,
who through Jesus Christ has brought us into the way of salvation. 4. There is
none that does good, no not one; and there is none that is righteous. But
hearken unto the speech of John, 1 John 3.7. Let no man deceive you: he that
does righteousness, is righteous even as he is righteous. I might run over
all the other particulars there laid down: but I shall content my self with
what is spoken in the 17. 18. its said, that the way of peace have they not
known; and there is no fear of God before their eyes. Is a regenerate man an
enemy to the way of peace? and do not they fear God, to whom God has
sworn, Jer. 32.40. That he will put his fear in their hearts, that they shall
not depart from him.

Again secondly, you would prove it by this argument, because he speaks of
all those who are justified. But let me tell you, that we must distinguish of a
man before and after his Justification. Every man is such a man before
Justification, and in this respect he speaks of all men: but after
justification there is a change wrought in a man, as I have formerly proved at
large; unto which I refer the Reader.

But thirdly you instance in David and Abraham, who were regenerated men.

Answ. We are not to forget that the Scripture dosh acquaint us, that there is
a twofold righteousness of a regenerate man. The righteousness of
Justification, and the righteousness of sanctification. Of the first of these
the Prophet speaking, says, that a man is blessed to whom sin is not imputed,
of the latter where he says of the same verse. And in whose spirit there is
no guile; which the learned Zanchius does apprehend to be spoken in reference
to that sanctification which is in the unregenerated part, understand the
distinction rightly, and you cannot want an answer to this Objection.

Arg. 3. We believe not so steadfastly, nor love so perfectly as we ought,
therefore is our faith and love imperfect, and sinful. Ans. 1. If we should
grant the antecedent, we may deny the consequence. It is true, that if a man
does not believe so steadfastly, and love so perfectly as he ought, that then
the man does sin, consider him physically. And this we have always granted:
but it does not follow, that his faith and love is sin, but that which is in
the flesh is sin, which is the cause that he does not believe so steadfastly,
and love so perfectly as he ought. Amesius does give a sufficient answer to
this in answering an argument which Bellarmine does bring against the
Protestants, to wit, that sins do not please God in Christ. It is true, says
he, that sin does not please God: but the stain of sin being done away, the
good which remains is pleasing unto God. ( Sane quidem certe, sedpeccati
macula in Christo deleta, bonum substratum placet. Tom. 4. l. 6. c. 8.)

2ly. We say that a regenerate man looked upon in the new Covenant, does
believe steadfastly, and love perfectly. His unbelief and hatred of God which
is in the flesh, being covered with the rich mantle of Gods grace and mercy: as
far as he does believe truly, he does believe steadfastly; and as far as he does
love, he does love perfectly. Let not his offend any man that I say he does
love perfectly. It is granted by most Protestant writers, that a regenerate man
has a perfection of parts, though not of degrees. A child may have an humane
nature, and the parts of a man, as well as a man of forty years old. A spark
of fire has the true nature of fire, a drop of water has the nature of water
in it, as well as all the water in the Sea. So a spark or drop of love, has
the divine nature of love in it, as well as that which burns in the breasts of
a Seraphim, and therefore is not sin or sinful. And for this reason it is said
that Abraham was not weak in faith, though it is unquestionable that he had
his weakness in the flesh, as well as other men, and that he staggered not at
the promise of God, through unbelief: but was strong in faith, giving glory to
God, Romans 4. And this is the meaning likewise of Amesius in the place formerly
cited, where he says, That the good works of the faithful are not only good
by the object of them, but in reference to all the causes of them, the
efficient, material, formal, and final cause. (Opera fidelium, non tantum
sunt bona ex objecto, sed etiam quoad omnes causas efficientem, materiam,
formam et finem.)

Arg. 4. Sanctification in the fear of God is always perfecting whilst we
live here in this life, 2 Cor. 7.1. and therefore it is not perfected until
the life to come.

Answ. Sanctification is said to be perfecting here, in reference to that which
is in the flesh, which is to be put off, that sanctificaiion may come in the
place of it, not in reference unto that which is already wrought, as though
that sanctification were not already perfect, if we take perfection as it is
opposed to that which is sinful. 2. It is said, that our Savior increased in
wisdom, Luke 2.52. will you say that his wisdom was sinful at first,
because he did increase and grow in it? You may as well say so, as conclude
that our sanctification is sin or sinful, because it does grow or increase
to a greater perfection.

Arg. 5. If our works be in themselves perfect, then might Paul have desired
to have been found in them before God.

Answ. I deny the consequence. For these good works are not wrought in us,
that they may be the cause or matter of our Justification, and therefore Paul
will not appear before God in them for Justification. But Paul and every true
Saint being justified by faith without them, does dare to bring them in the
presence of God as secondary evidences of Gods love to him. According to that
of John, 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because
we love the Brethren: he that loves not his brother abides in death, ver.
19. And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall persuade our hearts
before him. Which you, maintaining them to be sin and sinful, do not do.

Arg. 6. If the new man does not sin, then he is not the man who is
pronounced to be a blessed man, Psalm. 32. Romans 4.

Answ. This is a plain fallacy. You take the new man here physically, whom we
take according to Scripture, Spiritually and Theologically. Justification, to
speak properly, is neither of the new man, nor old man, but of the person in
whom there is an old man and a new man. And this man is justified from the
sins of the old man, by the work of the spirit in the new man, which does
carry him to the grace of God in Jesus Christ.

Arg. 7. Paul's best works were accounted by him but as dross and dung,
therefore they were not perfect, Phil. 3.

Answ. 1. This may be very well understood of his works done under the Law. As
the preceding words do seem to hold it forth, where he speaks of his Jewish
privileges and Pharisaicall righteousness. And secondly the words following
will seem to carry it this way, because he says, that he accounts all
things dung for the excellent knoweldg of Christ, by which is evident, that he
speaks of all things, as they stand in opposition to the knowledge of Christ.

3. This argument makes nothing for you because you account this knowledge
sinful. But let us take it, as you do: and an answer is presently at hand, to
wit, that the Apostle does not speak these words absolutely, but
comparatively. They are all dung in comparison of Christ, and in reference to
their uselesnesse to justification; Dung will as soon justify a man from sin,
as that love which flows from faith.

Arg. 8. This, that the new man sins not, does in a very high measure, if
not altogether overthrow all the offices of Christ. 1. His Kingly office, as
having none to rule, not the old man, for he savoureth no the things of God;
be is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; not the new man,
for he needs not the government of Christ, he is already perfect, and cannot
sin. 2. His Priestly office, which is to make propitiation for the sins of
those which shall be saved; now the new man who only shall be saved, never did,
nor could not commit any sin. 3. His Prophetical office; For whom should he
teach? the new man needs not his teaching, seeing he with all his works is
already perfect, and can be no otherwise. The old^ man is not capable of his
teaching.

Answ. I have already detected the fallaciousnesse of this argument, in
answering to the 6th Argument. Yet give me leave to prove in few words, that
this doctrine does magnify Christ in the glory of his spiritual offices.

First, in his Kingly office, the glory of a king does lie in subduing his
enemies. And in thy the glory of Christ considered as a King, does appear that
he does vanquish the enemies of us his Subjects, by ruling in our hearts with
his Scepter of righteousness. According to that of the Psalmist, that he
shall rule in the midst of his enemies. By this we see his regal power over
the old man. Again, the glory of a King is wrapped up in the willing obedience of
his Subjects, and this is made good in the new man. His people being made
willing in the day of his power. For what is here objected, that the new man
needs not the government of Christ? It is as if one should say, that a man does
make void and overthrow royal government, because he maintains, that the
Kings Subjects are willingly obedient unto him. But you say that they are
perfect, and therefore his government is needless. The spirits of just men are
made perfect, Heb. 12. And will you therefore conclude, that the government of
Christ over them is needless? But to pass this by. 2. It will appear that
the Priestly office of Christ, is not overthrown, but established rather by
this doctrine; for first, we hold that no man lives as a new man, who does
live under the guilt of sin, and therefore by the eye of the new man we are
daily to look upon Christ as a Priest, in whom is no sin; who by one
offering has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. Again,
the Priest was to offer up the sacrifices of the people for them, and by this
doctrine we establish Christ in his Priestly office, which we could not do if
we should say, that there were nothing in us but what is sin and sinful in
us. The people were to bring something which was good to be offered up by the
Priest to God. The blind, lame, and sick were not to be offered unto God,
Mal. 1.8. Neither is that which we do, that is sin or sinful, offered up by
Jesus Christ to the Father, but that which is good. And thus we establish
Christ in his Priestly office, by affirming that there is something good in the
new man, which is the matter of acceptance. 3. We do not overthrow his
Prophetical office by this truth. For he does daily teach us in the new man.
Whereas you say that he needs not his teaching; we say that the new man has
his dependence upon Christ, for wisdom, knowledge, and understanding. And as a
burning Lamp does daily stand in need of oil to be powered into it for the
maintaining of the light thereof; so we say that a Christian does daily stand
in need of spiritual oil to be powered into his soul by Jesus Christ, that he
may shine forth in the light of truth. Will you dare to say that the souls of
the Just, made perfect, have no need of the teaching of Christ, and that they
have no dependence upon him, because they are perfect? Again, it is necessary
in respect of the old man, who is filled with hellish darkness and ignorance,
that Christ be looked upon as the great Prophet, that we may put off the
ignorance which is in him, and may be more in the Spirit of Christ, which will
lead us into all truth. It being the way of Gods working to shine into our dark
hearts, to enlighten them with the knowledge of his grace in Jesus Christ. You
may begin to see by what has been delivered, that this doctrine does not
overthrow the offices of Jesus Christ, but does sweetly to the glory of his
Father confirm him in them.

Arg. 9. If the regenerate man work perfectly, then is the wages reckoned unto
him, not of grace, but of debt, Romans 4.4. But this cannot be that the wages
either of the blessings of this life, or the life to come, should be of debt
unto him, and not of free grace, seeing the Apostle testifies, that God of his
free grace gives us his beloved Son, and together with him, all things, Romans
8.32.

Answ. This first place which is alleged does not reach the point in hand,
because the Apostle does there speak of works done under the law for
Justification: and does thence conclude that if a man be justified by those
works which he does under the law, that then the reward is not of debt but
grace; because the law being not of faith, Gal. 3.12. does give nothing unto us
in a way of grace. But we are speaking of works done and accepted under a
Covenant of grace. The principal cause of men's error and mistake in this
controversy, is, because they examine the new man and his works, by the law
of works, and not by the law of sanctification, holiness and love in the new
Covenant of grace. If we did examine his works by the law of holiness which
is in the new covenant, we should plainly perceive that it is by the Spirit of
grace that his works are freely wrought in him; and by this means all legal
glorying, and carnal boasting is taken away. According to that of the Apostle,
1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to differ from another? And, what have thou, that
thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if
thou had not received it. By which you may plainly see, that the argument
will not hold good; to say that if a man work perfectly under a covenant of
grace, that his reward is not of grace but of debt. I shall therefore give you a
short answer to the first part of this argument, by distinguishing of a
twofold working, 1. under a law of works, and there it is true, that if a man
work perfectly, his reward is of debt. 2. Under a covenant of grace where a
man's sin is freely forgiven him, and by free grace he is enabled to work
righteously: and there his reward is not of debt to speak properly, but of
grace.

Secondly, Though we deny that God gives any reward to a spiritual man as a
debt due unto him, for his merits and deservings; yet we affirm that God
gives rewards to a spiritual man who does good works. And therefore it is
said that Christ comes with his reward with him, to give every man as his
work shall be, Revel. 22.12. And Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater
riches than the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of
reward, Hebr. 11.26. And this reward may be called a debt, not in reference to
man's merit, but in reference to Gods promise of grace; as a man by his promise
may make himself a debtor to a beggar. And therefore the Apostle speaking unto
the Saints, Hebr. 6.10. says, That God is not unrighteous to forget the work
of the Saints, and labor of love. And John exhorts us, that we lose not
those things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward, 2 John.
And in this sense something may be given unto us as a reward of that work of
grace, which is given unto us before it. Our confidence in Gods grace may have
a great reward in this respect. According to that of the Apostle, Heb. 10.35.
Cast not away your confidence which has great recompense of reward. And this
may be an answer to the second part of this argument.

Arg. 10. If the works of the regenerate be not evil, because the holy Ghost
works them. Then the works of the unregenerate, as his love and obedience to
his parents are not evil.

Answ. There is a general concurrence of God as the prime cause in the doing
of some things by wicked men, and thus God may concur to the doing of a thing,
and yet the thing as done by the wicked man may be evil, because not done in
faith. And it is no solid argument to conclude from hence God did concur in the
doing of this thing, and therefore it is not sin or sinful.

2ly. There is a special concurrence of Gods grace and Spirit in the doing of
a thing, as he is the principal agent in working good spiritually in the
Saints who are under a covenant of grace. And when God does concur with the
special and powerful assistance of his grace for the effecting of a thing in
a Saint, it is safe to draw a conclusion to prove the goodness of the thing,
from the considering of the principal agent which did concur in the doing of
the thing. As John does in these words, maintaining that a spiritual man
considered as a spiritual man, and acting as a spiritual man, cannot sin,
because his seed remains in him. By which distinction you may see the
weakness of your argument (with which you would prove the unsoundnesse of my
arguing from God, considered as the principal agent to the effect.) And the
disparity of Gods working in the regenerate and unregenerate. When God does
work in a spiritual man that which is spiritual, it is not only good
substantially and materially, but formally and circumstantially by the grace of
God, as I have proved at large. And therefore this argument is not strong
enough to overthrow what has been delivered.

Arg. 11. Either the holy Ghost works the works of the regenerate man wholly,
as the sole cause, and then it is not we but the holy Ghost that believes,
that loves, that fears God, that repents, that prays for the forgiveness of
his sin, etc. which were absurd to imagine, or else we also work with him in
some kind of causality to the producing of those works, that so the works may
be said to be ours, our loving, our fearing, our rejoicing, our praying. If so,
then are we in this working, either perfect or imperfect Agents. If perfect
agents, then is there no ignorance in our understandings, no depravation in our
will, no perverseness in our affections. The contrary whereof, all the truly
faithful find by experience, and the Scripture abundantly testifies. But if
we be imperfect agents, then cannot perfection come out of imperfection, no
effect can be better than its cause.

Ans. 1 The efficiency of the first cause, does not take away the efficiency of
the second cause. In God we live and move, yet it is not God that moves; he,
though he moves all things, cannot be moved himself ( immobilis, movens omnia.
Aug.) So it is not God that repents, but we repent. The ignorance of which
truth has been the cause of the wicked mystery of Familisme which my soul
abhors. And therefore we shall agree in the truth, which is implicitly laid
down in the first part of your Dilemma.

2ly Whereas you say that all the faithful grant, that man is an imperfect
agent. I answer, that if we take perfect here in this point, as it is opposed
to that which is sinful, so many Saints do grant, and all should and will, as
more light is beamed into their souls, grant it, that the sanctified and
spiritual man, considered as far forth as he is a spiritual man, does work
as a perfect Agent, not as an unholy, but an holy man. And therefore according
to your rule, his action must be spiritual and holy. And this may give an
answer to that argument which is brought from Job, Who can bring a clean thing
out of an unclean, Job 14.4.

3ly Whereas you say, that no effect can be better than its cause, etc. This is
not universally true. A man imperfect by the want of his arms or legs may
beget a child which is perfect, and has its limbs. But this not being much to
the purpose, I shall not contend about it.

Arg. 12. If the new man never sin, Christ came not to save the new man, for he
came only to save sinners.

Answ. The new man taken in this spiritual and theologicoll sense is not the
object of salvation: but an elect person guilty and sinful in himself. And
the new creation is a blessed consequent of our redemption by Christ: but I
have sufficiently answered this before.

Arg. 13. That which is not in its own nature agreeable to the holy law of
God, is not perfect, and without sin; for sin is the transgression or
disagreement with the law of God, 1 John 3.4. But the best of a regenerate man's
actions are not agreeable to the law of God, being not done with all the heart,
with all the soul, with all the understanding, and with all the strength, Mat.
22.37. Deuteronomy. 6.5.

Ans. 1. By this argument you would bring the spiritual man to judge himself
by the law or old covenant: but he is better taught by the Spirit. And as he
does not put his person under the old covenant, so does he not judge his
actions by the old covenant, but by the new covenant of grace. According to
that of the Apostle, Gal. 5.18. If ye are led by the Spirit ye are not under
the law. And thus looking upon what is wrought by the Spirit under the new
covenant, he sees it in its own nature agreeable to the law as it is delivered
unto him in the hand of the Lord Jesus. Not that Christ does require less
holiness than is required in the old covenant: but because he gives us more
grace, enabling us to keep his Commandments; by the keeping of which, we know
in the light of the Spirit that we truly know him. And the Commandments of
Christ are kept by the Saints Evangelically two manner of ways. 1. By
believing for justification. 2. By holy walking for sanctification; not that we
can keep them by holy walking, but as we walk in the light of our
justification. And thus he is as well able to keep the commandment of love, as
the commandment of faith. Suppose a King should pardon a Traitor, and should
give him an assurance of pardon for all future Treason which he might run into,
and had power to enable him in some things, and sometimes to be obedient unto
him as a loyal Subject, would you not say that this Subject were a loyal
Subject; all his traiterous acts forgiven, and his loyal obedience to the
command of his Sovereign being accepted? Thus it is between God and us: He
forgiveth all the treasons of the flesh, and accepts of the obedience of the
spirit. God does account that all the commands of the Law are fulfilled by us,
when that which is not done is pardoned. (Omnia tunc facta deputantur, cum id
quod non fit ignoscitur.) which is true in a sense in reference to sanctification
as well as to justification. And a spiritual man thus looking upon himself in
the glass of the covenant of grace, does know that he is a keeper of the
Commandments of God; and can say with the Psalmist, Ps. 119.10. With my whole
heart I have sought thee: O let me not wander from thy Commandments. All his
defects and imperfections with the committing of evil, and omitting good in the
flesh are done away, and that which is good is accounted so by the law of God,
as it is presented unto him in this Covenant. So speak ye, and so do, as they
that shall be judged by the law of liberty says James, Jam. 2.12. As God does
judge our persons by the law of liberty, or the law of the new Covenant, so he
does judge our actions, and thus they are perfect. And the law of the new
Covenant is not only faith for justification, but love for sanctification. And
thus this place is expounded by the learned Paraeus.

Arg. 14. Paul did not think himself to have fully apprehended, or to be
already perfect, but strove forward, Phil. 3.12, 13. which cannot be said of
the old man, but only of the new man, for the old man does not strive forward
for the prize of the high calling.

Answ. Though Paul had not attained to that perfection, which he looked for at
the resurrection: Yet he had attained to a perfection of parts which is
opposed to sinfulness. Which does appear by what follows in the 15. verse. of
the same Chap. where he does acknowledge the Saints in this sense to be perfect,
with which verse I shall put a period to my answers to your objections. As many
as be perfect be thus minded, and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God
shall reveal even this unto you.

Use 2. The lessons which God has taught me from these meditations, have been
very powerful by his grace for the convincing (...) of sin in a Gospel-way;
and for the humbling of my soul under his mighty hand, by seeing the huge
mass of corruption which is in the flesh, and that little quantity of pure
gold which is in the Spirit. It was the speech of one of the Ancients, that
grace in some Saints is like a spark in the Ocean. And thus I have apprehended
it in my self: Yet I see that as it is wrought by grace, so it is accepted by
grace, being not under the law as delivered in the first covenant, and yet not
without the law to God, but under the law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21. And this has
been a strong motive unto me to hunger and thirst after the righteousness of
sanctification, commanded and promised in the new Covenant, which does comfort
me with an assurance and confidence, that that which is perfected here in part
inchoatively, shall be perfected in degrees consummatively. I can say with
David, Psalm. 138.8. The Lord will perfect that which concerns me, he will not
forsake the works of his own hand. And seeing the strength and power of the
flesh in me, I am carried up in spirit, to admire and wonder at Gods
omnipotent grace, by which, through faith, which works by love, I am
preserved together with all Saints unto the day of salvation in Christ Jesus,
who is over all (Romans 9.5.) God blessed for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

