THE Romish Priest TURNED PROTESTANT: With the REASONS OF HIS CONVERSION.

WHEREIN The True Church is Exposed to the View of Christians, and Derived out
of the Holy Scriptures, Sound Reason, and the Ancient Fathers.

Humbly presented to both Houses of Parliament.

By JAMES SALGADO, a Spaniard, formerly a Priest of the Order of the Dominicans.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the Stocks-Market, 1679.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, with the Honorable
the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled.
Sirs,
I Hope you will pardon my boldness, because I presume to appear before your
faces. It is requisite I should give an account of my hope in Christ unto you,
who are (next to the most Illustrious King Charles the II. Defender of the
Faith) the surest Maintainers of the Protestant Religion. And unto whom else
should I dedicate a Treatise of the True Church, if not to the Parliament,
where as well the Commonwealth is to be found in the Church, as the Church in
the Commonwealth? Namely, There is a new resemblance in your Houses, of the old
face of Israel (which makes me the bolder) as the countenance of Lawgivers
(like that of Moses) does in its luster go far beyond the rest. Nature and
Religion have made you of that constitution, that you do not only shine for
your selves, but also spread out your beams for the benefit of others. Sirs, Be
pleased to accept of this small token of my due submission, and to look upon
him with an eye of benevolence, who desiring to depend upon your Sanhedrim,
will always remain, Sirs,

Your most Obedient Servant, James Salgado, a Spaniard, a Converted Priest.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THere are so many of this kind of Books put out, that one should think This to
be superfluous. But I was constrained to conform my self to the present Age;
not only for that I might wipe off the Calumnies of the Papists, who commonly
say, That the Roman Priests desert the Roman Church for no other reason than
this, That they may have liberty to do what they please, (whereas God knows,
they amongst themselves have a freedom so unbridled, that there is almost
nothing found there, but a great disorder and license); and to satisfy the
Protestants in the reason of my Conversion, and show to both the parties, why I
am turned a Protestant. I composed this Book first in Latin; but that my
Conversion should be manifest to all, yea even to the meanest, I caused it to
be Translated into English. Kind Reader, apply these newly-shuffled Cards (as I
may use the phrase of a Right Reverend Bishop of this Realm) for thy own
profit. May be you will find that in it, you never heard before. So farewell:
From one that is desirous of thy Salvation.

JAMES SALGADO.

Chr. Chapter Oxon, Dec. 26 -- 78. Reverend Sir,
I Am to give you thanks for the occasion you gave me of acquaintance with the
bearer hereof, Mr. James Salgado, whom I find by his discourse to be a right
Spaniard, born of a good Family, and of very good parts; and to have suffered
very much by the Inquisition of Spain for embracing the Truth of our Protestant
Religion. This consideration, and the great bounty and charity I saw used by
his Countrymen toward ours, when found in distress among them, makes me think
him an object singularly well deserving our common charity and benevolence;
especially considering how very rare a case it is to see a Clergyman of his
Nation come to us. They have been civil to him in this University, and I hope
good men will be so to him with you. To such as may desire to learn the Spanish
or Italian Tongue, he may be serviceable, having good skill in both, but in the
former he is eminent, as born and bred in Madrid. I will presume to beg the
continuance of your goodness to him, affording him your instruction and
commendation to good men there; for some employment he may be capable of, by
which you shall oblige much

Reverend Sir, Your very affectionate humble Servant, Andr. Sall.

Courteous Reader,
I Do believe that the Author of this Book, James Salgado, was a Romish Priest,
according to the Order of the Dominicans; and that he is now become a true
Convert to the Protestant Religion, as the ensuing Discourse will further
evidence to the intelligent Reader.

Nic. Lloyd Rector of St. Mary Newington.

(...) THE True Church.
THE ancient Fathers commonly called the Church an Ark of Noah, without whose
bosom none could be freed from the peril of everlasting damnation, as well as
none that was out of the Ark could escape the danger of the flood. And indeed
they did not say it without reason; because they knew that to them that were
strangers from the Church her privileges did not belong, as Vocation,
Justification, Sanctification; the want of which disinables a man from coming
to the perfection of the future world, and to the enjoyment of it. And as those
members that are not joined to a human body, are destitute of sense and life;
so they that are rooted out from the Head of the Church, which is Christ, or
have never been inserted into the Olive Tree, can expect no spiritual
influence, which is able to make us the heirs of eternal salvation.

This was the reason for which David affirms, That the Heathens did not know
the statutes of the Lord, namely, because they have been without the communion
of Israel, where the Church was in the Old Testament; Because the Lord showed
his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel, and he has
not dealt so with any Nation; Psalm. 147.19, 20.
therefore they have not known his judgments.

The Apostle does ascend higher on this matter, when he writing to the
Ephesians, says, At that time you were without Christ, Ephesians. 2.12.
you were aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world; Namely,
because they were not in the bosom of the Church, and were without that Ark of
Noah we spoke of; they were also without the Communion of Christ, who is a
loyal Husband only to one Spouse, as it is said in the Canticles, My Dove, my
undefiled, is but one. Cant. 6.9.


But when the Fathers did use this similitude, they meant by it the Universal
Church, whose beginning Austin deriveth from Abel, and deduceth the
continuation of it until the consummation of the world. Therefore no Church
which is extant here, or there, or in any place of the world, can go (in that
signification) under a name of an Universal Church; but that which was, is, and
shall be, and comprehends in its ambit, as well the Triumphant as the Militant
part. And if that be Catholic, Vinc. Lirin. contra. noph. novitates.
according to the Rule of Vincentius Lirinensis in his Book against the
profane novelties, Which has been believed always, everywhere, and by all,
surely the Catholic Church it self must be this, which was everywhere, always,
and was or will be found amongst all Nations of the World, by reason the thing
ruled cannot be narrower than the Rule, nor Faith cannot be found but in
Believers.

I cannot but confess, that there are many particular Congregations, many
Provincial or National Churches, amongst which, one may be, and is sounder than
the other; yet notwithstanding this, none of these Churches can be called
Catholic, if we take this word in a strict signification; Being they are only
parts, or members making up one general body, none of which can be called,
without a contradiction, Universal, except one would grant unto a hand or a
foot the name of a whole body.

From hence we may see, that the Roman Church, being it is a particular one
(albeit it should be sound and Orthodox, as it is not) cannot appropriate unto
it self exclusively to other Churches professing Christ, the name of a
Catholic or Universal Church.

I confess I am not so rigid, as to cut off the Roman Church it self from the
latitude of the Universal Church; because, besides that people living in that
same Communion (yet not formally Papists) which in the simplicity of their
hearts do profess God and our Savior, and believe in him, and in order to that
do work out their salvation as well as they can, (although many of them neither
understand the matter, nor the circumstances of it, by reason of their
unavoidable or invincible ignorance), can arrive to eternal salvation, being it
is truth, That God is no respecter of persons; Act. 10.34, 35.
But in every nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him: We do likewise yield, that the Roman Church may be called a
Church, although not in the moral, yet in the physical sense, just as an
Adultress does not lose the name of a Wife, albeit she loses the name of an
honest Wife.

But now because the Court of Rome will have their Church to consist either in
the Pope or in the Council, or else in them both; therefore we will speak of it
as it is considered in that kind, and consequently show and declare the same to
be false and erroneous. It is true that the Church taken in that kind, cannot
be, but as they say in Schools, a representative one; nevertheless, because the
rest of that communion are bound to obey it as an infallible one, therefore we
take the denomination, a potiori, and so affirm the same to be false and
non-Catholick; yea, none at all. It was not enough for the Papists to pronounce
all those Churches that hold no communion with them, Heretics, and so to shut
up the Gates of Heaven before them, but they were and are so bold as to affirm
their Church to be infallible and without error.

It is indeed a great postulatum, which is not only false in it self, but also
a great cause why the rest of the Churches will not, nor can hold communion
with them. And that I may pass it by, that no particular Church (as the Roman
is) can be called infallible; likewise it is as sure, that they, according to
the way of the Athenians, do not know whom they worship, and so erect an Altar
To the unknown God. Act. 17.23.


In vain do any dispute about the propriety or privilege of a thing, when they
can have no certain knowledge about the subject it self. In vain do they affirm
their Church to be Infallible, when they cannot tell where and which this
Church may be; because in this matter, we may see, Pares aquilas and pila
minantia pilis, one contradicting another. Some of them, as namely, the
Sorbonists, do place it in the Council; others, as Jesuits, only in the Pope;
some again say, that it does consist in them both jointly, that is, in the Pope
and Council.

Choose any side you please, and take hold either of one, or of the other
sentiment, you will find your self to stagger; and being set in the midst of
doubtfulness, with Masius of Sylvaducis, you shall not know where to turn you.
May be you will perceive from whence you have declined, but not whither you
should go; because after you have made choice of either of their meanings, you
will find your self entangled with many difficulties, out of which you shall
not be able to free your self; and so you will find your self to offer a
sacrifice unto an unknown god.

This I will endeavor to show briefly; Suppose now you should yield that the
Church does consist in the Council only, there you shall find presently some of
that same Communion contradicting that. But having past over this, I may ask
such a man, Who can know this Council to be infallible? Because first, Ex
partibus homogeneis nihil heterogeneum potest constari; out of things which are
of that same nature, nothing can be made of a diverse nature: All the members
making up the Council were fallible, How can it be then, that they should
become infallible, when they are gathered into one Synodical body? And if this
infallibility came but then to the Council, when it came to be a Council, I
pray, Where was it before? in what part of the World did it uphold it self? By
what Tubus opticus, or by what insensible transpiration did this good
infallibility come down upon the Fathers of the Council? or what shall become
of that infallibility after the Council is dissolved? into what place shall it
betake it self to rest? None can give an account.

Then how shall you know, that all they that were gathered in the Council, have
been lawfully baptized, or baptized at all? because you are not certain of the
Ministers or the Priests intention, upon which hangs the efficacy of the
Sacraments; how that they are canonically ordained, and not per saltum; how
that they have not intruded themselves by Simony; all which thou must believe
with a Divine Faith, before thou can embrace the decrees of the Council for
infallible ones.

Moreover, if the infallibility of the Church do consist in the Council, then
of necessity there should be always extant a general Council; so that the
diffident parts might have a free entrance, in order to make a disquisition of
their quarrel, and likewise a determination, and so live in peace. But where is
there such a one? And suppose there should be always a Council in esse, which
nevertheless is impossible; yet how should you know this Council not to be
partial, and not such a one as the Council of Ariminum, neither subject to
correction, by reason many former Councils have been mended by the later, as
Austin tells us.

May be you will make this exception, Christ promises unto his Disciples, Joh.
16.13
and so consequently unto his Church, That the spirit of truth shall guide them
into all truth; and that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Mat.
16.18


Well said, Christ did promise the holy Spirit unto his Disciples; but as the
things extraordinary must not be compared with the things ordinary, because the
Disciples had not only the matter, but also the words, from the indictment of
the Holy Ghost; so the Churches of our later times, Gal. 1.8. and 6.21. 2 Timothy
3.16.
are bound to the Doctrine of Scriptures, which are given by Inspiration of
God, and are not only profitable, but sufficient also for all kind of holy
instructions; which if the Council does follow, there is no doubt, but it shall
have the assistance of the Holy Ghost. 2. When Christ says, the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against the Church, he does not understand any particular
Church, or their Bishops, but the Militant Church dispersed through all the
World; and that this cannot err in matters fundamental, we willingly allow. 3.
Whence do you know that the Holy Spirit acts a praeses in every Council, by
reason the Ariminum Synod may have the name of a Council as well as the Nicene.
4. Who can satisfy you that the members of a Council do speak according to
truth, and by the inspiration of God, rather than partially? or that their
Decrees are framed more by the weight of Reason and Scriptures, than by the
multitude of Votes? or that it is not such a Council as the Tridentine was,
where the Holy Ghost (as the Bishop of Fifechurches, Episcopus quinque Eccles.
a member of that Synod says) was brought over from Rome into Trident, in the
Bags of the Roman Veredary, and he staid out longer when the Waters did rise,
but came sooner after they were fallen; so the Holy Spirit was afraid, either
to be wet, or to be drowned. 5. At last a Papist should proceed very
disorderly, if he being asked about the infallibility of a Council, from whence
he could prove it, should betake him to Scripture; because we ask them
antecedently to the Word of God of this infallibility of the Church, by reason
it is her Office as well to make a Canon, as to give authority to the
Scriptures; being their assertion is this, That the authority of Scripture (as
to us) does depend on the authority of the Church; But that which gives
authority to another thing, cannot mutuate his own from it.

Hence you may see with what difficulties they intricate themselves, that place
the Church and its infallibility in the Council.

But, neither those have lesser ones, that settle the same in the Pope alone.

Although this sentiment is very foolish, and consutes its own self by reason
of its absurdity, being it places the Church, which is a congregation of many,
in one man: yet we shall proceed in our proposition, (will run on our race).
For the most part of the Jesuits do hold this sentence, and affirm, That the
Pope like the Pythia of Delphos, only by himself may, and can frame Decrees,
and expose them to the belief of the people.

Be it so, that this Infallibility does reside with the Pope, the same
difficulties will come again.

For how will you be persuaded that the Pope has been Popable, because he
could be not Baptized? He could have occupied the Sea by force, by Simony, he
could be a Woman, as Johanna was, and not a man; all which, if it be present,
the Pope is no more a Pope.

Then how can you know that the Pope when he was going to frame his Decretals,
did use the usual and necessary preparations, as Prayers, and Fasting for seven
days, etc? How that he made them Motu proprio, as the Roman Court says, that
is, by his own Will, and not by the persuasion of the Chamber; all which, if it
be deficient, the Decretals and Constitutions are of no value, nor pronounced
out of the Cathedra or Pulpit, and so neither binding the Consciences, nor
Infallible.

Further, By what Argument will you be persuaded, that this Infallibility does
not belong as well to the Bishop of Paris, or Mantua, as to the Bishop of Rome?
and so that this infallibility is not auferible from the Roman Bishop, Gerson
de auferibilitatae Pape.
of whose Auferibility Gerson did write a Treatise; all which you must believe,
if you will take his Decretals for infallible.

At last, how one single man can be infallible in matters of Faith cannot be
understood, because he has neither any promise of it, nor has proved himself
to be such an one, as is clear and manifest by many examples.

May be you will betake your self to that vulgar distinction, of the Pope
pronouncing in his Chair, or in his Hall; out of the Pulpit, and without the
Pulpit; so that he may be called Infallible as to the first, but not as to the
second.

But you will find very little comfort in that same distinction; because, besides
that, it cannot be defined how one and the same man should contradict himself
without fear or coaction in the same matters: likewise, the Pope who can
deceive, being out of the Pulpit, should take advice from himself as sitting in
it, that he might not be mistaken; or else the Cardinals, if they would have
the holy Father to be without blame, should bind fast this good old man to the
Pulpit with chains, as another Prometheus to a Caucasus, that he should not
stir from this Cathedra, and so speak always truth. But it is over-true, that
the holy Popes did err most abominably, as pronouncing out of the Pulpit, as it
is shown both by Papists and Protestants; Platina de vitis Pontificum Romanorum.
and is to be seen in John, in Stephanus, in Formosus and others, which are to
be read of in Platina, of the lives of the Roman Popes.

2. They cannot tell us what they do understand by this Cathedra, or Pulpit;
for as to a material Pulpit, it can contribute nothing to the infallibility of
the Pope; or else it could flow in as well upon a Herdsman as the Pope, if it
should work by its Physical and internal virtue. And as to a moral Pulpit, of
which Christ makes mention, when he speaks of the Fulpit of Moses, nothing
else can be understood by it, besides the Holy Scriptures; and if the Pope
pronounce accordingly to them, we will freely obey him.

3. The Holy Spirit, upon whom, as they say, the infallibility of the Pope
depends, is not bound to any place, but blows where he pleases. Others
seeing no security to be found in the former distinction, did commence another,
viz. That the Pope cannot err in matters of Law; but he can be deceived in
matters of fact.

But this likewise is a broken Cane, and whosoever leans his hand upon it
will be deceived.

This distinction was found out by those that are called in the Popish Church,
Jansenists, for to heal that wound that was inflicted on them by Alexand the
VII, by reason of the famous five Articles of Jansenius^ the Bishop of Ypres;
but nevertheless, it has nothing of truth in it self.

For 1. when the Pope pronounces any thing as to the matters of Faith, he does
not only look upon the person, but considers the person as believing so or
otherwise, and so condemns him. And how a man that cannot err (as they say)
in matters of Law, should err in matters of Fact, cannot be conceived; by
reason he having ones Book, and being an infallible searcher and interpreter of
ones meaning, can fall into the question of Fact, out of the question of Law,
and so pronounce, that this and no other was the meaning of the Author.

2. Because Law makes a prescription unto a Fact, it is not likely, that he
who cannot err in matters of Law, should do so in matters of Fact.

3. Because sometimes out of a Fact arises a Law; therefore the same question
which was before a question of Fact, after it is become (by long continuance) a
question of Law, may be handled and decided by the Pope infallibly.

4. By this way, the Pope shall never be able to condemn a Heretic, or strike
him with a thunder of an Anathema, as one that has a fallible judgment in
matters of Fact: which shall not be admitted by the Papists.

5. That the Pope may err in matters of Law, and that most horribly, we have
shortly shown the same a little higher.

So that hence we may perceive how sallibly they believe that place the
infallibility in the Pope.

For the last follows the third meaning of the Papists, viz. That the
infallibility of the Church resides in the Pope and Council together. But,
Incidit in scyllam qui vult vitare charybdin. Because the same difficulties
which were proposed before arise again:

Besides it will be dubious which of them parties, viz. if the Pope unto the
Council, or the Council unto the Pope does communicate the infallibility.
Afterward, if the Pope be absent, and be there by his Messengers, if they have
the same authority he should have if he was present, The same they could not
have, because it is his own formally, or else he could grant it as well to all
the Bishops of the Council, as to his Messengers. Moreover, it will be very
doubtful if those Decretals which were framed in the Popes absence, will be
infallible, and binding the Conscience; for if all the Decretals are of no
value without the Pope's confirmation, it cannot be conceived how that these
Constitution, made in, and by the Council of Trent, can be ratified,
extraconciliariter, or without it, by reason the Popes infallibility does not
consist as he is separated from the Council, but as he is joined with it.

Hence then every one that has not a face of a Wizell, may see how the Papists
make their business to catch a shadow, and affirming their Church to be
Infallible, does not know, nor cannot agree amongst themselves wherein this
Church does consist: and so they do not know how to satisfy their own selves
nor others neither, although they brag very much of it.

Projiciunt ampullas and sesquipedalia verba. I my self remaining yet in the
Popish Religion, did perceive my self to be entangled by these difficulties;
and therefore I often considered how to be extricated out of them, that so I
might praise God in purity and holiness, with the freedom of my Conscience.

And although being in Spain (which is my native Country) I did hear very much
of the Protestant Churches; nevertheless, I could never meet with any Books
written by the Divines of that Communion, by reason we are severely forbidden
to read them. But because I did hear that they found all their Doctrine upon
the Scriptures, I took a great desire to read the same, and to search after the
Truth in order to my Salvation. Neither do they forbid in Spain, as a Country
religious above the rest of the Papists, to read the Holy Bible.

And after I had made it my business to read the Holy Word of God, I met with
those words of the Apostle Paul; 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: That the man of
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished with all good works. Here it seemed unto
me, that the Apostle had drawn a portraicture of a Minister, and proposed not
only the method of Preaching, but also the matter and the off spring of it; and
so declared by what means a Man of God, that is, a Minister of Christ, might
come to a full perfection of learning, in order to the Instruction of their
souls, that should be committed to his care.

Namely, he meant the Holy Scriptures of which he thought, they did contain the
treasure of the Divine Wisdom, when he pronounces them to be able to make one
wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.
and expresses the four fountains of Christian Morality to be contained in
them; and charge not only himself, but an Angel likewise with an Anathema,
Gal. 1.8. Gal. 6.16. Isa. 8.20.
if he should preach any other Gospel unto us, than that he has preached, and
pronounces his blessing upon them that walk according to this rule. God
himself is willing to reduce his People from them that have familiar spirits,
and from wizards, unto his will and counsel, sends them to the law, and to
the testimony; and adds, That for them that do not walk according to this
word, there is no morning, that is, no life everlasting; according to the
phrase of the Psalmist, when he says, Psalm. 46.5.
God shall help Jerusalem when the morning appears, that is, when the day of
our salvation will be approaching. This was the reason that John on his
Revelation declares, If any man shall take away from the words of the book of
this prophecy, Apoc. 22.19.
God shall take away his part out of the book of life. Seeing then that the
Apostle Paul did speak so highly in the commendation of Scriptures, as a man
that has not shunned to declare all the counsel of God, Act. 20.27. Act. 26.22.
saying no other things than those, which Moses and the Prophets did say should
come; I concluded presently, that there was no other fountain, out of which we
could derive the true Church, but only out of Scriptures, by reason we are
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.2.
Jesus Christ being himself the chief cornerstone.

And I saw likewise that the Ancient Father Austin, L. 3. cont. Ma. Arian.
did not disagree with my opinion, when he says, Neither will I alledg the
Nicene, nor do you alledg the Council of Arimine, unto my prejudice. Let matter
with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason decert by the authority of
the Scriptures, which are not belonging only to one party, but impartial
witnesses of both. Contra Donat.
There (that is in the holy Scriptures) as he says somewhere else, Let us
search after the true Church, and handle our questions.

But searching more narrowly after the Purity of particular Churches, I found
none answering so exactly the Scriptures as the Protestant Churches. Therefore
I steadfastly concluded with my self, as soon as God would grant me an
opportunity to associate my self in the Protestant Church, and reject the Roman
Idolatry. Which I accordingly have done, and having renounced the Popish
Religion, have adjoined my self unto the body of our Savior Christ Jesus, that
is, unto the true Protestant Church.

Whose truth I am going to show now as shortly as I can, and that by this
argument.

That Church which does vindicate the authority of the Scriptures, defends the
proprieties of them, and teaches according to the Scriptures, is a true
Church; but the Protestant Church does so: The Major is firm, and without
contradiction: The Minor is to be proved, which I am endeavoring to do.
Neither will I be so Scripturary, as that I should reject the old Fathers, and
the Primitive Councils; I will alledg them likewise as bearing witness unto
truth, which cannot be overthrown.

As to the first, The Protestant Church does vindicate the authority of
Scriptures, when she denies the same to depend from the authority of the
Church, not so much as to us.

Robert Bellarmin seeing that these who affirmed without any limitation, Bell.
de V. D. l. 1. c. 46.
the Divinity of Scriptures does depend from the authority of the Church, did
not speak soberly enough, he endeavored to mollify the Proposition with this
distinction, viz. that the Scriptures must be considered, either in themselves,
or in respect unto us. As they are considered in the first manner, they do not
depend from the authority of the Church, but as they are in the second.

But as the distinction is vain, because every authority is Relative, and is
not so much to be considered in it self, as in respect of the object; so
likewise the supposition is false, viz. That the authority of Scriptures, in
respect, or in relation unto us, does depend from the Church.

But before I come to the demolishing of this assertion, we will consider the
reason why Papists say and believe so. And indeed I can find no other besides
this, that they seeing themselves unable for resisting the Arguments of the
Protestants, which are drawn out of the Scriptures, endeavoring to pervert the
sense of them, asserting, that the same depends from the interpretation of
the Church, and so consequently are constrained to affirm, that also the
authority of Scriptures depends from the Church; of which Scriptures, nor of
the right meaning of them, nothing can be certain without the Tradition of the
Church. And by this same, they very handsomely tread in the footsteps of the
old Heretics, of whom one thus speaks.

The Heretics, when they come to be argued by the Scriptures, they presently
fall to the accusing of them, as if they could not be from or of a sufficient
authority, or not so to be understood, and of which no certainty can be had
without Tradition. Here is the true Protraicture of our modern Papists.

But to the thing it self. We deny the authority of Scriptures to depend any
way from the authority of the Church, but only from the holy Spirit, speaking
within the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1.21. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
by reason he is the author of them, and so he does endue them with an
irrefragable authority: And as Christ desires no testimony from any besides
from the Father, so likewise his word, which he has been pleased to leave upon
earth instead of his person. And as it is very unreasonable, that the Kings
Proclamation should depend from a Crier, or a Rule from a thing that is ruled;
or that the Sun should borrow its brightness from that Orb or Vortex which it
is contained in; so it is very disagreeable to affirm, that the Scriptures
should depend from the authority of the Church. The Church is a Candlestick,
the Word of God is a Candle, as our Savior declares, Luke 8.16. Now as a
Candlestick does contribute nothing at all to the light of the Candle, so
neither does the Church to the authority of Scriptures. We do not reject the
Ministerial Testimony of the Church in that case, by reason the Church leads us
unto the Gospel, as the Samaritan Woman did lead her fellow-citizens to Christ,
as Austin says; yet for all that, none of them can be called the cause of our
faith, but an instrument.

Yet the Papists do object against us, viz. 1 Timothy 3.15.
That the Church is called the pillar and ground of the truth; and from thence
they bring in this conclusion, that she is the only cause, from whom the
authority of the Scriptures does depend.

But very foolishly; because, first, that (I may pass by the Observation of
Camero, who affirms these words to belong unto the 16 verse, by reason there
is to be found in that verse a Copulative Particle, which otherwise should be
to no purpose, etc.) the Apostle does speak of the Church considered as a
house, and then shows which is the chiefest pillar or ground of the same (and
indeed, if we speak reasonably, a house cannot be a pillar, but a pillar is in
a house). It is, secondly, to be observed, that by this pillar, is not to be
understood an Architectonical, but a Political one; not one that should uphold
by its strength the authority of Scriptures, but one upon which the
Proclamations and Constitutions of the Supreme King are affixed.

Neither is the exception of Bellarmin against this distinction of any value,
viz. That by this way the Church may be as well called a Library as a Pillar;
by reason we do affirm, that the office of the Church is not only to keep the
books (as it is of a Library), but to expose the Contents of the same to the
view of people, and to under-teach them in the way of their Superiors will
(which belongs to a pillar).

The Church then can be an external Motive unto us, that the Scriptures are of
divine authority, but cannot persuade us unto it, by reason it is only the
propriety, and the business of the holy Ghost, whom the Lord joyneth with his
word; Ps. 59.21.
when he says, My spirit, which is upon thee, and my words which I have put in
thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, etc.

Austin speaks very handsomely to that purpose, Lib. de Confess.
speaking of the authority of Scripture. But how shall I be persuaded to
believe this? Moses indeed did say so; it is true, he said, but he is gone; and
although he should be present, and talk Hebrew to me, I should not understand
what he meant: but if he should speak Latin, I should understand. But by what
means should I know that he speaks truth? Therefore inwardly, inwardly I say
in the Cabinet of my heart, not the Greek, nor the Hebrew, nor the Latin,
neither the Barbarian truth; but he that without the sound of lips, or the
noise of syllables, should tell me he speaks truth, and I should say to this,
this man, You speak truth. You may see, Christian and impartial Reader, how
Austin did think he could be persuaded of the authority of Scriptures, not by
the authority of the Church, nor by the persuasion of Moses or the Prophets,
but by the internal truth, speaking in his heart, Which is the holy Spirit?

And let them not make an instance against us, that every one pretends the holy
Spirit, by reason pretension makes no prejudice to truth. Neither is the
question betwixt us and the Papists, as betwixt admitting the authority of the
Scripture, and denying the same, by reason both of us do admit the same; and
then the question arises, how, or by what way we may be persuaded, that these
Scriptures which we embrace as divine, are not profane. And if we or they
answer more agreeably, let every impartial Christian be a judge.

We conclude therefore, as this question to be unworthy of a Christian man, If
the holy Bible be the Word of God; so another assertion of a Jesuit, Sambar de
fide orthodoxa.
called Sambar, to be very foolish, viz. that the Protestant Churches have no
Scriptures. For besides that he defends this proposition for no other end, but
to escape the strength of the arguments derived out of the Scriptures, likewise
he confirms this proposition by no other medius terminus, or reason, but
because the Protestant Church (having no notes of a true Church) is false, and
so she can have no Scripture, being the Scriptures depends from the Church,
both in their material, and in their formal part. Whereas both the argument and
its probation is false, and they foolishly, petunt principium, take that for
granted, which we utterly deny, viz. that the Scriptures and their sense does
depend from the authority of the Church, as we did touch this point somewhat
higher.

Moreover, the Jesuit by this assertion does show his desperate cause, by
reason none of the ancient Fathers did deny the Scriptures to any Heretic (as
they suppose us to be), that they might show his case plain; and Austin says,
that the Scriptures are not belonging as proper to one, Aug. lib. 3. contr. Ma.
Arian.
but that they are common witnesses of both the sides. And if we would be so
rude, we could change the scene, and affirm, that the Papists themselves have
no Scripture, as to the formal part, because we did plainly show a little
higher, their Church not only to be false and erroneous, but none at all. But
being I am not afraid of their arrows, which they can take out of the
Scriptures, I will not deny them the Bible.

Having thus far secured the Sentiment of the Protestant Churches, about the
authority of Scriptures, I descend to the proprieties of them.

I affirm therefore, the holy Scriptures to be perfect, as well touching the
perfection of parts, as of degrees, and thence to be sufficient to our
salvation. The Law of God is perfect, says David, Psalm. 119.
and the sufficiency of it is shown by the Apostle in the forementioned words,
2 Timothy 3.16. The accession of the New Testament to the old makes no prejudice
to the perfection and sufficiency of Scriptures, because he that declared all
the counsel of God, spoke nothing other than what Moses did say and the
Prophets, as we writ before. Hence the old Fathers said very well, As the New
Testament is hidden in the old, so the Old Testament is declared in the new;
neither (gradus variat speciem) does a degree change the nature of things that
are of the same kind.

Neither do we dispute with the Papists, of this or the other part of
Scriptures, but of the whole Canon, as it is made by the Apostles, declared by
the ancient Church, and enumerated by Hierom. Hierony. in prol. Gal.
They are not therefore to commit a fallacy of division.

And as we do justly cut off from this perfection and sufficiency of
Scriptures, the books called Apocrypha, by reason they contradict themselves
and the holy Scripture, neither were they found in the Jewish Church, unto
which were committed the Oracles of God: Romans 3.2.
So we reject the distinction of the Papists betwixt the books Protocanonical
and Deuterocanonical, by reason a Canon cannot be changed. And for this reason
we do very little esteem, Traditiones non scriptas, not written Traditions;
because out of that is written, Joh 20.31 2 Timothy 3.15
we may have sufficient instructions for the life-eternal.

To refer unto these Traditions the several Orders of Friars, and the sheaving
of their Crowns, the words of Christ, John 16.12.
I have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now, is a
very great folly. Because if this was the meaning of Christ, he could very
easily have called a Barber, and commanded the heads of those Disciples to be
shaven. But may be he could not by reason of their baldness. Besides, that
Monks, Hieronimus.
whose duty was to weep, and not to teach, as an old Father says, were not
shaven for a sign of their honor and pre-eminence, but for a sign of their
penitence.

For the last, Psalm. 19.8. Romans 16.4.
the Scriptures are easy to be understood; The Commandment of the Lord is
pure, enlightening the eyes: and whatsoever things were written aforetime, were
written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. Which could not be, if the Scripture was not easy
and light. We affirm therefore, that as those things which are absolutely
necessary to salvation are few, so they are plainly set down in the Scriptures.
But as for other questions, I do not deny such things to be found in the
Scriptures, that can afford work enough for a human wit. Namely, as one says,
The holy volumes are of such a nature, Chrysostomus.
that as well a lamb may wade in it, as an Elephant swim.

Being then, that the holy Scriptures are perspicuous, as it is evident out of
reason, testimony, and the consent of the ancient Fathers; therefore the
Protestants proceed very lawfully in attributing judicium discretionis, or a
judgment of discretion to every true Christian. So that every believer by the
often reading of the Word of God, and by the conferring of one place of
Scripture with the other, may interpret the Gospel, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
because no prophecy of Scripture is of any private interpretation; for it came
not by the will of man, but by the holy Ghost.

As for the Fathers of the ancient Church, and the four Primitive Councils, we
embrace them as interpreters of the holy Scriptures; yea, we affirm likewise,
that they may bind subordinately to Scriptures our conscience, but not force
them to the faith (ligant, non obligant): yet we deny whether the Fathers, or
the Council, or the Roman Pope to be a Judge of the Controversies about matters
of faith, Austin. Fatetur Andradius contra K^mnitium, Defens. Council. Triden.
l. 2. Bellar. sacra scriptura regula decidendi certissima tutissimaque est.
Heb. 4.12.
but only the Holy Ghost speaking in his Word, or as one says, Christ himself
when he speaks: Let Christ judge of this controversy, who although he be
absene in his person, yet is present in his word.

Hence does flow, that the Scriptures may be justly called a Judge; not
proclaiming outwardly the sentence, but deciding the question as a Law, and so
it may be called a judex normalis, a normal Judge, being it is a discerner of
the thoughts and intents of the heart.

We did show (as I believe) shortly and clearly, that the Protestant Churches
do vindicate sufficiently the authority of the holy Scriptures, and derogate
nothing at all from their adjuncts and proprieties.

Now I will come to the second part of our argument, and show, that the
Protestants do teach according to the doctrine of the Holy Ghost, contained in
the Scriptures.

I will pass by these common places of Divinity, as touching God, in his Works,
Proprieties and Persons, by reason the Papists do believe the same as the
Protestants, except in some preter-fundamental things, which we will have
better opportunity to speak of somewhat lower.

Only this I touch at present, that Jesuital definition of the Free will is
very false and erroneous, viz. that it is Facultas qua positis omnibus ad
agendum praerequisitis aliquis possit agere and non agere: A faculty by which,
all the requisites belonging to the doing of a thing, being present, a man can
nevertheless choose to do it or no; I say it is false, because besides that when
the object is present, the will, by the determination of the last practical
judgment of our reason, embraces the object without any dilation; likewise it
is impossible that a man should change Gods Decree, which is one of the
requisits, Act. 17.28 Psalm. 7.6. Isa 4.10. Psalm. 8.11.
putting a man into a performance of this or another kind of an action; by
reason, as God himself cannot change, so neither can his Will, because he says
himself, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure: and David, The
counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all
generations.

After all the requisites to the prodition and betraying of Christ were found
in Judas, as viz. the determination of his Will by his Reason; the taking of
the money, etc. Judas could not choose but betray Christ, by reason the highest
requisite was present, which is the Will of God and his determination, or his
hand and his counsel; in order unto which, the Son of man was of necessity to
be delivered into the hands of sinful men, Act. 1.28. Luke 24.7.
and be crucified, and the third day rise again. All which could have been
changed, if the free will of Judas had been of that condition our Jesuitical
definition speaks of.

The Protestants therefore are sounder in this case, as well as in the rest,
because they define the free will thus; Arbitrium humanum est facultas agendi
libere, absque coactione, and determinatione physica ad unum; that is, The will
of a man is a faculty, doing a thing freely, without coaction, or physical
determination to one.

Because not every necessity takes away the freedom of our will, but only that
which is of coaction, and of physical necessity; for the free will cannot be
forced as to its actus elicitos, or internal acts, but quoad imperatos, or
external; nor can it be determined to one thing only, as the fire is
determinated to burning.

Therefore it is not free from the Divine determination, nor from the last
judgment of the practical reason, nor in the unregenerate from sin, unto which
although it be determined, yet considered specifically it has freedom, to make
a choice betwixt sin and sin.

So that in an unregenerated man it is only free to sin, neither can a man by
the virtue of the same arrive to the doing of any Theological good. 1 Cor. 3.5.
Col. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.3. and 5.14. and 2.12. Romans 14.23.
For we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God, being we are by nature the children of wrath; we
are dead without God, and every imagination of the thought of our heart is only
evil continually, Genesis 6.5. and from our youth, Cap. 8.28. And the best that
any unregenerate man seems to do is but bad, by reason it does not proceed
from faith, which qualifieth the work.

Just then as a privatione totali non datur regressus ad habitum nisi per
potentiam infinitam, from a total privation can be no returning to a habit,
unless by the infinite power; so likewise from sin (which is privatio
rectitudinis debitae inesse, a want or a privation of the righteousness which
ought to be within us), there is no returning to justice or righteousness, Joh.
11.43.
unless God awaken us, and speak to our dead hearts, Rise up Lazarus; unless he
commands the Sun of Righteousness to rise in our dark hearts as he did in the
first Creation, Mal. 4.
saying, Let there be light, Genesis 1.

And truly because Regeneration according to the phrase of the holy Scriptures
is nothing else but a new creation; Ephesians. 2.10.
For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, says
Paul; and elsewhere, In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing,
Gal. 6.15.
nor uncircumcision, but a new creature; confer Gal. 6.15. cum Col. 3.10. Hence
David prays, God should create a clean heart in him; it cannot be attributed to
any else but only to the Infinite power, Phil. 2.13.
which is in God, who works in us both to will and to do, according to his
good pleasure.

Whatever good works therefore are or were to be found in Heathens, are not
without reason called by Austin, August. Mat. 5.45.
Splendida peccata, shining sins. I do not deny, they may do somewhat good
morally, by the general influence of the Almighty, according to Paul's saying,
The Gentiles do by nature the things contained in the Law; Romans 2.19.
yet they can do no good as it is considered Theologically, because they are
destitute of faith, which purifieth the heart, and of a right end of their
doing, Act. 15 9.
which is Gods glory. Being they do not absolutely show this or the the other
sin, but for that they may show themselves before people, as Socrates did shun
Intemperance, for to gain by it vainglory.

Hence it flows that Justification, Sanctification, and the like, are not
ours but Gods; so that when God confers upon us as justified and sanctified the
eternal glory, he may be well said, August.
to crown with reward his own gifts, and not our merits.

As to Justification which we first intend to speak of, it is twofold, active
and passive. Or else it is to be considered, either in respect of God
justifying, or in respect of the man justified. In the first respect it is
nothing else but an outward absolution of a sinner, and a proclamation made by
God of a man, that he is reputed just for the merits and satisfaction of
Christ. Hence Paul says, That God justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5. Romans 4.5.
Romans 3.24.
By his Grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Romans 3.24. God
then so justifying makes no phyfical immutation or change in a sinner, as the
Papists do say, who would have this justification of God to be of that same
nature as their Transubstantiation is, in which one thing is changed into
another, that is, that God justifying does not proceed as a Judge at the Bar,
pronouncing one innocent, but as making by a physical immutation a just man out
of an unjust, as Christ did turn water into wine. To prove which opinion
Bellarmine, Becanus and the rest of the Jesuits did much labor, but without
any success. They produce nothing out of the Scriptures which is not to be
referred to Sanctification, and so they commit a great fault of ignoratio
elenchi, and their arguments framed from reason are so unreasonable that they
are not worth the while of refutation. The strongest of them which I intend to
alledg, is taken from the Word it self. They say,

Justificure nihil aliud est ex vocis etymologia quam justum facere, ex justus
and facio; and the rest of such words as are composed with the word facio are
of the same signification, as glorificare, sanctificare, to sanctify, to
glorify, which do not signify to pronounce one holy or glorious, but to make
one such and of that nature; and therefore justificate to justify, must not
signify to pronounce one just who is unjust in himself but to make one
righteous.

But I hope they will not prove themselves better Grammarians than they are
Divines. I answer therefore:

1. The sense and the right meaning of a word in matters Divine, is not to be
taken out of Calepin, but out of the Word of God, which is the rule of our
faith. Now out of the Scriptures it is plain, as it is demonstrated by many,
that Justification is every where taken in sensu forensi: Qui justificat impium
and condemnat justum ambo sunt abominationi Jehovae; he that justifies an
unjust man, and condemns the just, they are both an abomination unto the
Lord, faith Solomon. Here the justification of an unjust is opposed to a
condemnation of a godly man, and so in all other places the word Justification
is taken.

2. If this should be the meaning of the word, then there should be no
distinction betwixt Justification and Sanctification, as we find it to the
contrary, ^ev. 22.11 ^om. 8.30
Rev. 22.11. He that is righteous let him be righteous still, and he that is
holy let him be holy still: and so Romans 8.30. And whom he justified, them he
also glorified: where in the word glorified is comprehended Sanctification,
Glorificatio inchoata, velue glorificatio est sanctificatio consummata, an
inchoated glorifying, as Glorification is a consummated sanctifying.

3. And then this composition with the word facio does not always signify an
internal immutation in that thing unto which such a word is attributed; Luke
1.46.
as we may see in the Song of the blessed Virgin Mary, where she says,
Magnificat anima mea Dominum, My soul does magnify the Lord: where Magnificat
is compounded out of the word magnus and facio. Now let them put their heads
together, and if they can prove any way that the blessed Mother by her
magnifying the Lord, made in him an inward change, we will allow that God by
justifying us, makes an inward mutation in us.

Ante vero leves pascentur in ^here cervi. So much concerning the Justification
called active, now we will descend to the passive, or as it is considered in
respect of the man justified. And so considered it is nothing else but an
assurance of our righteousness in Christ, and by the imputation of his merits
which we receive and apply to our selves by faith, Romans 3.25, 26.
Romans 3.25, 26.

Hence we see the cause meritorious of our Justification to be the merits of
Christ, as we showed it a little before, and the hand by which we apply this
satisfaction of our Savior, or the instrumental cause, to be faith; Romans 5.28.
Therefore (says Paul) we conclude that a man is justified by faith, without
the deeds of the law.

It is as plain in the holy Word of God, as that the cause of the day is the
Sun, that we are only justified by faith, Gratia salvati estis per fidem: By
grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, Ephesians. 2.8.
it is the gift of God. So that I will not insist upon this matter any longer,
Romans 3.20
and therefore immediately conclude with the Apostle against the Popish Creed,
That by the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight;
for by the law is the knowledge of sin. There is therefore no justification in
the sight of God by our works, but only by faith, which applies the Panacea of
salvation unto our dead hearts, and makes us to live in him, and him in us.

We are not so unreasonable as to separate works from our faith, nevertheless
we affirm, that it is faith only that justifies: that which sees is only an
eye, that which weighs is only an arm, nevertheless, neither of them can either
see or weigh, unless they be annexed to the human body; so although faith is
said to justify only, the meaning is not that it is separated from the good
works.

The holy Apostle James says, Jam. 2.24.
We are justified by works and not by faith only: It is true, but he
understands either the justification before men, as we may see it out of Jam.
2.18. Show me thy faith by thy works, or else the confirmation of the inward
faith by the outward doings, or else he uses a kind of a Metonymia effecti; so
that he may understand by the faith and works, a working-faith, which he
seems to insinuate in the forementioned place, Ye see then how that by works
a man is justified, Ibid. Jam. 2.17.
and not by faith only; that is not by a bare faith, which if it has not works
is dead being alone, but by a living faith, which shows its goodness by works.

Therefore we are not justified by works, but as I said by faith, and every one
who looks into himself and his weakness must utter the Confession of
Bellarmine, Bellar. de bon. oper.
Propter humanae vitae fragilitatem and propriae justitiae incertitudinem,
tutissimum est in^ sola Dei misericordia spem collocare.

For the sake of the frailty of human life, and the uncertainty of our own
righteousness, it is the most secure way to rely upon the only mercy of God.

Consider, kind and civil Reader, the words of this Cardinal, who (as I can
show if necessity requires) at the end of the greatest Controversies which are
handled betwixt us and the Romanists, yields to the truth, and is more (though
an Italian) a Protestant than a Papist.

So then we have by the grace of God shown Justification, as in relation to
God, to be a forensick pronunciation of the righteousness of a sinner; and the
passive one to be only by faith, and a living faith, which applys to her the
merits of our Savior.

As to Sanctification we will not speak any thing of it, by reason the Papists
do not dispute much against the Protestants in this matter, only I utterly deny
these works which we do, to be meritorious, which are conducing and necessary
to our salvation, necessitate medit, as a means by which we should arrive to
everlasting salvation. Bernhard says very handsomely of them, Bernhard.
Opera bona sunt via ad regnum, non causa regnandi. Good Works are a way to
Heaven, but not the cause of it. Neither does the distinction of the Papists
betwixt the works de congruo and de condigno, mitigate their assertion. For
besides, that the congruency of Gods reward for our works consists only in his
own pleasure, Fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to
give you the Kingdom. Luke 12.32,
Likewise (which I always admired) they have found no other place out of the
Scriptures, or in them, for the asserting the condignity (or meritoriousness as
it is considered in it self) of good works, besides this place, which does
contradict them to their faces: Non sunt condignae passiones hujus temporis,
gloriae in nobis revelandae: This is the only place where the word condignae is
to be found.

Ex ungue leonem: It is enough to give a small portraiture of truth, because
Wisdom which has many sons can be justified by them.

I will go further, and show how the Protestant Church teaches well of the
Sacraments that are seals of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11
and give a short view of the Papists Errors. As touching Baptism, both of the
parties confesses the same to be a Sacrament of Initiation, by which we are
implanted in fide parentum, (which I hold) in the faith of our Parents, into
the Church, which is the Body of Christ.

But falsely do the Papists affirm, that, first, it does work ex opere operate,
by its own virtue, in order to our Regeneration, and the taking away of the
Original sin; not only because a thing corporal and outward can have no
influence into things spiritual, as to their amendment, but all proceeds from
God only; Omne bonum donum, and omnis perfecta Donatio descendit a patre
luminum, says James. But because a sign of the Covenant cannot contribute the
things in it comprehended; neither is it apparent by the effect, by reason
those that have been baptized, are, and have been subject to everlasting
damnation, and have fallen from that former Illumination, of which speaks the
Apostle, Heb. 6.4. And if this Sacrament should work ex opere operato, Heb.
6.4. Romans 4.9, 10.
Grace, or Regeneration, etc. Surely Abraham could not have been as he was
counted, righteous by faith in uncircumcision? Moreover, in the times
Primitive, and especially as to them that were baptized being at age, Faith was
required before the seal of Righteousness was stamped upon their souls and
consciences. Now, being that faith is a cause of other virtues and graces, and
has adjoined to it self that great work of Repentance; it must needs follow,
that the Apostle requiring faith (as to the aged) did suppose in them other
graces, not thinking that the same should be conferred upon them by the
Baptism, but rather sealed and confirmed: Yea, because the Sacrament of Baptism
is a seal of the Righteousness of faith, and not a thing working out by its
internal Power, Faith and Regeneration. This same reason has moved Austin, and
other of the ancient Fathers, to affirm, that Children are baptized either in
fide parentum, in the faith of their parents, if faithful Christians; or else
in fide Ecclesiae, in the faith of the Church, viz. if their parents be
unknown, or Infidels; because they were persuaded that faith is required before
baptism, rather than conferred by it. So that we think, that in these Children
which are elected, there is an operation of the Holy Ghost from the beginning;
which although not sensibly, yet efficaciously works upon their tender hearts
and minds: and if it does not work in them subjectively some kind of faith, or
else an actual faith; yet it objectively applies the benefits of Christ, which
are otherwise received by an actual faith.

Now that no body should think we do charge falsely our Adversaries, the
Papists, with this assertion; I will show the Courteous Reader the reason why
they do assert thus, and then evince the same out of another custom of theirs
in this holy Sacrament.

As to the reason why? it is this: Because they say, that Children dying
without being baptized, cannot be saved, but are in a limbus infantum, a kind
of a hole prepared for Children, where they suffer paenam damni, sed non paenam
sensus; that is, they are deprived only from the Vision of God, but are not
subject to any sensible torment. If then their election, which is unchangeable,
Act. 2.39.
and the being under the Covenant of Grace, which as well belongs to them as
their Parents, cannot save them, because of their not being baptized: Surely
baptism, which makes them able to demand Heaven, must work these graces by its
internal virtue, by which they may arrive to the eternal happiness.

2. They say none can be saved without the Church, and none can be counted as a
Member of it, unless he be baptized. So then, if the baptism only makes us
Members of the Church, without which we cannot be saved; Baptism likewise must
operate, by its internal virtue, those graces by which we are saved.

As to the custom in some particulars, it is this: They think the holy Baptism
to be so absolutely necessary to salvation, that they in case of necessity do
approve the baptism of Women, if they only observe the form of the baptism.
Which evinces, that they think baptism to work as we said formerly, ex opere
operato. Having showed the truth of our charge laid unto them, I will show with
one argument the falsness of them both.

As to the first; That not all Children that die without baptism are to be
deprived of the beatifical Vision, 2 Samuel 12.18, 23.
is as sure, as that David, who was saved, was to go after his death to his
child, which was dead without circumcision; instead of which baptism succeeded,
as we may infer out of Col. Col. 2.11, 12. Act. 2.39.
2.11, 12. It is as fure, as that the promise of everlasting salvation
belongs to the Children; which argument is to be pressed as well against
Anabaptists, denying the seal to the Children, unto whom belongs the promise;
(for which belonging of the promise, Peter was willing to confer Baptism upon
some Converts, as we may see out of the forementioned place, Act. 2.38, 39.
Act. 2.38, 39.) as against the Papists denying to the Children (albeit they be
under the promise, and the Covenant of Grace) dying without being baptized, the
life everlasting; by reason he that is in the Covenant of Grace, or under the
promises, is in Christ; he that is in Christ, Ephesians. 2.12. Act. 4.
must necessarily be saved; Therefore he that is under the promise of life, or
in the Covenant of Grace (as Children are), must necessarily be saved.

But they have an argument against us, Verily I say unto you, except a man he
born of water, Joh. 3.6.
and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Out of which words
they conclude, that baptism is of that efficacy, that none can be saved without
it.

But I answer. Matthew, Mat. 3.11.
He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and fire; that is, the Holy Ghost,
who is of a fiery nature, in cleansing as Gold seven times refined in the fire.
Therefore such expressions are metaphorical, or figurative and improper, and
are called Hendiadis: a like expression there is in Virgil, Poculis libamus and
auro. Virgil.
We drink out of Cups of Gold, Aeneid. 1. Arma virumque cano, id est, armatum
virum. Joh. 3.3.
that is, out of golden Cups; so that to be born of water and spirit, is
nothing else, but to be born out of a watery, or out of a fiery spirit. Hence
what Christ says here, by way of Hendiadis, he expresses the same in its own
proper words, a little higher, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God. So that hence we may inter by the authority and explaining of
our Savior himself, in this place to be understood only the spiritual
Regeneration, and not the external Ablution of the water.

As to the second, we do utterly deny the Baptism performed by Women to be
lawful and irrevocable.

They have nothing else to alledg, only the example of Zipporah, Exodus 4.25, 26.
and so they think a Woman may as lawfully baptize, as circumcise.

I will not answer according to the usual answer of some Divines, Zipporah
sinned in doing so; because I believe the Almighty God does never bless men for
sin, as he did Moses, for that doing of Zippora. But I answer thus; that in the
Old Testament circumcision was indifferently performed by any, byreason it was
not so strictly joined with the office of Preaching, as Baptism is in the New
Testament, made so by Christ himself; Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them,
etc. Mat 28.19
So that now it is unlawful for any one to administer the holy Baptism, besides
him who is ordained for Preaching.

Now we are minded to speak of the second Sacrament (for we will not regard
their assertion of the rest of their five Sacraments, which have no ground
neither in Scriptures, nor in the ancient Fathers), which is the Lord's Supper.

This according to the true Doctrine, is nothing else, but only a visible sign
of an invisible grace, by which visible sign, that is, Bread and Wine, 1 Cor.
10.16, 17.
we receive the body and blood of our Savior, as a seal of the Covenant of
Grace, tending unto our salvation. We do not deny the body and blood of Christ
to be really present in this holy Sacrament: But we deny the same,

1. To be there corporally, because the body of our Savior being
circumscriptive, and in heavens, is not everywhere: And then,

2. We deny this Supper of our Lord to be a sacrifice for the living and the
dead. Which is my greatest point in this case, and I accordingly will endeavor
to declare it.

As to the first, the Papists do urge very much their Transubstantiation. It is
a question, and a Controversy very well known, but I hope to add some light to
it: I go on. By this Transubstantiation, they understand nothing else, but the
corporal presence of the body and blood of our Savior, under the accidents of
Bread and Wine? So that they think the substance of those Elements to be turned
into the first nothing, out of which they were formerly created, and the
accidents only to remain, which acts in the senses of our sight, feeling and
taste.

This is the description or (...) Transubstantiation, upon which we say the
same to be quite false and erroneous.

1. The name of it, nor the matter in it contained is not to be found in
Scriptures, 1 Cor. 10.17.
by reason after the consecration it is still called bread, of which we are
partakers; where not only we are said to be partakers of bread, which could not
be if it was annihilated, but likewise no Papist will admit this Sacrament to
be called bread after Consecration, which nevertheless the Scripture does.

2. The name of it is newly come up, nor was it ever heard before the Council
of Lateran, when Berengarius was forced to recant the truth, and fall into a
most abominable error, as to say that Christ's body was eaten and bitten with
teeth, etc. Atteri dentibus and in alvum demitti.

3. It is a most improper name to a thing, yea it is as much to be called
Transubstantiation, as creation could be called annihilating; because
Transubstantiation is nothing else but a mutation of one substance into
another, as in Cana of Galilee Wine was turned into water: but here the Papists
say that one substance does not become another, but that the one (which is the
bread and wine) is annihilated, and the other (which is the body and blood of
Christ) is induced under the accidents or species of bread and wine (although
here likewise they have a thousand distinctions about the introduction, or
adduction of the body of Christ underneath the accidents, which I will pass
over); so that by this way it must be called annihilation of one, and
introduction of another substance, rather than Transubstantiation; but because
the thing is false, the name must be of that same nature.

Convenient rebus nomina saepe suis. 4. There can be no Transubstantiation
where the thing that is given, in the distribution of the Sacrament, is called
by the ancients a sign, a figure, because none can be a sign or a figure of
himself; as Christ should be, if he should be given as present corporally or
bodily under the accidents. Austin,
Now Austin says, Non dubitavit Dominus dicere, hoc est corpus meum, ^um daret
figuram corporis sui. The Lord was pleased to say, This is my body, when he did
give the figure or the sign of it. And the most of the ancient Fathers do
interpret the words in this sense, as we will show God willing in another
Treatise, purposely handling of this matter. Scripture, as we showed somewhat
higher, calls it, Sigillum, or signaculum justitiae fidei, a seal of the
Righteousness of Faith; and what is a seal of a thing, cannot be the thing it
self.

The Objections that the Papists have against Protestants as to their
Transubstantiation out of the Scriptures, as well as out of the ancient
Fathers, we will not touch them here, referring them to that Treatise which we
spoke of before, where it shall be most fully handled of. Only I cannot pass
this Objection by, which I did read in one Anonymus Jesuit framed against our
last reason, Jesuita Anonymus.
namely that nothing can be a sign of it self. He makes this instance, That
something can be a sign of it self, as David could had been a sign of himself,
as fighting with Goliath in the Valley of Terebinth, if he had presented himself
upon the Theater.

But I answer, 1. David had not been a sign of himself but of his actions he
performed at the time of the Combat. 2. If David had been sewed up in a Sack,
or else had lain upon the Theater being covered with a skin of an ass, (as they
say Christ is covered with the species of bread and wine) so that no body could
have seen him, I do not understand how he could have been a sign of himself, or
of his actions either, and showed how valiantly he had fought with Goliath.

I will omit here, that this Sacrament was instituted for the remembrance of
Christ Man, and that the remembrance is only of a thing absent, as likewise
many of their exceptions against us, because I refer all this to the aforesaid
Treatise.

Only I will show my second Proposition, which is, that the Supper of the Lord
is no sacrifice for the living and the dead. And this as short as ever I can by
this general argument.

Where there is no Priest, no Altar, no proper Host, there is no proper
sacrifice for sin.

In the New Testament there is no such thing.

The Major is very true and plain. They (Papists) allow their sacrifice to be
proper; if so, she must have a proper altar, a proper Priest, a proper Host,
because the nature of Relatives is such that they do in general relate to one
another, and so says Bellarmine, Bellar. de Missa. lib. 1. c. 16. De cuten
san. lib. 3. c. 4. De Miss. lib. 1. c. 14.
Altaria non consueverunt erigi nisi ad sacrificia proprie dicta: The altars
use not to be erected, unless for sacrifices properly so called. And again,
Sine altari non potest sacrificari: Without an altar there can be no sacrifice.
And again, Nunquam altar proprie dictum erigitur, nisi ad sacrificia proprie
dicta: An altar properly so called, is never erected but for sacrifices
properly so called.

If we therefore evince that there is no proper altar, nor Priest, nor
sacrifice in the New Testament (that is, besides Christ himself.) We shall show
our conclusion evidently that there is no sacrifice neither.

As to the Altar there is no material altar to be sound in the holy Scriptures,
as one that should be used in the New Testament. Christ the instituter of this
holy Sacrament, Luke 22.21. 1 Cor. 10.21. Bellar. de missa. lib. 1. cap. 17.
celebrated the same on the Table: the Apostle Paul calls it a Lords-Table,
there is no mention made of an altar which had been done if it had been in use;
hence the great Bellarmine, Ap stoli non utebantur nominibus sacerdotii
sacrificii, altaris: The Apostles did not use the name of Priesthood,
sacrifice, altar, as knowing well that there could be none after the material
sacrifices were sealed up.

But the Papists object out of Hebr. We have an altar whereof they have no
right to eat, Heb. 13.10.
who serve the tabernacle. I answer that it is an ignoratio elenchi. We do not
deny an improper altar of which this Text speaks, but we deny a proper and a
material altar. That this Text speaks improperly, the words themselves show,
viz. We have an altar whereof to eat etc. Can any body eat a material altar;
and that this altar is an invisible and an improper one the sacrifice that the
Apostle would have to be offered upon it does plainly evince it, Heb. 13.15
By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that
is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name. So the old Fathers
likewise; Ambros. in Epist. ad Hebr. Bernh. in ser. om. S. Ser. 4. Nazian.
Orat. 24. ^ell. l. 1. (...) miss. ^ap. 14. Dan. 9.
Ambrose says, Nihil horum est visibile neque sacerdos, neque sacrificium,
neque altar: Nothing of these is visible, neither the Priest, nor the
sacrifice, nor the altar. Bernhard, Altar nihil aliud arbitror esse quam
corpus Domini: I think the altar to be nothing else but the body of the Lord.
Nazianzen the Divine calls it an altar which is above, that is, Christ himself.
And for the last the Papists themselves must yield here an improper altar to be
understood, as Bellarmine confesses, Non urgeo ipsum locum, I do not urge this
place; and so does Thomas, Anselmus, the Divines of Collen, and others.

As to the Sacrifice there is none proper neither; so prophesies Daniel, that
the Sacrifice and Oblation should cease, and so we see in the fulfilling of the
same Prophecy. Heb. 9.26.
So says Paul, Nor yet that he should offer himself often, but now once in the
end of the world, etc. And in another place, Heb. 10.12
And every Priest stands every day ministering and offering, but this man
after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right
hand of God. Where the Apostle plainly shows that Christ offered himself but
once, and so cannot be offered any more. Yea, it is observable that the Apostle
urges the sufficiency of Christ's oblation, and the excellency of it, by this
argument: 1. Because he offered himself but once, and did not repeat it often
as an insufficient sacrifice. And 2. because he sat down on the right hand of
God for ever, having done his work perfectly, which the Priests could not do,
because they did stand, which signifies one that has not done his work as
yet, but must lay his hand once more to it, before he can sit down, and rest
himself from his work. Therefore the Papist commencing daily sacrifices of
Christ after that one sacrifice do derogate from the sufficiency of it, and
make him liable to standing, where he sits already for ever at the right hand
of God.

This was the reason likewise, why God did destroy Jerusalem and the Temple
after the fulfilling of Christ's Mediatorship, as to one part of his Priesthood
which is his sacrifice, viz. that there should be no more material sacrifices,
being the place to which they were bound was deftroyed.

The Papists do urge the old custom, and the expressions of the old fathers,
who commonly speak about sacrifices; but they are very much in them, because
they understood by the word of a sacrifice nothing else but Sacrificium
Eucharisticum, a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, which commonly was performed at the
Lord's Supper, which and alms joined together with prayers, are a living
sacrifice, Romans 12.1. Clem. Alexand. l. 7 Stromat. De vero cultu. l. 6. c. 25.
August. de C.D. l. 10. c. 4. Psalm. 110.
holy and acceptable to God. Hence Clemens Alexandrinus says, they will not
believe that a holy altar is a righteous soul, and holy prayer the incense. And
Lactantius, There are two things to be offered, a gift and a sacr fice both
incorporal, the gift is the integrity of mind, the sacrifice is prayer and
psalms. Austin calls our heart an altar, our sacrifice humility and praise, our
fire charity. And so Hieronimus, Ambrosius and others.

As to the Priest, there is no other but Christ himself, because he is a Priest
for ever according to the order of Melchizedech, and they cannot be Priests
Levitical, because they are ceased.

And so I having showed there is no proper altar, no proper Priest, nor no
proper Host, besides Christ himself, Who is our sacrifice, Epiphan. lib. 2.
^om. 1. Ha^s.
our priest, our altar; I conclude there is no proper oblation extant at this
time, for the sins of the living and the dead, and by consequence no
Transubstantiation upon which the sacrifice is builded.

And here falls their Purgatory, because besides that it is contrary to
Scriptures, to Reason, to the ancient Fathers, injurious to the satisfaction
and merits of Christ, likewise if there be no sacrifice there shall be no Mass,
and per consequens no money for the delivery of the souls out of Purgatory, and
so Purgatory must needs fall.

Here falls likewise their Doctrine of Concomitancy, Gelasius Pontif. Conc.
Constant.
for which sake, as their Pope says, they have committed a sacriledg in
subducing the Cup from the Layman, which although the Council of Constance
professes to be contrary to the Primitive institution of Christ, and the use
of the ancient Church, yet notwithstanding all this for some foolish reason (as
that the hands of some does shake, that some have ugly beards, etc.) it
declares the man to be an Anathema, that will not believe it. And it is, and
always has been, a great wonder for me why the same doctrine of Concomitance
should not as well serve in the taking away of the bread, and using the cup, or
else in subducing it as well from the Clergy as from the Layman; why it is an
observation and a fulfilling of Law to abstain from one, and a sin, yea a
mortal sin, from the the other. There is no Reason nor Scripture for it to be
found. Therefore the Protestants teach very well, as well to the nature as to
the integrity of this Sacrament, as we may see in their daily practice.

The rest of the arguments which they have against or for this matter, we will,
as I said, refer to the aforementioned Treatise.

Only I will touch the point of the worshipping of Saints. In which the
Protestant Church teaches according to the holy Scriptures, and to the ancient
Fathers, August.
that Sancti honorandi sunt imitatione, non adorandi religione: The Saints are
to be honored by Imitation, but not adored religiously: and that for these
true Reasons, viz.

1. We cannot believe in Saints, Ergo; we cannot worship them: it is the
argument of the Apostle Paul, Romans 10.14.
How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?

2. We are severely forbidden to worship any thing besides God; Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, Mat. 4.10. Isaias. Aquinas. 1. p. q. 57. ar. 4. Jer.
17.1. p. q. 12. ar. 8.
and him only shall thou serve.

3. Because they do not know our thoughts, nor our prayers: Abraham did not
know us, and Isaac was ignorant of us: From thence says Thomas Aquinas, to
know the cogitations of the heart is the property of God, and elsewhere, Ergo
Angeli non cognoscunt secreta cordis; therefore Angels know not the secrets of
the heart. And again, Cognoscere singularia and cogitata, and facta hominum,
non est de perfectione intellectus creati; To know particulars, and the
thoughts and acts of men, is not of the perfection of a created understanding.
This considering, Durandus says, 4. p. 463.
Si quaeratur an beati, cogitatione beata, cognoscunt orationes nostras,
dicendum qu^d non. If the question be, whether the blessed Saints in their
blessed knowledge do know our prayers? It is to be answered, they do not:
according to Austin, Aug. in lib. de cur. promort. c. 15.1 Reg. 8.39.
Proinde fatendum est nescire quidem mortuos quid his agatur. Furthermore, it
is to be confessed, that the dead know not what is done here, because God only
knows the hearts of all the Children of men; seeing then that the Saints do
not know our prayers, nor our thoughts; neither is it unlawful to adore them,
or worship them.

But I cannot pass by with silence an answer of a Jesuit, Jesuit, Anonymus.
upon this place we produced in our third Reason, Abraham does not know us. He
answers, that the Saints are said not to know the Israelites, as Christ says
to the wicked, Non novi vos, I do not know you; Mat. 7.
yet he says, Christ knew them well enough.

It is an answer I never heard before. But this good Socius does not consider
that,

1. He contradicts his own opinion of the Fathers in the Old Testament, being
in limbo patrum, where surely they could not be adored, nor know our
necessities, as well as Christ knew theirs to whom he spoke, I do not know you.

2. When Christ says, I do not know you; he means by it, the knowledge of
approbation, that is, that he does not approve them nor their doings, as it is
plain, ex antithesi, of knowing one, as David says, Psalm. 1.
The Lord knows the way of the righteous; that is, he approves it. But when
Abraham is said not to know one, it is to be referred to a mere ignorance, as
we may see it out of the opposition made betwixt Abraham and God; But thou, O
Lord, etc. So that when God is said not to know a thing, it is to be understood
he does not approve it; but when men are charged with ignorance, it is to be
understood properly.

But having past this Objection, I will go on. Peter the Apostle, a Saint, and
a holy Man would not admit the worshipping of Cornelius, saying, I my self also
am a man. Act. 10.26
The Angel (of whom John knew he was such an one) would not admit the
prostration of John, but says, Worship God. Rev. 19.10


A Heathen Poet could tell that God only should be worshipped, when he says,
Nec ela sum dixit, nec sacro thuris honor,
Humanum dignare caput.
Why should we Christians then be so unjust to the Almighty God, as to deprive
him of his honor?

The distinction which they use betwixt Latreia and Duleia, and Hyperduleia, is
of no value; and I have seen many which sufficiently, yea abundantly refuted
the same. Only I will conclude in this matter, that if Papists cannot be
accused of formal Idolatry, surely they are guilty of material. Their
exceptions betwixt the coherence of Signum and Signatum, and other small
exceptions in that kind are vain. Every man is an Image of God, but I do
believe they will not worship every one.

Having thus far shown the truth of the Protestant Churches, in defending of
the holy Scriptures, and in conforming their Doctrine to them in the most
weighty points. I will infer this conclusion, that the Protestant Church is a
true, a faithful, and a sincere Church, which was to be the conclusion.

This I will add for the last, that namely, the Papists seeing they could not
prevail with the Protestants, in the way of disputing of their Doctrine: They
questioned the Ministry of the Protestant Clergy, saying the same was not
lawful.

But besides that their own Scholasticks, Bannes, Canus.
as Bannes, Canus, and others does allow, that per haeresin potestas ordinandi
non amittitur: Likewise they show the contrary by their practice, because they
do not re-ordain them that are ordained in our Churches, as to the substantial
part; and it is sure enough, that a bad Governor, or Governors of the Church
may send good laborers into the Vineyard of Christ, as I will show by an
instance, in answer upon the next following argument.

A Papist once discoursing with me about the Clergy of the Protestants, that
namely they were unlawful, because they were ordained by them that fell off
from the Church of Rome, and so became Heretics, framed this argument against
me, viz.

That Antichrist can send no servants for Christ.

But the Roman Pope (as the Protestant says) is an Antichrist, and he cannot
send any servants for Christ. It seemed unto me a very strong argument at the
first, till at last after a little while I answered him thus:

That Antichrist (that has nothing of Christ in him) cannot send servants for
Christ, I allow; but the Roman Pope is such an Antichrist, I deny, and so do
the Protestants; because: they do not affirm the Pope to be quite without
Christ, or else he is not an open Antichrist, but a hidden one, under a Cloak
of a Vicar of Christ, who distributeth the Offices of his temporal and earthly
Court. And that such a one may send good men, and willing to serve Christ; I
have showed it by an instance, which was this. When Christ was upon earth, and
the limits of the Church were within the compass of Canaan, the Church was very
much corrupted; Christ calls their learning, fermentum, leaven; their lives,
sepulchra dealbata, painted Coffins. Paul calls the High Priest a whited
Wall, and yet they did send out good Workmen into the Vineyard of the Lord: as,
viz. Joseph, Nicodemus, and others.

Thus I stopped the mouth of the Papists, and here I will make an end of my book.

In the mean time, I thank the Almighty God for that he has been pleased to
open mine eyes, for they see the way of truth, and pray him to confirm me in
it: And wish that every one may reject the way of abomination, and be rooted
and built up in Christ, and stablished in the faith, lest he be spoiled by vain
deceit, Col. 2.7, 8.
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ. Surely the Popish Religion, as it is considered in it self, and so by
consequence their Church, is nothing else but Babylon: Apoc.
Exite igitur ex ea popule mi; Go out of it my people, lest you should be
partakers of their sins. Embrace the true Protestant Religion, which is pure in
her Doctrine, holy in her Manners, true to God and King, to which both who will
obey, let him be a true Protestant.

FINIS.

