THE HISTORY OF THE Original and Progress OF Ecclesiastical Revenues: WHEREIN
Is handled according to the Laws, both Ancient and Modern, whatsoever concerns
matters Beneficial, the Regale, Investitures, Nominations, and other Rights
attributed to Princes.

Written in French by a Learned Priest. And now done into English.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Faithorne and John Kersey, at the Rose in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and Samuel Smith at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1685.

TO THE READER.
IT may seem unnecessary to say more of this Treatise, than that it proceeds
from the famous Pen of Father Simon; who has herein far outgon all who have
written on the same Subject, even the Learned Father Paul.

This Work plainly discovers what good Use the Ecclesiastics have made of the
Pious Inclinations of the Laity, to their own Advantage: which may justly
reflect on the Church of Rome, that great School of Politics; but ought not in
the least to prejudice the Honorable Esteem, and Liberal Endowments, which a
sound Orthodox Church does or ought to enjoy in a well-governed State.

A TABLE OF THE Matters contained In this BOOK.
THE Original of the Community of Goods among the Primitive Christians. Page 1
The first Revenues of the Church. Page 5 The Original of the Ministers of the
Church. Page 7 The Original of the great Authority of Bishops. Page 9 Of the
Government of the Church in the beginning. Page 11 The Original of the
Ordination of Priests and Bishops. Page 13 The Nature of Ecclesiastical
Revenues in the beginning. ibid. The Original of Lands and immovable Goods in
the Church. Page 15 Abuses in the Administration of Church-Revenues. Page 17
The Cust^m of the Western Church different from that of the East. Page 20
Disputes about the dividing of Church-Revenues. Page 21 Change of Discipline in
the Church. Page 23 The Office of the Stewards. ibid. Whether Church men can
retain their Inheritance. Page 24 Edicts of Emperors. Page 27 The Excessive
Covetousness of Churchmen. ibid. Laws of the Emperors against the Avarice of
Church men. Page 30 The Original and Progress of Monks. Page 32 Clerks that
lived in Community differed from Monks. Page 33 Monks subject to Bishops. Page
34 Canons against Monks. Page 36 The Primitive Revenues of Monks. ibid. The
Original of the Churches of Monks. Page 37 Monks in the West before St. Benet.
Page 38 The difference of Ancient Monks from the Modern. ibid. Alterations in
Church and State. Page 40 Ecclesiastical Revenues in the same condition as
Temporal Estates. Page 41 A distinction betwixt the Churches and the Altar.
ibid. The Ruin of Private Churchmen. Page 42 The Original of Lands and other
Revenues belonging to Monasteries. Page 44 The Original of Private Masses. Page
45 Forms of Ancient Donations. Page 47 Means of acquiring Estates amongst the
Monks. Page 49 An Explication of the Contract called Precarius. Page 51 Other
ways of Acquisition. Page 52 Investitures depending on Princes. Page 59
Elections depended not on the Pope, no not in Italy. Page 60 Elections only
free in name. Page 63 The Original of the Exemptions of Monasteries. Page 64
Differences betwixt the Monks and Curates concerning Tithes. Page 66
Distinction of the Church from the Altar. Page 67 Disputes betwixt Bishops and
Monks. Page 73 Ecclesiastical Employments inconsistent with Monks. Page 75
Princes ruin the Monks. Page 77 The Original of great Power annexed to
Churches. Page 79 The Authority of the Pope as to Benefices. Page 82
Reflections on the Right of Popes. Page 87 The Custom of France as to the
Reception of Bulls. Page 89 Of the Right of the Regale. Page 90 Of the Regale
under the second Race of the Kings of France. Page 92 The Regale under the
third Race. Page 94 The Regale different from Investiture. ibid. Explication of
Investiture. Page 95 The Regale granted by the Pope. Page 97 A more particular
Explication of the Regale. ibid. A Restriction of the Regale. Page 102 The
Custom of the Parliaments. Page 104 The Regale authorized by a General Council.
Page 105 The Right of Collation attributed to the Kings of France by the
Regale. Page 107 The Regale under Philip the Fair. Page 112 Under Philip of
Valois. ibid. Under Louis XII. ibid. Under Henry IV. Page 113 Under Louis XIII.
Page 114 The Regale at present in all the Churches of France. ibid. The
Monarchy of Sicily. Page 116 The Pope's Power in France. Page 122 An
Explication of the New Canon Law. Page 123 The Original of Benefices. Page 124
An Augmentation of the New Law. Page 126 The Original of the Liberties of
France. Page 131 The Rules of the French Law and Right. Page 134 The Canon or
Common Law Page 136 Particular Law or Right. Page 137 Laws and Rights of Popes.
ibid. Reversions or Expectative Graces abrogated. Page 138 The Right of
Graduates. Page 139 Bretagne is not subject to the Prevention. Page 140
Lay-Patrons are not subject to Prevention. ibid. Elective and Collative
Benefices. Page 141 Derogations from the Right of Prevention. Page 142 The
Right of Devolution attributed to the Pope. Page 145 Benefices vacant in Curia.
Page 147 Other Rights of the Popes. Page 151 Alienations depend on the Pope.
Page 153 Concordats depending on the Pope. Page 155 Commendums depend on the
Pope. Page 157 The Rights of Commendatary Abbots. Page 158 Of Unions. Page 162
The Pope's Power limited in France. Page 164 The Judging of Bishops. Page 165
The Power of Legates in France. Page 166 The Power of Nuncio's in France. Page
168 Of Cardinals. Page 169 The Rights of Chapters. Page 173 The Original of
Parsonages and Dignities without Cure. Page 174 The Original of the Rights of
Chapters. Page 178 The Rights of Chapters during the Vacancy of the Sea. Page
182 The Rights of Patrons. Page 185 The Privileges of Lay-Patrons. Page 188
Whence comes the Distinction of Patronages. Page 191 Of Huguenot-Patronage.
Page 193 The Original of Ecclesiastical Patronages. Page 198 The Original of
Priories. Page 199 The Right of Commendatary Abbots as to the nomination to
Benefices. Page 202 Concordats or Agreements betwixt Abbots and Monks. Page 206
To whom it belongs to present to Benefices during the Vacancy of the Abbatial
See. Page 209 Of Priors amongst Monks. Page 211 Cluni and Cisteaux have changed
the Ancient Government of Monasteries. Page 213 Derogation from the Rights of
Commendatary Abbots. Page 215 Of Regulars. Page 218 A Comparison between
Commendatary and Regular Abbots. Page 220 A Description of the Lives of Regular
Abbots. Page 222 Military Orders. Page 228 The Original of Commanderies. Page
230 A Military Order wherein one may Marry. Page 232 Philip II. the richest
Prelate in the Church. Page 234 Of Hospitals. ibid. Derogations from the Rights
of Bishops. Page 237 The Novelty of Resignations in favorem. Page 238
Regulations that derogate from Resignanations. Page 240 Of Regress. Page 242 Of
Permutation or Exchange. Page 244 Of Unions. Page 246 Of the Indults or
Privileges of Members of Parliament. Page 248 Of Degrees. Page 249 Of
Exemptions. Page 254 Rules to distinguish the true Exemptions from the false.
Page 258 Of what Authority are Cartularies. Page 264 A distinction betwixt
false Titles, and Titles falsified Page 268
Errata.
PAge 66. l. 26. r. Ecclesia. p. 79. l. 15. r. to the Prescripts. p. 82. l. 2.
for Venice, r. Rome. p. 114. l. 6. r. Monsieur de Marillac. p. 128. l. 23. r.
Moines. p. 251. l. 16. for their, r. there are.

THE HISTORY OF THE Original and Progress OF Ecclesiastical Revenues.
WHat is mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, The Original of the Community
of goods among the Primitive Christians.
concerning the Primitive Christians having all things among them in Common, is
not to be understood, as if private persons had been obliged to sell their
goods, that they might render them common to all believers. For, that we may
not fall into the error of the Anabaptists, there is a great difference to be
made betwixt a Custom that happened but accidentally in the Church of
Jerusalem, and continued not there long, and a Divine Law, which can never be
dispensed with. No other Law obliged Believers to it at that time, but the Law
of Charity; and we are at present under the same obligation, seeing the goods
which we possess, become in some manner common to our Brethren, when they fall
into necessity and want. The Apostles were not ignorant of the Laws which Moses
made in favor of the Poor, to prevent their being reduced to beggary. And in
that sense we ought to explain the words of the Psalmist, (...). Psalm. 37.25.
I have not seen the Righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging Bread. Where we
are to observe that the Jews took to themselves the name of Righteous, to
distinguish themselves from other Nations that Worshipped Idols. The Books of
Moses contain many Laws which oblige the Rich, on several occasions, to make
their goods common to the Poor, and one of the chief is the Law that prohibits
the exacting of Usury from their Brethren. And that Law is still in force among
them, in the low condition to which they now are reduced, they being persuaded,
that that charity toward their Brethren, is of divine right. We are not then
to inquire into any other cause of that Community of goods which was in use, in
the Infancy of Christianity, but the Laws of Charity, which are still the same,
though the practice of them differ according to the diversity of occasions. For
seeing the Primitive Believers lived in Society, and that there were a great
many poor among them, those who had estates were obliged to sell them, to
supply the necessities of their Brethren.

The Apostles conformed exactly to the Custom which was already established in
the Synagogues. They made a gathering on the days of their Assemblies, in
imitation of the Jews, and during the week every one laid up what he could, to
be delivered to those who took the care of collecting their Alms. In the places
where Christians met, there were Tertul. in Apolog.
Boxes, as well as in the Synagogues, for receiving the Alms of private
persons, and the money was distributed amongst the Poor, the Orphans, Widows,
and Sick. Now this distribution was not made indifferently by every one that
pleased: But as in the Synagogues, there were Officers entrusted with that
care, so likewise the Apostles appointed Deacons, or Ministers, to whom they
gave the same Commission, reserving to themselves, nevertheless, the chief
direction and oversight thereof. In a word, if we consult the Jewish Writers,
and the present practice of their Synagogues, as to what concerns their
Charity, we shall find that the Apostles have exactly followed their Discipline
in that particular. They still send their Alms to Jerusalem, and to other
places in Judea, for the relief of the Poor that live in those parts: And
besides the constant Charity that they give in the Towns where they live, to
those that are in want, they assist Foreign Jews, who make application to
them, in their necessity; and for Proof of this, it would suffice to show a
Certificate signed by their Rabbis, after the same manner, as Letters of
Recommendation, were granted to Believers in the First Ages of the Church;
which gave Lucian occasion to say, that to become rich in a short time, there
needed no more but to pretend to be a Christian.

At that time the Ministers of the Church had no other Revenues, The first
Revenues of the Church.
but what they gathered from the Charity of believers: For as to Tithes,
First Fruits, and other Rights that belonged to the Levites and Priests, they
were abolished with the Sacrifice. Our Savior having instituted a new form of
Ministry, appointed also a new way of providing for the necessities of the new
Ministers. He received the Alms that were given him, and put them into the
custody of a Steward, to be distributed according as need did require. St.
Paul, who speaks often in his Epistles of the duty of Ministers toward the
people, and of the people toward their Ministers, says no more, but conform to
the words of our Savior, that they who preach the Gospel, should also live by
the Gospel, and that they who serve at the Altar, should participate of that
which is offered upon the Altar; thereby alluding to the Offerings of the Old
Testament He never makes mention of Tithes, nor of those Dues that were given
to the Priests, because he supposes that, that Priesthood being abolished, the
rights that from thence accrued to the Priests, ought likewise to be abrogated.
And therefore, the Primitive Christians, who sold their estates, for the relief
of the Poor, and maintenance of their Ministers, thought it not sufficient to
bestow the tenth part, but freely gave all that was necessary, knowing that the
right of Tithes and First Fruits, were but only Ceremonies, and Customs of the
Old Testament; of which they retained no more, but what concerned Morality. So
that Charity was the Rule of what they were to give to the Ministers of the
Gospel. And St. Paul who has made several good Regulations, concerning the
Administration of these Alms, calls the Portion that was given to the Priests
and Widows, Honoraries. This he does, when he recommends to Timothy, (...), 1 Timothy 5.3.
to honor Widows that are Widows indeed: For Widows had particular Offices in
the Church, as well as the priests, whom the same St. Paul affirms (...). 1 Timothy 5.17.
to be worthy of double honor, that is, of a double reward. In effect the term
of honor is used by Lawyers, to signify the recompense that is given to the
Officers of Justice, to Advocates and Physicians; and I make no doubt but that
St. Paul borrowed it from the Greeks or Hellenists, who sometimes make use of
it. In this sense these words of Ecclesiasticus are to be understood, (...).
Eccles. 38.1.
Honor a Physician, that is to say, pay the Physician. Now seeing the
Priesthood was a Real Employment, and Divine Function, St. Paul had reason to
give it the Title of honor, which properly belonged to the Magistrates of
States.

The Church has not only imitated the Synagogue in the way of distributing its
Charity, but also, The Original of the Ministers of the Church.
has followed the Discipline observed amongst the Jews, in respect of their
Ministers. The Synagogues were composed of a Ruler of the Synagogue, which the
Hellenist Jews called Archi-Synagogus, Priests or Elders, and Deacons; and that
was the cause, why the Apostles established in Christian Assemblies, those
three sorts of Ministers under the names of Bishops, Priests and Deacons. The
Bishop in these Assemblies, had the same honor as the Ruler of the Synagogue
amongst the Jews, had in their Synagogues. The Superiority of the Rulers of the
Synagogue, in respect of the Priests or Elders, consisted only in some Titles
of honor, as being the Chief amongst their Brethren. And therefore they are
all comprehended under the name of Priests or Elders in the Hundred and seventh
Psalm, where we have these words: (...). Psalm. 107.32.
Let them also exalt him in the Congregation of the People, and praise him in
the Assembly of the Elders; which was the place of their Meetings. So we find
in the New Testament, that the names of Priest and Bishop are indifferently
taken the one for the other; and that Assembly or Council of the Elders, which
was called Presbyterium, consisted of the Bishop, and the Priests or Elders.
The Bishop, or President, as the Ancient Fathers speak, had indeed the chief
Direction or Superintendency; from whence he was called Bishop. which word is
also found in the Greek of the Septuagint or Hellenists, but he made up but one
Body with the Elders or Priests, who in Quality of Judges, had their
Jurisdiction jointly with him. Hence we may infer that in the beginning of the
Church, the management of affairs, and the Jurisdiction which is now called
Episcopal, did not depend on the Bishop alone, no more than the distribution of
the Offerings, but on the whole Senate or Assembly of the Priests; and this
continued so long as there was but one Church in every City, one Altar, and one
Consistory of Priests joined to their Bishop, because it was not easy then, for
the Bishop to become Master of the whole Jurisdiction and Administration of the
Revenues. But so soon as it was necessary to increase the number of Churches,
The Original of the great Authority of Bishops.
there was some cause to fear, lest those who governed the new Churches, might
attribute to themselves the quality of Bishops, finding themselves at the head
of a particular Church. And therefore the Bishops began to take to themselves
authority over them, for which it was necessary to appoint, that there should
be but one Bishop in every City, on whom the Elders or Priests should depend,
who were to take upon them the Government of the new erected Churches, which
were called Titles. St. Jerome strongly maintains this opinion in his
Commentaries on the Epistle of St. Paul to Titus, where he affirms that before
this division, each Church was governed by the Common Council of the Priests;
but that for avoiding all occasion of Schism, one of these Priests or Elders
was chosen to be the Chief, and to take upon him the care of the whole Church.
He pretends that the names of Priest and Bishop did not at all differ in the
beginning, and that therefore St. Paul made use of them indifferently: Then he
subjoyns, Episcopi noverint se, magis consuetudine, quam dispositionis
dominicae veritate, Presbyteris esse majores. Hieron. com. in Ep^st. ad Tit.
That it is only Custom which has made Bishops greater than Priests. And this
may be confirmed by the authority of St. Paul, who writing to the Churches,
under the name of Elders, comprehends both Bishop and Priests.

It is to be observed, however, that the Church being increased, has borrowed
many terms and points of Government from the Republics of Greece, and that
when there was a necessity of erecting Dioceses, it has in that followed the
distinction of Provinces, according as they were established in the Empire. Of
the Government of the Church in its Commencement.
The Church which in its commencement allowed much to the people, grew
afterward more Aristocratical in its Government, when by experience it
appeared, that the multitude of people served only to confound and perplex
affairs; and then the Polity of Aristocratick Republics came in vogue. Nay we
find in the very Acts of the Apostles, two sorts of Assemblies, as well as in
Republics, The one is composed of the Chief amongst the Believers, and is
called Ecclesia. The other admits all indifferently; and that the Republics of
Asia named Agoraia, which they have always distinguished from the Assembly that
they named Ecclesia. And therefore the name of Ecclesia or Church has still
been given to Christian Congregations, and constantly retained by the Greeks,
who made the first Ecclesiastical Laws, from whence it has been derived to the
Latins, who are indebted to the Greeks for all the Ecclesiastical Polity that
was settled in the first Ages. In this sense we ought to interpret the words of
Origin contra Celsum.
Origin concerning the Form of Church Government, which he explains with
relation to the Greek Republics. The Athenians, for instance, called those
Bishops, to whom they committed the care of the Towns that depended on their
Commonwealth.

It was long before the Church owned any other name but that of Bishop, to
distinguish him who had the principal Administration; nay, when it was even
necessary to denote a Bishop, who had Jurisdiction over others, she called
those Bishops, (...). Can. 33 Apost.
the First Bishops of a Nation; or made use of some other expression, without
inventing new words. We find nevertheless the name of Metropolitan in the
Council of Nice; but the Greeks, whose Language is fruitful in new words,
invented a great many, to express the different Offices of the Ecclesiastic
State, which were not so soon brought into use in the Latin Church. The names
of Archbishop, Primate and Patriarch, are but Titles of Honor and External
Jurisdiction; whereas the quality of Bishop, and that also of Elder or Priest,
The Original of the Ordination of Bishops and Priests.
is a Character that marks the Ordination, which the Apostles borrowed from the
Synagogue, that chose its Ministers by the Imposition of hands. In that manner
Moses laid his hands on Joshua, and the other Elders, who were presently filled
with the Holy Ghost: And if we will credit the Authority of the Rabbis, the
power of Imposing of hands belonged not only to the chief of the Sanhedrim, but
also to the other Elders; which seems likewise to be confirmed by St. Jerome,
Hier. in Episi. ad Evagr.
who pretends that the Elders or Priests enjoyed that Right a long time in the
Church of Alexandria, where the Priests, who in imitation of the Apostles, were
twelve in number, chose one from among themselves to be their Bishop, on whom
they all together laid their hands; as the Patriarch Eutychius observes in his
Annals of the Church.

Having now spoken of the Persons who had the care of the Revenues of the
Church, The nature of Church-Revenues in the beginning.
and observed wherein those goods did consist, it will not be amiss to subjoyn
that those Revenues were rather a kind of Subsidies employed for the Relief of
the Poor, than any real Rents. Nor was there need of any solemnity for
consecrating them to the Church, seeing they were not fixed, and the Laws of
the Empire permitted not Christians to possess public Estates. After all, the
Collections which we have mentioned, ceased not upon the death of the Apostles;
for we read in one of the Apologies of St. Justin Martyr, St. Just. Apol. 2.
that in the Public Assemblies Believers bestowed their Charity after the
Communion, and that one of the Brethren kept the money, to be afterward
distributed among those who were in want. That Custom was also in use in the
time of Tertul. Apo.
Tertullian, and the Church had no other Revenues, but such Alms or
Contributions, until the time of Constantine, who permitted Churches to possess
real Estates, and to be endowed with Lands and Inheritances. Plin. Epist. lib.
5.
Pliny the younger observes, that private persons were prohibited to give their
Estates to any College or Society, but that they ought to choose certain and
special Heirs, and not the Gods in general. It is true, the Laws made
afterward a Restriction, that one might bequeath or give his goods to lawful
and allowed Colleges or Societies, and that by special Privilege the Jewish
Synagogues, which were of the number of those Allowed Societies, were
nevertheless excluded from that Privilege: And because Christian Assemblies
were always rejected under the Pagan Emperors, as unlawful Conventicles, it is
certain the Church never enjoyed any Possessions, until the Fourth Century
under the Empire of Constantine. All these Laws may be seen in the Body of the
Civil Law, wherein they are inserted.

It was about that time then, The Original of immovable Estates in the Church.
that Churches began to be endowed, as well as the Pagan Temples, because
Christian Congregations were no more then considered as Conventicles. The
Emperor Constantine, granted them great Privileges, and permitted People to
bestow upon them Possessions of all kinds. He ordained also that they should
inherit the Estates of the Martyrs, Confessors, and of those who had been
banished, when the true Heirs did not appear. I speak not here of the Donation
which Constantine, accordto some Eusebius. l. 2. de vita Constable. cap. 36.
Authors, made to the Church of Rome, because it is notoriously known that the
deed is false, and that the Successors of Constantine possessed Lands that are
mentioned therein. It may be affirmed that the Privileges granted by
Constantine to Churches, for enjoying of Rents, have occasioned great
disorders: Which made St. Jerome say Potentia quidem and divitiis major, sed
virtutibus minor facta est. Hier. in vita S. Malch.
that the Church was indeed become more Powerful and Rich under Christian
Princes, but that it was less Virtuous. St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. homil. 86. in
Matthew.
describes at length the sad State of Bishops and other Church men, since the
Church enjoyed Lands and other fixed Revenues, because they forsook their
employments, to sell their Corn and their Wine, and to look after their Glebes
and Farms: Besides much of their time was spent in Lawsuits. He wishes that he
might see the Church in the State that it was in in the times of the Apostles,
when it enjoyed only the Charity and Oblation of Believers. St. Austin was also
in the same Opinion, and Possid. in vita Aug. cap. 24.
it is reported in his Life, that he often refused the Inheritances which were
offered to his Church, thinking it fitter that they should be left to the
lawful Heirs. And in the same Life we read, that St Austin would never purchase
Houses nor Lands, nor any other Possessions for his Church: Wherein he showed
his wisdom and prudence; for nothing does more obstruct the Charity of
Believers toward Churches, than when they see that they enjoy vast Estates,
the Revenues whereof are nevertheless more uncertain, than the Alms that are
given to a Church that has not the repute of being Rich. And so it was also,
that those, who knew St. Austins mind, sold their Lands, and gave him the
money; which the more willingly they did, as being persuaded, that the good
Bishop bestowed it on pious uses, and not in making new Purchases for the
enriching of his Church.

Though, at that time, Abuses in the Administration of Church-Revenues.
Bishops and Deacons had the care of the Revenues of the Church, yet
notwithstanding even in the time of Constantine many abuses were committed in
the management of them. And this made the Fathers of the Council of Gangres, to
make a Canon against the Eustathians, who divided among themselves the Revenues
of the Church. It was decreed in that Council Conc. Gangr. Can. 7. and 8.
that the Bishop alone, and those to whom he did commit the care of the
Revenues of the Church, should receive and distribute what was bestowed on
Churches. But it happened not long after Conc. Antioch. Can. 25.
that the Bishops themselves abused their power: For most of them being Poor*
and charged with Families, they reserved part of the Church Rents for their
subsistence. And all that could be done, to put a stop to that corruption, was
(...). Can. Apost. 37.
to suffer them to give somewhat to their Re^^tions, if they were Poor, but
withal prohibiting them to sell the Estates that belonged to Churches. Nay, the
Fathers were even obliged, not to leave the administration of the Revenues of
the Church in the power of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, without giving an
account of them: For the Council of Antioch ordained, that the Bishops should
give an account of the administration of those Revenues, in the Provincial
Synod. And that the goods which properly belonged to Bishops, might not be
confounded with those that appertained to their Churches, every Bishop upon his
Election (...). Can. Apost. 39.
gave a list of the Goods and Estate, that he possessed, which was separated
from that of the Church, to be disposed by will or otherwise at his pleasure,
according to the Provision of the Civil Law. But notwithstanding all this
caution, the Bishops made themselves still Masters of the Revenues of the
Church, and the Fathers were obliged to create Treasurers or Stewards to take
the care of them, that so the Bishops might apply themselves entirely to the
duties of their Office. These Stewards were likewise necessary for preserving
the Revenue of the Church, which the Bishops and other Church men did not
employ according to the Canons. But because they were appointed by the Bishops,
they relapsed again into the same abuse, and the Poor had cause to complain of
the same Bishops, who gave them but a very inconsiderable share of the Goods
that were destined for their Use. Upon all these accounts the Fathers of the
Council of Calcedon decreed, That for the future the Stewards should be chosen
from among the Clergy, and that it should be no longer in the power of the
Bishops themselves to administer the Revenues of the Church. That Office became
so considerable in the Church of Constantinople, that the Emperors took from
the Clergy the nomination of the Stewards, and appointed them themselves. And
this lasted until the time of the Emperor Isaac Comnenus, who remitted that
right to the disposition of the Patriarch.

The power of Stewards was not so great in the Western Church, The Custom of
the Western Church di^^ers from that of the East.
as in the Eastern; for seeing the Bishops and other Ecclesiastics did not
according to equity distribute the Church Revenues, and that besides the
Churches were meanly endowed, there was a necessity of making a particular
designation of the use, to which these Rents were to be employed: And that was
adjusted in this manner; to wit, that the Bishop with consent of his Clergy,
should divide the whole Revenues of his Church into four parts, of which the
First should be for himself; the Second given to the Churchmen; the Third to
the Poor; and the Fourth and last applied to the Fabric of the Churches.
Gratian cause. 12. q^^^. 2. cap. 23.
Gratian relates a letter of Pope Zosimus directed to an Archdeacon, where
that distribution is mentioned, but without permitting the Rents of the Church
to be dismembered, as some Church men pretended, who would have had Lands
assigned them for their portion St. Gregory answering some Questions that were
put to him by Austin the English Bishop, confirms that Dividend, St. Greg. Pope.
which had been already approved by several other Popes, and withal appoints
that the Bishops portion, should not only be for himself, but for as many as
were necessary for his Retinue, and for maintaining Hospitality. The Bishops
wrangled with their Clergy about that distribution, pretending that they had no
right to the new Acquisitions of the Church; A Dispute about the distribution
of the Revenues of the Church.
but the same Pope St. Gregory adjusted the matter in favor of the Clergy. The
Priests pretended farther, that they ought to have two parts of the share that
was assigned to the Clergy; and that the other Churchmen ought to have but a
third of the same. That matter was referred to the Bishop, who was to give to
every one according to his merit and pains. Nevertheless St. Gregory. who in
that followed a Law established in the Churches of the West, writing to Austin
concerning the Discipline that he was to observe in England, tells him that it
was more convenient to persist in the Community of Goods in the Church of
England, than to introduce into it those kinds of dividends. And indeed it will
appear in the sequel of this Discourse, that the dividing of Ecclesiastical
Revenues, has been the cause of most of the disorders that have happened in
the Church; and I dare boldly affirm, that the thing that has preserved a
greater purity of the Ancient Discipline in the Eastern Church, has been
chiefly, that the Orientals never made any such partitions. None but the
Western Church has put the Estates of the Church into Titles and Livings, in
the same manner as if private persons were the absolute masters of those
Estates.

The Barbarous Princes, A change of Discipline in the Church.
who seized part of the Empire, brought great changes into the Church, and the
Discipline of the Canons was only preserved in the East. The Greeks,
nevertheless, have sometimes remitted certain Ecclesiastical rights in favor
of their Princes. But that is nothing if compared with what has been done
under the Barbarous Princes in the West.

The Stewards of whom we have spoken, The Office of the Stewards.
took upon them not only the care of the Revenues of the Church, by order of
the Bishops, but also preserved them during the vacancy of the Sea, and
distributed them among those to whom by right, and according to the Canons,
they belonged. But because most part of the Churchmen had Estates of their
own, either by Inheritance or Purchases that they had made, there arose great
difficulties upon their Death about the distinguishing of those Estates: Some
there were that pretended, that those who lived on the Revenues of the Church,
could not in conscience retain their own Inheritance. St. Jerome who was of that
opinion, St. Jerome.
is positive, that the goods of the Church were designed for the Poor; which
agreed very well with the Edict of Constantine, that prohibited the Rich to
enter into any Office of the Church, Whether Churchmen can keep their own
Estates.
though he did it upon Politic Reasons, and for the good of the State. Most of
the other Fathers were also of St. Jeroms mind, St. Austin.
and St. Austin admitted no Clerk into his Church, till first he had disposed
of all his goods, either in favor of the Poor, or by Sale. He was for having
all Clerks really Poor, in imitation of the Apostles, and for living altogether
in common upon the Revenues of the Church. Nevertheless it is to be observed,
that he did not require that of them but as a greater perfection, and that he
never thought it absolutely necessary for entering into orders, and enjoying the
allowance of the Church, that one must possess nothing at all. Otherwise he
must have gone against the Ancient Canons, which leave Churchmen at liberty to
dispose of their own Estates as they please. It is true these Canons were made
in the Eastern Church, where most of the Bishops having been Married before
their Election, had Wives and Children to provide for; and where Priests and
Deacons might Marry if they pleased. And therefore it was not reasonable to
take their Estates from them. Besides, it must be considered, that when these
Canons were made, Churches were but ^oor; Nay and some time after Constantine,
no Churches but those of great Cities were Rich.

However, these Ancient Canons of the Eastern Church, were Cause. 12. Quaest. 3.
renewed in the Church of the West, though they had not the same reasons for
doing it. Churchmen were only prohibited to bequeath by Will, the Goods which
they had got in their Livings, because Believers did not give to Churches, only
to enrich the Churchmen. If it happened, nevertheless, that the Bishop died
without making a Will, and had no heirs, then did the Church succeed to all his
Estate. The Churches of Spain, who had got a Latin Translation of the Ancient
Greek Canons, imitated the customs of that Church, which were likewise
propagated in other Churches of the West. We may here observe by the by, that
Gratian is often mistaken; Gratian.
and that there is no credit to be given to his Citations, but when they are
found to agree with the Ancient Greek Canons Nor are the very Summaries which
he gives of Canons always true, as when it is marked in general, over the Head
of the Canon taken out of the Council of Tarragona, that the Estate of the
Bishop dying without a Will, ought to return to the Church; whereas it is
barely said in the Council, that the Priests and Deacons shall make an
Inventory of his Goods, and that according to the Greek Canons; to the end that
what was properly his own, might be set apart from that which belonged to his
Church. But this is not a proper place to correct the faults which occur in the
Collection of Gratian.

Ammian.
The Emperor Julian revoked most of the Privileges granted to Churches by
Constantine. Zozim.
Nay, he took from them their Endowments, alleging for a Pretext, that the
perfection of Christian Religion consisted in Poverty. But Valentinian
afterward recalled the Edicts of Julian; though he did not confirm all the
Grants that Constantine had made to the Church; Edicts of Emperors.
and the Emperors that came after him, were more sparing in their Liberality.
But the Avarice of the Churchmen made up what was wanting in the Bounty of the
Emperors: Excessive Avarice of Churchmen.
For if we give credit to what St. Jerome reports of the Priests and Monks of
his time, St. Jerome.
they spared no Trick nor Artifice whereby they might hook in the Estates of
private Persons. I shall make no scruple here to produce some proofs of it,
since Cardinal Baronius has done the same before me; and then it will easily
appear that the Anchoret of whom Sulpicius Severus speaks, had reason to say,
Ecclesiam auro non strui, sed potius destrui.
that nothing was more likely to ruin the Church, than great Riches. Seeing it
would be difficult to translate the words of St. Jerome with the same force and
elegance, Sulpitius Severus in Dialog.
as they are in the Original, I shall only extract some passages in Latin out
of his Writings; as first in one of his Letters to Eustochium, he thus
describes what past at Rome among the Churchmen. Hier. in Epist. ad Eustoch.
Clerici -- osculantur capita matronarum, and extenta manu, ut benedicere eos
putes velle, si nescias, pretia accipiunt salutandi: -- quidam in hoc omne
studium vitamque posuerunt, ut matronarum nomina, domos moresque cognoscant; ex
quibus unum, qui hujus artis est princeps, breviter describam. -- cum sole
festinus exurgit, salutandi ei ordo disponitur, viarum compendia requiruntur,
and pene usque ad cubicula dormientium senex importunus ingreditur; si
pulvillum viderit, si mantile elegans, si aliquid domesticae supellectilis,
laudat, miratur, attrectat, and se his indigere conquerens, non tam impetrat
quam extorquet. In another of his Letters, he describes more to the life, the
low and sordid Offices, which the Priests and Monks of his time rendered to Old
Men and Ladies who had no Children, that they might catch their Estates and
Inheritances. Audio, says he, in senes and anus absque liberis quorundam turpe
servitium, ipsi apponunt matulam, obsident lectum, pur^lentiam stomachi, and
phlegmata pul^^onis manu propria suscipiunt, etc. In the Epistles of this holy
Doctor, we may have a full and lively Representation of the Churchmen of his
time; and he cannot forbear to blame the vanity of Widows of Quality, who
refusing to marry again, that they might not be subject to a Husband, liked
very well to be courted by Churchmen, that so they might bear the Rule. Illoe
interim, says that Father, quoe Sacerdotes suo viderint indigere proesidio,
eriguntur in superbiam, and quia maritorum expertae dominatum, viduitatis
proeferunt libertatem. His Commentaries upon the Holy Scriptures are likewise
full of the like complaints against the Avarice of Churchmen, whom he upbraids
with their desire of enriching their Relations with the Goods that belong to
the Poor. I wave a great many other Reproaches that he makes to them, which got
him the hatred of the Ecclesiastics and Monks of his Age. And nevertheless he
said nothing but what was true, and approved by all good men: So that when most
part of the Priests and Monks censured him as a railing and violent man, Sulp.
in Dialog.
Sulpitius Severus undertook his defense, and made the same complaints against
the Churchmen, whose unsupportable Vanity he condemns. These were not only
then the grievances of St. Jerome, who in that cannot be accused of Passion,
since that before him St. Hilary Hilar. comm. in Psalm.
compared the same Churchmen to the Scribes and hypocritical Pharisees,
Comedentes domos viduarum, and oratione longa orantes. Matthew. 23.14.
who in appearance made long Prayers, and devoured Widows Houses. In a word, if
men condemn St. Jerome of Passion, they must also condemn St. Gregory Nazianzen,
St. Basil, St. Ambrose, and indeed the greatest Saints of that Age. who could
not endure the Covetousness of the Churchmen. But nothing justifies St. Jerome
more, than that the Emperors Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian, were obliged to
make a Law against those corruptions, which is to be found in these words in
the Code of Theodosius. Codex Theodos.
Ecclesiastici, aut ex Ecclesiasticis, vel qui continentium se volunt nomine
nuncupari, viduarum ac pupillorum domos non adeant; Laws of the Emperors
against the Avarice of Churchmen.
sed publicis exterminentur Judiciis, si posthac eos ad fines earum, vel
propinqui putaverint deferendos. Censemus etiam, ut memorati nihil de ejus
mulieris, cui se privatim sub praetextu religionis adjunxerint, liberalitate
quacunque vel extremo Judicio possint adipisci, and omne in tantum inefficax
sit, quod alicui horum ab his fuerit derelictum, ut nec per subjectam personam
valiant aliquid, vel donatione, vel testamento percipere, etc. That Law, which
was directed to Pope Damasus, was read in the Church of Rome. St. Jerome in his
Letter to Nepotian.
St. Jerome does not accuse the Emperors of Injustice, for publishing a Law
which seemed contrary to the Liberties of the Church; but he accuses the
Avarice of Churchmen, who having slighted the Law of God, have been forced to
obey the Laws of Men; and he asserts, that therein the Priests and Monks are
inferior to the Priests of Idols, and to the Societies of the infamous, who
are not debarred from receiving Inheritances. The disorders of Ecclesiastics
must at that time have been very great at Rome, that Christian Princes were
obliged to make such rigorous Laws against them.

Now seeing Monks come within the compass of the complaints that St. Jerome and
the other Fathers have made against Ecclesiastics, it will be pertinent to
speak a little of their Original and Progress, The Original and Progress of
Monks.
and to show how they came to have a share in the Revenues and affairs of the
Church. The Original of Monachism is commonly attributed to St. Paul the
Hermit, and St. Anthony; in imitation of whom Egypt was entirely filled with
Monks, whereof some were Solitary, and others lived in Community. That kind of
Life afterward got footing in Syria, Pontus and the lesser Asia. Those of Egypt
and Syria have still retained the name of St. Anthony their Founder: Whereas
the others of the Province of Pontus and the lesser Asia, took the name of St.
Basil, who brought from Egypt into those parts the Rule and Institution of St.
Anthony. So that St. Basil and St. Anthony have filled the Levant with Monks,
who at present bear their Names. St. Athanasius coming to Rome, and having
there published the Life of St Anthony, many also in Italy embraced that kind
of Life, which from thence was propagated into the other Provinces.

We must, nevertheless, have a care, not to confound the Clerks who lived in
Community under the direction of their Bishops, with Monks. Eusebius, Eusebius.
Vercel.
Bishop of Verceil, was the first in the West, who according to the Testimony of
St. Ambrose, joined together two things which seemed contrary, to wit, the
Monastic Rule to the manner of the living of Clerks. The Clergy that lived in
Community differed from Monks.
It is not to be magined that these Clerks were true Monks, no more than those
who empraced the same kind of life, under St. Martin and St. Austin. They
bor^owed only from the Monks, their way of living in common, being for that ^o
less serviceable to the Church; whereas in the beginning, Monks lived out of
Towns, were for most part Laics; and so far from performing any public
Ministry in the Church, that their Profession wholly debarred them from it. All
their Employment consisted in Prayer, and Laboring with their hands, and their
study in reading the holy Scriptures. It is true, Bishops sometimes drew Monks
out of their Monasteries, and associated them to their Clergy; but then they
were no longer Monks, being reckoned in the number of Clerks. St. Jerome always
distinguishes those two kinds of life, and speaking of himself as a Monk, he
says, Clerici pascunt oves, ego pascor. Hieron. Epist. ad Heliod.
Clerks are Shepherds, for my part, I am one of the Sheep; And he always builds
on this principle, that it is one thing to be a Monk, another thing to be a
Clerk. Alia monachorum est causa, alia clericorum. He nevertheless acknowledges
that Monks by their profession were not excluded from Ecclesiastical
Employments; on the contrary, that Monachism ought to serve them as a Noviciat
in order thereunto, when Bishops shall Judge them worthy. Sic vive, ut Clericus
esse merearis: quod si populus vel Episcopus te in Clericum eligat, age quae
sunt Clerici. Hieron. in Epist. ad Rust. Monach.
Live, says he, writing to Rusticus the Monk, in such (...) manner as you may
deserve to be a Clerk^ and if the People or your Bishop, (...) their eyes upon
you for that end, (...) that which is incumbent on a Clerk.

The Monks at that time were Subject to Bishops, and ordinary Pastors, having
not so much as distinct place in the Church from the rest of the People, Monks
subject to Bishops.
because they were of the number of Laics. But since there happened several
heresies in the Eastern Church, and that many learned Monks bravely opposed
them, it was thought convenient to draw them from their great solitudes, and to
settle them in the Suburbs of Cities, that they might be useful to the People.
And St. Chrysostom thought it even fit to call them into Cities. Which was the
cause that most of them, applying themselves to study, aspired to the Clergy,
and with much precipitation got into holy Orders, whereof Pope Zosimus
complains in one of his Epistles. But seeing they were useful to Bishops, not
only in Spiritual, but Temporal affairs, they got into great Reputation; and
the same Bishops who were glad to have a numerous Clergy, and fit persons about
them to carry on their designs, gave them considerable Offices, wherein they
behaved themselves excellently well, as appeared in the affair of Nestorius.
But having abused the authority that was put into their hands, and growing
insupportable to all People, even to the Bishops themselves, because of their
vanity and their meddling in all kinds of business without the permission of
their Ordinaries, the Fathers of the Council of Calcedon thought fit to make
Canons against Monks, for putting a stop to the disorders which they occasioned
in the Church. Canons against the Monks.
Wherefore it was decreed in that Council, that for the future, Monks should be
wholly under the Jurisdiction of Bishops, without whose permission they should
meddle no more in any affairs whether Civil or Ecclesiastical^ that they should
not leave their Monsteries to ramble up and down, and (...) frequent Towns;
that they should no^ build any Monastery or Chapel, without consent of the
Bishop of the place and that they should be secluded from Ecclesiastical
Employments, unless called thereunto by their Bishops, when they should judge
it necessary.

And thus was the Canon law Reestablished in regard of the Monks who had not
continued long without shaking it off, and they were put into an absolute
dependence on Bishops who took care of Monasteries as we^ for the Spiritual as
Temporal. As the Monks of that time were but part o^ the People, so they had no
other temporal Revenue also, The first Revenues of Monks.
but what they gained by their labor, and a shar^ in the Alms, which the
Bishop caused to be given unto them, if they were in want, in the same manner
as to the other Poor. Besides that, the People gave them their Private Alms,
that they might pray to God for them. Some of them, nevertheless, kept somewhat
of their Patrimony; St. Jerome.
but St. Jerome blames them, as counterfeit Monks, who followed not the Rules of
Evangelical poverty. As to the Spiritual, they came to the Parish Church with
the rest of the People, and sometimes they were allowed to send for a Priest to
administer the Sacraments unto them. At length they were permitted to have a
Priest of their own number, The Original of the Churches of Monks.
on condition that he continued Monk, and only officiated in the Monastery.
This gave them occasion of having Churches apart, and of making a kind of
separate Body. After that it was impossible for Bishops to hinder them from
performing all Ecclesiastical functions in their Monasteries; and since that
time there have always been disputes betwixt the Bishops and the Monks, because
the Monks on many occasions refused to submit to the orders of the Bishops,
which they pretended to be contrary to the Discipline of their Monasteries.

Though at that time most part of the Monks were in the East, Monks in the West
before St. Benet.
yet for all that, there were a great many also in the West, before St. Benet
planted a particular Order there. St. Jerome, St. Ambrose and St. Gregory make
mention of Monks in Italy, amongst the Gauls and in several other parts of
Europe. Besides, all the Authors who have written of the beginning of the
Christian Religion in several Countries, speak of Monks that were there. There
was this difference, The difference betwixt the Ancient and Modern Monks.
nevertheless, betwixt the first Monks that were in Europe before St. Benet,
and those that came after him, that the first were barely Monks, without being
addicted to any particular Order. To be a Monk was sufficient, to make them
received as such, in all Monasteries wheresoever they traveled. There was no
talk then of particular Rules and Institutions But every Monk labored to
improve himself by the example of others, and to embrace what he thought most
perfect in the Monastic life. So that, it may be said, that the Monks both of
the East and West were all of one Order, having at that time no Mark of
distinction amongst them. The ancient Rules that have been written by the
Primitive Monks, ought rather to be looked upon as different Commentaries upon
the Monastic life, than different Rules; for the intention of those who
embraced that kind of life, was not to distinguish themselves by particular
Rules from the manner of ^iving of other men, but to submit themselves by a
more particular resignation to the Maxims of the Gospel, and to find out all
possible ways how they might live up to the Counsels of our Savior, who will
have us to wean our hearts altogether from the World, that we may follow him
alone who is above it.

I shall not here speak of the Institution of St. Benet, which is in the hands
of every body; but shall only observe by the by, that the design of that Saint
was not to make any innovations in the Monastic life, but to make a Collection
of what he found most perfect in the Rules and Institutions of others. Matters
are much altered since. All the several Orders of Monks make now a days so many
petty different Republics in the Church, and are so many little States who
have all their several interests. But let us now return to our Subject
concerning the Original and Progress of the Revenues of the Church.

No sooner were the Barbarous Kings become Masters of a part of the Roman
Empire, Changes in Church and State.
but the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws suffered great alterations. There was a
necessity of complying with the humor and temper of these new Conquerours, who
meddled in the affairs of the Church. There was not now, as formerly, the same
liberty in electing of Bishops. Prince^ thought of securing their States, by
conferring Bishoprics only on such as they could rely upon. So that
Ecclesiastical dignities began to be looks upon, as mere Lay-Offices, at the
disposal of Princes, with which they could Reward those that served them. And
which was more pernicious to the Church, Princes and other great Lords began to
make no more distinction betwixt goods consecrated to God, and goods Profane.
The necessity of the times must be born with; and the great Wars that Princes
were engaged in, was the cause that the best part of the Revenues of the
Church, fell into the hands of Laymen. The Revenues of the Church in the same
condidition, as temporal Estates.
They made Contracts of Alienation about them, as about other Possessions; and
these Contracts past for lawful, when they were made in the usual forms. No
body opposed it. The Bishops and Monks treated often with Laics about those
concerns, either by way of Exchange or Purchase. The ancient Cartularies or
Registers of the Monks are full of such kinds of Contracts; wherein it appears
that Children succeeded to their Fathers as well in Church livings, as in other
Estates. The Counts or Judges decided the differences that arose amongst
private persons about such Estates, in the same manner as about other
Inheritances and Possessions.

It is true some scrupulous People made a Distinction betwixt Altars and
Churches; A distinctio betwixt Churches an Altars.
comprehending under the name of Churches, Lands, and other Revenues for which
men might contract; and assigning a Priest to the Altar, who was to have a
Salary for saying Mass and performing other Ecclesiastical Functions. But some
who were not so scrupulous made no such imaginary distinction. For in the
ancient Cartularies there are to be found forms of deeds of alienation of
Churches and Altars, with the Bells, Chalices, Crosses and other Ornaments of
the Church. This was practiced even in Italy, before the Popes entered into the
cognizance of the goods of the Churches, which depended not on their Diocese.
To these troublesome times we may attribute the total Ruin of private Church
men, The Ruin of private Churchmen.
who were obliged to take wages from those who possessed the Churches. And
which is more unhappy, the greatest part of those Revenues are fallen into the
possession of Cathedral Churches and Monasteries, to which they did not at all
belong. The truth is there are forms of Contracts to be found in the same
Cartularies, which make it appear that Monks have bought several Churches from
Laymen; but part of these Churches had been usurped by the Laics from the
Churchmen, to whom they ought to have been restored, and not sold to the Monks.

When the administrations of Church Revenues were erected into Benefices, or
perpetual Titles, the Churchmen who were hired by the Chapters of Cathedral
Churches, by the Monks, and even by Laics, became perpetual Vicars and Curats.
But the best part of the Benefices remained still to the Canons and Monks, who
took to themselves afterward the Quality of Primitive Curates. Besides, since
private men were not able, Princes and other great men bought the Churches from
those Churchmen, and gave them to the Monks, who entertained Secular Priests,
to take the care of administering the Sacraments to the People; all the Revenue
and Tithes in the mean time remaining to the Monasteries. Wherefore, it will
not be amiss to explain in this place more particularly, the Original and
Progress of the Revenues annexed to Monasteries, and at the same time to speak
of their privileges and exemptions. A great part of what we shall say of
Monasteries, being also applicable to other Ecclesiastics.

We have shown before, that Monks having made profession of poverty, The
Original of Lands and other Revevenues belonging to Monasteries.
lived only by their labor, and the Alms they received as being poor. And
since they were not employed in Ecclesiastical Functions, they could not apply
to themselves these words of St. Paul, They which wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar. And therefore it seems they ought never to pretend to
the enjoyment of Church Revenues, which according to Natural and Evangelical
Law, belong to none but the Ministers of the Church. The contrary
notwithstanding has come to pass; For most part of Churchmen have been
deprived of the Revenues that belonged to them, and the Monks endowed
therewith. It has been already observed that Monks applied themselves much to
Prayer, and that that got them the Charity of many private persons. But since
Bishops allowed them to have Oratories or Churches for their own use, this
Charity was doubled and People began to leave their Parish Churches, and flock
to their Chapels. Nay there were some Monks that made Fonts in their
Monasteries, in the same manner as there are in Baptismal Churches. The Bishops
did, indeed, forbid them to administer any Sacraments, but to those of their
Monastery, and denied them Baptismal Churches. But though they were at that
time subject to them in all things, even in what concerned the Monastic
Discipline, yet it was not in their Power to hinder the People from giving them
Charity. There were, nevertheless, some Bishops who would have reduced them to
the observance of the Ancient Canons, and not suffered them to have Priests
among them: But Pope Gregory, who was favorable to the Monks, wrote in their
behalf to one of his Suffragans, that he should permit them to Celebrate Mass
in their Monastery; The Original of private Masses.
and that was chiefly the Original of private Masses, which have been very
useful to the Monks, and bring at present some profit to most Religious
Societies.

It is to be seen in Ancient Manuscript Missals, that in that which they call
the Canon of the Mass, mention was made of the Alms which the Priests received:
For whereas the Priest says only these words, Remember Lord thy Servants and
Handmaids, and all who are present; He heretofore said, Remember, Lord thy
Servants and Handmaids, who make me subsist by their Alms. Memento domine
famulorum famularumque tuarum, and omnium circumstantium. Memento domine,
famulorum famularumque tuarum quorum eleemosynis sustentor. Can. Missal. MS.
With many other words which are not at present, in the Canon of the Mass. As
it has always been the belief of the Church, that Prayers, and especially
those of the Sacrifice, were very advantageous to the dead; so the Monks
quickly found the benefit of having Priests among them, thereby to attract the
Charity of the People, which turned to very good account to them. To them may
likewise be Attributed the Original of Private Chapels, and the multiplication
of Altars, for celebrating several Masses, at one and the same time: For,
according to Ancient Custom, it was not lawful to say more than one Mass, at
which all assisted, and it was even a thing unheard, that many should celebrate
Mass the same day, upon the same Altar: Which Custom is still observed in the
Eastern Church.

In the Formularies of Marculphus, many Deeds of Cessions or Donations, in
favor of Monasteries are to be found. The most Common form was expressed in
these Terms: JN. the Son of N. give to such a Monastery Pro remedio animae meae.
for the remedy of my Soul, such and such goods. Children made the like
Donations to Churches, and especially to Monasteries, for the repose of the
Soul of their Father or Mother. The form of Ancient Donations.
It was enough for most part, to put these Terms in general into the deed, Pro
mercede animae meae, vel genitoris and genitricis meae.
For the remedy of my Soul, or of the Soul of my Father or Mother, without
particularising the Number of Masses, as it is practiced at present. And by
that means they might receive all the Foundations that presented, without being
obliged to increase the Number of Priests. It is true, there are other Forms of
Pious Legations, which are larger, and wherein, besides these terms, pro
remedio animae nostrae, it is likewise added, ut pius deus and dominus noster,
Ann. 1061.
Jesus Christus peccata nostra dimittere and minuere dignetur, and paradisi
portas nos gaudentes introire jubeat; and ut in ultimo tremendo Judicio non
inter hoedos ad sinistram, sed inter oves ad dextram aggregari mereamur
consortio, etc. But in these Deeds there is only mention made of Prayers in
General. There are nevertheless pretty Ancient Forms, wherein mention is made
of particular obligations, wherewith the Founders or Benefactors charge the
Monasteries: But these Deeds are very rare, and even sometimes supposititious.
The Emperor Lovis II. Son of Lotharius, in a Privilege which he granted to
the Abbey of Casaur, seated in the Abruzzo, of which he was the Founder,
obliges the Monks to say daily three Masses for him, to sing the Hundred and
twentieth Psalm in all the Offices and Hymns of Vespers and Matins; and that
for the ransom or remedy of his Soul. This privilege is Printed at the end of
the sixth Tome of the Book Entitled, Italia Sacra; and though the Author has
taken it out of some Cartularies, yet there appear several Additions and Marks
of Forgery, which I found by comparing it with an Ancient Cartularie of that
Monastery, where the same Privilege is written without all these Additions. It
is true the Number of the Masses, and the other Obligations that are in Print,
are likewise in the Manuscript, but seeing in that Cartulary, there are many
other Privileges of the same Emperor, in favor of the Monastery for the same
thing, where these Conditions are not to be found, there is ground to doubt of
the truth of that Privilege; besides that in the first Deed of the Foundation,
there is nothing of it mentioned. However it be, it is certain that those kinds
of Grants contained nothing commonly, but Obligations for Prayers, and
sometimes for Masses, and that but in general: Which has much contributed to
the augmenting of the Revenues of Monasteries, because the Monks could still
receive new Foundations and Pious Legacies, without obliging themselves for all
that to any new Obligations; and private Persons who were persuaded, that the
Prayers of the Monks would be available to them, made no difficulty of giving
their goods to Monasteries. Means of acquiring Estates among the Monks.


By this means the Monks have acquired great Estates in Lands, which because
they would not labor them themselves, they let out by a kind of Leases or
Copy-holds, which they called convenientiae. There was no notice taken at that
time of the Canon Laws, which prohibit the Alienation, or Farming out of Church
Lands, for a long term of years; they were then, as all other Goods and
Estates, subject to the Civil Laws, and Customs o^ places. Bishops and Abbots
sold and exchanged the Rents of their Churches, without consulting the Pope.
The Lease, which they termer convenientia or agreement, was for a certain
number of lives; so that the Lands were engaged for many year on Condition of a
yearly Reven^^ paid to the Abbey: And for greaten security it was specified in
the Deed Ann. 970. Ad usum fruondi per nastrum praestitum, cultandi, and
exfructandi, non vendendi, nec donandi, nec concambiondi, etc.
That so much Land was let by way of loan, to the third Generation, to be
labored and emproved, and the profi^^ thereof enjoyed, without permission to
sell, exchange, or any ways engage the same This way of letting of Leases is
still in use in England; and the Monks made use of it heretofore, as all other
Church men, having the same liberty as they had to purchase, sell and exchange:
Whereas in the beginning they made a scruple, of enjoying the property of any
Lands, only they sometimes labored and manured Lands, that no body claimed a
right to, for their own subsistence.

There is mention made in the treatise of matters Beneficiary attributed to
Father Paul, An Explication of the Contract called Precarius.
of a form of a Contract called Precaria, which has much enriched Monasteries.
The Old Cartularies, are full of such kinds of Deeds, which consisted in a
Donation made by private Persons, of their Estates to Churches, which they
obtained back again from the same Churches, by Letters which they called
Precarias, or Precatorias to be possessed by a kind of Copyhold, or Lease for
Lives; for most part granted a Lease for five, six, and even for seven Lives,
on condition of paying a yearly Revenue to the Monastery. People bestowed their
Lands more willingly upon the Church, when they perceived that they still
reserved the profits of them for many years. And I have seen in ancient
Cartularies forms of Precarious Contracts, wherein private Persons sold their
Estates to a Monastery, and afterward obtained Literas precarias usque in quint
im ginerationem Under Lonis 11 Son of Lotharius.
Letters or Leases of them to the Fifth Generation: So that after the Fifth
Life, the Monasteries could dispose of the Lands, whereof they had the
property, from the date of the Contract, the sellers enjoying only the Profits,
upon Condition of paying yearly a certain sum of Money, and obliging themselves
to cultivate (2) and improve the Lands, without any Power to sell, give, engage
or exchange the same according to the tenor of the Contract or Deed.
Beneficiali ordine usu fruendi, cultandi, laborandi, meliorandi, non vero
vendendi, nec donandi, nec concambiendi, etc.
In those days there were many other Deeds of the like nature, which were
authorized by the Civil Law, and Customs of Countries; and no distinction was
made betwixt Secular and Church Lands. Monks were allowed to purchase and sell,
in the same manner as Laymen.

Those who embraced a Monastic Life, Other means of Acquisition.
contributed much also to the enriching of Monasteries: For it commonly
happened that they who made choice of that Profession, thought it not enough to
give themselves to God, unless likewise they offered all they had; of which
they made a Conveyance, according to the forms used in several Countries. The
Tenor of that Deed, is to be found in the Ancient Cartulare of Casaure in
these terms: I. N. Son of N. in such a year of the Emperor N. and of the Count
N. offer and give, of my own free will and motion, this present day, my proper
Person, and all the goods which I possess in such and such places, to such a
Monastery, where I intend to live the rest of my days. And for the greater
solemnity of this offering, it was made in the Church, where the Person laying
his hand upon the Altar, was, with all his Estate, offered to God. It is also
to be observed, that the profession of a Monastic Life, hindered not the Monks
from inheriting the goods of their Relations, which they might dispose of in
favor of their Monastery. Besides, Widows, who having taken the Veil from the
Hand of the Bishop, could not Marry again, gave part of their Estates to the
Monastery or other Churches, of which a Deed past in the following Tenor: I.
N. Daughter of N. the Servant of God, who have taken the Veil of Religion, give
to N. Abbot, or to such a Monastery, such and such goods for the remedy of my
Soul, and of the Soul of my Husband.

Besides all these ways that have brought great wealth to Monasteries, it is to
be observed, that the Constitutions of the Order of St. Benet, allowed a Monk
to leave the Society of his Monastery, that he might live Solitary and an
Anchorite, which was called, De Claustrensi fieri Archoritam.
of a cloystered Monk to become Anchorite. These Anchorites, who retired from
the Monastery, with the permission of their Abbot, went and lived in some
neighboring place; and they were not so Solitary, but that they were visited
by the People, that came to recommend themselves to their Prayers. They
received large Alms, as being esteemed holier than the rest; and took all kinds
of Donations, whether in Lands, or Movables. When they were grown Rich in one
place, they went to another, where they met with the same Charity from the
People. The Estate which they had acquired belonged to them, and before their
death they made it over to the Monastery, out of which they came. And that
their Donation might be in form, an Act past upon it in these terms: Cartuiary
of Casiure. Am. 10, ^.
J. N. Priest and Monk of such a Monastery, out of which I came with Permission
of the Abbot, that I might lead a more retired Life, give to my Abbot N. for
the repose of my Soul, all the goods which I possess, and which I have
purchased with his Permission. The Deed of Donation contained a list of Goods,
Lands and Churches, which these Anchorites left to their Monasteries, and at
the same time they delivered up the Deeds of private Donations, which were kept
among the other Records.

Besides all this, Monasteries made no difficulty to sell the Ornaments, and
consecrated Vessels of their Churches. There is mention sometimes made in
Ancient Cartularies, of Chalices and Silver Crosses given in payment for Lands
bought from private Persons, when there was no necessity for it. But what is
more surprising, Monks bought indifferently from all sorts of men, and often
enough from those who had abused their Authority in seizing the Goods of the
Poor: Which gave encouragement to many great men, to usurp the Estates of their
Neighbors, because they were sure to find Monks, to whom they could sell them,
we find a very considerable Instance of this in the Cartulary of the Abbey of
Mire in Suisserland, which has been Printed. The Monk who compiled the Acts of
that Monastery, having reckoned up the Lands and Possessions which lawfully
belonged to the Abbey, gives afterward an account of goods Quae cum injustitia
and rapina, aut violentia congregata, aut acquisita sunt.
that had been acquired by unjust means. That good Monk says, that he was
obliged to publish to the World, those unjust Acquisitions, that he might
therewith acquaint his Brethren; and discharge his own Conscience: Then he
mentions a Golden Chalice, enriched with Precious Stones, and two Silver
Crosses, with which and coined Silver, they bought some Lands which had been by
a Person of Quality unjustly taken from Poor Country People: And in fine,
having represented the injustice of such kind of Purchases, he subjoyns, that
men should take heed, not to mind their Body with so much care, as to lose
their Souls, by enjoying unlawful and usurped goods. Dum unusquisque boc solum
altendere debeat, ne ita corpus nutriat, ut animam perdat, cogitetque quid
prosit, si l^tro rapiat, and ^^onachus co^^^^.
Nevertheless after these reslexions, he spares not to reckon up the ill
purchased Goods, as well as the rest. For it is very rare for Religious
Communities to make restitution; no man in particular thinking himself obliged
to it.

The Privileges granted by Princes to Monasteries, has also much contributed
to the preservation, and increase of their Revenues. Those Privileges, which
were called Charters of Freedom and Royal Commands Cartae libertatis and
praecepta regalia.
exempted Monasteries from ordinary Taxes; and Princes having once taken them
into Protection, no man durst molest them. Nay when they had any suit with
their Neighbors about controverted Lands, it happened very seldom that they
lost the cause; because the Judges Commissionated by Princes, most commonly
favored the Monks, who were looked upon as men belonging to the same Princes,
and whose Lands were in some sort reckoned of their Demain, especially when
Princes were the Founders of the Monasteries. The Original of Investitures,
which have caused so much trouble in the Church betwixt Princes and the Pope,
proceeds from such Foundations, and in the beginning they signified no more,
than the Letters whereby the Prince revested or invested a Church, to speak in
the Language of those times. Nay the very deeds that private Men made contained
the term Invest, which signified giving, and putting men in Possession of
Lands. Now that this might be made more solemn, some ceremonies were added,
which may be called Fictiones juris, Fictions of Law.

I have found in an Ancient form of Investiture made under the Emperor Louis
II. That the Judges, and other Lords commissionated by the Prince, gave
Investitures in his absence, of which an Instrument was left, specifying the
year of the Emperors Reign, and the years of the Count or Judge of the places,
which was signed by the other Judges, and Witnesses present at the Ceremony.
The form was conceived in these terms, Cartulary of Casaure.
N.N. investierunt per demandationem Augusti, per colonnam de curte, etc. N.
abbatem. In other forms of Investitures we find per annulum. In effect, the
custom was to make use sometimes of a staff, sometimes of a Ring, and most
commonly of both together. When these Investitures were made by Princes, that
staff was called the Royal Staff, in the same manner as their Privileges were
called Carta regalis, praeceptum regale, Jussio regalis, defensio regalis.
Royal Charter, Royal Command, Royal Jussion, Royal Protection; And at length
it was called Sceptrum regale.
Royal Scepter. The Investitures of Bishoprics were given per sceptrum regale,
as it is mentioned ^n some Authors, and Ancient Cartularies.

Although Charlemain and his Successors referred the Election of Bishops to the
Clergy and Monks, according to the ancient Canons, yet they were never made
without the consent of Princes, Investitures depending on Princes.
who most commonly designed those who were to be chosen; and the Electors durst
not do otherwise, because from them must be obtained the Investiture of Lands,
Privileges and Immu^ities. This was not only observed in France and Germany,
but even in Italy. It is to be found in the Ancient Cartulary, of the Abbey of
Casaure, founded by the Emperor Louis II. That the Monks of it took always the
Investiture from the Emperors and Kings, without ever having recourse to the
Popes, until the Wars that happened betwixt the Popes and German Emperors. For
then, as it is observed by the Monk who wrote the Chronicle joined to that
Cartulary, Ann. 1073.
the Canons and Monks were obliged t^ apply themselves to the Popes, for
obtaining privileges, and permission (...) proceed to a New Election, Cum non
possent ad Imperatorem iye, quia jam discordia and dissidium inter Romanam
Ecclesiam and Imperatorem Teuthonicorum parabatur, ad praesentiam Apostoli^^
sedis accesserunt.
in respect that the Wars hindered them from a^ dressing themselves to the
Emperor That happened in Italy under the Po^tificat of Gregory VII. who with
(...) much vigor attacked the Investiture Princes. And although the Mon^ of
Casaure had already obtained from Pope Leo IX. A Privilege like those which
they obtained from the E^perours, yet they complained that t^ Wars hindered them
from having reco^^ to the same Emperors, as if they (...) only owned the Popes
for the right Investiture, because they were constra^ed to do so by the
necessity of the time.

The same History informs us, that t^ Canons and Monks did not choose the
Bishops and Abbots, before they had a quainted the Emperors and Kings. A^
therefore in the Elections of Bishops a Abbots which were made by the what Body
of the Canons, The Elections depended not on the Pope, no not in Italy.
and Monks, (...) consent of Princes was always menti^^ed, but not a word of
the Pope, who that time did not concern himself these Elections, no not in
Italy as appears manifestly by the Cartulary of Casaure, and the Manuscript
Chronicle annexed to it. This was still observed under the Emperor Henry III.
For that Chroni^le makes mention of a Dominicus electus in Abbatem, ab omni
congregatione, consensu Imperatoris Henrici venerabilis Churradi filii. Ann.
1047.
Monk named Dominick, who was chosen by the whole Community, with consent of
the same Emperor. The act of that Election is mentioned at length in the
Car^ulary with the Subscriptions of all the Monks who chose Dominick; and it is
specified in the beginning of that Act, that they all with one voice, from the
highest to the lowest, chose Dominick (...) Monk and Priest: then he adds, that
that was done with the consent of Elelin Chancellor to the Emperor Henry. The
same Monks in that Chronicle affirm besides, that they were obliged to have
recourse to Pope Urban II. Because the Normans suffered them not to apply
themselves to the Emperor. The Author of the Chronicle adds, that their Abbot
Grimualdus, went to Pope Urban, to declare to him the sad condition to which
the Wars had reduced the Abbey, and that since that time, it Sub protectione
Romanae Ecclesiae, quam hactenus Abbatia sancti Clementis ignoraverat; quia ab
Imperatoribus gubernabatur, meruit collocari.
began to be under the Protection of the Roman Church, having always been before
under the protection of the Emperors.

But it is more observable what he say in the same Chronicle Grimualdue primus
ab Vrbano in Abbatem consecratus, baculum pastoralem in loco Sceptri recalis
quod Antecessores sui and Epse ex dono Imperatoris in dexter a portabant
suscepit.
that the Abbey Grimauldus was the first that made use (...) the Pastoral Staff
which he received from the Pope for the Investiture of the Abbey and that all
the other Abbots his predecessors, had carried a Royal Scepter, which the
Emperors gave them. And there fore the Monk who wrote the Cartulary of that
Abbey represents on the one side Pope Urban, and on the other, the Abbot
Grimuald, in whose hand the Pope puts a Crosier, whereas he had represented the
rest with a Staff, and makes Pope Urban speak these Verses to the Abb^^
Caesaris ob sceptrum baculum tibi porrigo dextrum,
Quo been sis fretus, plus Caesare dat tibi Petrus.


But the Monks soon learnt by experience, that the Popes Pastoral Staff di^ not
defend them like the Royal Bator^^ And therefore the Author of that Chrenicle
Abbatia quae hactenus fuit Imperialis camera, modo datur pro pretio, sicut a
mercatoribus venditur vilis ancillula. Vbi sunt fastus recales? ubi Sceptri
magnificentia?
deplores the misery to which his Monastery was reduced at that time and
regrets the loss it sustained, in being no longer protected by the Emperors.

I mention this, to show how little power the Popes had before that time in the
Elections of Bishops and Abbots, and that it was wholly in the hands of
Princes. However the Monks got always these words put into the Immunities or
Privileges, that Princes granted them; That they should have liberty to choose
an Abbot of their Society according to the Institution of St. Benet. Yet after
all, The Election^ were only free in name.
they durst not choose any Abbot, but with consent of the same Princes, who
named to them most commonly, those who were to be chosen, not observing even
the order, which appointed the Abbot always to be taken of the house whereof he
was to be Abbot. Liberty of Election remained only in inconsiderable Abbeys,
and even there, in the beginning, the permission of the Bishop in whose Diocese
it lay, was necessary. Before the Institution of St. Benet, the Monks were in
all things Subject to the Bishops, and could do nothing without their consent.
But the clause of that Institution concerning the Election of Abbots, which is
to be made by the Monks of the Community served them for a Pretext, by degrees
to exempt themselves from the Jurisdiction of Bishops. Original of the
Exempritions of Monasteries.
It is true that Monks who depended on Bishops, even for the observation of
their Institution, could not choose a new Abbot, before they had obtained the
permission of their Bishops. But as they represented their Rule, they were not
hindered to follow it; and so they obtained from the Bishops power to choose
their Abbots according to the tenor of their Constitutions. There was no need
afterward^ to have recourse to Bishops for a new Election, for they themselves
left to the Abbot and Monks all that concerned their Rule, and they began to
make a difference betwixt the Jurisdiction of the Bishops, and the Monastic
discipline. The Monks went even a little farther, and obtained from their
Bishops exemptions from episcopal Jurisdiction. And so soon as the Popes had in
the Diocefes of other Bishops, got the power which they have at present, the
Authority of Bishops was greatly diminished. For the Popes granted to Monks,
most commonly for Money, as many exemptions as they pleased. We must, however,
take notice, that the Primitive Exemptions of Monks are not so large, as those
of later times, and that the more the Authority of Popes has been advanced, the
Privileges of Monks have increased proportionably. After all, these Exemptions
have been very advantageous to Monasteries, and very uneasy to Churchmen that
depended on them. For, seeing the Abbots had all power in Spirituals as well as
in Temporals, the debates which they had with Churchmen were always decided in
favor of the Monastery.

Besides, the Abbots most commonly compounded with those to whom they gave the
administration of Churches, and cut off part of their Stipend for the use of
the Monastery. And for the better succeeding in this, they pretended that their
Monastery had the right of a Baptismal Church, and by consequent the Tithes and
other Church Dues belonged to it. If the Priests objected that they had always
received the Tithes, and that therefore their Church ought to be accounted
Baptismal; then the Monks defended themselves other^ ways, affirming that the
Priests only enjoyed the Tithes, by the charitable benevolence of their Abbots,
and that by right they belonged to the Monastery. A difference betwixt the
Monks and Curats about Tithes.
Thus the Monks of the Abbey of Mire heretofore pretended, that the Tithes of
the Churches which depended on their Monastery, belonged to them. I shall here
relate the terms inserted in the Acts o^ the Foundation of that Abbey that
every one may Judge of the right that Monasteries have often usurped over
Church^ that depended on them, without any title. The Act of the foundation of
the Abbey of Mire,
De decimis vero, quas cler^ antea hic a nostris agris accipiebant, c^dendum
est antecessoribus nostris hoc p^tius pro charitate, vel ad solatium victis
quam projustitia and subditione sanxisse and in potestate abbatis est, utrum
velit a^^ dare, aut sibimet habere, admonition sunt a modo omnes qui
secesserint huc ^^ habitandum, ne unquam consentiant (...) clericus curam ab
Episcopo, sed Abba^^ accipiat, quod istud monasterium est mal^^ Ecclesiae. To
which may be added that the Abbots gave frequently enough the Government of
Churches to some of their Monks, who discharged th^^ Office of Curate, instead
of secular Priests; and then it was easy to attribute to the Monastery, the
Tithes which belonged to the Curates. There was, indeed, sometimes debates
betwixt the Bishops and Monks; but the Bishops were easily gained by money, to
suffer them to appoint Vicars or Curates in the Churches, which they pretended
did depend on their Monasteries.

That we may better understand the Custom of that time, it is to be observed,
that Gregory VII. and other succeeding Popes, made several Constitutions to
oblige Laics to restore to the Church the Tithes and other Ecclesiastical
Revenues, A distinction betwixt the Church and the Altar.
which they possessed; but most of these Restitutions were only made to
Cathedral Churches and Monasteries, though the goods belonged to private
Churches. Now seeing the Church at that time was distinguished from the Altar,
Monasteries retained the Churches, that is to say, the Lands, Tithes and other
Revenues: But because the right of providing these Altars, belonged to the
Bishops, it behoved the Monks to obtain from them; that which was called, (...).
the Redemption of Altars, Godefroi of Vendome, and other Authors of the same
Age, make mention of that right. Besides, the Council of Clairmont ordained,
That the Altars which had been given to Chapters or Monasteries by the Vicars,
whom they called Par^ons, should return to the Power of the Bishop, unless the
Bishops had confirmed in writing the Donation made to the Chapters and
Monasteries. To obtain this confirmation from the Bishop, a certain sum of
money was required. And this abuse caused another; for private men would alse
have Churches, of which they receive^ the Profits in imitation of the Canon^
and Monks, and had the cure supplied by Vicars. There was no necessity that
they who were provided with such Altars should be Priests, seeing they
substituted Vicars in their places. John o^ Salisbury condemns that abuse
Nolunt Sacerdotio enerari, ant servire a (...) de altario vivunt, sed
personatus qiosdam introduxerunt, quorum jure ad alium overa, ad alium
reseruntur emolumenta.
and cannot endure that those that did no^ wait at the Altar should partake
with the Altar, applying to themselves the Revenues of Churches, without
rendering any service to the same Churches. Yve^ Bishop of Chartres complains
likewise of that corruption, in a Letter to Pope Urban II. wherein he lays open
the ba^ Custom that was in France, in respect of such Personages which had been
authorized by the Bishops his Predecessors: Qui altari non serviunt, says he,
de altari vivunt, a quo sacrilegio cum eos absterrere velim, monedo,
increpando, excommunicando, altaria a me redimere volunt sub nomine personae,
sicut a predecessoribus meis ex prava consuetudine redemerunt.

Pope Urban, indeed, condemned that abuse in a Council held at Clairmont, to
hinder the Simony that Bishops committed in selling Altars: but it seems that
they who had bought them from the Bishops, gained by their Simony; for it was
decreed in that Council, that such as had for the space of thirty years enjoyed
these Altars, should not be molested for the future, and that the Bishops
should exact no more from them, but the due, which they called redemptio
altarium. Pope Pascal Successor to Urban, confirmed the same Decree in one of
his Epistles, to Yves Bishop of Chartres, and Ranulphus Bishop of Xantes,
wherein he speaks to them in these terms: Ipsi Arvernensi concilio adfuistis,
in quo praesidente Praedecessore nostro bonae memoriae Papa Vrbano,
consentientibus Galliarum Episcopis, decretum est ut altaria quae ab annis
triginta sub vicariorum redemptione Monasteria possedisse noscuntur, quiet
deinceps and sine molestia qualibet Monasteriis ipsis firma permaneant.

In this manner did Monasteries and Chapters, who were also comprehended in the
Decree of the Council of Clairmont, retain to perpetuity several Altars which
did not all belong to them; and they were at the same time exempted from paying
to the Bishops the usual dues, that were paid after the death of the Vicars;
for obtaining liberty to put other Vicars in their places. It had been, me
thinks, more convenient and agreeable to the Ancient Canons, to have left the
power of providing for Altars to the Bishops. And to prove that that right
belonged to them, when Laics were forced to restore to the Church the Tithes
and other Church Revenues which they possessed, it was decreed in the Council
of Melfi under Pope Vrlan II. That no Laick should have Liberty to give to
Monasteries or Chapters, Tithes Churches, or other Ecclesiastical Rights,
without the consent of the Bishop of the place, or the permission of the Pope.
But it happened that the Bishops abused their Power, and permitted Chapters and
Monasteries to receive these Rights from Laics, on Condition of a certain sum
of money to be paid to the Bishops, for granting Liberty of establishing
Priests or Vicars who might take upon them the Spiritual care of Churches.
These decrees of the Popes that were backed with Excommunications, frightened
many Laics, who instead of restoring the Church Revenues to private Churches,
to which they belonged, restored them to Chapters and Monasteries, with the
permission of the Bishops. The Laymen liked it much better to restore the
Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical Revenues, to Chapters and Monasteries, from
whom they got money, than to private Churches, which had none to give. And
therefore Councils decreed that these Restitutions should not be made without
consent of the Bishops, thereby to prevent all compacts or agreements betwixt
Laics and Ecclesiastical Communities. There were, nevertheless, a great many
Laics, wh^^ were not startled at the Excommunications of Gregory VII. and
other succeeding Popes, but notwithstanding them kept still the Tithes and
other Ecclesiastical Revenues. They did more, for they instituted Priests to
take care o^ Souls, without expecting the Institution of the Bishops. And that
was th^^ cause why the Council of Lateran under Alexander III. decreed Con.
Later. III. cap. 14.
Th^^ Clerks or Priests that should take upon them the Government of Churches,
from the hands of Laics without the Authority of the Bishop of the place,
should (...) excommunicated; and that if they persisted, they should be deposed
from their Ministry. Nevertheless the Popes suffered Laymen still to enjoy the
Tither of Churches whereof they were in possession. But they granted Chapters
and Monasteries Privileges to ge^ them out of their hands, even when the
Bishops would not consent to it^ These kinds of Privileges which were casily
obtained from the Court of Rome, brought in great Revenues to Chapters and
Monasteries, who put Secular Priests into the Government of Churches, allowing
them such moderate Stipends, that the Popes were obliged to condemn that
Avarice of the Canons and Monks, who denied Priests even a necessary
subsistence.

The vast Rents that Monasteries enjoyed gave umbrage to the Bishops, Canons,
and to Princes themselves, to whom it was represented, that most part of these
Revenues ought rather to belong to secular Priests who served the cures, than
to Monks, who by their Profession were excluded from all Ecclesiastical
Functions But seeing the Monks had taken advantage of the ignorance of Secular
Priests, and that the government of most Churches was committed to them, it was
a difficult task to turn them out, and to re-establish Secular Priests in
Churches. And therefore there happened great contests betwixt the Canons and
Monks, especially in England, where the Monks had deprived the Canons of their
Canonships, and even obliged Secular Priests to turn Monks, if they intended to
enjoy their Benefices. The Bishops did what lay in their power to remove the
Monks from Church Dignities. But on the other hand the Monks had their recourse
to the Popes, who were already become Masters of a great part of the
Jurisdiction of Bishops; and Princes who were persuaded that Monasteries were
grown too Rich, favored the Bishops against the Monks and Popes. All the
Archbishops of Canterbury had been Monks, from the time of Austin, whom Pope
Gregory sent into England, until the Reign of Henry 1. But when under that
Prince, they came to the Election of an Arch Bishop, Hist. Sim. Daniel. 1123.
all the Bishops of England declared publicly, that they would have no Monk
for their Primate, and that amongst the Clergy there were as virtuous men, and
as fit for the Government of a Church, as any in the Monasteries: So by degrees
they began to take the Government of Churches out of the hands of Monks, though
they were protected by the Popes. Yet they still made a distinction betwixt
Regular Canons and Monks, which continues to this day; for we find but a few
Monks that take the Charge of Parish-Churches, and perform other Ecclesiastical
Functions out of their Monasteries, Whereas regular Canons in all places
discharge those Offices, without being obliged, as Monks are, to put Secular
Priests into their Cures.

There remain at present but few Cathedral Churches in the hands of Monks,
though heretofore it was a very common thing to see no other Canons,
Ecclesiastical Employments inconsistent with Monks.
in Churches, but Monks, who at the same time took care both of Churches and
Monasteries; which was altogether opposite to the Canons, and even to the
Institution of the Monastic life. Quisquis autem ex Monasterio ad
Ecclesiasticum ordinem pervenerit, ulterius illic nec aliquam potestatem, nec
licentiam habeat manendi.
St. Gregory indeed, allows Monks to enter into holy Orders, and to officiate
in that capacity, when it shall please their Bishop to enjoin them: But then
they could no longer continue in their Monasteries, being become real Clerks.
Nevertheless the Monks did the contrary, Greg. Papa.
and remaining still in their Monasteries, took upon them the care of Churches.
We even find in the History of England, that the Office of Archdeacon of a
Cathedral Church was annexed to the place of Prior of a Monastery. The desire
they had of enriching their Houses, was the true cause why they continued in
their Communities though by right they were separated from them, because of the
Ecclesiastical Employments in which they were engaged; and so far from laying
aside their Monkish customs, when they were associated to the Clergy, they
introduced into their Churches the Practices and Ceremonies of their
Monasteries; and that was the thing that made way for the Re-establishment of
Secular Priests, in Cathedral Churches and other Benefices. But nevertheless,
part of the Revenues that belonged to Private Churches remained still in the
possession of Monasteries.

Besides, Princes and Bishops could not endure that Monks should possess
Eclesiastical Dignities, after that the Popes were grown so powerful that they
disposed at their pleasure of the most part of Benefices. For the Monks always
espoused the Interests of the Popes against Princes and Bishops, under pretext
of defending the liberty of the Church; and seeing Princes refused to submit to
the Pope, with whom they had continual quarrels, they resolved to give no
Ecclesiastical Promotions, but to those who were devoted to their Service. The
English History gives us a pretty Instance of this, in the Reign of Richard I.
Princes ruint the Monks.
That Prince having assembled the Bishops of his Kingdom, could not forbear
with Tears to tell them, that he was an unfortunate wretch, and no King. Se
miserum esse, non regem. Chron. Gervasii.
He complained that the Revenues of his Kingdom were crumbled into infinite
parcels, of which the least part came to his share, and Haec enim and illa
possident albi Monachi and nigri, and ordinis diversi Canonici.
that they were possessed by Black Monks, White Monks, and Canons of different
Orders. Then he upbraided the Secular Priests with their Vices, and scandalous
and debauched lives that were notoriously known to all the World. Eleemosynas
Populi, said that Prince speaking of Secular Priests, distrahunt, and expendunt
in pravos usus, dum magis cogitant de suarum pannis meretricum, quam de suarum
vestimentis vel libris Ecclesiarum -- tolerabile malum videretur, si singuli
suas mulierculas observarent, and saltem thorum non invaderent alienum.

These corruptions were not peculiar to England alone, but were spread over all
the Churches of Europe, where Priests who were prohibited to Marry according to
the Canons of the Western Church, made no scruple publicly to keep Concubines.
And we are obliged to the Monks, for the services they rendered to the Church,
in those days when the Secular Priests were plunged in Ignorance and Vice: But
their Services were not so considerable, when they began to declare for the
Popes, who pretended alone to have the absolute disposal of all Church Revenues
contrary to Ancient Custom. King Richard, of whom we have been speaking
attributes the disorders which the Court of Rome caused in his dominions to the
weakness of the Priests of his Kingdom Romani says he, Propter debilitatem
vestram, adeo nobis infesti sunt, ut nobis solummodo videantur imperare,
literulas sua^nobis vendunt, nec Justitiam quaerunt, sed litigia fovent,
multiplicant appellationes, redimunt placitantes et cum solam pecuniam
appetunt, veritatem confundunt pacemque subvertunt. That Prince continuing his
complaints, told the Bishops of the same assembly, that for Remedy to all these
evils, the Monks must be obliged to shut themselves up within their
Monasteries; without sharing in Ecclesiastical affairs; and the Secular Clergy
reformed, who would be much more serviceable than the Monks Romany latronibus
si transgrediuntur, poterunt obesse.
in resisting the unjust attempts of the Court of Rome. The Kings advice was
followed by all the Bishops, and it was resolved in that Assembly, that the
Monks who possessed Cathedral Churches, should have their private Churches near
to these Cathedrals, and that Secular Canons should be settled in their places.
And in this manner did Princes with assistance of the Bishops endeavor to
re-establish Secular Priests in the Churches according to Prescripts of the
Canon Law. But that was not done without great difficulty, because the Monks
were protected by the Popes, whose authority was become formidable; and it is
to that time especially, that we ought to attribute a great part of the
Exemptions which the Monks obtained from Rome, that they might not depend on
the Bishops who endeavored their Ruin.

It was a troublesome thing to Princes, The Original of great power given to
Churches.
to see the Popes dispose at their pleasure of the goods and Lands, which Kings
their Predecessors had given to Churches, at that time when they had the power
over them. It is certain Princes would never have granted such large Revenues
to Churches, if they had thought that they should have fallen into the hands of
the Popes. For, to what end was it to give to Churches whole Towns, and great
Demains, with secular Jurisdiction, when the same was not to be in their
disposal for the future? The German Historians attribute chiefly to the
Emperors Otho's the enriching the Bishops and Monasteries of Germany with so
great Revenues Theodor. de Hiem. priv. and Jur. Imper.
Otho primus omnibus pene Cathedralibus Ecclesiis in Italia, Gallia, Germania,
Burgundia et Lotharingia constitutis, multas civitates, castra, oppida, villas,
and multa alia dominia temporalia, and Jurisdictiones donavit, atque illis
omnibus Ecclesiis propria insignia perpetuo deputavit. Archiepiscopos quoque
and episcopos ducatibus, comitatibus and baroniis communivit, quibus nobiles
and potentes vasallos subjecit, ut semper essent ad resistendum and manu forti^
aganis Hareticis, etc. That does not altogether agree with the reflections that
Father (2) Paul has made in his History, where he pretends that the Bishops of
Germany, during the Wars that were betwixt the Emperors and Popes, had usurped
the Lands which at present they enjoy with the Titles of Peers, Marquesses and
Counts. Though that may indeed, be true of some, yet it cannot be generally
affirmed of all; for the Records of those Churches evince the contrary.
Nevertheless the titles which they produce ought to be well examined, because
many of them are false. Seeing Bishops and Abbots were at that time employed in
the greatest affairs of State, it was easy for them to obtain what they desired
of Princes: Besides that, they being more capable of business than Laics, the
same Princes consided much in them. But these great Revenues wherewith Churches
have been enriched, have only served to kindle War betwixt Popes and Princes,
every one pretending ^o have a particular right over Ecclesiastical Revenues.
And that divided the Authors of these times, some writing in favor of the
rights pretended by Princes, and others in favor of the Popes. And it is no
easy matter at present to reconcile together the rights of those two Powers.

No man can deny, The Authority of the Pope concerning Benefices.
but that the Pope ^^ Bishop or Metropolitan of Rome, Patriarch of the West,
and Head of th^^ Church. I shall not now examine by wh^^ Right, Divine or
Positive, these tither belong to him; for that is a Question of Divinity rather
than History. It moreover certain that the Pope has (...) all these Qualities
in vain, and that (...) very one ought to enjoy some rights th^^ are peculiar
to him. It is not questions but that in quality of Bishop of Rome he may
dispose of the Benefices with his Diocese. It remains then only to (...)
inquired into, whether he can in quali^^ of Patriarch of the West, and Head
(...) the Church, by right provide for all th^^ Benefices or Ecclesiastical
Dignities (...) all Christendom. If we consult the matter of fact, it is of
public Notoriety that the Church of Rome has not ha^^ any Privilege as to
that, above other Churches. Every one took care of providing what Ministers
they wanter without having recourse to Rome; an^^ when difficulties arose, they
were adjusted in Provincial Synods. No ma^^ ever wrote before the Establishment
o^^ the new Law, that the Bishop of Rome alone in quality of the Successor of
St. Peter, had all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and that other Bishops were
only his Vicars, or Delegates. Popes, nevertheless, do at present pretend that
their Authority in respect of Ecclesiastical Revenues is founded on Divine
Right, and that because they had not for many ages enjoyed it, it ought not to
be inferred that they had no Right to it. A Divine Right, say they, being
essentially inherent in the Person of the Pope, can never prescribe: And it is
a bad consequence to say, that Popes have no Right, because they have not for a
long time enjoyed it, nor do at present enjoy it in its full extent. Men are
sometimes obliged not to make use of their Right, or to remit part of it for
Peace sake. Laws in their rigor are sometimes prejudicial to the repose of the
Church, and in that case, mild ways, suitable to the times, are to be followed.
And therefore Innoc. III. de translat. Episc tit. 7. cap. 1.
Pope Innocent III. affirms in one of his Epistles, that the Translations of
Bishops and other changes of Sees belong by Right to the Church of Rome; that
Popes enjoy that Privilege in Quality of th^^ Successors of St. Peter; and
that in that Quality they are above all the Canon Law. So that according to his
Logic we ought not so much to consider what is decreed by the Canons, as what
is Commanded by Popes, on whom th^^ same Canons depend; because accord^ to his
Principle, all the Canon Law derives its force and Authority from th^^ Primacy
of St. Peter.

Pope Innocent, who laid down th^^ Maxim in favor of his See, knew, for a^^
that, that all the Ancient Canon Law is contrary to it, and that the Election
Translations, Demissions or Resignations of Bishops, were made in Provinc^^
Synods, and besides, that Princes have had a great share in all those matters
within their own Kingdoms. For instance the Practice of the Church o^^ France
under the first Race of their Kings, was very far different from that pretended
Divine Right mentioned in the compilation of the Decretals: For we find that
the Kings by themselves, called Councils for affairs of that nature, and that
G^^gor. Turon. lib. 5. cap. 20, 27.
in the greatest causes, such as the deposing of Bishops, they named for Judges
what Bishops they pleased within their Kingdom. In a word, Kings and the
Bishops of places handled in Councils, the affairs which the Popes now a days
pretend to belong to them by Divine Right. It is true, under the Second Race of
the French Kings, the Authority of the Popes was greater in France; But it was
still limited by the Princes, without whose consent they could do nothing, even
in the causes, which are called the greater, and whereof the decision seemed to
be reserved to the Popes. As to matters of smaller importance, the Bishops had
the absolute power over them, and the whole disposition of Benefices depended
on them. The Popes had never dreamt of the right which is now established, if
private men who disputed one with another about the validity of their
Elections, had not had their recourse to the chief See for decision of their
Controversies. We find still in the Eleventh Century, instances of the power of
Provincial Councils, who received Resignations or Demissions made by Bishops,
and admitted Translations from one See to another, without having recourse to
the Pope for it. And there is nothing more novel than the provisions to
Bishoprics in the manner they are made at present by the Popes Bulls which
confirm the Elections in those places where they are still in force, o^ the
nominations of Princes who enjoy that Right. But since private Person have
given occasion to the establishment of the New Law, it has no^ been difficult
for Canonists to defen^ it.

To make it out, that the Pope (...) Master of all Benefices, they say tha^ he
is the Collatour of Collatours, an^ the Ordinary of Ordinaries, not only in the
Western Church, where of h^^ is Patriarch, but also over the whole World,
because he is the Patriarch o^ Patriarchs, and Chief of the Universa^ Church.
They farther add, that the Church of Rome has founded all other Churches; and
by consequent, can dispose of them as Founder and Patron. It is certain that
the Patriarchs o^ Alexandria and Antioch ordained the Bishops that were within
the extent of their Patriarchship, and that the Pope did the same in regard of
the Bishops who are in the Regions which were called Suburbicau. On the other
side the Canonists prove by the Testimonies of St. Leo, St. Gregory and of some
other Fathers, that St. Peter founded the Churches of Antioch, Alexandria and
Rome, which are the three chief Patriarchal Churches from which the others have
sprung.

And this is the ground upon which the Canonists pretend that the Pope has the
disposal of all the Churches in the World. They are nevertheless obliged to
confess that that Right was unknown to the Ancients, and that it is no where
contained but in the Book of the Decretals. Nay I dare be bold to affirm that
the Decretals contain but part of that new right whereof the Pope is at present
in Possession, and that since the Collection of the Decretals, the Court of
Rome has made many discoveries in Beneficiary matters, of which I shall not
speak in this place. It shall be enough for me to observe here, that nothing is
esteemed at Rome, but the present Maxims; that the Decrees of Gratian are not
valued there, because they contain for most part nothing but Old Customs, which
are out of Doors^ and that the Books of Decretals are not received neither, but
so far as they sui^ with the present times. The great Principle of the Court of
Rome is, that the Pope is above the Laws, that it belong to him alone to make
Canons for the Government of the Church, and tha^ it is in his power to change
the Ancient; and to introduce New ones, according to the necessity of times,
places and occasions. If it happen that Princes oppose the Execution of their
Bulls, they easily take up the matter by Concordats or other means, without any
prejudic^ at all to their pretensions; because a^ they say, there are two sorts
of Laws^ to wit, jus strictum, otherways the Law of rigor, which for most part
cannot be put in Execution; and jus remissum, which is a Law somewhat
favorable and remiss, which may be also called the Law of Economy and
Prudence, which the Church has often made use of, to comply with the humor of
those with whom she has had to do.

The Popes are always on that lock with Princes, and what they cannot obtain at
one time, they hope to obtain on another occasion. On this Maxim are founded
all the Concordats, and other Accommodations which they have made with several
Princes. And therefore the Arguments which P. Paolo tratt. delle mat. benef.
Father Paul draws from the nature of Concordats, to prove that Popes have not
by right an absolute Power over the Revenues of the Church, are not altogether
conclusive; because Popes will pretend that these Concordats, are only made by
Provision, and for a time, till they be able to exercise their right in its
full extent. That has been a very advantageous Maxim to the Court of Rome,
which has obtained at one time, what was impossible to be obtained at another.
They indeed propose matters according to the rigor, and their pretensions; but
they suffer Princes to moderate them according to the Customs received in their
Kingdoms. The Custom of France in the reception of Bulls.
And that is the reason why several of the Popes Bulls are not received in
France, and that they are not registered, till first they be examined, to see
whether they contain any thing contrary to the Liberties of the Gallican
Church. Besides, they are not registered but with certain Clauses and
Modifications, that they may be made agreeable to the Customs of the Country;
whereas at Rome they are registered in their full extent, and without any
restrictions. The Spaniards do the same also, but with less noise than the
French do. They receive all the Popes Bulls with great respect, then they
examine them in Council; and if they find that there is reason no^ to put them
in Execution, they inform the Holy Father of it by a supplication, and so the
Bulls remain without effect.

Though Popes have done all that lay^ in their power, to get the absolute
disposal of the Revenues of all the Churches in the World, they could never as
yet hinder Princes from taking to themselves certain Rights or Privileges, Of
the Right of the Regale.
which they enjoy at present. These Rights differ according to the diversity of
Countries; but I shall only treat in this place of the Rights of the Regale, of
which the Kings of France are in Possession. Many pretend that the Right of the
Regale is as Ancient as the Crown of France: But that cannot be, if we consider
that Right as it is established at present. For it comprehends not only the
Collation of Benefices which have no Cure of Souls, for which the King provides
by his absolute power, during the vacancy of the Episcopal See; but besides
that, the King has the Administration and disposal of all the Revenues of the
Bishopric, until the Sea be filled. Now it is certain, that under the first
Race of the French Kings, the Rents and Profits of Vacant Churches were managed
by the Clergy and Arch deacon, as appears by the Council of Orleans, held under
King Childebert, and by the Council of Paris, held under King Clotair II. where
it is decreed, Councils of Orleans and Paris.

Ab Archidiacono and clero in omnibus defensentur and conserventur, quod si
quis ausu temerario res ipsas ingressus fuerit, and ^^e dominatione Ecclesiae
abstulerit, ut necator pauperum communione privetur.


That the goods of the Bishop deceased, shall be defended and preserved entire
by the Archdeacon and Clergy; and that they who shall dare to seize or usurp
them, shall be Excommunicated.

At that time the Gallican Church observed the Canons of the Council of
Calcedon concerning the Stewards or Treasurers, who were to take the care of
the Revenues of the Church after the death of the Bishop. In some Churches the
Archdeacons supplied the place of Stewards. But in what manner soever that was
performed, whether by Stewards, or Archdeacons, it is still true that Princes
took no share in the Fruits of vacant Bishoprics, since one part of them were
employed for the occasions of the Church, and the other preserved for the
succeeding Bishop. It cannot then be affirmed, that in that respect the Right
of the Regale has been in use under the first Race of the Kings of France,
unless one would confound this Right with that of Nomination to Bishoprics,
which the Kings of the first Race enjoyed. But by the Word Regale, is meant now
a days somewhat quite different from a bare Nomination: For the Regale at
present attributes to the King, the Spiritual and Temporal Fruits of Vacant
Bishoprics, until the time they be provided; which differs from the Ancient
Rights of Nomination and Investiture.

Furthermore, Of the Regale under the second Race.
the same Right of the Regale, in the notion we take it here, was also unknown
under the second Race of the French Kings, as appears by a Letter of Hincmar
Archbishop of Rheims, written to Charles the Bald, For that Archbishop sets
down the Canon of the Council of Calcedon, for a Rule during the Vacancy of the
Episcopal See: ut post mortem Episcopi reditus Ecclesiae viduatae futuro
Episcopo penes Oeconomum ejusdem Ecclesiae integrae conservari jubeantur. And
in a Ann. 876. Synod. Pontigon.
Synod held under the same Emperor, it was appointed according to what had
been decreed in the Council of Calcedon, that after the Decease of the Bishop,
the Rents should be preserved for his Successor by the Steward or Treasurer of
the Church. It is true, Charles the Bald acted otherwise, after that Ebbo
Archbishop of Rheims was deposed from his See: For during the Vacancy of the Sea, which continued several years, that Prince seized the Rents of the Church,
and gave part of the Lands thereof in Fee. But that Instance does not overthrow
the practice of those Times, seeing the King promised in the Ann. 845.
Synod of Beauvais to Hincmar, and the other Bishops, that he would restore to
the Church of Rheims, all the Lands that he had taken from it: Besides, that
was a singular Act, and only done by the King, for a greater punishment to
Archbishop Ebbo, who had been deposed. Nor can the Right of the Regale be
proved by the bad use that Charles Martel made of Church Lands, which he gave
in Fee to Laics; for the Capitularies of Charlemain of Louis, and Charles the
Bald, condemn that Dissipation of Church Revenues, and attribute it to the
necessity of the Times, which in some manner obliged Princes to give
Church Lands to their Subjects, thereby to endear them to their Service.

In fine, The Regale under the third Race.
the same Right of the Regale, as we understand it, was not yet fixed in the
beginning of the third Race, as appears by a Letter of Gerbert Archbishop of
Rheims, wherein he recommends it to the Clergy and People, to whom he directs
his Letter, to take care that the Estate of the Bishop deceased be preserved
for the succeeding Bishop: Sit vestra pervigil cura, ut secundum divinas and
humanas leges, res defuncti Episcopi, tam mobiles quam immobiles, futuro
reserventur Episcopo.

We must not, The Regale different from the Investiture.
neither, confound the Right of Investiture, with the Right of the Regale, as
some Authors have done. For it is not to be found in History, nor in any
Ancient Deed, that Emperors and Kings, who have had the Investitures of
Bishoprics and Abbeys, have therefore enjoyed the Revenues of Churches, during
the Vacancy of the Sea: but application was only made to them for proceeding to
a new Election, which was not to be made without their consent; afterward they
gave to Bishoprics and Monasteries, the Investiture of Lands or Fiefs which
had been left to them; in the manner as we have before described.

Before the Popes disputed the Right of Investiture with Princes, An
Explication of the Investiture.
and claimed the Power over Elections, the Investiture contained nothing of the
Spiritual, but only Temporal Rights, in respect of Lands and Fees in which
Bishoprics and Monasteries were invested, and the Bishops had full liberty to
give the Consecration wherein the Spiritual consisted. If Popes had not had a
design to take from Princes the Right which they had in Elections, they had
never thought of reckoning the Investiture among Spiritual things. There is
nothing worse grounded, than that distinction of Investiture which is mentioned
in the Agreement that was made betwixt Pope Calixtus II. and the Emperor Henry
IV. The Pope grants to Henry, that all Elections of Bishops and Abbots, shall
be made in his presence, thereby to prevent disorder; and that those who should
be elected, should receive from the Emperor, the Regales or Regalities by the
Scepter. Henry the Emperor at the same time obliges himself, not to give
Investitures by the Ring and Staff or Baton, and allows the Liberty of
Elections. But that distinction of Investitures given by the Pastoral Staff,
and by the Scepter, as if the first had been a thing Spiritual, and the other
merely Temporal, has no ground in the World. Investitures were barely given by
the Staff and Ring whether that Staff was called, Royal or Pastoral. Simony
consisted not in the form of Investiture, but in the Emperors taking of Money,
from those to whom they gave it; and since that was always done before the
Election, it might be said that the Election was Simoniacal. That abuse ought
to have been corrected, and matters left as they were before.

In the mean while, The Regale granted by the Pope.
it is very probable, that the Agreement made betwixt Pope ( alixtus and Henry
the Emperor, ^s the true Original of the Regale: For ^n these two Instruments
there is men^ion made of the Regale: Ann. 1122.
Electus au^em Regalia per sceptrum a te recipiat, ^s the Popes Declaration to
the Emperor bears. That word Regalia compre^ended the Sees which Princes had
granted to Churches; afterward it was extended to all the Revenues that were
^ossessed by the same Churches. Now according to the Laws of the German
Emperors, it was the nature of Fees, that they who enjoyed them, became
Vassals to the Emperors of whom they held them; and were obliged to take an
Oath of Allegiance to them. A more particular Explication of the Regale.
Moreover, after the Death of the Vassal, the Emperor enjoyed his Revenues,
until his Successor being invested in the same Fees, had sworn to him Fealty
and Homage. That Law reached Churchmen, because their Churches possessed
several Fees: And it is the present Custom of France, that the Regale begins so
soon as the Church is Vacant and does not end, till the new Bishop has sworn
Allegiance to the King and be admitted by Law. Louis the Young is the first
King of France Ann. 1161.
who has made mention of this Right of the Regale: For speaking of the
Bishopric of Paris, he uses these words, Episcopatus and Regale in manus
nostr^venit. There is mention also made (...) it Ann. 1190.
in the last Will and Testamen^ of Philip the August, wherein tha^ Prince
says: Nos vero, tam canonic^ quam monachos monemus, ut talem past^ rem
eligant, qui deo placeat and utili^ sit regno. Regina autem and Archiepisc^pus
tamdiu Regalia in manu sua te^^ant, donec electus consecratus sit vel
be^dictus; and tunc Regalia sine contradictione ei reddantur.

We find in the Histories of England that the Right of the Regale was
established in that Kingdom, at the same time it was in France, and that it
occasioned many troubles there. (...) proceeded even to the Churches of
Ireland; and it appears by a Letter of Pope Innocent III. directed to a
Cardinal, Legate in that Country, that the Custom of the Regale, was in the
Church of Armagh; and the Pope in his Letter makes use of the Word Regalia. Nay
he speaks of that Right, as of a thing received and authorized by Custom: And
to hinder Princes from enjoying too long the Revenues of Churches, he shortens
the time of the Vacancy of the Sea, ordering the Me^ropolitans remote from
Rome, to enter into the Administration of their Churches, before they had
obtained their confirmation: Quia, says that Pope, si tanto ^empore quo usque
posset Electus, confir^ationem cum pallio a sede Apostolica ob^inere, Regalia
non reciperet; Ecclesia ^uoe interim administratione careret, non ^odicum
incurreret detrimentum.

Many other Popes have also confirmed by Bulls, the same Right of the Regale,
which the Kings of France en^y. But the Emperor Frederick II. Ann. 1215.
made a Constitution against the Regales, as if they had been Contrary ^o the
immunities of the Church, and Ann. 1219.
confirmed his first Constitution, ^y a Second which he addressed to Pope
Honorius III. These Constitutions are ^entioned by Goldastus in the following
words: Dimittimus and refutamus abusum, quem in occupandis decedentium
Praelatorum, aut etiam Ecclesiarum vacantium, nostri consueverunt Antecessores
committere. That Prince remits to the Pope and other Bishops, the Right which
was called the Regales, as a Spiritual Right which belonged not to the
Emperors Lib. 8. de concord. cap. 18.
M. de Marca, produces also many Authorities of Popes and Councils, t^ prove
that the Revenues of Vacan^ Churches in the Gallican Church, did no^ belong to
Princes, and that the Decre^ of the Council of Calcedon, which appoin^ the
Revenues to be kept for Successo^^ should be observed there as well as ^ other
Churches. Most of these pro^^ are to be found in the Decrees of Grati^ and
thence it appears, that that abuse^ very Ancient, and practiced long before the
Regale was established, and tolera^ed by Popes. Wherefore Councils pr^hibited
Princes and other Laics to i^vade the Goods and Revenues of Churchmen after
their Death. That wick^ Custom of seizing the Estates of Bishop^ so soon as
they were dead, was sprea^ over the whole Church: For (...) read that it was no
less in use in the E^^ than in the West. Ann. 1150.
The Emperor Manuel Comnenus prohibited his Magistrates, to seize for his
Exchequer the immovable goods of Vacant Churches.

Ann. 1137.
Raymond Count of Barcelona, made the same Prohibition also to his Officers:
And to prevent the Revenues of Vacant Churches from being dissipated, he
himself took upon him the custody of them, by an Authentic Declaration, which
he made by way of Privilege to the Church of Barcelona; and that Privilege is
not only extended to all the Profits of the Bishopric, even during the Life of
the Bishops, but to all the other Churches of the Province of Tarragona. The
same Privileges were also granted to the Church of Narbonne: But
notwithstanding that, Laics still continued to seize the Estates of Bishops
after their Death, and retained them under pretext of preserving them, and
hindering dissipation. Nevertheless the Popes who vigorously opposed that
usurpation of the Laics, seem at the same time to have approved the Right of
the Regale which the Kings of France enjoyed in Relation to several Bishoprics
of their Kingdom. Ann. 1238.
Pope Gregory IX. in o^^ of his Epistles directed to the Archbishop of
Narbonne, and to the Bishop^ of Magalone and Elne, complains that the Stewards
and Bailiffs of the King of France, in the Province of Narbonne contrary to all
right and reason, sei^ed the Revenues of Bishops, during the Vacancy of the Sea: Then he add^ Quod nullo tempore praedecessoribus ipsius regis, vel aliis,
occasion Regalium, vel alia extitit attentatum.
that the Predecessors of the King had never done it under pretext of the
Regale, or any other Right.

The Popes, as appears by the Letter of Gregory IX. condemned not the Right of
the Regale, which the Kings o^ France had in several Churches of their Kingdom,
as a matter of injustice an^ usurpation; and the History of the Life of St
Louis informs us, A Restriction of the Regale.
that St. Louis made no Scruple in imitation of his Predecessors, to make use
of it in those places, where Custom had authorized the same, wherefore the
Kings of France Tantum pr^scriptum, ^^^^tum possession.
have not extended that Right, but to Churches where it was already
established. Heretofore the Parliaments decided all matters concerning the
Regale, merely by possession; and which is pretty surprising, upon a difficulty
that was started Ann. 1258.
in the Parliament of Paris, concerning the Regale of the Bishopric of Puy,
there was but one part of the Regale of that Church adjudged to the King,
because after having examined the Reasons on both sides, it was found that the
King had enjoyed but a part of the Regale during other Vacancies of that See.
And because it was evident that the King had not enjoyed the Forts of the Town,
and several Castles, it was decreed that the Church of Puy should not be
molested in these and several other points, which the King did not claim by
virtue of the Regale, because he was not in possession of them. When the
Question is of Imposing a Servitude or Burden upon any whosoever, good Titles
must be shown, or long Possession proved: And therefore the King, who did not
think that by the Right of the Regale he could take the Forts and Castles of
that Town, Ann. 1259.
made a Declaration, whereby he reserves to himself the power of taking into
his hands the aforesaid Forts and Castles by Right of Superiority, when the
Interest of his Service required it.

The Parliaments observed the same Rule for deciding the matter of the Regale
under King Philip III. the Son (...) St. Louis: The Custom of the Parliaments.
for there is to be found in a^ Ancient Record of the Court of Parliament, Ann.
1272.
this Decree against the Pretensions of the Kings Officers to the Church of
Albi, on occasion of the Right of the Regale; Reddita per d^minum regem
procuratoribus Capit^^ Albiensis Regalia Ecclesiae Albiensis, qu^mortuo
Episcopo Albiensi, Senescallus C^cassonensis ad manum domini regis cep^rat, and
saisinaverat sine causa, cum ^^minus Rex super he alias nunquam us^fuisset,
prout ex aliorum and ipsius rel^tione fuit inventum. At that time th^^ the
Right of the Regale was not dete^mined and fixed, but Practice, and the received
Custom was exactly followed insomuch that there were some Churches wholly
exempted from the Regale, and others only subject to pa^^ of it. In the
beginning, the Regale reached only Fees that held of Prince^ and it was after
extended to the Reve^nues that accrued from Tithes; and eve^ the Collation of
Benefices depending o^ Churches. The Churches that retaine^ the Ancient Right
of the Regale, were not at all subject to that Right for the Revenues of
Tithes, and Collation of Benefices; and that was the reason why Parliaments
adjudged only to the King in some Churches, the Regale for the Rents of Lands
and other Temporal Possessions of the Churches, and left to the Bishops the
Revenues arising from the Altars, Tithes, Offerings, and sometime the Collation
of Benefices.

This Right of the Regale Ann. 1274. The Regale authorized by a general Council.
was confirmed by the Council of Lions at the Instance of King Philip III. in
presence of his Ambassadors: But the Council only confirmed the Custom of the
Regale in the places where it was already introduced, and prohibited the
bringing of it into other places. Petr. de Marc. ^^o. 8. de coacor. c. 24.
M. de Marca, who relates the Decree of that Council, observes that the term
Regalia is there taken in a new sense, for the keeping and enjoying of all the
Fruits and Revenues during the Vacancy of the Sea: And besides, he adds, that
under the name of Fruits, the Collations of Benefices are comprehended, because
of the Constitution of Alexander III. which preceded that Council, wherein it
is expressed, that the Collation of Benefices ought to be reckoned among the
Fruits and Profits. But it seems to me that the Intention of Pope Gregory X. in
that Council, was to hinder for the future, Laymen of what Quality soever they
were, from invading Church Lands and Revenues, during the Vacancy of the Sea,
under any pretext that might be alleged, either of the Regale, Custody or
Protection; because, in effect, they who seized the Revenues of Churches after
the Death of the Bishops, never wanted Reasons for it, alleging the pretext of
Pretection or Custody. The Council comprehends the Right of the Regale, which
several Princes enjoyed, with the other Rights which many great men pretended
for possessing the Revenues of Churches during the Vacancy of the Sea. But
since the Maxims of the Canon Law are for most part taken from the Civil, Pope
Gregory thought it fit Tantum prascriptum, quantum possessum.
to leave those Rights to those who were already in possession of them, without
examining the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the Titles; because it would have
been a difficult matter to have succeeded in it, by reason of the long
Possession of many Princes, which gives a sufficient Title in the Civil Law.

As to the Collation of Benefices, I do not think that the Council intended to
comprehend them under the name of Fruits and Revenues, as M. de Marca affirms.
The truth is, it is a Maxim received and authorized by Custom since the
Introduction of the New Law, that Collations are of the number of Fruits:
Collationes sunt in fructibus.
But the term Collation is then taken in a larger sense, to wit, for the
Presentation or Nomination to Benefices; whereas the Kings of France by the
Right of the Regale, enjoy a real Collation of Benefices, The Right of
Collation attributed to the Kings of France by the Regale.
which the Canonists affirm to have something of the Spiritual. For the Kings
of France present not barely to Benefices like other Patrons; but they conser
in full Right by virtue of the Regale, in the same manner as Bishops do. Nay,
the Regale gives more Right to the King of France in regard of the Spiritual,
than Bishops have: For it is a Maxim of Canonists, that none but the Pope can
receive Resignations in favorem; and the reason they give is, because a
Resignation made in favor of another, is a kind of Simony; and that the Pope
alone, who is above Ecclesiastical Laws, can dispense with it: Solus Papa, say
they, purgat a Simonia: But they should add, and Rex Francorum; for the King of
France receives the Resignations which are called in favorem.

There are a great many other Rights which the Kings of France enjoy by virtue
of the Regale, and which are peculiar to that Right. The Lawyers and French
Canonists have much ado to explain the Original of these Rights, which they
suppose according to the common Rules of the Canon Law to be Spiritual Rights,
and by consequent not to belong to Lay-persons, unless it be by a special
Privilege granted by Popes to the Kings of France: But since no such
Privilege can be made appear, and that on the other hand, the Kings of France
pretend not to hold that Right by Privilege of the Pope, the difficulty grows
greater. Bonis. VIII.
Pope Boniface VIII. in the contest that he had with Philip the Fair, failed
not to write to that Prince, that he accounted those Heretics who pretended
that the Collation of Benefices, which he said was a Spiritual Right, could
belong to Laics. Joan. Paris.
Johannes Parisiensis, who wrote at that time upon the same Subject, affirms
that there is a difference to be made betwixt Princes and Subjects, in that
these as being inferior to others in Knowledge, and discerning of Persons
proper for Benefices, could not but present; whereas Princes might confer,
Habent omnem peritiam inscrinio pectoris.
as being endowed with a full and entire Knowledge. But that Reason does not
conclude in the point in hand, where the Question is of the Spiritual, and not
of the Temporal.

That difficulty nevertheless may easily be resolved, if we suppose that the
Right of Collation which belongs to Bishops, is not properly a Spiritual Right;
and that therefore Laics who have enjoyed it by a long Custom, cannot be
excluded from it. It is to be observed then, that according to the Rules of the
Ancient Canon Law, the Collation of a Benesice was wholly Spiritual, because
then there was no other Collation, but only the Ordination, which cannot be
given but by the Bishop. But since Ordination has been distinguished from the
Ecclesiastical Function, many new terms have been invented; and among others,
that of Collation or Institution, and the Right of Collating is attributed only
to the Bishops; so that Lay-Patrons may name or present to Benefices, provided
those whom they have presented, take Collation or Institution from the Bishops,
which alone gives the power of performing Spiritual Functions. Nevertheless, we
find in France, especially in Normandy, many Laics, who in full Right confer
Benefices, as well as the King There are even Abbesses, as the Abbess of
Montivillers, in the Country of Caux, who in full Right confer Cures, without
any necessity of having recourse to the Ordinary for Collation or Institution.
I know it will be answered to this, that Laics, who enjoy that Right, are
grounded on Privileges granted them by the Pope. But however it be, it is
certain, that if that Right were necessarily inherent in the Quality of Bishop,
the Pope could not by a Privilege grant it to Laics, no more than he can
grant the Right of Ordaining, wherein the Spiritual really consists. And
therefore that Collation which succeeds Ordination, is not the same
Spirituality with the Ordination; but it has been only thought necessary to
hinder Persons incapable from possessing Benefices. The Right of conferring
Benefices deprives not Bishops of the Right they have of Judging of the
Capacity of those who have received Institution or Collation from Laics: For
besides that first Institution, which is called Collative Institution, there is
another kind of Institution called Institutio Autorisabilis, which gives the
Bishops power to examine the Capacity of those, on whom Laics have conferred
Benefices, that so they may authorize their Collation. There is no such great
difficulty then, as is commonly imagined, to conceive the Right of conferring
Benefices, which the Kings of France enjoy by virtue of the Regale. That which
is called Spirituality in beneficial matters since the Introduction of the new
Canon Law, is far different from that which is truly Spiritual according to the
Ancient Canons; and that is a thing not sufficiently minded by the Canonists.
Nevertheless the same John of Paris, whom we mentioned before, observes very
well, that the right of conferring is not properly Spiritual, but that it is
only annexed to the Spiritual. Let us now return to the History of the Regale,
and see how it was established in France after the Decree of the Council of
Lions.

Ann. 1302. Th^^ Regale un^^^ Philip the Fair.
King Philip the Fair made an Edict for authorizing the Regale, after it had
been confirmed by Pope Gregory in the Council of Lions: But it extended only to
Churches, where it had been introduced by Custom. These are the terms of his
Edict; Regalias quas nos and nostri praedecessores percipere assuevimus and
habere in aliquibus Ecclesiis regni nostri. That Prince conformed his Edict to
the Decree of the Council, Under Philip of Valois.
and would have the Rents of Churches preserved, and the ordinary Revenues only
received in title of Fruits. Ann. 1334.
The Constitution of Philip of Valois restrains also the Regale to Custom,
Under Louis XII.
and to the Churches of the Realm, where that Right was established. Louis XI.
Ann. 1499.
made a like Edict, and besides, prohibited his Officers, to molest Churches,
where there was no Right of Regale or Custody. And therefore M. de Marca after
Ruzee, Pasquier, and several other French Lawyers, who have written about the
Regale, observes that that Right is not in all the Churches of the Kingdom, and
that in those where it is settled, it is not in all after the same manner. He
nevertheless confesses, that many have pretended the Regale to be a pure Royal
Right; and therefore that it ought to extend to all the Churches of the
Kingdom; but that Pasquier, the Kings Advocate in the Chamber of Accounts, a
knowing man in that matter, calls those men Court Flatterers.

It is certain, that notwithstanding all the Actions that have been brought
upon that Subject in the Parliaments, the Kings of France have never taken to
themselves the Regale but in certain Churches: And we have still Ann. 1606.
Under Henry IV.
an Edict of Henry IV. wherein he declares, That he pretends not to enjoy the
Regale, but in the manner that he and his Predecessors have, without stretching
it to the Prejudice of Churches that are exempted from it. The late King of
France Ann. 1629.
made also an Ordinance, whereby he declared, Under Louis XIII.
that he would enjoy the Right of the Regale, as in times past: And seeing
these Terms were Ambiguous, the Clergy made their Remonstrance that they might
have the explication of them. Monsieur de Marel Keeper of the Seals, and the
other of th^^ Kings Commissioners who had frame^ that Ordinance, answered, That
th^^ King declared that he would not enjoy th^^ Regale, in those places where
he had ^^ enjoyed it for time past. And thus y^^ have an abridgment of the
History ^^ the Regale in France. But at prese^^ there is no more regard had to
all that neither have I related it but as an Historian, and to serve for
Instruction. Th^^ present King has Ann. 1674.
not long since by a Declaration registered in the Parliaments, comprehended all
the Churches of his Kingdom within the Regale, excepting four, which are
exempted from it on an onerous Title. So that there is no more need of
consulting the Chamber of Accounts, The Regale at present in all the Churches
of Frances
where the account of the Regales were taken, to know how matters went
heretofore, and what Churches were subject to the Regale; for that Declaration
prevents a great many law suits. Without examining whether the Regale be a
Crown right and by consequent unalienable, it cannot be denied but that the
Sovereign who grants a Privilege, may revoke it, and therefore the King might
rescind the Privileges and Exemptions from the Right of the Regale, which the
Kings his Predecessors had granted to some Churches of the Kingdom. The
Parliaments had already rescinded most part of these Privileges, of which some
were ill grounded. I shall not here give a Catalogue of the Churches of the
Kingdom, which pretend not to be Subject to the Regale, because it would be
needless and unseasonable. Such as would be farther informed as to that, may
consult the French Lawyers who have handled that Subject.

Nor shall I speak of the Rights, which other Princes have of providing to the
Benefices of their Kingdoms: For besides that most part of these Rights belong
to them in Quality of Patrons, or are founded on Privileges, and Concessions
granted by Popes, and sometimes on Concordats, made betwixt them and the Court
of Rome; these are matters void of my design, which is to apply my self more
particularly to the Rights, whereof France is in Possession, than to the
Customs of other Kingdoms. Yet I cannot silently pass over the Right which the
Kings of Spain enjoy in Sicily, and which i^ Commonly called the Monarchy of
Sicily, Monarchy of Sicily.
because it is the greates Spiritual Right, that Princes ever took to
themselves. It even suprasses that which Henry VIII. Of England boldly took
when he separated from the Church of Rome. The King of Spain in Quality of King
of Sicily, pretends to be Legate a latere, and born Legate of th^^ Holy See; so
that he and his Viceroys in his absence, have the same power over the
Sicilians as to the Spiritual that a Legate a latere could have. And therefore
they who execute that Jurisdiction in Sicily, for the King of Spain, have power
to absolve, punish and excommunicate all sorts of Persons, whether Laics or
Ecclesiastics, Monks, Priests, Abbors, Bishops, and even Cardinals themselves,
that reside in the Kingdom. They acknowledge not the Popes Authority, being
Sovereign Monarchs as to the Spiritual. They confess that the Pope has
heretofore given them that Privilege; but at the same time they pretend that
it is not in his Power to recall it: And so they acknowledge not the Pope for
head, to whose Tribunal no Appeal can be made, because their King has no
Superior as to the Spiritual Moreover, that Right of Superiority is not
considered as delegated, but as proper; and the King of Sicily, or they who
hold that Jurisdiction in his place, and who are Laymen, take the Title of
Beatissimo and Santissimo padre, attributing to themselves in effect, in
respect of Sicily, what the Pope takes to himself in regard of the whole
Church; and they Preside in Provincial Councils.

It was a matter of astonishment, that in our Age, Queen Elizabeth took the
Title of Head of the Church of England: But seeing in the Kingdom of Sicily,
the Female Succeeds as well as in England, a Princess may take the Title of
Head of the Church of Sicily, and of Beatissimo and Santissimo Padre. Nay it
has happened so already in the time of Jean of Arragon and Castile, the Mother
of Charles V. the Sicilians ground this Right of Supremacy in Spirituals, upon
a Bull of Pope Urban II. granted to Roger and his Successors, wherein are
these words: Quae per legatum actur^ sumus per vestram industriam, legat^vice
cohiberi volumus. Cardinal Barenius who in his Tome II. Ann. 1097.
Annals resutes that pretended Spiritual Monarchy, thinks that that Bull was
granted by the Antipope Anacletus, and that it has not been faithfully
related. But it is far more probable that it is false, and that it has been
forged during that time, that Sicily had no Communication with the Church of
Rome, from which it was separated, refusing to acknowledge the Holy See, either
in Spirituals or Temporals. It was an easy matter an that time, for the Kings
Officers, to foist in that Bull, and to put it in execution; for Sicily
continued ninety years under an Interdict, from the year 1282. until the Second
year of the Pontificat of Gregory II. who took off the Interdict. During that
time, Martin King of Arragon, made great attempts upon the Ecclesiastic
Jurisdiction, and ordained that Bishops themselves might not Excommunicate any
without his Permission, or the Permission of his Viceroy, but Sicily being in
possession of that Spiritual Monarchy, the Kings of Spain, who take the Title
of Catholic Kings, have rather increased than diminished it. Charles V. caused
an exact search to be made, to find out Titles to Justify this pretended
Monarchy; but it was no where found save in the Book of the Pandects that was
printed in the year 1526. and confirmed by Charles V. the seventh of December
the same year. Afterward, in the year 1556. there was a Book published, called
the Monarchy, wherein are contained the Rights of that Jurisdiction. And that
this Book might be rendered the more Authentic, it was signed by all of the
sacred College, that is to say, the Council of the Kingdom. One Copy of it is
preserved in the Royal Chancery of Sicily, and another Copy was sent to the
King.

The Bull of Urban II. which is the Basis of the Sicilian Monarchy, is related
at length by Fazelle in his Decad. 2. lib. 7. cap. 1.
History of Sicily Printed at Palermo in the year 1558. But historians who
wrote before him have made no mention of it; And it is very probable, that
Fazelle took it from John Lucas Barberius a Sicilian, who about the Year 1513.
composed in favors of King Ferdinand, a Volume of all the Privileges and
Titles of the Kingdom of Sicily, which he called caput Brevium; and in that
Volume he inserted the Bull of Urban II. As if the Original had been in the
Chancery. It is not to be imagined how much the word Monarchy has displeased
the Court of Rome. Baron. Ann. 1097. n. 28.
Nomen hactenus inauditum, says Cardinal Baronius, tunc proclamater infaustum,
adscribitur chartis, and memory perpetuae consecratur, jam regiis cusumlypis,
and imperatorio promulgatum Edicto. And he adds, that the Kings of Spain in
quality of Kings of Sicily, take a Title that Tyrants and the greatest Enemies
of the Church of Rome durst never claim. Ibid. n. 30.
Quod nunquam a piis regibus, nec a Tyrannis ipsis Romanae Ecclesiae
perduellibus, neque ipsis acerbissimis Romanae Ecclesiae persecutoribus
Friderieo filio atque nepotibus, ejusmodi Monarchiae nomen expugnatum ullatenus
reperitur. In fine the Cardinal pretends that to atrribute to Sicily a
Spiritual Monarchy, is to overthrow Divine Laws, and that it is only to the
Church of Rome to which our Savior has given that Title. But the Kings of
Spain slight all the complaints of the Court of Rome as to that, and persist in
the enjoyment of the Rights of their Spiritual Monarchy in Sicily, where they
acknowledge no other Pope but the King, or such as he does commissionate in his
place. So that it may be said, there are two Popes and two Sacred Colleges in
the Church, to wit, the Pope of Rome, and the Pope of Sicily, to whom also may
be added the Pope of England, for the King of England takes the Title also of
Supreme over the Churches within his Dominions.

Thus far we have shown the Original and Progress of Ecclesiastical Revenues,
how they have been administered, and in what manner they have come into the
Possession of Chapters and Monasteries. We have, besides, spoken of the power
of Bishops and Princes, and of the Pope also, over such Revenues. It would be
now time to show more particularly, by what ways Popes have made themselves
almost absolute Masters of the goods of the Church, and to observe the quarrels
they have had with Princes upon that account. But since Fra. Paolo has handled
that in his History, and that it is sufficient to read the Decretals, to be
informed in what manner their authority has been by degrees established, I
shall speak no more of that Subjuct. And it is for the same reason, that I have
not said any thing neither of the Original of Tithes, because it has been also
well enough handled by Fra. Paolo. All men are sufficiently persuaded, that
under the first Race of the Kings of France, that Nation had no recourse to
Rome for regulating the affairs of the Church. The Popes Power in France.
Nay and under the Second Race, Charlemain who gave a great deal of authority
to Popes, did not consult them about the Erection of the new Bishoprics and
Arch-Bishopricks which he established. In Italy it self, many Ages after, the
Princes and Bishops were absolute Masters of all that belonged to Churches. The
Prince or Judges appointed by him, decided the differences that happened
betwixt Bishops and Abbots, and amongst other Churchmen, concerning their
Revenues and Privileges: but seeing matters now a days are settled in another
manner, and that the Discipline of the Church is wholly altered, I thought it
necessary, having observed the original and Progress of Church Revenues, to
describe in a few words the present State of beneficial matters. It would be to
no purpose to know the Customs of our Forefathers, if we be ignorant of what
is at present in use amongst our selves. The former serve only for our
instruction, but the latter will be useful for the conduct of our lives. An
Explication of the New Canon Law.
I shall say nothing in this place of the Original of Benefices, in the manner
that they are established at present; for it is very well known that they did
nor begin till about the Eleventh Century: And whereas in the Ancient Canons
there is only mention made of Ordination and the Ministry, afterward there was
no more talk but of the Portion or Benefice. Nevertheless, though the manners
of expression, and a great part of the Ancient Discipline were wholly changed,
yet in many things the Maxims of the Ancient Law were still observed. For
Instance, heretofore Ordination differed not from the Ministry or Benefice; and
therefore when by the Introduction of the New Law, they were separated, that
Maxim was still retained, That he who can Ordain, can also Confer a Benefice;
and that he who cannot Ordain, cannot Confer a Benefice neither. But by degrees
the Popes have by their Privileges and Exemptions derogated from the Common
Law that was grounded on the Ancient Canons; and we see that Abbots exempted
from the Jurisdiction of Ordinaries, confer in full right, Cures and other
Benefices. Though the Establishment of Benefices be commonly referred to the
end of the Tenth Century, or beginning of the Eleventh, yet some footsteps of
them are to be seen long before. For about the year 500 under Pope Symmachus,
to some Churchmen Portions of Land were assigned, to be enjoyed by them for
Life, as appears by the terms of Tom. 1. Council. Gal. Ann. 513.
the Epistle of that Pope to Caesarius, where he prohibits the alienation of
Church Lands, unless it be in favors of Clerks who might have merited, or of
some Monasteries or Hospitals, and that only during the Life of those that
should enjoy them. Possessiones, Ib. q. 1. possessiones.
quas unusquisque Ecclesiae proprio dedit aut reliquit arbitrio, alienari
quibuslibet titulis atque contractibus, vel sub quocunque argumento non
patimur; nisi forsitan Clericis honorem meritis, aut Monasteriis, religionis
intuitu, aut certe peregrinis necessitas largiri suaserit; sic tamen ut haec
ipsa non perpetuo, sed temporaliter, donec vixerint perfruantur. These words
make it manifest enough, that even in that time there was some kind of
Benefice, though the Portion of Revenues was not as yet made to Churchmen in
particular; but that was rare at that time, and only granted for extraordinary
Causes.

There are besides some footsteps of the Foundations of Benefices, and of the
Right of Patronage in the Tenth Canon of Ann. 441.
the First Council of Orange; but the Custom of that Time was far different
from the present Practice. The Rules of the New Canon Law, which began chiefly
under Pope Nicholas I. who lived about the middle of the Ninth Age, brought a
great alteration in the Affairs of the Church. Pope Gregory VII. who lived
pretty forward in the Eleventh Age, (...) of (...) Law.
extended the Rules of that New Law, beyond all that his Predecessors had done:
And the Popes that came after him were so far from remitting any thing of these
Novelties, that on the contrary, they augmented them; so that the Law which
has been introduced into the Church since that time, deserves better to be
called the Popes Law, than the Canon Law; because in settling this New Law,
there has not been so much regard had to the Ancient Laws of the Church, as to
the Profit of the Popes and Court of Rome. And this in process of time
occasioned great disorders; so that Princes were obliged to make Laws and Prag
maticks to hinder those Abuses; though it has not been in their power entirely
to abolish them.

The Compilation which Gratian the Monk Ann. 1150.
made of the Canons of Councils, the Decretal Epistles of Popes, and of many
sentences of the Fathers, of which he made up a Body of Canon Law, contributed
much to the authorizing of the New Law: For that Collection of Canons was
publicly taught in Schools, and even made use of in deciding Controversies.
The Fathers and Councils were not studied in their Original, but only in the
Decrees of Gratian; and Men were not knowing enough at that time, to perceive
that a great many of the Citations of Gratian were false, and that he followed
not always the Rules of the Ancient Laws, having inserted into his Collection
several supposititious Pieces. Besides that, he gave to the Popes Decretals the
same Authority as to general Councils, and sometimes even perverted the words
of the Ancient Canons, that he might accommodate them to the Law which was
authorized by the Popes of his Time. But the Collection of the Decretal
Epistles of Popes, which Ann. 1230.
was made by order of Gregory IX. occasioned a far greater Alteration in the
Affairs of the Church: Nevertheless, they were in France publicly read in
Schools, as well as the Collection of Gratian. These Decretals have been the
cause of an infinite number of Lawsuits; and though they were received in the
Western Church, and publicly taught by the Professors of the Canon Law, yet
there was a necessity of rejecting them on several occasions, and having
recourse to the Ancient Canons. At that time the Compilation of Gratian was
called the Ancient Law, though it contained a great many Novelties: But being
compared with the Book of Decretals, there was some reason for calling it so.
The tedious and troublesome Debates which the Kings of France had with the
Popes, was the cause that the French despised the Collection of the Decretals;
nor are they at present much esteemed by them. They are of Opinion that that
work was only compiled, for establishing the Interests of the Pope, and
overturning the Ancient Law. And the Satyrs that were made against the
Decretals run still in their minds, especially this Proverb which was
heretofore so common.

Depuis que le decret print ales
Et Gend arms porterent malles,
Moins allerent a cheval,
Jamais le monde n'eut que mal.
Since the Decrees were pieced with tales,
And Soldiers put on Coats of Males;
Since lazy Monks have mounted pad,
The World's been plagued with all that is bad.
But after all, as to what concerns the common practice, the Decretals are to
be preferred before the Decrees, seeing most of the Rules of Law which now are
in use, are taken out of the Book of Decretals, and not from the Collection of
Gratian. Nor is the sixth Book of Decretals to be slighted, which is commonly
called the Sext, though it was compiled Ann. 1298.
by the order of Pope Boniface VIII. an enemy of the French; because a great
part of the Constitutions that are contained in that Collection have been taken
out of the Decrees of the Council of Lions, and are observed in France,
Besides, the Decretals which carry the Title of Clementine, because that
Collection is attributed to Pope Clement V. have been for most part taken out
of the Council of Vienne, where the Ambassadors of France were present. The
other Decretals that are contained in the Body of the Canon Law under the name
of the Extravagants of John XXII. and the common Extravigants, seem not to have
so great authority in France, as the former Decretals; Neither do I think that
all the new Bulls of which the Bullary is composed, are much esteemed there,
because they have never been received in France.

Since the great clashings that happened betwixt Boniface VIII. And Philip the
Fair, and betwixt Julius II. and Louis XII. The French have been much more
cautious in admitting the Bulls of the Pope, than they were before. The
differences likewise that happened in the Council of Trent, in respect of
France, have been also the cause that the French suspect all that comes from
Rome, and that they submit not easily to its Laws. And therefore the Popes
Bulla are not received till first they be examined, and, if it be necessary,
modified; Nay and many times they are not actually received. In a word, there
are but some of the Rules of the Chancery received in France. These are now the
grounds on which the new Law is founded, and which has been very much
qualified in France, the knowledge whereof is necessary, that we may understand
what measures are at present to be taken in Beneficial matters.

Though France has submitted to the New Law, The Original of the Liberties of
France.
yet has it still retained somewhat of the Ancient Canons: And when it has
found the new Laws to be contrary to the Interest of the State, it has had
recourse to the Ancient, and defended it self by the Canon Law. And therefore
they have given the name of Privileges or Liberties of the Gallican Church, to
that which was no more but the Ancient Canon Law; But which has been called
Privileges or Liberties in respect of the New. For instance, when the French
have been pressed by the Authority of the Decretals, they have had recourse to
the Ancient Law contained in the Decrees of Gratian; but since the Collection
of Gratian authorizes a great many false Decretals of the first Popes, which
have introduced a New Law, the French Bishops have had recourse to a more
Ancient Compilation of Canons, when the Authority of these Decretals has been
objected to them. Nevertheless, for all that France could do, the Popes Law
has at length prevailed, notwithstanding the Pragmaticks of the Kings, who
endeavored the re-establishment of the Ancient Canons.

The most Ancient Pragmatick of France is attributed Ann. 1268.
to St. Louis: But there is ground to doubt whether it be his or not, though it
seems no man has hitherto questioned it. The reason why it is thought to be of
St. Louis, is because it bears the name of a King called Louis, and that the
Date proves evidently that it can be of no other Louis, but Louis IX. Elias of
Bourdeille Archbishop of Tours, who was afterward made a Cardinal, has
mentioned all the Articles of that Pragmatick in a Writing that he composed in
the the time of Louis XI. against the Pragmatick Sanction of France. It is
true, he refutes the Pragmatick of St. Louis, as if it had been really the Act
of that Prince: But he seems to have doubted of it, not daring absolutely to
affirm that he was the Author of it, but only Adscribitur ei fecisse
pragmaticam.
that it was ascribed to him. The Contemporary Authors who have written his
Life, speak not a word of it. The Popes who have so vigorously opposed whatever
they thought contrary to their Interests, did not at that time complain of that
Pragmatick, though it wholly ruined their Interests. Is it possible that in the
Ann. 1438.
Assembly of Bourges, where that famous Pragmatick past, no mention should have
been made of the Pragmatick of St. Louis, if there had really, been any such?
Nothing could at that time have been of greater force to authorize that
Aslembly. There appears nothing more Ancient in favors of the Pragmatick of
St. Louis, than the Remonstrances made by the Members of Parliament to King
Louis XI. And there is a great deal of probability that it has been foisted in
about that time Ann. 1461.
because it was known that King Louis, being then but Dauphin, was of
Intelligence with the Court of Rome, for abrogating the Pragmatick made at
Bourges; and the Members of Parliament omitted nothing that could make for that
Pragmatick. There are besides, terms somewhat extraordinary in the Pragmatick
attributed to St. Louis. These words, ad perpetuam rei memoriam, are not of the
style of Ordinances. Nor do we find any where else, that St Louis affected that
way of speaking that his Crown depended of God alone; neither was it at all
proper for the affairs that then were in agitation. I could bring a great many
other Reasons, to show that there is ground to doubt of the Reality of that
Pragmatick: But besides that that would lead me into a long and tedious
digression, the Canon Law of France subsists not so much upon the Pragmatick
ascribed to St. Louis, as upon that of Bourges, and the Concordat which has
derogated from several Articles thereof.

To know then the substance of the Law of France in regard of Beneficial
matters. The Rules of the French Law.
We must not wholly rely on the Popes Decretals; but it is also necessary to
know wherein the Pragmatick, Concordat, the Edicts of the Kings, and the
Sentences of Supreme Courts differ from the Law established in the Decretals.
Besides, seeing the the Concordat or Treaty that past Ann. 1516.
betwixt Leo X. and Francis I. has abolished several Articles of the
Pragmatick, there is no more of the Pragmatick to be retained, but what has
not been rescinded (...) qualified by the Concordat; nor does the Concordat it
self entirely subsist at present, because the Popes and Kings of France have by
mutual consent derogated from it in many heads. Neither must we insist too much
on Ordinances; for there are some of them, especially those that were made in
the States assembled at Orleans, which have not been received into practice. In
fine, the Jurisprudence of Decrees has not always been the same, and does
still vary daily; and which is observable, Courts do not agree among themselves
in their decisions; not only Courts in different Provinces, where it is hard
that Judgments can be the same, by reason of the different Customs on which
they are grounded, rather than the Law; but even in Paris, where the Maxims of
Parliament differ from those of the great Council, and many times the Council
of State has Prejudications which agree not with those that are followed in
the Parliament, and in the great Council. It were to be desired, that there
might be an uniformity in Judgments, which would not be difficult to be put in
practice. These are the Principles of the French, which I have traced with all
possible Exactness. In the sequel of this Discourse, I shall treat of the
Customs of France in respect of Beneficial matters.

According to the Rules of the Canon Law, The Canon Law.
every Bishop ought to provide for the Benefices of his Diocese. Heretofore
none but the Bishops could give liberty to build Churches and Chappe^ in their
Dioceses, and appoint Priests to govern them; and therefore a^^ Churches
depended on them: And a^ the Pope ordained none without the limits of his
Diocese, so could he not give Ecclesiastic Employments, which no^ a days are
called Benefices, but with^^ the bounds of the same Diocese. That is expressly
set down in the XVII. Canon (...) the first Council of Orleans, where (...) was
decreed Omnes Besilicae, quae per diversa loca constructae sunt, vel quotiaie
construuntur, placuit secundum Canonum regulam, ut in ejus Episcopi, in cujus
territorio sitae sunt, petestate consstant. Tom. 1. Council. Gall. Ann. 511.
that all Churches the should be built, should be in the power of the Bishop,
according to the Rules of the Ancient Law. But the Bishops cannot now have the
benefit of that Ancient Law, as being abolished by a new and particular right.
There are at present Patrons both Ecclesiastic and Laick, who have a special
right of presenting to the Churches which they have founded: And besides, the
Pope in quality of Universal Bishop, has taken to himself a full power over
all the Churches in the World. And therefore Bishops can have no advantage of
the Ancient Canon Law, Particular Law.
but when the new and special Law has no place; for then the Canon Law is
again of force. This is necessary to be observed, if we would exactly know, to
whom it does belong to confer Benefices, which are to be presented according to
the Rules of the Canon Law, that (2) gives the Bishop Power over all the
Churches of his Diocese; Episcopus de jure communi fundatus est in libera
administratione omnium Ecclesiarum suae Diaecesis.
or otherwise according to the Prescript of the new and particular Law:
Inferiores non possunt Jurisdictionem Episcopalem vendicare, nisi de Jure
Speciali. It is therefore pertinent to know what that special Right is, which
Derogats from the Common and General Law. Let us begin with the Right of Popes.

The Pope may concur with the Ordinaries, The Rights of Popes.
because he is the Ordinary of Ordinaries, and that his Jurisdiction extends
over all the Churches in the World, for which Reason he may also prevent them.
He pretends to a fullness of Power, which he has not renounced, by
communicating the same to others; whence it follows, that without overthrowing
the right of Ordinaries he may prevent them; and he that presents first, has
the advantage. I speak here, according to the Maxims of the New Law, without
examining whether they be true or false, because that would be needless in
regard of the practice which is the matter in hand. The Pope may then in full
right confer Benefices by Prevention; but seeing Prevention is very prejudicial
to the Collations of Ordinaries, it is qualified in several Heads.

1. Prevention has no place at present but for Vacant Benefices, and the Pope
cannot now dispose of Benefices before they be Vacant, as he did heretofore,
reserving them to his own disposal. Mental Reservations and Expectatives or
Reversions have been abolished by the Council of Trent. Reversions abrogated.
And therefore since that Council the Article of the Concordat, which
authorized Mandats, or Mandamus's from the Popes, that were a kind of
Reversions, is abrogated. it is to no purpose to enlarge upon the nature and
manner of executing these Mandats, since they are abolished. The same Sess. 24.
Can. 19. and Sess. 25. Can. 9.
Council of Trent has abolished all other Expectatives or Reversions,
comprehending therein the Grants or Indulgences made to the Chancellor of
France, the Masters of Requests, Presidents, Councillors, and some other
Officers of the Parliament of Paris: But in that the Authority of the Council
is not admitted; On the contrary Pope Clement IX. Has augmented the
Privileges of the indulged. There is another kind of Reversion in being in
France though the Council of Trent has also abrogated it, to wit, the
Privileges granted to those who have studied a certain number of years in any
Famous University of the Kingdom, who are called Graduats. That right of
Graduats, The Right of Graduats.
which is founded on the Pragmatick and Concordat, is so owned in France, that
some French Lawyers, nay even some Parliaments pretend that the Prevention of
the Pope cannot be prejudicial to Graduats; but the most received custom of
France admits the Popes Prevention in prejudice of the Graduats and indulged.

II. The right of prevention is not in all parts of France, and it would even
be wholly rejected there, if they received the Decrees of the Council of Trent.
Bretagne, Bretagne is not subject to the Prevention.
which is not comprehended within the Concordat, is not subject to the
Prevention; but the Pope divides the Collation of Benefices with the
Ordinaries. He confers them in full right during the Months of January, March,
May, July, September, and November; The Ordinaries confer them during the other
six Months. And when the Sea of Rome is vacant, the Benefices that fall in the
Popes Months, cannot be provided by the Ordinaries, because in that case the
right of Devolution has no place; but the Collation is reserved to the future
Pope. Before the Reign of Henry II. the Pope conferred Benefices during eight
Months of the Year.

III. Lay-Patrons are not subject to Prevention.
The Popes Prevention cannot hurt Lay-Patrons, who always retain their right of
Presentation, unless they themselves derogate from it; and then the Pope ought
to specify it in his Rescript, adding these words, Accedente Patroni Laici
consensu. And that upon better reason is observed in respect of Benefices,
which are in the nomination of the King, and such as are subject to the Regale.

IV. Elective and Collative Benefices.
Some distinguish Benefices into purely Elective, Elective Collative, and
purely Collative; and they pretend that the first which are purely Elective,
are not subject to the Prevention of the Pope, because they stand in need of
the Confirmation or Collation of the Superior; that in regard of the others
which are Collative, the Pope may bestow them, because of his right of
Prevention: But the more common practice is, that the Popes Prevention takes
place in all Benefices, except those, to which, as we have said, the King
nominates, and to those that are subject to the Regale: And as to Elective
Benefices, none but the Heads of Orders are exempted from the Prevention; for
the Deanries of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches may at present be resigned in
favorem, and conferred by the Pope. We must nevertheless, except the Deanries
that are Elective upon the Title of Laick Foundation; for then the Rule is the
same, as of Lay-Patrons, from whose rights the Pope never derogates. There are
besides, certain Benefices wherein the Popes Prevention has no place, because
they require certain conditions that are annexed to them: As for instance, the
Theological Penitentiary, and other Benefices that are assigned to Musicians,
or which demand certain Qualities, that are inseparable from them. Now seeing
these Qualities are personal; the Pope cannot supply them by Prevention.
Besides that, it is easy to hinder the Popes Prevention in Elective Benefices;
for, to tie the Popes Hands, there needs no more, but to begin the Election.

V. Derogations from the Right of Prevention.
There are many things that hinder the Popes Prevention from taking effect.

I. If the Ordinary has conferred the same Benefice before him, though the
Collation be null and void, yet it hinders the effect of Prevention; so that in
that case nothing produces somewhat; and it is held for an undoubted Maxim,
that Collatio Ordinarii, etiam nulla and invalida, impedit preventionem Papa.
We must, in the mean while, observe that the bare Presentation of the Patron is
not sufficient to hinder the Prevention, because the Presentation alone gives
not the Benefice; it is necessary that Vt saltent tang at aures Collatoris.
it be notified to the Collator. Nevertheless, many are of opinion that the
bare Presentation of the Patron is sufficient to hinder the Popes Prevention
from taking effect; and they are grounded on this, that the Right of Prevention
is odious, and therefore ought not to be favored. On the other hand, it is
acknowledged by all, that the Popes Prevention has only place, quando res sunt
integrae, when matters are entire. Now, say they, it cannot be affirmed that
matters continue still in an entire Condition, when the Patron has given his
Presentation, which acquires a Right to him that is presented; and it is
certain that Juri quaesito Papa non potest derogare.
the Pope cannot derogate from an acquired Right. Notwithstanding all these
Reasons, and many more which are alleged in favors of Presentations, that are
pretended ought to hinder the Popes Prevention, yet it is the Common Opinion at
present, that the single Presentation of the Patron, does not hinder the effect
of Prevention, unless it has been intimated to the Ordinary Collator.

II. The Indulged and Graduats hinder the Popes Prevention, when they have made
their demand in form; for then res non censentur integrae.

III. The Pope himself has derogated from his right of Prevention in favors
of Cardinals, to whom he has granted Privileges or Immunities, that they
shall not be prevented by him. There are likewise some Persons of Quality that
obtain the same Privilege from the Pope; and so they have the whole six Months
for providing to their benefices, according to the Rules of the Canon Law,
without any danger of being prevented.

IV. To the end the Popes Prevention may obtain its effect, there must be
neither fraud nor surprise in it; wherefore the Rule of the Chancery de
verisimili notitia, is received in France; and it is necessary, that betwixt
the death of the Beneficiary and the Collation of the Pope, a sufficient time
must intervene for carrying to Rome the news of the Vacancy of the Benefice if
the contrary be proved the Prevention is Judged fraudulent and Anticipated, and
by consequent null.

Besides the right of Prevention, the Pope has also the right of Devolution in
quality of Superior; and in that case by common Law he may confer all
Benefices after a certain time. The Ordinary has six Months to provide for the
Benefices that depend on him, and these six Months are reckoned from the day
that he might have had knowledge of the Vacancy. If he provide not within these
six Months, the right is devolved on the immediate Superior; for instance from
the Bishop to the Metropolitan, from the Metropolitan to the Primate, if the
Primate enjoy that right, and from the Primate to the Pope, following in that
the order of Jurisdiction. But the right of Devolution is of no great use to
the Pope, because it is swallowed up in the right of Prevention; and besides
Benefices must continue vacant for the space of a year or two, before that he
could confer them by devolution, unless it be in respect of Collators who
depend immediately upon himself. If it happen nevertheless, that the ordinary
Collator has provided amiss, his right devolves instantly upon the immediate
Superior, and the Ordinary has no more right of conferring the Benefice for
that time. In that kind of devolution, application (...) commonly made to Rome,
and the Pope becomes the ordinary Collator. We must however take notice, that
there are certain cases wherein the Ordinaries may vary in their Collations,
and that it is not always true, that when they ha^^ once conferred they lose
their right (...) for they may give the same Benefice (...) several Persons
upon different considerations. For instance, if they have bestowed a benefice
which fell in the Months assigned to Graduats, to (...) that is not Graduat,
they may afterward give the same Benefice to a Graduat th^^ demands it.
Besides, if the Ordinary has in full right conferred a Benefi^^ that is in
Patronage, he may again con^^ it of new upon the Presentation of the Patron. If
he had also conferred a Benefice, and it be found afterward that (...) was not
vacant, or that he to whom (...) had granted it would not accept the same, he
would not therefore lose (...) right of providing to it a Second time So that
in all these cases devolution (...) no place; and therefore the negligence or
excess of ordinary Collators cannot be supplied by the Pope, seeing they are
not to be imputed to their negligence or excess. The Pope, on the contrary, can
give one and the same Benefice to several Persons, because his power is not
smited, as that of Ordinaries, and his right cannot be devolved, as not having
any Superior. That right which Popes enjoy is the cause of an infinite number
of Lawsuits. All are welcome at Rome for their Money; and yet it is certain
that one only can obtain the Benefice, though it has been granted to many.

Farthermore, Benefices vacant in Curia.
the Popes confer the Benefices of which the Incumbents or Titularies die in
Court, that is, within ten Leagues of Rome. That right is a kind of
Reservation, whereof Pope Clement IV. is the Author. The Constitution of that
Reservation is mentioned in the Sext the Chapter Licet, in these words,
Collationem tamen Ecclesiarum, personatuum, dignitatum and beneficiorum apud
sedem apostolicam vacantium, specialius caeteris antiqua consuetudo Romany
pontificibus reservavit: But seeing these words, Ecclesiarum and dignitatum,
are general, the Author of the Gloss upon the Sext, who was Secretary to Pop^
Boniface VIII. pretends that the Pope has not comprehended under that
constitution Bishoprics and Abbeys, and yet the Concordat which serves us for
a Rule, comprehends under the Benefices that are reserved to the Pope, upon
account of Vacancy in Curia, both Bishoprics and Abbeys. Master Charles Du
Moulin has been forced to say, Carol. Moulin.
that there has been surprise in the Concordat. And in Effect the sense of the
Constitution of Benefices vacant (...) Curia ought not to be extended, (...)
explained according to the intention of the Popes Clement IV. and Bou^fiace
VIII. Who are the Authors of the same. And therefore there was reason to say
that the Kings Commissioners were surprised and over reached, when they
suffered that clause of the Concordat to pass: For it is certain, that the
Benefices, which are provided by way of Election, were not within the compass
of the Chapter Licet, nor of the Constitution de beneficiis vacantibus in Curia.

On the other side it is not doubted but that the nomination of the King has
been surrogated in place of Elections, and by consequent ought to enjoy all
their rights. So that the Benefices to which the King Nominates by Virtue of
the Concordat, ought not to be reserved to the Pope when they are vacant in
curia. And this the Officers of the King pretend at present in France, and the
Parliament of Paris has sufficiently explained it self on that Subject.

It would seem nevertheless, that the King acknowledges that Reservation of the
Popes, especially when he gives his Grant to those who are not of the Kingdom,
and who may chance to die at Court. He grants them no Benefices, but on
condition that they shall obtain from the Pope a Brief, de non vacaudo in
Curia; and after that, whether they obtain that Brief or not, the Benefices to
which they are provided cannot be reckoned to become vacant in Curia. Monsieur
Doujat has caused to be Printed the Brief de non vacando in Curia. Which Pope
Clement IX. Ann. 1667.
granted to Cardinal Mancini for the Abbeys that he possessed in France. Which
is directed to the King in these terms: Nos, ne praedicto Cardinale sor^^ apud
sedem Apostolicam deeedente, majes^^ t^a impediatur, quominus ad Monas^^ria
hujusmodi, ratione dictorum Concordatorum; aut specialis Indulti Apostolici
nominare possit, opportune providere volentes, supplicationibus ejusdem
majestatis tuae nomine nobis super hoc humiliter porrectis inclinati, eidem
majestati tuae, etc. It is plain enough by the terms of that Brief, that the
Pope pretends that all Benefices vacant in Curia, are reserved to him, even by
the Articles of the Concordat, and that the King does likewise acknowledge that
Reservation by virtue thereof. I have seen some other Briefs (...) non vacando
in Curia, which are express in the same manner. The Duke of Nenbourg has
obtained Ann. 1673.
one for the Abbey of Fescan, which is likewise directed to the King: Yet the
Popes do but seldom grant them; and it were to be wished that they never did,
yea and that it were never desired of them, that so a clause of the Concordat
might not be authorized, which without doubt is vicious, and which may be
abrogated, without any prejudice to the substance of the Concordat it self.

The New Law received in France gives the Pope many other Powers which they
enjoyed not, Other Rights of the Popes.
when the Church was governed according to the Ancient Canons.

I. The Creation of New Bishoprics, and the Erection of Archbishopricks,
belong to the Pope. II. Bishops cannot be translated from one See to another,
without taking New Bulls from the Pope: And if they enjoy Abbeys or other
Consistorial Benefices, they are also obliged to take new Bulls for all these
Benefices, and by consequent to pay new Annats or First Fruits. But it is still
to be supposed that the Pope cannot put this Power in execution without the
Kings Permission: And even in the Bulls of Translation the consent of the King
is mentioned. III. The Pope by his Bulls confirms those whom the King has
named to Bishoprics, Abbeys and other Consistorial Benefices. IV. The King
cannot enjoy his Right of Nomination to Bishoprics and Abbeys which are not
situated in the places mentioned in the Concordat; but the Pope grants him
Indults or Privileges to nominate to those Benefices. Seeing France is now of
greater extent, than it was when the Concordat of Bologna, was made betwixt
Pope Leo X. and Francis the first of France, the Kings of France have been
obliged to obtain from the Pope Indults, which are called Indulta Rigiae
Nominationis, of which many forms may be seen printed in the Collection of
Monsieur Doujat. It is in the mean time in the Liberty of the Pope to grant
them for ever, or only for a certain time. V. It being a general Maxim received
and approved of all, that Secular Benefices ought to be given to Seculars, and
Regular Benefices to Regulars, the King cannot Emancipate Benefices from the
Rule, to put them in Commendum, unless he have Permission from the Pope,
because that is one of the Clauses of the Concordat: But the King and Pope, who
have made the Concordat, dispense with it daily, it being in their Power so to
do. VI. The Pope, who pretends to an absolute Power over all Benefices,
according to his pleasure Secularises Benefices, that are in Rule; and so he
derogates from that great Maxim, Secularia Secularibus, Regularia Regularibus,
in favors of those, who for that end send their money to Rome. The Monks
notwithstanding, who are powerful at Rome, because of their Generals that
commonly reside there, or of their Procurators that live in that Court for the
affairs of their Societies, hinder as much as they can the Secularisation of
Benefices, which they pretend does of Right belong to them. VII. The King
cannot Alienate the Church Lands of his Kingdom without the permission and
consent of the Pope; Alienations depend on the Pope.
nor can he raise the Tenths of he Clergy, which have in process of time, been
converted into Ordinary Subsidies, without obtaining Power from the Pope.
Heretofore Churchmen pretended that their goods were consecrated to God, and
that so, they were not obliged to lay them out for maintaining of Wars, or for
other public necessities; it being enough that they contributed to them by
their Prayers. But the specious pretext of holy Wars cured them of that
Scruple, and it was decreed in the Council of Lateran under Innocent III. That
these Tenths should be taken from Ecclesiastics, for the Expeditions of the
Holy Land. After a Door was once opened to Tenths, the Popes and Kings together
often raise them. But seeing Popes had got a Custom of raising Tenths in France
for their own private concerns, it was decreed in the Council of Constance,
Council. Constantiense.
that they should be no more raised, but with consent of the Prelates of the
Kingdom; and thereby the Popes were excluded from the Liberty of raising them.
However, those that were granted to Kings increased much, and that which in the
beginning was very extraordinary, has since turned into a Custom. The
necessity of maintaining long Wars in France for Religion, promoted very much
the establishment of Tenths, which is at present a kind of Tax upon the
Churchmen, collected by receivers, appointed for that purpose. We must, in the
mean time, observe that Popes dispose not at their pleasure of Church Revenues,
as they pretend they have Power. They have not the Liberty to sell the Revenues
of the Church, unless the King and Clergy consent to it, and the causes of
Alienation be first examined: For the Bulls of Permission to alienate are not
received in France, if they contain these Terms, motu proprio, sine
inquisitione, etiam invitis Clericis. In a Word, for Alienation of Church Lands
in France, the two Sovereign Powers, I mean, the Pope and King must concur.
VIII. All Concordats, Concordats depending on the Pope.
Transactions or Pactions in any beneficial matter, ought to be confirmed in
the Court of Rome, because there is a kind of Simony in them, private persons
not being allowed to dispose of their Benefices under certain Reservations or
Conditions; and that is the reason why application is made to the Pope for
Pensions and Resignations in favorem. Ordinaries cannot appoint, nor confirm
Pensions: Nor can they admit of any Resignations in favorem neither, unless in
the case of Permutation; Nay and in that case too private persons many times
apply themselves to the Pope. There is another kind of Concordat, or
Transaction, which Commendatary Abbots, and Monks, daily make betwixt
themselves, for dividing their Revenues, without having recourse to Rome. But
these Concordats are easily broken, and their Successors may derogate from
them, because an Abbot has no power to oblige and tie up the Will of his
Successor. He may, indeed, make over his rights during his life; but he cannot
dispose of that which belongs to another. And therefore, though these
Concordats were even confirmed in the Court of Rome, and in the Parliaments,
they may still be rescinded, if it be found that one of the Parties contracting
has received any notable prejudice: In that case he is allowed to seek relief,
and by stronger reason his Successor ought, who is not obliged to stand to all
that has been done by his Predecessor. The Pope himself pretends not to
prejudice by his Rescripts the acquired right of others; nor indeed is it in
his power, though it should even be inserted in his Rescript, that there has
nothing been done without knowledge of the cause, because he may have been ill
informed. Again, the Pope has no power in France over the Temporal of
Benefices, but only the Spiritual, for which recourse is had to him as to a
Superior, that he may authorize the Transactions which private persons have
made amongst themselves, and purge them from Simony. IX. None but the Pope can
give Benefices in perpetual Commendum; Commendums depend on the Pope.
and the French are the more obliged to acknowledge that power of the Popes,
that there is no Kingdom in Christendom where so many Regular Benefices are
Erected in Commendum, as in France. Now seeing Commendums, in the manner that
they are at present established, more for the advantage of private persons,
than benefit of the Church, are altogether contrary to the Canons; none but the
Pope can confer in Commendum, because he only can dispense with the Canons, as
well in respect of the incapacity of persons to whom Commendums are given, as
of incompatibility of Benefices, in which the Commendataries are invested. And
therefore Benefices in Commendum are in some manner reserved to the Pope,
because they subsist upon a special Privilege, which can be granted by none
but him: And when the Commendum is void by the death of the Commendatary, it is
not to be judged vacant by his death, but as it was vacant before the
Commendum, which brings no alteration in matters. However, the Pope does still
give the same Benefice in Commendum by a Privilege that he continues on; so
that it may be said, that the Privilege or Dispensation has wholly derogated
from the Canon Law, which only subsists in name, and the Dispensation stands
for Law as to the effect. In the mean time, though they who possess Commendums
have not obtained them but by Privilege or Dispensation, The Rights of
Commendatary Abbots.
yet they still enjoy them, and have all the Titles, Profits and Honors, as if
they were Titulars, inasmuch as by the Bulls of Commendum the Commendataries
are subrogated into the rights of the Titulars, and the terms are always used,
which import that the power of the Commendatary is the same with that of the
Titular, to whom he is substituted: Curam Monasterii ac regimen and
administration^^^ tibi in spiritualibus and temporalibus plenar^e committ^ndo.
The Pope gives in some manner by his Bulls the Investiture both of the
Spiritual and Temporal, and grants the Commendataries liberty to dispose
according to their pleasure of the Profits of the Abbeys, after they have
satisfied the Charges which are always expressed in the same Bulls: De residuis
fructibus, reditibus and proventibus disponere and ordinare potuerunt ac
debuerunt. And to make it appear that the Modern Commendums are different from
the Ancient, which were established in favor of Churches, and not of Persons,
the Popes add in their Bulls, that they give the Commendataries power to
dispose of the Profits of their Commendums for their own use, that they may
live more commodiously, nay and according to their Quality: Vt statum t^um
juxta gradum tuae nobilitatis decentius tenere valeas, de alicujus subventionis
auxilio providere volentes, etc. This is not the place to examine whether the
Popes can attribute to themselves so great an Authority, which seems to
overthrow all the Discipline of the Church. I only speak, at present, of what
is in practice, and of the power that the Popes have in France, where the
Bulls, whereof I have given some abstracts, are received and authorized by
custom. And for that reason also, the Canonists say, that the Titles of
Benefices are only of positive right, and that so, the Popes who have absolute
power over that right, especially when it has been voluntarily established by
them, may dispense with it as they please, and in favors of whom they will. On
this principle are grounded the Dispensations which are obtained from Popes,
for possessing several Benefices, and that they daily derogate from the nature
and quality of Benefices in favors of private persons. But after all we must
still suppose the Maxim which we have already observed, that this great power
of Popes cannot be executed in France, if the King consent not to it; and
besides, that the Court of Rome, has no power over the Possessory right of
Benefices. X. The Popes give not only Benefices in commendum to Clerks,
dispensing both with their Age, and other Qualities requisite; but they
dispense also with the Clerkship of Children as yet in the Cradle, until they
have attained the Age of taking the Tonsure. It is enough to declare, that the
Child is designed for a Churchman: Infantem qui, ut accepimus, in secundo vel
tertio suae aetatis anno constitutus, and ad vitam Ecclesiasticam agendam
destinatus existit. But since no man can enjoy a Benefice, but he that is a
Clerk; and that on the other hand, the Child is not as yet of Age, the Popes
use these terms in their Bulls: Eidem Infanti, cum primum Clericali charactere
rite insignitus, and in aetate legitima constitutus, seu alias ex concessione
and dispensatione Apostolica ad Monasteria obtinenda capax and habilis fuerit,
per eum, quoad vixerit, tenenda; regenda and gubernanda, ita ut ex nunc, prout
ex tunc, pro eo affecta and destinata sunt ac esse censeantur, etc. Then the
Pope, in the same Bull, names a Steward, who shall take care only of the
Temporal, until the Child be grown up and shaven. N. Administratorem
Monasteriorum in temporalibus solum, donec praedictus Infans charactere
Clericali insignitus fuerit, and Monasteria sibi per no^vel successorem nostrum
Romanum Pontificem pro tempore existentem, commendari obtinuerit. It appears by
these (...) words, that the Child is not as yet properly established Abbot
Commendatary by the Bulls, because he is not as yet a Clerk; but that the Abbey
is only assured to him, and that in the mean while, he shall enjoy the Profits
of the Benefice, as if he were actually invested in it, and that because the
Pope by his Bulls gives him the right. XI. Though Ordinaries may unite smaller
Benefices, Of Unions.
yet it only belongs to the Pope to annex Benefices which are called
Consistorial, nay and many times application is made to him for all sorts of
Unions. That Power of the Pope, of uniting all sorts of Benefices, proceeds
from the fullness of his Authority; whereas that of Ordinaries is limited.
Nevertheless heretofore they enjoyed that Right. But we have already observed,
that we speak only here of the New Law, in the manner that it is at present in
force in France, without examining the ground of it. and if it be contrary to
the Ancient Canons. It is not, for all that, to be imagined that the Pope is so
much Master of Unions in France, that he can make them at his pleasure, and
without lawful cause: For the Unions which are commonly called personal, and
only made during the lives of some persons, are not admitted there, because
such kinds of Unions are not for the Benefit of the United Churches. It is then
necessary to make Unions lawful, that they be grounded on true causes, and not
upon pretexts? Otherwise they are null, conform to the Decree of the Council of
Constance, which rescinds Unions made by the Pope Si non ex rationalibus causis
and veris factae fuerint, licet Apostolicae sedis auctoritas intervenerit.
Sess. 43.
if they be not supported by good reasons. It is not sufficient, for all that,
that the Pope in the Bull of Union make use of these words, Et ex certa
scientia nostra: But he ought to direct to some Body upon the place a Rescript
of Delegation ad effectum unionis. That information may be had of the
usefulness of the Union. Besides, those who are concerned in the Union, and
especially the Patrons of Benefices must be cited, who ought to be heard,
because Union is a kind of Alienation for ever, which deprives the Patron of
his Right. There are many other Formalities to be observed, for making Unions
valid in France, where in reality the plenitude of the Popes Power is
acknowledged; The Popes Power limited in France.
but still with reservation of the liberty of limiting it according to the Laws
of the Kingdom. And upon that ground the Parliaments insist when they rescind
Unions that want the Formalities, and declare them abusive. The Council of
Trent Sess. 7. Can. 6.
has also declared, that Unions made within 40 years should be null, unless
they had been made in presence of the Ordinaries, for just reasons, and those
who were concerned cited. But by the addition of these words, Nisi aliter a
sede Avostolica declaratum fuerit.
if the Holy See has not declared otherwise, it renders the Pope absolute
Master of Unions; which is not received in France, where no regard is had to
the Prescription of forty years; for remedy may be had even after an hundred
years against an Union that has not been made in Form, if we believe the
French Practitioners in Law. The Council of Trent however is not altogether
repugnant to that Custom. It will have no respect to be had to the Prescription
of forty years, if the Bulls of Union have been surreptitious or obreptitious:
That is to say, if the Information that has been given to the Pope, be not
found to be true; and that is common to Apostolic Bulls and Rescripts, where
that clause is always supposed, Si preces veritati nitantur.
if the Petition declare the truth. XII. There is another kind of Union that
belongs also to the Pope alone, to wit, the suppression of one Order for
uniting it to another, or the Disunion of two that had been united. Yet that
cannot be done without the consent of the King. XIII. The Decision of Causes
which are called the greater, The judging of Bishops.
for instance, the Deposition of Bishops, is reserved to the Pope, who,
nevertheless, judges not of them at Rome, but appoints Judges in France; and he
is not obliged to delegate a certain number of Bishops, as some have pretended,
nor to choose the Comprovincials of the Bishop who is accused. It is in his
power to delegate in partibus such Commissioners as he pleases, provided they
be of the Kingdom, and accepted by the King.
The Ancient Right of Metropolitans and Comprovincials is now out of doors^ and
Councils are no more called for that effect. The Pope then, does all
nowadays, by means of his Briefs, Bulls and Rescripts, which, never the less
cannot be of force without the Kings Permission. And therefore it is, that the
Deposing of Bishops in France, depends absolutely on the Pope and King. The
Pope names Commissioners to be Judges of the Process, and the King accepts
them. I know a great many oppose that in France; but it is in vain to object
Law against matters of fact and examples, when the Question is about
Discipline. I shall say nothing of Ancient Customs, because I treat only here
of what is practiced at present.

Having spoken of the Popes Power in France, The Power of Legates in France.
in reference to beneficial matters, it will not be amiss to say somewhat of
the Power of his Legates and Nuncio's. The Power of Legates which are called a
latere, is very great, because they are, as it were, the Popes Ambassadors, and
represent his Person at the Courts of Princes, to whom they are sent about
Extraordinary Affairs. Their Instructions are at length specified in the
Letters which the Pope gives them; but they are not put in Execution, until the
King has approved the Legation: And besides, the Kings Officers do not
Register the aforesaid Letters of Legation, but with the Modifications and
Restrictions that are added to them according to the pleasure of the King, and
the Liberties and Customs of the Kingdom. The Legates then have almost the same
power in all that concerns Benefices, as the Popes whom they represent have;
and therefore they are very troublesome to the Ordinary Collators during the
time of their Legation, which lasts as long as the King pleases. There are
nevertheless, some things which they cannot perform without special Orders from
the Pope, such as are the Translations of Bishops. Nor can they receive
Resignations in favorem, unless that be expressly mentioned in their
Instructions, and not limited or abrogated in the Restrictions that have been
made of them; and therefore in that case the Bulls of their Legation, and the
verification of them in Parliament, must be consulted. Mr Doujat has Printed
some of them in his Collection, and amongst others that of Cardinal Chigi,
which may inform us of their power in France, where they exercise both the one
and other Jurisdiction, that is to say, both the voluntary and the contentious,
but still in Quality of the Popes Delegats, and therefore their Jurisdiction
ceases, if the Pope happen to die during their Legation. Besides these Legates
a latere who are but rarely se^^ into France, there is another Legate a latere
at Avignon, who exercises his Jurisdiction in the City of Avignon and County of
Venisse, In the Provinces of Vienne, Arles, Embrun, Aix, and Narbonne That
Jurisdiction is commonly given to a Cardinal, who has a Sub-Delegat or
Vice-Legate who discharges all the duties of it.

As to the Nuncio's in France, The Power of Nuncio's in France.
they have no Jurisdiction; they are looked upon rather as the Popes Envoys for
Civil matters, than as Churchmen. Nevertheless there is a Custom introduced,
which has been many times, and on several occasions condemned, to wit, that
the Popes Nuncio in France, receives attestations de vita and moribus, whereby
he takes information of the manners of those who are nominated by the King to
Consistorial Benefices. But that is an abuse introduced by the very same
persons that have been nominated by the King. For, fearing that their Bulls
might not be expeded at Rome, they cause an attestation de vita and moribus, to
be made before the Nuncio's; whereas that attestation ought to be given by the
Bishop of the place where the persons named to Benefices reside. Afterward they
might be recommended to the Nuncio, as the Popes Minister in France; which is
sometimes practiced even by the Kings order. But private persons have had their
recourse to the Nuncio for their security, and that Custom is observed at
present, notwithstanding all the Remonstrances that have been made to hinder
that Jurisdiction of Nuncio's in France.

It remains now that we speak of the Cardinals of the Court of Rome, of
Cardinals.
and of their Privileges: But seeing these Privileges respect their private
persons, rather then the right of others, that article may be omitted; nor
shall we touch at it but by the by. The name of Cardinal did not in the
beginning signify a particular dignity, as it does at present, but only denoted
the difference of Churches and Employments: For Instance, the Canons of
Cathedral Churches were for most part called Cardinals in Italy, to distinguish
them from the Ecclesiastics of other inferior Churches. The same name was
also given to Priests, Deacons, and even to Subdeacons, when there was occasion
to distinguish them from the lower Clergy: But it was a Title much inferior to
the quality of a Bishop: And therefore when one was made a Bishop he retained
no longer the Title of Cardinal. Matters are at present much altered; The
dignity of Cardinal now a days, is the next to the Papacy, and they are in
respect of the Pope, as Senators, or Councillors, are in relation to him that
presides in the Senate. Nevertheless since the Papacy is become Monarchical,
the Pope takes their advice merely for Ceremony, but acts according to his
pleasure. He makes use still of these Terms, De consilio fratrum, but it is
most commonly to secure his relations after his death, especially in regard of
the Revenues of the Apostolic Chamber, which the Popes dispose of too
absolutely, the Cardinals not daring to oppose them. That which renders the
Cardinals more considerable than all other Churchmen is, that they choose the
Pope, and may themselves be chosen. They have stepped into the rights of the
Ancient Roman Clergy, to whom it belonged to choose their Bishop, in the same
manner as was observed in other Churches. Now, since the Jurisdiction of the
Pope is much augmented by the New Canon Law, the Dignity of the Cardinals also
who are his Councillors, is become greater, and that they may be honored
according to their dignity, they have many Privileges granted them, which
exempt them from the common Laws and Customs.

They have six whole Months for bestowing Benefices whereof they are the
Collators, without any fear of being prevented by the Pope, who has in their
favors dispensed with his right of Prevention. Besides, the Pope who daily
derogates from the Rule de viginti diebus to favor Resignees, does never
derogate from it in prejudice of Cardinals in respect of Churches whereof they
are the ordinary Collators; and that is a Privilege singular to them. Neither
are they subject to the Indults or Privileges of the menbers of the Parliament
of Paris: So that they are not obliged to bestow upon the Indultees or
Privileged the Benefices whereof they are the Collators, because they have a
Grant from the Pope, which gives them power of disposing of their Benefices to
whom, and in what manner they please. Nevertheless the Parliament of Paris has
sometimes pronounced Sentence contrary to those Privileges of Cardinals, and
has favored the Indultees, by virtue of the nomination of the King, who they
thought ought to be preferred before the Indultees of Cardinals. In fine, the
common Rule, which says that Secular Benefices should be given to Seculars, and
Regular to Regulars, is of no force in respect of Cardinals who Habent os
apertum ad omnia Beneficia.
in that quality can receive all kinds of Benefices.

To have explained the right of the Popes in France in respect of Beneficial
matters, is not sufficient to discover fully wherein the ancient Canon Law is
abrogated, which gave Bishops absolute power in the Collation of Benefices; we
must besides that examine the right of other Collators, and Patro us whether
Ecclesiastic or Laick; In a word, it is necessary to know the rights of all
who are in present possession of providing to Benefices, in what manner soever
it be. It would seem that none have more reason to challenge that Right, The
Rights of Chapters.
than the Chapters of Cathedral Churches; for as heretofore they made but one
body with the Bishops, and were of their Council, so they had some share in the
Jurisdiction. Wherefore, when the Revenues were separated, at the same time the
Jurisdiction was divided, especially the gratuitous Jurisdiction, or the Right
of providing to Benefices; and I take that to be the true reason why Chapters
are at present the Collators of some Benefices separately from their Bishop.
They have even made certain Laws among themselves, which are different
according to the diversity of places. Every Canon presents by turn to Benefices
that become vacant in his week, or in the time that has been allotted him in
the Dividend which they have made among themselves. Besides that, dignified
Canons can provide to Benefices that depend on their Dignities, whether in
particular, or jointly with other Dignitaries; wherein the Custom observed in
every Chapter is followed. Care is to be taken though, that all sorts of
Customs be not authorized; for it may be, that Canons have made Agreements
among themselves, which are prejudicial to the Rights of private persons; and
there are but few that mind that Bishops cannot call into question that Right
of Chapters, The Original of Personages and Dignities without Employment.
since they have agreed on both sides by Transactions which were in their power
to make. But that has given occasion to a very great corruption, which has
established in the Church Benefices without any Employment: For the Canons are
not only separated from their Bishops, but they have, besides, every one taken
his Revenue in particular, and minded the management of it. This is the cause
that many Offices which were necessary whilst the Revenues were in common, are
become useless; and instead of suppressing them, they are erected into
Benefices, which are called Dignities, that is to say, Sine-Cures or Benefices
without Office. I shall here give some Instances of them, that the Original of
these Dignities or Benefices may be known, of which the Titulars for most part
are uncertain whether or not they be obliged to reside on their Benefices I
reckon then amongst these Dignities, the Provostships of St. Martin of Tours,
which are pretty numerous. These Provostships were heretofore possessed by the
Canons of the Chapter, who were chosen to take the care of the Temporal of the
Church: And seeing the Revenues of that Church were in several places, the care
of them was committed to different persons, who had severally the management of
the Rents of their distinct Quarters; and because of that, they were called
Praeposi^i, whence the name of Provost is derived. But since the Canons took
the care of their Rents every one in particular, these Offices are become
useless; nevertheless they are still retained, and are now called Dignities, or
simple Benefices, whereof the Titulars cannot be obliged to Residence, as
heretofore they were, because the obligation to reside proceeded not from the
Office of Provost, but of the Canonship which they enjoyed with their
Provostship, that was not then a Benefice, but merely a Commission or Office.
And in this manner also ought we to consider the dignity of Treasurer in
several Cathedrals of the Kingdom, which in all likelihood, was but an Office
that consisted in taking care of the Revenues of the Church, and is at present
a Benefice without Office, which is called a dignity of honor, because it is
only by Custom that it has the name of dignity, there being none but the
Titles of Archpriest and Archdeacon that are dignities of right, by reason of
the Jurisdiction which they have retained.

It is the same with all other dignities or Sine-cure Parsonages, and therefore
I shall insist no more on that Subject. I shall only observe, that several
Persons do in some manner enjoy two Benenefices, though they be not reckoned
amongst those who possess plurality of Livings. The Deans, for Instance, of
Cathedral Churches, and the chief Dignitaries of Collegiat Churches, have
double the Revenue of the other Canons, though they be no more in effect, but
Canons as the rest are, and have nothing over them but a Prerogative of honor.
But Custom, which has made that and many such other practices familiar to us,
is the cause why they are not reckoned in the number of those who have several
Benefices; besides, they may allege for their Justification, the words of St.
Paul, who says. That the Elders who Rule well are counted worthy of double
honor. 1 Timothy 5.17.
After all, if the Chapters challenged no more to themselves in Beneficial
matters, but the rights whereof we have been speaking, Bishops would have no
cause to complain of them: But there are some who have attempted upon the
Jurisdiction of the same Bishops, and pretend to an Episcopal Jurisdiction. as
well as they. You shall see Canons who have rather out of vanity, than
necessity, a great Vicar, an Official and other necessary Officers, for
exercising Episcopal Jurisdiction, as if they had a Diocese to govern. Most
part of Chapters, besides, pretend to ^e exempted from the Jurisdiction of
their Bishops, and have a little Territory depending on them, in regard of
which they exercise the functions of Episcopal Jurisdiction, and hold the place
of inferior Ordinary Prelates, which are mentioned in the Decretals.

To know upon what ground the Canons build that Episcopal Jurisdiction, The
Original of the Rights of Chapters.
which gives them power of conferring several Benefices, we are to observe that
all the Rights and Privileges of Chapters can only derive their Original from
the Bishops whose Brethren the Canons call themselves. Before their Rents were
separated they governed the Churches jointly with the Bishops: And so it is not
to be thought strange, that after their separation they have retained part of
the Jurisdiction that belongs to them by the Canon Law, if they be in
possession of it. And therefore Car. Moulin Reg. de Infer. resign.
Mr. Charles du Moulin affirms that the Collation of Canonships and Prebends of
Cathedral Churches belongs by common right to the Bishops and Chapters. It is
true, that seems to establish several Heads in one and the same Diocese, but
seeing these Heads are subordinate to Bishops, Canonists do agree, that besides
Bishops, inferior Prelates may be owned for Ordinaries, and they think that
Nom^^^ Episcopi, In^^riores Jura Epis^^^^lia habent^, in his quae
^ur^sdic^ionem coucernunt, comprebenduntur.
under the name of Bishop inferior Prelates who are in possession of Episcopal
Jurisdiction are likewise to be comprehended. According to that maxim, Chapters
may be Ordinary Prelates, praelati seorsim ab Episcopo; And the New Law is the
more favorable to them, in what concerns the Collation of Benefices in full
right, that Collation Non est Ordinis, sed Jurisdictionies
belongs not at present to the Orders, but to the Jurisdiction. So that,
reserving still to the Bishop all that concerns Orders, the Chapters may
perform the other functions that respect Jurisdiction.

It is true that according to the Ancient Canon Law, the Clerks of Cathedrals,
who have since been called Canons depended on their Bishops, as well as the
rest of the Churchmen: But that hindered them not from being the Bishops
Counselors, who in the beginning did nothing considerable without the Counsel,
nay even the consent of their Clergy. Bishops, nevertheless, at present
question most part of their rights, and accuse the Canons Vsurpatae alienae
Jurisdictionis.
of usurpation. The Parliaments favor the Bishops, because they are persuaded
that the Jurisdiction which is called Episcopal, belongs by the Canon Law to
the Bishop alone, and that the Canons can have no ground but the Exemptions and
Privledges which they have obtained from Popes, or which they enjoy by virtue
of transactions made with Bishops, who could not do prejudice to the rights of
their Successors in what concerned Episcopal Jurisdiction, because it cannot
be communicated to others than Bishops, and that in every Church there is but
one Episcopal Chair, Nulla est eathedra nisi Episcopalis.
the Seats of Canons being but Benches in the Quire for the performance of
Divine Service. But in my Judgment, Chapters which are founded on the Canon
Law, have not Justice enough done them in that particular; and the Seats of
Canons or Ancient Clerks were not in the beginning bare Benches for singing in
the Quire, but Chairs of Jurisdiction, since the Fathers give them the name of
Senators, comparing the Assembly of a Bishop with his Clergy to a Senate. The
transactions therefore, that they have made with their Bishops ought to be
considered, as agreements which they had power to make, and not as mere
condescensions of Bishops in favors of Chapters. Besides, the Exemptions that
Chapters have obtained from Popes, ought to be preferred before all other
Exemptions, because these Privileges are very many times but a confirmation of
their right. I know that the Council of Trent has derogated from the
transactions of Chapters with their Bishops, unless they have been confirmed by
Popes, and that it has also annulled their exemptions: But besides that the
Council of Trent is not received in France, where Exemptions grounded on good
Titles are still in force, it may be said that the Bishops in that Council have
not done the Canons Justice, and that as to the Concordats and Agreements which
they have made with Bishops concerning Jurisdiction, they had right and power
to make them. And therefore it was not in the Bishops power to annul the same,
but only to ordain a review, that it might be examined whether any thing had
been done in them contrary to the Canons, and whether they have not been
Simoniacal.

If the Rule of the Canon Law were exactly observed, The Rights of Chapters
during the Vacancy of the Sea.
it would be easy to regulate the Rights of Chapters during the Vacancy of the Sea; because the Jurisdiction being common to the Bishop and Chapter, it must
needs be that the Chapter succeed to the whole Jurisdiction after the death of
the Bishop, and that by consequent it present to all Benefices until the Sea be
filled. But the contrary is practiced: for the Benefices which the Bishop
confers with his Chapter, are distinguished from the Benefices to which he
presents alone. In regard of the first, as the Chapter bestows them jointly
with the Bishop, so does it retain the Right of conferring them alone, during
the Vacancy of the Sea: But it disposes not of others, as it is expressly
mentioned in the 31th Book of the Decretals Tit. 9. cap. 2.
Cum nusquam inveniatur cautum in Jure, quod capitulum, vacant sede, fungatur
vice Episcopi in collationibus praebendarum: That is to be understood of
Collations that belong to the Bishop alone, and it is even extended to those
where he would be obliged to take the Advice and Consent of his Chapter. The
reason of that practice is, because the Right of conferring passes then to the
next Superior; and it cannot be said, that the Chapter is superior, nor even
equal to its Bishop, in the Benefices to which the Bishop presents alone.
However, I think, if matters had been examined to the bottom, the Chapters
might confer all Benefices, sede vacant, because then they would re-enter into
their Ancient Right after the death of their Bishop. It has not been minded,
that that Decretal was made for the profit of the Pope, who happens often
enough during the Vacancy of the Sea, to be immediate Superior; and so in some
sense he becomes Ordinary. There is in the Bullary a Constitution of Pius V.
whereby he reserves to himself all the Benefices depending on Bishops sede
vacant; but most of the Constitutions in the Bullary are not received in
France. It is certain that Chapters are in place of the Bishops during the
Vacancy of the Sea, for all Collations which are called necessary: and
therefore they collate upon the Presentation of Patrons, and the Nomination of
Graduats. Vacant Cures, though they be in the Collation of the Bishop alone,
ought to be reckoned in the number of necessary Collations: But many are not of
that Opinion as to this last Right, for the reasons which I mentioned before.
It belongs to the Chapter also to confirm not only those who are presented by
Patrons, but those also who are chosen. The reason which many able Canonists
give for authorizing that Right of Chapters, is because there is difference to
be made betwixt free, and necessary Collations; Confer est li^erae
voluntatis; at instituere praesentatum, aut confirmare Electum, est
necessitatis.
the first are favors that absolutely depend on the Bishop; but in the others
he has not the same power, seeing he cannot reject those who have been chosen,
or presented, if they be found capable. It would be then necessary, according
to that Maxim, to reserve all the Collations which are called free, to the
Bishop who is to succeed; but that is not observed in France, where the King
has his Right of the Regale, and presents to all Benefices that have no Cure
of Souls, until the Sea be legally filled; and for other Benefices they are
provided to in the manner as I have just now mentioned.

We are now to explain the Rights of Patrons, The Rights of Patrons.
which have also derogated much from the Ancient Right of Bishops, on whom all
the Churches of their Dioceses depended absolutely, and without any
restriction. They are called Patrons of a Church, who have founded, or endowed
it; so that there may be several Patrons of one and the same Church, because of
different Benefits, for which the Church is obliged to different persons,
whether for having built it, or for having bestowed the Ground whereon it is
founded, or for having allotted Lands or Possessions, for Maintenance of the
Ministers that serve the Cure of the same. All these things acquire to the
Benefactors a Right which is called the Right of Patronage; and though it does
not clearly appear by the Deed of the Foundation, that they have reserved to
themselves that Right, yet still they have it, provided they have not renounced
the same. The Patrons enjoy several Honors and Privileges by virtue of their
Patronage; the chief is the Right of presenting to the Bishop, or other
Ordinary Collator Clerks to be provided to the Benefices whereof they are the
Patrons: And if they whom they present be capable, the Collator cannot refuse
them; he is obliged to give to the Presentees Collation or Institution upon the
Letters of Presentation: And if it happen that slighting the Patrons, they give
the Benefices to others, the Provisions are null. Now, that Presentation which
is the chief advantage of Patronage, has been granted long before the
Establishment of the New Law, and of Benefices, to those who founded Churches,
and maintained Ministers: For Bishops Ordained for the same Churches, those who
were recommended to them by the Founders, when they were capable of the
Ministry to which they were called. Novell. Justinian.
That is expressly mentioned by Justinian in the Novel 126. chap. 18. where it
is said; Si quis Oratorii domum fabricaverit, and voluerit in ea Clericos
ordinare aut ipse, aut ejus haeredes, si expensas ipsis Clericis ministrant,
and dignos denominant, denominatos Ordinari. Si vero qui ab eis eliguntur,
tanquam indignos prohibent sacrae regulae ordinari; tunc sanctissimus Episcopus
quoscunque putaverit meliores ordinari procuret. The Ancient Canons make
mention also of that Right of Nomination granted to Patrons or Founders of
Churches.

Gratian, who 16. q. 7. c. 10.
alleges the Canon of the first Council of Orleans, to prove that all the
Churches of every Diocese are in the power of the Bishop 16. q. 7. c. 32.
makes in the same place several Restrictions in favors of those who have
founded Churches: And amongst others he asserts their Right of Nomination upon
the Authority of a Council of Toledo. And therefore Bishops or other Ordinary
Collators can never derogate from the Right of Patronage, though they look upon
it as a kind of servitude annexed to Benefices, which, for all that, depend
wholly on them, because of the Right of Collation or Institution which belongs
to them. Yet that hinders not Patrons from considering it as an honorable
Right: And though it be the Institution or Collation that properly invests the
Beneficiaries in their Benefices, quia praesentatio non est pars substantifica
Institutionis, sed est tantum quaedam servitus beneficii; yet it is always true
that the Institution or Collation of Bishops, is not altogether in their own
power in respect of Benefices that are in Patronage, because they are limited
to give the Institution to those who are presented to them by the Patrons.

There are two sorts of Patrons, Laick, and Ecclesiastical; and though the
right of Nomination to Benefices whereof they are the Patrons, be common to
both, yet they differ in many things, and Lay Patrons have even some advantage
over the Ecclesiastical.

I. The Privileges of Lay-Patrons.
The Pope nor his Legate can never derogate from the right of Lay Patrons and
they who favor the Court of Rome say only that the Pope might absolutely, if
he would, do it, seeing he is Master of all Benefices, but that he never will.
And therefore neither the Pope nor his Legate, can ever prevent Lay-Patrons,
who have four Months entire for presenting to Benefices. It Is true
Ecclesiastical Patrons have fix Months, for providing to the Benefices of their
Patronage; but that is useless to them in France, where the Prevention of the
Pope takes place. In Normandy Lay Patrons have full six Months to present in,
as well as Ecclesiastics: But that Privilege is founded on Custom, and not on
Law, that only allows four Months to Lay-Patrons, which being expired they lose
their right of Presentation for that time, the same being devolved on the
Ordinary, who bestows the Benefice on whom he pleases. II. The King cannot
derogate from the right of Lay-Patrons by his right of the Regale, because the
Regale gives him no more right, than the Papacy gives the Pope. Now it is
certain, the Pope, as we have observed, can do nothing in prejudice of
Lay-Patrons: On the contrary, the King can derogate from the right of
Ecclesiastical Patrons during the Regale, and confer the livings that depend on
them, without any necessity of having their consent: And as the Regale gives
the King right to receive Resignations in favorem, in the same manner as the
Pope enjoys it, so upon such Resignations, he can confer Benefices Vacant
within the Regale. III. The Lay Patron has liberty to alter. If he has
presented an unworthy person, he can name another; which is not granted to an
Ecclesiastic, who cannot accumulate Presentation upon Presentation, as a Lay
Patron can. The reason of that difference is chiefly, because the ignorance of
a Lay Patron is to be excused, but not of an Ecclesiastic, who, in such a
case, forfeits his right, for that time, after the first Presentation. IV. The
Ordinary cannot admit of Presentations without the consent of the Lay Patron:
Whereas he may do it without the Ecclesiastical Patron, from whose Right he can
derogate in case of Permutation, but not in pure and simple Demissions; for the
Benefice being then vacant, the Ordinary cannot confer it, but upon the
Presentation of the Patrons, whether they be Ecclesiastics, or Laics. V. A
Benefice in Lay-Patronage cannot be burdened with a Pension or Annuity and Mr.
Charles Du Moulin is of the Opinion, that the Popes Rescript cannot be put in
execution, unless the Patron consent to it, or that clause be added, Si tamen
Patroni consensus accedat. But seeing the Pope can Derogate from the right of
Presentation of Ecclesiastical Patronss by conferring in full right Benefices
that are in their nomination; he can upon stronger reason, Authorize by his
Rescripts, Pensions settled upon the Benefices of their Patronage, without any
necessity of having their consent.
After all, it will not be amiss to observe, Whence comes the distinction of
Patronages.
that the distinction of Patrons Laick and Ecclesiastical, is not taken from
the difference of persons; for a Church Man may be a Laick in respect of his
Lands and Inheritance, to which the Patronage is annexed: But a Layman cannot
be an Ecclesiastical Patron, because Ecclesiastical Patronage is a right that
belongs to a Person or Community, by reason of Benefices which they enjoy. In a
word, Benefices are in Ecclesiastical Patronage, when they depend on a Church.
I do not here examine, whether the Pope can dispense with a Laick for enjoying
a Benefice, and still remaining Laick; in which case it would be true, that a
Lay-Person might be an Ecclesiastical Patron. It is sufficient that we have
examined matters according to the ordinary course of Law; and without any
farther inquiry into the thing, it will be easy to distinguish these two
Patronages, according to the Principles that we have laid down. We must,
nevertheless, observe, That it many times happens Lay-Patronages, in process of
time, to become Ecclesiastical; and that either by the terms of the Donation or
by the Translation and Donation that Laymen make of their Lands and Lordships
to Churches or Monasteries. In the Title of the Foundation of a Church, it is
sometimes expressed that the Founders reserve to themselves the Right of
Patronage, only for a certain time, and for a limited degree of Kindred; and
then that failing, the Ordinary in full right confers the Benefices that were
before in Lay-Patronage. Wherefore it is necessary that Bishops examine the
Titles of foundations, which are sometimes qualified with restrictions in their
favors. Besides, we find that Cathedral Churches and Monasteries enjoying a
great many Lordships with Patronages annexed to them, these Patronages have
changed their nature, being become Ecclesiastical by the Lords making of them
over to Churches. We must nevertheless, except great Benefices, such as
Bishoprics and Abbeys, which the Kings of France can never transfer to the
Purchasers of Crown Lands. The King can only transfer the Patronage of smaller
Benefices with the Inheritance; and then the Patronage from Royal becomes
Ecclesiastical, if it be given or transferred to a Church.

There arise great difficulties in France about Lay-Patrons who make profession
of the Reformed Religion. Of Huguenot Patronage.
And seeing Protestants are not treated according to the Rigor of the
Ecclesistical Laws, which deprive Heretics of their Estates, it would seem
that since they are left in possession of their Lands and Lordships, they
should also enjoy all the fruits and honorary Rights that are annexed to the
same Lord ships especially according to the Maxims of the New Law, which
Collationes sunt in fructious.
places the Presentation to Benefices in the number of Fruits. No man doubts
but that Patronage is a real Right annexed to Lands, and that by consequent it
follows them as being a fruit of the same. It would seem, then, that no regard
ought to be had to the Quality of the person; in as much as the Right of
Patronage is not personal, but real; and besides, the Presentation is but a
servitude of the Benefice, and not a Spiritual Title. Nor does the Presentation
properly give the Benefice. But institution must be had from the Ordinary upon
the letters of Presentation; and in that the Spirituality does really consist.
The Ordinary may refuse those who are presented by the Patrons, if they be not
capable; and so it remains always in the liberty of Ordinaries not to supply
Benefices that are in Huguenot Patronage but with fit and able men. The
Patrons, then, if they would, cannot abuse their Right, and it is impossible,
that the Church can thereby receive any prejudice, if the Ordinaries discharge
their duty.

These and many more reasons that might be brought upon that Subject, were the
cause that Lay-Patrons professing the Reformed Religion obtained heretofore an
Order of Council, whereby they were allowed to nominate fit persons, who in
their place might present to the Benefices of their Patronage; but that is not
now observed; for the Ordinaries, in full Right confer such Benefices, so long
as the Patrons make profession of the Reformed Religion. And therefore it is
fit we should observe, that the Right of Patronage, which is real and united to
the Land, is not lost, but only dormant and in suspense; so that if the Patrons
happen to be reconciled to the Church, they enjoy their Right of Patronage, in
the same manner as if they had never professed the Reformed Religion. That
Custom is backed with good reasons; and though the Right of Patronage be not
properly Spiritual, it is, at least, mixed, and it is a common saying, that it
is quid Spirituale annexum Temporali. And that it cannot be Sold separately,
but only with the Land or Inheritance to which it is annexed. It is true,
Patronage is a real Right; yet that hinders not but that it is exercised by a
person. Now it is ridiculous, that a man who believes not in the Church,
should present to it a person for a Spiritual Right, and that that Right should
be granted upon his Presentation. Grant that the Bishop is free to accept or
reject him who is presented, and that he is the Judge of his capacity. That is
not enough: For if the Canons prohibit the giving of a Benefice upon the
recommendation of an Heretic, upon stronger reason, it ought not to be given
upon his Presentation. The Bishop can only Judge of defects that are known to
him, and it may be the Protestant Patron may present a very capable man, but
who may have secret engagements with himself. It is not strange to see
Churchmen who have followed their studies at the charge of Protestant Patrons,
in hopes of procuring them Benefices of their Patronage, to the end they may
comply with them, and do prejudice to the Rights of the Church. But these
Artifices are so hidden, that few can come to the knowledge of them. And
therefore Patrons who profess the Reformed Religion, have with reason been
excluded from the Right of presenting to Benefices which depend on their
Patronage. It may be doubted, whether Bishops in defect of these Patrons, who
are incapable of presenting to Benefices of their nomination, ought in full
Right to confer the same Benefices. It would seem, that that did belong to them
by Canon Law, because the Patronage which is a kind of servitude tolerated by
the Church, ceasing, the Bishops enter again into their ancient Right. But on
the other hand, seeing Lay-Patrons enjoy not the right of Patronage, but
because of their Lands and Inheritances, there is a great deal of appearance,
that it belongs to the King who is their Sovereign Lord, to supply the defects
of his Vassals, when they themselves cannot exercise a Right that is annexed to
their Fiefs; In the same manner as the King in Normandy has the Right of Wards,
and that by virtue of that Right he is Patron in the place of the Minors, who
have Lands with right of Patronage, until they be of age. However, It is
certain that the Bishops are at present in possession of that right, and that
they are grounded upon a declaration of the King, which they pretend to be in
their favors. There happened lately a Process betwixt the King and the
Archbishop of Rouen concerning the Cure of Oinville, which is in Huguenot
Patronage, and to which both the King and Archbishop had presented; which
shows plainly enough, that the King had a mind to recover his right, having
referred that matter from his Council to be examined in the great Council.
After all, the Patrons professing the Reformed Religion, have found a device to
preserve their Right of Patronage; For by a counterfeit Contract they sell
their Lands with Patronages to some Catholic of their Friends or Relations;
And so they remain Masters, unless the Fraud of their Contracts be discovered.
But let us now come to Ecclesiastical Patronages.

Ecclesiastical Patronages derive their Original from the I. Council of Orange,
The Original of Ecclesiastical Patronages.
where Bishops that found Churches out of their Dioceses, are permitted to
present capable Persons to them, who are afterward to be ordained by the
Diocesan Bishops. That Right has past insensibly to all other Founders: And at
length, regular Communities have also presented to Benefices depending on their
Monasteries. In their favors the Rule has been made, which bears that Secular
Benefices shall be given to Seculars, and Regular to Regulars. By Law all
Benefices ought to belong to Seculars, because none but Seculars are by right
capable of Ecclesiastic Employments, and that the Religious have only got into
them by Privilege and Dispensation. But since they have been permitted to
possess Lands; Nay Fiefs and Lordships, they have had many Churches in their
disposal, which they have governed themselves, or committed to Secular Priests.
They commonly gave Parish-Churches to be governed by Secular Priests, allowing
them but a very moderate Stipend; and had even the power to change them as they
pleased. But at length they were forced to place Curates, or perpetual Vicars
in their Churches, for preventing a vast number of Abuses; and partly from
thence we have the Cures to which they present in Quality of Patrons. The
Original of Priories.
As to Priories and other Benefices to which they nominate, they were at first
but Administrations, or Manual Benefices, which, for that reason, were called
Obediences, because the Religious were employed in those Offices by the command
of their Abbots or Superiors, whom they were obliged to obey; and they
continued no longer in the Employments, than their Superiors pleased. They had
the name of Praepositi, or Obedientiarii, and their Care extended more to the
Temporal than the Spiritual. If Lands lay remote from the Monastery, some
Religious were to be sent thither to take the care of them: And seeing Monks
ought not to live alone, unless they were Hermites or Anchorites, they had
Companions assigned them, of which one took the Title of Praepositus, and the
places where they lived were called Cellae, Grangiae, Obedientiae, to
distinguish them from the Principal Monastery of which these Houses were but
Dependances. This is the Original of Priories, and other lesser Benefices of
Monasteries, which in the beginning were Manual and in Rule. Nay, it seems even
contrary to the Institution of the Monastic life, that Monks should properly
possess Benefices in Title, in the manner that they are Established by the New
Law; for they are the absolute Masters of their Revenue, which is in some sense
contrary to the Vow of Poverty that they have made. In process of time, many of
these Priories have been conferred on Seculars, whether because of the
scandalous Lives of the Religious that possessed them, or for other reasons;
and by that means the Benefices are gone out of the Rule. Forty years
possession is enough to change the nature of Benefices. In the mean time the
Monks who perceive that these Benefices are by their Foundation regular, use
all possible Endeavors to recover them again, and spare no means to get them
out of the hands of the Seculars who possess them, being persuaded that they
cannot commit Injustice nor Simony in regaining the Lands which they pretend
belong to their Church. When Benefices are once in possession of Monks, it is
hard for them to return again to Seculars, because, as we have observed before,
after forty years possession they become regular. On the contrary, it happens
often, that Benefices possessed by Seculars, fall under Rule, because Regular
Communities compound with Seculars, by Pensions, Annuities, or other ways. We
have then general Rules for distinguishing Benefices in Rule, from those that
are not, to wit, forty years possession; and failing that Rule, all Benefices
of their own nature, and by Canon Law, are Secular. Nothing but the Foundation
can prove a Benefice to be in Rule; and then the Title of the Foundation
derogates from the Ancient Canon Law.

Though it be certain, The Right of Commendatary Abbots in the nomination to
Benefices.
that Religious, and Regular Communities present to many Benefices in Quality
of Patrons, yet there is great difficulty, to know to whom that Right of
Patronage belongs since the Establishment of perpetual Commendums: And there
happen many suits upon that account betwixt the Commendatary Abbots and the
Monks. Yet it is an easy matter to resolve all these difficulties, if we lay
down some principles that cannot be questioned. We must not consider then the
Modern Commendums as bare Consignations, but as real Titles, as all the Bulls
of Commendum bear. If the Commendums were no more but bare Consignations, the
Commendataries could not have, as is commonly said, Jus in re, but barely the
keeping, or Custodiam Commendae; and by consequent they could not dispose of
Benefices, because such kinds of Commendums or Consignations are only for a
certain time. It is not so with the Commendums now in question, because they
are ad vitam, and retain nothing but the name of Commendum, being in effect,
real Titles, which give to Comendatary Abbots all the Rights which Regular
Abbots enjoyed, to whom they have succeeded. That Principle, which is
unquestionable, being supposed, it is plain enough to whom the Right of
Patronage belongs, whether to the Abbot alone, or to the Monks Jointly with
him. There needs no more for that, but to consult the Right of the Regular
Abbots of every Order. If the Constitutions and Custom of the Order attribute
to the Abbot alone the honorary Rights, there is no doubt but the Abbot
Commendatary ought to enjoy the same Rights. If, on the contrary, the Regular
Abbot cannot enjoy these Rights but with consent of the Community, and that he
be not the absolute Master of them; they must be divided betwixt him and his
Community, in the same manner as temporal goods are: For then the Rule gives to
the Monks the same power in respect of their Abbot; as the Canon Law gives to
Canons in regard of their Bishop. We must, nevertheless, take notice, that it
is not enough to establish the Right of Monks, that the Abbots have taken the
counsel, or even the consent of the Community, when there has been occasion of
nominating to Benefices, for many may have done that, without any obligation
upon them from their Constitutions: But it must besides, be made out, that
their Nominations would have been null without the consent of the Community.
The reason of that Maxim is, because the Canon Law and Popes Bulls give all the
honorary Rights to Abbots; and so there is no derogating from them but for
great reasons. It is certain, the first Monks were entirely subject to their
Abbots in all that concerned their Functions and Employments. St. Benet has
also reserved to the Abbot that Superiority over the Religious: And when that
Order began to receive Lands, and that it was necessary to give the charge of
them to some Monks in particular, the Abbot alone gave them their Commissions
which were at first but Administrations, though since they are become
Benefices. I make no doubt but the Popes Bulls, which are very favorable to
Commendatary Abbots, are founded on that Ancient Right of Regular Abbots: But
as to what concerns Temporal goods, the same Bulls of the Pope do not allow
them to be alienated, because they belong to the whole Community, and not to
the Abbot alone. And therefore when the question is of selling or alienating
any Lands or Possessions belonging to the Abbey, the Abbot is not then absolute
Master, but his Community must consent to it. For the same reason Commendatary
Abbots are obliged to divide the goods and Revenues of the Abbeys with the
Monks or to give them Money to the value of their share or Portion: And though
they are very willing to rest satisfied with a yearly pension, yet they have
still the same Rights to the Lands and Inheritances. It concerns them to have a
care that they be not imbazeled in the hands of the Abbot, in as much as their
Portion diminishing by the diminution of the Revenues of the Abbey, their
Pension would be lessened at the same time. The Abbots themselves cannot hinder
the Monks from taking cognizance of the Leases which they make of the Lands of
their Abbey, and from having always an eye over their actions, because they
have the same right that the Abbots have of enjoying the Revenues of the
Monastery. Agreements betwixt Abbots and Monks.


That common Right of the Abbots and Monks in regard of the Temporal Profits of
Abbeys has given occasion to Agreements and Transactions that are made betwixt
them for the partition of the same. In France the Revenue of the Abbey is
divided into three parts, of which there is one for the Monks, one for the
Charges, and a third for the Abbot. But the Abbots enjoy commonly two parts,
because they oblige themselves to defray the charges; and if they neglect to do
it, a third part of the Revenue may be sequestrated, until it be done. Upon
that foot, it is easy to decide the difficulties that might arise betwixt the
Abbot and Monks about the division of the Revenues: There needs no more, but to
give a third part to the Monks, and two thirds to the Abbot, who is obliged to
the reparations of the Fabric, payment of Tenths, and other Charges. As to the
honorary Rights, they ought not to fall under a dividend, because by the Canon
Law they all belong to the Abbot alone, who may make them over either in whole
or in part to his Monks. But that gratuitous Concession does not prejudice the
Rights of his Successors, because the Abbot can only dispose during his life,
of the Rights that subsist in his person; and the Monks cannot enjoy them after
the death of him that has granted them, because that Concession is no more in
force. It is not the same as to Agreements or Transactions, because all
Transaction supposes the Right of two Parties who are agreed together; and so
the agreement will always subsist in respect of the Religious, though the Abbot
be dead, until it be broken off by his Successor. In France, Abbots may break
the Agreements of their Predecessors, especially if they think themselves
injured. We have many instances of that practice: And there seems to be reason
for so doing, because Abbots may make secret Compacts with the Monks; and take
the advantage of such, to the prejudice of their Successors: And therefore the
Abbots have right to break the Agreements of their Predecessors. It is a
harder matter to dissolve those Transactions when they have been confirmed at
the Court of Rome, and in the Parliaments, with cognition of the cause; for
then they become real, and by consequent oblige the Successors. In that case,
the Abbots cannot rescind the Concordat or Agreement, till they have obtained a
Rescript from the Pope, and letters from the Parliaments upon a Bill preferred.

Farthermore, we are to take notice that many times the partition of the
honorary Rights is inserted in the Concordats with the division of the Revenues
and especially the Presentations to Benefices, as if that could be divided
betwixt the Abbot and Monks. It is a vicious clause in the Agreements, because
it is of the nature of a Concordat, that they who Transact have some Right to
the thing for which they do Transact; otherwise it is not an Agreement, but a
Concession. This Maxim, which is undeniable, being supposed, it is easy to
resolve the difficulties that daily happen betwixt Bishops and Religious
communities during the Vacancy of the Abbatial See. To whom it belongs to
present to Benefices during the Vacancy of the Abbatial See.
The Ordinaries provide to Benefices that are vacant at that time, and the
Monks also on their side, present; which daily occasions great suits, and it
seems that there is nothing as yet fixed and determined as to that. But
according to the principle which we have laid down, there is no doubt but when
the Religious Community presents to Benefices jointly with the Abbot, they
ought still to present during the Vacancy, because one of the Presenters is
enough in defect of the other. But when the Abbot alone nominates to Benefices,
and he dies, the Ordinaries enter again into their Canonical Right, and confer
in full power, because the Patronage or Right of presenting ceases by the death
of the Patron.

That right of Ordinaries, or of Religious Communities, is not to be called
Devolution: For Devolution has no place, but when there is a neglect on the
part of Patrons or Collators; and then their Right is devolved upon the
immediate Superior. In the question we now examine, there is no neglect; and
they who say that on those occasions the Right is devolved upon the Ordinary,
or upon the Chapter of the Monks, speak very improperly. It is far better said,
that the Ordinary, or Chapter of the Monks provide then to Benefices by the
Canon Law, and their own Right. In vain do the Monks object to Ordinaries,
their Concordats, or the Rights of their Chapter, because, as we have already
observed, the Chapter has no power sede vacant, but as to Benefices where
they present jointly with the Abbot: And as to the Agreement or Concordat,
there can be none but for what belongs in common to the Abbot and Monks. Now
the Presentation to Benefices and other honorary Rights being only in the
person of the Abbot, they cannot fall under a dividend, and by consequent no
Tranfaction can be made about them. To this we may add, that Ordinaries have an
acquired Right to all the Benefices of their Diocese, when there is no Patron;
for then they confer in full Right; and so Abbots cannot give a Right which is
not their own.

What we have said of Commendatary Abbots, Of Priors among Monks.
ought also to be understood of Priors, who have Monks in their Priories; for
the Division of the Rents ought to be made in the same manner. It is worth the
observing, that amongst the Religious there are two sorts of Priors, to wit
Conventual Priors, and Claustral. The Claustral Priors govern the Abbey in
absence of the Abbot, and during the Vacancy of the Abbatial See, as it happens
to be so long as the Commendum lasts. Conventual Priors are the Heads of Houses
dependant on Abbeys, in regard, that, as we have said before, Monks were sent
to take the charge of the Revenues of these Houses; and there was one amongst
them whom all the rest obeyed, from whence at length, came the name of Prior.
And it is from that that the simple Priories, as they are called now adays,
because they are secularised, and Chapels, derive their Original. Now seeing
some of these Priories became considerable, they were elective in the same
manner as Abbeys were. And therefore they are in the Kings Gift, as well as the
Abbeys; and the Pope in providing to them observes this difference only, that
he bestows Bishoprics and Abbeys in full Consistory, and Priories in Chamber.
I have said that Claustral Priors govern the Abbey during the time that it is
in Commendum; which is to be understood of the Government in respect of
Monastic discipline: For though Commendatary Abbots are substituted in the
Rights of Regular Abbots, yet it has not been thought fit to subject the Monks
to them, in what concerns the Rule of their Institution. However, they take the
power of putting in and turning out the Claustral Priors, according to the
terms of their Bulls, which give them full authority over the Monks. But that
power has been qualified especially in respect of the Religious who live in
Congregation, such as are in France the Benedictin Monks of the Congregation of
St. Maur, who elect their Claustral Priors. At first, every Abbot was Supreme
in his own Monastery, and Independent of any other. The Priors and other
Claustral Officers depended solely on him: But the Reformations of Cluni and
Cisteaux introduced some alteration into the ancient Government. Cluni and
Cisteaux have changed the Ancient Government of Monasteries.
The Monasteries that followed that Reformation presently submitted to the
Abbots of Cluni and Cisteaux, who were like the Generals of all the other
Abbots and Priors, and by that means they became dependant on them.

Besides, the Heads of Monasteries, that they might be independent of the
Bishops, were exempted from their Jurisdiction, which made a kind of New
Hierarchy in the Church: For whereas before the Monks depended on their Abbot,
for the Rule, and for all the rest, on the Bishops in whose Dioceses they
lived, they made now a particular and distinct Body in the Church, which
acknowledged no Bishop but the Pope for Superior; and for Government of that
Body they established a Form of little Councils, which they called General
Chapters: The Pope having granted to the Heads of these Orders great
Privileges, which have in many things derogated from the Jurisdiction of
Ordinaries. This Reformation has been found so useful to keep Monks in their
Duty, that it has not only been received amongst other Religious, who
pretended an Exemption from holding such Chapters, but is also augmented,
especially since the Council of Trent, which will have Monks live in
Congregation. In this manner the Reformation which is called the Congregation
of St. Maur, has been established in France, under the Popes Gregory XV. and
Urban VIII. who in their Bulls of Erection gave power to that new Congregation,
to aggregate thereunto the Monasteries that would accept the Reformation. And
this has wonderfully redounded to their profit; for they possess at present
all the good Abbeys of the Kingdom. They depend not at all on the Bishops, but
immediately on the Pope, and they are governed by a General who is chosen every
three years according to the Rules of the Canon Law. Besides, they have
Provincials, Assistants and Definitors, as the other Modern Religious have.

I mention this, that we may not measure the Rights of Commendatary Abbots
according to the practice at present observed amongst the Monks, but according
to the Custom that prevailed before these Reformations. The Popes, who make
Commendatary Abbots, have in France taken some Rights from them, and given them
to the Religious of the Congregation of St. Maur; for they give them not only
liberty to choose Claustral Priors independently of the Abbot, A Derogation from
the Rights of Commondatary Abbots.
but have also united to the Conventual Mensae the Claustral Offices, which the
Abbots had Right to dispose of before the Reformation, as well as of all the
Benefices of their Abbey. The power then of Commendatary Abbots over the Monks
must be limited according to the Bulls of Popes that have been received in
France; and we must know wherein they have derogated from the Bull of
Commendum, which gives Commendataries all power both in Spirituals and
Temporals. By Spirituals Commendatary Abbots would have meant the Presentation
or Collation of Benefices, and the Jurisdiction in regard of the Monks. They
pretended that the appointing of Claustral Priors depended on them, that the
Right of visiting and correcting belonged to them; and in a word, that being
substituted into the Rights of Regular Abbots, they ought to have the same
Authority and Jurisdiction. Prosper Fagnani.
But Fagnani relates a Bull of Innocent X. in favors of the Monks of Cisteaux
against a Commendatary Abbot, who took to himself all the Rights that we have
just now mentioned. By that Bull it is ordained, that Commendatary Abbots shall
exercise no Jurisdiction over the Monks; that the Abbot of Cisteaux, and other
Regular Abbots of that Order, shall visit every one his own District, or
Commissionate Visitors; and that the Spiritual Jurisdiction over Monks shall
not be administered by Commendatary Abbots. It meddles not with the Nomination
or Collation of Benefices, because without doubt that belongs to the
Commendatary Abbot, as it did before to the Regular, who in the beginning had a
Sovereign Authority over the Monks; and they, on the contrary, had none over
him, as appears by a Letter of Pope Pelagius related by Gratian, against the
Monks, who under pretext that they had elected their Abbots, would needs turn
them out, and choose others in their place who might comply with their manner of
living. Gratian. 18. q. 2. C. nullam.
Nullam potestatem de caetero, says Pope Pelagius, nullam licentiam Monachis
relinquimns pro arbitrio suo aut Abbates expellere, aut sibimet alios ordinare,
quia nulla autoritas remanebit Abbati, si Monachorum potestati coeperit
subjacere, ut de caetero fideliter and studiose universa quae vel ad divini
cultus reverentiam, vel ad utilitatem ejusdem Monasterii pertinerent, Abbatis
sollicitudo, ad quem potestas tota pertinere convenit, debeat adimplere. These
words are chiefly to be observed. Abbatis sollicitudo, ad quem potestas tota
pertinere convenit. And the Commendatary Abbots, who by Dispensations from
Popes have succeeded to the Rights of Regular Abbots, have by common Law the
same absolute power, and ought by consequent dispose of all the Benefices of
the Abbey, without any opposition from the Monks, unless there be a contrary
Custom that derogates from the Canon Law, which gives the whole power to the
Abbot, and not to the Monks.

I shall say nothing in this place of the other Religious, Of Regulars.
who are commonly called Regulars, because much of what we have observed may be
easily applied to them It is true in the Canon Law Monks and Regulars are
pretty often distinguished, but they are also many times comprehended under the
same Rules; and that which makes them different is not considerable as to the
matter we treat of. The Canons themselves who are called Regular, and who take
the Title of Regular Clerks, lead at present a life that resembles more that of
Monks, than that of Clerks: For they live separately in their Monasteries, and
are subject to their Abbots or Priors. They are no more in the Cathedral
Churches under the direction of their Bishops, and so far from being employed
by them in Ecclesiastical Functions, they depend entirely on their Regular
Superiors, who dispose of their Persons and Employments. And therefore it
ought not to be thought strange, that we reckon all Regulars in the number of
Monks, because they differ not from them, as the learnedest Canonists have
observed Hostien. Panorm.
unless in certain Cases expressed in the Law, exceptis casibus in Jure
expressis. This makes me think, that the Abbots or Priors of Canon Regulars
ought by common Right, as well as Abbots amongst Monks, to have all the
government both in Spirituals and Temporals, and that therefore it belongs to
them to dispose of all the Benefices and Offices of their Communities: But they
have followed the Reformation, that subjects them to Constitutions, wholly
opposite to the ancient common Right of Abbots. We see that the Abbot of St.
Genevieve in Paris is elective, and that every three years they make a new
Election. In a word, they live in Congregation, and have general Chapters, for
ordering the more important affairs of their Order: Which differs much from the
Ancient Rights of Abbots. Nor is it to be imagined, that if the Abbey of St.
Genevieve returned into Commendum, the Commendatary Abbots ought to be obliged
to share their Jurisdiction with the Religious: But they ought to reassume the
Ancient Right of Abbots, and only consider wherein the Popes have derogated
from it in favors of the Religious who live in Congregation. But as it has
been already observed, there is nothing take from Commendatary Abbots, but the
Jurisdiction that concerned Monastic Discipline. Though I have often spoken of
Commendatary Abbots, and of the Rights that belong to them, yet I thought it
not proper to examine particularly, whether their Title be Canonical, because
that would have carried me from my subject; it being sufficient that the New
Law has established it.

It is true in the beginning, A comparison betwixt Commendatary Abbots and
Regular.
there was great crying out against Commendums; And there are still a great
many that cannot approve of them: But if a History were made of Regular Abbots
as there has been of Commendataries, we would find that there have been greater
abuses in the Church under Regular Abbots, than there are at present under
Commendatary. Commendatary Abbots have but the third part of the Revenues of
their Abbeys in their disposal: The second part is appointed for the
maintenance of the Monks, and the third for the charges of the Monasteries. The
Regular Abbots, on the contrary, had the disposal of all the Revenues of their
Abbeys, they starved their Monks, and squandered away the Rents of the
Monasteries, by leading lives altogether inconsistent with their profession.
The difference then betwixt Abbots Commendatary and Regular is, that the former
enjoy but a third of the Abbey, and the whole was for the use of the others. It
is true Regular Abbots had not Bulls assigning them the Revenues of their
Abbeys in utilitatem personae; but notwithstanding they disposed of them as if
they had been properly their own: Whereas the Bulls of Commendatary Abbots
appoint the best part of the Revenue of Abbeys for the use of the Poor, the
Monks and Churches. I am persuaded that the Monks desire not that Regular
Abbots should be restored with the same power they had before. If it were so,
the Thirds which now they enjoy peaceably without any charges, would no longer
be at their disposal, but in the power of the Abbot, who would govern them
according to his humor. I assert nothing but what has been said before me by
the most zealous Benedictine Monks, who have often complained of the Rigor
wherewith their Abbots treated them, and of the profuse dissipation of the
Revenues of their Abbeys. That I may not be tedious, A Description of the Life
of Regular Abbots.
I shall only here report some words of the Abbot Trithemius upon that subject,
and refer the Reader to the works that he has made for the Reformation of his
Order, and especially of the Regular Abbots of his time.

It is well known that John Trithemious was a Religious Benedictine, and one of
the most famous Regular Abbots of his Order. He was at many General Chapters,
and presided in some, in which some Harangues that he made are still extant,
wherein he describes at length the disorders of his Brethren, who lived in a
more secular way than Abbots Commendatary do at present. Trith. Orat. 2. Ann.
1492.
He upbraids them with want both of knowledge and piety, that they were wholly
addicted to the World, and minded nothing but Riches and Pleasure. He lays
before them the holiness and other virtues of their Forefathers, Orat. 2. Ann.
1493.
and at the same time shows how much their Order was corrupted, after this
manner bespeaking them in an assembly: O vos Abbates idiotae, and scientiae
salutaris inimici, qui diem obscaenis amoribus consumitis, qui vinum in
saturitate bibitis, qui terrenis lucris intenditis, qui ad tabulam stolidi
luditis; quid respondebitis Deo and legislatori vestro benedicto? That
corruption was so univesal, that he affirms that of Ten Thousand Monasteries,
there were not a thousand that any way observed the Rule of their Institution;
but that the Abbots were wholly plunged in debauchery, voluptatibus carnis
submersi, and he applies these verses to them.

Neglecto Superum cultu, spretoque tonantis
Imperio, Baccho, indulgent, Venerique ministrant,
Sacra ferunt Auro, numinis Altaria Vendunt,
Auro vina libant, Auro laquearia fulgent.
Scorta tegunt gemmis, canibus convivia ponunt,
Exuviis inopum culti ditesque rapinis,
Successu elati Superos Acherontaque rident.
This is the description that the Abbot Trithemius makes of the Regular Abbots
of his time in a Harangue that he spoke in their presence; and in the same
place he adds Qui nomine reformati, re autem ipsa deformati sunt.
that they who called themselves reformed were no better than the rest. The
same Abbot in another Harangue describes at length Orat. 4. Ann. 1496.
the rigourousness of Abbots toward their Monks, whom they obliged to fast,
whilst they themselves feasted with those whom they invited to their Tables,
and exempted themselves from the usual Fasts under pretext of Hospitality. He
upbrards them that they were not true Abbots, seeing they were not in place of
Fathers to their Monks, to whom they denied what was necessary: Necessaria
fratribus tuis alimenta subtrahis, vilia and insipida largiris; tu optimo vino
stomachum tuum satias, fratribus quod deterius est subministras. This being
well considered, I don't think that the Monks who at present live under
Commendatary Abbots, desire to be again governed by Regular, who have used them
more like Slaves than Children. And it is not to be imagined that that abuse
reigned only in the time of Abbot Trithemius: But that learned Abbot was moved
with the disorders whereof he was a witness, and not being able to suffer them,
he wrote a letter which bears this Title, Liber penthicus de ruina Monastici
Ordinis. Wherein he deplores the lamentable state to which the Order of St.
Benet was reduced Trith. de ruina Monist. Ord. cap. 2. ut brevtter dicam quid
sen tio, nec M ^achis Ecclesiae, nec Ecclesis Monachi aigni sunt.
he says freely, that the Church had no need of Monks: And seeing many Monks
forsook their Profession to become Canons, he calls them Apostates,
notwithstanding the Dispensations they had received from the Pope. Most part of
these evils in Monasteries proceeded from the Elections, because Quales
Monachi, talis Abbas, Monanachorum.
wicked Monks could not but choose a wicked Abbot.

In fine so excessive was the vanity of Monks and Abbots at that time, that as
the same Author informs us, Monks would not be called Monks. They abhorred so
Sacred a name: Sanctum nomen quasi stultitiam abominantur. Nor would the Abbots
be termed Abbots, they thought they were affronted, when that Title was given
them. Abbatis nostri nomen suum tanquam indignum judicantes, gratiosi domini
vocantur; and si contigerit eos similiter appellari dominos Abbates,
indignantur, and vocantem se aspernantur and avertuntur tanquam magnam passi
injuriam. Besides, the Regular Abbots of that time fell into a passion when
they were called, My Lord Abbot; And at present Church men of quality look upon
that as a very honorable Title. But what is stranger, they had more men in
their Retinue, than the wealthiest Bishops had; and it many times happened that
a poor wretch who had been chosen Abbot, had the Train of an Arch Bishop:
Videres, continues Abbot Trithemius, famulos eorum flectere genua, deponere
capucia sua and se inclinare; non Abbates, sed Archiepiscopos putares. O
vanitas insana! Filius pauperis sutoris Abbas factus, dominus gratiosus
nominatur. And that nothing might be wanting to the diversion of Regular
Abbots, they went to baths with great equipage, and in good company, as the
same Abbot upbraids them in one of his Harangues; Trith. Orat. 4.
Ad Thermas sumptuose properas, socios and socias vocas. This was the condition
of Monasteries and Regular Abbeys, when Commendataries were established: And I
leave it to the Reader to make the comparison betwixt them. I pretend not, for
all that, to Justify the Commendum, nor the vices of Commendatary Abbots. But
it is my design only to show that we must not always Judge of things, by the
abuse that men make of them; and that if the History of the Abbot Regular were
made public, as it has been intended, all men would be persuaded that Regular
Abbots have been no better men than Commendataries; and that it would be, in
fine, a very bad Reformation in the Church, to reduce Abbeys again under Rule,
in the manner as they have been formerly. It might be said then erit novissimus
error pejor priore. To make a profitable reformation to the Church, it would be
necessary to go back to the most Ancient Canon Law, which subjects Monks to the
Jurisdiction of Bishops, and at the same time establishes an independance
amongst the Houses, as it was in the beginning. Every Monastery should obey a
Superior or Abbot, and the Superiors or Abbots should obey the Bishops, who
ought to visit them as well for the Spiritual as Temporal. That would be the
means to hinder disorder and the dissipation of Revenues, of which a great part
is spent in needless Journeys, and in holding general Chapters. But it is to no
purpose to enlarge any more on this matter, which requires a particular
treatise.

Besides the Monks and Regulars we have spoken of, Military Orders.
there is another sort of Religious, who according to their Institution, bear
the name of St. John of Jerasalem, from whom descend those that are called
Knights of Malta. That Order is much different from other Religious, and their
Benefices differ also from the nature of all other Benefices. They are rather
the Administrations of Hospitals, than Benesices, and in effect, that Order
began by an Hospital that was built at Jerusalem, for the reception of those
who went to see the holy places. The founding of Hospitals for Lodging of
Strangers, is Ancient enough and there was either in the Bishops House or
elsewhere, places appointed for that end, that the sick might be taken care of,
and other charitable works performed, for which part of the Revenue of every
Church was allotted: Afterward in process of time they were distinguished from
the common Revenue of Churches, and many private persons gave Lands and
Inheritances to be erected into places of piety in imitation of Monasteries.
They cannot be said properly to be Benefices, because the Rents of them are not
designed for Church men, but for all men who are in misery and want. And
therefore there are as many kinds of Hospitals as there are calamities. In the
beginning the Bishop had the care of these Monasteries, because he ought to
provide for the necessities of the Poor, and of all those who were in misery,
as well as for the subsistence of Clerks. But the Religious of the Hospital of
St. John of Jerusalem made a particular Body in the Church, which has to this
day its particular Constitutions. To speak properly there is but one Hospital
in all the Order, and that Hospital is at present reputed to be in Malta. All
other private Hospitals or Commanderies, are but members of that Hospital, on
which they depend: And therefore their Revenue by Right, belongs to the common
Treasury of the Order.

I think Commanderies may be compared to the conventual Prieuries of Monks, The
Original of Commanderies.
which in the beginning were only administrations of the Revenues of certain
places distant from the principal Monastery. As Monks were placed in these
Houses to ta^e care of the Rents, so also there has been a necessity of
sending Knights into those places where the Order had Lands. The name of
Commander has great resemblance with that of Praepositus, which was given to
Monks who managed the Rents of these remote Houses. Besides, their
administration was called Obedientia, because they depended wholly on the
Abbot, who gave them that Commission. It is Just so with the simple Commanders
of Malta, who are rather Farmers of the Order than Beneficiaries They have,
nevertheless converted their Commissions or Farms into a kind of Benetices,
paying a certain acknowledgment to the common Treasury of the Order; and that
acknowledgement is called Responsion.

We must put a difference then, betwixt Hospitals which are by Foundation
Secular, and Regular Hospitals that are possessed by Religious, such as are the
Commanderies we speak of, which are appropriated to the Religious of the Order,
and cannot be possessed by others. Nay it is necessary also, that those of the
Order be qualified for peaceable enjoying of them, and their Benefices are not
all of the same nature. We must therefore observe, that there are amongst them
Knights, Chaplains, and serving Brothers, and that there are Commanderies, or
Revenues assigned to these three different qualities. There are besides the
great Officers, the first of whom is he that at present is called the great
Master of the Order, and is the Head; who in the beginning was the Master of
the Hospital: Under him are the great Officers of the Order, who are for most
part Military Officers because of the employments to which they are appointed,
such as the Admiral, Marshall and others. I shall not speak here of the
Bailiffs or Conventual Priors who are of the great Cross, nor of their other
Officers, because the Institution of their Order and their Laws are Printed. I
shall only add that it is to be observed, that though that Order be composed of
so many Nations, yet it is but one only Convent divided into several Tongues.
Every Tongue contains several Provinces, and in every province there is a great
Prior who from time to time holds Provincial Chapters. For obtaining a
Commandery one must be of the Nation where the Commandery lies, have performed
his Caravans, which consist in some years Services at Malta, and be of the
quality requisite for the Commandery, being besides bound up by certain
Statutes; But they are often dispensed with at the Recommendation of Princes,
who have also made Concordats with the Knights of Malta, as well as with the
Popes.

There is another kind of Knights who also enjoy Church Lands, A Military Order
wherein one may marry.
and nevertheless seem neither to be Religious not Ecclesiastics, because they
are Married. They call themselves, however, Religious, and have their Laws as
other Religious have. In Spain the Commanders of the Orders of St. James, of
Calatrava and Alcantara are of that nature. There are in France also the
Knights of St. Lazarus who may Marry. It is pretty difficult though, to tell
upon what Title these Married Religious possess Ecclesiastical Revenues; unless
it be said, that being by Profession Religious, they ought to be obliged to
Chastity: But that the Pope who according to the Maxims of the New Law, is
Master of the Canons, has dispensed with that Obligation, and that by an
Apostolical Privilege they may have Wives: Which is conform to the opinion of
the ablest Divines, who think that the Pope may for lawful causes dispense with
Monks as to their Vow of Chastity. The married Commanders of these Orders must
then be reckoned amongst Regulars, and they may in conscience enjoy, under the
Title of Regulars, Church Lands that are appropriated to their Order. This, at
least, is the opinion Mart. Navar.
of one the most learned and strict Canonists of our age, who calls Philip II.
King of Spain, the greatest Prelate in the Church next to the Pope, because he
was the chief or great Master of the three Military Orders of Spain, and
enjoyed a good part of the Tithes of Churches within his Territories. Phil. 11.
the richest Prelate of the Church.
In this quality of Prelate Regular, the King of Spain is the richest
Beneficiary in his Kingdom: And seeing he is not only great Master of the
Orders of St. James, Calatrava and Alcantara, but is also King of Spain, he
can, as King, appropriate to his own use the Revenues of his Commanderies, at
least as much as is necessary to make him live like a King. In the same manner
as it is lawful, according to the Maxims of the New Law, for Cardinals, Sons of
Kings, Nobles and men of Letters to possess several Benefices, that they may be
able to live according to their quality.

From all that hitherto has been said, it is easy to Judge how much the
Ecclesiastical Discipline has changed in Beneficial matters, and how much the
present practice differs from Ancient Customs. The Canon Law does, indeed give
the entire disposal of Church Revenues to the Bishops within their several
Dioceses; but the new and particular Law takes from them the greatest part of
their power. Hospitals in the beginning depended on the Bishops, as all other
goods and Lands that were dedicated to works of Charity; they appointed men to
take the care of them, and the administrators gave account of them. But by
degrees they have lost that Right, and even private persons have possessed
Hospitals in Title of Benefice. That Abuse has been corrected by the Councils
of Vienne and Trent, which revived the Ancient Canon Law: But they are not
received in France, as to that point that the Administrators should give in
their accounts before the Ordinaries. In effect, since the management of these
Rents seems not to have any Spiritual relation, it has been thought more
convenient to give the Administration of them to Laics, who in some manner are
in place of Guardians. Churchmen are excluded from it, because they might
abuse them, and apply them to their own use as Benefices belonging to
themselves. Nor have the Nobility and public Officers any share in that
affair, because it might be feared that they would render themselves Masters of
the Revenues assigned to Hospitals. And therefore they choose most commonly
good and sufficient Citizens, and the right of nominating them belongs to the
Founders. The Edict of Henry II. gave the Oversight and Visitation of all the
Hospitals of the Kingdom to the great Almoner of France: But Francis I. gave
the same power to the Kings Judges of the places where the Hospitals lay. It is
true the Ordinaries protest against that Edict, pretending that it is
prejudicial to their Rights: But the Parliament of Paris took no notice of
their opposition, farther then that it was decreed, that they might depute one
or two on their part, to be present with the Kings Judges at the Visitation,
but with this condition, that they could not in any thing contradict them.
Henry II. made a Second Edict, which is wholly conform to that of Francis I.
Since that time the Ordinaries have no power over the Revenues of Hospitals,
only they and other Church men are invited to be present at the making of the
accounts. It is, nevertheless, to be observed that there are several Benefices
which are real Titles, and yet called Hospitals, Gods Houses, and Alms Houses,
and which in effect are not Hospitals, but so called for some particular
reasons which would be too long to relate. Besides, Hospitals are sometimes
given in Title of Benefices, when they are no more but Accessories to a more
considerable Benefice.

Having spoken of the persons in whose favor the Maxims of the New Law have
derogated from the Canons and Ancient right of Bishops, Derogations from the
Rights of Bishops.
it remains now to speak of the things that derogate from the same Right, and
we shall begin with the Resignations that are called in favorem. There are two
sorts of Resignations. The first which is called a pure and simple Resignation
is made in this manner: The Beneficiary does purely and simply resign his
Benefice into the hands of the Ordinary; and then the Benefice is void. That
Resignation, which may also be called Renunciation or Demission, is Canonical,
and we have some instances of it in Antiquity; But Bishops did not easily admit
of it: They made examination whether they who would lay aside Ecclesiastical
Employments, had reasons that obliged them to that Demission; and if no lawful
reason appeared, their Resignations on Demissions were not received. The other
Resignation which now-a days is far better known than the former, is called
Resignation in favorem; because he that resigns his Benefice, does it only on
this condition, that it shall be given to him in whose favors he has made the
Demission: and that if it be given to another the Collation should be null. The
Novelty of Resignations in favorem.
This kind of Resignation is so New, that there is no mention made of it in the
Body of the Canon Law, in the Decretals, nor in the Sext. The New Canonists
themselves do all agree that it is Simoniacal, because it includes a Paction or
Condition, to wit, that the Resignation of the Benefice is not made but that
the other may be invested who is named by the Resigner. And therefore there was
a necessity of having recourse to the Pope to get a Dispensation for the
Simony: And that is the reason why none but the Pope can receive those
Resignations in favorem, because he is above the Canons and Positive Law.
Bishops cannot admit of them, in regard their power is limited, and that they
cannot purge the Simony which is incurred by a compact. After all, there is
nothing that derogates more from the Right of Ordinaries and Patrons, than that
Resignation in favorem, because they who possess Benefices, dispose of them in
the same manner as of their Inheritances: And it surprises me to see it so
common, that men of greatest integrity make no Scruple by that means to render
their Benefices hereditary in their families, as if the Popes dispensation
acquitted them always of Simony. Abbot Trithemius could not endure that the
Monks of his time obtained such Dispensations from the Pope Trith. de ruina
Monast. Ord.
Nec mihi, said he, dispensationem Romani Pontificis objicias, quam nisi Deus
approbet, te minime excusabit, Non omnia Deo placent, quae per summum
Pontificem in terra geruntur. Many now a days, cry out against the Commendum,
who nevertheless countenance by their example, the Simony of Resignations in
favorem. We do not find that they resign their Benefices into the hands of
Ordinaries, to be by them disposed of after a lawful and Canonical way. Men are
so accustomed to this evil, that they don't think it is an evil, it is grown so
common. In the mean time, since these Resignations in favorem are Odious, and
that they are prejudicial to the Rights of Ordinaries and Ecclesiastical
Patrons, many Regulations have been made to limit them.

In the first place, the Regulation which is called de viginti diebus has been
renewed in respect of them; Regulations that derogate from Resignations.
and this was made to hinder Benefices from becoming Hereditary. That
Regulation is at present called, de infirmis Resignantibus. And it bears, that
if a sick person who resigns his Benefice, die within twenty days, the Benefice
is vacant by death, and therefore the Collation made upon such a Resignation is
null, but that Regulation is at present useless, because the Popes daily
derogate from it in prejudice of Ordinaries. None but Cardinals by virtue of
their Privileges, and some persons of quality, to whom the Pope grants the
like indulgences, enjoy the benefit of the Regulation de 20. diebus, as well in
respect of those that are in health, as of the sick. In the Second place, there
is another Regulation which is called de publicandis Resignationibus which is
in force in France, and has been made to prevent Benefices from becoming
Hereditary. By that Regulation the Resignee is obliged to publish his
Resignation within the space of six Months; and if within that time he take not
Possession of the Benefice, and the Resigner die, the Benefice is vacant per
obitum. However the Right of the Resignee does not prescribe till after three
years, whilst the Resigner is alive, and he has all that time for taking
possession of the Benefice that has been resigned to him. In the third place,
there are many conditions required to make a Resignation in favorem valid.
Seeing they cannot be admi^ted but by the Pope, they cannot be made but by
Proxy. And that the Procuration may be good, it ought to be made before an
approved Notary, whether Apostolical or Royal, and signed by two Witnesses. It
ought besides to be special, and for such a Benefice: And if it take not effect
within a year, it is presumed to be revoked. The Resigner may also revoke his
Resignation before it has taken Effect, and that Revocation ought to be
legally intimated to the Resignee, or to the Proxy.

There are also some certain Cases, Of Regress.
wherein the Resigner may re-enter into his Benefice, by a way which is called
Regress. It is not easy to determine when the Regress ought to take place: and
therefore the Courts of Justice disser much amongst themselves in the Judgments
they pronounce about that matter; and many times one and the same Parliament
varies as to the matter of Regress. In that case Equity is more observed than
the Rigor of Justice: For it is commonly thought the sick person has made a
tacit Compact with him to whom he has resigned his Benefice, that his
Resignation shall be null, in case he recover his health. Seeing that Compact
looks very much like confidence, it is thought to produce a kind of natural
obligation, and that the Resignee ought to be condemned as a perfidious person.
Upon that principle the Parliament of Normandy insisted not long since, in
deciding a difference that happened betwixt two Churchmen concerning the Cure
of holy Cross in Rouen. The Resigner Recovering his health would have entered
again into his Benefice at the desire of his Parishioners who solicited him.
On the other hand the Resignee had taken Possession of the Cure, by virtue of
his Legal Collation from Rome upon the Resignation. Nevertheless the Resignee
was maintained in his Possession, and it was Judged that Regress ought to take
place in that case. Perhaps it would be more convenient to assign an Alimentary
Annuity to him that has resigned his Benefice, than so easily to admit
Regress. At least they ought not to take place, when the Resigners reserve to
themselves an Annuity. Besides, by countenancing Regress, Resignations in
favorem are also countenanced, which are odious, and Simoniacal, because many
would not resign their Benefices, if they did not hope to enter again by way of
Regress. And therefore Regress ought not to be granted but very rarely, and for
weighty reasons, for instance, because of Nonage; It being to be presumed that
when a Beneficiary who is under age, resigns his Benefice without the consent
of his Father or Guardian, he has been persuaded to do it by some trick So
that Regress then takes place, and the Minor is restored to his Benefice
without any New Collation.

There is another kind of Resignation in favorem, Of Exchange.
which is called Permutation or Exchange, and is likewise prejudicial to the
Right of Ordinaries, and more to that of Patrons: It is in the Ordinaries
power, nevertheless to admit or reject them, that depending on him. He ought
never to allow Exchanges unless for lawful and Canonical reasons: But so great
is the corruption now a days in Beneficial matters, that nothing occurs oftener
than instances of Exchanges without any cause; and Bishops grant them easily,
when Benefices are in Patronage, and they confer them not in full Right.
Permutation, then, is nothing else but the Exchange of one Benefice for
another, made in the hands of the Superior: And seeing it is supposed to be
made for true reasons, and that by consequent there is no Simony in the case,
it may be admitted by the Ordinary's, in as much as there is no need of a
Dispensation. To the end an Exchange may be valid, the Exchangers must resign
their Benefices in the hands of the Ordinary or Ordinaries, if they be of
different Dioceses, and the Ordinary gives them New Collations, according to
their demands, for he is bound, and cannot dispose of the Benefices, but in
favors of the Exchangers. If he does it the Collations are null, and each
continues in his Benefice. Besides, they must mutually take Possession of the
Benefices, otherwise nothing is done, and things remain as they were before. If
one only of the Exchangers had taken Possession, and the other die, the
Benefice of him that dies is vacant per obitum, and the other keeps his
Benefice, because the Exchange was not completed. This has been appointed by
the New Ordinances and the Declaration of insinuations, to prevent a disorder
that was much in use. For it happened very often, that a Beneficiary being
ready to die, exchanged his Benefice with another Beneficiary, and the latter
took Possession of his Benefice with whom he had exchanged; whereby the
Permutation was accomplished on his part, so that the Benefice belonged to him:
Afterward the sick person dying without having taken Possession of the Benefice
that was given him in Exchange, the surviver kept his former Benefice; and so
he enjoyed two at the same time, by that fetch which Mr. Charles du Moulin, in
his Commentary upon the Regulation de publicandis, calls speciem furti.
Nevertheless the practice continued long after him in the Parliaments, and that
was called gaudere de bona fortuna. But the New Ordinances have reformed that
abuse, and there is no more now of gaudeat de bona fortuna.

The frequent Unions of Benefices, Of Unions.
which were made in the times of Schism and disorder, have also done great
prejudice to Ordinary Collators, and to the Pope himself, because by that means
many Titles have been suppressed. They have nevertheless been profitable to
Bishops and Chapters, who have made use of these occasions for uniting to their
Benefices, inferior Livings and Cures: But these kinds of Unions are not now
in use, unless it be sometimes in favor of Communities who enjoy by that means
several Benefices: yet there is greater care taken of that at present, than
there was in times past; and if it were not well looked after, a great part of
Benefices would fall into the hands of Regular and Secular Communities: Which
would be very prejudicial to Collators and Patrons, and even to private
Churchmen, who can no longer pretend to Benefices which are united in that
manner. I speak not here of necessary Unions, or at least, of such as are
useful to the Church; for these Unions still subsist. If, for instance, a
Priory or Chapel is so ruined, that it is impossible to restore it; what
remains of the Revenue ought to be united to another Church: If the Prebends of
a Chapter or Collegiat Church are too small, several of them must be joined
together: If in a Town or Borough there be too many Cures, and they but poor,
it is convenient to suppress some of them, and give the Revenue to others. In
the same manner a simple Benefice may be joined to a poor cure; and, in a word,
Monasteries where the Rule has ceased, may be joined to a Bishopric that has
not a competent Revenue: But in all these Unions the advantage of the Church is
always to be regarded, and the Rights of Superiors maintained; otherwise they
are abusive. And therefore Unions are not to be made but upon good and
necessary information. The Bishop has Right to make these Unions, unless it be
when the Union is to be made to his own Church, because then he cannot be Judge
in his own case. Moreover the Union of Bishoprics is reserved to the Pope.

Though Reversions have been abolished, Of the Indults or Privileges of
Members of Parliament.
yet there are in France Privileges of the Members of Parliament, and the
degrees of those who have studied a certain time in the Famous Universities of
the Kingdom, which are a kind of Reversions, and by consequent are prejudicial
to the Rights of Ordinary Collators, and of Ecclesiastical Patrons. I shall not
speak here of the Original of these Privileges. Only we may observe, that
during the time of Schism, Popes granted those favors to Princes, to great men
that were powerful in the Courts of Princes, and to such as might be a
hinderance to them in their settlement in the Papacy. The Council of Trent has
abolished Indults as well as Apostolical Mandats. But since its decisions are
not received in France, the Privileges of the Members of Parliament have been
still retained. To the end a Privilege whereof we are speaking may have its
effect, Letters must be procured from the King, commanding the Ordinary
Collator, to confer on him who has the Privilege the first vacant Benefice of
his Collation. Besides, these Letters must be intimated before the vacancy of
the Benefice: and then the hands of the Collator are tied. The Indultee or
Privileged person has six Months to require the Benefice in, and the Collator
can be charged but with one Privilege during his life: or if it be a Community
which dies not, then it is regulated by the life of the King. The Collator, in
the mean time, could formerly oblige the Indultee to accept the first vacant
Benefice, provided it were worth 200 Francs, because the Privilege is de
beneficio proxime vacaturo. But he cannot at present be obliged to it, unless
it be worth 600 Francs of yearly Rent. In the number of Expectative Graces, or
Reversions, may also be reckoned the Kings nomination for his happy coming to
the Crown, and his nomination for the Oath of Allegiance, which gives him Right
to nominate to the New Bishop after the Conclusion of the Regale, one for the
first vacant Prebend. Of Degrees.


The complaints of the University of Paris against the Bishops, who commonly
bestowed Benefices on their Domestics and undeserving persons, were the cause
that in the Council of Basil, it was decreed, That the third part of Benefices
should be set apart for the Graduats of Famous Universities, and that if the
Ordinaries gave them to others, their Collations should be null. The Pragmatick
made in the assembly of Bourges, ratified that decree of the Council of Basil,
but with this qualification, that the third destined for Graduats should be
divided into three parts, and that two thirds of that third should be
appropriated to those who had some notable employment in the University. And
therefore it was ordered by the same Assembly, that the University should name
those whom they would have preferred. And thence arises the distinction of
simple Graduats, and Graduats named. The Concordat has preserved that Right of
Graduats: But because fraud might be committed in the third of Benefices which
were given in course one after another, they had four Months of the year
allotted to them, to wit, January, April, July, and October, and the Benefices
that fall during these four Months are appropriated to them. January and July
are called Months of Rigor, because the Collator or Patron is obliged to give
the vacant Benefice to the Graduat named, who is the Ancientest, and has most
Right; whereas in the other two Months which are called Months of favor, he is
free to give the vacant Benefices, to such enrolled Graduats as he pleases. To
be a Graduate, it is enough that one has studied two years Philosophy, three
years Divinity, and taken the degree of Master of Arts. Yet this hinders not
but that their Batchelour Graduats, Doctor Graduats, Graduats, in Divinity, the
Canon Law and Medicine, to whom also there is a certain time assigned; and in
case of competition the most qualified Graduate is preferred before the other,
though it be sometimes pretty hard to know who ought to be preferred. That this
Right may take effect, the Letters of Degree, Attestations of the time of Study
and the Universities Letters of Nomination, must be signified to the
Ecclesiastical Patron or Collator. And because Gentlemen have some Privilege
as to the time of Study, they ought likewise to produce the proofs of their
quality. Of all these Instruments and Acts the Patron or Collator ought to keep
a Copy. They are besides obliged every year in Lent to renew the Register of
their names, which they may do in the Office of the Ecclesiastical Register.
When a Benefice falls in the Months that are appropriated to them, they ought
to demand it within six Months; and that being expired they are no longer
admitted to make their Requisition. If the Pope prevent them before they have
made their demand, he that has been provided by the Pope obtains the Benefice;
And there is no need that the Pope should even mention that the Benefice is
destined to Graduats, because he is not tied to the Law that is in France in
favors of Graduats. But the Ordinary ought to specify in his Collations the
quality of the Graduat, which is the cause for which he gives the Benefice.
Nevertheless he may still put questions to the Graduats, though heretofore they
pretended to be exempted from examination. But the easiness of obtaining
Degrees makes, that there are to be found many ignorant and vicious Graduats.
And therefore the Collator, and even the Patron, have always right to refuse
them, if they judge them incapable of the Benefices which they have demanded.

It is to be observed that all sorts of Benefices are not Subject to Graduats
I. Consistorial Benefices and such as are in Lay-Patronage are exempted. II.
The dignities of Cathedral Churches; but amongst these dignities the
Penitentiary is not reckoned; and there is some difficulty also as to the
Divinity Lecture, though there be Judgments as to that in favors of Graduats.
III. The right of Graduats has no place but when the Benefices are vacant by
death. IV. When the Graduate has a Benefice of 400 Francs a year, or an
Annuity of the same value, which stands him instead of a Benefice, he is
thought provided, and cannot pretend to any Benefice in quality of a Graduate,
unless he had not that Provision by virtue of his degrees; for in that case he
may renounce his Benefice or Annuity, and have right as before, to demand the
Benefics. appropriated to Graduats. The reason why a Graduat having a Benefice
of 400 Francs is reckoned provided is, that in the Concordat 200 Florins are
mentioned, which have been valued at, 400 Francs: But I think, at present they
ought to be valued at 600. V. When the Benefice that falls in the the month of
Graduats is under Rule, it cannot be demanded but by a Regular Graduat Just so,
the Regular cannot demand Secular Benefices. VI. In fine, if an Indultee or
Privileged person, and a Graduat, demand one and the same Benefice, the
Indultee is preferred before the Graduat.

The Exemptions which Popes have granted to several Churches, Of Exemptions.
as well Regular as Secular, have also much derogated from the Canonical Right
of Bishops, because Abbots and other Patrons confer in full Right the Benefices
which are contained in their Exemptions; and they failing, the Right is
devolved on the Pope, who is become their immediate Superior. This is not a
proper place to handle these exemptions to the full, nor to speak of their
Original; besides, we have elsewhere said somewhat as to that Subject. I shall
only mention what relates to the Custom of France.

I. The Decree of the Council of Trent that derogats from Exemptions is not
received there; But the Titles, on which the Exemptions are founded, are
examined; and if the Titles be lawful, the Privileges that are expressed are
allowed. II. Possession alone is not enough to authorize these Privileges:
Legal Titles must also be produced, in as much as many are in Possession of
their Privileges, because their Titles have not been sufficiently examined,
which most commonly are false and it is not Just that Exemption, which is but a
Privileged Right, should prejudice the common Right of Bishops, unless it be
well grounded, and granted for lawful causes: To this may be added, that Fraus
nemini debet Patrocinari.
[falshood can never make a Prescription, and that a Possession grounded on a
bad Title, is no true Possession. All possible rigor ought to be used then
against the Right of Exemption or Privilege, because it derogates from the
Common Law; and nothing should be granted to the exempted, but what is expressly
set down in their Title of Exemption: And it is absolutely necessary that the
Privileges be mentioned in plain Terms, without any ambiguity. III. The more
ancient the Titles of Exemption are, of the less extent are the Privileges of
the Exemptions, as appears by Ancient Formularies, which hardly contain any
thing else in respect of Monasteries, but the liberty of choosing the Abbot, and
the free Disposition of all their Revenues; as to the rest they were entirely
Subject to the Bishops.
Exemptions, as we find them now a days, began only with the Reformations of
Cluni and Cisteaux, who were exempted from the Jurisdiction of Bishops by the
Title of their Foundation. Though that happened in a disorderly time, yet these
Exemptions are not meddled with in France, seeing they are owned by all men. But
there is great cause to doubt of the most part of others, which are supposed to
have been granted by Popes after the Foundation of Monasteries. There are but
few of them that are true in their full extent, which is easily discovered when
one sets seriously to work to examine the Titles: And in that manner Peter de
Blois Arch Deacon of the Church of Bath in England affirms, that the Exemptions
of Monasteries in his time were examined, of which the greatest part were
forged by the Monks. The Bishop of Salisbury thought the Letters of Exemption
of the Abbey of Malmesbury to be false, quia in filo and Bulla videbantur
vitiosae, stilumque Romanae curiae minime redolebant. Nevertheless the Abbot
refusing to submit to his Bishop, fell into such a rage against him, that the
same Peter de Blois complained of it in his letter Petr. Blaes. Epist. 68.
to Pope Alexander.

III. To whom, upon occasion of the Abbot of Malmesbury, he represents the
abuses of Exemptions; take it in his own words: Viles sunt Abbates and miseri
qui potestatem Episcoporum non exterminant, cum pro annua Auri uncia plenam a
sede Romana possint assequi libertatem. By this it is apparent enough, that
Monasteries obtained for Money from the Court of Rome, as many Exemptions as
they pleased, and that Simony was much practiced by the Monks, especially the
Regular Abbots, who by that means shook off Obedience to their Bishops, that
they might more freely squander away the Revenues of their Monasteries, and
have no Body to check them for their vices. Petr. Blaes. ibid.
Detestantur Abbates, habere suorum excessuum correctorem, vagam impunitatis
licentiam amplectuntur, claustralisque militiae jugum relaxant in omnem
desiderii libertatem. Hinc est quod monasteriorum fere omnium facultates datae
sunt in direptienem and praedam. These and many other reasons which I omit, are
the cause that no great favor is shown to the Exemptions of Monasteries in
France, though they be not wholly rejected there: To which may be added, that
many of these Exemptions, especially those of Chapters, have been obtained in
the times of Schism; and it often happened, that the Chapter which opposed its
Bishop, acknowledged one Pope, and the Bishop another. And that is to be taken
notice of in the Titles of Exemptions, Rules how to distinguish true Exemptions
from false.
that what was done upon occasion of Schism may not be authorized.

That true Titles may be the more easily distinguished from such as have been
foisted and counterfeited, we shall here set down several Rules, which are
necessary to be known, if one would with any exactness make that distinction:
And that will not only serve to discover the falsity of Privileges and
Exemptions, but also to Judge of other Titles.

I. One must have seen true Titles that are past all exception, according to
which are to be examined those that are produced. The Characters are to be
minded if it be an Original Piece; for it seldom happens, that they who
counterfeit Titles, do exactly imitate these Characters, whether it be that
they write too hastily, or that they are satisfied to do somewhat that comes
near them, but which is not altogether like. II. The difference of style that
occurs betwixt true pieces and counterfeit, is very useful for distinguishing
the one from the other: for instance, one must know in what manner Princes in
different times began their Letters, and how they finished them; for it is
certain, the style has not been always the same. Besides, they have also
expresied themselves in different manners in several times, as to the Body and
Contents of their Letters. III. The way of dating Letters has much varied; and
that is a thing that has not been always minded by those who have
counterfeited false I riviledges: They have for most part, followed the Custom
of their times. IV. Chronology and ^he Subscriptions of the Writing or Deed are
to be minded, examining if they who have subscribed it lived all in that time,
and if they could probably be all together in the place spoken of; or if the
matters of fact reported suit with the Customs and Practice of those times. V.
One must not be ignorant of the time when certain ways of speaking began to be
in use. For it is easily perceived that a Piece is New, when it contains New
terms and expressions. VI. It is necessary to be acquainted with History and
especially what concerns the Rights of Popes, to know whether the Writing do
not attribute to the Pope who grants the Privileged some Rights which he did
not as yet enjoy: And that happens commonly in Ancient Privileges, because
they who have counterfeited them, have squ^red themselves according to their
own times, and not the times of the Popes whose names they have borrowed VII.
One ought to know Chronology, History, the manner of beginning and dating of
Writings, the diversity of Style and of Subscriptions, not only in respect of
different Times, but also of different Places and Persons: For it is certain,
that these things have varied according to the diversity of Places and Persons.
Princes do not always agree in that with Popes and Bishops; and Princes differ
also among themselves. For instance, the manner of beginning the year has not
been uniform in all places, nor in all times, Dates and Subscriptions are very
different according to the diversity of Places and Persons. And that has made
those who have been ignorant of those different Customs, fall into such gross
faults, that the falsity of the Deeds which they have counterfeited stares in
ones face. VIII. There is nothing more common than to see counterfeit Marks or
Monograms. And therefore it is convenient to have true ones, to make a
distinction of the real from the false; which is also to be observed in Seals,
that have been often counterfeited. It must not, for all that, be concluded
that a Deed is good, because nothing seems wanting to the Subscription, nor to
the Seal: For there was nothing more easy heretofore than to remove the Seal
from one Deed to another. Seeing the Seal was fastened to the Parchment, and
that there was no Counter-Seal, the Seal was easily taken off without hurting
the Impression, by heating the Parchment a little. It is true in after times
that falsisication was remedied by means of a Counter-Seal, and a little string
that tied the Seal to the Parchment: But for all the care that could be taken
it is impossible altogether to prevent falsification. There is nothing more
easy than to keep the Subscription and Seal entire, and with some Waters or
Essences to wash out all the writing, and to suppose another Title in what
manner one pleases. The reality then of the Subscription and Seal is not a
sufficient proof; but it will be convenient also to consider, whether the
Parchment has not received some alteration, or whether the Ink be not too new;
or different from that wherewith the Subscription has been made. IX. The
counterfeiting of a Deed has sometimes been found out by the newness of the
Parchment, that had some Mark to make it known by. On the contrary, they who
have affected to have Titles too Ancient, and have for that end written their
Privileges on the Barks of Trees, have rendered themselves ridiculous, because
it is easy to be made out, that at that time when they are supposed to have
been written, there was no use made of the rind of Trees, at least in Europe.
X. They also who have joined many dates together, thinking thereby to render
their Titles more Authentic, marking the years of Princes and Emperors with
the Indictions and such other things as were contrary to the Custom of the
places and times wherein they lived, thought to have imposed on others by an
odd and unseasonable exactness.
Did I not fear to be too tedious, I would give instances for confirmation of
all these Rules: But that deserves a separate work. I shall only add some
Remarks concerning Cartularies, because I perceive men too credulously believe
them, and mind not, that part of the Titles which are contained in Cartularies,
are either false or corrupted.

Cartularies are the Rolls or Registers of Churches or Monasteries, Of what
Authority are Cartularies.
wherein are recorded the Contracts of Buying, Selling, Exchange, Privileges,
Immunities, Exemptions and other Deeds and Charters. These Cartularies, are
long posteriour to most part of the Acts contained in them, and they are only
made for preservation of the Acts, and that Posterity may have recourse^ to
them. But there are strong reasons to doubt of the fidelity of those who have
compiled the Cartularies, because a vast Number of false or corrupted Titles
are to be found in them.

In the first place, seeing in the beginning the Custom of writing Titles, or
Acts of Foundations, and Immunities or Privileges, was not as yet introduced,
the Compilers of Cartularies who saw that they enjoyed several Lands, and that
they were in Possession of some Privileges, without having any Titles for
them, have not failed to make, and to insert them in their Cartularies. I
believe it is for that reason, that the Titles which are in the Cartularies,
attributed to the Kings of France of the first Race, are almost all false; and
for the same reason also, we ought to mistrust the Primitive Exemptions, which
are the more to be suspected, that they appear the more Ancient. The Lawsuits
that Bishops have had with the Abbots of Monasteries, have also much
contributed to the Augmentation of false Titles: For to back their several
causes, they spared no pains in falsifying of Deeds.

In the Second place, the Compilers of Cartularies have not always inserted the
acts as they were in the Original Writing: Which is easily proved by comparing
the Originals with the Copies that are Registered in the Cartularies, or even by
comparing Ancient Cartularies, with others more Modern; for the later they are,
of the greater extent they are. We find, for instance, the Foundation of the
Monastery of Casaure, otherwise called of St. Clement, in the Ital. Sacr. Tom.
6.
sixth Volume of the History of the Bishops of Italy, and in the Title of that
Foundation, some Charters of Immunities, Privileges, and Exemptions are
mentioned. But these acts agree not for most part with other Copies that are
inserted in a more Ancient Cartulary of the same Monastery. And, which is
observable, in the Printed Copy, which without doubt has been taken out of a
later Manuscript, there is an enumeration of many Lands belonging to the
Monastery of Casaure, as may be seen in the Privilege which bears this Title
Ibid. page 1308.
Ludovici II. Imperatoris Augusti privilegium fundationis and dotationis
Monasterii Sancti Clementis in Piscaria, Anno Domini. 875. But in the
Manuscript Cartulary which I have read, there is nothing to be found of that
long list of Lands and Possessions: They are only named in it in general, and
not in particular. Besides, these words of the date which are in the Printed
are not in the Manuscript Cartulary, Anno Dominicae Incarnationis. 875. Because
the Emperors at that time made no mention in their Letters of the year of our
Lord. The same Catalogue of Lands and Possessions that is to be found in the
Printed Privilege of the Emperor Louis, is to be found also in another
Privilege granted by Roger King of Sicily to the same Monastery. But the
Ancient Manuscript Cartulary contains nothing of that list: Whence it is to be
inferred, that the Monks have made no scruple to Register in their Cartularies,
Titles in a quite different way from what they were in their Originals. The
same has also happened to the Privileges of Popes which are in the same
Cartulary: For there are some things in the Printed Copies, that are not to be
found in the Manuscript Acts, and amongst others the Privilege attributed to
Leo IX. is shorter in the Manuscript, than in Print, for the Printed Copy only
ends with this clause; Ibid. page 1311.
Quoniam scriptum est, terminos patrum nostrorum nulla authoritate illicitae
temeritatis transgredi praesumi, and quia opportunitatis exigit ratio propter
vos and transgressores Canonicae correctionis debere fraeno constringi, illius
insuper spirituali baculo perdat animum, cujus temporali gladio Malchus amisit
auriculam: Qui autem observator extiterit, ditetur dono Apostolicae
benedictionis, etc. There is not a word of all this in the same Privilege, as
it is inserted in the Manuscript Cartulary. Many other instances might be
brought of the great liberty that the Compilers of Cartularies have taken in
transcribing Originals, and even the Copies of their Titles; and by consequent
they are not much to be credited.

It is easy to be Collected from what has been said, A distinction betwixt
false Titles, and falsified Titles.
that a Title is not altogether false, though there be falsities in it. Yet I
think these kinds of Deeds ought entirely to be rejected, for the least falsity
that occurs in them, because falsaries should never be countenanced in any
thing, and that the Exemptions whereof we speak are odious and against the
Canon Law. It is then absolutely necessary, that they who pretend to be
exempted should produce good Originals to prove their Exemptions, at least that
these Falsities be not to be found in the Acts that have been approved by
Princes or other Superior Powers; and after all, they ought to be very
carefully examined. That we may know the nature of Acts, it is to be observed,
that Monasteries have sometimes got their Titles and Privileges confirmed by
Princes and other Superiors, upon Information that the Ancient Titles were so
old and worn out, that it was hard to read them; and then others were
substituted in place of the Ancient. These Renovations were not always very
sincere: For the Old writings were sometimes forged, and besides they added
things that suited not with the times of those who were pretended to have
granted the Ancient Privileges. But since he who had power to grant
Privileges himself, confirmed them, they could not be accused of falsity,
unless there was surprise in the case, and that lies had been alleged in the
Petition; because it is a general Maxim, that every Petition or Supplication
ought to be grounded on truth. After all, these Privileges which are said to
be substituted in place of others more Ancient, are not easily to be admitted:
For that would be to open a door to a great deal of Forgery; And Besides, a
Title cannot be substituted in place of another, by way of renewing and
confirmation, unless the latter make mention of the former, and that it be
expressly mentioned, that that last Privilege has only been given in
confirmation of the Ancient. And thus you have in a few words the Principal
Rules that are to be observed in the Examination of Titles, which Monasteries
and other Churches that pretend to be Exempted or Privileged, produce for
Justifying their Exemptions and Immunities. Many instances of false Titles
might here be alleged which would render the Rules much more intelligible: But
that matter is not to be handled to the bottom, without engaging into a great
many inquiries that are wide of our Subject, and require a particular Treatise.

FINIS.

