The Sick POPES Last Will and Testament, WITH His several Legacies left to his
dear Children the Jesuits and others.
BEing very crasie in Body, but extreme sick in Mind, and sorely shaken with
the Fever of Envy for the late Miscarriages of our holy Designs in England,
for the subverting the Government and Religion there; and finding by the
several evil Symptoms, as blasphemous Belchings, desperate Ravings, idle
Railings, frequent Cursings, filthy Spuings, Blasts of Excommunications, and
many other the like Signs, that I am not far from my End: I do therefore thus
ordain, constitute, and make this my last Will and Testament in order and form
following.

Imprimis, I do bequeath my Soul to him that has most right to it, whether God
or the Devil; but since the later has been much my Friend upon several
occasions, and that I knew him best, on condition he will give me the Supremacy
in his Kingdom, I shall bequeath it to him.

Item, As for my Body, I order it to be buried with the usual Pomp and
Ceremonies, and that there be given a Plenary Indulgence to him who shall write
my Epitaph.

Item, I will and bequeath to my next Successor all my Spiritual Pride, and to
maintain it all S. ^eters Patrimony, witlpall the Incomes, Tithes, Benefits,
Profits, and Emoluments, made and received by Sacrilege, Perjury, Simony,
Lying, Whoring, Murder, and the like, in as full and ample manner as was
possessed by any of my Predecessors. As also the Benefits and Profits accruing
by Indulgences, Pardons, and false Miracles, ^p^ous Frauds, and holy Cheats,
throughout my Jurisdiction.

Item, I will and bequeath to my most Catholic Son a large Pair of Asses Ears,
a large Pack Saddle fitted for his Back, with a great Bridle and Cavalon fitted
for his Head and Mouth, on condition that my Successor may ride him, as I and
my Predecessors have done.

Item, I will and bequeath to the Lords of the Inquisition a Chest of Cruelty,
ten Boxes of Persecution, a Book called the Art of Tormenting, the Powder of
the Hearts of Tigers to be taken before they examine their Prisoners, and for a
Cordial a ^ottle of the Blood of Ma^^yrs.

Item, I will and bequeath unto all my Cardinals seven precious ^hials of the
seven deadly Sins, with a large Box of Luxury another of Sodomy, and a third of
Buggery.

Item, I will and bequeath to the Franciscans six Fardels of Hypocrisy, and
seven Chests of Franciscan Lies.

Item, I will and bequeath to the Dominican Friars the History of Jetzer, seven
Trunks of Verbosity, and two of Backbiting.

Item, I will and bequeath to the Capuchines one Boxful of Deceits, and three
of formal Austerities.

Item, I bequeath among the Nunneries 7000 Chests of Concupiscence.

Item, I will and bequeath among the Friars and Secular Priests as many Vats of
Lust, and 15000 Dollers to pay off Surgeons and Apothecaries Bills for curing
of the Venereal Disease.

Item, I will and bequeath to all the Hospitals and Prisons within my
Jurisdiction, for the Relief of the sick and poor Prisoners Three Halfpence.

Item, I will and bequeath to my most Christian Son a Sword to cut off the
Hugonots, and a Halter to hang himself, after he has miscarried in his Designs
of becoming the General Monarch, and placing S. Peter's Chair in Paris.

Item, I will and bequeath England, Ireland, and Scotland to him that can take
them from the right Owner.

Item, I will and bequeath all the Kingdoms of all Heretical Princes to the
Catholics that can take them from them, and a tenth part of every such Kingdom
so conquered to the Jesuits.

Item, I will and bequeath the King of Portugal an Iron Yoke, to wear at my
Successors will and pleasure.

Item, I will and bequeath to the Emperor, so long as he shall continue to
persecute the Protestants, two Chests of Agnus Dei's, seven consecrated Roses,
two Crystal Crucifixes, and another of Gold, with holy Relics, Trinkets,
Gewgaws, Vests, Copes, Caps, Tippets, Rotchets, and other things, for him to
dispose of as he shall think good among the Electors.

Item, I will and bequeath all the Hollanders to the Devil, and their Lands for
the keeping of my Successors Hogs.

Item, I will and bequeath a Chest of Money to the King of Poland to fight
against the Turk, that he may not think of molesting my Successors.

Item, I will and bequeath the City of Geneva for a place to make a common
Stews, and leave the Begging Friars Overseers of the Work, and to be Stipendary
Pimps throughout the World.

Item, To all the Poor Whores in Rome I give 6000 Crowns, and to all the Rich
as many Indulgences.

Item, I give and bequeath to my dear Sons the Jesuits, whom I make Overseers
of this my last Will and Testament, Machiavils Book fairly Gilt, one large Box
of Cunning, another of Policy, three of Deceit, seven complete Fardels of
Perjury, Lying, Cozenage, and other precious stuff; seven Vats full of Worldly
Greatness and outward Pomp; ten Chests of Impudence, and as many of
Insinuation; one of seeming Purity and Sanctity, one of Murders; also a Book
called the Art of Conjuration, a Chest full of Sanctified Daggers, and a
Cabbinet of Mother of Pearl today up their Morals in; two Chests of exquisite
Poisons, and five of Poisonous Doctrine.

Item, I will and bequeath seven hundred thousand Crowns to be given to Private
Secretaries, that shall advance or promote our holy Cause, now almost at the
last Gasp, by writing Verses, Poems, Ballads, Dialogues, Lampoons, Satyrs,
Remonstrances, Discourses, Letters, Books, or Pamphlets, and such like; and to
be disposed of by my dear and faithful Sons the Jesuits.

Item, I further bequeath to those my dear Children a precious Box of Spanish
Cruelty, another of Moorish Treachery, a third of Hellish Conspiracy, a fourth
of Turkish Tyranny, as a Surplusage for a Testification of my Gratitude and
Good will for all the Service they have done the Holy See, and to encourage
them for the future to assist my Successors.

Item, I will and bequeath to my Natural Nephews all the rest of my Worldly
Goods, to be equally divided amongst them.

Item, I will and bequeath an Annual Stipend of Two thousand Crowns, to be
employed for the Expunging several places of Scriptures, that point me to be
Antichrist, and the Whore of Babylon, and several others that declare the Fall
and Overthrow of our Power and Jurisdiction.

Item, I will and bequeath the like Stipend to him or them who shall invent new
Anathema's, Curses, Plots, and Conspiracies against all Heretics, especially
those of Great Britain and Ireland.

Item, I will and bequeath for the writing the Lives and Acts of all the good
Popes since Gregory Bishop only of Rome, and not Universal Bishop, seven
Farthings, because the Work will be small.

Item, I will and bequeath for the writing the Lives and Acts of all the bad
Popes since that time seven thousand Crowns, because the Work will be great.

Item, I will and bequeath an Annual Stipend, to be given at the discretion of
my dear Sons the Jesuits, the Overseers of this my last Will and Testament, for
the writing the Holy Life of Pope Alexander, and his good Nephew Caesar Borgia,
for a Pattern of Romish Goodness and Policy.

Item, Because my good and faithful Friend the Devil, whose Kindness I cannot
but acknowledge in many things, though he miscarried in the late Conspiracy in
England, should not be forgot, I will and bequeath him Soul and Body of all
those that shall call me Antichrist, or Whore of Babylon, or that shall write
against me, and my holy Sons the Jesuits, and of those who shall make Plays of
any of our Predecessors, or shall write or speak Prophecies of our Downfall and
Overthrow, as I have full Power and Authority to do.

Lastly, Lorder, constitute, and appoint my said old Friend, Privy Counselor
and Secretary to my Successors, and to manage the business of State Policy with
the General Procurator of the Jesuits in a private Cabal. And I further
confirm, ratify, and allow, all Privileges, Grants, and Emoluments, granted
and given to my dear Sons the Jesuits, and desire them to see this my Last Will
and Testament fully and wholly performed, as witness my Hand and Seal.

Signed with the Seal of THE FISHER.

The Popes Epitaph.
HEre lies an Old Man who would be a God,
Whose Pride on the Neck of an Emperor trod;
Whose Will was a Law, whose Lust was a Rule:
[Infallible] though an Idiot or Fool:
Could Kings Excommunicate soon in a breath,
Yet could not keep off the great Tyrant Death;
Who (proud as he was) assaulted his Throne,
And thrust the [Infallible] under this Stone;
Who can by this time Infallibly tell,
How many proud Popes are humbl'd in Hell.
FINIS.

