Sions Groans for her Distressed, OR Sober Endeavors to prevent Innocent
Blood, and to stablish the Nation in the best of SETTLEMENTS.

Grounded upon Scripture, Reason, and Authority.

Proving it the undoubted right of Christian Liberty under different
persuasions, in matters Spiritual, to have equal Protection as to their Civil
Peace.

Unto which is added the Testimony of fifteen ANCIENTS.

Humbly offered to the Kings Majesty, Parliament and People.

And left unto their Serious View.

By Tho. Monck, Joseph Wright, Fran. Stanley, etc.

Matthew. 7.12. Therefore all things whatsoever you would that men should do to
you, do you even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.

Mat. 13.28, 29, 30. The servants said unto him, will thou then that we go and
gather them up? but he said nay, lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up
also the Wheat with them, let both grow together in the field (the world) until
the Harvest, which is the end of the world.

Act. 5.38. And now I say unto you, refrain from these men, and let them alone,
for if this Counsel or Work be of man, it will come to naught, but if it be of
God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found to fight against God.

London, Printed for the Authors, and are to be sold in London, and at
Westminster. 1661.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
WIth burdened hearts as once the two Disciples traveling unto Emaus, spoke
to Christ a supposed stranger, so speak we unto thee, Art thou a stranger in
our Island, and have not known the things that have come to pass in these
days, while the father has been divided against the son, and the son against
the father, three against two, and two against three, Even a man's foes they of
his own household; so great have been our Divisions like Reuben, that no sooner
light has been by Gods grace manifested to the begetting Children of the
Freewoman, but presently they are persecuted by the Children of the
Bondwoman; and how unpleasing this is to Jesus Christ, and how unlike his
golden Rule that says, And all things whatsoever ye would that men should do
to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law, and the Prophets. We say
how unpleasing this is to him, judge upon thy serious perusal of this following
Treatise, which we commend to thy perusal in thy most retired consideration,
when thou can read with thy thoughts, least cumbred with other business, our
design in what we beg may be perused, is general good, in setting at liberty
that which God made free, even the Conscience. Thou can not be ignorant of
the great Contriversie that now is on foot as to uniformity in Worship, to
impose by violence, where they cannot persuade, under seeming pretense of
Scripture warrant and antiquity, the contrary to which is asserted in the words
of truth and soberness, by Scripture, reason, and practice of the Primitive
times.

And lest violence and oppressing of conscience, should run up to that height
till it terminate in the blood of some who are dear, and their blood precious
in the eyes of the God of all the Earth, therefore have we committed this unto
the view of all men as part of the work of our Generation in singleness of
heart, and remain lovers and prayers for all men that we might live a
peaceable, and a quiet life in all godliness and honesty.

Farewell. Tho. Monck. Joseph Wright. Geo. Hamon. Fran. Stanley. Will. Reynolds.
Will. Ieffery.

The eight day of the 3 Month, 1661.
Sions Groans for her Distressed, OR Sober Endeavors to prevent Innocent
Blood, and stablish the Nation in the best of Settlements.
AS all the holy Scriptures have been written afore-time for our learning and
admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come; So that particular Book
of the Revelation, is of such excellent worth, That blessed is he that reads,
and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, Rev. 14.8. Chap. 17.2. and 18.3.
and keep those things that are written therein, for the time is at hand. In
which Book, in no less than three several Texts it is testified, that the
Nations of the world, and inhabiters of the Earth, with their Kings, would
drink the wine of the fornication of that abominable Harlot, that sits upon
Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations and Tongues, and by her sorceries
deceives all Nations until they become drunk, and altogether incapable (in
that condition) to receive the pure waters of life, tendered to them in the
plain way of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus.

This with grief of heart we see too visible, for the Doctrine and Traditions
of Rome (who is mystery Babylon, and since her Apostasy the Mother of Harlots,
For the woman which thou saw, is that great City which reigns over the
Kings of the earth) have so corrupted the earth, Chap. 17 18.
and clouded the understandings of the sons of men, that the great and most
important truths of God cannot be received or believed.

The reason why the Nations are so generally beguiled in the concernments of
their souls, is because the greatest part being carnal and unregenerate
persons; they are naturally inclined to such ways of worship, as are
accompanied with external pomp and glory, and therefore the Spirit of the Lord
testifies that the great Harlot fills her abominations, Chap. 17.4.
and filthy fornications in a golden cup, like the Physician that guilds his
bitter Pill, that his Patient may the better swallow it.

Thus does the Romish Church, and her followers, who to make their carnal
Ordinances find the better reception, deliver them to the inhabitants of the
earth by such as are honorable amongst men in worldly Sanctuaries, most
magnificently built and adorned, endowed with Lordly Revenues, accompanied with
Music and Voices, and Pontificial Vestments, yea many Superstitions and
Customs merely earthly and sensual (if not worse) which we say so pleases the
earthly and unregenerate man, that he is ready to say, This is the best
Religion, which is of most esteem in the Nations, and accompanied with all
earthly glory and delights, altogether forgetting, that strait is the gate, and
narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that find it, Mat.
7.14. Luke 16.15.
And that which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of
God.

And if it had been the mind of the Lord Jesus, that the Gospel should have
been recommended unto the world, and accompanied with these Ceremonies and
Formalities that are practiced in the worship of the Nations, or were used
amongst the Jews, it is very strange we should not have one word for it in all
the Scriptures of the New Testament, when Christ was as faithful over his
house, Heb. 3.2, 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 18 18, 19
as Moses was over his, and is to be heard in all things as Moses himself
commanded; and there will be little encouragement to touch with the Gentile
Nations in their superstitious Ceremonies, when it shall be considered, that
the Rites and Ceremonies of the Mosaical law being once the appointments of
God, did far exceed in glory what the shallow inventions of the Romish, or any
of the National Churches are able to produce, yet wholly taken away; which the
Author to the Hebrews notably proves, saying, Then verily the first Covenant
had also Ordinances of Divine service, and a worldly Sanctuary, for there was a
Tabernacle made, the first wherein was the Candlestick and the Table, and the
Shewbread which (...) called the Sanctuary, and after the second vail the
Tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all. They had also their High Priest,
Heb. 8.^. Chap. 10.9.
and offerings, and linen Ornaments belonging to this Covenant; but says our
Author, If that first Covenant had been faultless, then no place had been
sought for the second, and he takes away the first, that he might establish
the second.

And now under the second Covenant, which is the Gospel, the Romish Bishop,
Chap. 8.1^2.
or any man on earth, cannot be our High Priest, For we have such an
High Priest who is set on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the
heavens, a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the Tabernacle which the Lord
pitcheth, and not man.

And under this second Covenant, God has not promised his presence to any
Temple built of wood and stone, as of old, Act. ^.48.
For now the most High dwells not in Temples made with hands, as the
superstitious Clergy would persuade us, but where two or three are gathered
together in the name of Christ, there is he in the midst of them, although it
be in a House, by a Rivers side, on a Mountain, or in a Wilderness, such little
respect has he to place.

As little respect has God to persons, because of any honor or esteem they
may have in the world, either for birth or natural endowments, but such as
usually are foolish, weak, and base in the eyes of the world, does he make use
of in the work of the Gospel, that so the learned Doctors and Masters of Arts
may not have wherewithal to boast. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29.


Which despised way of the Gospel we well know becomes a great stumbling block
to the Gentile Nations, as in the first delivery of it it did unto the Jews,
who would not receive the Lord of life, nor his Doctrine, because not
accompanied with that earthly glory which their corrupt hearts affected, and
rather would retain that exploded dispensation of the Law which God had
departed from, than they would receive the glorious Gospel by those hands the
wisdom of God thought fit to tender it, for which obstinacy, as the Apostle
Paul says, The wrath of God is come upon them to the uttermost, even to the
laying waste their Temple and Cities, the great slaughter of their persons, and
captivating their posterity as at this day. 1 Thessalonians. 2.16.
Let therefore the Gentile Nations fear, but more especially this Nation, for
some such spirit seems to appear amongst those that would retain their empty
and dead forms of worship, which God has showed his displeasure against, and
have no footing in the whole Book of God, rather than they will receive the
pure way of God, without the mixture of humane Inventions and Traditions.

But the bare rejection of Truth, and embracing of error is not all the evil,
that the Nations generally are engaged in by the Church of Rome, and her
followers; but for to complete and fill up the measure of their iniquities,
like Nebuchadnezzar, nothing less must be inflicted on the servants of the most
High God, that cannot bow down to the golden Image of their Inventions, than
the fiery furnace of Persecution, many times unto death it self.

And this the people of the Lord must endure, it being as certain their portion
to be persecuted, as it is the practice of the false Church to persecute, who
build their superstructures of Will Worship, on no other foundations but
Violence and Cruelty; else what mean these imprisonments, banishments, wars and
massacres, which have been made in Europe for Religion; what troubles and
desolations in Germany, civil commotions in France, cruelties exercised in the
Netherlands by that Darling of the Romish Church, the Duke of Alva, and others?
what M^ssacres in France, Piedmont, and Ireland, to carry on the business of
Religion, for the satisfaction of a blood-thirsty and insatiable Clergy, when
the Disciples of the Lord Jesus were to use no other violence against those
that rejected them, than to shake the dust from their feet, which should be a
witness against them at the Tribunal of Jesus, Act. 13.51. Mat. 10.14, 15.
not Cesars? yea this Popish principle of propagating Religion by the Sword,
has reached the poor Americans, many hundred thousands of them having been
destroyed, because they would not be Proselites, no other cause being to be
given; for it cannot be supposed, those remote and simple people had so much as
known the Spaniard, much less done any injury unto him; our own Nation has
also felt the rage of this fury, both before, and in the Reign of Queen Mary,
and the wise may judge whether the Bishops endeavors to impose their Liturgy
in Scotland, with their cruelties in England, did not contribute much to our
late unhappy troubles. But certainly if the Romish and National Clergy were
guided by the Spirit of God, the Authority of Scripture, or force of Argument
to support their forms of worship, they would not then impose them by external
force, when by such proceedings they render themselves altogether unlike the
Lord Jesus the Prince of peace, who came not to destroy men's lives, but to save
them.

But on the contrary it will evince to all that have their eyes open, how like
they are to that woman which is drunken with the blood of the Saints, Rev. 17.6.
and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, Chap. 18.24.
in whom will be found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that
were slain on the earth. Although as our Lord and Master has foretold, Joh.
16.2.
in killing others, she may think she does God service.

Lest therefore those unchristian principles of persecution for conscience,
which troubles the world, should take root in this Nation, to the stirring up
men's minds to shed the blood of the innocent, the guilt whereof is able to
sink the most flourishing Kingdoms into an ocean of misery and calamity, we
have here following written some arguments (which we humbly offer to all men)
to prove, how contrary to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, and good reason it is
for any Magistrate by outward force to impose any thing in the worship of God,
on the consciences of those whom they govern, but that liberty ought to be
given to all such as disturb not the civil peace, though of different
persuasions in Religous matters.

In which Discourse we neither desire nor design, to diminish any of that power
which God has given to the Kings Majesty that now Reigns, whom we own to be
chief Magistrate and Governor of these Nations, over all persons as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal, and to all his Commands, that do not oppose the
Scriptures of (...) we yield active obedience not only for wrath but also (...)
conscience sake, and if any thing otherwise shall be required, we shall be
passive, and suffer what may be inflicted on us for our consciences; for what
ever has been suggested by evil men, See the Confession of faith printed in
March 1659. and since reprinted, and presented to his Majesty.
yet that Magistracy and Government is an Ordinance of God, has been
frequently asserted in our discourses and writings, and is by us believed, as
fully as the Apostle Paul in the 13 of the Romans has taught: And all that we
desire, which is dearer to us than our lives, is that our spirits and
consciences may be left free to serve the Eternal God, which ought to be
granted us, seeing as the same Apostle says in these cases, Romans 14.12.
We shall every one of us give an account of himself to God. But to our
Arguments, the first of which shall be that which some of us made use of to the
Kings Majesty from Maidstone, which we have not yet seen weakened.

Let it therefore be considered, if any Magistrate under Heaven in the days of
the Gospel, has power by outward force to impose any thing in the worship and
service of God on the conscience, it is given him as he is a Magistrate only,
or as a Christian so considered, but that no such power is given by God to any
Magistrate, appears, 1 Because if Magistrates as such, have such an Authority,
then all Magistrates in all Nations have the same power; then if we lived in
Turkey, must we receive the Alchoran, and be worshippers of Mahomet; if in
Spain, be Papists, in England, sometimes Papists as in Henry the eighths ^ayes,
Protestants in Edward the sixths, Papists again in Queen Mary's, and
Protestants again in Queen Elizabeth's, and so for ever as the Authority changes
Religion, we must do the same, but God forbid, for nothing is more absurd. 2
Seeing in the days of the Gospel, the Lord Jesus is that great Prophet, which
as Moses said is to be heard in all things, Mat. 28.18.
and as himself testifies, Has all power in heaven and earth given unto him;
Then if Magistrates have power to impose any thing by outward force on the
conscience, it must be committed unto them from the Lord Jesus, and written in
the Scriptures of the New Testament, or else how does it appear, Let no man
think of men above that which is written, 1 Cor. 4 6.
but the whole stream of the New Testament Scriptures run clear in another
channel, and there is no color for any such supposition, as farther appears. 3
Because the Apostles themselves (that gave forth those Commands which are
written in Scripture to be obedient to Magistrates) refused to be obedient to
their Rulers; when they were commanded to forbear, that which they judged part
of the worship of God, Acts 4.19.20.
and said, Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more
than unto God, judge ye. 4 All the Scriptures of the New Testament, that
enjoin obedience unto Magistrates, were written when the Romans had the Empire
of the world, whose Emperors were for the most part (if not all) heathenish
Idolators, for the first three hundred years until Constantines time, it
therefore cannot be supposed, that any of those Texts of Scripture that call
for obedience to Magistrates, intend an obedience in matters of faith, for then
the Christians that lived under those Emperors, As Dioclesian Eusebius. 8. Book.
3. Chap.
must needs have denied Christ, and worshipped the Roman gods, as some of the
Emperors commanded. 5 If Magistrates as such, have power from God in the days
of the Gospel, to command in spiritual matters, and to punish those that obey
not, then must Christians surely be actually obedient, not only for wrath, but
also for conscience sake, because else they should resist the Ordinance of God;
but if this were true, the way to heaven would be so far from being strait and
narrow, Luke 14.27.
that any might be a Disciple of Christ without taking up the cross and
following him; yea all sufferings and persecutions should wholly be at an end,
and they that undergo them should utterly be condemned (for it is not to be
supposed there could be persecutions, if all the commands of the Magistrate in
spiritual causes were actually to be obeyed) It therefore reasonably follows,
Rev 7.14, 15. Jam. 1.12. Act. 14.32. 2 Timothy 2.11.12
that no Magistrate as such, has power from God to compel in spiritual causes,
but on the contrary for Saints to endure persecutions and sufferings rather
than actually obey, is abundantly by the Lord foretold, rewarded and justified,
as by the Scriptures of the New Testament appears. Bu^ if it be objected, that
neither the Magistrate is to command, nor the subjects actually to obey any
thing but what is according to the mind of God.


It is answered, that all Magistrates suppose what ever they impose to be so;
but the question is, who is to determine, for if the Magistrate, or any other
man, or men, have power from God to judge and determine what is lawful for men
to obey, then no room is left for them to dispute the lawfulness of any of his
commands, it being their duty to obey what ever is commanded, and so as it has
been said before, the Cross of Christ ceases; but if every one shall give
account for himself to God, then it reasonably follows that every man judge for
himself in matters spiritual, Romans 14.12.
and therefore for the Magistrate to compel, Josh. 24.15.
cannot be warrantable by Scripture or Reason.

Again, that the power to judge and determine in spiritual matters, is not in a
Magistrate as such, Gallio the Roman Deputy of Achaia, well understood, when
the Jews made insurrection with one accord against Paul, and brought him to the
Judgment seat, saying, This fellow persuades men to worship God contrary to
the Law (which almost ever since has been the great cry by all sorts of the
National Clergy, whose turns it has been to have the Magistrate on their
sides, against all others that have differed from them) but Gallio said, Act.
18.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
If it were a matter of wrong, or wicked lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would that
I should bear with you, but if it be a question of words, and names, and of
your Law, look ye to it, for I will be no judge of such matters: But in that
he suffered So^thenes to be beaten, he did not well, it being a civil injury.
And he drove them from the Judgment seat. Which worthy example, if
Magistrates would be persuaded to follow, by judging and punishing only Civil
injuries and wrongs, and leaving Spiritual differences to be decided and
judged, and punished by Jesus Christ according to the Gospel, they then would
find themselves and Governments quickly free from many inconveniences that now
they are involved in, about deciding Religious Controversies, with external
force and power.

And now that no Magistrate, although a Christian, has power to be a Lord over
another faith, or by outward force to impose any thing in the worship of God,
is also very clear.

1 Because the Lord Jesus himself, would never by any outward force compel men
to receive him or his Doctrine, for when his Disciples supposing they might use
violence (as under the Law) would have commanded fire to come down from heaven
(as Elias did) to consume them that would not receive him, Christ turned and
rebuked them, Luke 9.44, 45, 46.
saying, Ye know not what spirit ye are of, for the Son of man is not come to
destroy men's lives, but to save them; and most remarkable does it appear, that
it is not the intent of the Lord Jesus, that judgment should be executed on
those that reject his words to the punishing them in their bodies and estates
in this life (as under the Law) from his own sayings, written John 12.47, 48.
which speak thus, If any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not,
for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world, and he that rejects
me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him, the word that I have
spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day. And the Apostles also were so
far from propagating the Gospel by outward violence and force, Mat. 10.14. Act.
13.51.
that all their proceedings were by entreaty and persuasion, and in case of
resistance to shake the dust from their feet as a witness against their
opposers; nor will it avail to say, As the dividing Inheritances, etc.
because the Magistrate exercises authority on civil and temporal things, which
the Lord Christ would not, that therefore in spiritual things they may do the
same; unless it may be supposed the Magistrates right to have supremacy over
the world to come, in all heavenly and eternal things, because God has given
him power over the world that now is in earthly and temporal things, which may
be conjectured upon as good ground from what is written, as that a Magistrate
under the Gospel Dispensation, has more power in spiritual causes, than the
Lord Christ, or his Apostles would exercise, especially seeing there is not the
least warrant for any such power from Christ or the Apostles, from any thing
that is written in the Scriptures of the New Testament, Isa. 8.20.
And to the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them.

2 If any men, as Christians, under heaven have had any such power in the days
of the Gospel, the Apostles and Elders in the Primitive times must needs have
had it; but this they utterly disclaimed, as Paul in the 2 Cor. 1.24. Not for
that we have Dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy, for by
faith ye stand: Yea the Lord Jesus when they strove for Domination forbids it,
Mat. 20.25.
saying, Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them,
and they that are great do exercise Authority upon them, but it shall not be
so amongst you; 1 Pet. 5.2, 3.
even so says Peter speaking to the Elders, Feed the flock of God which is
amongst you, taking the oversight thereof not by constraint, but willingly, not
for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, neither as being Lords over Gods
Heritage, but being Examples to the flock: Why therefore the Christian
Religion should be built and supported by Violence and Cruelty, when the
Foundation was laid, and the work carried on all the Apostles days, and some
hundreds of years after, by a quite contrary means, is a question would be
resolved by those, whose strongest Arguments, for the support of their
Religion, is take HIM IAYLOR: For such is the difference between the way which
the Apostles and Primitive Saints took in carrying on the work of the Gospel,
and approving themselves to be the Ministers of God, and the way now used by
the National Clergy, that nothing is more unlike; they being Ambassadors for
the Prince of Peace* 2 Cor. 5.20.
did in his stead beseech and pray the disobedient to be reconciled to God,
never stirring up the Nations to ruin, and destroy by external Violence those
that opposed them in their Ministry; 1 Cor. 4.12, 13
but as the Apostle Paul says, Being reviled, we bless, being persecuted, we
suffer it, being defamed, we entreat, giving no offense in any thing, that the
Ministry be not blamed, but in all things approving our selves as the
Ministers of God, 2 Cor. 6. from 3. ^. to the 10.
in much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in Distresses, in Stripes,
in Imprisonments, in Tumults, in Labors, in Watchings, in Fastings, by
Pureness, by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by
Love unfeigned, etc. O ye Rulers of the World, and Inhabitants of the Earth,
this was the way the Lord of all things, with his Disciples and followers took,
to plant and establish the Doctrine of the Gospel in the hearts and affections
of the Sons of men. Be ye not therefore unlike those whom you say you follow,
by imposing your Doctrines and Traditions by the Violence of Penal Laws and
Edicts, to the Imprisoning, Banishing, and Spoiling the Goods of the
Conscientious, causing them (as the Saints of old) to be Destitute, Heb.
11.30, 37, 38.
Afflicted, and Tormented, although for their innocence and uprightness, the
world is not worthy of them.

3 It is very plain that the Lord Jesus himself, Mat. 13.
in his Parable of the Tares, and Wheat, forbids any outward force or violence,
to be exercised upon false Worshippers and Heretics as such, for by the
Tares, which he forbids the pulling up cannot be intended the Transgressors of
the Second Table, such as Thieves, Murderers, or any that should do that Civil
injury or wrong unto another; which he would not have done unto himself, for
all confess with one consent, that the Magistrates Authority reaches such,
neither can it be intended that the children of the wicked one in any sense
that visibly appear to be so, should be tolerated in the Church, for that
destroys the power of Excommunication: That which unavoidably then follows,
is, That although men are Tares, or the Chi^dren of the wicked one, by erring
in the worship of God, yet should they not be plucked up, but tolerated in the
Field of the World, until the Harvest shall come at the end of this World,
when the Angels who are to be the Reapers (and infallibly can distinguish
between the Tares and the Wheat, which no Magistrate now can) shall gather the
Tares in bundles, and cast them into a Furnace of fire; there shall be
wayling, and gnashing of teeth. Which Scripture so eminently concludes for a
Toleration, that the greatest Enemies to true Liberty, have been at a great
loss, when they have endeavored to make it speak some other thing, as that
Expositor is, J. T. Supplem. p. 29. l. 32.
who says, It seems to him not to note the duty of the Civil Magistrate, but
the event of Gods Providence, that God would permit the co-habitation of the
wicked in the World with the just; not that Magistrates or Ministers should
permit them, and not by Civil punishment, or Ecclesiastical, remove them out
of the Church, or the World.

But if men did not fight against Truth, they would not so eminently contradict
their own sayings, for who can believe that it should be the mind of God, to
permit the co-habitation of the wicked in the World with the just, as
aforesaid, and yet the Magistrate should not permit them, but remove them by
Civil punishment out of the World. Has the Magistrate power to remove those
out of the World, that God would have permitted to live. How soon may a
Magistrate, if guided by such Doctrine, bring the blood of the Innocent upon
himself and Nation? and innocent blood the Lord will not pardon, 2 King. 24.4.
It therefore highly concerns all Magistrates, before they persecute any for
matters of Faith or Worship, to see they have a better warrant for so doing,
than the word of men, which will not secure them at that day when God shall
judge the secrets of men, by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel, Romans 2.16.
Rev. 20.12.
which will be found to be the Book that shall be opened, when the dead both
small and great shall stand before God to be judged by what is written therein,
So many as have lived where the word of the Gospel comes
according to their works; as the Lord Jesus says, The Word that I have
spoken, the same shall judge you at the last day; and this is his word, to Let
both Tares and Wheat grow together in the Field of the World until the Harvest.

4 It can in no wise be safe, for Magistrates in the days of the Gospel, to
persecute and destroy those that are contrary minded in Religious matters,
because of their fallibility, and that is the very reason why the Lord Jesus,
in the forementioned Parable, Mat. 13.29.
forbids gathering up the Tares, lest the Wheat be rooted up along with them.
That Magistrates may err in Spiritual and Religious matters, woeful experience
has taught the world in all ages, the Lord of Life himself was put to death,
for supposed blasphemy and wickedness, and accused for being an enemy unto
Caesar, which great mistake was committed through ignorance, as Peter says,
Act. 3.17.
And now Brethren, I not that through ignorance ye did it, as also did your
Rulers. And at this day, what mistakes are continued in Magistrates about
Religion, some being Calvinists as in Holland, In Europe
and Geneva, more Lutherans, but the greatest part Papists, and each of these
condemns, and many times persecuteth the other for Heresy or Superstition,
unavoydably therefore it follows, that some of these must err, but we need not
go far for the proof of this in one and the same person, who receives that at
one time for truth, which at another time must be persecuted for error; this
appeared notably in King Henry the Eighth, who persecuted the Protestants to
death, and writes against Luther, for which the Pope gives him the Title of
Defender of the Faith, and yet a while after receives some of Luthers Doctrine,
and rejects the Supremacy and Authority of the Pope, and serves the Papists as
he did the Protestants; nor will Magistrates be the more free from mistakes, by
relying on the Authority of Synods, Popes, or General Councils, because such
eminent contradictions, and oppositions have appeared amongst each of them,
that nothing is more uncertain than their conclusions. As for General Councils,
whose Authority is in the greatest estimation of the three, As Ier. Tailor now
Bishop of Down in his Liber. of Proph. Sect. 6. at large proves.
it is plain they are so far from being infallible, that their Decrees have
been not only directly opposite to plain Texts of Scripture, and the practice
of the Primitive Church, but also against each other; which appeared first in
the Council of Constantine, the Thirteenth Session, where it was Decreed that
the Lords Supper should be given but in one kind, when nothing is more plain,
than that the Lord Jesus instituted it, the Apostle Paul afterward delivered
it to the Corinths, Mat. 26.26, 27. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.
and the Primitive Church received it, with both the Bread, and the Cup.

So for the Council of Trent, to Decree that the Service in the Church should
be performed in Latin, how contrary is it to the Doctrine of Paul, who said in
the Church, He had rather speak five words with understanding, that he might
teach others, than ten thousand words in an unknown Tongue. So also have they
clashed one with another, 1 Cor. 14.19.
the Council of Trent allowing Picturing of God the Father, the Council of Nice
altogether disallowing of it, and in the great Arrian Controversy, which was
no circumstantial business, how many Councils and Conventions, were both for,
and against it.

As little reliance can be put on any supposed infalibility the (...) may have;
Benedict the Silvest 3. Gregory 6.
there having been two or three at one time, each rageing against the other,
with their censures and decrees: and notorious it is, For Acts and Monuments,
vol Page 188.
what descention there was amongst the Popes, and Cardinals about Pope
Formosus, who being first Bishop of Pontiniake was degraded by Pope John the 8
th. and made to take an oath to lead a secular life al his days, yet by Pope
Martin that succeeded John, was Formosus released from his Oath, restored to
his Bishopric, and afterward came to be Pope, and so continued 5. years,
making several Decrees; but Stephen the 6 th. coming to the Popedom, abrogates
the decrees of Formosus, takes up his body, cuts off two of his fingers, throws
them into the river Tiber, and then buries him in a laymans Sepulcher: Next to
Stephen, succeeded Romanus, who on the other hand repeals the Acts and Decrees
of his Predecessor Stephen against Formosus, and Pope John the 10 th. in a
Synod at Ravena, ratifies all the decrees and doings of Formosus, yet after
all this, comes Pope Sergins, digs up again Formosus, cuts off his Head, and 3
more of his fingers, and throws his body into Tiber, likewise deposed all such
as had been consecrated by him; Al which Schisms and discensions, makes it
plain to the World, that there is nothing of infallibility in the Popes.

And for National Conventions and Synods, they are so far from any show of
infallibility, that the same complexion and temper the Nation is of wherein
they are called, and have their promotions, you shall be sure to find them of,
because they have their dependency on the Authority that calls them together.
So that although the last National Synod in this Nation, would have established
Presbytery, because that then was most like to take, yet it is very
questionable, if now a Convention be called, whether it will be much talked of
amongst them.

Then this must be concluded from all, that seeing Magistrates themselves
General Councils, Popes, or National Synods may err, in judging and
determining the most weighty Controversies in Religion, there can therefore be
no security for a Magistrate that he does well, in persecuting or putting to
Death the contrary minded, in religious matters, seeing through mistake he may
as soon persecute, or put to death, the true followers of the Lord Jesus, or
any other; yea, in likelihood much sooner, because they in conscience toward
God, cannot receive the inventions and traditions of men, in the Worship of
God, but must be a witness for the eternal God against them, for which they are
accounted (as the Saints of old) pestilent fellows, Acts 24.5, 12. Chap. 17.6.7.
movers of sedition, turners of the World upside down, enemies to Caesar, and
upon this account persecuted, when the greatest part of men being unregenerate,
and have no other Spirit in them, but what is of this World; there is therefore
no reason why the World should persecute and hate his own.

Fifthly, For Magistrates to inflict temporal punishments upon any of their
Subjects, for not conforming to their decrees, that enjoin any Spiritual
Worship or Service, Mat. 7.12.
is undoubtedly a breach of that Royal Law, which says, That whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do you even so to them, for this is the Law
and the Prophets; and is a sure and standing rule, by which all men, if they
would deal ingeniously by themselves, might measure the justice of their
proceedings toward others, for who, that was not a desperate enemy to himself,
would put out another man's eye, if he were sure his own should be put out as
soon as he had done, as he was to be served by the Judicial Law, neither would
those that are forward to persecute, be very zealous in their proceedings, if
they were sure, that those whom they persecute, should have power on their
sides, to meet the same measure unto them; and this is worthy of observation,
that this rule of doing as we would be done unto, can be received, and pleaded
by all sorts of men, whilst they are under affliction and persecution, but who
remembers it, when they have power to afflict and persecute others: the Papists
themselves, when out of power in this and other Nations can plead against
persecution for their conscience, Annals of Eliz. written by Camden Pa^^^^k,
Page 20.
as they did in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, procuring the Letters of the
Emperor, and other Princes, to interceede for some places to be allowed* where
they may worship by themselves; but in this they desired more than themselves
would allow to others, when in power, so many of the Protestants, where the
Magistrate is different from them in Religion, As in France
can be very well pleased with a tolleration and: Martin Luther in his Sermon
of the Good Shepherd, Page 81. of his Book.
engl^shed by W. G. in the year 1581. speaking of the Kingdom of Christ, says
it is not governed at all by any force or power, but by outward Preaching
alone, that is, by the Gospel; why therefore ^^nnot the Protestants, who would
seem to have an honorable Esteem of this man, be of the same Spirit, and the
Papists be as much for Liberty in prosperity, as in adversity, seeing the Lord
Jesus has not directed at one time to the use of force and violence, in the
work of the Gospel, and at another time, if the civil sword be not to be
procured, then to use arguments and perswations; no, at all times the rule
which his Disciples must take notice of, says, whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do you even so to them, Mat. 7.1, 2.
for with what measure ye meet, it shall bemeasured to you again.

And because mystery Babylon, has not regarded these sayings but exercises
all manner of cruelties, and deaths upon such as cannot believe as she believes
and practices, therefore God will find out a way to retaliate upon her, all the
blood of his servants, and in the cup which she has filled, shall it be filled
to her double; how much she has glorified her self, As at this day. Rev. 18.6,
7, 8, 9.
and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her; for she says in
her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore
shall her plagues come in one day, Death and Mourning, and Famine, and she
shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God who judges her,
and the Kings of the earth, who have committed fornication, and lived
deliciously with her, shall bewail and lament for her, and her Merchants, which
are the great men of the earth, who Traffic with her in things costly, verse.
11.23.
delicate and of esteem in the World, and inslaves the souls of men, or (as by
the margent it may be read) bodies and souls of men these also shall mourn over
her, verse. 13.
for no man buyeth their Merchandise any more, and thus the fierceness of Gods
wrath will over take her, to the sinking of her like a Millstone into the
bottom of the Sea, because the great weight of innocent blood lies upon her,
for in her will be found the blood of Prophets and of Saints, and all that were
slain upon the earth; he that therefore would not partake with her in any of
her plagues, let him flee from her, and partake not with here in any of her
sins (one of the greatest, verse. 4.
being the persecution of men for keeping a good conscience) for except the
great God should cease to be what he is, if men repent not of their deeds,
there will be as certainly punishment, as there is sin, and it shall not be the
arm of flesh, that will be able to support this strumpet, although many
Kingdoms should engage in her quarrel, (...) shall the wisdom and prudence
of great states men be able to keep of her judgments, for if men should cease
to do any thing against her, yet God will make the very Elements to fight
against her, and will contend with her, by famine, and Pestilence, yea and
Sword to, although she fears it not, for God will stire up the 10. Kings to do
his will upon her, and by his great works, and judgments, that he will
manifest in the Earth, will he gain himself a name, and great honor and glory
even so Amen.

As it is no ways lawful from the word of God, for Christian Magistrates in
the days of the Gospel, to destroy, and root out the contrary minded in
religious matters (although Idolaters,) so such proceedings may sometimes prove
inconsistent, with the very being of Nations, for suppose any Nation were
wholly Heathenish idolators, and the word of God coming in amongst them, should
convert, the chief Magistrate, and one twentieth part of the Nation more; must
he then with that twentieth part, destroy all the other nineteen, if they will
not be converted, but continue in their Heathenish Idolatry? it cannot possibly
be suposed to be warrantable: and this reason holds good likewise against the
rooting up and destroying Heriticks, out of the world, because if the Church
proceeds against any of her members to Excomunication, the Churches deportment
toward him so cast out, is to be the same as toward a Heathen, so says
Christ himself, If he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an
Heathen man, and a Publican, Mat. 18.17.
who for the aforesaid reason is not to be destroyed because he is so: and
moreover seeing the Lord who is abundantly Merciful, many times give
repentance not only to the unbeleeving Idolater, but also to the excomunicated
person, he therefore that destroys the body of such a one, does as much as in
him lies destroy his soul also; for the Lord you see brings into his vineyard,
some at the third hour, some at the sixth, Mat, ^^.
some at the ninth, and others at the eleventh: he therefore that shall destroy
any at the third, or sixth hour of the life, hinders his conversion that
possiblely may be called at the ninth, or eleventh hour. And so may be charged
with bringing eternal loss and damage, to him whom he destroyed

Object. But whereas the Example of the Kings of Israel and Judah, is made the
greatest Pillar to support the Magistrates proceedings under the Gospel, in
persecuting, and punishing, the contrary minded in religious matters, or such
as shall be judged guilty of Blasphemy, or Idolatry; therefore the second
Cannon of the English Church, tells us, Whosoever shall affirm, that the Kings
Majesty has not the same Authority in causes Ecclesiastical, that the godly
Kings had amongst the Jews, shall be Excomunicated: but if Magistrates would
defer persecuting any man for religion, until the Clergy had proved this
unto them, it would be happy for the most Conscientious under them, and
themselves too.

Answ. But in answer, we deny not, but the Kings of the Jews had power to
punish Idolatours, and Blasphemers, and some other transgressors of the then
Law of God; which power was given them of God, and written in plain precepts,
in the Mosaical Law, but who tells them that Magistrates under the Gospel
Dispensation, has such power? has the Lord Jesus said any such thing? or if
he have where is it written? nay where is it written from the beginning of
Genesis, to the end of the Revelations, that Magistrates under the Gospel,
should have the same power in Religious causes, as those under the Law? If the
judicial Law be a rule, for Magistrates under the Gospel to walk by, then why
must it be mangled in pieces, and just so much taken of it as suites their
interest, and all the rest rejected? Is it left to Magistrates now, or was it
ever left to the Jewish Kings, to take what part of it they please to be a rule
to them, and reject all the rest, and it is eminently remarkable, how this plea
is by the Clergy themselves that most contend for it, made together invalid,
for by it they will stir up the Civil Magistrate, to punish those that
dissents from them about the Doctrine and worship, under the notion of
Blasphemers or Heretics, and against such this Law must be held Authentic,
but he that smites or curses his Father, or Mother, or steals a man, or him
that commits Adultery, or breaks the Sabbath; who were all of them sure to
be put to death by the same judicial Law, yet in these cases they will not
tell the Magistrate it is any rule, but is to be rejected, because here they
cannot much make it reach their supposed Heretics, who they are more jealous
of, then any of the aforementioned ^^fenders.

But besides, it is observable, that the Kings of the Jews, all the time they
kept to the Law of God, had advantages to give Righteous Judgment in Spiritual
Causes, (which Magistrates under the Gospel have not) for they had that
standing Oracle of God amongst them, the U^m and Thumum, together with
extraordinary Prophets, which in all difficult Cases they had recourse unto,
and would infalliably direct them, to judge according to the Mind of God, but
when these Kings became wicked, and lost the benefit of the abovesaid Oracle,
and extraordinary Prophets, then although they had the written Law amongst
them) did they run headlong into gross mistakes, that the True Prophets of the
Lord were sure to be persecuted, and those Prophets which would prophecy
smooth things unto them, were cherish^d, although many times by hearkening unto
them, they lost their Kingdoms, Lives, and it is to be feared, Souls and all;
How grossly did Ahab mistake, when he accounted Elijah the troubler of Israel, 1
Kings 18.17
and caused poor Micaiah to be imprisoned, and fed with bread and water of
affliction, Chap. 22.6.17.
because he would not help to deceive him, at his 400 False Prophets must eat
bread at Iezebels table, when Micaiah must have bread and water of afflict.
Ier. 8.4, 5, 6. As it has been In our day.
400. time serving Prophets had done: So Jeremiah ^^s accused for seeking the
hurt of his Nation, and not the welfare, and must be put in a miery Dungeon,
because he in plainness delivered the Mind of the Lord to the King, his Princes
and People; how therefore can the Gentile Rulers assure themselves, they do any
better then these Rulers did, if they shall persecute the contrary minded in
Religious matters, s^eing they have neither an infalliable Oracle to inquire
at, nor extraordinary Prophet, nor yet such written precepts, as the Jews under
the Mosaical Law had that did not only direct them what offenders should be
punished, but also what the particular punishment to every several offense
should be.

Furthermore, it is very plain, that the Gospel which we live under, is clear
another Dispensation, far different in all its Ordinances, and Administration
from the Law; under which the Lord Jesus is the only Lawgiver, who does not
(as Moses) proceed against the Transgressors of his Precepts, by External force
and power, to the destroying them in their Bodies, and Estates, 1 These. 1.9. 2
Pet. 3.9. Acts 17.31.
in this life, but in long sufferings waits on men, not willing they should
perish, but rather that they should repent and be saved. And when any continues
in disobedience to the Gospel, his punishment is eternal in the World to come;
therefore as the Apostle Paul says, Judge nothing before the time, until the
Lord come, 1 Cor. 4.5.
who will bring to light hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
Councels of the Hearts, and then shall every man have praise of God; the same
Apostle testifies of himself, that he was a Blasphemer and Persecutor, 1 Timothy
1.13. and if the Mind of God had been, that he should have suffered death in
that Condition, how should he have had repentance given him, and been such a
glorious Instrument in the Church, as afterward he was.

And it is too well known, that the Jews are the great Blasphemers against our
Lord Jesus Christ, that is on Earth, yet it is not the mind of the Lord, they
should be destroyed from the face of the earth, for how then should the
Scriptures be fulfilled, wherein God has promised to call them, and make them
the most Glorious Nation on earth? or how can they be converted, if they be not
permitted where the Gospel is preached? we speak not this in favor of any
Blasphemy, for our Souls abhor it, but because all men that have Powers in
their hands, might be as tender of t^^ Lives of Men, as the most Righteous and
Holy God is, who would have men be imitators of himself, in mercy and goodness
toward others, and he makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the good, and
sends rain on the just and unjust.

If it shall still be objected, that it is inconsistent with the safety and
well being of any Nations, to allow or Tolerate any more ways of worship then
one: we answer, experience has taught the contrary, to several Countries of
Europe, as France, and the united Provinces, and several Countries of Germany,
besides those that say they are the Servants of God, should conclude that to be
most for the safety and well being of their Countries, which is most agreeable
to his heavenly will, declared in his Word: it was the ruin of Jeroboam, and
almost all the Kings of Israel that succeeded him, that they would rather Act
by corrupt Principles of State Policy, than by the Word which God had spoken;
and although God had rent 10 Tribes from Rehoboam, and given them to him, yet
he wanted faith to believe his new Kingdom could any ways be secured to him,
or kept from going back to the Lineage of David, unless he devised some new way
of Worship, to keep the People in their own Land, and for his so doing, he
thought he had much reason of State; for what Prince now will conclude it good
Policy, to permit his People to go up yearly into his Enemies chief City to
worship, but will conclude it to be a notable way to alienate the affections of
his Subjects from him, to his great prejudice and detriment: thus Jeroboam
reasons as by his words appears, 1 King 12.16.^7, 21.
(take them at length) And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the Kingdom
return to the house of David; if this people go up to do Sacrifice in the house
of the Lord at Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this People turn again unto
their Lord, even unto Rehoboam King of Judah, and they shall kill me, whereupon
the King took Council, and made two Calves of Gold, and said to ^h^m, it is
too much for you to go up to Jerusalem; behold thy God Oh Israel, which brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt? which Policy of his procured this Event, which
God denounced against him, saying, I will bring evil upon the house of
Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14.10.11.
him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up, and left in
Israel, and will take away the Remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man
takes away dung till it be all gone. And for the sin wherein he made Israel to
sin, is he Branded to all posterity, but on the other hand had he permitted the
people to go up to Jerusalem to worship, and keep the appointments of God
though seemingly against his present intrest, then had the Promise of God been
made good unto him, Chap. 11.38.
which the Prophet Ahijah declared long before he came to the Kingdom, Saying,
And it shall be (if thou will harken unto all that I command thee, and wilt
walk in my ways, and do that is right in my sight) to keep my statutes and
commandments, as David my servant did, that I will be with thee and build the
a sure house, as I built for David, and will give Israel unto thee. Which
things were written for the example of such as should come after, be wise now
therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord with
fear, and rejoice with Trembling, Kiss the Son least he be angry, Psalm
2.10.11.12.
and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little, Blessed
are all they that put their trust in him.

(...)
