SYOSIS, OR THE Intimate Converse OF POPE and DEVIL Attended by A Cardinal AND
BUFFOON.

To which Is annexed the Pourtrait of each, with a brief Explication thereof.

BY JAMES SALGADO Spaniard and Converted Priest.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Snowden. 1681.

mock seal TENET FACIEM DIABOLI EC^LESIA PERVERSA
The Fool and Cardnal join; and well they may.
Both make the World their scene and all a play.
No show in the Fair without a lay Buffoon.
So without Cardinal no Pope at Rome.


mock seal SAPIENTES STULTI ALIQUANDO
With what strict bonds t^^ Pope and Devil are ti'd!
Who 'tween them both the ^^^le of the World divide.
They to each other mut^all kisses lend,
And in them Vote, which ^ay the world shall bend.


To his most Illustrious Highness Prince RUPERT Duke of CUMBERLAND, one of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Knight. of the Noble Order of the
Garter.
The Author wishes a Success proportionable to his high Valor.
IT is a manifest impeach (most glorious Prince) both to your Highness's
Authority and Candidness; to have your Illustrious name (a name celebrated
above the Stars) prefixed to so mean and inconsiderable a Pamphlet. My
presumption had been more excusable, had it been to some weighty Volume, the
product of long pains and most accurate politure. But since voluminous Opera's
are not for the genius of this present age, who being more taken with
succinctness, will not reckon brevity amongst my crimes, but having long since
renounced all prolixity, may value this Compendium as a Homer shrunk up into a
Nut-shell. The more delicate Stomachs of these times loath that flesh (as
rightly they may) that being often hash'd and stewed, retains neither taste nor
virtue in itself, but has lost it in such abundance of swashy broth. And if
your Highness be delighted with such a brevity; I humbly presume, that this
small Tract (may I use the vanity to say) this small body consisting of its due
Members and Arteries will not be exposed as a new born Orphan, altogether
destitute of your most noble Patronage.

I have endeavored to expose to public view the Pope of Rome, that true
Apocalyptick Beast, in his own proper and genuine Colors. I have deservedly
linked him with the grand Devil, that sworn Enemy of Mankind, and universal
Parent of all Disorder and Confusion: Not in the least doubting, but your
Highness's deep, and most acute Judgment, will quickly perceive the reasons of
that Conjunction. And if I do not evince (tho briefly) the description fully
and in every part to answer the Frontispiece, I will ingenuously confess my
self to be carried sheer from my Design; or must loudly confess, that the truth
of History is very questionable.

But to the truth of these Premises, it is an unparalled rudeness to doubt of
your Highness's Assent, who has been thoroughly instructed in the verity of the
Proposition, as well by those manifold dangers your Princely Person underwent,
as the sad and miserable calamities that befell your Royal Father and his
Family, from the Hellish Malice and Tyranny of that cursed Romish Crew; besides
what you have added by your long and constant experience of their unwearied
pursuit after Royal and innocent blood.

So that nothing remains for me now, but to cast these unworthy Papers at your
Highness's feet for Patronage and Protection: earnestly praying in the lowest
posture of an humble suppliant, that it would please your Highness, according
to your wonted Gallantry to give them a kind and courteous receiption. And that
it would further please you to beam down on your unworthy Supplaint, the warm
blessings of your Princely Favor, as may best suit with your innate and known
generosity, and his Condition.

This if your Highness please to vouchsafe, it will vastly add to those
Obligations, whereby I am bound to be for ever Yours, entirely to admire and
serve.

Long and happy may you live (most Illustrious Prince) a Comfort to your self,
the Church, and State; as it shall be the daily and hearty Prayers of,

Great Sir, your Highness's most devoted humble Servant, JAMES SALGADO, A
Spanish Priest Converted.

SYMBIOSY, OR The true and genuine Picture of the Pope.
MOst Curte^us Reader, of what make soever thou art, thou art desired to lay
aside thy graver matters, whilst thou viewest here the Pope in the Devil, and
the Devil in the Pope These Arcadians, like old friends of the same Trade and
Country, are both so closely united, so tied together in knot more undiss
lvable than the Gordian, that they seem no longer two distinct persons, but one
and the same. This Roman Cerberus is so thoroughly died with the Morals of
Satan, so closely follows his footsteps, and so officiously Executes his
Mandates, that we justly account him either genuine Son or else Vicegerent of
the Devil. But lest our Preface grow too long, lest the softness of Words with
the neglect or loss of substantial things, should be proposed to our Reader, we
will forthwith set about the thing itself. And whilst in proper Colors we limn
out the Pope (qua talis) under the formal Character of Pope, we shall briefly
touch on those Reasons, which persuade us to believe this Prometheus, this
dunghill I dol of the Devil.

First then, if we look into the Original of both, the Truth of that we propose
will very clearly appear.

When the Almighty hand of God laid the foundations of the earth, the same hand
as we may very well suppose, had created Angels the Morning Stars, the Sons of
God which shouted for joy at sight of the Creation in its Craddle: An Argument
of the goodness of them all, nor could any evil be created by God, whatever the
foolishness of the Jews suggesteth, assigning the Reason why the approbation of
the second days work is omitted, Genesis 1.12. because the Devils made, as they
usually affirm, on that day, it could not be said, Behold all was good. Whereas
of Angels made good, some either swelling in the magnificence of their present
condition, or aspiring to greater state declared a war against God, revolted
from him, and at length under the weight of their own sin, fell into the Abyss
of a never to be repaired misery, and thus degenerated into Devils.

Also when God would by Christ create the new Heaven and the new Earth, he
employed his Apostles as faithful and chief builders who should wisely lay the
foundation of our Salvation, and preach Jesus Christ to us. And since these of
necessity must at last die, it seemed good to him to appoint Pastors and
Teachers to succeed them in the work of the Ministry, for perfecting of the
Saints, Ephesians. 4.
and for the Edifying of the Body of Christ. All these in Sacred Scripture are
called Angels. Apoc. 1.
The seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches, says our Savior. Such
were the Primitive Bishops of the Roman Church, (the Faith of which, the
Apostle does in an excellent character describe, Rom 1.) These Angels carried
it humbly, the Zeal and Constancy of them was for the main, worthy of
Commendation. Till in process of time, swelling with pride (whatever were the
occasion) they were first in Boniface the III. changed into professed and open
Devils, about the sixth Age, as Lucifer before had (as is Credible) fallen on
the Sixth day of the Creation.

Ambition in the Roman Prelates had already spread itself, and albeit Gregorius
I. contesting with John of Constantinople, had somewhat checked the itch, yet at
last it broke out like a flame, and if it did not turn the World into ashes, it
did like hellish fire scorch and blast the World, the very next Successor of
Gregory (who had branded the Pride of John as an Imitation of Lucifer) turns
Lucifer himself under the name of Bonifacius, (though Malifacius were a truer
title for him) who without difficulty obtained the title of universal Bishop by
grant from Phocas (designing thereby to oblige the Romans to himself) when he
had most wickedly murdered the Emperor Mauritius and his Royal Children.

These were the beginnings of this Lucifer, this the way to the ambitious aim,
this the method of obtaining the High Priesthood of Rome, that he might be like
the Devil, he began with the Devil, that he might resemble him who was a
Murderer from the beginning, it was fit he obtain his investiture from a
Murderer. By these or such like means, the Ambition of this most holy Beast
grew up, which is sufficiently known to all that have but cast an eye into the
Records of History. Is there any need I should mention Zacharias, whose pride as
the pride of his successors was set up to the highest pitch by Pepin King of
France? In kind requital whereof, Calv. Inst. 4. c. 7. Sect. 17.
Zachary deposes Childeric, and Devil-like absolveth his Subjects from that
Oath of Fealty they had sworn to Childeric. What shall we say of Sylvester II.
who (as old stories tell us) was advanced to the Pontifical dignity by the
Devil himself.

Thus I suppose it is clear to every one, that the Origin of this most holy
Father, was the same with that of the Devil.

Now lest our Pope should but seem to vary ever so little from the temper of his
Predecessor, he has made himself famous (much like the Devil.) by slaughter of
men, and the utter ruin of many; in which cruelty he proceeds as in a thing
that needs not be deliberated, like bloody Executioners made more fierce by
taste of humane blood, he retains the Savageness he contracted from the taste
of the blood of Mauritius It is obvious to every one, how mary Murders, how
many bloody Butcheries havebeen committed by the Pope. Who is a stranger to the
proceedings of Roderic Borgiu, [Alexander 6?] How many did he, by the help of
Valentine a Duke but his bastard Son, poison? How many did he procure to be
murdered? The very dust of the Cardinals, of St. Angelo of Capa, of Modena,
and of Ursine do still cry out, the Tombs of other very rich men removed by
poisons, cry aloud, that he like an hungry Vultur was wont first to destroy
their life, and next seize all their goods; for all which cruelties at last he
was justly punished in the Garden of the Cardinal Cornetensii, for the Pope
coming somewhat before Supper time, very thirsty by reason of the vehement
heat, unwarily drinking lighted on the poisoned Cup, which his foresaid Bastard
had prepared for the Cardinal; and next morning the Pope breathed out his
impious Soul. Did not Hildebrand (afterward Gregory the 7th) that Firebrand
from Hell, murder by poison six Popes, by this means making way for himself to
the Popedom? Did he not in his frantic fit often cast his Breaden God into the
fire, as if he would have Sacrificed to Vulcan? Of which crimes convicted, and
by the Council of Worms deposed, like exiled Devil, he died at Brixia in Italy.

What should I here mention Henry III. King of France, stabbed according to
appointment of the Pope, by James Clement of the D^minican order Monk, whom the
Pope our High Pontife did in (...) and solemn Speech praise for (...) Why need
I repeat the Parisian but cherly Slaughter? Or the Murthe^ of Prince Maurice?
Or the cruelt^ of Mary against her Protestant Subjects of England? Or the
frequent exposing the life of Queen Elizabeth to the danger of death by
Treacheries? Or the never to be forgotten Gunpowder Plot? Why should I a^ last
mention more at large the mos^ merciless Inquisition of Spain? the blood of
many innocents, whose life has been tyrannically and without Law taken away by
the means and procurement of the Pope, does yet trickle down within our own
view. And what wonder if they do so slightly account of the life of others, who
can murder one another, and as slightly think what becomes of themselves or
others after death? I may scarce touch here on Julius, his casting the Keys
into Tiber, and his taking up the Sword, his army marshaled against the French
King, of which sixteen Thousand men in one battle were lost in the sight of
Pope Julius. I will not more than glance at the Armies of Urbane 6th. and
Clement the Antipope. It will be enough to have reckoned up Boniface 7th. and
Gregory 5th. one of which put out the eyes of John 18th. the other put out the
eyes of John 15th. and starved them by famine, or procured their death by
violent course. Did not Stephan 6th procure, that the body of Formosus should be
dig'd out of his Grave, his two hallowed fingers cut off, he put into a
Lay-man't habit, and in infamous manner be again buried? Did not Sergius
command that Formosus defended by Romanus 1st. by Theodore 2d. and John the
9th. and restored to the honor of having been worthy of Episcopal dignity
should be beheaded, and that his head should be cast into Tiber? Eminent
instances of infallible Holiness? if you see not here the Effigies of the
Devil, I know not where it can be seen.

Yet we have not drawn the last lineament, the Devil is proud, wh^ though he had
nothing, promised all the Kingdoms of the World, Mat. 4.
and this to our Savior, if he would fall down and Worship. What think you of
our Pope, who from Servant of Servants has raised himself to be Lord of Lords,
under whose feet, as one blasphemously says, is written King of Kings? It is
known by experience, that he claims to himself a Power; and Right over Kings,
Princes, Seepters and Crowns, in so much that with impunity in Devilish pride
Alexander III. trod on the neck of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa and
blasphemously repeated these words, Ps. 91.13.
Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder, and claimed in these ill expounded
words, an equal share with St. Peter, whilst he derived the influence of them
to himself by that Passage, and Mihi and Petro, to Me and Peter. Was it ought
but Diabolical pride in that same Hellbrand, to make the Emperor Henry 4th with
his Wife and little Son, bare footed in the coldest frosts for three days
together, to wait before the Gate of the Palace at Ganusium ever he would
admit him to a Conference? Moreover whence those Schisms in the Church, but
from the excessive defire the Popes of Rome had after a Primacy over the
Universal Church? whence did the Tartars take advantage to make so much
slaughter in Poland, Silesia, and Hungary, but from the most fierce dissentions
raised by the Pope against the Emperor Frederick II. about Praeeminence?
insomuch that this proud Progeny of Lucifer grew to that height of Impudence as
to assert, (with Innocent III.) that the Pope was like the Sun, the Emperor but
as the Moon, and thence by a Mathematical Argument concludes the Papal throne
47 times greater than the Imperial, and that as Lead was of less value than
Gold, so much was the Imperial dignity less than the Papal.

This pretty well for a pretender, but he imitating his Exemplar, who blinds
the eyes of the Nations, assumeth divine Honors to himself, and usurpeth a
God-like Authority, nay lifts up himself above God himself, as the transcendent
power of Dispensing and Exempting, given to him by the Canonists, manifestly
declare: So that the foresaid Gentlemen, the Popes thought they need not blush,
when they assert their Power to dispense with the Law of God, and Nature, and
Christ, and against the Precepts of both Old and New Testament, in which cause
we want not examples of the former and present Age. This does particularly
appear in the Popes Dispensation to Henry 8th. of England, that he might marry
his Brother's Relict, and at this day in the Prince of Portugal, with Papal
Dispensation, marrying his Brother's Wife, the Brother still alive. By such
Rules it is, that he is proved to be obliged by none, but is above all Law, or
indeed lawless. As for his Power transcendent, this gives him an honor no less
than that due to Angels, Antonin. Sum. part 3.
by virtue hereof, the Papacy is the supreme created Power, Angels and
Archangels are subjected to him, and are (if his flatterers speak truth) the
Fowls of Heaven, as men are the Sheep and Oxen, Joh. de Pariis.
and as Souls in Purgatory are to be understood, when the Fishes of the Sea are
said to be put under Man's foot. But this is not high enough yet! He can make
something out of nothing, and make that just and equal, which was unjust and
unequal. Take the Character of his Person:

They are not pleased he be or God or man,
Neuter to both, he is, above both what he can.
In plain prose what will he prove to be? Not an Angel, for he rules the
Angels, and the Pope gives them Law, not God, How great soever his barbarous
pride be, and whatever his Flatterers whisper in his Ear, he dares not declare
that he is God; well then, neither God, this too much; nor Angel, this too
little, but the Devil will fit it well, and for such let him pass, whilst we
farther spin out the thread of our Discourse, and view whether there be not
more of the like documents which confirm what we say.

He is either Devil, or Progeny of the Devil, who does his works or fulfils his
desires. Ye are (says our Savior) of your Father the Devil, Joh. 8.
and the Will of your Father ye will do. Now what a long train of Popes, how
many names of them shall you read, who have continually and diligently done the
works of the Devil, Men as culpable in faith as in Morals. How great a current
of all Vices was there in John 13. who ordained Deacons in a stable, was
incestuous, a Worshipper of Devils, a Ravisher of Virgins, who had at last a
miserable death by the hand of the Husband, whose Wife was Adulteress to that
Pope.

As for Gregory 7. what Blasphemies, what Perjuries, what Consultings with
Wizards, what study of the Black-Art are there reported of him? I will not here
paint out John 23. nor Eugenius censured in the Councils of Constance and
Basil; nor Silvester 2. a Magician and a Necromancer. Time would fail ever I
could rehearse all their Vices, such their Morals, their Faith was no better,
nor co'd it be otherwise, than they should be delighted with the Doctrine of
Devils, who were united close to Devils in a knot that cannot be untied. I will
pass by the several Honorus's, Stephanus's, Anastasius's, Caelestin's and
John's, It will be sufficient to inform my Reader, that in one Iron Age the
Popes which succeeded each other to a greater number than 50 in the Roman See,
were Apostatical, or Apotactical (disorderly livers) rather than Apostolical.
May we account these the Ministry of Christ? The Doctors of the Church? The
Vicars of Christ? The Successors of Peter? Men whose chief delight was in a
dissolute Life, and spreading of Haeresies? These must be accounted Devils, or
Successors of an Apostle, as Darkness is Successor of Light, or Sickness
succeeds Health. Doctors of the Church by the same Rule that Scipio was
surnamed Africanus, because he had wasted and enslaved Africa.

Let us go a little further in our Parallel, we shall find one more quality,
(omitting others) That the Devil and our Pope agree in. Satan is crafty and
contriver of endless cheats: The guileful Serpent which under the Pretense of
Friendship, decoyed our first Parents into sin, that when he had made them like
himself in sin, he might utterly ruin them by misery: In this an easy view
will show you the Pope the Fox like Herod, and an unwearied imiter of the
Devil, who does lay traps for Souls with this bait, Mat. 4.
All these will I give to thee. The Pope destroys Souls, and by his
Indulgences, that well known Merchandise of Rome, most craftily dreineth all
the Countries of Europe. Read over the Annals of all Ages, you will find every
where that under the cloak of Religion, and under a counterfeited Vicariate
from Christ, the Pope has ruled all, and lorded it over the Imperial and Royal
Purple, much as of old the Pagan Rome's Emperors, by force of Arms, tyrannised
over the World. Mantuan witnesses this, What, Rome head of the World, by Arms
never gained,
That she by ill framed pious frauds obtained.
whilst she demurely acts the Sobriety of the Curii, she debauchedly lives in
the Riots of the Bacchanals and is as much a stranger to Religion as she
pretends acquaintance with it. All which that she may do cheaper than at
Expense of her Reputation and Honor, she does craftily endeavor by fit
distinctions, like mince meat, to prepare that the Christian World may swallow
it without chewing. So that when the Pope errs, It is in a controversy of what
was done, not what was right, and in the character of a private Christian, not
in the great figure of Pope of Rome, and when he was unluckily out of his
Chair, not when he was gravely seated in it. These are some of the finenesses
of the Devil; New paint by which the ugly face of old Satan is somewhat
smoothed, and his falling Kingdom patched up a little more plausibly.
Devil-like and with the same Artifice he divides Kingdoms, and engages them in
Wars against each other, he raises jealousies between King and Subjects, sets
them to pull one another down, that their ruins may build and adorn his
Palaces, there is no necessity I should appeal to other Kingdoms shaken by the
troubles he raised, though France were silent, and Germany and Venice held their
Peace as dumb; England alone might come forth and speak to this point. England
a most happy Kingdom, which all admire, and court her Friendship, for which all
do most carnesty (as for the Golden Apple) contend. A Kingdom now the hope of
Spain; a terror and check to France; support of Netherlands, in how great
Perplexity and Confusion does it See itself, by the devilish Stratagems of the
Pope? I Will say nothing of the burning of London, of the civil Wars raised among
them by the Pope. The present Plot alone is an unshaken argument, to
demonstrate what I have said; from the least to the greatest, all stand
wondering to see the measures of an universal ruin of King and Kingdom, laid
out by the crooked, but long measuring Pole of Papal crafts, when they see so
many Plots, so many Devices multiplying like Hydra's heads, on the Discovery
and Disappointment of former; well there may be some fear within and some
without, whilst dangers hang over our heads, and threaten as if they were
unavoidable. And now England is become a weeping Democritus. So much the more
for that she sees all the Conspirators cajolled by the craft of the Pope, like
constant Companions with seeming cheerfulness endure Death, the Gallows, and
all without a penitent Discovery of their guilt: Staley dies, Coleman is
executed, the Jesuits hanged, the Murderers of Godfrey are so punished, and
Stafford brings up the rear, all lead in blind obedience to the Pope, through
his Diabolical subtlety. Swear, and forswear, though to the Pit of Hell,
The secrets of the Popish Plot never tell.
Unhappy world thus to be bewitched! unhappy Kings thus to submit themselves to
the Command of the Pope! who never leaves them in rest, till tired out, they
lay themselves down at the feet of this three headed Cerberus, who at his
leisure devours them. How much would it be for the good of the Christian World,
would the Cardinals do now (what is as most earnestly desired in that Tripple
Schism headed by three Popes at once) by an unanimous Vote, resolve after Death
of the next Pope, no other should ever be chosen more. Then our PAPA,
interpreted by that word which is begun with each letter of his name, P.
Poculum the Cup. A. Aureum Golden. P. Plenum Full. A. Abominationum of
Abominations. (the Character of Babylon in the Revelation) so taken away, Kings
and Princes would no wore drink of the intoxicating Wine of her Spiritual
Fornications.

This our Buffoons, the Purple flatterers of the Babylonish Strumpet might
easily do. Without difficulty might these Fools in the play, remove that Idol
which first they make and then adore, and finally propose to be adored by
others; Then would the Vicar of the Devil cease, when his strength were thus
broken and scattered.

Oh for some Diogenes wiser than the rest, with Candle and Lanthorn to seek a
Pope in the apartments of the Vatican, or through the corners of the Christian
World, and yet not find him; Then,, and not till then, will Christ, as he has
right, reign alone in his Church: And the Monarchs of this World deriving their
authority immediately from Christ, would take care, that in the Church those
things might be established, which conduce to the public Peace in a most sweet
harmony. This proud Satan, that blends Hell and Heaven, should be bound nor ever
loosed till eternally destroyed by the Breath of the mouth of Christ.

FINIS.
SYMBIOSIS PAPAE and DIABOLI, UT ET Cardinalis ET MORIONIS. CUM Adnexa
utriusque Effigy, and brevi ejus Explicatione.

Opera and Studio JACOBI SALGADO Hispani Conversi Presbyteri.

LONDINI Typis T. Snowden, MDCLXXXI.

mock seal TENET FACIEM DIABOLI EC^LESIA PERVERSA
Papa, Satan, fratres nodo ju^guntur ab arcto.
Cur* Quoniam mundi fert^r uterque Deus.
Os ori junctum est; quia, q^ dilabitur orbis
Communi voto, sufflat uterque sibi.


mock seal SAPIENTES STULTI ALIQUANDO
Morio ^^athoni Babylonis jungitur ast cur?
Orbem nam scenam frater uterque facit.
Vix spectator erit, stulto modo toll theatrum;
Nec Romae, dempto Cardine, Praesul erit.


Illustrissimo AC Celsissimo PRINCIPI RUPERTO, CUMBERLANDIAE Duci, etc. Res non
minus fortiter quam feliciter agere.
AButor auctoritate and benevolentia Tua, Princeps celsissime, quod lineolis
hisce nomen Tuum, super aethera notum, praefixum cupio. Quod si libellus, tum
mole grandior, tum cura and art limatior, prodiisset, excusatius me acturum
fuisse non prorsus diffido. Ast vel ipsum compendiosum istud seculum me
absolvet, and in exilium missa prolixitate hunc nuci inclusum Homerum
anteferet. Nauseant quippe delicatiores Stomachi super talibus escis, quae
toties masticatae a solius jusculi abundantia commendantur. Et, si brevitas
delectet, compactum istud, suisque membris and arteriis coagulatum quasi
corpusculum, Tuo non destituetur Patrocinio.

Papam hic, veram illam Apocalypticam bestiam propriis and genuinis reddidi
coloribus, and pro ejus merito; cum jurato humani generis host, omnis
confusionis and ataxias Parente Diabolo, contuli. Rations sagax Tuum and
perspicax judicium acu mentis in processu tanget, and nisi evictum dederim
(summatim licet) descriptionem Effigiei respondere, nae aut ego fine excidi,
aut omnis historiae veritas exolevit.

Sed cur ego de Tuo, magnanime Princeps, assensu dubitarem, qui propriis
periculis, Parentis cladibus and quotidiana rerum experientia de veritate
propositionis meae jam olim edoctus fuisti.

Patrocinium solummodo Tuum supplex expeto, and humili observantia obtestor, ut
pro more Tuo id est, benign ac benevole lineolas hasce excipias, auctoremque
earum ea prosequaris Clementia, quae and depraedicatae Tuae generositati and
meae conditioni respondeat.

Hoc si a Celsitudine Tua impetratum fuerit, habebo unde and mihi aeternum
gratuler and Tuum me in posterum mancipium, profitear.

Vive Illustrissime Princeps diu faustus, ubique felix, Tibi, Ecclesiae,
Reipublicae, and habe Gratiae Tuae quam commendatissimum

JACOBUM SALGADO, Hispan. Presbyt. Conversum.

SYMBIOSIS, etc. Sive Vera and genuina Papae Delineatio, etc.
QUisqui^^es, Lector Candidissime, sepositis gravioribus negotiis, mecum hic
Papam in Diabolo, Diabolum in Papa intuere. Tam arcto hi' Arcades ambo
copulantur nexu, tam indissolubili concatenantur Gordio, ut jam non divisi ab
invicem, sed unum idemque esse suppositum videantur. Tam feliciter Romanus
Cerberus Sathanae mor^bus imbutus est, tam stricte ejus premit vestigia, tam
denique officiose mandata exequitur, ut vel progenies Diaboli, vel ejus
Vice-Regens venire mereatur. Ne vero in longum protrahatur Oration, meraque
verborum lenocinia, rerum pondere vel neglecto vel praetermisso, Lectori
proponantur, rem ipsam aggrediemur, Papamque qua talem, genuinis delineaturi
coloribus, strictim eas attingemus rations, ob quas nobis, hic Stercorariae
Sedis Prometheus, Diabolo ipsi comparandus videatur.

Inprimis si utriusque Originem introspexerimus, Propositionis nostrae aequitas
clarius elucescet.

Dum ipsa terrae fundamenta omnipotens Dei manus poneret, etiam Angelos creasse
censenda est, quos matutina astra and jubilantes Dei filios in ipsis Creationis
incunabulis Creator pronunciat. Job. 38.
Omnes tum erant boni; Genesis 1.
neque enim quicquam mali Deus creaverat, quicquid Judaeorum sentiat Stultitia,
quae rationem praetermissi secundae diei epitheti, verse. 12. quod esset bona,
in Diabolorum (quos tunc factos suspicatur) creationem consuevit refundere.

Quidam autem horum sic creatorum Angelorum, vel conditionis suae magnificentia
elati, vel ad altiora aspirantes, bellum indixere Deo, and, lata sua culpa, ab
eo deficientes, tandem in miseriarum and irreparabilis infelicitatis abyssum
praecipitati, Diaboli evasere.

Cum etiam Deus in Christo novum coelum and novam terram crearet, Es. 65.
Apostolos suos tanquam fideles Architectos adhibuit, 1 Cor. 3.
qui fundamentum salutis nostrae Jesum Christum sapienter ponerent. Quia vero
illi tandem supremum erant obituri diem, successores eis, Pastores and
Doctores, idque ad opus ministerii, Ephesians. 4.
ad Consummationem sanctorum, ad Aedificationem corporis Christi assignare
dignatus est.

Omnes tales in sacra pagina Angeli dicuntur; Apoc. 1.
Septem stellae Angeli sunt septem Ecclesiarum, inquit Salvator. Quibus quin
primitivi Romanae Ecclesiae Antistites (quorum fidem encomiastice describit
Apostolus) accensendi sint, nulli dubitamus. Romans 1.
Submisse hi Angeli se gerebant, laudabilis maximam partem fuit eorum zelus and
constantia, donec tandem, turgentes. Superbia (quaecunque ejus fuerit occasio)
post sextum seculum (velut sexto die cecidisse Luciferum credibile est) in
Bonifacio III. in professos and apertos Diabolos fuere commutati.

Serpebat jam olim in Romany Praesulibus ambitio, and licet eam quodammodo
Gregorius I. Fox. p. 13.
contra Johannem Constantinopolitanum decertans sufflaminarit, tandem tamen in
flammam erupit, and Universum si non combussit, saltem instar Ignis Infernalis
adussit orbem. Proximus Successor Gregorii (qui Johannem in elucidatione sua
Luciferum imitari aiebat) Lucifer evasit. Quippe dictus Bonifacius, sed
Malefacius dicendus, Universalis Episcop^ titulum a Phoca Parricida,
Imperatoris Mauritii and stirpis regiae pessimo sicario (qui ea ratione
Romanorum animos voluit devincere) facile impetravit.

Haec erant hujus Luciferi initia, haec ad Ambitionem via, haec obtinendi summi
Pontificatus Methodus. Ut Diabolo similis fieret, a Diabolo inchoare debuit: ut
eum, qui est Homicida ab initio, referret, Joh. 8.
a Parricida investituram obtinere merebatur. Talibus vel similibus mediis sua,
sacerrimae hujus Bestiae Ambitio capiebat incrementa. Notum satis istud est
eis, qui historiarum adyta vel a limine salutarunt. Et quid hic Zachariam
commemorem, cujus insolentia, aeque ac successorum ejus, per Pipinum Galliae
Regem in arce collocata fuit? Calv. Inst. 4. c. 7. Sect. 17.
In cujus rei redhostimentum Zacharias Childericum deponit, ejusque subditos a
juramento fidelitatis Regi praestito, diabolice absolvit. Quid Sylvestrum II.
quem ab ipso Diabolo ad Pontificatus dignitatem evectum, antiquis monumentis
proditum legimus.

Originem ergo sanctissimi hujus Patris eandem, quam Diaboli, fuisse nulli non
patere existimo.

Ne vero Papa noster ab Antecessoris sui natura vel latum unguem discedere
videretur, non minus ac Diabolus homicidiis, variorum internecionibus clarus
effectus est, quasi nihil de crudelitate deliberaturus, quam ex hausto Mauritii
cruore contraxerat, veluti solent Carnifices ex poto humano sanguine ferociores
evadere. Quot enim ab illis homicidia commissa, quot lanienae effectae, nemini
non obvium est.

Cui ignoti sunt Roderici Borgiae, postea Alexandri VI. processus? Quot ipse,
opitulante Valentino Duce, filio suo notho, veneno enecavit? Quot vita privare
curavit? Joh. de Serres.
Clamant adhuc Cardinalium de S. Angelo, de Capa, de Modena, and de Ursino,
cineres vociferantur aliorum ditissimorum veneno e vivis sublatorum busta,
quorum omnia bona, tanquam insatibilis Vultur, post exitum eorum ad se rapere
consueverat. Licet tandem justas crudelitatis suae, in horto Cardinalis
Cornetensis, poenas dederit. Intoxicato enim, quod supradictus spurius pro
Cardinali paraverat, vino Papa ante tempus coenae accedens, nimio calore
exsiccatus, imprudenter hausto, proximo mane impiam animam efflavit.

Annon Hildebrandus (deinceps Gregorius VII.) infernalis ille titio, sex Papas
veneno enecavit, ut ea ratione sibi viam ad Papatum sterneret? Annon impanatum
suum Deum, ^abie correptus, Vulcano saepius consecravit? Quo^um criminum
convictus, and ^n Wormatiensi Concilio condemnatus, tandem Brixiae in ^talia
depositus, Vrsperyen.
exul Diabolus expiravit.

Quid hic ego Henricum III. Galliae Regem, per Papae subornationem, a Jacobo
Clemen^e, Dominicani Ordinis Monacho, (quem and panegyri summus noster Pontifex
dignatus est) pugione transverberatum; quid lanienam Parisiensem aut
Hibernicam; quid Mauritii mortem; quid Mariae in Anglos Protestants
crudelitatem; aut Serenissimae Elizabethae Reginae vitam, toties fatorum
periculo expositam; vel nunquam obliterandam pulverariam Conspirationem; quid
tandem crudelissimam Hispanicam Inquisitionem, fusius commemorem? Stillat adhuc
multorum sanguis innocentium, quorum vitae, curante and promovente Papa,
tyrannice and illegitime ereptae fuere. Et quidni ipsi aliorum vitas
floccipenderent, cum violentas manus sibimet invicem, non solum in vita, sed
post fata etiam injicere non dubitent. Non hic Julii clavium in Tiberim
projectionem and assumptionem Gladii, non instructam contra Galliarum Regem
aciem, ex qua ipse praesens sedecim millia hominum in Praelio amisit: neque
Urbani VI. and Antipapae Clementis exercitus attingam. Satis erit Bonifacium
VII. and Gregorium V. enumerasse, quorum alter Johanni XVIII. Fox. p. 160.
alter Johanni XV. oculos eruere, and vel fame enecare vel violenter vitam
eripere curarunt.

Nonne Stephanus VI. resosso Formosi Corpore, and duobus consecratis digitis
praecisis, Platina.
laici vest indutum, infamem in modum iterum tumulari curavit? Nonne Sergius
eundem Formosum a Rhomano primo, Stella.
Theodoro secundo, Johanne nono defensum and Episcopali dignitati restitutum,
capite truncari jussit and tandem caput (...) Tiberim proiici? Pulchra
in^llibilis sanctitatis exempla! ni^ hic Effigiem Diaboli videas, escio ubi
conspicies.

Sed necdum lineamentorum ^is. Superbus Diabolus est, ^ui vel Salvatori nostro,
ipse ni^il habens, Matthew. 4.
omnia mundi regna ^onare pollicebatur, si modo ca^ens adoraret eum. Quid vero
de ^apa nostro existimas? Ex servo ervorum Dei evasit in Dominum ^ominantium,
in cujus calcaneo, ^t blaspheme quidam ait, scriptum ^^st: REX REGUM.
Experien^a compertum est, quod in Reges, (...) Principes, in Sceptra and
Diadenata, jus and potestatem sibi vindi^et, in tantum, ut Alexandro III.
^icuerit supra collum Friderici Bar^arossae diabolico fastu impune ^aclare,
Joh. de serres.
cum blasphema horum verborum repetitione: Super Aspidem and Basiliscum
ambulabis. Et aeque verborum horum, licet pessime expositorum, energiam ad se
ac ad Petrum extendere, per illud suum: Et mihi and Petro. Quid superius
nominatus Hellebrandus praeterquam Diabolicam insolentiam commisit, quando
Imperatorem Henricum IV. Jewel. Defens. Apol. p. 168.
una cum Uxore and Infantulo nudis Pedibus, in maxima frigoris impatientia, per
triduum ad Ostium Palatii sui Canusiis stare fecit, priusquam eum ad suum
Colloquium admitteret? Unde illa in Ecclesia Schismata, Niceph. Greg. lib. 5.
praeterquam ex Romanorum Pontificum nimio primatus in universam Christi
Ecclesiam desiderio? Unde tot in Polonia, Silesia, Vid. Mornae. Hist. Pap. p.
845.
Ungaria a Scythis editae strages, praeterquam ex atrocissimis Romani
Pontificis cum Imperatore Friderico II. Aventin. lib. 6. Annal. Bojor.
ob praeeminentiam dissidiis? Quid, quod haec progenies Diaboli eo processit
impudentiae, ut se (cum Innocentio III.) Soli, Imperatorem Lunae assimilare non
erubuerit: imo adjecit, Innocent. 3. in deoretal.
Papalem dignitatem septies and quadragies Imperatoria majorem esse, hanc vero
infra Papalem praeeminentiam adinstar Plumbi, Gelas. distinct. 96.
infra Auri decus and pretium subsidere.

Levius id esset, nisi ad exemplum Diaboli oculos Ethnicorum excaecantis, non
solum divinos sibi Honores and Authoritatem arrogaret, verum etiam Deo se ipsi
anteferret. Manifesto id evincunt attributa ei a Canonistis dispensativa,
exemptiva, and transcendentalis Potestas. Juxta priorem, Papam, contra Jus
Divinum and Naturae, contra Novum Testamentum, imo de omnibus Veteris and Novi
Testamenti praeceptis dispensare posse, Jewel Defens. Apol. p. 59. Fox p. 785.
asserere non erubescunt. Neque destituimur hac in materia, anterioris and
praesentis seculi exemplis. Quemadmodum istud in Henrico VIII. Britanniarum
Monarcha Fratriam suam ex dispensatione Papae in Uxorem ducente, and modo
regnante Lusitaniae Principe liquido apparet. Juxta aliam, nulla Lege tenetur,
sed est merus Exlex.

Quantum ad tertiam, quam transcendentalem dicimus, non minor honor Papae
debetur, Anton. in Sum. part. 3.
quam Angelis. Juxta eam Papatus est summa Virtus creata: Angeli and Archangeli
sunt ei subjecti, quos volatilibus Coeli Gnathones ejus comparant, ut omittam
Oves and Boves (per quos homines) and Pisces Maris, Johan. de Pariis.
per quos animae in Purgatorio intelliguntur. Altius assurgunt: Ex nihilo
potest facere aliquid, Nicol. did. 96.
aequum ex iniquo; and si ipsam personae qualitatem respicias.

Nec Deus est, nec homo, quasi neuter inter utrumque. Extravag. Bonifac.
Quis ergo tandem erit? Cum Angelus esse nequeat, utpote fraenum suae
potestatis illis injiciens, Papa Angelis praecipit, Agrippa.
necessum est, ut sit Diabolus, quia ne ipsa quidem, quantacunque sit, ut Deus
dicatur (quicquid garriant adulatores) non sinet barbaries.

Ulterius rationum nostrarum filum protendamus and videamus, utrum plura non
sint, quae nostram Propositionem adstruant, documenta.

Diabolus ille, vel Progenies Diaboli esse debet, qui facit opera Diaboli, and
ejus explet desideria. Joh. 8.
Vos (inquit Salvator) ex Patre Diabolo estis, and desideria Patris vestri
vultis facere. At quantum Paparum syrma, quot onerosa ipsorum nomina legeris,
qui opera Diaboli assiduo and sedulo perpetrarunt. Mores aeque ac fides in
multis culpabiles. Quanta in Johanne XIII. in omnia vitia proclivitas,
Diaconorum in stabulis ordinatio, incestus, Diaboli invocatlo, violatio
Virginum, Adulteria, and tandem miser per manum Mariti Adulterae ex hac vita
exitus.

Quae de Gregorio VII. Fox p. 159.
Blasphemiae, quae Perjuria, qualis auguriorum sectatio, quam iniquum
Necromantiae studium, recitantur? Non hic Johannem XXIII. non Eugenium,
Constantiensi and Basileensi Conciliis castigatos, non Sylvestrum II. Magum and
Necromantam depingam. Dies me desiceret, si per omnia eorum vitia divagari
deberem.

Sed nec fides moribus melior. Nec enim aliter fieri potest, quam ut illi, quos
indissolubilis cum Daemone copulavit nodus, doctrinis Daemoniorum delectentur.
Omittam hic Honorios, Stephanos, Anastasios, Caelestinos, Johannes; sufficient,
quod ferreo illo seculo plures quam quinquaginta Pontifices, Apostatici potius
aut Apotactici quam Apostolici dicendi, Genebrardus.
in sede Romana sibi mutuo successerint. Hosne ergo Ministros Christi, hos
Ecclesiae Doctores? Hosne Vicarios Dei and Petri successores diceres? Quorum
unica in vitae dissolutae ratione and in proseminandis haeresibus erat
delectatio? Vel Diabolos dicas necesse est, vel eo modo successores Apostoli,
quo tenebrae luci, morbus sanitati dicuntur succedere: Eo modo Doctores
Ecclesiae, quo Scipio dicebatur Africanus, eo quod Africam vastasset and
subvertisset.

Sed ulterius pedem promoveamus, and unam adhuc Diaboli (ut caeteras omittam)
qualitatem in Papa nostro reperiri exhibeamus. Astutus est Satan, and mill
fraudum Artifex: Callidus Serpens, qui sub amicitiae praetextu Parents nostros
ad Peccandum pellexit, ut postquam eos sibi similes reddidisset, etiam penitus
subjiceret. Converte autem oculorum aciem in Papam, protinus conspicies, vulpem
esse hunc Herodem and Diaboli imitatorem indefessum. Animam Diabolus per Tibi
dabo venatur. Hic vero and animas perdit, Mat. 4.
and per suas indulgentias notamque illam Babylonicae meretricis mercaturam
ingentem pecuniae vim, omnibus Europae Regionibus callidissime emungit. Evolve
omnium temporum Annals, ubique reperies, Religionis obtentu and vicariatus
Christi praetextu, Papam omnia rexisse, and pro lubitu suo purpuratis imperasse
capitibus, non secus ac olim Romani Imperatores universum orbem, armorum suorum
potentia, in officio continuerunt.

Orbis Roma caput, quicquid non continet armis,
Relligione tenet. --
Attamen curios simulando Bacchanalia vivit, and dum Religionem obtendit, quam
maxim ab ea reperitur alienus. Ne vero quicquam existimationi ejus and honori
decedat, fraudulenter admodum palpum, variis ad. hoc negotium confictis
distinctionibus, Christiano orbi conatur obtrudere. Dum errat, errat in
quaestione facti non juris, qua privatus Christianus, non qua Romanus Pontifex,
extra Cathedram, non in Cathedra constitutus. Nonne haec sunt figmenta Diaboli,
nonne nova inventa, per quae deformis satis Sathanae facies aliquantulum
interpolatur, and ruens ejus Regnum fulcitur plausibilius? Subservit Diabolicae
huic illius astutiae, quod semper Regna cum Regnis, Regem cum subditis
committat, ut ea ratione in aliorum ruinis sua edificet Palatia. Non hic opus
est ad aliorum Regnorum turbas per eum concitatas excurrere. Sileat Gallia,
taceat Germania, Venetiae obmutescant, sola Anglia prodeat in medium and
loquatur.

Anglia, Regnum felicissimum, quod omnes mirantur, cujus omnes amicitiam
ambiunt, and quasi de aureo Pomo contendunt acerrime. Regnum, quod est spes
Hispaniae, terror and stupor Galliae, Belgii fulcimentum, in quanta quaeso per
Diabolica Papae Stratagemata nunc semetipsam perplexitate, in quanta confusione
conspicit! Nil dicam de Londinensis Urbis conflagratione, nil de mutuis
cladibus Papae opera procreatis. Moderna sola Conspiratio inconcussum est
stabiliendae nostrae propositionis argumentum. A minimo ad maximum omnes stant
attoniti, quando Regis and Regni universalem ruinam quasi jam in Papalis
astutiae statera appensam suspicantur. Quando tot vident machinationes, tot
nova stratagemata, quae quasi Tirynthianae hydrae capita in locum priorum
praecisorum cum foenore renascuntur. Metus eos intus and foris oppressit,
pericula hinc inde quasi certo imminentia formidantur. Flens est Anglia
Democritus. Et quidem eo magis, quod videat omnes conjurationis Achates
calliditate Papae circumventos, Mortem, Crucem, and omnia sponte subire, nullo
criminis and reatus sui propalato indicio. Moritur Staley, perit Colemannus,
intereunt Jesuitae, plectuntur Godefredi sicarii, agmen tandem impraesentiarum
claudit Staffordius, caeca erga diabolicas Papae astutias ducti obedientia.
Jura, Perjura, secretum prodere noli. Infelix mundus, quem talis fascinavit
socius! Infelices Reges, qui ejus sese submittunt Imperio, nunquam magis
inquieti, quam dum in iniquissimo tricipitis hujus Cerberi finu lassatum caput
gestiunt recondere. Quam expediens universo Christianorum orbi foret, si (quod
in triplici illo Antipaparum schismate ardentibus votis expetebatur) Cardinales
communibus fuffragiis in id conspirarent, Gerson.
ne unquam amplius post fata unius, alter Pontifex eligeretur. Tunc PAPA
noster, literis in voces resolutis Poculum Aureum Plenum Abominatioum, e medio
sublatus, nuuquam ulterius Reges and Principes fornicationum spiritualium vino
inebriare pergeret.

Atque facile Mimus noster, Cardinalis.
purpuratus Babylonicae Meritricis gnatho id posset efficere; facile qui nunc
Morionis instar scenam ex mundo facit, adorando eum, quem ipse creavit, and
aliis adorandum inique propinando, omnes has difficultates amovere. Cessaret
Papa Vicarius esse Diaboli, qui tali destitutus instrumento vires suas si non
ad ultimum frangeret, certe tamen quam maxim dissiparet.

Et utinam Diogenes iste tandem resipisceret, utinam accensa Veritatis taeda in
foro Vaticano, imo in ipso foro orbis, quaereret Papam nec tamen inveniret.
Tunc temporis solus in Ecclesia, veluti debet, regnaret Christus, and seculares
Monarchae, jus suum ab eo immediate arcessentes, curarent ea in Ecclesia, quae
communi paci, rerumque quam suavissimo ordini, harmonice inservirent. Ligaretur
hic superbus and ubique summa immiscens Sathanas, nec ante dissolveretur, quam,
spiritu oris Christi deletus, aeternum concideret. 2 These. 2.


FINIS.

