REFORMATION'S PRESERVATION: OPENED IN A SERMON Preached at Westminster before
the Honorable House of COMMONS, at the late solemn FAST, July 26. 1643.

By SIDR. SIMPSON, Minister of the Word.

Published by Order of that House.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Allen, and are to be sold in Popes-head-Alley,
1643.

TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
ALL the well-affected in the Kingdom cry unto you, as the woman of Samaria did
unto the King, Help us: or as the Disciples did to Christ; you have bid us
come unto you upon the waters, Save us, for we are sinking; sinking in our
estates, our liberties, our Religion, yea in our hearts and courage too. You
have many ways before you for our safety, as the speedy execution of justice
on Offenders, Ier. 5.1. 1 Samuel 21.15.14. (their life may be our death 1 Kin.
20.4^.) the vigorous prosecution of the war; the taking hold of all
advantageous opportunities; the wise and active improvement of that Spirit God
has yet left in the People, which never was more high and great then now it
will be. Great dangers raise great courage.


But there is no means like to Reformation: that is a defense cannot be beaten
down. The stones and timber of the Temple were hewed and squared indeed, some
time before they were set up, but if that building be not in your heart, and in
your hearts above all things besides, what ever else you do will either be
without success, or make us further miserable. Without success; for except
the Lord do keep the Kingdom, the Watchmen are in vain; and God will not
keep that which is not a Glory to him: or else make us more miserable; for
when men are subdued, God will come and war against us. It Is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God: Our God is a consuming fire, Heb.
12.29. and these words are spoken to press on a Reformation. If a Reformation
be not aimed at, Quorsum haec dispendia? why are we in jeopardy every hour?
and are as sheep accounted to be slain? If it be aimed at, troubles are not
troubles, losses are not losses: Those heaps are not ruins which the Builder
makes, in plucking down to make the house up better. Men will never reckon of
their taxes, dangers, fears, if they may have Reformation for them. Some
evils have so subtly laid themselves between the stones of the
Commonwealth, gotten such Laws, obtained such favor amongst men, because
they are employed so much in Civil matters, that no word of God alone can
destroy them, without sharp contentions, unless your hands be on them. Every
one may reform himself, but you only can the Nation, of those evils: and
unless those be removed, actum est de Religione. The God of Heaven give to
all and every of you such a spirit as may make you fearlesse of dangers,
faithful to your trust, true to your professed ends, and succesfull in this
work which shall be the daily prayer of him who is

Your Servant in the Lord, S. Simpson.

A SERMON, Preached at the late Fast, before the Honorable House of COMMONS.
Isaiah 4. the latter part of the fifth verse. For upon all the glory, there
shall be a defense.


THere are but two things that are the desire of all good men in these times,
The Reformation of Religion, and, The safety, and preservation of it, and of
the Kingdom; and you have both these in the text, Reformation, in the word
glory; Levit. 21.2y.
preservation, in the other. There are but two works of this day,
Soul-afflicting, and Soul-comforting of our selves in God, and we have matter
for both these in the text too: For mourning, because our glory, Relgion, is
stained, darkened, assaulted, endangered. It is now with us as it was with the
Israelites, 1 Samuel 4. Our Arc is in the field, therefore it is sit every man's
hand should be on his loins, and his heart be full of trembling. For matter of
comfort and encouragement the text is fitting too, for the words are a promise,
that none shall hurt us; Upon all the glory there shall be a defense.

If you look on the former chapter, and the foregoing verses of this Chapter,
you shall find as bad times foretold as could be, such in which the slaughter
should be so great, that there should not be the sixth man lest at most, for
seven women, says the text, Verse. 1.
shall take hold of one man, such a time wherein the women shall run up and
down, and desire, (...) firmiter apprehendere, vel retinere fugientem.
Precibus ac sollicitationibus adorientur. Musc.
and hang on men, not so much to marry them, as to save them from the (...) pro
defloratione.
unchaste hands of rude Soldiers. The case of this people was somewhat like the
case of Benjamin, wherein they had not men enough to give unto their women. Sad
times, to have the present generation murdered, and no hopes of another that
should be chaste and holy: and yet that was not all, if it had been but the
loss of their lives, they would not have so much complained, but in the loss
of this nation Religion was lost too; in the blotting out of their names, Gods
name was blotted out from under heaven; There are no people fare so hardly, nor
find such sharpness from the hand of God, as these who make profession, and
but a profession of religion. Apostatizing Churches have the severest
punishments. In this sad case God comes to comfort them, for that is his manner
with his people if he give one foul word, he gives two fair; if he gives a
stroke, he gives a kiss; if he send out an enemy against them, himself
speaks as David to the Commander when he went out against his son Absalon,
Deal kindly with them: Therefore you have in the latter end of this Chapter
(whereof my text is a part) a double consolation given them.

First, That God would by all their troubles and afflictions reform them and
make them a glory.

2. That when they are so, there should no hand touch them; he would be their
defense: as if he should have said, There is no other course then this I take,
will serve your turn, your dross will not come off, but by such a degree of
fire as you are cast into, my intendment is not to destroy you, but to purge
you, not to lay you my garden wast, but to weed out these things and persons
that are hurtful: I will touch no flower but these that have only color, not
savor, for upon all the glory there shall be a defense.

[Glory] in the general is nothing else but apparent excellency.

First, in glory there must be some divine excellency, some surpassing good,
and therefore it is given unto God, Thine is the glory. The Kings daughter is
all glorious within; as within is opposite not to outward, but to apparent,
Psalm. 45.
she is really glorious. Therefore it is called a weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4.
ult.

Secondly, this must be evident, Psalm. 50.23.
and therefore he that offers me praise, says God, he glorifies me: From hence
it is attributed to the Church that is reformed, and after the mind of God:
Glorious things are spoken of thee thou City of God: Psalm. 63.2. Psalm. 87.3.
My soul thirsts to see thy power and thy glory as I have seen it in the
Sanctuary. And because that upon this, one great part of the discourse hangs, I
shall therefore by the way make it evident, that by Glory is understood here a
Church reformed; And that from a threefold ground.

1. By considering the context. 2. Because there is nothing in the reformation
of the Church, but what is included in the word glory, in the Scripture phrase.
3. Because there is nothing in glory but what is in a Church reformed.
First, if you look to the context, you shall find there a branch coming out
of the earth in the 2. v. that is, Isa. 5.7. Isa. 44.3.4.
a Church erected when the face of it was spoiled, corrupted, yea
undiscernible: this is beautiful.

The Septuagint render it (...), in all parts according to the will of God; it
is such the members whereof are holy, verse. 3. are purged, verse. 4. and that by
the Spirit of Judgment, and by the spirit of burning.

Secondly, whereas there goes but two things to the reformation of the Church,
they are both in the word glory.

First, there must be all the ordinances; thus the Arc was called glory, 1 Samuel 4.21.
and the Arc signified both the word and Sacraments; here are communicants in
these, and they are such as are cleansed and undefiled, verse. 3. here is
thirdly, government; 2 Pet. 2.10. it is said of some they do despise and not
respect dominions, (...)
or glories, as the word is; and the glory that is there spoken is not eivill
but ecclesiastical, for it is such a kind of despising, as Corah and Dathan
were guilty of against Moses, Jude 8.11. Now they opposed Moses, not as a
Magistrate, but as a Minister and Lawgiver unto the Church, and therefore they
said, Are not all the people of the Lord holy? and not wise, or valorous, or
true hearted? which art the virtues of a Magistrate. Besides, false teachers
are for the most part flatterers of Prin-ces, not Despisers, as Zedekiah was,
and Simon Magus who adored Nero. Whenyou have the ordinances, then the

Second thing required to a Reformation, is to have them pure, and after Gods
prescript, without humane addition or alteration: take this for a rule, the
more plain Gods ordinances are, the more powerful; the more there is of man,
the less there is of God in them, Ezekiel. 44.7. God tells them they had polluted
his Sanctuary, that is, made it common, the facramentall bread did them no more
good than their own ordinary bread, and the company of the Saints no more then
the company and society of men. You have this in the text too, for here is
beauty joined with glory in verse. 2. and beauty is a native complexion; here is
glory joined with purging, the spirit of judgment, and of burning, in the
verse before my text; here is holiness written on every Soul, verse. 3. and to
be holy is all one with being set apart to a holy use and being prepared, and
fitted for it.

Thirdly, take glory in the highest sense that possibly you can, yet then it
suites with reformation. Take glory for bliss and happiness in heaven; the
Scripture so describes a Church as you can scarce know heaven, and it asunder;
Heb. 12.22.23. (...), Hesich.
You are come to the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, unto
innumerable Company of Angels, unto the (...), Phil. 3.15. Heb. 11. last. LXX
Vocant. (...).
general assembly, to the Church of the first borne which are written in
heaven, unto God the Judge of all, and unto the Spirits of just men made (...),
Phil. 3.15. Heb. 11. last. LXX Vocant. (...).
perfect, etc. and yet it is apparent it is meant of the Church here, for he
says they are come into it: and if he had only meant it concerning the
Communion all Saints had together, he had not attained his end, for which he
spoke these words; which was to prove that in the new Testament there was such
a Communion as the old had not in comparison of it. Rev. 21. You have there
spoken of a City, all whose pavement and gates are Jewels, you would think it
were heaven, but it is not. For you read in the 22.15. of a Judgment day that
does come after; There are three things that make heaven, or everlasting glory.

1. Gods revealing of himself. 2. Gods full communicating himself. Vniformis
in Dewn convolutio intellectualiu^ virtutum, Dionyside divin. nom. c. 4.
cessante discursu, mentis intuitus figitur in contemplatione unius simplicis
veritatis, Aqu. 22. q. 180. 1 Chro. 16.11. 2 Chro. 7.14.
3. The convolution or turning of all the Soul upon God, according unto what
he does reveal of himself: and all these are in the Church reformed.
First, there is a revelation of God, Ephesians. 3.10. the unsearchable riches of
Christ, and the manifold wisdom of God is known in the Church; therefore it
is called his face wherein you may see all the motions and turnings of his
heart: it is called his beauty, Psalm. 27.4. I long to see thy beauty. Beauty is
the symmetry and proportion of all parts; if you look on the actions of God in
the world, you cannot see how one attribute can accord with another. The guilty
soul understands not, how God can be just and pardon him; the presuming spirit
understands not how God can prosper him and hate him; the troubled sinner, how
God can afflict and love him. You shall see all these in the Church well
agreed. Psalm. 73.17.

Secondly, In heaven there is a full conveyance of God; and so there is in the
Church, Ephese 1. ult. the Church is the fullness of God, that is, that which
he fills, his fullness passively. They have the increases of God, Colos. 2.19.
Now there is nothing in the phrase of Scripture called by the name of God, but
what is eminent, as the mountains of God, the City of God, the increases of
God, therefore there are such increases as pass the understanding of any, but
these that have experience and feeling of them.

Thirdly, In heaven the soul is fixed on God, and being so, is changed into
his likeness; the Apostle says the selfsame thing concerning the Church, 2
Cor. 3. ult. we look upon him with open face, and are changed into the same
image, from glory to glory; in the ministration of the word; There is no
difference between heaven and a Church reformed, but only this, that in
heaven God is enjoyed immediately, here in ordinances; that there you do
receive the fullness of God at once, (though some will question it) here by
degrees; that there the very presence of God holds the soul to him, here the
Minister as Gods watchman, he says, hoc age, warnes men when as they are
remiss and careless, the word keeps the ear, the Sacraments, all the senses,
and all the thoughts and affections upon God himself. Thus I have donewith the
explication of that:

Only (I beseech) you do but compare the apprehension of the world, and the
expression of my text concerning Churches. The world they account Reformation a
torment. As the devils did Christ's coming; or bands and fetters, as the Kings
and wise men of the earth did, Psalm. 2.3. Let us break these bands asunder,
and cast his cords from us. It is a heaven upon earth, glory: What
inconveniences do men forecast will follow or accompany reformation? but as he
some timesaid when he wastold he did ill to desire to be out of the world and
in heaven, before he had done his work, Whether I sin or not (says he) I
would I were there. And so say I concerning inconveniences, what ever they be,
it is no matter, so we were in that glory.

And that you have Mat. 11.12. The Kingdom of heaven, that is, the Church of
the new Testament, suffers violence, Genesis 19.3. (...). Genesis 33.11. (...). Judge.
19.7. (...) Chemn. ad loc.
and the violent take it by force, that is, men are so set on it, as that what
ever they pay for it they will enjoy it; so violence signifies in the language
of the Seventy in not a few places: If David might have but one thing in this
world, it should be this, that he might live in the house of God, in the Church
of God, and to behold his glory there. Psalm. 27.4.

But the maine point I would insistion, and for which I have chosen the text,
is this:

Reformation will be Preservation.

If you will have the trowell in your hands to build Gods house, God will carry
the sword in his for your defense. Rev. 3.20.
And in the explication of this I shall do these three things.

1. Show you what these evils are which these that go about reformation are
liable to, that they need protection against. 2. Show what this defense is,
that you may see whether it be answerable to the trouble, and opposition you
shall meet with. 3. Make good this defense belonging unto reformation by a
reason or two; and I shall go no further then the very chapter wherein my text
is, for all these.
First, for the evils, you have three sorts.

First, Inhumane treacheries, for this verse does refer both unto Pharaohs
persecution, and to the dealings of the Canaanitish Kings with the people of
Israel in the Wilderness. Exodus 14.24. Exodus 13.15. Deuteronomy. 31.15.
Pharaohs dealing was very treacherous, he bad the people go, gave them their
liberty by Proclamation, but when he had got them at advantage, he brought up
an Army to cut them off; the Kings of Canaan dealt very inhumanely, they would
neither let the Israelites live quietly by them, nor pass quietly through
them; they would neither let them have things for their necessities freely, nor
afford them for their moneys; The reforming Church will meet with such kind of
enemies, yet they are not all, but

Secondly, here is in the fifth and sixth verses, heat and cold, that is, such
evils as are intolerable, for who can abide his frost? unavoidable, for there
is none can hide himself from the heat, as it is in the 19. Psalm, they are
such evil^s as are constant, as the ordinances of night and day, Summer and
Winter; they are such as are successive, one coming on the neck of another:
when Psalm. 121.6. he had said, He shall keep thee that the Sun shall not burn
thee by day nor the Moon by night; in the next verse as an explication of that
he says, He shall deliver thee from all evil: There is nothing then that is
evil, but it is comprehended under heat and cold of which this verse speaks.

Thirdly, you have also storm and rain spoken of (covert from the storm and
the rain,) that is, such evils as are desolating, and come on a suddame before
one be prepared for the enduring of them; when Christ would express the sudden
and great apostasy of these which built on the sand, he tells them the storm
and the rain fell, on them and they with it; In Psalm. 11.6. when God would set
out the judgments he brings on the World, he tells them there shall come
storm and rain, of fire and brimstone; the Church reformers must look for
such like storms, that all the Anchors they have cannot hold, they shall be
left merely to mercy, and the power of God, such evils come and they know not
the morning of it, vipers in their own bowels, traitors among their veryest
friends which they supposed not; such plots as are ruinous, such designs as
will make an utter end; that is the first thing; and yet against these there
shall be defense.

Such evils as you have heard, the Church is subject unto, not because Christ
does not love her, but that you may see he does, for he comes in to their
defense: A Ship that is tossed at Sea in a storm, is set so much nearer heaven,
that is all that troubles shall do to you; if you have more stomes, God will
have more care, if the wind rise, you shall be sure it shall be either fair
for you, or else it shall not hurt you; for upon all the glory there shall be
a Defense. Its better to be in trouble that God may show himself for us more
then ordinarily, then to be without trouble, with ordinary comforts. And for
this Defense,

You have five words in this little Chapter to set it forth, tabernacle,
shadow, place of refuge, a covert, and defense; the word of my Text; God uses
more words in promises then in any other dispensation, he speaks short when he
threats, he speaks largely when he promises; his heart is broken into many
words, that so there may be no mistake or doubt in us. He uses more words in
this matter of preservation, than he does in any other. It is the observation
of Musculus on Psalm. 121. (a Psalm that is of the nature of my Text) that
though there be but eight verses in it, yet we have the word keep used five or
six times; the Lord shall keep thee, the Lord shall keep thee, and so forth;
God speaks often of His defending of us, because there are but few who think
He is Defender of the Faith, that nail will hardly down, therefore God gives
it so many blows; Calv. ad loc.
Who is there that glorifies God as one that will preserve him in well doing?
Though all that do believe do think they shall meet with salvation at the
last, yet for preservation here, as soon as one has got his heart a little
quiet, the next danger that comes is like the wind unto the leaves of the
wilderness, that takes it all away; God speaks often that you may believe its
sure he says. You have many doubts; therefore God has many words; you say God
will in this, but it may be another trouble may come, and there he will leave;
why says God, what sort soever your troubles be, let them be heat or cold,
rain or storm; let them be plotted, concealed mischiese, against all that I
will be a defense, look you but to my glory. Let us look a little unto every
one of the words he says.

First, he will be a Tabernacle; so it follows in the sixth Verse; the word
signifies to cover a thing from the sight of another, by laying something on
it, as Rahab hid the spies from the searchers, or as the helmet hides the body
from the adversary, or as the blind hides him that is undermining the walls,
for in all these sorts is the word used, in Nahum 2.5. Psalm. 140.7. and so the
meaning of it is this, that either God will so keep you that your enemies
shall not find out what you are about, or if they do, yet nothing shall come
near you for to hurt you. If that be not enough, then

Secondly, you have a shadow, and the shadow of a rock, as it is expounded,
Esa. 32.2. A shadow you know is cooling and refreshing, and makes the heat of
the day as though it were not. If that be not enough,

Thirdly, you have a place of refuge; Montanus translates it confidentiam, a
spirit above all danger, that will not stoop or be base for any inconvenience
it shall suffer; If that be not enough,

Fourthly, you have a Covert; your enemies may strike, and break themselves,
they shall not hurt you, as the great drops that fall upon the house break
themselves into little small things that will wet no body. But to come to the
word in my Text, Defense.

Fifthly, Defense it has a threesold reference; first, to the Arc; secondly,
to the people of Israel in journying from Egypt; thirdly, unto the custom of
marriages among the Jews.

First, to the Arc, which is called glory; in the Arkethere was Manna, Aarons
rod, and the Testimony; the mercy seat, or propitiatory, was the covering of
it, and this signified Christ, Psalm. 32.1. upon this covering there were two
Cherubims, the emblemes of Angels, on that God sat as on a throne of Majesty,
Psalm. 99.1. from this God gave direction to them, Exodus 25.22. Numb. 7.89. And
all this comes to thus much, that Christ, and God, and Angels, all shall be
with you; for the sins whereby you have provoked God, he will be propitious,
if there be any help in heaven he will afford it; if you refer it,

Secondly, to the people of Israel journying from Egypt, so this defense was
the pillar of cloud, and fire, and told them thus much, that no natural
evils, (for the cloud kept off the heat) no spiritual evil should befall
them; 1 Cor. 10.
for it was a Sacrament that God would direct them in all their counsels; he
would interpose between them and all their foes.

Thirdly, if you refer it unto the custom of Marriages among the Jews, as
in the Psalm. 19.6. and Joel 2.16. Vide Sanct. preleg, in Cant.
the custom was to have a Canopie for State, carried over the head of the
Bride in the day of marriage, and so the phrase is thus much, God will honor
you; you may now be accounted rebels, it shall appear you are loyal; you may
be accounted breakers of Laws, it shall appear you are the children of
justice, there is not an imputation, but God will wash it from you. And so I
have done with the second point.

Quest. But how will this be made good, you will say to me? Thus.

First, that God will defend them, it appears by the guard he has set over
them which are his glory; Angels camp about such, Psalm. 34.8. all the while
that Cambyses in the absence of Cyrus raged against the Church, Daniel 10.
verse. 13. there is an Angel left in Persia to look unto him; you are the
charge of Jesus Christ, Zach. 1.10, 11, 12. Verses, and observe, he is among
the Myrtle tree that is the Churches, taking account of the Angels, in Verse
10. upon Horseback, to note his speedy succor, on a red horse, because he
will have the blood of your adversaries: And he does not only fight, but
prays. O Lord of Host, says he, how long will thou not have mercy on
Jerusalem and on the Cities of Judah? 1 Cor. 10.4. the Rock that followed them
was Christ; not that the water of the Rock did always follow them, for that
failed, and the people were athirst in the Wilderness, but Christ signified by
the Rock was always with them for their preservation. As the tender parent
thinks that none can look to the beloved child so well as she, and therefore
always has it in her arms; Its so with God too, and therefore you have it in
Isaiah 27.1.2.3. Verses, Lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day.

Secondly, it appears that on the glory there shall be a defense, because the
glory of the Church is the glory of God. In Judges 9.3. the Vine is said to
cheer the heart of God; the Chaldee expounds it thus, Ex quo libatur ante
Dominum, because God was served with it. Haggai 1.8. God makes the Church his
heaven, as it is our means to heaven, Go, says he, and build my house and I
will be glorified in it.

Quest. But how can this thing be, you will say?

Answ. Consider as there is a double incarnation of Christ as I may call it,
one proper in the flesh of his person, another mystical in the flesh of his
Saints, and therefore they are called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. And Paul is said to
fulfill the sufferings of Christ in his body, Col. 1.24. so you may conceive a
double glorification of God, the one in the beholding of his excellencies in
himself, the other in beholding of himself in us and in his worship: As the
beams of the Sun falling on the earth raise up the height of the sky, and
make all the glory of the heavens to appear, so does the glory of God, or the
attributes of God do unto his glory; when either they are bestowed, or
manifested to his Churches.

Thirdly, if so be the Church should suffer ruin, Vide Iun. ad Icc.
the whole world would come to ruin too, Isay 6.13. for the holy are as the
props and pillars of it.

There is only one objection may be made against this defense;

Revel. 11.7. when the measure of the temple was come down from heaven, and
the witnesses had declared their restimony fully, yet then they were slain.

when they had finished their testimony, Verse. 7.

Secondly, you shall find they devoured their adversaries, even as the fire
that came out of the Over and Furnace in the Book of Daniel, devoured those
which stood before it; In the 11. Verse you shall find that they could not be
overcome, and in the the 13. Verse, when as the Popish party think that now
they have none to trouble them, then shall there come an earthquake (a part of
this defense) such civil wars as shall be their utter ruin, but the advance
of these witnesses again to renoune and glory. Now we have done altogether
with the Explication of the Text; I come to the Application of it: Upon all the
Glory there shall be a defense.

First, see the reason why God does expose his people, the people called by his
name, to so many troubles? why he lets in crosses, calls in enemies,
disheartens and disables these that are on his side? they have defiled his
glory, and therefore he will not defend them, God will take his own peoples
part in nothing that is evil; as is it with a Diamond, if it be not right it
is worth nothing, or a picture, if it be not to the life, it is of no value;
and so it is with the ordinances of God, if they be not pure and after Gods
mind. That which is said concerning one ordinance the ministry, is true
concerning all, if they have lost their savor, they are not fit to be kept,
but to be thrown out to the dunghill. What would you have God to do, (my
beloved) would you have him defend the people called by his name, when they are
but so called, but are enemies to his glory? would you have him embrace his
Spouse when she has played the harlot, and brought forth to strangers? would
you have him keep his house when the devils haunt it? for so in 1 Cor. 10.21.
that which is not done by the word in Godsworship, is done unto devils, because
he is the appointer of it: would you have him defend these that oppose him? who
ever they be that corrupt his worship, or are corrupt in his worship, they
shame God, they disgrace God, nay they do as much as they can to make God
unhappy, to take from him his glory, and therefore upon them there shall be no
defense.

glory, on our Religion, that so we may prevent the ruin and desolation, which
if it be not timely looked unto will come on us. First, mourn for the
corruptions which have been in Religion; so Nehemiah did in Nehem.
9.16.17.26.28. Verses, and yet some of these sins were committed many hundred
years before he was borne; A man is guilty of all the sins he knows and
does not grieve for, because all those he likes. How has it been (I beseech
you) with us in this land! the face of Religion was grown wan and pale unto
the death, her beauty gone, her favor changed, her countenance so smutted,
mangled, blurd, that you could scarce know her; her own children were afraid
of her; and therefore fled from her, as from her (in the story) that would have
put them unto death; her speech was changed, she spoke she knew not what; in
stead of Minister she said Priest, for Sacraments, Sacrifice, for Table, Altar;
her heart was wounded, her fundamental doctrines rased, her worship mingled,
original sin denied, the will of man was made supreme over God, and God a
servant unto it. Christ's precious blood made common, shed without respect unto
any ones good in particular, and for ought that either Christ or God the Father
knew, for all his death no man should be saved by it; for all was left unto
man's will, and of a fallible cause there can be no certain and infallible
knowledge. When God had been at all the cost of Christ's blood, and at the
putting forth his right hand to work grace in man's heart, yet still man was at
his own will, so that he could make all this cost of God in vain; He
certainly is not God who is so unwise; they might as well have said there is no
hell; for if this be a natural power to will the things which are
contradictory, no man can be damned for it, for what ever is natural is good,
and the putting forth of a natural power cannot be of such ill desert. The
deity of God was denied, and as you may find in the last Canons, as great
penalty put upon one, that should not say that Bishops were Jure Divino, as on
him who denied that Christ or the Father were not God; The person of the Holy
Ghost was questioned. I might send you the parts of Religion as the Levites
Concubines quarters were sent abroad unto all the Tribes: give me leave to
represent it to you like Tamar, Ammons sister, with her hands on her head,
thrust out of doors, and complaining in the streets with tears, thus; They
have ravished me, and forced me to their wills and ends, they pretended love to
me, but intended Popery, and Atheism; they have corrupted me, and now they
cannot abide me; some of my children have been starved for want of food, some
have fallen into diseases, because the food they had was not wholesome, and some
were forced from me to the howling Desert and Wilderness; Who can now abstain
from tears? Look on the present corruption, Christ's body is trodden under feet
by Swine in the Sacrament, the Sabbath profaned, purity nicknamed,
reformation feared more than vassallage. Never, never was the glory so near
departing as it is now, it is on the threshold, taking the wing; we are at that
pass they were Joel 2.14. who can tell whether God will return and leave a
blessing behind him? and therefore it is time to rend your hearts, and turn
unto the Lord; Religion is a going, persecuted by Papists, hated by the
ignorant, unkindly used by her own friends. 1 Chro. 29.
David (you know) and the people did so long before God built the Temple.
Abraham's ten be found to the number of other profane persons; Isaiah 22.13.
and if there were none such, there is a time when mourning, prayers, tears,
humbling will do no good, but merely to men's own souls, Levit. 26.40. unto
44. if they do accept of the punishment, and humble themselves, yet the land
shall lie desolate and enjoy her Sabbaths: The Lord grant this be not our
condition, because we have been often threatened, and afflicted, but have not
returned; the light it is true shines very gloriously Jerusalem had never
better preaching then a little before its ruin, then she had Christ and the
Apostles; Revel. 11.7. when that the witness of the measure of the temple was
delivered, they were all slain, and Antichrist came to sit in his Throne with
greater quietness than ever before, for now all that would trouble them were
taken away. What would the misery of this land be should Religion perish?
shall I present it to you in the carriage of Phineas wife? 1 Samuel 4.20. the
grief of it made her miscarry, she is senseless of any other grief, but the
loss of the Arc and Glory, senseless of the death of her Husband, of the
pains of her travel, yea, of the parting of her soul and body; she is deaf
to all comforts, comforts of life, of children, of friends and she cries out,
not as one in pains of death, but going to hell, The glory is departed, the
glory is departed: Come I beseech you, and stand by the deathbed of this dying
Saint, hear her groaning out her soul, and taking her farewell of the world,
and all her friends, and she says thus, My life is a burden, my children
nothing, the land a hell to me, the glory is departed: the death of my
Husband, the loss of my Father, tenderer to me then he, I could have borne,
might I but have enjoyed Religion: Had I but bread and water, though I had made
a hard shift for my self and my poor children, I should have been satisfied;
but now speak unto me no word of comfort, let me alone to dye, I have lived
in glory, and I cannot live otherwise: and dying, she breathes out her soul
and these words together. The Arc, the Arc, the Glory, the Glory is departed;
and it was not a feminine passion, though that Jeremiah was made like a brazen
Wall, yet he says in one place, his eyes wept in secret, Ier. 13.17. Si totus
vertar in fletum, and nequaquam guttae sint lachrymarum sed abundantia
fluminis, non satis digne flevero, Hieron. ad locum. Psalm. 84.2.
and he could not weep enough, Jer. 9.1. Isaiah, Isa. 22.3. cries out, Let me
alone, I will weep bitterly, I will not be comforted. David, that had the
heart of a Lion, yet says, My flesh cries; the word that is translated (cries)
when as it is given to any thing but the voice, it signifies bedewed cheeks,
blubbered eyes, pale face, wasted spirits, yet all this was in David, because
he was put from the house of God. Can you, can you (my beloved) love these
sins that brings this loss? can you love your selves, who have done these
sins? can you part with Gods glory, your own glory, your defense too, and not
be troubled? The sin for which God suffers Religion to be corrupted, and by
which it is corrupted, are the greatest sins, because they are against Gods
Crown and Glory; if these move not, what will? Judge. 18.23, 24.
Micah could not let his Idols go, but he cried out; and can you let the
Gospel go, and Christ go, and not do so much? Jesus Christ, who never shed a
tear for all he suffered, wept, and could not speak for weeping, when the
Gospel was departing; he wept and said, O that thou had known, and he
could go no farther: every word he spoke was uttered with a sigh, and pointed
with a tear, and he could go no further then, O that thou had known, at
least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace: Shall the
thoughts of it make Christ weep and not the feeling of it make you? Let me but
set before you as in a vision, the state of souls when as the glory is gone,
Religion is corrupted, Popery (which you feared) brought in, one soul lies
dying in its sin, another gasping after comforts, a third possessed with
legions of temptations, a fourth bleeding to death, and there is none to stanch
the issue; the cure that is given worse then the disease; a fifth looking on
this side, and that, saying, Who will give me of the waters of life? O that one
day of the Son of man might now be afforded; one Sermon, one instruction, one
promise opened; but all in vain, the glory is gone. And if this do not melt
you, yet let good nature move you, for when the glory is gone, your defense is
gone; your works shall be slighted, your walls rased, your Armies
discomfited, your name be rotten and corrupted, your wives ravished, your
children murdered, your houses plundered, and which shall lie upon you with
the loss of all, and which is worst of all, that all this is come, because the
glory has not been regarded: If ever you would have the glory stay (my
beloved) and have it return from the threshold, into the midst of the Temple,
it must be by entreaty, and entreaty with tears; in Ezekiel. 43.10. If they be
ashamed of all they have done, then show them the form of the house: And so I
have done with that Use.

glory there shall be a defense, be not therefore fearful, but believe; set
down this; Your purity is your safety. It is an ordinary word, God defend,
when any danger or evil is foretold; God will not defend except you be a
glory; He will defend when you are. What mean these trembling hands, and
shaking knees, and discouraging words? all will come to nothing, the cause will
be lost; what could you do more if you had no defense? and what defense would
you have, if this be not enough, God? Shall he that is on a Rock fear
underminings? There is nothing makes more strong then faith, because it makes
Gods power man's; I am able to do all things through him that strengthens
me; There is nothing makes more weak then fear, because it does not only
put God from man, who is his Help; but sets God against man, as his enemy; the
promise arms God, and girds him with strength; faith in the promise, brings
God to the use of his arms, it says unto him as Dalilah did unto Samson, The
Philistines are upon thee, show thy self, or (as God speaks in the Prophet)
pursue, and follow, and destroy; so says Faith, Now they are in arms rout
them, ruin them, now they have lift up their hands against thee make an utter
end of them; do what thou can, who can do what thou will. It is worth your
observation, the Israelites had never met with so many troubles in going to the
land of Canaan had not their hearts been full of so many doubts and fears; If
you will not believe, you shall not be established, Isa. 7.9. Compare together
the causes of your fear, and your defense; what are your enemies but
creatures? your defense, God: Man is against you, God is for you: if so be they
be rain you have a covert; if they be a storm you have a rock; if so be they
be heat, you have a tabernacle: Shall the Lion dread the Lamb, and the strong
the weak, the Giant the Pigmy?

Why busy you your selves about the thing belongs not to you? Look you to the
glory, God will to your defense and safety. You must provide means, God will
find success; There is a carelessness of faith, as well as a carelessness of
security, Ezekiel. 28.16. it is promised they should dwell safely, and the same
word Isa. 32.9. is translated careless:

Why do ye fear, O ye of little faith? who ever perished being innocent?
what Church ever suffered while it retained it is glory? Ephesus was delivered
up, but they lost their love first, Judge. 5.8.
Rev. 2. there were wars in the gates of Israel, but there were dols first;
where there is no dross to purge, God will not cast into the fire.

What do you make of God, in thinking, that while you are about his work he
will not defend you? but unfaithful, in not keeping his promise; unkind, to
leave you, who are his Church and Spouse, unto the rage of men; unjust, to take
part with the wicked adversaries against you; yea, unnatural, not to regard
his own glory and happiness.



Isa. 48.22. with 57.20, 21.
else you needed no defense; the wicked will always be like the raging sea,
they will cast forth mire and dirt, when once God does reduce, and bring his
people back to such an estate of glory. Truth is brought into the world with
pain, it is born in blood; there never was, nor never shall be a through
Reformation without troubles, for the most are always the worst, and will not
endure it, Act. 2 19, 20. Mal. 4.1. etc.



He will create on Mount Sion a desence; and creation is out of nothing.







glory, they are for reformation or when they are but for revenge, or for some
particular ends of their own; as one turned Turk, that so he might be
revenged on one that struck him, so many-turne Christians, turn unto a good
cause, that they may meet with them that did oppose them: Jehu said he was for
God, when he was for his Crown.

suffer, their sufferings preserves the glory; suffering puts an accent, a note
of observation, upon that for which it is, and says, this is a practice, a
truth to be stood for unto the death, in this there is a better thing then in
life it self.

Poena ad paucos, timor ad omnes; many escape, because some feel: in Heb. 11.
they stopped the mouths of Lions; that is, as it may be expounded by what we
find in the story of the Roman Empire, it was forbidden to put any more of the
Christians to death, because (say they) they make nothing of death.

when shall this be, that we shall have this defense? when will the spears be
broken into Plow-shares? when will the Lord arise and save?

glory: and let me tell you this, you have made a reformation when you have
made a resolution, if it be on good grounds. And I will prove it from Scripture
too, 2 Chronicles. 30.19, 20. they were not sanctified according to the purification
of the Sanctuary, who came up unto the Passover, but their heart was set to be
so, and the Text says, God healed the Land.

Fourthly, set on (I beseech you) on the work of Reformation; You may reform
things that are amiss, you have a Law of God for it, Ezra. 5.1. they began to
build the Temple; the decree of King Darius came after in Chap. 6.12. You have
a Fundamental law for it, a Law of Nature, it is for your defense; upon all
the glory there shall be a defense; Reformation is your Militia, your Army,
your Bul-warkes, your all in all; but be sure when you go about Reformation
you make it a Glory; the foundation of utter ruin is laid in, first
Reformation commonly; or in reformation, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. there was but one
circumstance of person out of Order, and you see it cost the life of some; it
hindered the bringing home the Ark unto all; They looked into the Arc who were
the persons that should not, 1 Samuel 16.19. and it cost the lives of 50000. of
them, more perished in that then in the War.

Zephan. 1. The Prophet comes in Josiah the Reformers time, and says, he will
pluck down utterly, and the reason of it was because there were the Chemarims,
men that went in black to the heels, in garments of more preciseness and
holiness than others, though their hearts were not after Gods Statutes; there was
something left in Court, and Country, and they brought all to nothing: that is
very hardly changed afterward, that passes in reforming times; as the errors
in the first concoction are not mended in the second: the reason of the fall of
the House lies not so much in the strength of the storm, as because the
foundation was not laid well at first, Archiep. C. in Stari-ch.
Mat. 7. You know who it was that said, when he brought in so many Popish
things, he intended but only to bring things to the first, and Primitive
Reformation, to King Edwards time, because there was then but a little step
gone in many things from Popery; And if you would make a thorough Reformation,
give me leave from the Scripture to propound some such things as not being
observed, may hinder it.

First take heed of Policy; Genesis 34.22, 23.25, 26.
The Sichemites to get the Estates of the People would be circumcised: but you
know it cost them their lives. Policy does with Religion as Amnon did with
Tamar, when it has it is will of it, and served it is turn, it thrusts it out
of doors; Jeroboam to preserve his Kingdom set up the Calves; least the
Romans should come in and take the City of Jerusalem, the Jews would not
receive the Gospel, but they lost both. Hieron.
Iuschismatis remedium; to prevent schism, they would have one Bishop over the
Ministers, and that brought in a Pope, for by the same reason there ought to
be one Minister over another, to keep them in Order, there ought to be one
above al, to order al: Cum clim pro universa Graecia in Marathone quondam
pericliti essent, etc. Cirill. contra Julian lib. 6.
To bring on the Heathen to Christianity, they thought it best in former times
to have Feast days, and to give such names unto the things of the Gospel, as
they gave unto their own Worship, but it brought not the Heathen in, but
Heathenisme. It is the greatest policy in the world to defend, and save a
tottering State, and that is no way done so, as by thorough Reformation. Policy
may be considered two ways.

1. Either as an Orderer or ranger of things into their proper place and
season, and so Religion is subject unto policy, because they have both one end,
the public defense: or else

2. Policy may be considered as the Lord, and Religion as subordinate, and so
it must not be subject to it, for Religion is supreme, the end of all things.
There is a natural worship which depends on the nature of God, and that a man
must do though he dye presently, as a man must believe, and a man must
acknowledge God, though the point be at the breast, the dagger be at the heart:
but there is secondly a worship of God, which only does arise from the will of
God, instituted Worship, as Divines term it, where the things are not good in
themselves, but in order to Gods will, as there is nothing in the bread, nor in
the Wine, but what is in ordinary bread, but as the Character of Gods
institution comes on it. In things of this nature the rule is, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice Exodus 8.26. Moses professes he would not sacrifice
among the Egyptians, because they would stone him presently, 1 Samuel 5.12. the
Kingdom was established in David's hands; all things were at quiet, before he
would bring in the Arc. c. 6. In tumultuous times it is dangerous to alter any
thing in matters of Religion of this sort, more then needs, like the giving of
a purge to one in a Fever; it may perhaps bring death: for it both puts a new
Title on the quarrel, and divides among the Friends too, and acquaintance of
the cause; not to change, is not so much policy as religion; and Religion will
never thrive the worse for it; the Gospel tells us there is a leavening time,
wherein the leaven is put into the meal before such time as it is kneaded up:
the sum is, policy must not make any thing hinder our Confession; policy may,
and is a just ground, why men should forbear the profession of some things
that are good; but that is the first thing.

2. Would you make a thorough Reformation, take heed to the Laws; whence is it
that there are so many Non-Residents, that do not feed but starve the Flock?
we have a Law for it: whence is it that men are forced to profane the Lords
Supper, and to eat and drink their own damnation? But because you have a Law,
that men of sixteen years of Age must come to the Sacrament: A Law like the
Spaniards Practice, who forced the Indians into the River to be baptized and
then cut their throats; a less evil then this drinking of damnation; whence
came it that the ceremonies grew to be like clouds, so many were introduc't,
that the glory could not be seen; but because there was a Law of retaining
such, as were among the Papists apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the
remembrance of his duty, by some notable signification, whereby he might be
edified, as you may find it in the Book of Common Prayer. Take heed unto the
Laws, (I had almost said, if I might crave pardon for the word) take heed what
Laws you make in matters of Religion; for if the thing should fall out to be
evil (as what man is there that erres not) when once it is a Law, it will be
followed: Hos. 5.11. they willingly followed the commandment of worshipping
the Calves; the counsels of Jeroboam and his persuasions prevailed much, Micah
6.16.
but the statutes of Omri found no opposition. Suppose the thing be good, a
Law, will be a Ne plus ultra, beyond which men will not go, and so it may
either hinder, or make a future reformation harder. Not to be contented to do
what is enjoined by men of wisdom, that will be accounted unquietness of
spirit at the best; and to go any further then the Law, will be esteemed
pride, if not disobedience. Moses gave the Law of Divorce, and you shall find
that men stuck so unto that, that Christ's interpretation of it would not
pass: yet that you may not be mistaken, consider that the things of Religion
are of several sorts: First some are such as consist in indivisibili, which
admit of no variation, such as are known to all Saints in one degree or
another, such in which there is no possibility of alteration afterward; let me
add unto this, such as the common light of all Christians reaches unto, as
the observation of the Sabbath, the Low, etc. and diverse other things; and let
me add unto that, such things as do immediately and properly concern the
Weal public: these ought to be established; there should be such Rules for
these, as all men should go by. But there are some other things in religion,
whereof a good and godly man may have no knowledge; the knowledge whereof is
rather a privilege unto some, then a propriety unto all Saints: Romans 14. the
Text says there expressly, that these were to be received into the Church, who
held for Jewish Ceremonies at that time lawful. (I say, at that time) though
they held them not necessary for salvation: In things of this nature God is
tender, and man should be so too, and yet the weal public not be hindered.

Thirdly, in Reformation do not make reason your rule, nor line you go by; it
is the line of all the Papists: God (say they) has not less care of his
Church in the New, then he had in the Old Testament; there he gave them one
high Priest, who should infallibly determine all controversies; and therefore
now there should be one Bishop, who should have the same light and power. You
shall never read in Scripture where any man walked after the imaginations of his
own heart, but by and by you shall read he did do wickedly: In the point of
worship of God the Text says clearly, Exodus 20.4. thou shall not make unto thy
self, that is, by thy own wit, any thing which may as an image be like to
what God has appointed, as an image is to the person; any thing which may keep
God in mind, or keep or stir up affection to him, as a picture does to him it
represents; nay it reaches further then that; the greatest reason in the world
of any obedience is Gods nature: if he be God that gives being to all things,
all things must depend on him by faith; if all things come from him, all things
must return to him as the utmost end; he ought to be served with all a man
has, because all a man has is from him. This the nature of God teaches a
man; but the nature of God is not the reason, but his well is the reason of his
outward worship: it does not follow, if God be God he must be served with
Sacraments, or such Ministers, but because he has set it down and appointed
it: the second Commandment does forbid not only reason, but all divine
reason, that is not sanctified by institution in the worship of God: I say not
only all humane, but all divine: Reason may be considered two ways; first, as
it is a disposer and placer of all things in their order, and so it belongs to
all knowledge and science: secondly, as it imports a Principle of doing any
thing, and so Gods outward worship, has no ground in any reason, but Gods will.

Fourthly, if you would make a through Reformation, look unto the Ministry; if
an Angel fall from heaven, he will sweep many together with him: your own
experience has taught you, that no place has yielded such stubbornness in
superstition, so much disobedience and rebellion as those, where the Minister
has either been blind or profane: the only Rule of Reformation is the word
of God: What (I beseech you) will you dee with that in the worship of God,
which will not bring your souls to heaven, but perishes in the use, as in
Col. 2.22. And that will never bring you to heaven that never came from heaven;
for there is no effect of a greater power, or of another nature then the cause;
If so be that Christ has only told you thus in the general, You shall have
government, but not told you what government, he has not left himself the
Crown on his head, but put it upon yours: Be you Judges, whether is he greater
that says, I will have this to be done, or he that has power to say, I will
have it done this way or no way, you shall have it done as I please.

Lastly, would you have Reformation? begin then to reform your selves; God
would not have David build his Temple, because he had had his hands in blood;
that is, he had shed the blood of Vriah: For otherwise in the building of the
second Temple they might fight and build, Neh. 4.13.17
use the Trowell and the Sword together: there was none might work at the
Tabernacle, but he that had a Spirit, Exodus 35.30. what have Tobia's and
Sanballat's to do with such kind of things as these? Certainly that will be
accounted but Policy, which is done in Religion by men who are not holy in
their conversation: you have motive enough to this within my Text, your lives
lie on it, for without this you shall have no defense; your way unto glory lies
in it for without it, it will not be glory, that is, it will not make you
glorious in the eyes of God. I shut up all with a word of exhortation.

glory, that so he may be our defense: there is that in the Text, that would
make a dumb man speak, and that would work a heart in him who has no mind
to pray; the very mention of it is alluring, glory, and a defense; Heaven and
safety, God and all in the world: the words upon the glory there shall be a
defense, are not so much declaratory, as promisory; they have bound God so fast
he cannot go back: there is nothing does prevail with God so much as Prayer
that is for Reformation: in the eighteenth of Luke, I will go and give him his
desire, lest he trouble me, the Word that is used there by the Evangelist is
(...), Budaeus in Pandect.
and (...) sign fieth a black eye, or a mark in the face; look as this
reports that a man has overcome one, with whom he either fought or wrestled,
so it will bring such a blot on God, as he shall never wipe out, if your poor
prayers should be turned into your own bosoms; that Prayer for Reformation,
obtaines as soon as ever it is made: and you have a Scripture for that in the
book of Daniel, as soon as ever, in Daniel 9.23. At the beginning of thy
supplication, the commandment came forth, and I am come to show thee, that
thou art greatly beloved: He that will not pray for glory has no grace; He
that will not pray for a defense, he has no nature alive in him; he that when
he is promised he shall have, will not ask, despises; nay he does worse
then that, he incenseth God unto the greatest wrath against him. Take up
therefore the words God has taught you, and speak unto him, Joel 2.17. Lord
spare thy people, and give them not to be a reproach, why should thy enemies
say, Where is their God? Where is thy bowels and thy truth, thy goodness and
thy power, are they not for everlasting?

To conclude all, say unto God in Prayer, and power it forth with tears, what
Ruth did unto her Mother-in-Law, when she bid her go away; Where thou go I
will go, and where thou live I will live, where thou dyest I will be
buried: So say to God; Lord, if thou will take away Religion, and the Gospel,
then first take us away; If thou will have thy name blotted out from under
heaven, first begin with ours; Life will not be worth the having. when we may
not live with thee in glory. I will assure you this, and it is in the words of
my Text, if so be you will be so set as you will have glory, you shall have
defense, you shall be Gods glory, and God will be your shelter, for upon all
the glory there shall be a defense.

FINIS.

