O England; thy time is come, God has not taken thee until thou be full; yea,
the fullness of thy time is come; with speed prepare to meet the Lord in
Judgment, lest thou be cut off; woe unto thee if he turn from thee before thou
be refined. Remember, was not the Jews cut off that thou might be grafted in?
Remember and take heed.

J.N.

Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus which
is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen
him go into heaven, Acts 1.11. The glorious Reign of Christ is come;
Ho! every one behold the Son:
This is the beautiful Morning Star,
Who sends his Messengers through the air
And calls up all to Judgment; O have and come away
You Virgins that are ready! this is the Marriage-Day.
YOu foolish Virgins, how have you been sleeping away your precious time? had
it not been better you had watched and prayed? O foolish, foolish Children, will
you sell your birthright for a moments pleasure, and a little ease? But what
more can be said to you; I see the Spirit is grieved with you, and the Spirit
is weary with striving with you: O that I could weep tears of blood for the
slackness of the desires of the people concerning their eternal salvation! Is
your souls of no more value then to make a sport of time? O England! thou have
not wanted for Warning my soul stands witness in the presence of the Lord
against thee, that in the Cities, Towns, and Market-Streets, I have past with
bitter cries and streams of tears, for a most two years time, warning you of
this day that is coming upon you as a Snare, with this Lamentation, O people of
England repent! O that thou would consider the time of thy visitation! O
that thou would prise thy time before the door of Mercy is shut! Now the
Light is risen, how art thou found slaying the Lamb of God? in thee is found
slain the blood of the Innocent; O England! the blood of the Innocent cries
loud in the ears of the Lord God of Power; O that thou would consider and
repent, and prise thy time before thou be consumed and made a common deluge for
ever! Thou art fat and full, thou art fitted for slaughter, and great and
terrible will thy day of calamity be; the Sword of the Lord is drawn against
thee, and will be sheathed in thy bowels. O repent! repent, and let the
destruction of Sodom be a warning to thee O England! fitted for slaughter; thou
art light and vain, thou kicks against the Lord, thou lifts up thy heel against
him; O England, the time is come that nothing will satisfy but blood; yea, yea
the time is come that nothing will satisfy but blood: Thou art making thy self
drunken with the blood of the Innocent; he will be avenged of thee; till blood
come up to the Horses bridle; thou art making thy self drunken with the blood
of the innocent, and now he will give thee blood to drink, for thou art worthy;
for he will be avenged of thee till he is satisfied with thy blood: Come down
ye high and lofty ones and lie in the dust, and repent in sackcloath, and lie
lovv before the Lord and come and see if by any means there may be a place for
repentance found.

This mournful cry began at London, so to Colchester, and through the Nation:
Ah Lord! what shall I yet say for them? or how shall I enter into a Treaty for
them? Behold, they have slighted thy tenders of Grace, and they wipe their
mouths, and take their fills of mirth; and they wipe their mouths, and cry,
Tush, the Lord is gone far off; they cry, Miracles are ceast, and there is no
Revelation; tush the Lord sees not: When thy servants have showed them thy
mind, they have said, Let him do his worst. O Lord arise in thy zeal, and show
thy power, for they blaspheme thy Name continually; how have they slighted thy
love, now thou have visited the earth with thy pure voice? how cruelly have
they beaten thy Prophets, and now thy Son is come they conspire to kill him?

O Generation of unbelievers! now is not the Scripture fulfilled that says,
When the Son of man come shall he find faith upon the earth? Is it not seen
that you love the world too well? you look for the reign of Christ, I know you
do, for there is that in your consciences which shows you that your soul is
in death, and waits for redemption; but how have you slighted the Messenger of
reconciliation, that has told you in secret that you should come away and
leave your vanities; it had been well if you had minded the check and reproof,
if you had done so, your hearts had been purified, then now you had been ready
to meet him; when he fulfilled all Righteousness, and ascended unto his Father,
he gave down his spirit among you, which has visited your Fathers and you unto
this day, which was to minister unto you, until his second coming: But how
has your ears been stopped against it, did it he ever appear in such an age
before? But now the Heavens is loaded with a Blessing, and there is not room in
the earth to receive it, make room, make room, enlarge your hearts, for it is
there that he will reign I see; and as your hearts is enlarged, you will come
down as Zicheus did; for he is made a little lower then the Angels, that so he
may raise up the innocent Seed, which lies scattered in your dark hearts: As
far as you are obedient to the spirit that preaches to your souls in prison, so
far you make room for his reign, so far you become Members of the body; for
now he has prepared you a Leader and a Captain; does not your eyes see the
Lord has prepared him a body fitted for sufferings in patience, which he has
crowned with love and meekness; so that the more you torture him, the more he
loves, yet you cannot see; but to you that live in hope my heart is enlarged,
yet to see the redemption of Zion, and to enjoy the glorious Reign of Christ;
the Lord give you the desire of your souls, for now is your time to receive:
Wherefore I beseech you sit you under your own vine, feed in peace, go not
forth after them that cry, Lo here, and Lo there, for they are false
Watchmen, they will smite you, and bereave you of your fresh springs which you
should enjoy in the spirit; but watch low and still in your minds, and with
that which is just, judge that which is unjust; and when your wills would have
Liberty, let it be crossed with the Light; then you will see that in your
obedience you will have peace, and the peace that your obedience will bring,
will so knit your hearts to the Lord, that nothing will be too hard for you;
then comes your hearts to be opened to receive the Blessing, and your minds
steadfast in Communion with the Lord; He will visit you with his fresh springs,
and cause the seed to grow; and as it grows up to God, it brings the Son down
to you, who is given into the world to redeem your souls from the power of sin
and death; and so as he purifies you with judgment, so your Temples will be
fitted for Christ to rule and reign in you, and then comes his will to be done
in the earth as it is in Heaven; and as your hearts, minds and affections
incline to the Lord, you will see faith increase; and by patient waiting in
hope, you will see the Hills levelled, and the mountains laid low of sin and
corruption; and when the Lord has plucked your feet out of the Snare, and set
you upon a plain, then will you run the way of his commandments with great
delight; and this is the State of Virginity.

Oh you noble hearts! it is you that are fit to entertain Christ in his reign,
for in your obedience the precious springs of Life does open in you, and pure
consolation you feel, Songs of Joy and Triumph, and the Father, Son and Spirit
meets in you; then has the soul Liberty from the devouring Enemy; as the pure
Spirit gets Victory over the evil Spirit, so the Spirit of Christ comes to
reign in your mortal bodies, then comes the showers of Grace as the
morning-due, which bathes your souls in the blood of the Lamb, and waters the
tender Plant in you. This is a wise Virgin that is ready to meet the Bridegroom
in this his day; I counsel you that have oil to trim your Lamps; and prepare
to meet the Lamb, for now it is full time, for he that was to come, is come,
and his time is short, and then no more time; make haste away you Virgins of
the ^aie, for time is short; for now is the time of sealing come, he that is
filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is holy must be received into
the body. Now blessed are you that are found ready; for now we see there has
been terrible wars betwixt Michael and the Dragon to make room for the Babe;
not one step but through blood that we can get for entertainment amongst you;
but now I see the foundation is firmly and deeply laid through sufferings; and
now set your Battle never so strong, it will grow more firm; but blessed be the
peacemakers, for they are fit to have the Mansion in my Fathers Kingdom. Why
should it seem a strange thing to you to see Christ reign in his Saints and
fit and prepare the Vessels, and make our bodies fit for himself to dwell in,
seeing our hearts are ready to bow to his Will? And is it not more for his
glory, though it be a greater cross to your wills, to purify these bodies, and
pour out the dregs thereof, then to bring down that body which was crucified at
Jerusalem, seeing all are in his power and one Spirit rules in both; by much
tribulation, anguish of Spirit, and svfferings of the flesh, has he now fitted
a body for himself, who has conquered death and hell; so perfect is he that
he can laydown his life for his enemies, not opening his mouth to defend
himself; this Vessel is as precious to me as that which was tortured at
Jerusalem, seeing the Father has prepared them both, and the same Graces
springs from both according to its time of working, which now is finished in
sufferings. Shall I not follow thee unto death, O my beloved? yea, seeing thou
art revealed in me by my Father to be the Son of Peace.

Now what though he was brought up with you? despise him not as your fathers
did; but the Scriptures must be fulfilled, A Prophet is not without honor but
in his own Country; surely if you knew the bowels of love that flows to you;
you would be more meek; what shall we do to declare our love? the Lord knows we
love all men, from the Magistrate to the meanest, and delight to live in love
and peace with all men; and if any do lord it over you, and judge you in their
Wills, they must be judged. Now I beseech you, is not this the manner of the
reign of Christ, to purify the bodies of his Saints to make them Temples for
himself, and quicken them by his Spirit? and he that leads the way is the
Captain, King, or Prophet, which in all ages the people loved and honored;
Would you were worthy to receive the salvation of his love and peace, which the
shovvers of his rain has brought; his Reign is glorious. Now hearts are knit
together in unity each to other, and Praises springs freely up to the Father of
all, and here is none shut out who is real hearted: Whether ever we see your
faces outwardly, yet I am sure if you love the Lord, and be obedient to him,
we shall meet in Spirit, and that Spirit will reveal to you that Innocence
must be King. Therefore friends all, use the World as if you used it not; for
the time is very short, and every one shall be taken where is; he that is
filthy, shall be filthy still; and he that is holy, shall be holy still; for no
place of Repentance shall be left; and many shall say, Lord, we have preached
in thy Name, and in thy Name we have cast out Devils, and done many wonderful
things; but he shall say unto them, Depart ye Workers of Iniquity, I know you
not; and they shall fly into the Dens and Caves of the earth, and shall call
to the Mountains and Rocks to fall on them, and cover them from the glory of
his presence.

Watch, Watch, the time hastes exceedingly, when time shall be no more, for
the Gate shall be shut, and no place left for Repentance.

Martha Simmonds.

COnsider I beseech you how clearly the Scripture is fulfilled in our days;
are you not all talking of the Reign of Christ, but knovvs it not? And this is
the cause of it, My Ways says the Lord are not yours, nor my Thoughts yours;
for as the Heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher then
yours; and none knows his will but those that are willing to be guided by an
innocent spirit, and that lives out of their own thoughts; and they only are
the Virgins that will be found ready to reign with Christ Jesus in
righteousness, for they are diligent in the depth of the search of their own
hearts, and sees how the Lord breaks them into tenderness, and makes them
subject to his will; as Christ was to his Father, so are we in this evil world.

Now I would not have you ignorant of the mighty day of the Lord, and of his
glorious appearing amongst the sons of men; but rather that you should consider
how that it stands more for his glory to cross all men's wills, then to fuifil
them; and what if he will be pleased to do as the Potter does with his clay,
who having made one vessel, as seemed him good, and sees that there is yet an
oppertunity for him to break it, and make it more for his honor then it was,
seeing it is yet clay in his hand; and so is man in the hands of the Almighty.
Oh my Friends! consider how much more shall the Lord be glorified in purifying
a Vessel fit for himself to dwell in all righteousness, meekness, and
long-suffering: And thus we see his reign, and rejoice in sufferings as
Deceivers, and yet true.

So friends consider, that if it had pleased him, he could have prayed to his
Father, and he would have sent him Legions of Angels; but he chose rather to
suffer, and thereby to cross his own will, and also all men's wills, for surely
he is the same now as he was in former ages, who always appeared contrary to
the expectacions of all the world; but if he should appear in the way you have
long looked for him, then man would have something to boast in; but now boasting
is excluded; for it has pleased the Father of Spirits to appear in a spirit a
little lower then Angels, and so is hid in the Clouds from all men's eyes, of
corrupt hearts, and self-conceited ones, who thought they had an eye to have
pierced through the Clouds, are now found the blindest of all sorts; for as he
suffered at his going away, so does he at his coming again, for so says the
Scripture, he shall come in like manner as he went.

Hannah Stranger.

There Is none can reign with Christ but he
That is a Virgin pure in innocence.
No evil thoughts nor words must be,
For that will stain Virginity.
O How excellent is thy ways thou God of Mercy and Truth! surely they that go
out of thy paths are not worthy to walk therein; they that forget thy love,
have not found the sweetness of it; why should it be that any that have known
thy Word should cast it behind their backs. But let my soul cleave to thy
Statutes, and let obedience be my life continually; so shall I be acquainted
with thy will, O Lord, thou know I love thy counsel, and in it my heart
pondereth; and if thou will open thy bosom, and let me come nearer to thee,
that is all I desire; but let me remember thy former mercies, for they are
life; how have thou led me through the Deserts, and refreshed me with thy
Crystal Streams, and gave me Manna for food? How gently did thou guide me
when all comforts failed me, and removed the mountains out of my way, and has
set me upon a plane, that I run the way of thy Commandments with great delight?
Why has thy Rod been so light upon me, seeing my sins have been multiplied?
How have I escaped the Rod of thine anger? nay, thou did put a Rod into my
hand, to smite the backslider and hard-hearted: O Lord, thou know it was thy
will, I did not resist thee; Oh that they might know it, the rod, and who it
was that did appoint it! and now thou have taken it out of my hand, and bowed
me to thy will, and has opened a door of Mercy to all sorts of people; Oh let
thy Mercy shower down abundantly, and fill the earth with thy Blessing that
thy Works may praise thee, for now praises ready for thee, and many hearts
pants after thee, that have long lain amongst the pots; all the upright love
thee, for they have been as a chased Roe upon the Mountains, which have wanted
a Shepherd; wherefore arise O Lord, and visit the Nations with thy appearance,
that they may know thy salvation.

Martha Simmonds.

OH my beloved! Where have thou been hidden? in the clefts of the Rocks? and I
could by no means find thee, though I have sought thee day and night with a
mournful and bleeding heart? but when I was still and patient, then thou did
appear to me with pure consolation, and then we did sup together; but then thou
would withdraw again, and then my soul would mourn, for I saw thy presence
was my life and preservation. Thou did command me forth into thy Work, to
invite those in which knew thee not, and I was obedient to thee; when I
returned and gave thee an account, thou did accept my service, though men
denied it, and thou gave into my bosom a double Blessing. Oh! how thou have
drawn me unto thee, and inclined my heart to thy will; how have thou indeared
my soul within thy bosom? Thou have tried me, and in thy trial thou have found
me steadfast; it all that I desired of thee was, and is, That thou would
wholly take me into thy Counsel: I ever loved thy Reproof, and dreaded thy
Anger; for I find correction is as balm to me, and I have not murmured at
them. Oh pure, eternal, perfect Lord God! when I came near to know thee, it was
life for evermore, for thy presence overcame me; but how have I been tossed to
and fro in this dark world? surely thou had a purpose to make use of me in
thy will and time; for the devil has set very fore against me; for before ever
I saw the Light of the Sun, or received a natural birth in this visible World,
I was rejected of men, for my Patents denied me a birth; and as concerning
self, it had been good I had not been born; for I have not had pleasure in this
world, but have stood as one alone; and since I knew the way to thee, I have
exceedingly hasted out of it; and before I knew the way, I sought for the way
to all that pretended to direct the way; but they hadstoln thy words, and had
not thy life so they wearied me, and profited me not; but now thou have
revealed thy son in me Oh! how am I overcome with thy presence? and now I shall
live with thee for ever.

M.S.

IS it become a crime not to judge another in his Work; but to let him stand
and fall to his own Master Christ Jesus, who alone has power over the
conscience? Does not the Apostle Paul say, Wherefore do thou judge thy
Brother? Wherefore do thou set at naught thy Brother? Did not he say this to
those that judged one another? And did not he plead the cause of both for one
against the other that judged, when they could neither of them bear the other;
yet did not he then vindicate both in their contrary persuasions, and judged
only their judgings of one another? Romans 14.

Did Christ judge John Baptist because he came neither eating nor drinking? or
did John judge him because he came both eating and drinking? though the world
judged both, saying of the one, He has a Devil; of the other, He is a glutton,
and a win-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners.

Did Barnabas judge Boanerges because he was a Son of Thunder? or Boanerges
judge Barnabas, because he was a Son of Consolation.

It is said, Cant. 4. last. Awake, O North-winde; and come thou South and blow
upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out. Let my Beloved come into
his Garden and eat his pleasant fruits. Let him that reads understand. And
let not the South-winde say to the North-winde, There has been no need of
thee. Neither let the North-winde withstand the South-winde, and say, There is
no need of thee. Or let not the Garden say to the Winds, There is no need of
you or either of you, for both are needful for causing the Spices to flow out,
that the Beloved may enter into his Garden to eat his pleasant fruits. Let him
that reads understand what the winds are.

W.T.

THis is a day of shaking and staggering to them whose minds are without,
busying themselves to comprehend the measures of others. The only way to be at
rest and quiet, is to mind our own measure, committed to us, and to be faithful
therein; to keep pace with our own guide, who leads the Lambs as they are able
to bear: Let the weak not judge that which they comprehend not; and let the
strong not despise the weak being found faithful in their measure; and so unity
is preserved in the body, from the youngest babe to the highest grown; and
there is breadth enough in our Fathers Kingdom for both. And this preserved unity
between Paul and his weaklings; John and his little children, Christ and his
babes.

The day is appearing which I have waited for, in which all that have their
faces toward God in truth shall own one another in their several measures, and
love shall be increased. The children of the Kingdom shall feel the love of God
in one another, and shall embrace that, and not trouble themselves with the
several work of others, or narrowness or largenes^ of understandding Mysteries;
but love shall embrace that which is of it self, and so the Flock of God shall
walk in peace, without pushings, judgings, whisperings; back-bitings,
censurings, every one growing up in his own measure. This day is appearing, if
it go not in again.

W.T.

O How wonderful are thy Works, O God! the depths of thy counsels are past
finding out: Who knows thy ways? and to whom do thou give account of thy
actions, how thou do order the works of thy hands? Oh! how vain a thing is
man when thou turnest thy hand upon him? How often have thou broken me to
pieces? How often have thou led me through deaths? How has thy terror many a
time seizd upon me? and thy dread made me afraid? Thou have bruised me from
morning till night: Oh! who may stand before thee thou Judge of all men? In the
days of my affliction, how have I roared from morning till night! Then did I
seek death, but could not find it; and thirst to be covered in darkness, but
could not obtain it. I said, I will go down into forgetfulness; but thou would
not suffer me: But in thy will thou raised me, and sent me to the Nations. A
sign and a wonder thou have made me, and a stranger to them who had well known
me. Yea, how often have thou changed me, so that I have not been known to my
self? And thou have hid me from such as have followed me: Thou have lifted me
up, and I have been exalted; thou have cast me down, and I have been despised.
I have been a scorn to fools that knows not thy ways; and as a prey to the
devourer: Then I said, Thou have cast me off; else why am I covered with
blackness But this was my impatience, my haste, and my folly: Thou smilest upon
me in the midst thereof, and I was judged yea, I loathed my self before thee.
Oh how have thou turned me in a moment! Thou liftedst my head out of Prison,
and set me above such as sought to destroy me. Yea, how often have thou
redeemed me from death? how often have I been beset about? yea, the eyes of
evil men have been daily upon me to see my fall. Yea, many a time had I been
driven from my steadfastness; but thy Promises have been my refuge: Yea, had it
not been for thy Word, I had dispaired of hope; therefore do I love it more
then gold. Oh that men knew thy faithfulness! Out of the pit have I cried to
thee, and thou heardest me, and did answer out of thy Holy Place. Then I
said, I will fear thee for ever, and obey thee till death, because thy Word
has strengthened me. Thouturned away thy face, and I became darkness: Then I
said, I am forsaken, for thou have found iniquity in me. Thus have I been as
clay in thy hands, and durst not ask thee an account of thy doings. Oh thou
faithful one! how dreadful art thou? how powerful is thy presence? with thy
breath do thou change the world, and make all things new: So do thou make
man forget his travel; and turns his sorrow into a Song. Praise the Lord O my
soul, while I have a being among the sons of men.

J.N.

A Morning-Song when I being in Prison at Westminster.
SInce thou have drawn me to thee, how does my soul love thee my God! Since
thou have begotten me to thee, how does my heart bow before thee my Father? How
does my soul worship thee? How do I delight to live with thee? It is life to
abide continually in thy presence, to receive thy commands and do them. Oh how
have thou made me with thy hand, and formed me anew with thy free spirit! so
that the tedious ways of wearisomness is forgotter, and I love to run the way
after thee, and to tread thy paths. Surely all the time of my life is too
little to serve thee in thy holy ways, my Redeemer and my King. Oh! let my
soul for ever live in thy bosom, that I may continually taste the breathings of
thy pure life, which fillss my soul with fatness, and my heart with pleasure.
With tears I have found thee; with joy I live with thee: Oh how am I afraid to
lose thee! O how strong is love! I cannot live without thee. Blessed be the day
in which thou called me out from my Kindred, and set a Hedge betwixt me and
mine acquaintance, that thou might turn me to thy self. Thou set my familiars
afa^ from me, that thou might bring me to thee alone, Oh my joy! Thou have set
all the world against me, that I might seek thee to take my part: Then did I
cry unto thee, and thou wast near; for this was thy purpose concerning me, That
I might know thee. In secret did thou support me, least my faith should fail;
yet not in my way, least I should be exalted, and so forget thy fear; yet would
never suffer me to want thy goodness. How often have thou stripped me of all,
yea, my dearest friends, who were as my life, were set against me in Judgment;
this was done that thou might prove me in the fire, to melt me and try me, that
thou might bend me for thy self alone. Then did I see how vain a thing is man,
how soon is he changed into a lie. I said, To thee alone I commit my cause:
Then did thou draw near and justified me; thou healed my wound with thy
anointing, thou poured in thy consolation as oil into my bones, which was
dried with sorrow: Thou made me forget all my grief; thou renewed my youth, and
my flesh came again as a child; my heart thou made new within me: A clear
vessel did thou make me after the breaking of the old: Then did thou fill
me with thy goodness; thy Word became my food, and the joy of thy spirit was my
strength: I became obedient, and thy love was spread in my heart. My soul is
satisfied with thee, my God, and my Redeemer; Praise the Lord.

J.N.

A Song of Deliverance.
THou have seen, Oh my God, thou have seen it, when the wicked one laid a Snare
for my feet in the day of my trouble, when he spread his Net to take me
unawares: In the dark he spread it, he covered it, he said in his heart, He
shall not know thereof till I have caught him within my compass, he shall not
perceive it; so was I as a bird, innocent, not knowing that it was for my life:
Then did thou show me it, Oh thou preserver of the helpless; thou said,
Hearken unto me, so will I save thee from his subtilty; follow me, so shall
thou escape* Thou led me in a foolish way to the wisdom of the enemy, but I
found it a way of peace and safety, and a path of purity, in which my soul
delighted. With holiness did thou compass me, and beset me about with
salvation. Though mine enemies compassed me about like a flood, yet was my soul
in safety. Thou discovered to me the man of mischief, and said in secret, This
is he that seeks for thy life. Shall I forget thee my God? Shall I forget thee?
Shall not I have thee ever before me? By thy mercy have thou gained my heart.
Thou know I love thee; incline thou my heart unto thy fear continually: Keep
thou me, for my trust is only in thee; so shall I praise thy Name for ever, and
spread thy glory and goodness while I have any being; Praise the Lord O ^y soul.

J.N.

Evil eyes do watch me, Oh my God! they come to spy out my ways, who have
mischief in their hearts; and according to the mischief of their own hearts, so
do they wrest my ways, till they have filled their hearts with envy, the
bitterness whereof they vent when they shoot their Arrows; they have pierced my
soul withlyes, wherewith they reproach thy pure ways; they are not afraid to
speak evil of thy spirit. O Lord, will thou teach me in innocence, do thou
guide me in thy pure path, so shall I not be ashamd when I behold the face of my
Enemies: Give me not up to the wills of them that seek for my life; rescue my
soul, and I shall praise thee, my Redeemer, and my God. In thee alone I put my
trust: Let not the wicked have dominion over the poor and helpless; break the
wills of the blood-thirsty man. Thou see how many have joined hands against
me in this day of my trouble, to take my life; yet in thee is my trust: Plead
for me, O my God, declare thou my innocence With cruel jealousy have they
wounded me, when they have condemned thy righteous ways: They have done what
they could to cause me to disobey thee; and have set themselves to stop my way
that I should not follow thee. O my God, thou have seen it, and have redeemed
me out of their hands, yet have they cast out floods of reproach after me; they
have tempted me daily: Had not thou holden me up when they caused me to
stagger, I had fallen for ever; but thy promises was a stay unto me. O let me
never forget thy faithfulness; let me mention thy Name to all that want a
refuge.

J.N.

THe spring of Summer does appear,
The bud is fresh and green;
The Turtles voice does sweetly sound;
Our King in Z^ons seen.
Shall we not sound this thing abroad?
Shall not we Praises sing?
O subtle self! thou have long withstood
The Praises of our King.
But since Zion he has set up
By power of his own,
To all the Citizens thereof
Our God and King is known.
What we have seen we spread abroad,
What we both seel and know,
Which has the Vessels filled with Praise,
Like Floods that overflow.
The Heavens above, the Earth below,
Does both in Fraises meet;
Righteousness runs down, Truth springs up,
And does each other greet.
Purity has put forth her voice,
And Love does loudly cry,
Innocence a Trumpet sounds
To all the passers by.
Holiness from Heaven is sounded forth
Unto our God alone,
Peace is proclaimed; in Purity
Our King is on his Throne.
The Heathen rage to hear thereof,
The Kings together flock,
And all the world does set themselves
To overturn this Rock
From whence these Waters does descend,
That makes this fruitful sound;
For his appearance none can bear
Who in self and sin are found.
So such with sand this Flood would stop,
With earth cur wells would fill;
And thousands are together set,
Who seeks this Seed to spill.
Yet shall we sit and sing thy Praise
VVhilest we a being have,
Though all the world do us withstand
Whose souls are in the grave,
Oh Holy! Holy! Holy! still
Both night and day we cry,
Thy Song most sweet, thy Praises pure
Shall cause our Foes to fly.
Oh Zion sase! how art thou set
Upon a Hill most high?
Thy Life not known, thy Joys are hid
From all that pass thee by.
Thy Babes are Plants of Holiness;
Gods Husbandry thou art;
Yet all dark Powers of wickedness
Against thee take a part.
By day the evil Tidings came;
By night the arrows fly;
Yet in thy House I safety have
Within thy Temple high.
J.N.

The End

