Ward, Mayor.
Jovis xxjmo die April. 1681. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli secundi Angl. etc.
xxxiijtio.
THIS Court does desire Mr. Sill to Print his Sermon, Preached at the
Guild-Hall-Chappel, on Good Friday last.

Wagstaffe.

Freedom from Fear of Death, through the Death of Christ.

A SERMON Preached at GVILD-HALL-Chappel, ON Good Friday, A.D. MDCLXXXI.

By WILLIAM SILL, Rector of St. Austins, and St. Faiths united, and Chaplain to
the Lord Bishop of London.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Sign of the Bisheps-Head in St
Paul's Churchyard, 1681.

To the Right Honorable Sir PATIENCE WARD, Lord Mayor Of the City of LONDON,
AND TO The Court of ALDERMEN,
Right Honorable,
THAT this Sermon is made public, is from the humble Regard that I am obliged
to pay to the ORDER I have received.

I am the less concerned for what Censure may pass upon the honest Plainness of
it, because I judge that I should much less have answered the great Importance
of the Subject, if I had affected to treat of it upon any other Grounds than
what the Scripture does give us. For the most consummate Political or Moral
Discipline can afford us no Weapons more equal to encounter with the Power of
Death, than any of those Arguments it can suggest to us are to obtain a Respite
of the peremptory Sentence from this inexorable King of Terrors.

If upon this account this Discourse may obtain a favorable Acceptance, I
shall have all that is aimed at by this humble Address from,

(Right Honorable) Your most obedient, and humble Servant, Will. Sill.

A SERMON Preached on Good Friday, at GVILD-HALL- CHAPEL. ON HEB. II. 14.15.
HEB. II. 14. -- That through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is, the Devil;

HEB. II. 15. And deliver them who through fear of death were all their
lifetime subject to bondage.


THE Excellency and great Usefulness of this Epistle to the Hebrews, has been
well judged to have been the cause of the main Attempts that have been made to
deprive us of its Divine Authority; the consideration of which should move us
to attend more earnestly to it. For whatever other Difficulties may for some
time have been started by such wary Persons as meant no harm to Religion, to
hinder the Reception of this Epistle with the same readiness that other parts
of the holy Scriptures were admitted; yet he that well weighs the advantage we
have from it, of taking a more full and clear account of the Use and Abrogation
of the Jewish Ceremonies, and of Christ's being the End of the Law, and of the
Nature and Dignity of his Office, as Mediator between God and Men, will
conclude That he that from the beginning has ever envyed Mankind whatever
might promote their happiness, has been active in giving weight to those
Scruples which if they had been pertinaciously adhered to, would so far have
brought upon the Church an irreparable Loss.

But the peculiar Meditations which the Solemnity of this Day does call us to,
may yet farther offer something to us of more immediate concern; in that this
Epistle does fully set forth and magnify the Priesthood of Christ, and the
Virtue, Benefits, and Dignity of the one Sacrifice of his Death. Through which,
seeing that we have the greatest Advantages that our fallen and miserable
condition did stand in need of, and such as the Great God could not bestow upon
us any more agreeable, This may more especially be presumed to have an
Ascendant upon our minds, which nothing but a sottish Stupidity, or base
Ingratitude can defeat, to make us acknowledge and admire the watchful
Providence of God for our good, in that this Sacred Book has now for many
Ages, without the least hesitancy been received, as inspired from Gods Holy
Spirit, by the Universal Church of God, and consequently to secure our heedful
regard to the main Scope of it.

Which (more especially as to the former Chapters of this Epistle,) is to
recommend to us the Doctrine of Christ, and to require our hearty Reception of
it, and Submission of our selves to the power and efficacy of it. Heb. 2.1.
That we give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at
any time we should let them slip; considering with our selves what possibility
there can be for us to escape, if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the
first began to be spoken by the Lord, Ver. 3, and 4
and was confirmed by them that heard him; God also bearing them witness both
with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost,
according to his own Will?

Now the Reasonableness and Necessity of all this is farther laid before us by
the holy Penman of this Epistle from the Dignity and Preeminence of the Person
of Christ, not only above Moses, but far above all the great and glorious
Angels of God.

And this partly from the Eternity of his Essence; this Eternal Son of God
being the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, by whom
he made the Worlds, Heb. 1, 2, 3.
and who upholds all things by the word of his power.

And partly, from what this Eternal Son, after he was Incarnate, and had
assumed our nature did acquire, or was conferred upon him; God having appointed
him Heir of all things, and therefore directing us to expect all that Good
which by the fall of Adam, from that Right and Capacity he was created to, we
had lost, only in and through Christ, Ver. 3.
who when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high; and was, for the suffering of Death, Crowned with Glory and
Honor, having all things put in subjection under him. Heb. 2.8, 9.
God thereby signifying, That that state of Humiliation, to which the Son of
God was pleased to submit himself, whatever mean thoughts vain and proud men
might entertain of it, was a thing highly pleasing to him, and in his infinite
Wisdom directed to excellent Ends; in which his Goodness and Propensity to
favor Man kind, should be most eminently apparent to the astonishment indeed
both of Men and Angels, but to the peculiar benefit of the first. Heb. 2.16.
For he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but he took on him the Seed of
Abraham; and that in order to this infinitely good and wise End, advantageous
to miserable and lost Man, even to a miracle, Heb. 2.9.
That he by the grace of God should taste Death for every Man.

And shall this which was so highly pleasing to God on the behalf of Man, not
be sufficiently esteemed and valued by Man, who has the sole benefit of it?
Should not this unexpressible Condescension of the Eternal Son of God be a
powerful Motive to us, to make us most freely exert the utmost Powers we have
in giving a ready and affectionate entertainment to the Gospel of Christ, and
in yielding a most cordial and sincere submission to it; even such as
proceeding from a true love of him, may express the great sense we have of his
love to us?

To this very end does the Author of this Epistle add this consideration to
others that he had laid down, taken from the admirable Love and Condescension
of the Son of God, that we should be most solicitously careful, even with
warmth and all earnestness, to hear his Voite To day, Heb. 3.7, 13.
to exhort one another daily, while it is called To day, lest any of us should
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; to hold fast our profession; Heb.
4.14.
to hold the beginning of our considence steadfast unto the end, Heb. 3.14.
that so we may be made partakers of Christ. And, seeing that we have not an
High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Heb.
4.15, 16.
therefore to come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy,
and find grace to help in time of need.

And that for this among other reasons, because the Compassion and Love of the
Son of God has so far stooped to the relief of sinful and miserable Man, as to
be made a little lower than the Angels. Heb. 2.9.
Seeing that, as God, he could not die for us, he would become our Brother, and
assume our Nature into the Unity of his Person, that so in our Nature thus
assumed he might die for us, and deliver us not only from Death, but from all
Fear of it.

Forasmuch as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part of the same. -- That through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is, the Devil;

And deliver them, who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject
to bondage.

In my discoursing of which words, I will do these two things: 1. I will
Explain the most material words and expressions in the Text, that we may fix
upon the proper Notion of the nature of this our Bondage, and our Deliverance
from it. 2. I will offer some of the most pertinent Considerations I can, to
quicken our thoughts and Apprehensions of the whole matter, and to dispose us
for receiving the kindly Influences of all, in such a way as may be most
agreeable to the Solemn occasion of our meeting together this Day.


1. For Explication of the words, and the true Notion of the thing. The
Innocence and Holiness of our blessed Saviors Life is judged to be one reason
among others of what St. Peter told the Jews, Act. 2.24. That it was not
possble that he should be holden of death: But this is of it self a Sufficient
reason that none should be so vain as to think that when we speak of the Death
of Christ, we can be supposed to understand any thing else by it, but only that
Temporal Death which he suffered upon the Cross. Whereas our own case is so
wholly different, that though we have the Honor to be of that Nature of which
Christ did partake, yet all we being polluted and guilty before God, Romans 3.19.
we shall not come up to the full sense of the Scripture, when we are told that
Death is the wages of sin, Romans 6.23. 1 Cor. 15.56.
and that the Sting of it is sin; nor shall we be sufficiently sensible of
death, as proceeding from, and expressive of, and always accompanied with the
dreadful Wrath of God, unless when we speak of that Death of which the Devil
had the power; and the fear of which made men subject to Bondage all their
lifetime; we do, as in reason we ought, under stand by it, not only the
separation of the Soul and the Body, but more especially Eternal Death, and in
the general the dreadful Curse in its full latitude, to which Man was obnoxious
by reason of Sin; so that the measure of the hurtfulness of the Death we speak
of, is to be taken from hence, because it is the effect of Gods Wrath, and that
because of Sin.

Now consequently hereupon, if we would judge a right of that Bondage to which
men are subject through the fear of this, we must seriously think with our
selves how it could be otherwise to them that are supposed to lie under the
Guilt of sin, and under the Sense of the Punishment that belongs to it, but
that the Malediction of God, and the approaching of a certain Judgment, Hell it
self, and everlasting burnings, and all that can strike horror into the minds
of men, should ever be ready to offer themselves to their thoughts; and This so
unavoidably all their lifetime, that nothing can show them any rational
sufficient Ground to escape what they are afraid of, when they seriously think
of all this without respect to Christ.

And can it be otherwise conceived, but that this must be a most wretched
condition, fitly called a Bondage, not permitting men to do any thing with
Freedom, who cannot be otherwise, but all their life time subject to this
slavery of Sin, of the Devil, and of Death? For all these in the issue do come
to the same; and therefore the fear of Temporal death as that leads to Eternal
death, but especially the fear of the last, Prove. 14.18. Ephesians. 2.3. Mat.
23.15. Act. 13.10.
as being that Inheritance of Man's Folly, which as to a Child of Wrath, Hell,
and the Devil, a despised and forsaken Father, and therefore now a just and
righteous Judge, will appoint him as his everlasting Portion, in a place where
there shall be nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth, cannot but seize men,
who being out of Christ, are obnoxious to it, with all anxiety, horror, and
anguish of mind.

Thus poor miserable Man finds an endless torture in himself, which so wholly
possesses him, as to seem not to admit of any further Degrees, if my Text did
not mind us that the great Enemy of Mankind, the Devil, is ever active and
restless in adding all the weight and sharpness he can to this Bondage; who
besides his Tyranny and Usurpation upon men, which could not exceed the extent
that Gods Permission had given it for the Punishment of former sins; and
besides whatever claim he might make to men upon their Voluntary submission to
him, as consequent upon his having seduced them from their obedience to their
Creator; which yet, seeing that they had no right to dispose of themselves, and
that their continued slavery was an addition to their Crime, as well as to
their Misery, could not give him any just right or Dominion over them: I say
besides all this, the Devil does come upon Man with a more dreadful assault, as
having his fury armed with a Commission from God, as the Executioner of his
Wrath upon Malefactors already adjudged to death, and consequently is said, as
to the never-failing success of what his malice could prompt him to, to have
had the power of death.

So that Man, as considered without an Interest in what Christ has done for
him, was in a double Bondage of Sin and of Punishment. The Devil was the Author
of, and the Solicitor to Sin, by the entrance of which into the World Death
also entered, Romans 5.12.
and passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned; And through Sin it was that
he had the power of death, that is, of inflicting death both of body and soul.
By this it was that the Devil reigned over Men to their eternal destruction:
For in that sense this Kingdom of his may be conceived to be fitly called
(...), the Empire and Dominion of death, from the effect of it, in that it was
deadly and destructive to Man.

But to the great joy of us all, and that we may ever adore and magnify the
blessed and only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15.
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and submit our selves to God, James
4.7.12.
the one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy, having now this
assurance, that if we resist the Devil, he will flee from us, this dreadful
Empire is now brought to its fatal period, and the Tyrant, as such, being
wholly deprived of his Tyranny, is destroyed too, as if he were not at all, as
to any hurt that he can do us; our strong Helper and mighty Deliverer, the holy
and ever blessed Jesus, God and Man, having rescued us out of the jaws of death
and destruction, by destroying him that had the power of it. The promised Seed
of the Woman has punished that piercing and crooked Serpent, Isa. 27.1.
has broken the head of that fierce and terrible Leviathan, Psalm. 74.14.
in such a way as that he has truly showed himself to be the Seed of the
Woman. The Conquest was obtained by him in Humane nature, and that not without
receiving such Wounds as he in that nature was capable of, not without the
honorable marks of a Bloody Victory. For, as Christ the Seed of the Woman, did
bruise the Serpents Head; Genesis 3.15.
so also the Serpent was permitted to bruises his Heel. Through Death he
destroyed him that had the Power of death.

And now having thus far given some account of the several words and
expressions in my Text, the full import of the Doctrine of it will be more
clearly stated, by comparing the proper Notion of the Bondage and Deliverance
there mentioned with some few particulars which are to be considered, as they
are Dependant and Consequent upon that which is primarily to be understood; or
as they belong to that Application, which it is but reasonable we should make
of the whole to our selves.

1. That there is a Yet-remaining Bondage, to which the Fear of Death does make
Particular men Subject, must be acknowledged, which may admit of several
Degrees, as they are more or less the Servants of Sin; Romans 6.16, 17, etc. Romans
8.9, 13.
Because, not having the Spirit of Christ, not through the Spirit mortifying
the deeds of the Body; But serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, living in Malice
and Envy, Hateful and Hating one another; Tit. 3.3.
They must in their own Thoughts be concluded to be so far from having any
Benefit by that Deliverance which Christ has obtained, as in truth to be the
Enemies of the Cross of Christ. Phil. 3.18.
Though the Gospel of Christ be preached unto them as well as unto others, Heb.
4.2.
yet the Word preached does not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in
them; not begetting that Hope in them, 1 John 3.3.
by which they are enabled to purify themselves, to have always a Conscience
void of offense toward God, and toward Men. Act. 24.16.


And therefore (unless they be grossy deluded) being sensible that the Death of
Christ is of no Advantage to them, while they Continue in an impenitent State;
It is impossible but that they must Fear Death, and cannot be supposed even to
think themselves Delivered from this Fear, by the Death of Christ.

But the Bondage in my Text, and our Deliverance from it, are in this present
Discourse to be looked upon, not with respect to the Particular Subject, but to
the Common Nature of Man, Christ himself only excepted: The Bondage as incident
to Humane Nature, as Fallen and Depraved; And the Deliverance from it, as that
which All men stand in Need of, and of which all are Capable, as to the
Foundation of it, that is laid in the Death of Christ, and with the Refusal of
which all are Chargeable, to whom the tender of it is made by the Preaching of
the Gospel.

We are All either Actually under it, or, as to any thing that is in our
selves, Subject to the greatest extremity of it, or we are in some Measure
actually Delivered from the Effects of it, and have a comfortable prospect of a
Complete Deliverance. All have Sinned, and come short of the glory of God;
Being justified freely by his Grace, Romans 3.23, 24.
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Only of this, to prevent all
Presumption, we must ever be mindful, that those Only are the persons to whom
now there is no Condemnation, Romans 8.1, 2.
who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit;
Such in whom the Law of the Spirit of Life, in Christ Jesus, has made them
Free from the Law of Sin and Death.

2. There is also a Farther Bondage, which is Consequent on the Fear of
Temporal Death, when Men for Fear of Persecution, or Death, do commit Sin, or
neglect any part of their Duty; by that means endeavoring to avoid what they
fear; our Deliverance from which is Consequent upon our cordial Belief of that
Deliverance which Christ has obtained for us by his Death. For if we truly
believe That, and acquiesce in it as our Happiness, Why should we be afraid of
them which Kill the Body, but are not able to Kill the Soul? Mat. 10.28.
Nay, does not our Faith, if it be lively and sincere, teach us above all
things to fear him, which is able to Destroy both Soul and Body in Hell? Heb.
4.1. etc.
Ever fearing lest a Promise being left us of entering into Gods rest, any of us
should fail of it through Unbelief: Of which there can be no greater instance
than by Slighting that Deliverance our Savior has obtained for us, to declare
that we place no Confidence in it.

3. There is also a Fear of Death, to which Weak, though Sincere Christians may
be in some measure Subject, which may at Sometimes so much Disturb them, as to
Approach very near to the Bondage here in my Text; and which is at all times
both their Unhappiness and their Sin. This proceeds from great Defects in their
Faith, and in other Graces, and generally from great Neglect of what their holy
Profession does call them to.

Now, though the serious Consideration of the Deliverance here in my Text, and
men's hearty Endeavors to work out their Interest in it, with fear and trembling
of another nature, Phil. 2.12.
and of a better temper, are fit Means under the Conduct and assistance of Gods
Grace, wholly to Suppress or Mitigate these Fears; Yet our Deliverance from
This fear of Death, is not the thing I am in Particular to consider, but only
in General, as there is a sufficient Foundation laid for this Deliverance, if
it be fully Assented to, and duly Applied.

The Main thing therefore to be considered in our Deliverance from the Fear of
Death, through the Death of our ever blessed and most compassionate Redeemer,
and through the unexpressible Love of God to Mankind, is this, That Christ
has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. Gal.
3.13.
Our being obnoxious to the eternal Wrath and Anger of God, was the Only thing
that was formidable in Death, and This being taken away by the Death of Christ,
there is nothing remains in Death, as it is a bare Separation of Soul and Body,
why we should be afraid of it. All those that are truly Penitent and Regenerate
by the grace of Gods Spirit, have now abundant reason for a perpetual Security
and calmness of mind, either in Life or Death. To all such To live is Christ,
and to die is gain. Phil. 1.21.
They can look cheerfully upon Death, and will not commit the least Sin to
decline it.

It is only their Way to Happiness, and all the Harshness that it seems to
have, is from some Natural Difficulties, which the God of Nature seems to have
implanted in Men, that they might not be out of love with Life, and unwilling
to serve God here in their Generations, till their Change come. Genesis 6.9. Job.
14.14.
To which, when a Good man does understand that he is now made to approach by
Providence, and the good Hand of God, all those natural Impressions, being
useless, do then give place to the Exercise of Faith; And he does not only
calmly resign his Spirit into the hands of God, and trust the Salvation of his
Soul with his gracious Redeemer, but to Depart this Life, and to enter upon a
better, becomes now his Wish and his Choice.

For he is so far now from fearing Everlasting Death, that he has a clear
prospect of an happy Eternity: Seeing that Christ has not only abolished
death, 2 Timothy 1.10.
but has brought life and immortality to light, through the Gospel. Romans 8.15.
He has no longer the Spirit of Bondage to fear, but the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby he can cry, Abba, Father.

Being justified by Faith, Romans 5.1, 2, 3.
he has not only Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, but by him also
he has access by Faith into this Grace, wherein he stands; And does rejoice in
Hope of the Glory of God; And can therefore glory in whatever Tribulations can
befall him. Nothing Before could ease him of his Bondage, but he was subject to
it all his Lifetime: And nothing Now can disturb the Serenity of his mind. Our
Spiritual Freedom is extended as far as the Bondage was, from which we are
freed, even to the finishing of our whole course. 2 Timothy 4.7.
For being delivered out of the hands of all our Enemies, we are enabled to
serve God without fear of any of them, Luke 1.47, 75.
in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our Life.

I must further add, that the Doctrine of my Text thus explained, is so far
from giving encouragement to Sin; that this Deliverance which we have from the
fear of Eternal Death, by the Death of Christ, is in truth one of the most
powerful Motives to Holiness of life: Seeing that we are hereby assured that
our pious Endeavors will be Accepted of in Christ, and meet with their wished
for Success, which without the knowledge of our Peace being made with God, no
man could have any Assurance of. If it were not for This, All that we could do,
would be indeed worse than at a Peradventure, and could have no better Grounds
to warrant its Acceptance with God, in order to the Saving of our Souls, than
only such seemingly fair Hopes, and probable Conjectures, as a Well-bred
Heathen might have had, to enforce the application of himself to the study and
practice of such Political Virtues as might be beneficial to Mankind; and to
keep up that Decorum which the very Manliness of the apprehensions and powers
which he had, might require from him, in order to his supposing of his
Condition to be less hazardous, when he should leave this World. Of whom it may
yet be presumed, That his Knowledge of that fatal Curse which lay upon all
Mankind, was as slender as his Ability could be, to direct all he did to the
Glory of God, which yet is in truth the very Soul and Life of Religion.

It is therefore to be well observed what St. Paul says to the Colossians,
Col. 1.22.
That Christ did reconcile them unto God in the Body of his flesh through
Death, that he might present them holy and unblameable, and unreprovable in his
sight.

Before they were Reconciled to God, they could not be thus Unblameable and
Unreprovable in any sense: And, After they were reconciled to God, we must
suppose that there were many Defects in them, which if God had been extreme to
observe in the greatest Rigor, they could not have been able to have defended
themselves against his severe Scrutiny. Yet, they being Reconciled to God
through the Blood of Christ, those instances of New Obedience, which by the
Grace of God did truly proceed from the Honesty and Integrity of their Hearts,
were so favorably Accepted of, that He that had before reconciled their
Persons to God, through his Death, could consequently represent what they thus
faithfully did, as Holy, Unblameable and Unreproveable in the sight of God;
that is, Acceptable in his sight, free from all Charge of Sin from the Accuser
of the Brethren. Rev. 12.10.


Thus I have given you some account of the Notion of the Bondage mentioned in
my Text, and of the Nature of that Deliverance which we have through the Death
of Christ, from the Fear of Death: Which in short is this, That Christ did
suffer Death upon the Cross in our stead, that we might be freed from Eternal
Death; That our Guilt being taken away, we might be Discharged from that Curse,
to which we were obnoxious by the breach of Gods Law; And consequently, That
being dead with Christ, we may believe that we shall also live with him, having
this undoubted Assurance, to encourage us to lead such Lives as become
Christians, Romans 6.5, 8.
That, if we have been planted together in the likeness of his Death, we shall
be also in the likeness of his Resurrection.

Having therefore by Gods Assistance dispatched the First thing I proposed to
my self, to treat of in this Discourse; I now come 2dly. To offer to your most
serious Thoughts some of the most pertinent Considerations I can think of, to
quicken our Apprehensions of the whole matter, and dispose us for Receiving the
kindly Influences of all, in such a way as may be most agreeable to the Solemn
Occasion of our meeting together This Day.

Had you One in this Place that were able fully and clearly to lay before you
the Subject that This Day calls upon us to Consider, What warm Affections would
it beget in you! What Tears would it draw from your eyes! What Esteem and value
would you have for the Christian Religion, the Foundation of which, and of all
our hopes and expectation is laid in what we this day commemorate!

All Vice and Sin might reasonably be presumed to remain for ever odious to
your thoughts; and all Virtue and Goodness to have that Charming Aspect as to
command your rational Choice, as well as your passionate Address. Good men
would be confirmed in their Faith, Love, Meekness, Patience, and all virtuous
Resolutions: And bad men would be ashamed that they had so long trifled away
their precious Time, and would condemn themselves of the greatest Folly, for
neglecting so great Salvation, and not having vouchsafed to stretch out a hand
to receive so signal and important a Deliverance, tendered to them with such
astonishing Condescension, such compassionate and tender Regard to their most
deplorable State, and recommended to them, from our Saviors ready undertaking
of so many Hardships to persuade them to be Wise for Themselves, and to Love
Themselves, and to espouse their own Interest. For a good Man some would even
dare to die; Romans 5.7, 8.
But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet Sinners,
Christ died for us. And, Can any Love be conceived to be like This of our
Saviors, which exceeds the highest expressions of Kindness and Pity that ever
any one has showed to his most dearly beloved Friend, in the greatest need and
Straight in which he can be imagined at any time to have been?

What strength would all this add to your Faith! What amazing thoughts would
you have of the Wisdom of God, even the Wisdom which God has ordained before
the World unto our glory! 1 Cor. 2.7, 9.
Such as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it ever entered into the
heart of man!

How would you weep for our Saviors Sufferings, and yet much of it proceed
from Joy, when you should have well considered how he contrived that he might
be capable of Suffering for us, and then readily received the bitter Cup from
his Fathers hands! Phil. 2.7, 8.
He First made himself of no neputation, and took upon him the form of a
Servant, and Then he humbled himself yet farther, and became obedient unto
death, even the death of the Cross. To Death; which is so Dreadful, that even
upon a Natural account it has been judged to be of all things most Terrible.
As being so contrary to Flesh and Blood, so repugnant to Nature, so destructive
of all those Endearments, which our nearest Relations, Familiarities and
Friendships, and even that natural Propensity there is in man to Society, have
contracted. Which puts a Period to all those Enjoyments which are agreeable to
all those Capacities and Desires, which our present Condition, even without the
loss of Virtue and Honor, cannot choose but acknowledge to be Grateful, and
which by long Custom and Usage do prescribe to that Claim which it is not easy
for us to disown as wholly Unreasonable.

He became obedient to Death for our sake; which, if it had nothing else in it,
is yet a Privation of that which every man's Experience, both of Himself, and of
what he may observe in Others, will tell him to be sweet: And That too, the
Death of the Cross, a painful, lingering, ignominious, and accursed Death.

How many farther Advantages might we receive from fixing a steadfast look upon
Jesus the Author and finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy that was set before
him, Heb. 12.2.
endured the Cross, despising the shame!

Could any thing hereafter discourage us from being Constant in our holy
Profession, from Persevering in all Christian Duties to the end?

Could it possibly be that we should be wearied and faint in our minds, Ver. 3.
if we did but seriously consider him that endured such contradiction of
Sinners against himself?

Our Deliberate Thoughts of our Saviors Death and Passion would clear up to us
many important Truths. Could any man, after he had well thought of it, doubt of
the Guilt that lies upon all Mankind, or of the Corruption and Depravation of
our Nature, seeing that the Salvation of Man did require thus much to be done?

Could he think himself sufficiently Secured from Danger by such Exercise of
his natural Powers as may possibly be in many instances at his Command?

Would the acquiring of Political Virtues, nay, his Heroic courage in the
Practice of them, stand him in sufficient stead?

Could any man be ignorant of the Use of the Law, to Show us our Sin, to
Reprove us and Condemn us for it, and so to make way for a firm and lively
Faith upon a Crucified Jesus, that should steadfastly look on him whom our Sins
have pierced, Joh. 19.37.
and should call to mind what St. Paul has taught us, That as Sin is the Sting
of Death, so the Law is the strength of Sin; 1 Cor. 15.56. Gal. 3.10.
And that as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the Curse?

Could any such doubt of the need we have of the Consolations of the Gospel,
who should First have in his thoughts that Expression of the Psalmist, Psalm.
143.2.
with which we usually begin our Public Devotions, Enter not into judgment
with thy Servant, O Lord: For in thy sight shall no man living be justified:
And Then should consider how St. Paul applies this general Truth to himself,
That he desired to be found in Christ, Phil. 3.9.
not having his own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith: And
that he tells us, That however there were many in the World who valued
themselves upon Wisdom ( by which, for all that, 1 Cor. 1.20, 21.
they were not able to know God) Yet the main thing that he put a Value on, was
the knowledge of Christ Crucified? 1 Cor. 2.2.


Of so great Importance is it to us, in all these respects, and for the
inciting of us to all Courage and Resolution in the doing of our Duty; Such an
abundant matter will it afford us of Praising and magnifying the Wisdom and
Mercy of God, and the Love and compassionate Kindness of our gracious Redeemer;
Such powerful Motives will it afford us to love, fear, and obey God, and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent: So much are we concerned to have the Subject of This
Day, and of my Text firmly fixed and rooted in our Minds, and in our Hearts!
Even This so great and necessary Truth of Christ's dying for us, and thereby
delivering us from the Fear of Death, and from the eternal Wrath of God; To
which we were before Obnoxious, and so should have been to all eternity,
without any Hopes of Deliverance from this dreadful Bondage, or without any
Possibility that by any thing we could do, we should be Accepted of by God, and
admitted to his Favor, If we were not assured from the great Mercy which we
this day Commemorate, That it is the Blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, that does purge our Conscience
from dead works to serve the living God. Heb. 9.14.


Two things therefore more I shall briefly do, 1. I shall give some more
particular account from the Scripture of Christ's Dying for us. And 2. I shall
point at some of those Heads from whence your own Thoughts may make a yet
farther, and a more close Practical Improvement of the whole.

1. Some more particular account from the Scripture.

1. The Death of Christ is represented to us in the Scripture as a Propitiatory
Sacrifice, and the Price of our Redemption. Romans 5.11.
By him we have now received the Atonement. And, When we were Enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the Death of his Son. V. 10. V. 1.
We have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. He has made peace
through the Blood of his Cross, Colos. 1.20. We have Redemption through his
Blood, even the forgiveness of sins, Colos. 1.14. The Chastisement of our peace
was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.5.

And this is more apparent, because together with the mention of I his, there
is a manifest Intimation of Gods Acceptance of it in our Stead. Christ is said
by the Grace of God, to have tasted Death for every man, Heb. 2.9. In our Stead
he suffered Death, and Gods Grace and special Favor is acknowledged in all
this, in that it was For Us that he died, that God Accepted it, As Such. And
therefore God's Love did appear to the World in giving his only begotten Son;
In sending him, that the World through him might be saved, John 3.16, 17. God
by all This has showed himself so clearly to be for us, that the Apostle asks
the question, Who then can be against us? He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, How shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
Intercession for us, Romans 8.31, 32, 33, 34. His Resurrection giving abundant
evidence of the Dignity of the Sacrifice of his Death, and of Gods gracious
Acceptance of it, And his Intercession for us, making good to us the Effects of
it.

2. That Gods Favor to us was to be obtained in This Way, namely, by the Death
of Christ, is so clearly foretold in Isa. 53. that nothing can be more. And the
same was also Typified by the Paschal Lamb, by the Sacrifices, and by what the
High Priest did on the great Day of Atonement. Thus Christ did put away Sin by
the Sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.26. By his own Blood he obtained eternal
Redemption for us, Ver. 12.

3. That this should be done, is represented to us in the Scripture as a
gracious and wise Contrivance of God, and as an Agreement between God the
Father, and the Son. Thus what was done against Jesus, Acts 4.27, 28.
is said to have been before determined by the Hand and Counsel of God. And
Act. 2.23. the Jews are said to have taken Jesus, and by wicked hands to have
crucified and slain him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God.

And as to the Agreement between God the Father and the Son, Bp. Pearson on the
Creed, p. 185.
that the Son should do all this on our behalf, we read Isa. 53.10, 11. of the
Lords bruising him and putting him to grief, and of making his Soul an offering
for Sin, and that he should bear the Iniquities of many: Upon his doing all
which, it is said, that he shall see his Seed, he shall prolong his days, and
the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. Now the Declaration of the
Sons Readiness to do all this, that so all might be effected that was agreed to
by the Father to follow upon it, is expressed, Heb. 10.5. etc. Sacrifice and
offering thou would not, but a Body have thou prepared me: In Burnt-offerings
and Sacrifices for Sin thou have had no pleasure: Then said I, Lo, I come to do
thy Will, O God. And the Apostle adds, ver. 10. By the which Will we are
Sanctified, through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all. Than
all which nothing can be more clear: So that those men must be supposed to
Delight in Contradiction, that can be bold and forward to object any thing
against the manifest Evidence of all this.

4thly, and lastly, The Scripture does give us some Grounds, according to our
weak measure of judging of the great and high things of God, whereupon we may
observe the Fitness of all this, and the Suitableness of those Means that have
been used, to the good and wise Ends for which they were used.

That an Expiation in general was necessary, Man's Weakness to fulfill the Law
does seem to be one Reason, Romans 8.3. What the Law could not do, in that it was
weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh; and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: Or, (as the Expression for sin,
(...), is otherwise expressed in the Margent of that Place) By a Sacrifice for
sin he condemned sin in the flesh.

And many Reasons have been given, why a Satisfaction should be made, before
God would pardon Sin, with respect to the Holiness of God, and to the securing
a due Honor and Regard to his Law, and to the expressing how Odious Sin was in
the sight of God. That so men, by having Pardon over-easily granted, might not
be Encouraged to Sin, or at least not so much Deterred from it: And that we
might the better judge of All This by considering at what a heavy Price our
Redeemer purchased Pardon for us.

And the Wisdom of God does farther appear in this, That the Price of our
Redemption was to to be paid in Our Nature: In which Nature also he was to take
Possession of Heaven; and therefore, a little before he left this World, he
laid this Consideration before his Sorrowful Disciples to Comfort them, Joh.
14.2, 3.
I go to prepare a Place for you, that where I am, there ye may be also.

Other Reasons may also be given in Explication of such Places as these,
namely, That the Captain of our Salvation was to be made perfect through
Sufferings; Heb. 2.10. Luke 24.26.
And, That Christ ought to have suffered these things, and to enter into his
glory. For, besides the Correspondence that cannot but be between what God has
Foretold, and what does come to pass, it may not be unfit to observe a
Denotation in all this of Gods Ordinary Methods in dealing with the Sons of
Men; He having thought it convenient to Exercise them with many Hardships
before he bring them to an Immutable Happiness. And therefore, God having
determined that those whom he purposed to Glorify should, even in this
respect, be Conformed to the Image of his Son, Romans 8.28, 29.
It was necessary that by Suffering he should be the Firstborn among many
Brethren.

And therefore we should Learn from what befell him to Expect Sufferings, and
from his Example both to be Willing to suffer, and How to suffer; That God is
to be Glorified in All that we are, or are Capable of, as well in Suffering as
in Doing, That we should never decline any Suffering, Mat. 5.10. 1 Pet. 2.18,
etc.
or any Occasion of it, for Righteousness sake: And that, even when we suffer
wrongfully, we are so to behave our selves as by our Christian-like Deportment
to express that Meekness, Patience and Submission, and hearty Praying for our
Persecutors, which he did express to the wonder of all that beheld him. We must
hence learn to be Subject to all those that have Authority over us, not only to
the good and gentle, but also to the froward: For unto this matter does St.
Peter apply the Argument he fetches from what our Savior suffered, 1 Pet.
2.21. Telling us that Hereunto we are called, because that Christ also suffered
for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow his steps: Who did no sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth: Who when he was reviled, reviled not
again: When he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that
judges righteously. This reason of the Fitness of our Saviors Sufferings is
very Pious, and the Application of it most Necessary.

But whatever Reasons we may take notice of, they must all be considered with
respect to Gods Decree and good pleasure, and may not so be laid down as to
make what We may Apprehend as Necessary, a Limiting of the absolute Freedom of
the Divine Will.

Which being premised, I am willing a little farther to insist upon the
Consideration of the Fitness that Christ should take Our nature upon him, and
therein suffer for us, from what we read in the next Verse but one after my
Text, That It behoved him in all things to be made like unto his Brethren, that
he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in things pertaining to God,
to make Reconciliation for the Sins of the people. Upon these Two things I
shall lay the main Stress of the matter, and consider them in such a way as may
be most pertinent to the main Subject of my Text.

1. That he might be a Merciful High Priest, the eternal Son of God took our
nature upon him. Not that he needed this to make any Addition to his Mercy,
which is infinite; but that having those Affections that are Common to our
nature, and in our nature having had a lively Sense and Experience of our
Infirmities, Heb. 4.15.
We according to that infinite distance there is between the Incomprehensible
and Self-sufficient God, and our poor Defective and Polluted nature, might with
the greater Assurance go to this Emmanuel, this God with us, Mat. 1.23. John
1.14.
to the Word that was made flesh and dwelt among us, and lay open all our wants
before him, 1 Timothy 2.5.
as the One Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus.

For, the infinite Perfections of God, which are nothing else but the one same
uncompounded Essence, though apprehended by us under differing Conceptions,
which we call Justice, Mercy, Power, etc. are so far above our Comprehension,
that when according to our Measure we endeavor to form such Notions of them as
may be a sufficient Ground for our Trust and Confidence, without the lest
Wavering, or even Suspicion that our Ignorance may be Prejudicial to us, we
find our minds so Dazzled with the exceeding glory of the Object, and our
thoughts so divided, and many times Contrary to each other; that the more we
Think of that which cannot be Comprehended by us, the more we are Confounded,
and do at last find it Impossible to have any firm Rest and assurance for the
Soul, which can pretend to Exceed that Discovery we have of God in Christ. He
that confiders what our Savior has told us of himself, I am the way and the
truth, and the life: Joh. 14.6.
No man comes unto the Father but by me, must be wanting to himself in
admitting that light which he may receive, if he be at any loss in the
certainty of this, That as in Christ we have all requisite Knowledge of God, so
in and through him we can only expect to find the Great God, who is Glorious in
Holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders, Exodus 15.11.
to be propitious to us.

It is therefore our Happiness that we have an High Priest, who having taken
our Nature upon him, has thereby brought what is Necessary for us to know of
God to that Measure that we are able to reach to. The safest Prospect we can
take of Gods infinite Attributes, is in him that is the brightness of Gods
glory, Heb. 1.3.
and the express Image of his Person. And though it may be a dangerous
Curiosity to lanch out too far into this Depth, yet this is our Comfort, and it
should be our main Concern, that we have in Christ not only a Satisfactory, but
even a Glorious discovery of that particular Attribute of God, in which our
lost Condition is chiefly concerned, even that of Mercy in our Merciful
High Priest.

2. It behoved the Son of God to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might
be a faithful High Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation
for the Sins of the People.

He having Undertaken to make Reconciliation, and by so doing to show himself
in a most eminent manner to be our High Priest, and the Manner of this
reconciliation being Agreed on between the Father and the Son, how could it be
but that the only Happiness of Sinful and Miserable Men must depend upon the
making of such a reconciliation as would be Effectual? How can we apprehend
Christ to have been a Merciful High Priest, but we must conclude that he was
therefore a Faithful High Priest? His Mercy inclined him to Compassionate our
misery, and to Intercede with God for Pardon, as our High Priest; and therefore
as our Faithful High Priest, he did not only Intercede for us, but he
interceded for us Powerfully. He did all that in the Wisdom and Decree of God
was necessary to obtain our Reconciliation. Thus in all things he was like unto
his brethren, that he might be a faithful High Priest; that what we had need
of, and what his undertaking the Office of Mediator did teach us to expect,
might fully answer our Wants and our Expectation from it.

All the promises of God are in Christ Yea, 2 Cor. 1.20.
and in him Amen. Every Declaration of the Favor and Love of God the Father to
us, is to have its Completion through Christ, in whom as his beloved Son, Mat.
3.17.
he is well pleased, and in whom alone he is Propitious to us. Luke 2.14.
And this Declaration of Peace on Earth, and Good will toward Men, is so
surely Founded, and firmly Ratified in Christ, that we are taught to ground our
Expectation of it upon the Faithfulness of God: In so much, that in the
general, every Act of a truly Christian and lively Faith, by which we receive
the Testimony of Christ, is a setting to our Seal that God is true; Joh. 3.33.
and in particular, If we confess our sins (which will contain our
Acknowledgment of Guilt and Obnoxiousness to Divine Wrath, and our looking upon
Christ as the Propitiation for our Sins, together with that true Repentance,
and sincere Affection of the Heart, which this Confession as being made not to
Man, but to God, does require) we are then taught to look upon God, as one that
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1.9.
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

But now, As all this declares the Faithfulness of God, and the Excellency of
Faith, which not only ascribes the greatest Honor to God, but receives that
Honor from God, as to have no less Evidence of its Certainty, than there is of
the Unchangeableness of God himself; seeing that it is impossible but that God
should Accept what he has freely declared, that he will accept on our behalf
from him whom he has appointed the Mediator between himself and us: So all
this does suppose that this Mediator does faithfully perform what, as such, he
undertakes to perform, in order that it may be Accepted of by God.

And therefore, seeing that the Holy Spirit of God in Scripture has declared,
Romans 3.25, 26.
That God has set forth Christ to be a Propitiation through Faith in his
Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of sins that are past,
through the Forbearance of God: That he might be just, and the justifier of him
that Believes in jesus, It becomes necessary, according to this wise
Appointment of God, and the agreement between Himself and the one Mediator,
between God and Men, that this Mediator should be made like unto us, and in
this likeness, that is, in our nature, suffer for our sins: That he might be a
faithful High Priest, that he might in truth and reality, and in the rigor of
Justice perform all, in things pertaining to God, which was thus necessary to
make reconciliation for the sins of the People. Even all that, as our High
Priest, he had undertaken to perform for our Perfect and Full Reconciliation,
and without which God was not obliged by any thing that he had freely Promised
to Accept of his Offering in our stead. For from what has been said, and from
the farther evidence of that Place (with which I will shut up this point) It
pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell; Col. 1.19, 20.
and (having made peace through the blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all
things to himself, it is put beyond all doubt that the Fathers Reconciling all
things to Himself by the Son, was no otherwise in the purpose and decree of God
practicable, but by the Peace which Christ made by the Blood of his Cross.

In all this we may discern much, though we cannot reach to the whole, of that
astonishing Wisdom and Goodness which is in the Scripture set forth to us, in
that the eternal Son of God took upon him our nature, that in that Nature he
might by Death deliver us from that Bondage to which we were subject through
Fear of Death; from which we have the greater security, because though it could
be performed in his humane nature only, yet the Dignity of his Person added an
inestimable value to his sufferings. It was the Eternal Son of God, Bp. Pearson
on the Creed, p. 186. Gal. 4.4. Joh. 1.14. Act. 3.15.
very God of very God, who when the fullness of time was come, was made of a
Woman, was made under the Law: It was the Word which was made Flesh, and dwelt
among us: It was the Prince of Life, the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2.8.
who suffered in humane nature, which he Assumed into the Unity of his Person;
being put to death in that Flesh, Romans 1.3, 4.
according to which he was made of the Seed of David, but as considered in an
inseparable Conjunction with that Spirit of Holiness, according to which he was
declared to be the Son of God with Power, by the Resurrection from the dead.

And now, Psalm. 116.12.
what shall we render unto the Lord for all his Benefits toward us? What is
Man, O merciful God, and gracious Redeemer, that thou should thus magnify
him, and that thou should set thine heart upon him? Job. 7.17.
How should this give us such a deep sense of the great things of our Religion,
as may quicken and increase in us all requisite Graces, as may show us our
Misery by nature, and lay more closely before us the Hope of Righteousness by
Faith, Gal. 5.5.
which through the Spirit we wait for! How should this increase our Humility,
our hatred of Sin, our Gratitude, and an unfeigned Resolution of the most
universal Obedience that we can possibly yield to the Faith, and to the Truth,
and to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ! Who besides all the other
Obligations he has laid upon us to obey him, does now more especially call
upon us, not only to consider that Victory which through him we have over
Death, Sin, and the condemning Power of the Law, but also to consider him as
the Captain of our Salvation, giving us a signal instance by those sufferings
he did voluntarily undergo, of that Obedience in which we must always be ready
to imitate him, whatever the Trials of it may be, that our Heavenly Father may
think good to call us to; and that indispensably, if we expect any benefit by
what he has done and suffered. For so the Apostle tells us, Heb. 5.8, 9. That
though he were a Son, yet learned he Obedience by the things which he suffered:
And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them
that obey him.

Which Obedience that we may ever judge our selves infinitely obliged to pay,
and be heartily willing to pay it to the utmost, let us ever have in our
thoughts what he has suffered for us, and that our sins were the Cause of all,
the Meritorious cause of his Sufferings, and that which gave the sharpness to
them; but especially let us be mindful of that incomparable Love which this
proceeded from, That so from the pleasing force of its constraint, as by a
compendious way, and yet no less expressive of all those Bonds of duty which
the Mercy we this day commemorate does lay upon us, not permitting any
Circumstance of it to want its due moments of weight, we may as from the joint
sense of all, be prevailed with to live as those that expect that Deliverance
which our most compassionate Savior has by his own Death obtained for us.
That we may live in all Holiness of life, and die with comfort, Looking for
that blessed Hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ: Who gave himself for us, that he might Redeem us from all
Iniquity, and Purify unto himself a peculiar People, Zealous of good Works:
Tit. 2.13, 14.
To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost be ascribed, as is most due, All
Praise, Honor, and Glory, henceforth, and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

