The Very COPY of a PAPER Delivered to the SHERIFFS, Upon the Scaffold on
Tower Hill, on Friday December. 7. 1683.
By Algernoon Sidney, Esquire Before his Execution there.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers; Friends, Countrymen, and Strangers;
IT May be expected that I should now say some Great matters unto you, but the
Rigor of the Season, and the Infirmities of my Age, increased by a close
Imprisonment of above Five months, does not permit me.

Moreover, we live in an Age that makes Truth pass for Treason: I dare not say
any thing contrary unto it, and the Ears of those that are about me will
probably be found too tender to hear it. My Trial and Condemnation does
sufficiently evidence this.

West, Rumsey, and Keyling, who were brought to prove the Plot, said no more of
me, than that they knew me not; and some others equally unknown unto me, had
used my Name, and that of some others, to give a little Reputation unto their
Designs. The Lord Howard is too infamous by his Life, and the many Perjuries
not to be denied, or rather sworn by himself, to deserve mention; and being a
single Witness would be of no value, though he had been of unblemished Credit,
or had not seen and confessed that the Crimes committed by him would be
pardoned only for committing more; and even the Pardon promised could not be
obtained till the Drudgery of Swearing was over.

This being laid aside, the whole matter is reduced to the Papers said to be
found in my Closet by the Kings Officers, without any other Proof of their
being written by me, than what is taken from suppositions upon the similitude
of an Hand that is easily counterfeited, and which has been lately declared in
the Lady Car's Case to be no Lawful Evidence in Criminal Causes.

But if I had been seen to write them, the matter would not be much altered.
They plainly appear to relate unto a large Treatise written long since in
answer to Filmer's Book, which by all Intelligent Men is thought to be grounded
upon wicked Principles, equally pernicious unto Magistrates and People.

If he might publish unto the World his Opinion, That all Men are born under a
necessity derived from the Laws of God and Nature, to submit unto an Absolute
Kingly Government, which could be restrained by no Law, or Oath; and that he
that has the Power, whether he came unto it by Creation, Election,
Inheritance, Usurpation, or any other way had the Right; and none must Oppose
his Will, but the Persons and Estates of his Subjects must be indispensably
subject unto it; I know not why I might not have published my Opinion to the
contrary, without the breach of any Law I have yet known.

I might as freely as he, publicly have declared my Thoughts, and the Reasons
upon which they were grounded, and I persuaded to believe, That God had left
Nations unto the Liberty of setting up such Governments as best pleased
themselves.

That Magistrates were set up for the good of Nations, not Nations for the
honor or glory of Magistrates.

That the Right and Power of Magistrates in every Country, was that which the
Laws of that Country made it to be.

That those Laws were to be observed, and the Oaths taken by them, having the
force of a Contract between Magistrate and People, could not be Violated
without danger of dissolving the whole Fabric.

That Usurpation could give no Right, and the most dangerous of all Enemies
unto Kings were they, who raising their Power to an Exorbitant Height, allowed
unto Usurpers all the Rights belonging unto it.

That such Usurpations being seldom Compassed without the Slaughter of the
Reigning Person, or Family, the worst of all Villainies was thereby rewarded
with the most Glorious Privileges.

That if such Doctrines were received, they would stir up men to the
Destruction of Princes with more Violence than all the Passions that have
hitherto raged in the Hearts of the most Unruly.

That none could be Safe, if such a Reward were proposed unto any that could
destroy them.

That few would be so gentle as to spare even the Best, if by their destruction
a Wild Usurper could become God's Anointed; and by the most execrable
Wickedness invest himself with that Divine Character.

This is the Scope of the whole Treatise; the Writer gives such Reasons as at
present did occur unto him, to prove it. This seems to agree with the Doctrines
of the most Reverenced Authors of all Times, Nations and Religions. The best
and wisest of Kings have ever acknowleged it. The present King of France has
declared that Kings have that happy want of Power, that they can do nothing
contrary unto the Laws of their Country, and grounds his Quarrel with the King
of Spain; Anno. 1667. upon that Principle. King James in his Speech to the
Parliament Anno. 1603. does in the highest degree assert it: The Scripture
seems to declare it* If nevertheless the Writer was mistaken, he might have
been refuted by Law, Reason and Scripture; and no Man for such matters was ever
otherwise punished, than by being made to see his Error; and it has not (as I
think) been ever known that they had been referred to the Judgment of a Jury,
composed of Men utterly unable to comprehend them.

But there was little of this in my Case; the extravagance of my Prosecutors
goes higher: the abovementioned Treatise was never finished, nor could be in
many years, and most probably would never have been. So much as is of it was
Written long since, never reviewed nor shown unto any Man; and the fiftieth
part of it was produced, and not the tenth of that offered to be read. That
which was never known unto those who are said to have Conspired with me, was
said to be intended to stir up the People in Prosecution of the Designs of
those Conspirators.

When nothing of particular Application unto Time, Place, or Person could be
found in it, (as has ever been done by those who endeavored to raise
Insurrections) all was supplied by Innuendo's.

Whatsoever is said of the Expulsion of Tarquin; the Insurrection against Nero;
The Slaughter of Caligula, or Domitian; The Translation of the Crown of France
from Meroveus his Race unto Pepin; and from his Descendants unto Hugh Capet,
and the like, applied by Innuendo unto the King.

They have not considered, that if such Acts of State be not good, there is not
a King in the World that has any Title to the Crown he bears; nor can have any,
unless he could deduce his Pedigree from the Eldest Son of Noah, and show that
the Succession had still continued in the Eldest of the Eldest Line, and been
so deduced to him.

Every one may see what advantage this would be to all the Kings of the World;
and whether that failing, it were not better for them to acknowledge they had
received their Crowns by the Consent of Willing Nations; or to have no better
Title unto them than Usurpation and Violence, which by the same ways may be
taken from them.

But I was long since told that I must Dye, or the Plot must Dye.

Least the means of destroying the best Protestants in England should fail, the
Bench must be filled with such as had been Blemishes to the Bar.

None but such as these would have Advised with the King's Council, of the
means of bringing a Man to death; Suffered a Jury to be packed by the King's
Solicitors, and the Undersheriff; Admit of Jurymen who are not Freeholders;
Receive such Evidence as is above mentioned; Refuse a Copy of an Indictment, or
to Suffer the Statute of 46 Ed. 3. to be read, that does expressly Enact, It
should in no Case be denied unto any Man upon any occasion whatsoever; Overrule
the most important Points of Law without hearing. And whereas the Stat. 25 Ed.
3. upon which they said I should be Tried, does Reserve unto the Parliament all
Constructions to be made in Points of Treason, They could assume unto
themselves not only a Power to make Constructions, but such Constructions as
neither agree with Law, Reason, or Common Sense.

By these means I am brought to this Place. The Lord forgive these Practices,
and avert the Evils that threaten the Nation from them. The Lord Sanctify
these my Sufferings unto me; and though I fall as a Sacrifice unto Idols,
suffer not Idolatry to be Established in this Land. Bless thy People, and Save
them. Defend thy own Cause, and Defend those that Defend it. Stir up such as
are Faint; Direct those that are Willing; Confirm those that Waver; Give Wisdom
and Integrity unto All. Order all things so as may most redound unto thine own
Glory. Grant that I may Dye glorifying Thee for all thy Mercies; and that at
the last Thou have permitted me to be Singled out as a Witness of thy Truth;
and even by the Confession of my Opposers, for that OLD CAUSE in which I was
from my Youth engaged, and for which Thou have Often and Wonderfully declared
thy Self.

We do Appoint Robert Horn, John Baker, and John Redmayne, to Print this Paper,
and that none other do Presume to Print the same.

Peter Daniel. Sam. Dashwood.


LONDON, Printed for R. H. J. B. and J. R. and are to be sold by Walter Davis
in Amen Corner, MDCLXXXIII.


