THE SICK POPES Last Will and Testament. With his several Legacies Lest to his
Dear Children the Jesuits, and others.
BEing very Crazie in Body, but extreme Sick in Mind, and sorely shaken with
the Fever of Envy for the Late miscarriages of our Holy Designs in England,
for the Subverting the Government and Religion there; and finding by the
several evil Symptoms, as blasphemous Belchings, and desperate Ravings, idle
Railings, frequent Cursings, silthy Spewings, blasts of Excommunications, and
many other the like Signs, that I am not far from my End: I do therefore thus
Ordain, Constitute, and Make this my Last Will and Testament in Order and Form
following.

JMprimis, I do bequeath my Soul to him that has most right to it, whether God
or the Devil: But since the Latter has been much my Friend upon several
occasions, and that I know him best, on condition he will give me the Supremacy
in his Kingdom, I shall bequeath it to him.

Item. As for my Body, I order it to be Buried with the usual Pomp and
Ceremonies, and that there be given a plenary Indulgence to him who shall Write
my Epitaph.

Item. I Will and Bequeath to my next Successor all my Spiritual Pride, and to
maintain it, St. Peter's Patrimony, with all the Incomes, Tithes, Benefits,
Profits and Emoluments, made and received by Sacrilege, Perjury, Simony,
Lying, Whoring, Murder, and the like, in as full and ample manner as was
possessed by any of my Predecessors; and also the Benefits and Profits accruing
by Indulgences, Pardons and false Miracles, pious Fraud, and holy Cheats
throughout my Kingdoms and Jurisdictions.

Item. I Will and Bequeath to my most Catholic Son a large pair of Asses Ears,
a large Pack-saddle sitted for his Back, with a great Bridle and Cauason fitted
for his Head and Mouth, on condition that my Successor may Ride him, as I and
my Predecessors have done.

Item. I Will and Bequeath to the Lords of the Inquisition, a Chest of Cruelty,
ten Boxes of Persecution, a Box called the Art of Tormenting, the Powder of the
Hearts of Tigers to be taken before they Examine their Prisoners, and for a
Cordial, a Bottle of the Blood of Martyrs.

Item. I Will and Bequeath unto all my Cardinals, seven precious Vials of the
Seven deadly Sins, with a large Box of Luxury, another of Sodomy, and a third
of Buggery.

Item. I will and Bequeath to the Franciscans, six Fardels of Hypocrisy, and
seven Chests of Franciscan Lies.

Item. I Will and Bequeath to the Dominican Friars, the History of Jetzer,
seven Trunks of Verbosity, and two of Backbiting.

Item. I Will and Bequeath to the Capuchins, one Box full of Deceits, and three
of Formal Austerities.

Item. I Bequeath among the Nunneries, seven thousand Chests of Concupiscence.

Item. I Will and Bequeath among the Friars and Secular Priests, as many Vats
of Lust, and fifteen thousand Dollars to pay off Surgeons and Apochecaries
Bills, for curing of the Venereal Disease.

Item. I Will and Bequeath to all the Hospitals and Prisons within my
Jurisdiction, for the Relief of the Sick and Poor Prisoners, three Halfpence.

Item. I Will and Bequeath to my most Christian Son, a Sword to cut off the
Hugonots, and a Halter to Hang himself, after he has miscarried in his designs
of becoming the General Monarch, and placing St. Peter's Chair in Paris.

Item. I Will and Bequeath England, Scotland and Ireland, to him that can take
them from the Right Owner.

Item. I Will and Bequeath all the Kingdoms of all Heretical Princes to the
Catholics that can take them from them, and a tenth part of every such Kingdom
so Conquered to the Jesuits.

Item. I Will and Bequeath the King of Portugal an Iron Yoke to wear at my
Successors will and pleasure.

Item. I Will and Bequeath to the Emperor, so long as he shall continue to
Persecute the Protestants, two Chests of Agnus Dei's seven Consecrated Roses,
two Crystal Crucifixes, and another of Gold, with Holy Relics, Trinkets,
Gewgaws, Vests, Copes, Caps, Tippets, Rochets, and other things for him to
dispose as he shall think good among the Electors.

Item. I Will and Bequeath all the Hollanders to the Devil, and their Lands for
the keeping of my Successors Hogs.

Item. I Will and Bequeath a Chest of Money to the King of Poland, to Fight
against Turks, that they may not think to molest my Successors.

Item. I Will and Bequeath the City of Geneva, for a place to make common Stews
in, and leave the Begging Friars Overseers of the Work, and to be Stipendiary
Pimps throughout the World.

Item. To all the Poor Whores at Rome, I give six thousand Crowns, and to all
the Rich as many Indulgences.

Item. I Give and Bequeath to my dear Sons the Jesuits, whom I make Overseers
of this my Last Will and Testament, Machiavil's Book fairly gilt, one Large Box
of Cunning, another of Policy, three of Deceits, seven complete Fardels of
Perjury, Lying, Whoring, and other precious Stuff, seven Vats full of Worldly
Greatness, and Outward Pomp, ten Chests of Impudence, and as many of
Insinuation, one of seeming Purity and Sanctity, one of Murders, also a Box
called the Art of Conjuration, a Chest full of Sanctified Daggers, a Cabinet of
Mother of Pearl to lay up their Morals in, and two Chests of Jesuits-Poisons,
and five of Poisonous Doctrine.

Item. I Will and Bequeath to my Natural Nephews all the rest of my Worldly
Goods to be equally divided amongst them.

Item. I Will and Bequeath an Annual Stipend of Two thousand Crowns to be
employed for the expunging several places of Scripture that point me to be
Antichrist, and the Whore of Babylon, and several others that declare the Fall
and Overthrow of our Power and Jurisdiction.

Item. I will and Bequeath the like Stipend to him or them who shall invent new
Anathema's, Curses, Plots and Conspiracies against all Heretics, especially
those of Great Britain and Ireland.

Item. I Will and Bequeath for the Writing of the Lives and Acts of all the
good Popes since Gregory Bishop only of Rome, and not Universal bishop, seven
Farthings, because the work will be small.

Item. I Will and Bequeath for Writing the Lives and Acts of all the bad popes
since that time, seven thousand Crowns, because the work will be great.

Item. I Will and Bequeath an Annual Stipend, to be given at the discretion of
my dear Sons the Jesuits, the Overseers of this my last Will and Testament, for
the writing of the holy life of Pope Alexander, and his good Nephew Casar
Borgia, for a pattern of Romish goods and policy.

Item. Because my good and faithful friend the Devil, whose kindness I cannot
but acknowledge in many things, though he miscarried in the late Conspiracy in
England, should not be forgot: I Will and Bequeath him Souls and Bodies, of all
those that shall call me Antichrist, or Whore of Babylon, or that shall write
against me or my holy Sons the Jesuits, and of those who shall make Plays on
any of our Predecessors, or shall write or speak Prophecies of our Downfall and
Overthrow, as I have full power and authority.

And Lastly. I order, constitute and appoint, my said old Friend Privy
Councillor to my Successors, and to manage the business of State Policy, with
the general Procurator of the Jesuits in a private Cabal; and I further
confirm, order and allow all Privileges, Grants and Emoluments, given to my
dear Sons the Jesuits, and desire them to see this my Last Will and Testament
fully and wholly performed,

as Witness my Hand and Seal. Signed with the Seal of the Fisher.

The Popes EPITAPH.
HEre lies an Old Man who would be a God.
Whose Pride on the Neck of an Emperor trod.
Whose Will was a Law, whose Lust was a Rule
Infallible, though an Idiot or Fool.
Could Kings Excommunicate soon in a breath.
Yet could not keep off the great Tyrant death.
Who proud as he was, assaulted his Throne,
And thrust the Infallible under this Stone.
Who can by this time Infallibly tell,
How many proud Popes are humbled in Hell.
With Allowance.
LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor over against
Stationers' Hall, 1689.


