A DECLARATION UNTO ALL, BOTH PRIESTS AND PEOPLE.

First, To the Priests, that they may read themselves, and see their shame.
Secondly, That people may know their Bondage, and to whom they are in bondage
to.
A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land; the Prophets prophesy
falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it
so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?

Jer. 5.30, 31. For the sins of her Prophets, and the iniquities of her Priests
that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her,

They have wandered as blind men in the streets, they have polluted themselves
with blood, so that men could not touch their garments.

Lam. 4.13, 14. By one William Stymson who is scornfully called a ^uaker.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-Spread-Eagle at the West End of
Paul's, 1655.

A Declaration unto all, both Priests and People.
ONe thing lies in my spirit which is a great burden unto me; therefore I
cannot but speak a word or two more unto you my fellow creatures. O you poor
people of England, my soul is sore troubled for you, because you are made
slaves and bondmen to the wisdom of the flesh! My heart within me is broken,
because of the Prophets, that has scattered my flock, and has not visited
them says the Lord, Jer. 23.2.9.
Jer. 23.2, 9. They speak a vision of their own hearts, not from the mouth of
the Lord. v. 16. They say still to him that despises me, the Lord has said ye
shall have peace: and to him that walks after the imaginations of his own
heart, no evil shall come upon you, ver. 17. The Prophets are the Taskmasters
of Egypt, and are servants to the King of Egypt, who is King of darkness, they
lay heavy burdens upon you, they make you make brick, and gather the straw your
selves. Exodus 5.6, 7. Exodus 5.6, 7.
They lay heavy burdens upon men's shoulders that are grievous to be borne, and
will not help with one of their singers: they cry out against men if they will
not hear them preach, then they are fallen away from God, and from grace, are
men of errors, charging the people they should have no society, or communion
with any of those that cannot submit to their humane teachings; they lay heavy
burdens upon their own hearers, telling them they must be much in prayer, and
much in hearing the public means, though they know not what true praying, and
what true teaching is: they bid you be much in fasting, hearing, and weeping;
and if you do so, there is no doubt but you shall be saved; here they make you
make brick, and to gather the straw your selves.

O you poor sons and daughters of Adam, the Lord has seen and heard your
affliction! Hosea 2.14.
He is come to deliver you out of this Egyptian bondage, and to bring you into
the wilderness, and there you shall serve him; for he has prepared for you
some Moses's, that shall go before you, and lead you into Canaan, your land of
rest and peace; For now I will arise, says the Lord, and stand up to deliver
my people; therefore woe unto the Pastors that destroy and scatter my flock,
Jer. 23.1, 2.
and have not visited them; therefore I will visit upon you the evil of your
doings. Je. 23.1, 2. Woe unto you Scriles and Pharisees, hypocrites, for you
shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men: for ye neither go in your selves,
neither suffer ye them that are entered, to go in. Woe to you blind guides, ye
pay Tith-Mint, and Annice, and Cummin, and have neglected the weighty matters
of the Law, which is Righteousness, Mercy, and Judgment; Therefore woe unto you
false Prophets says the Lord, for I have seen folly in the Prophets of
Samaria, they prophesied in Baal, they caused my people to err by their lies,
and by their lightness; for they are weighed in the balance of God, and are
found too light. The Priests preach for hire, and the Prophets divine for
money; yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? no
evil can come upon us. Math. 23, Matthew. 23. Micah 3.11. Zeph. 3.3, 4.
Mich. 3.11. Zeph. 3.3, 4. Therefore, woe unto you blind guides, for the fierce
anger of the Lord is gone forth in fury against you: a grievous whirle-winde it
shall fall grieviously upon the head of the wicked: the anger of the Lord shall
not return until he has executed Judgment, until he has performed the
thoughts of his heart. Now in these latter days ye shall consider this
perfectly, I have not sent these Prophets, yet they run: and I have not spoken
unto them, and yet they prophecy; Behold I am against the Prophets says the
Lord, that steal my word, every one from his neighbor, Behold I am against the
Prophets that use their tongues and say, thus says the Lord.

You have stolen these words from your neighbor, and so speak from hearsay,
and not from the mouth of the Lord, What is the chaff to the wheat? says the
Lord, other men have labored in preaching, and writing and you are entered into
their labors: or else what do you do with your studies full of old books of
other men's writings? reading them, spending your time in lasiness; for you must
have a whole week to study 2 Sermons out of other men's works adding something of
your own to it, making the people believe it is the word of God, when indeed it
is but the wisdom of the flesh. Here you make the people spend their money for
that which is not bread, and their labor for that which satisfies not, Isa.
55.2. Isa. 55.2.
You will not preach without they give you so much money by the year, here they
spend their money. Secondly, You feed them with husks, without the kernel, and
they cannot be satisfied with your husks; for what is the chaff to the wheat
says the Lord? if they had stood in my Counsel, and had caused my people to
hear my Word, then they should have turned them from their evil ways, and from
their evil doings. Jer. 23. Jer. 23.
Therefore thus says the Lord, her Priests in the midst thereof are like
Wolves ravening the prey to shed blood, to destroy souls, to get dishonest
gain, her prophets have dawbed them with untempered mortar, seeing vanity, and
devising unto them, saying, thus says the Lord God, when the Lord has not
spoken to them, yet they say, the Lord says, Ezekiel. 22.27, 28. Ezekiel
22.27.86. 2 These. 1.7. Zach. 13 2.
Behold the Lord comes in flaming fire, to render vengeance to all his
enemies, to burn up all the false Prophets and unclean spirits, 2 These. 1.8.
Zach. 13.2. For thus says the Lord, My watchmen are blind, they are all
ignorant, they are greedy dogs, which can never have enough, and they are
shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way, eveone for
his gain from his quarter: they stand praying in the Synagogue, and are called
of men, Master; Matthew. 11.27.
therefore Christ cries, Woe against them. Math. 23.

Secondly, They deny immediate Revelation from Heaven which I and all the Saints
have, and do witness; therefore they deny the Father and the son; For no man
knows the Father but the Son, Mat. 11.27.
and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Math. 11.27.

Thirdly, They deny the Scripture: for the Scriptures declare, that all the
holy men of God in all ages, the Lord made known himself to them, by
Revelation. Here ye make God mutable and changeable, Mal. 3.6. Heb. 13.6.
which is blasphemy; for says he, I am God and change not, and this we
witness, Mal. 3.6. for He is the same to day, yesterday, and for ever. Heb.
13.8.

Fourthly, They deny perfection to be obtained while creatures live in this
body of clay: here also ye deny the Scripture, which holds out perfection, to
be obtained while the creature lives, or never. Genesis 17.1. Matthew. 5.48. 1 Pet.
5.10.

First, Ye deny God, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Matthew. 5.48. who is perfect in himself, and
all the Saints are made perfect as they are gathered up into Him. Genesis 17.1.
Deuteronomy. 18.13. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. Heb. 6.1. Secondly, They deny the enjoyment and
life of the Saints and holy men of God, which they were come to, and lived in,
and did witness the same to all the world, Genesis 6.9. Psalms 37.38. 1 Cor. 2.6.
Phil. 3.15. here they are liars and deceivers, and keep poor people in their
sins and filthiness; for they tell them they shall never be perfect while they
live in this body of clay, and so people go on in pride, covetousness and
oppression, envy, malice, and bitter cruelty, and contention, lying, swearing
drunkenness, lust and uncleanness, with all kind of wickedness, so that none
returns from his evil doings; Therefore woe, woe unto them, for they go in the
way of Cain, and are in the error of Balaam, who love the wages of
unrighteousness, and so deny Christ who was perfect, and the Apostle who said,
as he is, so sre we in this world; for he was perfect, and so must we be: and
he that has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure, 1 John
4.17. chap. 3.3. chap. 2.6. There is a voice of the howling of the Shepherds;
for their glory is spoiled: a voice of the roaring of young Lions; for the
pride of Jordan is spoiled. Zech. 11.3. This is the word of the Lord, Woe to the
Crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is a fading
flower, Isaiah 28.1. The Pride of Israel does testify to his face therefore
shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity: Judah also shall fall with
them: they shall go with their flocks, and with their herds to seek the Lord,
but they shall not find Him, He has withdrawn himself from them. Hos. 5.5, 6.
Therefore my Counsel is, that you would leave off deceiving poor souls, and let
the Lord who is an everlasting teacher, teach them; Psa. 23. Isa. 40.11.
for He will lead them in the paths of Righteousness, for Psalm 23. He will
lead his flock like a shepherd, and carry his Lambs in his Arms, and carry
them in his bosom, and gently lead them that are with young. Isa. 40.11. But
as for you he will spew you out of his mouth, and ye shall be as unsavory salt
under the foot of men: Jer. 28.26.
because ye have taught rebellion against the Lord, Jer. 28.26. And I will
gather my People from all places whither ye have driven them, and will set
shepherds over them, which shall not be lacking, says the Lord, Ier. 3.15.
for I will give them Pastors according to my own heart, says the Lord, Jer.
3.15. they shall build up the old waste places, they shall raise up the former
desolations, that you and your fathers the Priests have made; for they shall be
called the Priests of the Lord, Isa. 61.4.5.
and men shall call them the Ministers of our God. Isa. 61.4.6. They shall
bring all your brethren for an offering unto the Lord, out of all Nations upon
Horses, and Chariots, and Litters, and upon Mules, and upon swift beasts to my
holy Mountain Jerusalem, says the Lord; as the Children of Israel bring an
offering in clean vessels unto the House of the Lord, I will also take of them
for Priests, and for Levites says the Lord; for New Heavens, and New Earth,
which I make, shall remain before me, says the Lord: so shall your seed, and
your names remain from one new Moon to another: and from one Sabbath to
another, shall all flesh come, and worship before me says the Lord. Isa.
66.20, 21, 22, 23. verses.
FINIS.

