THE SECOND PUNICK WAR Between HANNIBAL, And the ROMANS; Englished From the
LATIN of SILIVS ITALICVS By THOMAS ROSS.

Ordior Arma quibus coelo se gloria tollit
Aeneadum patiturque ferox Oenotria Iura
Carthago: da, Musa, decus memorare Laboru^
THE SECOND PUNICK WAR Between HANNIBAL, AND THE ROMANS: The whole Seventeen
BOOKS, ENGLISHED FROM THE LATIN OF SILIUS ITALICUS: WITH A CONTINUATION from
the Triumph of SCIPIO, To the Death of HANNIBAL. By THO: ROSS, Esquire Keeper of
His MAJESTY'S Libraries, and Groom of His most Honorable Privy-Chamber.

Aut Prodesse solent, aut Delectare Poetae.

Horat. LONDON, Printed by THO. ROYCROFT, and are to be sold by JO. MARTIN, JA.
ALLESTRY, and THO. DICAS, at the Bell in S. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXI.

CAROLUS Secundus Dei gratia Magna Britaniae Franciae et Hiberniae Rex.


Could Hannibal, and Scipio, in whom
All the vast Hopes of Carthage, and of Rome,
Were fixed, Revive, and see how easily You,
By Your sole Virtue, Kingdoms can Subdue;
How from the Rage of War, without the Stain
Of Blood, You Sacred Crowns, and Triumphs gain:
They would no more contend, who best might claim
Priority; but yield it to Your Name.
Rome would her General, Carthage Hers refuse,
And jointly You the World's Commander choose.
THO: ROSS.
TO THE KING'S MOST SACRED MAJESTY.
DREAD SOVEREIGN,
YOUR Majesty's most Gracious Acceptance of this Poem, when it wanted all
Ornament, both of the Press, and Pencil, has Emboldened Me to this second
Address, most humbly imploring, that, as Your Goodness was then, both to It,
and Me, the only Refuge from the Tyranny of the Times; You will, now, be
pleased to protect Us, from the Envy of this censuring Age, in the Sanctuary of
Your Name, which will make this Copy as Immortal, as its Original, and fix on
it a Character, as Indelible, as the Faith, and Obedience of

Your MAJESTY'S Most Loyal SUBJECT, and humble SERVANT, THO: ROSS.

The Epistle at BRVGES. TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY;
May it please Your Majesty,
I Had not presumed, to present this Poem to Your Majesty's view, had I not
believed, the Dignity of the Subject might, in some Measure, plead my Apology.
I know Your Majesty is familiar with the History, in its plainer Dress of
Prose; but this Author being frequent in the hands of few, but those, whose
business is Books, I have adventured to make him English; believing (since, to
my strictest Observation of Historians, he does not, in the main, deviate from
the granted Truth) that his Poetical Fancies do not only ad Luster, but a more
then ordinary Pleasure to the Story; for herein all the most eminent Actions,
in that famous War (which once disputed the Empire of the Universe) are
described, with so vigorous, and lively a Flame, that (if my English has not
too much depressed it) it may create in the Readers an emulation of the
renowned Performers: which I have not presumed to present to Your Majesty (who
are above them) as Examples for Imitation, but that, by reflecting on them,
Your Majesty may see what unperishable Monuments Great Persons may build to
themselves, in asserting their Country; and, that as Your Sacred Person is
endowed with all those Virtues, that rendered the Valiant HANNIBAL famous, or
SCIPIO a Conqueror: so, by the blessing of Heaven on Your Majesty's Designs,
some happy Pen may have Matter to build you such another Monument for future
Times; and that Your Majesty's Kingdoms being Restored to their former Glory
by Your Hand, Posterity may date their Happiness from Your Conquest; and Your
Name become an eternal Terror to Rebellion.

So prays, Your MAIESTIE'S most Humble, and most Obedient Subject, and
Servant, THO: ROSS.
Bruges, November. 18th. 1657.
TO THE KING.
HAD Fortune placed You on a peaceful Throne,
Had not Rebellion made Your Virtues known
(As Stormy Nights, and Dark Eclipses, may
Set greater Value on a Fairer Day)
Posterity had only understood,
That You, like Your Great Ancestors, were Good,
And Just; that, under You, the Church, and State
Flourished, and seemed above their present Fate.
But then, when Hell, and Earth, had Must'red all
Their Forces, to procure Your Father's Fall;
When Traitorous Hands had seized upon Your Crown;
When all Our Rights, and Laws, were trampled down;
Temples to Stables turned; Our Flamens fly,
Or else, for Victims, on their Altars die;
All Holy things profaned: That You, alone,
(As when the Arrian Heresy was grown
Too strong for Truth, and in one Holy Breast
Religion dwelt, exiled from all the rest)
Have against these Cruel Storms a Bulwark stood,
And (like the Great Restorer, when the Flood
O'reran the Universe) an Ark prepare,
To which all such, as Good, and Loyal are,
For Safety fly; had never been known to Fame,
And still this great Addition to Your Name
Had been concealed, and, after Your Decease,
The Good, but Easy, Titles of a Peace,
Had been Your sole Renown: but now we see,
What You in Peace, what You in War can be;
With what an equal Temper You can stand
The Shocks of Fortune, and Your Self command.
So that by You the Old instructed are
To live, the Young the worst of Fate to dare.
Hence all, but such, as are withheld by Charms
Of Wealth, or Rebels, that now fear Your Arms,
Come from all Quarters of the World, in You
Their Present Happiness, their Future, view.
Our Church within Your Walls, alone, can keep
Her Rites, and recollect her scattered Sheep.
Within Your Breast the Archives of the Law
Are safely lodged, and thence we hope to draw
Those Streams of Justice, that (as sacred Nile
Swells, and makes fruitful the Egyptian Soil)
Shall England Happy make, that, now, with War,
As rudely looks, as if hot Sirius Star
On it, in stead of Libya, only shed
Its Flames, and Men, worse then her Monsters, bred.
None then can justly of their Fate complain,
That are Exiled, unless You there did Reign.
You are our only Wealth; and whether You
Auster's, or Boreas Frozen Kingdoms view;
Or should You to America repair,
Or the other Indies bless: whereer'e You are,
All, that are Good, will follow You, and all,
That Place their Home, that Place their Country call.
But, Oh! (me thinks) I see, with squallid Locks,
Poor England, rear her Head above the Rocks,
And this great Blessing beg, That She may be
Eased of her Chains, and, by Your Conquest, Free.
Go then (Great Prince) go; may propitious Gales
Still wait upon You, and extend Your Sails!
Those, that from Tyranny their Native Land
Redeem, in Fame's large Temple Greater stand,
Then those, whose Foreign Conquests Trophies rear.
Such the Camilli, such the Decii were,
Whose Names, in Story, are more Sacred far,
Then theirs, that, happy in Invasive War,
Brought Western Gold, and Eastern Spices home:
These did Enrich, but those Preserved Rome.
Such (Sacred Prince) be Your Return! May We
Such Your Success, and such Your Triumphs see!
As when the Phoenix, in his Parent-Nest
Revived, in Triumph from the Spicie East
Returns, and Offers, on the Pharian Coast,
Due Sacrifice to his Paternal Ghost;
While all the Birds of Night, and those of Prey,
Into the Deserts fly, to give him way.
But a more Noble, and Obsequious Train
Their King attend, and Egypt, wanting Rain,
Sees Father Nilus Flow, without Excess,
Over all the Land, and give a rich Increase,
Without their Labor. May You then repair
The Ruins of Your Throne, and, sitting there,
Restore to Us again an Age of Gold;
While Your Blessed Father may, from Heaven behold,
Himself in You, as Great, as You are Good,
And all due Expiations for his Blood
On Rebels made. While all, that now for Fear,
Or Interest with them Comply, when there
They You behold, shall then, repenting, come,
And justly from Your Mouth attend their Doom.
When France shall tremble, and the Swede shall run,
Fearing Your Arms, yet further from the Sun.
And Victory, attending on Your Hand,
Wheree're Your Ensigns fly, shall take her Stand,
Resolved to fix with You, and shall divest
Her self of Wings, to Plume Your radiant Crest.
And then those Wounds, those Ills, which We before
So much lamented have, We will Adore.
THE LIFE OF CAIUS SILIUS ITALICUS.
CAIUS SILIUS ITALICUS (whether born in SPAIN, but of ITALIAN Extraction, or in
ITALY, but of SPANISH Predecessors, I shall leave PETRUS CRINITUS, GYRALDUS,
and others to dispute) in his Youth, applying himself to the Study of
Rhetoric, was a close Imitatour of CICERO, as the most perfect Pattern of
ROMAN Eloquence; after whose Example, he pleaded many Causes, with such
Success, and Reputation, that he was, in a short time, made a Judge among the
CENTUM-VIRI: nor was that Honor the sole Reward of his Virtues, though he
lived in the Reign of the worst of Emperors; for he was thrice Consul, and his
first Consulship was signalized with (that great felicity to the ROMAN Empire)
the Death of NERO. He was Pro-Consul of ASIA, and returned to ROME from that
Province, with great advantage, both of Wealth, and Honor. It is no mean
Argument of his wisdom, and Prudence, that in the most troublesome Changes of
the Empire, he never fell under the displeasure of the prevailing Party: For,
as he was the last Consul, that NERO made, so he dyed the last of all, that had
been Consuls under him. Among the chief of the City, neither covetous of Power,
nor Obnoxious to Envy, he was reverenced, and esteemed by all: and of such
Integrity in the Opinion of VITELLIUS, that, when he despaired of Force to
resist the Power of VESPASIAN, he selected him, with CLUVIUS RUFUS, and
SABINUS, to Treat his Conditions with the Conqueror. Nor did his Friendship
with VITELLIUS, eclipse him with VESPASIAN, having ever entertained it with
Prudence, and Moderation; so, that he survived that Noble Emperor, and was
Honored with a third Consulship by his Son DOMITIAN. Under whom, finding the
weight of Business too heavy for his declining years, he retired into CAMPANIA,
and recreated himself with the MUSES: and, as his Veneration of CICERO had
moved him to purchase a Lordship, called by that Renowned ORATOR, His Academy
(in imitation of that of ATHENS) where he composed his Books, entitled his
ACADEMIQUES. So his high Esteem of VIRGIL caused him to buy a Farm, once
belonging to that Prince of Latin Poets, to whose Tomb (near NAPLES) as to a
Temple, he frequently repaired; and celebrated his Birthday, more Religiously,
then his own. Nor was he only a Devote to his Memory, but a Noble Emulatour of
his Muse, after whose Example, he composed this Immortal Work, supplying with
his Care, and Judgment, the Defects of Nature. He was Co-temporary with many
other famous Wits, as LUCAN, STATIUS, PERSIUS, JUNIUS AQUINAS, and MARTIAL, who
is frequent in his Praises, and commits to his Censure his own Works, in this
Epigram, among many other, excellently Englished by my worthy Friend JO: HEATH
Esquire. Martial. ad Silium; Lib. 4. Epigr. 14. SILI, Castalidum Decus, etc.
Silius, who art the Muses Fame,
Who the fierce perjured Africk's Name,
And crafty Hannibal's ( Rome's Foes)
Make yield to the greater Scipio's,
With thy commanding, powerful Style,
Thy severe Looks laid by a while,
Whilst loose December now abounds
With cogging Dice, and Boxes sounds,
And wanton Lots fly round the Board,
Thou to my Lines some Time afford.
But (pray) thy smooth, not knitted Brow,
To this my looser Mirth, allow.
So soft Catullus Sparrow might,
Appear in our great Virgil's sight.
He was esteemed Happy by those of his Time, through the whole course of his
Life, unless in the loss of the youngest of his Sons, who dyed in his Youth;
the other he left flourishing in Wealth, and Consular Dignity. In this
Tranquillity, and Content, he lived to the Age of seventy five years, when,
surprised by an incurable Ulcer, he, Voluntary, set a Period to his Life by
Abstinence.

Hic Crine effuso, atque Emieae Numina Divae,
Atque Acheronta vocat Stygia cu^ Vest Sacerdos.
-- Haec patrio jussu ad Penetrasia fertur.
Vt fari primamque datum distinguere Lingua
Hannibali vocem Solers Nutrire Furores
Romanum sevit Puerisi pectore Bellum.
Augustissmo: ac Potentissmo: Principi Caroso Regi. Fidei Defensor: Domino suo
Clementissmo^ Ejus Ausp^^^js Inchonto. tandemquee Absoluto Secundo Magnae
Britan^iae, Franciae, et Hiber Tabulam Hanc, vna cum Silio suo Angli^an^, su^
Humillime Vovet, Dicat, Consecratque Thomas Ross^^s.

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The First Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
At nine Years Old, Young Hannibal does swear,
At the Altar, to maintain the Roman War;
His Father, leading into farthest Spain
The Libyan Army, is in Battle slain:
Him Hasdrubal, in chief Command, Succeeds;
Who, Hate Contracting by his cruel Deeds,
By a poor Slave's revengefull Hand does fall:
Then Hannibal, elected General,
Breaks Faith with Rome, and to Sagunthus brings
His Arms, whose famous Siege the Poet sings.
I Sing those Arms, by which Rome's Glory swelled
To Heaven, and Haughty Carthage was compelled
To bear Oenotrian Laws. My Muse, relate
Hesperia's Toils: how many Men, how Great,
Rome bred, of Old, for War. When Cadmus, who was the Son of Agenor, King of
the Phoenicians, from whom the Tyrians descended, and from them Did^, who built
Carthage.
Cadmus Seed
Perfidiously infringed their Sacred Deed,
And, struggling for Command, did War embrace.
While Fortune long was doubtful, where to place
Carthage, her Power increased by many Conquests in Libya, and Spain; and Rome,
no less Potent in Italy: they both aspired to the Empire of the World.
The Empire of the World. The Tyrian Lords
Thrice with Successless They had there sharp Wars: in the first, the
Carthaginians were overthrown, in a Sea Fight, by Lutatius the Consul, near
Aegates, (an Island between Sicily, and Africa) in the second, Hannibal was
subdued by Scipio Africanus. In the third, Carthage was subverted by Scipio
Aemilianus.
Arms, and Impious Swords,
The Senate's Peace, and League, which they had sworn
To Jove, first broke. And, while, with Fury born,
Each Nation mutual Ruin did contrive,
They, to whom Fate the Victory did give,
After the Battle of Cannae, nothing was wanting to the Subversion of the
Roman Fortune, but Hannibal's Vigorous Prosecution of his Victory, in
besieging Rome it self; which neglected, gave her time to recover that
memorable Defeat.
Were nearest to their Fall. The Phrygian Powers
In Triumph enter Carthaginian The Roman Conqueror ( Scipio) who first entered
Carthage.
Towers.
Rome's Palaces Hannibal, thinking to divert Qu. Fulvius from the Siege of
Capua, advanced with his Army to the very walls of Rome, where He was repulsed
by prodigious Storms. See Book 13.
Sidonian Troops surround;
While only in her Walls she Safety found.
The Cause of so great Rage, and Hate, with Care
Alluding to Dido's Execration at her Death, on Aeneas's Posterity; Exoriare
aliquis nostris exossibus ultor,
Qui face Dardanios, ferroque, sequare Colonos.
Then from our Bones shall some Revenger rise,
To persecute the Trojan Colonies
With Fire, and Sword --
Ogilby, Vieg. Aen. l. 4.


Bequeathing to their Nephews endless War,
Let me relate, and their dark Counsels scan,
The Source of so great Stirs, which thus began.
It is not easy to reconcile Appian, Eusebius, and Josephus, concerning the
Building of Carthage. The first affirming it to be built fifty Years before the
Destruction of Troy: the other seventy Years after the Building of Rome: and
the last, more then three hundred years after Troy was destroyed. But most
conclude it to have been built by Dido; who, when her Brother Pygmalion had
slain her Husband for his Wealth, which she got into her Possession, fled, with
such Friends, as hated the Tyranny of Pygmalion, by Sea into Lybia, where the
Inhabitants, refusing to let her share in their Country, She only desired to
purchase as much Land as She could encompass with a Bull's Hide. Which
Request, seeming ridiculous, was easily granted: and the Hide cut into small
Thongs, encompassed all that Ground, where the Tower called Byrsa was built,
which first denominated the City, that, afterward called Carthage, contended
with Rome in Greatness. See Appian, in his Book De Lybic.
Long since, when Dido fled her Native Land,
Polluted by her Brother's Impious Hand,
By Chance, on Libya's fatal Coast she falls,
And, on her purchased Land, erects new Walls,
With a Bull's-Hide, in Thongs divided round,
Encompassed, and set out the measured Ground.
Here Juno (as the Ancient Story goes)
Neglecting Argos, and Mycenae, those
Beloved, and pleasant Seats, desired to build
Eternal Mansions for her dear Exiled.
But, when She saw Rome raise her lofty Head
So high, and, crossing Seas, her Eagles spread
Through all the World; moved by a Jealous Fear,
She the Phoenicians filled with Thoughts of War.
But these, at first, repressed, and having lost
Their high Attempts on the Sicanian Coast. Where with a Fleet of three hundred
Ships, Luctatius overthrew a Navy of double the Number, and thereby forced the
Carthaginians to quit Sicily, Sardina and other Isles in the Sea; between
Africa, and Italy, and accept a dishonorable Peace.
Sicanian Coast,
Again she Arms prepares: One Captain may
Suffice Her to embroil the Earth, and Sea.
And He was Hannibal; who now puts on
All Her dire Fury: Him She dares alone
Even against the Fates oppose. When, Joy'd to find
A Man so bloody, casting in her Mind
The Ills, that She would bring on Italy;
Shall that Dardanian Fugitive (said She)
His Troy, and Houshold-Gods, twice Captivate,
In Spite of Me, to Latium translate?
And, for the Trojans, Latin Scepters found?
Ticinus, a small River in Lombardy, that falls into the Po, more renowned by
Hannibal's first Encounter with the Consul Corn. Scipio, who was worsted by
him, then by the City of the same Name. See the Fourth Book.
Ticinus, rather may thy Banks abound
With slaughtered Romans; and my Tr^bia, a River near Plac^ntia, where, in a
second Conflict, the Consul Sempronius was overthrown by Hannibal. See the same
place.
Trebia's Flood
Swell, through the Celtick Plains, with Trojan Blood;
And Troubled Thrasimen, a Lake in the Plains of Perusia, near which Hannibal
overthrew the Roman Army, and slew the Consul Caius Flaminius. See Book 5.
Thrasimenus backward fly,
Affrighted at the Streams of Purple Die.
So I may see Hesperian Cannae, a small Village in Apulia, where the Romans
received a most signal Overthrow. See Book 9.
Cannae Crowned
With Bodies, and in Blood the Valleys drowned;
And Thee, swift Aufidus descending, with a strong Current from the Hirpin
Hills, emptieth it self into the Adriatic Sea.
Aufidus, uncertain where
To leave a Ford, when as no Banks appear,
Laboring over Arms, and scattered Limbs, thy Way
To break into the Adriatic Sea.
This said; the Youth, who nothing else desires,
But Broils, and War, with Martial Thoughts she fires.
Faithless, repleat with Guil, Unjust was He,
And, when once armed, contemned the Deity,
Valiant, but Cruel, hating Peace, and fired
With a strange Thirst of Humane Blood, desired,
Then, in His pride of Youth, to wipe away
His Father's Not only the Dishonor of Amil^ar, (His Father's) Repulse out of
Sicily, but the Loss of many other Victories, by former Generals, both by Sea,
and Land.
Stains, and in the Sicilian Sea
To drown all Leagues. Juno, with Hope of Praise,
Inflames his Heart, to which His Soul obeys.
Now in His Dreams, He seems to break into
The Capitol, and over the Alps to go:
Often in His troubled Sleep, rising by Night,
With horrid Cries His Servants He Would affright;
Who found Him, bathed in Sweat, His future War
To wage, and beat with Rage the empty Air.
This Fury, against Italy abused,
While yet a Amilcar, about to lead an Army into Spain, and having Thoughts of
a greater War against the Romans, Hannibal, then nine years old, flattering
Him to go wtih Him, it is said, that He caused the Child to lay His Hand on
the Altar, and to swear, that, so soon as He was able, He would become an Enemy
to the Romans.
Child, his Father had infused,
Belus was the Father of Dido, and King of Phoenice, from whom Amilcar Barca
likewise descended, his Ancestour, her Kinsman, accompanying her in her Flight.
Born of the Noble Barcean Race, derived
From ancient Belus. For, when first, deprived
Of her Sichaeus, Dido fled from Tire;
The Belian Youth, t'escape the Tyrian's Ire,
Joined to her Train, resolved to embrace
Her Fate, and Fortune: from that Noble Race,
Amilcar, famed for Valor, claimed Descent,
And, studious former Hatred to foment,
Soon as his Son could speak, and Words expressed,
Kindled the Roman War within His Breast.
Amidst the City, circled by a Grove
Of shady Yew, that did all Light remove,
A Temple stood, built to Eliza's Ghost,
And dreadful held through all the Tyrian Coast.
Here (as it is said) the Queen with Her own Hand,
Her self from Grief absolved: sad Statues stand
Of Father Belus, and, in Order, all
His Offspring, with Agenor, whom they call
The Glory of their Line, Phoenix, whose Fame,
Gave to that Land, an everlasting Name.
At length, Eliza Her Image was placed next to her Husband Sichaeus, whose
Memory she preferred to all the Temptations of other Suitours, keeping her self
constant to her first Nuptial Vow, till the Arrival of Aeneas (as Poets feign)
but her Honor is vindicated by Historians, and by Ausonius in this Epigram (
CXI.) on her Picture.

I Dido am, whom thou beholdest here;
Fair, even to Wonder, such my Features were.
Such I: not such, as Maro feigned, my Mind:
Nor to incestuous Lusts my Life inclined.
For Me never did Aeneas see, nor yet
To Libya, with his Trojan Fleet, retreat.
I fled Iarbas Arms, and Rage, and by
My Fall ('it is true) preserved my Chastity.
Transfixed that Breast, which a chaste Sword did prove,
Not Rage, or Grief, incensed by injured Love.
Thus pleased, I fell, lived chaste: by Fame belied.
Revenged my Husband: built a City: died.
What envious Muse did Maro then excite
My Loss of Honor, falsely, so to write.
Believe Historians rather in my Fame,
Then those, who Thefts, and Lusts of Gods proclaim.
False Poets, who the Truth with Verse pollute,
And Humane Crimes to Deities impute.

joined to her Lord
For ever; at Her Feet the Phrygian Sword:
Next unto these twice fifty Altars stand,
Built to the Gods, that Heaven, and Hell command:
Clad in a Stygian Vest with scattered Locks,
The Priestess, here, Enna was a City situate in the midst of Sicily, where
Ceres had a Temple, near to which, was a Sacred Grove. Out of which Pluto stole
Pros^^pina, who is from thence called En^^a.
Ennaea's Power invokes,
And Acheron: when from the trembling Ground,
Sad Murmures breaking, through the Temple sound,
And Flames from the unkindled Altars rise:
Then, raised by Magic Songs, with horrid Cries,
The wandering Ghosts fly through the hollow Air;
While Dido, in her Marble, sweats for Fear.
Hither comes Hannibal, commanded by
Amilcar; who observed with Curious eye
His Face, and Gesture. Him no Horrid Rites
Of The Place, nor mad A Priestess of the Massiliae Nation, a Barbarous People,
most familiar with those horrid Rites, which were there to be performed:
wherein, as if inspired from Hell, she walked, as mad, about the Altars; like
that described by our English Lucan. ( Lib. 5.) Then first from her mad Mouth
the foaming runs:
And, in the horrid Cave, were heard at once
Broke-winded Murmurs, Howlings, and sad Groans.



Massila's Fury frights,
Nor the dark Pavement stained with Blood, nor Flames
Arising at the sound of Horrid Names.
Stroaking his Head, his Father kissed him, chears
His early Courage, and thus fills his Ears.
An unjust Nation, sprang from ruined Troy,
With their harsh Leagues do Cadmus Sons annoy:
If Fates deny the Honor should be Mine,
To wipe off this Disgrace, may it be Thine.
Think on a War may Italy destroy:
And may the Tyrrhene Youth (my warlike Boy)
Thy Rising dread; and teeming Mothers fear
Their Children to produce, if Thou appear.
Moved by this Language, He replies. By Sea,
And Land, so soon as Years will suffer Me,
With Fire and Sword the Romans I Will pursue,
And what Rhetaean Fates decree undo.
Neither the Gods, nor Leagues forbidding War,
Tarpeian Rocks, nor Alps shall Me debarr.
This my Resolve by Mars I swear, and by
Thy Ghost, great Queen. This said, to Hecate
Falls a black Victime: the Priestess enquires
The trembling Entrails, as the soul expires.
And when (as Custom was) with Art the mind
Of The Gods she had explored, she thus Divined.
The Aetolian Plains I see with Armies filled,
And Lakes, that with Roman.
Idaean Blood are swelled.
What mighty Bodies climb unto the Sky
By Rocks; on whose high top thy Camp shall lie?
Now from the Hills the furious Army falls
Into the Plains, and now the trembling Walls
In smoke are lost. I see Carthaginian.
Sidonian Flames
Through all Hesperia shine, and bloody Streams
Mixed with Eridanus. Even He, that bare
To Jove the third Opimous Spoils were such, as One General, or King, took from
Another. Romulus was the Author of their Title; ( Vid. Live. lib. 1.) who took
them first from the King of the C^nienses. The Second gained by Corn. C^ssus, a
Roman Tribune; by whom T^lumnius King of the Vej^ntes was slain. And the Third
were the Prize of Marcellus, in his Victory over Viridomarus King of the
Insubrian Gauls: himself after slun by the Carthaginians. Vide Lib. 15.
Opimous Spoils of War,
Lies dead on heaps of Arms and Men; his face
Retaining still its fierceness. But, alas!
What Tempests do with sudden storms arise;
While, from the gaping Heaven, swift Lightning flies?
The Gods Great things intend, I see even Jove
Engaged in War, and Thunder from above.
The silent Entrails now no more revealed;
But Juno all the Fates to come concealed.
Dangers, and tedious Labors are behind.
So keeping in his breast the War designed;
While to remotest Gades he does lead
His Troops, and at The two Hills, which make the Straight of Gibraltar: Calpe,
in the farthest part of Spain; and Abila in the extremest part of Mauritania,
where Amilcar was slain in Battle against the Spaniards.
Alcides Pillars spread
His Getick Ensigns, slain in fight, in pride
Of all his hopes, the Tyrian Captain died.
Him After the death of Amilcar, the Carthaginians (willing to continue that
War, found then very advantageous to the State) by a gen^r^l vote of the
Soldiers, and People, elected Hasdrubal, who was Son-in-Law to Amilcar, to
succeed in his Command.
Hasdrubal succeeds: whose Reign begun
In that rich Land, where the declining Sun
Stoops to the Ocean: whose Tyrant-sway
The Iberi, and Beticolae obey.
Of a dark Soul, implacable was He,
The fruit of whose Command was Cruelty;
His Thirst of Blood unquenchable appeared,
Esteeming it an Honor to be feared:
This Rage known Torments could not satiate.
And thus, while He both Gods and Men forgate,
Tagus of ancient Race, and noble Fame
For Beauty, and for valiant Acts, (his Name
Derived from Golden Tagus, and bewailed
Through all Iberia;) on an Oak impail'd,
He shows in triumph to's sad Peoples eyes,
A King deprived of his Obsequies.
Content with his own Bounds, he nor required
Maeonian streams, nor Lydian Pools desired,
Nor those rich Vales, where liquid Gold does flow,
And Hermus with the Sand does yellow grow.
He first the Fight began, and last withdrew:
And when, with his fiery Steed, he broke into
The Ranks, no Sword, no Spear, could him withstand;
But in both Armies, with his Conqu*ring hand,
Tagus in golden Arms by all was known.
Whom when his Servant saw impail'd upon
The fatal Oak, deformed; snatching a Sword
From's side, esteemed by his lamented Lord,
Into the Tyrant's Tent he sudden pressed,
And Hasdrubal, after he had eight years enjoyed his Command, was slain by a
Slave of a Prince of that Country, whom he had cruelly put to death. Our
Author dissents from Polybius and Appian, (the first affirming him to have
been murdered treacherously in his Inn, the other in Hunting) and adheres to
Livy, in the manner of his death.
pierced, with numerous wounds, his cruel Breast.
Grief, now, and Rage, the Tyrian Camp divide,
And all their thoughts to sad Revenge apply*de.
Some Fire, some burning Brass, some Racks prepare,
And some with Rods his bleeding Body tear.
All busy hands in various Torments choose
Their part: some deadly Poison do infuse;
Others the gaping Wounds with Flames do fill.
And (what was terrible to see, or tell,)
While with all art of Cruelty each Limb
Was stretched; that Bones in liquid Flesh did swim,
And Marrow, mixed with Blood, in smoke did rise:
His Courage still was firm, and did despise,
And scorn their Torments; or as he had been
A safe Spectatour only, and had seen,
Not felt, what they inflict, the The Constancy of this Slave is recorded by
Livy in these words; When he was apprehended by those that were present, his
Joy so far exceeded all sense of Torments, that he endured them with as
pleasant a countenance, as if he had escaped: so that the Poet does not much
Hyperbolize the History, when he adds, that he stoutly called for the Cross,
the last punishment of condemned Slaves.


Slave disdains
His fainting Executioners; complains
They Are dull, and stoutly for the Cross does call.
'Midst these despised pains, the General
Thus lost, the trembling Army with one voice,
And cry, on So soon as Hasdrubal came to the Command of the Army, he sent for
Hannibal (to the great dislike of Hanno's Faction, who apprehended his haughty
Spirit) into the Camp: where he soon acquired the Love of the Soldiery,
especially of the old Bands, (that had served under his Father) who were the
first, that, after the death of Hasdrubal, declared him General, at the age of
twenty five years: which, assented to by the rest of the Troops, was
immediately confirmed by the Senate of Carthage, where the Barcean Faction was
most prevalent.
Hannibal straight fix their choice.
The Image of his Father's Valor, Fame
Of the War vowed against the Roman Name,
His young and active Courage, noble Heat,
His Eloquence, and mind armed with Deceit,
Procured this Applause. And, first of all,
The Libyan Troops salute him General;
Next these, the Pyrenaean People; than
The warlike Bands of the Iberian.
When straight a Confidence of this Command
Enflames his soul: as if the Sea and Land,
Where Auster rules, or where the Lamp of Day
In Cancer lodged tormenteth Libya,
Or Asia did submit; or He beheld
A third part of the World Obedience yield.
His Bounds were where Famed Nilus sees the Day
First rise, and with seven Streams invades the Sea.
But where they milder look to either Bear,
Washed by the Herculean-sea, the Hannibal, now Commander of so vast an Army,
commanded likewise all the Dominions of the Carthaginians, which were then very
great, especially in Libya^ being Lords of all that vast Tract of ground, upon
the Seacoast, from Carthage unto Hercules-Pillars: where they found an easy
passage into Spain; whose fertile Plains, to be seen from the Hills of
Mauritania, invited them to that Conquest, which Hannibal obtained.
Plains appear
Of fertile Europe, from the neighboring Hills:
All the vast Tract beyond the Ocean fills.
Nor will huge Which terminated the Bounds of the Carthaginians Westward, in
the extreme parts of Mauritania; as Nilus was their Boundary Southward.
Atlas suffer that his Name
Farther extend: Atlas, whose Neck the Frame
Of Heaven does prop: Whose clouded Head does all
The Stars support; which, that withdrawn, would fall.
The Winter of un-melting Frost, and Snow,
Dwells on his Beard; upon his lofty Brow
A Grove of Pines, that cast Eternal shade;
His Temples by the Winds are hollow made;
And Rivers from his misty Jaws descend
In Froth; and both his sides with Seas contend:
Which, when his panting Steeds the weary Sun
Does drench in smoking Waves, do seem to drown
The Chariot. But where parched Africk's Fields
Appear, the barren Earth no Harvest yields;
But Serpents, with fell Poison charged; yet where
The Soil is blessed with a more temperate Air,
Nor Pharian, nor Ennaean Plains excel.
Here the The Numidians, a wandering People, descended (as Salust relates) of
the Persians, were part of Hercules his Army: and, after his Death, returning
into Spain, planted themselves in that part of Africa; which borders upon the
Carthaginian Bounds, and Mauritania. Their manner of fighting is described by
the Poet: and of what great use they were to Hannibal appears through the whole
Poem, agreeable to History.
Numidians insulting fill
One quarter of the Camp: no use they know
Of Bridles; but, when Horses swiftest go,
Them, with a Wand, between their Ears applied,
As with the Reins, or Curbs, at pleasure, guide.
A warlike Nation, that in Wars delight;
Yet trusting more to Fraud, then open Fight.
The Spanish Troops another part contained;
Aids, by his valiant Father's Trophies, gained
From Europe: whose fierce Horse with neighing fills
The Plains, and swiftly climbs the encamped Hills:
(Not Mars through Thracian Fields more furious drives
A Nation fierce, and prodigal of Lives,
Willing to hasten Death: for, when their Prime
Of years is over-past by conquering Time,
Scorning decay of Strength, or Age, to know,
Bear in their hands their Fate. Here Metals grow
Of matter mixed, Of Electrum there are two sorts: one whereof is a Gummy
substance, which becomes hard, and has formerly been found, (though not very
plentifully) mixed with the Sands of Eridanus; (the Po) which gave occasion to
the P^et to fain Phaethon's Sisters to be turned into Poplars, and their Tears
into that substance, of which some Statues were made for Augustus. The other
sort (meant here) is a mixture of the Seeds of Gold with Silver.
Electrum's Pallid Veins
Produced, and darker Steel the Earth conteins:
But God those Springs of Mischief deeply hides;
Yet Astur, covetous, the Earth divides,
And, in her mangled Entrails drowned again,
Returns with Gold, and bears the Precious Stain.
Hence Durius, and rich Tagus, with thy Streams
Contend, Pactolus, and that Ana (a River in Spain, now called Guadiana) which,
according to the Ancient division of Spain, separates Hispania Baetica (that
contained the Kingdoms of Granata, Andalusia, with part of N^w C^stil^, and
Esiramadura) from L^stania ( Portugal) it runs, for the space of eight Germane
Miles, under Ground, and afterward^ breaking forth again, emp^ieth it self with
a full Chanel into the Atlantic Sea. Upon some part of this was a Grecian
Colony, mentioned here by the Poet, and asserted by Cluverius. lib. 1. Introd.
Geograph.
Flood, that seems
To bring up Lethe to the People, and
Upon the Gravii rolls the Glistering Sand.
A Land where Ceres, and Lyaeus too
Do dwell, and Olive Trees in plenty grow.
These Nations, now, reduced to the Command
Of Warlike Hannibal, and in his Hand
The Reins of Rule: straight with his Father's Amilcar, who, by his cunning
persuasions, drew many Cities to the Obedience of the Carthaginians: in which
Art Hannibal no less excelled, as appeared, not only at his first entrance on
his ^ommand, which gained him the ready Obedience of that vast Army, led by him
into Italy; but among the Gauls, and Italy it self. And for this he himself
commends Pyrrhu^, at that Interview with Scipio, at the Court of Antiochus, as
an eminent Virtue in him. Vide Live. lib. 35.
Arts
He makes his Party; now with Arms subverts
Decrees of Senate, now with Bribes; appears
The first to walk on Foot; the first, that bears
A part, if haste require, a Trench to make;
The first, that all Attempts would undertake:
Remiss in nothing, that to Honor tends;
Refuses nature Rest, and watchful spends
The night in Arms. Now, by his Cassock known,
Mixed with the Libyssaean Foot, lies down
On the Earth, contending with the Steel he wore
In Hardness: sometimes he would Advance before
His numerous Troops; and, with a valiant Hand,
Perform in Person, what he did Command:
Sometimes, on his bare Head, he would entertain
The Ruins of the Heavens; their Storms, and Rain.
The Tyrians saw, the Asturians did admire
To see, when Jove did dart his forked Fire,
When Thunder fell in Storms, and every Blast
Of Wind struck forth the Flames, how bold he past
Through all, on's snorting Steed: nor would retire,
Though clogged with Dust, and scorched with Sirius fire.
And, when the sultry Air did fry with Heat,
That parched the Earth, they seemed Effeminate,
Who sought a Shade: while He, to exercise
His Thirst, where er'e he sees a Fountain, flies*
His sole Delight's, to dress a furious Horse
For War, and to be famous for the Force
Of's killing Arm: to swim a Stream unknown
Over Ecchoing Rocks: to assail the Foe, upon
The adverse Bank. The first, that would ascend
To scale a Wall, and, when he did contend
In open Fight, where er'e his Sword did go,
It carried Death, and Streams of Blood did flow.
Being therefore, now, resolved to violate
The Sacred League, he urges on his Fate.
And, where he can, on Rome's Allies does fall,
And storms in farthest Lands the Capitol.
His waving Ensigns (first displai^d for love
Of greater Wars) against Alteia, Hermandica, Arbacaia, and some other
Provinces of Spain, had before felt the Fury of the Carthaginians: but
Sagunthus was the first Confederate City (with the Romans) that was Attaqued
by them. It is now called Mor-viedro, Situate upon the River Iberus (or Ebro)
about a mile from the Sea; great only in its Fame of this memorable Siege.
Sagunthus move.
The Walls, first built by Hercules, not far
From Sea, upon a rising Hill appear.
Whose noble Name Zacynthus, there by Fate
Entombed upon the Top, did consecrate.
He, among others of Alcides Train,
Returned to Thebes, the famed Gerion Three Brothers, that Reigned in Spain,
with such admirable Unanimity; that all seemed to be Governed by one Mind:
which gave Birth to this Fable. They were subdued by Hercules.
slain.
Three Souls that Monster did inform, three pair
Of Hands, his Head a triple Neck did bear.
Earth never beheld another could survive
One Death, to whom the Fates three Lives did give.
Yet here the Conqu'rour showed his Spoils: and, as
In Heat of day the Captive Herds did pass
Unto the Springs, a Serpent, kicked by chance,
Big with enflaming Poison, did advance
His tumid Jaws, and by a deadly Wound
Laid the Inachian dead on Spanish Ground.
About that time, an exiled Colonie,
Born in an Island of the Grecian Sea,
Came from the South, and by Zacynthus there
To Ithaca's Dominions added were.
The Daunian Youth, wanting a dwelling, then
Rich in their Numbers, led by Valiant men,
Sent from a City, which we Ardea term,
Arriv^d, their weak Beginnings to confirm,
These, by Agreement with the Roman State,
Having their Liberties inviolate,
And Honor of their Ancestors, forsook,
What they had long endured, the Tyrian Yoke.
Against these, therefore, his incensed Bands,
Breaking the League, fierce Hannibal commands:
Disturbs their Peace with Arms. Shaking his Head,
Himself high-mounted on his panting Steed,
Surveys the Walls; and, when he had beheld
The trembling Houses, Summons them to yield
Their Gates, and Forts: tells them; That Italy,
Their League^, and hop'd-for Aids, far distant be;
Nor should his Mercy meet them, if subdu'de
By Arms: That all the Senate could conclude,
Their Laws, and Statutes, nay their Gods, and Faith,
Were now within his Power. And what he says,
Confirms by's Javelin thrown against the Walls:
Which on Caicus, vainly threatening, falls;
And through his Arms his Body pierced. He slain,
And tumbling from the Rampart, brings again
To the insulting Conqueror his Dart,
Reeking in Blood, and trembling in his Heart.
The rest the Example of the General
With Shouts pursue; and straight obscure the Wall
With a dark Cloud of Darts. Nor was their clear
Valor in Number lost: each man does bear
Himself against the foremost; as if he,
Alone, would undertake the Enemy.
Here one the Sling with frequent Jerks does ply;
Which, waved thrice about his Head, lets fly
A Weapon with the Winds; which in the Air
Is lost, to sight. Huge Stones another, there,
Flings from his sinewy Arm: this does advance,
And from the slippery nouse expells a Lance.
But Hannibal, before all other, rich
In's Father's Arms, now flings, with flaming Pitch,
A smoking Lamp; then hurls his Javelin; now,
With Stakes, and Stones, does press upon the Foe:
Or poisoned Arrows sends, and does applaud
Insulting, as they fly, his Quiver's fraud.
Such Shafts the Daci, on the Getique Coast,
Steeped in the Poison of their Country, boast,
And by the Banks of two-nam'd It being also called Danubius by the Scythians;
by reason of an unfortunate Expedition they once made over it. Eustath. in Dion.
Ister shoot.
But now it is decreed, and they, about
The Hill, their horned Bulwarks raise; and, round
The City, armed Towers do abound.
Oh Faith, by ancient Times adored, which now
On Earth, we only by thy Name do know!
The Valiant Youth resolved stand, and see
All hope of Flight cut off; their Walls to be
Begirt with Arms: yet think a noble Death,
Most worthy Rome. And that, Sagunthus Faith
By them preserved, she might more Glorious fall,
Then stand: they now more resolutely all
Their Strength collect. Then from contracted Strings
Stones of vast Bulk the Phocaean The Balista was a kind of Sling; invented
(says Pliny, lib. 7. cap. 36.) by the Phoenicians: wherewith they cast Stones,
Spears, Darts, etc. and is here called Phocaean: for that the Sagunthines were
descended of the Thebans, in whose Territory was Pho^^s.
Engine slings:
Or, changing weight, whole Trees with Iron bound
Ejects; that, breaking through, the Ranks confound.
A Shout both Armies raise, and furious come
To Blows; as if they had besieged Rome.
Among so many thousands, that did stand,
Circled in Arms, like Corn on fertile Land;
Bold Hannibal, desirous to enspire
Into his Armie's minds that furious Fire
Was lodged in his own Breast, does thus excite
Their Rage, and Stimulates the following Fight.
Do we stand still before a Captived Foe?
Ashamed we have begun? Ashamed to go
On with this Omen! goodly Valor! Shall
These be the First Fruits of the General?
Must we fill Italy with such a Fame?
Premise such Fights as this? Go on, for shame.
This said, with Fury they invade the Wall,
On which they leave their Hands, and backwards fall.
With that in haste a Mount was raised, above
The Town, whereon the Fighting Squadrons move.
But with an This Engine is described by Livi ( Lib. 21.) to have been very
long, smooth, and round: but square at the End; out of which came a Pike of
Iron, (like that of the ^omane Pile) in length three Foot: that it might
penetrate both through the Arms, and Bodies of the Enemy. About it they
fastened Flax and Pitch: which kindled, and gathering Flames in its Motion, was
not only very hurtful to all that stood in its way, but terrible to those at
Distance.
Engine, that by many hands
Was moved, the brave Besieged, the thronging Bands
Drive from the Gates. It was a mighty Oak,
Strange to behold; which, for defense, they took
From the Pyrenaean Hills. This, strongly lined
With numerous Pikes of Steel, could hardly find
By Walls, resistance; and about besmeared
With Sulphur, and with unctious Pitch, appeared
Like an huge Thunderbolt, and from the Walls
Of their high Arcenal it swiftly falls,
Cutting with trembling Flames the yielding Air;
(So Comets, running with their bloody Hair,
From Heaven to Earth, cast a Prodigious light)
And with a furious Force, that did affright
Even Hannibal, upon the Army flies,
Tossing their smoking Members to the Skies:
Till, fixed to a vast Tower, the active Flames,
These were called Plut^i by the Latins: and were made use of, to cover Beams,
and Planks, while the Soldiers were working; to keep them from being fired by
the Enemy.
Through the raw Hides, consume the mighty Beams.
And there, in burning Ruins, both the Men,
And Arms involves. The Carthaginians then,
Grown wise by loss, through secret Mines convey
Their Troops, and so the City open lay.
That labor of Great Hercules, the Wall,
To the Earth, with noise incredible, does fall;
And in its Ruin Stones immense does roll,
That Echo from the Alps unto the Pole.
So airy Rocks, torn from their Native side
By Storms, with horror do an Hill divide.
The Breach was soon, with Heaps of Bodies slain,
Obstructing their Advance, supplied again.
Amidst those Ruins, both with equal Rage
Do meet; before the rest, in's prime of Age,
Murrus, ennobled by a Latin Line,
Himself a Greek, his Mother Sagunthine;
Whose Parents, in a Sacred League combined,
Dulichian Nephews to Italian joined.
He, as stout Vaidus his Companions calls
Aloud unto the Fight, upon him falls,
And wounds him, where unarmed he did appear,
Between his Cask and Corslet; with his Spear
Stopping his bold Attempts: and, as he lies
Prostrate upon the Ground, insulting cries;
The art down, false Carthaginian: surely thou,
As Conqueror, did fancy foremost now
To climb the Capitol: but, what could move
Such bold Desires? Go, war with Stygian Jove.
Then, as Iberus fiercely did advance,
To succor him, fixed in his Thigh his Lance:
And, spurning Vaidus dying Face, quoth he;
This to the Walls of Rome your Way must be,
O feared, and valiant Hands! you all must tread
This Path, whither soever your Haste does lead.
And, as Iberus labored to renew
The Fight, his Target seized, and pierced him through
His naked Side. Iberus, rich in Land,
And Flocks, unknown to Fame, could well command
His Dart, and Bow, against a flying Beast:
Happy in's Private life, had he possessed
Those Weapons still, within his Father's Groves.
To succor him with speed now Ladmus moves:
On whom bold Murrus grimly smiling, Thou
(Said he) shall tell Amilcar's Shade below;
That this Right Hand, after the Vulgars fall,
Shall give you for Companion Hannibal:
Then, rising high, with his Sword on's Helmet struck,
Which, through the very brazen Cover, broke'
His cracking Scull. Then Chremes, who his Hair
Unshorn, like to a Cap, on's Brow did wear:
With Masulus, and Harcalo, though old,
Yet not unfit for War; who with a bold
And fearless Hand, a teeming Lyoness
Would stroke: then Bragada, whose Shield's Impress,
A River's Urn: Hyempsal, who the Wrack
Of Ships from dangerous Sands would boldly take,
As Spoils, from raging Seas: these sadly all,
Slain by his fatal Hand, together fall:
And with them Atyr, skillful to disarm
Serpents of Poison, whose sole Touch could charm
To sleep the banefull Adder, and apply
The Cerast, all suspected Broods to try.
And thou Hyarba, Garamantick, born
By Oracular Groves, thy Helmet, like an Horn,
Bending about thy Temples, there were slain;
Accusing Jove, and Destinies, in vain,
That often falsely thy Return expressed.
But now with Bodies slain the Heap increased,
And with the yet-warm Streams of slaughter smoaks;
While Murrus to the Fight aloud provokes
The General: as when, pursued by cries
Of Spartan Dogs, a Boar the Forest flies,
And, met by Hunters, on his Back does rear
The Ensigns of his Rage, and his last War
Attempts, and, as his foamy Blood he eats,
Groaning, his Tusks against their Javelins beats.
But in another Quarter, where Despair
Had forced the Youth to sally, free from fear,
That any Hand, or Dart, could work his fall,
Raging amidst the Troops was Hannibal:
And shakes his Sword, that was, not long before,
With Fire enchanted, on the Hesperian Shore,
Made by Old Temisus; whose powerful Skill
Could temper, with his Charming Tongue, the Steel.
So, in Bistonian Plains, the God of War
Brandished his Sword; when, in his Iron Car,
The Titans he pursued; or, with the Breath
Of's Steeds, and Noise of's Wheels, extinguisheth
The Flames of War. Hoscus, and Pholus, now,
Lygdus, and Dirius, to the Shades below,
By him were sent. To them Galesus fair;
The Twins, Chronus, and Gyas, added were:
With Daunus; who all other did excel,
In Pleading at the Bar, and by his Skill
(Though a most Just Observer of the Laws)
Still gained the Hearers minds unto his Cause.
But, furiously, with Rage transported, now,
This Language adds, as he his Darts does throw;
Whither, proud Carthaginian, will the Spite,
And Fury, of thy Father, thee incite?
Here are no Fabrics, by a Woman's Hand
Erected, purchased with a Price; or Land
To Exiles measured, by an Oxe's Hide:
Here the Foundations of the Gods abide,
And Roman Leagues. While thus he, boasting, speaks;
With a fierce Charge, the Carthaginian breaks
Into the fighting Ranks, that him surround,
And seizing on him Captive, having bound
His Hands upon his Back* commands him strait,
In slowly-killing Pains, to meet his Fate.
Then bids his Ensigns to Advance; and, through
The Heaps of Slaughtered Men, the Way does show,
Exciting all by Name; and gives away,
Sure of Success, the City, as their Prey.
But now, informed by some, that Fled, that Heaven
To Murrus, in another Part, had given
The Day with Victory, enraged, he flies
Like a fierce Tiger, and that Enterprise
Forsakes: while, as he goes, his Helmet seems,
Upon his Head, to cast forth killing Beams.
As when a Comet, with its fiery Hair,
A Kingdom frights, and scatters through the Air
Its Bloody Flames; which, as they issue forth,
With Horror, threaten Ruin to the Earth.
The Ensigns, Arms, and Men, unto his Rage
Give way; and, as he, Furious, does engage,
Both Armies tremble: while his Spear ejects
A Light, prodigious; that round reflects,
Like Lightning, on his Shield. As when the Waves,
Swelling up to the Stars, while Corus raves
On the Aegaean-Sea, hang in the Air;
Filling the affrighted Sea-mens Hearts with Fear:
And roaring, Thunder-like, as they increase,
Toss, to and fro, the trembling The Cyclades are Islands in the Arch^^pelago;
in number fifty three: Situate round about the Isle of Delos; and from the
Circle derive their general Name. Solin. cap. 17.
Cyclades,
Within their hollow Bosoms. Him, not all
The Darts, that do invade him, from the Wall;
Nor Flames, cast at his Face; nor Stones, by Art,
Excuss'd from mighty Engines, could divert.
Soon as a shining Crest he did behold,
And, by the Sun's reflection, Arms of Gold,
Besmeared with Blood, look red; enrag*d, he says.
See Murrus, who Our great Attempts delays,
And Libya's Affairs: I Will make Thee know,
What thy Iberus, and vain Leagues can do.
Keep still your Laws, Faith, Justice: but (said he)
Leave your deceived Deities to Me.
Murrus replies; The art Welcome. My desire
To Combat Thee, long since, did burn like Fire,
In hope to have thy Head: receive what is due
For all thy Fraud, and under Ground pursue
Thy Way to Italy; to thee this Hand
Shall a long Journey give to the Trojan Land,
And Alps, and high Pyrene, crowned with Snow*
This said, perceiving his approaching Foe,
From the high Breach, a firm, and weighty Stone,
With all his Strength, he takes, and hurls it down,
As he Advanced, and in its speedy fall
Oppressed him, as if stricken with the Wall.
Shame fires his Thoughts; nor, still wont to prevail,
Though checked, did then his conscious Valor fail.
Gnashing his Teeth, he labors to ascend
The Wall, through all the Darts, that it defend:
But when he nearer shined, and stood upon
The Rampart, all the Tyrian Troops came on,
And compassed Murrus round, who all the Host
Amazed, and soon among his Foes was lost.
A thousand Hands, and Swords, together shine,
Unnumber'd waving Crests on Casks decline.
Loud Shouts, and Clamours, from all Quarters came.
As if Sagunthus all were in a Flame.
Murrus, his Limbs, with instant Death possessed,
Drags after him, and these Last words expressed.
Alcides, Thou, who first these Walls did rea^,
Whose Sacred footsteps we inhabit here,
Avert this Storm, which menaceth our Land;
If I defend not with a sluggish Hand
Thy Walls. And looking up (as thus he prayed)
To Heaven, Shall not our bold Attempts (he said)
More justly favored be, Great Hercules?
Unless our emulous Valor thee displease.
For, not unlike thy self, when Mortal, Me
Thou shall acknowledge. Then propitious be,
Thou God, that first did First Sacked by Hercules, in the Reign of King
Laomedon.
waste unhappy Troy.
Me rather, who the Relics will destroy
Of the Phrygian Race, (said Hannibal) assist.
And, as he spoke, with all his Fury pressed
His Sword through Murrus. Troubled at his Fall,
The Youth run in; his Arms, and Corpse, by all
Well known, were to the Conqueror deni'de,
For Spoil: the Troops increase on either side,
And stand all in an Heap; while Stones rebound
Against Helmets, and while Spears against Targets sound.
Some hardened Stakes do throw, some ponderous Lead,
By which the Crest's divided on the Head,
And Glory of the Plumes in Slaughter fall.
And now the Rivulets of Sweat over all
The Hannibal.
Libyan's Members flow; on every Scale
Stand barbed Arrows, in his Coat of Mail.
No Rest, no Shelter left to shun a Blow:
His Knees decline, and weary Shoulders bow
Under his Arms. Then, from his parched Jaws,
His Breath like Vapor breaking forth, he draws
Deep sighs, and Groans, that checked by panting throws,
A broken Murmur through his Helmet goes.
His Courage his Adversity outvies,
Persuading Virtue, then to exercise
Her Strength, when Fortune frowns: and so outweighs
Dangers, by the Glory of ensuing Praise.
A sudden Noise, among the Clouds, breaks forth
From the divided Heaven, and shakes the Earth.
Jove, over both the Armies, thund'red twice;
Then, in an horrid Whirlwind, in the Skies,
Shak'd the revengfull Lance of unjust War,
And couched upon his adverse Thigh the Spear.
Ye, Rocks Tarpeian, where Powers Divine
Reside! and Trojan Flames, that ever shine
On Virgin Altars! what great things (alas)
To you, by that fallacious Meteor, was
Promised by Heaven? for, had it nearer been
Opposed against their Rage, we never had seen
A Passage through the Alps; nor Allia
Should ( Thrasimenus) to thy Streams give way.
But Juno, on Pyrene's Top, from far,
Beholding his so early Heat, in War,
And fruitless Onset, pulls his falling Spear
From the hard Bones, where it did first appear.
He hiding with his Shield the Blood, that swims,
Diffused in Streams, upon his wounded Limbs;
Fainting, with slow, and doubtful Steps, retires.
The Night, at length, arrives to their desires,
And both the Earth, and Sea, in darkness hides,
And, putting Day to flight, the Fight decides.
But their resolved Minds still watch, with Care,
And, laboring in the Night, the Breach repair.
Extremities of Danger do incense
Their Thoughts, and Courage; which takes Violence
From their Despair. Hence Men oppressed with Age,
Women, and tender Children, all engage
To help, and in that dubious State of things,
With his yet bleeding Wounds, the Soldier brings
Stones to the Work: the Senators their share
Partake, and Nobles, in the Public Care.
They meet, and chosen Men exhort, with Prayers,
To succor their deplorable Affairs,
And from Sagunthus Walls to drive away
The Tyrian Flames. Now, go, with speed (say they)
And, Though Plutarch (in Vita Marcelli) admires, that Hannibal in those many
Fights against the Romans, and their Allies, was never wounded: yet Livy (
Lib. 21.) is positive; that, in this Assault, going too unadvisedly near the
Wall, he was desperately wounded, by a barbed Lance, in the Thigh: which so
much discouraged his Men, that his Officers had much ado to keep them from
deserting their Trenches.
while the wounded Tiger is restrained,
And shut within his Den, their Ships ascend.
A speedy Diligence is best in War;
The way to Honor is, where Dangers are.
Haste ye, these ancient Walls, that can no more
Defend us, and our Faith, at Rome deplore.
Come home with better Fates: in brief, Return,
Before in Funeral Flames Sagunthus burn.
With this sad Charge to the next Shore they hie,
And over the Seas with swelling Canvase fly.
Now Tithon's rosy Wife had Sleep exiled,
And with her Horses early neighing filled
The Misty Hills, and shook her Reins, with Dew
Surcharged: when from the Walls the Youth did show
Their high-built Towers; that there by Night had bin
Erected, and the City compassed in.
All Action's laid aside; the Soldier's sad;
The Siege declines; that Heat stands still, that had
So Active been; and, in that Danger, all
Their Cares are turned upon the General.
The The Sagunthines.
Rutuli, by this, the Seas had crossed,
Beginning now to see the Herculean Coast,
And Cloud-encompass'd Rocks, that to the Skies
From the Monoecian Hills, hanging over a little Port, where Hercules had a
Temple, called Monoecian; because he would allow no other God to share with him
in his Temple. And it was a Canon in the Augural Laws; That no Chapel, or
Temple, should be dedicated to two Gods: for that, if any Prodigy happened,
the Priests could not determine, to which of the two Deities they should
Sacrifice. Val. Max. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Monoecian Hills aspiring rise.
Here Thracian Boreas his Imperial Seat
Maintains: and, always Cold, sometimes does beat
Upon the Shore; sometimes, with roaring Wings,
Cleaves even the Alps; and, when himself he flings
Over the Earth, from the still-Icie Bear,
No other Winds against him dare appear.
With whirling Blasts, the Ocean is broke
Into divided Waves, that rise in Smoke,
And hide the Hills from sight: then, as he flies,
Heaves Rhene, and Rhodanus, unto the Skies.
When this dire Fury of fierce Boreas they
Had escaped, the alternate Dangers of the Sea,
And their sad War, and dubious Success
Of things, with frequent Sighs they thus express.
Dear Country! Faith's renowned Temple! where
Are now thy Fates? do yet thy Towers appear
Sacred on Hills? Or, of so Great a Name,
Do Ashes, the sad Relics of a Flame,
Only remain; ye Gods? Oh! fill our Sails
With gentle Winds, and give us prosperous Gales;
If that our Temples Roofs the Fire invade
Not yet, or Latian Ships can lend us Aid.
In such Complaints, they, Day and Night, deplore
Their State; until on the Italian Shore
The Ship arrived: where Father Tyber, made
More rich by Anyo's Waters, does invade
With Yellow Waves the Sea. From thence they come
Unto the Walls of their own-kindred, Rome.
The Consul calls a Solemn Council; where
Fathers of unstained The Primitive Virtue of the Romans was eminently
Glorious in the incorruptible Poverty of some of their Consuls: as, Q.
Cincinnatus, Serranus, M. Curious Dentatus, Fabritius, etc. Who contemned the
Tentations of their greatest Enemies; contenting themselves with little
Possessions, and choosing, rather to command over a Wealthy People, then be
rich Themselves. See Livy's Epit. lib. 14.
Poverty appear:
Whose worthy Names do from their Triumphs rise.
A Senate, that in Virtue equalize
The Gods: such Men, as valiant Acts to Fame
Commend; whom just Desires of Right inflame:
Their Beards, and Hair, neglected on their Brow;
Their Hands familiar with the crooked Plow;
Content with little: Hearts, whom no desire
Of Wealth torments; who, often, did retire
To their small Lares, in Triumphal Cars.
But, at the Temple-Gates, the Spoils of Wars,
Their Captived Chariots, and Weapons stained
With Blood, Opimous Spoils, which they had gained
From Generals, with Axes terrible
In Fight; then Bars of Gates, whose Cities fell
Under their Fury; Targets, pierced through
By Darts, and Swords, hang up: and here they view
Aegathes War; Ships scattered on the Sea,
Whose Stems, there hanging, Testimonials be
Of Libya's vanquished Fleet: the Helmets here
Of curled Senones are fixed; and there
The Sword, the Judge of their The Romans, besieged, in the Capitol, by the
Gauls, Articled to give some Talents for their Ransom. The Gauls brought false
Scales; and the Roman Tribune refusing to weigh the Gold, so much to their
disadvantage, an Insolent Gaul cast his Sword into the heavier Scale;
intimating, they would have on all Advantage. But, Camillu^ arriving, at the
same Instant, to their Relief, this Sword was taken, and (the Gauls repulsed)
kept, as a Sacred Relic, in the Capitol.
redeeming Gold:
With these, the honored Trophies of the bold
Camillus was a Noble Roman, no less famous, for the Preservation of his
Country; then Romulus, for Founding it. He was five times Dictatour, and was
chosen, by the Besieged Romans, to his second Dictatour-ship, while he was in
Banishment. At which time he gave that memorable Defeat to the Gauls. The Arms,
which he wore in that Expedition, were preserved in the Capitol See Livy, lib.
5.
Camillus, and his Arms, in Triumph borne
(The Gauls now all repulsed) at his Return:
Here were the Spoils of great Pyrrhus, (descended from Ae^cus) King of Spain;
who gave great Testimonies of his Virtue, in his Expedition into Italy, to Aid
the Tar^^tines against the Romans. With whom he (...) several Conflicts, with
various Events; and was forced to quitt Italy, (...) Conduct of Fabritius.
Aeacides;
And Epirotick Ensigns: among these,
Dreadful Ligurian Crests, with the rude Shield
Of Spain, and Alpine The Gesa were a sort of Weapons, used by the Celtick
Gauls, and seem* by Varro, to have been Long, and Slender, like Darts. For that
such, as had no Targets, carried more then one of them, in their Hands. Those,
reserved in the Capitol, were, either taken by Camillus; or from the Celtae,
who (as Appian) were Mercenaries to the Carthaginians in the first Punick War.
Gesa, they beheld.
But, when the Ruins they had born, and feared,
As written in their Squallid Looks appeared,
So, that Sagunthus Image seemed to stand,
Before their Eyes, and their Last Aid demand;
Grave Sycoris, with Tears, began, and says.
Ye, Romans, famous for your sacred Faith;
Whom justly all the Nations, that give place
Unto your Arms, acknowledge Mars his Race;
Think not, that we have measured over the Sea,
For Dangers light. Our Walls, and Country, we,
Besieged, and falling, saw: and there, whom wild
Beasts, or the raging Seas, brought forth, beheld,
Fierce Hannibal. Far from these Walls, Oh! far,
Keep him, ye Gods, I pray: and to our War
Confine his dreadful Hand. What mighty Beams
He hurls? How Strong, how Great in Arms he seems?
Over Pyrene's Hills he makes his Way,
And, scorning that Iberus (now called Ebro) runs, from its Fountain in
Cantabria, with a large Navigable Stream, through a large Tract of Ground, by
many fair Cities, for the space of two hundred and threescore Miles. The
Carthaginians were obliged, by the Articles, between them, and the Romans,
after the first War, not to pass over this River. Which Articles were violated
by Hannibal; who this way led his Army, over the Pyrenae^n-Hills (near which
it runs) in his March toward Italy.
Iberus Flood should stay
His Speed, he lists Calpe, in his Bands,
With those, that dive in A People, bordering upon the greater Lybian Syrts:
whose manner of Living is described by the Noble Lucan* ( Lib. 9) and thus by
Mr. May -- Yet this dull Earth
Unto a few small Herbs affords (...)*
Which are the hardy Nasamonians Fare:
Near the Seacoast they bleakly seated are.
Whom barbarous Syrts with the World's Loss maintain.
For Spoil, they, still, upon the Sand remain;
And, though no Merchants Trade with them, yet Gold
They have; and still, by Shipwreck, Traffic hold
With all the World. --



Nasamonian Sands;
And seeks greater Walls: that, if the Sea,
Whose Rage we lately felt, shall cease to be
His Bar, into your Cities he will break.
Think you, this desperate Youth would undertake
The charge of so great Broils, and violate
With Arms your League, or thus precipitate
By Vows into a War; only to give
Sagunthus Laws, or Us of Life deprive?
Oh! haste, suppress the rising Flame, for fear
The Danger prove too strong for tardy Care.
Or, though you have no Terrors of your Own,
Nor yet the Seeds of War, which he has sown,
Appear: can your Sagunthus be denied
An helping Hand, so near in The Sagunthines were Allied to the Latins, by the
Ardeates, derived from the Zacynthians, who built Sagunthum.
Blood allied?
All the Iberi, Galli, all that are
Still thirsting under Libya's fiery Star,
Under his Ensigns march. We pray you, by
The adored Beginnings of the Rutuli,
Laurentine Houshold-Gods, and by these dear
Pledges of Mother Troy, with speed prepare
To Aid our Piety, who are compelled
For poor Ardean; from Acrisius, whose Daughter Danae built it.
Acrisionean Walls to yield
Sagunthine.
Tyrinthian Towers. You nobly did contend
Against a Sicilian Tyran, and defend
Campanian Walls; and, once, to have expelled
The Samnites strength, was a great Honor held,
Worthy Sigaean Ancestors. I call
To Witness you Eternal Fountains, all
That, from Time's birth, live in Apulia,
And close Numician Pools: when Ardea,
(Too happy then) first sent her Youth abroad,
With Turnus Altars, for a new Abode;
That they, beyond Pyrene's Hills, with care,
All the Laurentine Deities did bear.
Why then, as Members from the Body torn,
Or else cut off, should we expect your Scorn?
Or why should We, descended of your Blood
Be now oppressed, because w' have firmly stood
Unto your Leagues? Thus, having ended all
Their sad Complaints (a woeful Sight) they fall,
Spreading their Squallid bodies on the Ground.
The Senate strait consult, and, as they, round,
Their Votes do pass, bold Lentulus, who seems
Even then to see Sagunthus fall in Flames,
Advises; That they instantly demand
The Youth be punished, and to waste the Land
Of Carthage, with a sudden War, if they
Refuse. But Q. Fabius Maximus Dictator, famous for his prudent Conduct against
Hannibal; of whom, see Book 6.
Fabius, who did wisely weigh
Future Events, in Dubious affairs
Not too Elate, who would not stir up Wars
On Light occasions, and well was Skilled
To manage them, yet not engage a Field,
Gravely advised; In matters of that Weight.
Not to be Rash: but try, if it were the Hate,
And Fury, of the General had moved
Those Arms; or if the Senate them approv^d:
That some be sent, who truly might Relate
The State of things. This, as fore-knowing Fate,
And providently pond'ring in his Breast
The rising Broils, wise Fabius expressed.
As when, at Stern, a Skillful Pilot finds*
By Signs, some future Danger in the Winds,
Contracts, unto the reeling Yard, the Sails.
But Tears, and Grief, with Anger mixed, prevails
With all, to hasten on the hidden Fates:
And, from the Senate, chosen Delegates
Are to the General sent; and, if he stand
Deaf to the League, in Arms, have in Command,
To turn to Carthage City, and declare
Against them, who had forgot the Gods, a War.
The End of the First Book.
Bellum Segestare Sinu, pac^^que ferebat
Quid Sedeat legere
Neutru^ ^^n^^^te Senatu
Se^ clausas Acies, gremioque effuderit^ Arma,
Accipite infaustu^ Libyoe, eventuque Priori
Pa^ inquit, bellum: et Laxos effudit A^^ctus
Illustrissmo: Celsissimoque Principi Iacobo Secundo^ Caroli Secundi Fratri:
Totius Duci Eborac: Caroli Martyris Filio natu Angliae Thalassiarchae etc
Tabula Humillime^ Dicata

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Second Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Ambassadors from Rome, to Carthage sent,
Young Hannibal's deserved Punishment,
For Violation of the League, demand:
Against Hannibal, for them, does Hanno stand.
The Carthaginians doubtful to declare
What they intended; either Peace, or War,
Stout Fabius offers, and to Rome returns.
In voluntary Flames Sagunthus burns:
And, to deprive the Conqu'rour of the Spoil,
The People, and their Wealth, compose the Pile.
THE Latian Ship, over the Herculean Seas,
The Senate's grave Commands, with Speed, conveys,
And some chief Senators. Wise Fabius: who,
Descended of Tirynthian Race, could show
The People of Rome assailed on all sides, by their emulous Neighbors, the
Family of the Fabii undertook the War against the Veientes, and marched out
three hundred and six men. Of whom (says Livy in his second Book) the Senate
would have refused none, to be their General: but they were so unhappy in their
Expedition, that they all dyed on the Place. One Youth only remaining; of whom
this great Restorer of the Name descended. See more below in the seventh Book.
Three hundred Ancestors, that, in one Day,
The cruel Storms of War had cast away;
When Fortune, that unequally withstood
Their Labors, stained with Patritii, or Patroni, were the chief of the Roman
Nobility, so called either from their number of Clients, or from their Wealth,
Gravity, or Number of Children: out of which Romulus, at first chose his Senate
of an hundred, in time they came to be three hundred, and were called
Senators, and their Sons Patritii, endowed with extraordinary Privileges.
Patritian Blood
The Banks of Cremera. An equal Share,
With him, in Cares, Publius Valerius (who was made the first Consul with
Brutus, after the Expulsion of the Kings) had the Surname of Publicola given
him, for that he was a great Lover of the People, and their Interess. Of him
descended this Consular Person, who was joined with Fabius in this Embassy.
Publicola did bear;
Who did from Spartan Volesus descend,
And (as his Name imports) the People's Friend,
The Roman Fasces, as His Grand-sire, bore.
When Hannibal first heard, that these, before
The Port, arrived, bringing Decrees of State;
That now (amidst the Flames of War) too late,
Forsaken Peace demanded, and withal,
The Punishment of Him, the General,
Included in the League. He strait commands
His threatening Ensigns, and his armed Bands,
To show, along the Shore, their Targets, stained
With Blood, and Swords, that late in Slaughter reigned:
And cries, There Is now no Place for Words; you hear
The Tyrrhen Trumpets sounding every where,
And Groans of Dying Men. While yet they may,
'Twere best, they would return unto the Sea;
Unless they long to be besieged. All know
What Armed men, in Heat of Blood, may do:
How lawless Anger is, and what drawn Swords
Will dare to Act. By these His threatening Words
Repulsed, from the inhospitable Shore,
They haste to Carthage with the laboring Oar;
While he, to Animate the Army, rails,
And thus pursues the Vessel, as it sails:
Prepares that Ship to carry over the Sea
My Head? Alas! Blind Souls, and Hearts, that be
Proud with Successes! Does your Impious Land
Armed Hannibal to Punishment demand?
I Will come, never ask it: you enough of Me
Shall have, e're you Expect, and that proud She,
Which now does Foreign Gods defend, even Rome,
Shall fear for her own Gods, and Gates, at Home.
Although you climb Tarpeian Rocks again,
Or in your The Capitol besieged by the Gauls, in the time of Furius Camillus.
See below.
Capitol, immured, remain:
No Gold your captived Lives shall dis-engage.
Their Minds incensed by his Words, and Rage
Joined to their Arms, soon Clouds of Arrows, round,
The Skies obscure; and ecchoing Towers resound
With Storms of Stones: all prosecute the Fight;
While yet the flying Ship remains in Sight,
And views the Walls. But still the General,
His Wounds discov'ring, on his Troops does call
For promised Piaculum is properly a Sacrifice for the Expiation of some
heinous Offense. But here a vindictive Satisfaction for the Affronts, and
Losses, the Carthaginians had sustained in former Wars. If any carp at the
Word, as scarce English, I shall desire them to interpret the Author (for it
is his) without a Periph^asis, which I believe not proper in this Place.
Piacles; and fills the Air
With new Complaints. We, we (Companions dear)
Demanded are. See Fabius from the Poop
Shows, in Contempt, our Chains, and we must stoop
To the proud Senate's Wrath. If you repent
Of what is begun, or our just Arms intent
Be worthy Blame: the Roman Ship from Sea
Recall, I care not; come, deliver Me
Enchain'd unto the Wrack: for why should I,
Born of Eoan Belus Race, deny
To be their Slave? Although so many Hands
Of valiant Libyan, or Iberian Bands
Circle me in? No, let the Roman State
For ever rule, and Ensigns propagate
To every Age, and Nation: let us dread
Their Words, and Frowns. This said, deep Sighs are spread
Through all the Camp, and all convert their Hate
Against Aeneas Race, and stimulate,
With Shouts, their Rage. Among the Numerous Throngs
Of un-girt Libyans, and different Tongues,
Fierce in the War against the Roman Name,
Hasbyte with Marmarick Ensigns came,
Sprang from Hyarba Garamantick. He,
Of Ammon born, Medusa's Caves, that be
In Phorcas Isles, Cyniphian Mace, and
Sunburned Battiades, did once command;
With Nasamon, and Barce ever-dry,
And Autololian Woods, and Shores, that ly
Near Treacherous Syrts; Getulians, that ride,
Swift, without Bridles. His first beauteous Bride
The Nymph Tritonis was: from whence the Queen
Her Stock did boast; That Jove himself had been
Her Grand-sire, and in Groves, foretelling Fate,
The Names of her great Ancestors relate.
She, still accustomed to a Virgin-Bed,
In Hunting, and in Woods, her Life had led;
The Basket, or the Distaff, to her Hands
Unknown; She Hunting, and thy Virgin-Bands
( Diana) loved, and with Her Heel to impell
The running Steed, or flying Beast to kill:
As when, disdaining Getes, and Cicones,
Or Rhoesus Family, or Bistones
With Moon-like Arms, a Troop of Amazons
Through the Pangaean lofty Forest Runs;
Over Thra^ian Rhodope, or Hebrus Plains.
She, by her Countrey's Habit known, restrains,
With Fillets of fine Gold, her flowing Hair.
Her right-side to the Fight exposed Bare,
Her left a Thermodoantiack Shield,
Bright as the Sun, defends. Thus through the Field,
Shaking the smoking Axel-tree, she runs
With rapid Speed; while her Companions,
Some in light Chariots, by two Horses Drawn:
On Horseback some, that Venus Rites had known,
With a more Numerous Virgin-Troop, their Queen
Attend. But She still in the Van is seen,
Proud to expose to View her Fiery Steeds,
(Chosen among the Best her Country Breeds)
And, as about the trampled Field she scowrs,
Flings wounding Darts, into the highest Towers.
But Mopsus, not enduring to behold
Her, at the Walls so frequent, and so bold,
Through the moist Air Gortynian Arrows sends;
Which, by the winged Steel, where he intends,
Give deadly Wounds. He, born in Crete, was wont
(Bred among the Sibyls Sacred Caves) to Hunt
In the Dictaean Woods; and, when a Child,
Birds, mounting to the Skies, had often killed;
And stopped by sudden Wounds the running Dear,
That escaped the Toils; and, while he yet might hear
The singing Bow, perceived the Beast to fall.
Nor could that Age any, more justly, call
A skillful Archer: had Gortyna sought
The Conquest, and Eoan Arrows brought.
But, when his former Sports the sad Decay
Of Wealth denied, constrained to put to Sea,
With Meroe, his Wife, and Sons, by Fate
Into Sagunthus led, in low Estate,
A Guest he there remained. His hopeful Pair
Of Sons full Quivers at their Backs did bear,
With light, Steel-pointed, Cretan Shafts; which he,
Standing amidst the Valiant Youth, lets flee,
Against the Massilian Troops: by which bold Tire,
With Gravius, Glisco, Baga, did expire,
And Lixus; who deserved not to have bin
The Object of so certain Aim, whose Chin
The tender Down of Youth not yet indu'd.
But, with his Arrows, while he thus pursued,
The Fight, he aims against a Valiant Maid,
Forsaken Jove invoking to his Aid,
Unluckily. For Sarpe, born upon
The hollow Banks of Sandy Nasamon,
No sooner saw him turn the fatal Bow,
But she received within her Bosom (though
Far distant) the swift Arrow, and her Fate;
Which, with a gaping Wound, did penetrate
So far, that at her Back her Sisters all
First saw the Point appear. Before her fall,
Incensed, another of the Virgin-Train,
Endeav'ring to support, but all in vain,
Her dying Limbs, and watring with her Tears
Her Eyes, whose Light almost extinct appears;
With all the Strength, that Grief and Fury lent,
Toward the Walls a deadly Arrow sent,
Which through the Shoulder of Stout Dorilas,
(As swift as Thought) with Rapid force did pass.
The Bow was drawn so far, the Horned Ends
Did seem to touch; and, as the Nerve extends,
The space between the Bow the Shaft supplies,
And, when Released by her Fingers, flies
Before the active Winds: then, from the Walls,
Headlong, the miserable Wounded falls;
And turning, upside-down, his Quiver, round
His dying Body, scatters on the Ground
The shining Shafts. Then Icarus, who stood
Near him (alike in Arms) his Brother's Blood
Prepares to Vindicate; and as, in haste,
His Hand unto the full-charg'd Quiver past,
To draw an Arrow; by a weighty Stone,
That from the Hand of Hannibal was thrown,
He fell to Earth: a deadly Coldness all
His stiffned Limbs possessed; and, in his fall,
From's fainting Hand, into its place again
The half-drawn Arrow sinks. His Sons, thus slain,
When Father Mopsus saw; thrice, to pursue
Their wished Revenge, in a sad Rage he drew
His Cretan Bow: but thrice his Right Hand failed,
And Grief, above his former Skill, prevailed.
Then, by their Death, of all his Joys bereft,
Too late, alas! he grieved, that he had Left
His Native Soil: and, Snatching up the Stone,
That against thee (Poor Icarus) was thrown,
Beating his Breast, in Vain, when no Relief
His Feeble Hands could give, to Ease his Grief,
By speedy Death, himself he Headlong sends
From an High Tower, and on his Son extends
His dying Limbs. While thus Unfortunate,
In Foreign Wars, this Stranger met his Fate;
Teron, who kept Alcides Temple, and
With Incense, at his Altars, used to Stand,
To new Designs the Army Stimulates,
And, in a sudden Sally from the Gates,
Invades the Tyrian Camp. He neither Spear
In's Hand, nor Helmet on his Head, did bear:
But, trusting to his Strength of Youth, his Broad
And Lofty Shoulders (like the Hercules.
Oetaean God)
With an Huge Club, destroys the trembling Files
Upon his Head a Lyon's threatening Spoils,
With Gaping Jaws, he wore. An hundred Snakes,
Carved on his Shield, displayed their Marble Backs;
Among which a Monstrous double Hydra spreads,
In several Serpents, her divided Heads.
Thus Armed, he Iuba, and Micipsa, (Famed
For Valiant Deeds, and from his Grand-sire Named)
With aged Tapsus, and Saces and Moor,
Driven from the Walls, and flying to the Shore,
Fiercely Pursues; and, by one Valiant Hand,
The Streams of Blood the Neighboring Ocean stained.
For, Hot with Slaughter, and not satisfied,
That Idus, Rothus, and Iugurtha Died,
Or that Marmarick Cotho he had killed,
Hasbyte's Chariot, and her Moon-like Shield,
Shining with Gold, he covets, and to invade
With all his Force, and Rage, the Warlike Maid.
Him, with his Bloody Weapon, when she spied
Come rushing on, she turns her Steeds aside,
And in fallacious Circles, wheeling round
The Champain Field, divides the yielding Ground;
And, as if winged with Speed, she makes her way,
With her light Chariot, through the winding Sea.
Thus, while she flies his Sight, swift as the Wind,
The Horses raise a Cloud of Dust behind,
And, with the rattling Wheels, in pieces tear,
An adverse Troop. She, to augment their Fear,
From her sure Hand, did frequent Darts expel:
By which Bo^d Thamyris, and Lycus fell,
With Stout Eurydamas, the most importunate of all Penelope's Suitours: who,
urging her to Marry him, assured her her Husband Ulysses was drowned; but he,
arriving at the same time, slew him. See Hom. Odyss. Lib. 15.
Eurydamas, whose noble Name
Derived was from him; who, known to Fame,
Fondly to high Embraces once aspired,
And, mad with Love, Penelope desired:
But by her Chaste, and Modest Arts deceived,
And the fallacious Web, so often unweav'd,
Gave out Ulysses, in the Sea, was drowned.
But, what he feigned of him, he after found
Real in his own Fate, and he expires
By Ithacus dire Hand; his Nuptial Fires
Turned into Funeral Flames: and, here, of all
His Race the last, Eurydamas does fall,
Slain by a Libyan's Hand; whose Chariot makes
Her way, and all his Bones in pieces breaks.
But now, perceiving Teron, after all
His Labors, hard beset, to work his Fall,
Into the Fight again, the Furious Maid
Returns with Speed, and, as, about to invade
Her Fo, she waves her Ax before her Brows,
Herculean Spoils to thee, Diana, Vows.
But Teron, no less big with hopes of Praise,
Himself against her bounding Steeds does raise,
Casting before their Eyes the Lyon's Skin,
And threatening Jaws: affrighted, they begin
To yield to Fear, and, turning swiftly round,
Cast, with its Load, the Chariot to the Ground.
Then on Hasbyte, who endeavors now
To quit the Fight, he leaps, and, on her Brow,
Strikes his Herculean Club: by which her Brains,
Dashed through her broken Skul, upon the Reins,
And fervent Wheels, dispersed ly; while He,
Hasting that such a Trophy all might see,
With her own Ax cuts off the Virgins Head.
Nor was his Anger there determined;
But fixed on a Spear he strait commands
To bear't, in view of all the Punick Bands,
And drive the Chariot to the City-Gates.
These Slaughters Teron, ignorant of Fates,
And that the Favor of the Gods declined,
Commits; while his own Death's not far behind.
For now Fierce Hannibal, whose Face the Throne
Of Rage, and Death appeared, came Furious on,
Incensed, and grieved to see Hasbyte dead,
And the yet-bleeding Trophie of her Head
In Triumph borne. But when the Troops beheld
The bright Reflections of his Brazen Shield,
And, as he moved (though distant far) did hear
The fatal clashing of his Arms, with Fear
Possessed, they trembling fled unto the Walls.
As when, to their known Beds, the Evening calls
The winged People, from the search of Food:
Or, when, on the Cecropian Hills, a Cloud
The Hony-lab'ring Bees, on tender Flowers
Dispersed, affrighteth, with approaching Showers:
Like one congested Heap, unto their Hive,
And fragrant Cells, they haste, and Murmuring strive,
One Climbing on another Back, to gain
Their Entrance at the Port, and shun the Rain.
Thus Fear the Sagunthines precipitates,
While Few discern their way, unto the Gates.
Oh flattering Light of Heaven! is Death to be
Shunned with so great a Fear; which none can flee,
Since joined to their Birth? They cry for Aid,
Repenting, that they had this Sally made
From their safe Walls, and Works: while still, in vain,
Teron their Flight endeavors to restrain.
Sometime Dire Menaces, sometimes his Hand
He does employ, and cries, Why flee ye? Stand;
He is my Enemy: to me the Crown
Of this great Fight belongs; and from our Town,
And Walls, the Tyrians by this Hand, alone,
Will I Repel. Stand therefore, and look on:
Or, if this Pannick Terror drive you all,
To seek the inglorious Shelter of a Wall;
(A shame, the greatest, that the adverse Fates
Can add) against Me only, shut the Gates.
But Hannibal, while yet a sad Despair
Of Safety seized their Hearts, and horrid Fear
Did reign in every Breast, a while suspends
The Slaughter of his Enemies, and bends
His course unto the battered Walls, which he
Resolves, with all his Force shall Stormed be.
The Herculean Priest, perceiving his intent,
Labors, with speed, this Mischief to prevent.
At which Fierce Hannibal, more furious grown,
Cries out; Receive, fond Porter of the Town,
That Punishment of Fate, that shortly shall
Sagunthus self involve, and, by thy Fall,
Open the Gates. His Rage could not afford
More Words: but, as he waves his fatal Sword,
The Daunian Youth flings his contorted Oak,
With all his Force, against his Breast: the Stroke,
Clashing against his Arms, with horror sounds,
And from the hollow Brass the Club rebounds.
Then having lost his Weapon, and his Strength
Employed in vain, unto the Walls, at length,
He turns; and, with the rest, forsakes the Fight.
The insulting Conqueror upbraids his Flight,
And follows at his Back. Then, with sad Cries,
The weeping Matrons, lifting to the Skies
Their trembling Hands, from the high Walls, proclaim
Their Griefs, and Fears: some, calling him by Name,
Tell him, They fain would send unto his Aid,
And let him in; but that they are afraid,
With him they should receive the Conquering Fo.
But now (alas!) He can no farther go;
For Hannibal oppressed him with his Shield:
And, as the City from the Walls beheld,
Cry's; Go, and let Hasbyte Comfort take,
In thy approaching Death. And, as he spoke,
Into his panting Throat, which now abhorred
A longer Life, thrusts his revenging Sword.
Then, from the very Walls, in Triumph leads,
Through all the Camp, his Spoils, and captived Steeds
Which, at the thronged Gate, excluded stand
By Multitudes, that fled his fatal Hand.
And now, the raging Troops of Nomades
Haste to perform their Queens sad Exequies:
Adding all Funeral Rites, and bearing thrice
The Corpse of Teron (as a Sacrifice
To Hallow her dead Ashes) round the Pile,
Cast into the Flames his Club, and Lyon's Spoil,
And singed his Face, now of all Form bereft,
And to the Iberian Fowls his Carcass left.
While thus Affairs before Sagunthus stand,
They, who, at Carthage, were in chief Command,
Consult upon the War, and what shall be
Returned to Rome's Imperious Embassy.
Whose Orators with Fear their Hearts had filled:
While some to their Demands persuade to yield;
Urging their Faith, and League, that, long before,
They, and their Fathers, at the Altars swore,
The Gods to Witness called. Others the Love
Of the ambitious Youth's Attempts does move,
To hope for Better things, if they pursued
The War. But Hanno, a Noble Carth^ginian, Head of that Faction, that opposed
the Ambition of the Barcean Family. He always persuaded the Carthaginians to
keep Peace with the Rom^nes, and, endeavoring to induce them to it, by
weakening Hannibal's Designs, obstructed all resolutions of Relief for his Army,
and by that means, in the end, Ruined both him, and his Country.
Hanno, whom a Native Feud
Against the General, had long enflamed,
Their Doubts, and rash Applause thus stoutly blamed.
I might for Fear (grave Fathers) now refrain
(For him with Threats some labored to restrain)
To speak; but I will not desist, although
I saw my Death approaching by my Fo:
I call the Gods to Witness, and to Heaven
I leave those Sacred Vows, that we have given,
Which to perform, our Countrey's Safety calls.
Although Sagunthus be Besieged, her Walls
Sinking in Flames; not yet too late, my Fears
This Caution give, which often, with anxious Cares,
Have broke my Rest, that this pernicious Head
Might not in Arms, and War, be nurtured;
And while I live, my Sense shall thus abide.
His innate Poison, and Paternal Pride,
I know. And as those Pilots, who the Skies,
And Stars do Contemplate, what Storms will rise,
What future Winds will cause the Seas to Rage,
To the affrighted Mariners Presage.
Aspiring to a Throne, he does invade
The Reins of Rule. All Leagues, all Laws are made
The Objects of his Arms: with which he falls
On Cities, and, from far, against our Walls,
By this last Act, Aeneas Warlike Race
He has incensed, and we have lost our Peace.
His Father's Ghost, and Fury, him excites,
And Memory of those Nefandous Rites
He once did Celebrate, and what of Old
Vainly to him Massila's Priest foretold:
And thus the Gods, for his infringed Faith,
On his perfidious Head convert their Wrath.
With Hopes of a new Kingdom blind, he Arms
Against Foreign Lands, and now Sagunthus Storms.
But let him not commix this Citie's Fate
With his own Fortune; let him expiate,
With his own Punishment, his proper Crime;
For now (Dear Carthage) at this very time,
He Thee Besieges, and Assaults thy Walls.
We After many Conflicts by Sea, and Land, between the Romans and
Carthaginians, at length C. Luctatius the Consul put an end to the War, by a
Naval Victory, obtained near the Islands Aegathes (in the Sicilian Sea) where
the Carthaginians received so great a loss, that they were constrained to beg a
Peace, and yield to those Articles, which so much enflamed both Amilcar and
Hannibal, to break into a second War.
stained, with Generous Blood, the Aenean Vales,
And scarce with hired Laconians could maintain
The War: our Navies, broken on the Main,
Have filled up Scylla's Caves: and we have seen,
When, from Charybdis Bottom, Decks have been
Spewed up again. Vain Wretch! whose Soul no Fire
Of Piety does Warm! do but retire
Thy Thoughts, a while, upon Aegathes War,
And Limbs of Libya dispersed far.
Whither do run? Why, thirsting after Fame,
Thus, in thy Countrey's fall, do seek a Name?
The Alps may give Thee way, and Apennine,
Equal to them, his Snowy Head decline:
Yet, though thou gain'st some Ground, think thou to find
In those great Nations a mortal Mind?
That they to Fire, and Sword, will yield? Alas,
You fight not now with a A Neritian Race, such as were the Sagunthines. For
Sagunthum was at first a Colonie from Zacynthus, and Neritus, Islands subject
to Ulysses.
Neritian Race.
Though in the Constitution of the Roman Militia, none could ordinarily, be
admitted into the List of Soldiers, before the Age of seventeen years: yet
Examples there were of some, that at fourteen years were in Arms, and were
eminent for their Valor; as the Son of Tarquinius Priscus, Scipio Africanus
(who rescued his Father) Marus, etc. See Live. lib. 24. Silius, lib. 6. and 14.
Their Soldiers in the Camp are Bred, and Born,
And, e're the Down appear, their Cheeks are worn
With Brazen Helmets: Ease, and Rest's unknown
To Aged-Men, who Pale, and Bloodless grown,
In the continued Service of the State,
In Fronts of Battails do provoke their Fate.
My self have Romans seen, who pierced through
Their Bodies, from their Wounds their weapons drew,
And turned them on the Fo: their Valor I
Have seen, and thirst of Honor, when they die.
If therefore, Carthage, thou decline this War,
Nor give thy Self up to the Conqueror,
How much of Mischief may prevented be,
And how much Blood shall Hanno save for Thee?
Thus He: but Gestar, whose full Breast the while
With Anger, and Impatience, did boil,
Who twice to Interrupt him had essayed,
Replies. Is then a Roman Soldier made
One of the Libyan Councils, and must He
A Member of the Tyrian Senate be?
It Is true, he is not Armed; but, well I know,
In all things else, he is a perfect Fo.
Us with the Snowy Alps, and horrid Height
Of lofty Apennine, he would affright,
With raging Seas, and Waves of Scylla's Coast:
Nor wants it much, but he a Roman Ghost
Still dreads; their wounds, and Deaths, he so does praise,
And to the Stars an Humane Race does raise.
Trust Me; though some cold Hearts with Fear may be
Possessed, we have a mortal Enemy.
Even I beheld their Regulus vanquished by Xantippus, and led Captive to
Carthage. See Lib. 6.
Regulus, the Hope
Of the Hectorean Race, their strongest Prop,
His Hands enchain'd behind, with public Joy,
Into a Dungeon dragged, never seen by Day:
I saw, when Crucified, from the high Oak,
He, hanging, on Hesperia did look.
Nor does the Face of Boys, that Helmets wear,
A cause of Terror unto Me appear;
Or, that their Cheeks with early Casks are worn:
We are not of a Race so sluggish born.
How many Libyan Troops their Years, in Deeds
Of Arms, out-go, and War on Naked Steeds.
The General, so soon as He could speak,
At the Altar vowed, this War to undertake:
To waste with Flames the Phrygian People, and
His Father's Arms resolved to take in Hand.
Even in thy Sight (vile Hanno) he shall be
Revenger of the Roman Cruelty.
Then let the Alps increase, and let them join
To Heaven their shining Heads, with Apennine.
Yet I dare say (though vainest Fears do find
Their Influence upon a guilty Mind)
Even through those Rocks, and Snows, nay through the Stars,
His way he will make, and scorn to think them Bars,
Which Hercules or'ecame, or to despair
Of second Honor. But the former War,
Its Devastations, and the Miseries
Of Libya, Hanno, vainly, amplifies:
Nor would, that we should undertake, and try
Again, these Labors, for our Liberty.
But let him lay those Throws of Fear aside;
And with the Women, safe at home, abide,
And save his sighing Soul: we, Fathers, we,
(It is Decreed) will meet the Enemy;
And from thy Walls (dear Carthage) far remove
The Tyran Romans, in despite of Jove.
But if the Fates resist, and Mars give way,
That Tyrian Byrsa, be condemned this Day,
I Will rather choose to Die, then give up Thee
(Dear Country) to Eternal Slavery,
And go with Freedom to the Shades below:
For as to that (Good Gods) which Fabius now
Demands, that we lay down our Arms, and qui
Sagunthus, when our Troops have conquered it.
Then Burn your Targets, let your Navy be
Consumed in Flames, and wholly quit the Sea.
But if our Carthage has not merited
To feel such things, as these, ye, Gods, forbid
This Wickedness! oh, let our Generals hands
Be free, and not bound up in peaceful Bands.
This said, he silent sat, as custom was:
The Senate straight proceed their Votes to pass,
While Hanno urges to restore the Spoils
Of War, and add's the Author of those Broils.
With that the Fathers, leaping from their Seats,
Amazd, as if the Fo were at the Gates
OF the Temple, Pray the Gods, that it may be
A Fatal Omen unto Italy.
Fabius, perceiving that their thoughts were far
From Peace, and, treacherously, inclined to War,
No longer able to conceal his Ire,
With speed another Council does require:
And to the assembled Fathers does Declare,
That in his Bosom he brought Peace, or War,
Demands their Choice, that, Him they would no more
Detain, with dubious Answers, as before.
But, when no Choice of either they expressed,
(As if he would powered whole Armies from his Breast,)
Take then a War (said He) (with that let us fall
The Poet in this relation fallows Livy lib 21. Polyb. l. 3. etc. But both
Aulus Gell. and Marcus Varro differ in the manner of Fabius his Proposal. The
first affirms, that he delivered to the Carthaginians an Epistle, wherein was
written, that the Roman People sent to them a Spear, and a Caduce, two Ensigns
of Peace and War, that they might choose which of the two they pleased, and
that their choice, should be deemed that which was intended by the Romans. The
Carthaginians replied, They would choose neither; but that those, that brought
them, should leave which of them they pleased; and that should be their Choice.
Varro alleges, they sent neither Spear nor Caduce; but two little Tallies,
wherein both were Carved.
His folded Garment) take a War, which shall
To Lybia, like the former, fatal be,
In its Events. This said, incensed, He
The Temple, and the City quit's, and home
Returns, a Messenger of War to Rome.
While such at Carthage^ was the State of things:
Fierce Hannibal, enriched with Trophies, brings
Again his Arms before Sagunthus Walls,
And, to his Aid, those many Nations calls,
Whose Faith to Rome was shaken by the Fear
Of dubious War; while they continued there,
The People, that inhabited the Coast,
Presents (the best Callaick Art could boast)
Brought to the General. A shining Shield,
That Beams, like Lightning terrible, did yield.
An Helmet on whose rising Crest, a Plume
Did tremble, and in Whiteness overcome
The Alpine Snow. With them a Sword, and Spear
Which afterward to thousands Fatal were:
With treble Chains of Gold, a Coat of Mail,
Studded, against which no Weapon could prevail.
These made of Brass, and harder Steel, inlay'd
With Tagus Wealth, triumphing, he surveyed,
And in the Carved Works was pleased to see
His Nations happy Birth, and History.
Dido, the first Foundation there did lay,
Of Carthage: and, her Navy sent away,
The Work begun, the industrious Youth pursued.
Some with long Piles, and Banks, the Port include:
To others Reverend Bitias prepares
Their Houses Platforms, all in equal shares.
And, as they turned up the Fertile Ground,
A Warlike Horses Head, by chance, they found.
The At the first, they dug up the Head of an Ox, which they interpreted a
Token of Labor, and Servitude: but, at length (says E^stathius, finding the
Head of an Horse, they saluted it, as an Omen of a Wealthy Soil, and Rest; and
there began the Foundation of Carthage.
Omen, with an universal Shout
Of Joy, they all appeared to Salute.
Among these Figures sad Aeneas stands,
Wracked on her Coasts, and with extended Hands,
Deprived of his Fleet, and Friends, is seen
To crave Assistance. Him the unhappy Queen
Views with an earnest Eye, and Entertains
With Smiles: for Love within her Bosom Reigns.
Then they Described the Cave, and secret Rites,
The Lovers used to warrant their Delights.
Mean while the Cries of Men, and Dogs, appear
To Strike the Marble Sky; till sudden Fear,
Of an Impetuous Storm, the Hunters all
Constrained, for Shelter, into Woods to fall.
Not far from these, upon the Empty Shore,
Eliza Weeps, and did, in Vain, implore
The Trojan-Fleet's return, that now to Sea
Had hois'd up Sails, and bore her Love away.
Then on a lofty Pile, at last, She stands,
Wounded; and to the Tyrians commands
Revenging Wars: the Trojan Prince, the while,
Beholding, from the Sea, the flaming Pile,
To the propitious Fates his Sails does spread,
Resolved to Follow, wheresoever they Lead.
Apart from these, at Stygian Altars, stood
Young Hannibal (a Child) who secret Blood
Offered, with the infernal Priest; and there
The War against Aeneas Race did swear.
But Old Amilcar's Image seemed to be
Alive, and Triumph over Sicily:
You Would think he breathed forth War; within his Eyes
A Flame of Terror, with grim Aspect, lies.
Upon the left Side of the Shield, a Band
Of Spartans, with their ragged Ensigns, stand:
Whom Bold Xantippus, as a Conqu'rour, led,
From fair Amycle, famed by Laeda's Bed.
Near these, hung Regulus, their sad Renown,
Upon a Cross; and, to the trembling Town,
Faith's great Example was. A joyful Face
Of Things adorns the rest: where some the Chase
Of Beasts pursue, and carved Houses shine.
Not far remote from them, with parched Skin,
The black- Moor's Sister, in an horrid Dress,
Tames, with her Country's Speech, a Lyoness.
Then, through the Fields the wandering Shepherd moves
Free without Stop, through unforbidden Groves:
Near them his Dart, and (whom he Cydon names)
His barking Dog, his Cottage, and hid Flames
In Veins of Flint; then, lively, they expressed
His Pipe, familiar to the laboring Beast.
Then on a lofty Hill Sagunthus stands,
And by unnumbred Nations, and Bands
Of Fighting men, Besieged-round appears,
And to be pushed at, by their trembling Spears.
About the Borders, rich Iberus seems
To make the Circle up, with winding Streams:
Over whose Banks fierce Hannibal, from far,
Calls Upon Conclusion of the first Punick War, the Carthaginians were obliged
by Article, not to pass over the River ^berus: which Article was transgressed
by Hannibal.
Africk-People to the Roman War.
On his broad Shoulders, as he, smiling, tries
These wealthy Presents; proudly, thus, he cries.
In how much Roman Blood shall I imbrue
These Arms? with how great Punishments pursue
That Gowned Senate; that themselves do make
Revengers of the War we undertake?
Now in the Siege the Fo grows old, a Day
Concludes the Citie's Fate; while, weary, they
Their foreign Aids expect: but, now, no more
They look upon the Seas, or helpless Shore;
Disparing of their long expected Aid from the Romans, the Sa^unthines, after
eight months Sieg, resolved to die within their Walls. What miseries they
endured; till the City was taken, are at large discoursed in Livy, Lib. 22.
Perceiving Deaths approach, with sad Despair:
For their parched Entrails, the Contagious Air
Enflames, while Famine in their Bowels reigns,
And dries the Blood, in their contracted Veins.
From their fallen Cheeks, their sinking Eyes, within
Their Heads retire, and through the shrivled Skin
The Bones, and ill-knit Joints (a woeful Sight)
With Nervs, consumed, appear; the Dew of Night,
Some gather from the Earth, to quench the Fire
Of thirst, and some themselves do vainly tire
For Liquour, while they hardest Oaks do bruise;
Their rav'ning Hunger, which does naught refuse,
Compels them to strange Food. From Shields they tare
The Hides to feed upon, and leave them bare.
These Ruins of his City from the Sky,
Alcides looked on, with a mournful Eye,
But all in vain; for him the strict command,
And fear of his great Father Jove withstand,
That he should nothing act against the Decree
Of his severe Juno.
Stepmother. Therefore He,
Concealing his Design, to Faith repairs,
Who in the farthest part of Heaven, the Cares
Of Deities revolved: thus, at her Shrine
He tries Her Counsels: Thou great Power Divine!
Born before Jove himself: who art the Grace,
And Honor both of Gods, and Humane Race,
Consort of Justice, without whom nor Seas,
Nor Earth, can know the benefit of Peace;
A Goddess (where thou art) in every Breast!
Can thou behold Sagunthus, thus oppressed,
Unmoved? That City, which, for Thee alone,
So many, so great ills, has undergone?
For Thee the People die, upon Thee, all,
Men, Women, Children, that can speak, do call,
By Famine overcome: from Heaven relieve
Their sad Estate, and some Assistance give.
Thus He; To whom the Heavenly Maid again
Replies. I see all this, nor is it in vain,
That thus my Leagues infringed are: a Day
Shall come, Alcides, that shall sure repay,
With Vengance these their dire Attempts. But I
Was forced from the polluted Earth to fly,
To seek, in Jove's blessed Mansions, a Place,
Free from the numerous Frauds of Humane Race.
I left their Tyrans, that their Scepters hold,
Fearing, as they are Feared: that Fury, Gold,
The vile Reward of Treacheries, I left,
And above all, the Men, who now bereft
Of all Humanity, like Beasts by Spoil,
And Rapine, live, while Honor is the Foil
To Luxury, and Modesty by Night,
And her dark Crimes oppressed, avoids the Light,
The place of Right, the too imperious Sword
Does arrogate; and Force alone's Adored:
Virtue gives way to Vice; for look upon
The Nations of the Earth, and there is none
Is Innocent; their frequent Fellowship
In Crimes, alone, the Common Peace does keep.
But that these Walls, erected by thy Hand,
May in the Book of Fame for ever stand,
By an End worthy Thee, and that they may
Not give their Bodies up a Captive Prey,
To the Proud African (which, only, now
The Fates, and State of Future things allow)
The Honor of their Death will I extend
Beyond the power of Fate, and them commend,
As Patterns, to Posterity, and go,
With their praised Souls, unto the Shades below.
This said; The constant Virgin, through the Air,
Descends, and to Sagunthus does repair,
Then struggling with the Fates: through every Breast
She goes, invades their Minds, which, all-possest
By her great Deity, each Soul does prove
Her Altar, burning by her Sacred Love.
Now, as if Strong again, for Arms they cry,
And in the Fight their weak Endeavors try.
Strength, above Hope, they find, while the sweet Name,
And Honor, of the Goddess does inflame
Their Hearts; resolved, for her Sake, to dye,
And suffer things, far worse then Death; to try
The Food of Savage Beasts, and Crimes to add
To their Repast: but them chaste Faith forbad
Longer, with so much Guilt, to view the Day,
Or with Man's Flesh their Hunger to allay.
Her when Saturnia (who by chance came down
Into the Libyan Camp) within the Town,
(Which she so hated) saw, she does upbraid
The Virgin's Courage, and the War she made.
Then in a Rage, with troubled Steps she went
To that dire Fury, that does still torment
The guilty Souls, and thus upon her calls,
With Hands extended. Strike (said she) those Walls,
Thou Darling of the Night, let thy fell Hands
Destroy that People, it is Juno commands;
My self, within a Cloud, will here stand by,
And see the Issue of thy Industry.
Those Weapons, which sometimes immortal Jove
Disturb, by which thou Acheron do move,
Thy Flames of Sulphur, and thy hideous Snakes
In Curls, thy horrid Voice, which silent makes
Hell's Triple-headed Porter, and let fall
From's Jaws his poisonous Spume, commixt with Gall:
What Plagues, and Mischief, what Impiety
Soever within thy fruitful Breast do lie
Upon these hated Rutuli throw down,
And let Sagunthus sink to Acheron;
Thus let their peevish Faith rewarded be.
Incited by these words, Tisiphone
Invades the Walls, then, round about, the Hill
Trembles, and roaring Waves the Shore do fill.
Innumerable Serpents, on her Head
Hissing, her tumid Neck, and Breast, or'espread.
Death, walking with her, his wide Jaws extends,
On whom pale Sorrow, and black Grief attends.
All Plagues were present, that created were,
While Cerberus with howling rends the Air.
Forthwith she counterfeits Tyburna's Face,
Her Voice, her Speech, her Gesture, and her Pace.
Tyburna, of a Noble Race, derived,
Her Blood from Daunus, and by War deprived
Of her dear Husband, Murrus, then bewailed
Her Widdowed Bed. The Fury having veiled
Her self, with her sad Countenance, her Hair
Disheveled, to the Assembly does repair,
And tearing there her Cheeks, What end (said she)
Of our great Faith, and City, shall we see?
I have my Murrus seen, who, every Night,
Does me, with his yet gaping Wounds, affright,
And lamentably, thus, on me does call,
Fly, my Tyburna, Fly this Citie's Fall.
Or if the Conquering Libyan deny
The Earth to thee, to me, Tyburna, fly.
Our Gods are fallen, and we (poor Rutuli)
Are lost, the Punick Sword does all enjoy:
I tremble, and his Ghost, as yet, before
Mine Eyes, methinks, appears. Shall I no more
Thy Stately Palaces, Sagunthus, see?
Happy my Murrus was, thrice happy He,
Who saw his Country standing, when he fell!
But us Victorious Carthage will compel,
(After so many Miseries of War,
And Dangers of the Sea) their Yoke to bear,
And serve Sidonian Ladies, and to lie,
Captives in Libya's Bosom, when we die.
But you, whose conscious Valor does deny.
(O brave young Men!) a possibility
To be made Captives: to whom Death will be
A certain Guard against all Misery;
With your own Hands, your Mothers now redeem,
From Slavery. True Virtue gets Esteem
From hardest things. Go on, that Praise to gain,
Which, hardly, meaner People can obtain.
With this sad Language having filled their Ears,
The Fury to an ancient Tomb repairs,
Which on the Hill was built by Hercules,
A Landmark unto such as Plough'd those Seas,
By him adorned with all Sacred Rites.
Come thither, from the Bottom she excites
(A Sight of Terror) a Caerulean Snake,
With Spots of Gold upon his Scaly Back;
His shining Eyes are filled with bloody Flames:
And (to increase the Terror of those Beams)
He hisseth loud, and shakes his forked Tongue,
And then, with Speed, into the trembling Throng
Of Citizens he glides, and from the Walls,
Into the midst of all the City, falls.
Thence like a Fugitive he makes his way
To the Shore, and drown's himself in the foaming Sea.
Then all distracted are; and, as betrayed,
Its silent Mansion every frighted Shade
Fled, and refused to stay in Conquered Ground.
And, now, Despair of Safety does confound
Their troubled thoughts: they, now, their Meats detest,
And mad Erinnys Reigns in every Breast.
Nor is the Wrath of Heaven, which they endure,
More grievous, then the sad Delays of sure,
And certain Death. They all contend their Fate
To meet, with Speed, and longer Life do hate.
The Sagunthines driven to the sad Choice, either of yielding to the Mercy of
the Conqueror, or to perish by the Sword, which now had so far prevailed, as
that they had lost more, then half the City, and daily quitted Ground, so that
little was left to them within their Trenches, besides the Forum, (or great
Marketplace) they heaped all their Riches into one Pile in the Forum, and with
it burned themselves, to avoid the insulting Fury of their Enemies.
Amidst the City, by the Industry
Of all the People, raised to the Sky,
There stood a lofty Pile; to which they bear,
And drag, their Riches, that congested were
In long-continued Peace. Their Wealth, acquired
By their own Hands, and stately Robes admired
For Art, embroid'red with Callaick Gold
By Skillful Matrons; and their Arms, of old,
Brought from Dulichian Zacynthus, by
Their Grand-sires; and those Gods, the Rutuli
Took from their ancient Abodes; with all,
They could their own, as yet, Unconquered, call:
Their Shields, and hapless Swords, and what within
The Earth, in time of War, had buried been,
Again dug up, they add unto the Pile,
Glad, with themselves, to burn the Conqu'rour's Spoil.
When these the Fury saw together heaped,
She shakes her Lamp of Sulphur, lately steeped
In burning Phlegethon, and drives away,
By Stygian Darkness, the affrighted Day.
Then they began the Work, whose sad Renown
Their Memories, with lasting Fame, shall Crown,
Through all the World, and them Unconquered call.
For, prompted by Erinnys (Chief of all)
Scorning Delays, they all, with Triumph, pressed
The unwilling Swords into each others Breast.
Then thrice the Strokes of her Infernal Whip
Sound sadly through the City; while they dip,
In Blood of Kindred, their unwilling Hands;
And every Man, with thoughts of Horror, stands
Amazed at what he Acts, and does bemoan,
With Floods of Tears, the Mischief, that is done.
This, mad with Rage, and sense of Misery
So long endured, Obliquely turns his Eye
Upon his Mother's Breast: whilst that invades
His dear Wive's neck with his Ax; then, straight, upbraids
Himself, and, checked with Horror, does survey
What he is about to do; then flings away
The Weapon 'midst his Rage: yet cannot she
Escape; for straight the Blows redoubled be
By Fierce Erinnys: who through all appears,
And, with her Breath, inspireth horrid Fears.
Thus in the Husband Nuptial Love does dye;
Those sweet Delights are lost, and Memory
Of Hymeneal Tapers. Then, at length,
The mangled Corpse he throws, with all his Strength,
Upon the Pile: whence a dark Pyramid
Of Smoke, like a black Storm, does waving rise.
But thou, Tymbrenus, with unhappy Rage,
And Piety Sinister, do engage,
Amidst the Throng; hasting to Anticipate
The Carthaginians, in thy Father's Fate:
Wounding that Face, and Members, that were known,
In all things, to resemble so thine Own.
And you, Lycormas, and Eurymedon,
Twins, so alike in Form, that both were one,
Who labored in your Sons to propagate
Your Names, and Forms, here sadly met your Fate,
In prime of Age. But Thee that Sword, from Guilt,
Absolves; which, through thy Throat transfixed, spilt
Thy Blood, Eurymedon: while, with her Woes
Distracted, and deceived, Oh! whither goes
My dear Lycormas, your sad Mother cries?
Here turn thy Sword. And, as Lycormas dies
By his own Hand, She, by the Marks, again,
Of his Twin-shape, deceived, exclaims in vain;
Whither, Eurymedon, does Rage thee lead?
Thus she, with changed Names, invokes the Dead:
Till, to her trembling Breast the Sword applied,
On her ambiguous Sons, she, Frantic, died.
This noble Citie's horrid Miseries,
Their Punishments for Faith, and Prodigies
Renowned, with their sad Acts of Piety;
Who can relate, without a weeping Eye?
Scarce could the Punick Camp, and cruel Foe,
Forbear their Pity, in their Tears, to show.
That City, Faith's most ancient abode,
The Author of whose Walls was held a God,
By the Sidonians treacherous Arms does fall,
And their Forefathers mighty Actions all,
By the unequal Gods, neglected are;
While Fire, and Sword, consumes them every where
That Place, that wants a Flame, is impious held;
And Clouds of Smoke, with pitchy Darkness, swelled
Up to the very Stars: At length, the Tower,
That stood upon the Hill, by all the Power,
Of War, till then, untouched (from whence the Shore,
And Carthaginian Camp, they used to explore,
And all Sagunthus) with those blessed Abodes
On Earth, the Sacred Temples of the Gods,
Now sinks in Flames; whose Image, from the Main,
By Waves, that seem to burn, 's returned again.
But now, behold! Tyburna, 'midst the Heat,
And Rage of Slaughter, most unfortunate,
Armed with her Husband's Sword, in her Right Hand,
Her left a flaming Taper waving, and
Her Hair dishev'l'd, her Breasts made black, and blew,
With Strokes of Grief, and to the public View
Exposed with naked Arms, to Murrus Tomb,
Over Heaps of mangled Carcases, does come.
As when, tormenting Souls, the Infernal King,
With Groans, like Thunder, makes his Courts to ring,
Alecto at his Throne does strait appear,
To act his Will, and Plagues administer.
Her Husband's Arms, that lately with much Blood
Defended were, as then she weeping stood,
Upon the Tomb she lays, and, having prayed
The Elysian Ghosts to entertain her Shade,
She puts the flaming Taper underneath,
And willing to accelerate her Death,
These, in the other World, my Self (said She)
My dearest Murrus, will convey to Thee.
Then, taking up the Sword, her self she laid
Upon his Arms, and gaping did invade
The rising Flames, Dispersed on the Ground,
Promiscuous Heaps of half-burnt Bodies, round
About her ly unhappy Funerals!
As when a Lion, fierce with Hunger, falls
On trembling Flocks, which greedily he eats,
With Thirsty Jaws, and Blood regurgitates
From his extended Throat, over mangled Heaps
Of half-devour'd Trunks, and Limbs, he leaps;
Then walking round them, with a murmuring Noise,
Grinding his Teeth, surveys what he destroys:
The Sheep, and Guardian-Dog, the Company
Of Shepherds, with the Master, prostrate ly,
And all the Cottages, as if a War
Had late been there, destroyed, and wasted, are.
And now the Carthaginians do invade
The City, by these Ruins empty made.
This Work, which glad Saturnia commends,
Performed, to Hell Tisiphone descends,
And with her, as in Triumph, proudly takes
A numerous Troop, to the Infernal Lakes.
But you, blessed Souls! who cannot equaled be
By any Age, since Time's Nativity,
May you the Glory of the Earth become,
And, happy Dwellers in Elysium,
Adorn the chaster Seats of pious Souls!
But you, whom unjust Victory enrolls,
In Fame's large Catalogue, ye Nations, hear;
Break not the Leagues of Peace, nor Crowns more dear,
Then Faith esteem. Cast from his Country, He
A wandering Exile, through the World, shall be;
And Carthage, trembling, shall behold him Fly,
While, in his troubled Sleeps, affrighted by
Sagunthine Ghosts, He Will wish he there had died
By them: and, when a Sword shall be denied,
This great unconquered Captain then shall go,
After the Forces of Antiochus were broken, and he made Peace with the Romans,
Hannibal, when he had spent some time about Crete, and Rhodes, still suspecting
his safety, fled to Prusias, King of Bithynia, who at first civilly received,
and employed him in his Wars; but, at length, fearing the Power of the Romans,
he basely sought to betray him into the hands of their Ambassador, C.
Flaminius (whose Father Hannibal had slain; in the Fight near the Lake
Thrasimenus) which to avoid, finding none other remedy to escape that
Treachery, he Poisoned himself.
Deformed by Poison, to the Shades below.
The End of the Second Book.
Te Strages Nemorum --
-- Magnaeque Ruinae
Idcei Generis Lachrimasaque Fata Sequuntur
Sedjam praeteritos vl^ra meminisse Labores
Conspectae propius dem^sere pa^^ntibus Alps.
Memoriae Illustrissimi desideratissimique Anglis Lugendi Henrici Glocestriae
^ucis Principis^ et ob Eximias Virtutes perpetuo Tabula Religiose Consecrata.

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Third Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Bostar to Ammon's Oracle is sent,
To understand the future War's Event.
To Carthage, Hannibal His Wife, and Son,
Conveys by Sea, unwilling they should run
The Hazard of the War. A Numerous List
Of all the Nations, that Him Assist.
Pyrene overpass'd, He marches on,
Until His Conquering Army stood upon
The Banks of Rhodanus: whose rapid Stream
By Art, and Industry, He overcame.
At length ascends the Alps, great Miseries
The Army, in their tedious March, surprise;
Until arriving in the Taurine Plain,
They there Encamp. Bostar returns again,
From Horned Ammon's Temple, and declares
The God's Command to prosecute the Wars.
ALL Ties of Faith by Tyrian Arms undone,
And Walls of The Metaphorical Epithete of the Poet, given to Sagunthus, as a
City of entire, and inviolate Faith
Chaste Sagunthus overthrown,
Through Jove's Displeasure: strait the Conqu'rour went
To the World's Bounds, and Gades, The Carthaginians, and Inhabitants of Gades,
being both derived from the Tyrians: who, for the Benefit of Trade, planted
themselves in several Parts of the World, and had many Colonies in Libya;
whence, with them, Diodorus Siculus, ( lib. 5.) believes a Colony came, that
built Gades. For that Gadir* in the Punick Tongue, signifies a Walled Town.
by Descent
To Him allied: and diligent to find
What Prophets, and presaging Souls divined,
Concerning his Command: Bostar is strait
Dispatched by Sea, to know ensuing Fate.
This Oracle was a long time very famous, so, that Alexander hazarded both
himself, and a great Part of his Army, to visit the Temple, through the Sands,
between Egypt, and Mesogaba: where when arrived, the flattering Priest
declared him the Son of that God. But (as Strabo observes) after the Romans
became Masters of Libya, the Credit of this Oracle submitted to the Sybils
Books, and the Etrurian Augury, and in the time of Strabo, the Temple was not
to be seen, but ni its Ruins.
It Is a Belief, in Sanctuaries long
Preserved, where horned Ammon, placed among
The parched Garamantians, emulates
Cyrrhaean Caves, that in a Grove, which Fates
Foretells, he future Ages did declare,
With their Events. An happy Omen the^
To his Designs he sought, and, long before
The Day arrived, all Chances did explore,
And Fortune of the War. But here, the God
Adored, the Holy Altars he does load
With Spoils, snatched lately at Sagunthus Fall,
Half-burnt from the then flaming Arcenal.
It Is a Report (and not believed Vain)
That, from the first Erecting of that Fane,
The Timber Firm continues, and has known
The Hands of the first Architects alone.
Here they rejoice to think the God does dwell,
And from his Temple does Decay repel.
And they, that have the Honor to repair
Into the secret Places, must with Care
Provide, that Women do not enter in,
And from the Gates must banish bristled Swine.
Neither before the Altars may they wear
Discolored Robes: their Bodies covered are
With Linen; and Pelusiack Tulbans Crown
Their Heads: their Garments loosely hanging down;
They Incense burn, and, by their Fathers taught,
The Sacrificing Vest with Studs is wrought:
Barefoot, short-hair'd; their Beds from loose Desires
Are free; their Altars keep Eternal Fires.
Within no Statues of the Gods appear,
Or Images. The Place a Rev'rent Fear,
And Majesty, adorn. But, carved with Skill,
The Gates the Labors of Alcides fill.
There the Lernaean Hydra lies, her Snakes
Cut off; and there, with God-like Strength he breaks
The Nemaean Lyon's gaping Jaws: and then
Hell's Porter, dragged from his Eternal Den,
Affrights the Ghosts with Howling, and disdains
His Thraldom; while Megaera feared the Chains.
Near these, the Thracian Horses; and the Boar,
Arcadia's Plague: the Heart, whose Forehead wore
Horns, that, in Breadth, the Arms of Trees surpassed:
Next them, a Conquest, no less easy, placed,
Earth-born Antaeus on his Mother stood;
And the two-formed Centaur's ugly Brood,
While the poor The Acarnanians were wont to cut off the Hair from their
Foreheads; lest their Enemies, closing with them in Fight, should lay hold of
it.
Acarnanian seems to fear
His Naked Front: then Oeta does appear
To shine with Sacred Fires, and to the Skies,
On winged Flames, his mighty Soul does rise.
These various Shapes of Valor having filled
A while his Eyes; near to them he beheld
A Sea, that, rising to a wondrous Height,
Fell on the subject Earth, with all its Weight;
No Shores do give it Bounds, but every where
The Waters, over the Fields, diffused are.
For, where blew Nereus, in Caerulean Caves,
Turns, from the Bottom, the contorted Waves,
An Inundation breaks; and, by Release
Of hidden Springs, fierce Torrents do increase:
Then, as if Trident-struck, with furious Throws,
The impetuous Billows labor to impose,
Upon the trembling Earth, the swelling Main:
Then strait the falling Tide retires again,
And the forsaken Vessel leaves aground;
While, looking for the Flood, the Decks are crowned
With idle Seamen: stooping from above,
In her bright Chariot, the Moon does move
These restless Kingdoms of Cymotheae,
And the continual Labors of the Sea;
Bringing the Tide, and bearing it away,
While still alternate Tetbys does obey.
These viewed in Haste: for weight of many Cares
Lay on his Thoughts; first to remove, from Wars,
The Consort of The Wife of Hannibal.
his Bed, and Son, as yet
An Infant, and depending on the Teat;
For they their Virgin Nuptial-Tapers joined
In Youth, and still retained a loving Mind.
But at Sagunthus Siege begot, the Child
Not yet the Age of twice six Moons fulfilled.
And Hannibal, resolving to remove
Those dear, and tender Pledges of his Love,
From Arms, and future Danger, to his Son
Directs his Speech; and, smiling, thus begun.
Oh! Thou great Hope of Carthage, and no less
A Terror to the proud Aeneades!
May Thou exceed thy Father in thy Fame,
And by thy Actions build Thy self a Name!
May Thou a greater Warrior appear
Then was thy Grand-sire: and, now sick with Fear,
May Rome teach Matrons to prepare their Tears,
When they dis^ourse the number of thy Years!
If my divining Soul do not delude
My Sense; this very Boy, we may conclude,
A mighty Labor to the Earth will be:
I know my Countenance in his, I see,
Beneath his angry Brow, his threatening Eye.
Observe the weighty Echo of his Cry,
Those Elements of Anger, that from me
Derived are. If any Deity,
By Chance, so glorious Acts anticipate,
And break off their Beginnings, by my Fate;
(Dear Wife) endeavor to preserve, with Care,
This Pledge of War: and, when thou first shall hear
Him speak, within my Cradle him convey,
And on Eliza's Altar let him lay
His tender Hands, and, to my Ashes, swear
The Prosecution of the Roman War.
Then, when, more firm in Years, his Cheeks shall wear
The Flower of Youth, let him in Arms appear;
And, scorning Leagues, a Conqu'rour at Rome,
Raise in the Capitol for me a Tomb.
But Thou, whom the happy Honor of a Birth,
So High, attends, renowned through all the Earth,
For Faith, and Constancy; remove, O far,
Remove, from Dangers of uncertain War,
And leave these harder Labors* We must go
Over Rocks, and Hills, that, covered over with Snow,
Seem to prop up the Heavens. We, what may make
Juno, her self, admire, must undertake
Alcides Labors, and the Alps, that are
A Toil, more grievous, then the sharpest War.
But, if inconstant Fortune my Design
Shall thwart, and promised Favors shall decline:
May thou live long, and hasty Fate extend
Thy ev'ner Thread of Life, beyond my End!
Thus He. Imilce, of Cyrrbaean Race,
Whose Ancestour (Renowned Castalius) was
Apollo's Priest: and Castulo, in Spain,
So called from his Mother, does retain
As yet the Name; and from that sacred Line
Derived her Parents; since the God of Wine,
Shaking high Calpe, with his Thyrsus, and
Armed Menade^, subdued the Iberian Land:
And Milicus, who (of a Satyr born,
And Nymph Myrice) on his Front, the Horn
Of his lascivious Father planted wore,
A Potent Scepter in that Country bore.
From him her Country did Imilce claim,
And famed Original; from him, her Name,
Corrupted by their barbarous Speech* She than,
Tears flowing, with sad Language, thus began.
(...) Forgetful, that My Safety does depend
On Thine, do thou refuse Me to attend
On thy Designs? Is thus thy Nuptial Vow,
And First Fruits of my Bed neglected now?
Or shall I wanting be to climb with Thee
The Frozen Hills? believe, and try in Me
A Woman's Strength. No Labor is too great
For my Chaste Love: but, if on me You set
No other Rate, but of my Sex alone,
And part for that; I yield, I look not on
My Fate. May Jove consent! Go Happy Thou,
Go, and propitious Gods our Prayers allow!
And when in Fight, and Heat of Arms, you are,
Think then on Me, and this Your Son, with Care.
For I nor Romans, nor their Darts, nor Fire,
Do dread so much, as Thee: who do desire
To Run upon their Swords, and do present
Thy Head to Danger. Thee no good Event
Of Valor satisfies. Honor, to Thee
Alone, seems vested with Infinity.
Soldiers to dye in Peace, to Thee appears
A Fate ignoble. Oh! my many Fears!
Forgive Me, for I tremble: yet, I none
Do fear, that shall encounter Thee alone.
But pity Us, great Father Mars, this Storm
Avert; nor may the Trojans do Him harm!
Now to the Shore they haste, the Seamen climb,
And, hanging on the Yards, their Canvase trim,
And fit them for the gently-breathing Wind:
While to allay his Fears, and ease his Mind,
Oppressed with Cares, Thus Hannibal; Oh spare
These Omens, My most constant Wife! Forbear
Thy Tears. In Peace, or War, We all must have
A Period to Our Life. Our first Day gave
A Being to Our last. Brave Thoughts do few
Inflame, by Noble Actions to pursue
Eternal Fame; such only mighty Jove,
Has destined to the blessed Abodes above.
Shall I the Roman Yoke endure, and see
The Towers of Carthage in Captivity?
Ghosts do by Night affright Me, and the Shade
Of My dead Father does My Sloth upbraid.
The Altars, and the horrid Sacrifice
I once did offer, stand before mine Eyes.
Shortness of dubious Life forbids Delay
Of Time. Shall I sit still, that Carthage may,
Alone, acknowledge Me, and speak My Fame?
And shall not all the World know what I am?
Shall I relinquish Honor, through a Fear
To Die? Alas! How little Distant are
Death, and a Silent Life. Yet think not I
Do Praise affect, with mad Temerity:
I have Esteem for Life; for Glory wears
Titles, and is adored in length of Years.
Great Trophies of this War shall also Thee
Attend: if Heaven, and Gods propitious be.
All Tyber shall Thee serve; the Ilian Dames,
And the rich Roman, with the Wealth he claims.
While thus they sadly talk, and mutual Tears,
Express their present Grief, and future Fears:
From the tall Ship, the Master (put to Sea)
Beckons to come aboard without Delay.
Then, from Her Husband snatched, with fixed Eyes,
She views the Shore, till the swift Vessel flies
Through liquid Paths, and takes Her Sight away;
While Sea from Land retires, and Land from Sea.
But, Hannibal, resolving to remove,
With Cares of War, His pensive Thoughts of Love,
Goes to the ruined Walls: the which He views,
And, often, in His Wish their Fall renews;
Walking about the Ruins, till, at length,
His Labors overcame His stubborn Strength;
And Sleep insensibly, with pleasing Charms,
Composed His Mind, intent on War, and Arms.
Then Jove, designing still to exercise
The Trojan Race in Future Miseries,
Revive their ancient Labors, and by Wars
To raise their lasting Name unto the Stars,
His slothful Rest, and Resolution curbs,
And, by infused Fears, His Sleep disturbs.
And, now, Cyllenius, through the humid Shade
Of Night, His Father's high Commands convai'd:
And, lighting on the Earth, thus sharply He
The sleeping Youth upbraids. It Is base to see
A General in Sleep consume the Night:
They must be Vigilant, would stand in Fight.
The Seas oppressed with Navies Thou shall see,
And the Ausonian Youth, insulting, flee
Over all the Ocean: while Thou do stand,
At first Attempts, in the Iberian Land.
Is it an Action of sufficient Fame,
Or Valor, to commemorate Thy Name;
That, with so great Attaques, Sagunthus fell?
Awake, if any Thing within Thee dwell,
Fit for brave Actions; rise, and go with Me,
And, where I call Thee, bear Me Company:
But, I forbid Thee to look back; for this
By the greater Thunderer commanded is.
And if Thou do obey, Thou shall become
A Conqueror before the Walls of Rome.
With that He seemed to lead Him by the Hand,
With Speed, and full of Joy, to Saturn's Land.
When strait a Noise breaks forth, with a loud Crack,
Like Thunder, round about; and, at His Back,
The Hiss of direful Tongues the waving Air
Shakes, and repells: while He, with sudden Fear
Surpised, no more retains in His Mind
The Precepts of the God; but looks behind.
When dragging Groves from hills, and, with the Strokes
Of His vast Bulk, eradicating Oaks,
And bearing Rocks along, through invious Ways,
A Serpent, black as Night, his Tongue displaies
With dreadful Hissing, and to's Eyes appears
As big, as that, which the unequal Bears,
In numerous Foldings, does at once behold,
And both the Constellations unfold.
So large his Jaws, immanely, he distends,
And, lifting up his Head, in Height ascends,
Equal to Hills. Heaven's Rage ingeminates
The Noise, and, mixed with Hail, new Fear creates.
He, with his Monster frighted (for nor Sleep,
Nor Night, did then their former Empire keep,
And, with his Wand, the God had put to Flight
The Darkness, and with Sleep had mingled Light)
What mighty Plague it was, demands, and where
'Twould fall, or whither that vast Body bear,
That then the Burden of the Earth was made,
Or, gaping, what sad People 'twould invade?
To whom Cyllenius answers. Thou do see
The War, so much desired, and sought by Thee.
Thee greatest Wars attend: the dreadful Fall
Of Woods, and Forests, with high Storms, that all
The Face of Heaven disturb, the Slaughter Thee,
And Death of Men, the great Calamity
Of the Idaean Race, and saddest Fate
Do follow, and upon Thee daily wait.
As great, and terrible, as that dire Snake,
Which now the Mountains, with his scaly Back,
Depopulates, and drives the Forests through
The Fields before him, and does Earth imbrue
With frothy Poison. Such thou having past,
And overcome the Alps, with War shall wast
All Italy; and, with a Noise as great,
The Cities, and their Walls, shall ruinate.
Thus wounded with these Stings, the God, and Sleep
At once forsake him, and cold Sweat does creep
Over all his Limbs: while, in a woeful Fright,
His Dreams revolving, he retracts the Night.
And now, with happy Omens, to the King
Of Gods, and Mars, they Holy Offerings bring:
But, first, a Snow-white Bull devoutly they
To Hermes, on deserved Altars, lay.
And, all these Rites performed, He strait commands
His Ensigns to advance. With that the Bands,
Whose Languages, and Manners, different were,
With Clamours shake the Camp, and fill the Air.
But now, Calliope, declare to Fame,
What, and how many valiant Nations came,
(Raised by his dire Attempts) to Italy;
What Cities, with untamed Iberians, He
Did arm; what Troops on the Paretonian Shore
Libya presumed to muster, and before
Great Rome, to challenge, to her self, the Reins
Of Rule, and on the Earth impose new Chains:
No Tempest, raised by impetuous Storms,
Went on so furiously; no dire Alarms
Of War, when twice five hundred Xerxes his Navy, consisting of a thousand
Ships, when he made that unhappy Expedition against Greece, and boasted to make
a Bridge over the Hellespont.
Ships o're-spread
The Sea, and filled the trembling World with Dread.
The Carthaginian Youth, the Chief of all,
Their Ensigns spread: of Body light; not tall
Of Stature: but of that proud Grace deprived.
Apt for Deceit, they readily contrived
Their secret Frauds. A Round unpolished Shield,
With a short Sword, their Arms; and in the Field
They Barefoot marched; ungirt, with Garments re^
They cunningly concealed the Blood was shed.
Captain to these, in Purple splendid, tall
Above the rest, Brother to Hannibal,
Mago, in's Chariot, with the Noise alarms
The Fo, and 's Brother imitates in Arms.
Next these, divided in Sidonian Bands,
(Built before Towr's of ancient Byrsa) stands
Old Vtica. Then Aspis, which the Shore
Encompassed with Sycanian Walls: whose Store
Of crooked Turrets, that a Warlike Shield
Resembled, all the Neighbr'ing Sea beheld.
But young Sychaeus drew the Eyes of all
Upon himself: whom, Son to Hasdrubal,
With a vain Pride, his Mother's high Descent
Had filled; and's Uncle Hannibal content,
With no less Pride, still to repeat his Name.
Near these, the Warlike Soldier, that came
From watery Berenicis, and the Bands,
That, with long Dolon was a sort of Weapon, not always of one Fashion, being
a long Staff with an head of Iron; sometimes a short Sword fastened to it,
sometimes a Dagger; and sometimes a Whip.
Dolons armed, among the Sands
Of thirsty Barce dwell. Then to the Fight
Cyrene, sprang from Pelops, does excite
The false Battiades: whom, once extolled,
And by Amilcar famed, Ilertes old
In War, but young in Counsel, did command.
With Tabraca (then Tyrian People) and
Sarranian Leptis, Oea too combined,
Trinacrian Colonies, with Africa joined:
And Tingis sent, from a Tempestuous Sea,
By Lixus: Vaga, and Hippo famed to be
The Love of Kings, and their Delight of old.
And Ruspina, that does from far behold
Unequal Billows, rising on the Main:
With Zama, a small City, five days journey distant from Carthage; made famous
by the Overthrow given by Scipio to Hannibal.
Zama, where the Libyan Troops were slain
By valiant Scipio. See the Continuation of the second Book.
Thapsus too, that stood
Renowned, as often imbrued with Roman Blood.
These Nations, both in Arms, and Body great,
Whose Name, and Deeds, did still perpetuate
Alcides Honor; taller by the Head,
Then all his following Bands, Antaeus, a Libyan King, slain by Hercules.
Antaeus led.
Then came the Aethiopians, not unknown
To fruitful Nile; who that mysterious Stone
Do cut, that draws, untouched, the distant Steel:
With Mibians; whose parched Bodies feel
The Fury of the Sun; not wont to wear
Helmets, or Coats of Mail, or Bows to bear;
Accustomed, when in Fight they did contend,
With Flax their Heads, and Bodies, to defend,
And, in some deadly Poison, to imbrue
Their Swords, or to infect the Darts they threw.
Then first Cinyphian Macae did begin
To learn Phoenician Warlike Discipline:
Their squallid Beards, their Faces overspread,
And Goat Skins rough their Shoulders covered;
With Sling-Darts armed, they came into the Field.
But the Adyrmachidae a painted Shield,
And Swords, like Hooks, by Art intorted, bear;
And their left-Legs with Armor guarded were:
But they Rude Tables have, and uncouth Fare;
For in hot Sands their Viands roasted are.
Massilians then, with Ensigns shining bright;
Who, last of all, behold the falling Light
Of Day, which the Hesperian Seas do drown.
These, with long curled Tresses hanging down,
Fierce Bocchus leads, and views upon the Shore,
Growing, on sacred Trees, the precious Ore.
Getulians likewise, from their wandering Home,
Into the Camp, to his Assistance, come;
Familiar with wild Beasts, they could allay,
With Words, the Lyon's Rage. No Houses they
Possess; but dwell, continually, in Wains,
Bearing their restless Lares through the Plains.
A thousand winged Troops, whose Steeds obey
The Wand, as nimble as the Wind, their Way
Into the Camp do break. As when the Hills,
And Plains, a Pack of Dogs with Echo fills;
And with full Cry, in view, the flying Deer,
Do follow, and precipitate with Fear.
These, his stern Face, and Brow, with Rage o're-spread,
Acheras, slain Hasbyte's Brother, led.
And near to them, the Medicinal Troops, in Arms
Advance, the tanned Marmarides: whose Charms
The Poison of fell Serpents can allay,
And make the horned Cerast to obey.
Then her unskilful Youth Bamura sent;
A Nation poor in Steel for Arms, content
Their Spears to harden only in the Fire:
Yet, with this weak Defense, did they desire,
To mix their horrid Murmurs with the rest,
And furiously unto the Battle pressed.
Then fierce Autololes, whose nimble Speed
Outstrips the Torrent, or the fleetest Steed:
Birds to their Speed, in Flight, might seem to yield;
And, when they overran the Champian Field,
It was as vain a Task, to think to find
Their Footsteps, as to trace the lighter Wind.
Next, who by Juice, and Fruit of that famed Tree,
The Hospitable See the Continuation of the Second Book.
Lotus nourished be,
Are listed in the Camp, with those, that stand
Amazed to see, in Garamantick Sand,
The Dypsades; whose boiling Poison fills
With Flames, and with strange thirst the wounded kills.
When Perseus had cut off the Gorgon's Head,
(As Fame reports) her banefull Blood was shed
On Sandy Libya; and, since that, the Ground
With Medusaean Serpents does abound.
These by a Captain, most renowned in War,
And born in Meninx Isle, commanded are:
Choaspes was his Name, who still did bear
In's fatal Hand, a missile barbed Spear.
Then Nasamon, who durst invade the Sea
For Shipwreck, and deprive her of her Prey.
Next, those, who near to Pallas Pools do dwell:
And where the Warlike Maid (as Fame does tell)
Among those Waters, with her Olive found,
With it did first enrich the Libyan Ground.
Then all those Nations, that inhabit, where
The Sun does fall, and Hesperus first appear.
Before the rest, the stout Cantabrians, whom
Nor Frost, nor Summer's Heat could overcome,
Nor Hunger; and were still observed to be
Above the Reach of all Extremity:
Who, when their Heads are crowned with hoary Hairs,
From some high Rock prevent their weaker Years:
Life, without War, they hate: in Arms they place
The cause of Life; to live in Peace, is base.
With these, unhappy Memnon's Servant, from
The East, a Stranger to his Native Home.
The Astyrian, sprinkled with Aurora's Tears,
Within another World, in Arms appears.
His Horse was little, and unknown to War;
Yet swift, and firmly on his Back would bear
The skillful Rider; or, in easy Reins,
Hurry the peaceful Chariot over the Plains.
Next, Herdrus, who Pyrene meteth over
In Chase, and fights with Arrows, like the Moor.
To join with these, the Warlike Celtae came;
Who with the Iberi did divide their Name.
By these it is Honor held, in War to die,
And to be Burnt. For, when their Bodies ly
Exposed abroad, they do believe't to be
Against Heaven, and Gods, a great Impiety,
If on their Limbs devouring Vultures tire.
Then Rich Gallecia, in Divining Fire
And panting Entrails skillful, thither brings
Her Youth; who sometimes in their Language sings
Rude Sonnets; sometimes, with alternate Feet
Striking the Ground, the barbr'ous Numbers meet;
Or beat the lofty Tune upon the Shield:
Their Pastime this, and chief Delight, is held;
This Custom (not wholly omitted in Spain) was not peculiar, only to the old
Inhabitants of Gallicia, but to the Celtae, Thracians, and others; who imposed
those more servile Labors on their Wives.
The Women's Labors other things fulfill:
For it is beneath the Men to sow, or till
The fertile Ground; and whatsoever's done
Without a War, their Wives perform alone.
These, with the Lusitanians drawn from far
Removed Caves, and Dens, conducted are
Viriarthus was, at first, a cunning Hunter; then a Robber; after, by his
Valor, attaining to be a ^eneral of a Lusitanian Army, and with it overthrew
three Roman Captains, in three several Conflicts: but was in the e^d slain by
some of his own Party, corrupted, by Cepio the Roman Consul. See L. Florus.
By Viriarthus; whom the active Fire
Of Youth then warmed; who after did acquire
By shedding Roman Blood, a noble Name.
With these the neighboring Ceretani came,
Once great Alcides Camp: and Vasions, who
No Helmets used to wear: Ilerda situate near the River Sicoris (in Spain)
where Caesar besieged Petreius, and Afranius, two of Pompey's Generals.
Ilerda too,
Which after saw the Romans Civil Rage.
Neither did Concavus; who does assuage
His Thirst with Horse's Blood (whose Fierceness shows
He sprang from Massagets) this War refuse.
Now Ebesus Phoenician Arms assumes,
And Artabus, who, armed with Aclides were a kind of Pole-Ax, which, fastened
to a Chain, they threw at the Fo, and drew back again.
Aclides, comes,
Or slighter Darts, and fierce the War attends:
With these the Balearique, who descends
From Lindus. But Tlepolemus with Slings
Is armed, and winged Lead in Battle flings.
From Oena, and Aetolian Tide, came
The Gravians, who had changed their Graian Name.
Next New Carthage in Spain, founded by Teucer.
Teucrian Carthage sends a youthful Band:
Phocensians, and Tarraco, whose Land
In Vines abounds, whose Grapes, in Clusters swelled,
By Latian Bacchus, only, are excelled.
Among these the Hedetanian Cohorts went
In shining Arms, from cooler Sucro sent:
And Setabis, which lofty Towers adorn:
That Setabis, whose Textures seem to scorn
The proud Arabian Webs, and overcome,
In rarest Art, the best Egyptian Loom.
Mandonius these Commands, and Caeso known,
For Horse-manship, their Camps now joined in one.
But the Balarian Light Vetonian Wings
Tries, by the open Sea; and when the Springs
Approach, and Zephyrs breath their warmer Airs,
Preserving hidden Lust, his Herds of Mares
Exposes, and by This generative Wind was from the West, in the Vernal
Equinox. And of this, not only the Poets, but even Philosophers, as Aristotle,
Varro, and Pliny, who ( Lib. 8. c. 4^.) mentions them to be about Lisbon in
Portugal. And the like by Saint Augustine ( Lib. 21. De Civit cap. 3.) in
Cappadocia, but they allow them not so long lived, as our Author, by four
years. However, both the Winds, and Mares, if ever they had this Virtue, have
long since lost it.
generative Wind,
Makes them conceive, and propagate their Kind.
But they are not long-lived, their Age does haste,
And the seventh Year is, commonly, the Last.
But Susana (whose Walls Sarmatians reared)
On Horses not so light, in Arms appeared:
These Strong, and full of Mettle, to the Bit,
Or their fierce Master's Will, do scarce submit.
Them Rindacus commands: with crooked Spears
They fight, and every Crested Helmet bears
The frightfull Jaws of Beasts: Themselves they give
To Hunting; and by Theft, and Rapine, live.
But, above all, Parnassian Cast^lo,
With noble Ensigns, shines: and Hispal, who,
Assaulted daily by Alternate Tides,
Renowned, against the Ocean firm abides.
Near these, familiar with Lyaeus Rites,
Nebrissa: where the Satyrs their Delights
Enjoy by Night; and, clothed in the Panther's Skin,
There Maenades their Mysteries begin:
Carteia too (to Heighten hese Alarms)
The Nephews of great Argonthonius was King of that part of Spain, where stood
Cart^ia, and Tartessos, upon the River Baetis: whose healthful Soil is
extolled, both by Pliny, lib. 7. cap. 4. and Strabo, lib. 3. Those neither
allow him above half that Age, ascribed to him by the Poet.
Argonthonius Arms;
A Warlike King, who^e Life the Age surpast
Of Men, and thrice ten times ten years did lastt.
Tartessos too was there; which still surveys
The Steeds of Phoebus diving in the Seas.
Then fatal Where Caesar besieged the two Sons of Pompey: the one whereof was
slain there in Fight; and the other fled. The Slaughter of the Romans there
was so great, that Caesar made a Counter-Mure in an Attaque of thirty thousand
Carkases.
Munda, that as deep a Stain
Of Roman Blood, as the Aemathian Plain,
Did after bear; and Corduba, the Grace
Of the Gold-bearing Land, the War embrace.
These Phorcis, with long yellow Tresses crowned;
And fierce Aranthicus, in Arms renowned;
Led, from their Native Country* to engage
In Libya's Quarrel: both of Equal Age,
Born upon Bethe's Banks; whose horned Brows
Were overshadow'd with fat Olive-Boughs.
These the Sidonian Captain, through the Field,
Clouded with Dust, commanded, and beheld
Mustered in Arms: and, in what Place soever
All His bright Ensigns could, at once, appear,
He drew them up in Triumph; all along
Covering the Ground, with Shadows of the Throng.
As when, descending through the Liquid Plain,
To visit farthest Tethys in the Main,
Where weary Phoebus rests, the God of Seas
His Chariot drives; the blew Nereides
Rush from their Caves, and each, contending, swims,
Displaying, in perspicuous Waves, their Limbs.
But Hannibal, disturbing the Repose
Of The World, to the Top of high Pyrene goes:
That vast Ridg of Hills, that divides Spain from France.
Pyrene, (whose rough Brows the Clouds enfold)
From far the Rich Iberi does behold,
Divided from the Celtae, and still stands
A firm Divorce between those mighty Lands.
The Hills their Name from a Bebrician Maid
Did first derive, and by the Crime ('it is said)
Of Hercules, a Guest; when, by the Fate
Of those his Labors, raised by Juno's Hate,
Triple Geryon's Land he did invade:
And then, in Bebrix cruel Palace, made
Lyaeus Vassal, he Pyrene left,
Her Form bewailing, now by him bereft
Of her Virginity; and (if we may
Believed) of her unhappy Death (they say)
That God was Cause: that God, who in her Womb
Began to swell. For She her dearest Home,
Frighted, forsook; and, with an awful Dread,
Her Father's Ire, as from a Serpent, fled.
Wandering in desert Caves, Alcides Night
She did Lament, and all his Vows recite,
And Promises, unto the Shady Groves:
Till, thus bewailing his ungrateful Loves,
And lifting up her Hands to implore his Aid,
She to the salvage Beasts a Prey was made.
But when, at length, the God returned again
With Spoils, a Conqueror, Gerion slain;
Her mangled Limbs with Tears he did bewail,
And, when he saw her Face, with Rage grew Pale.
The lofty Hills, struck with his God-like Voice,
Appear to shake: when with a mournful Noise
He on Pyrene calls; and under Ground
The Dens of Beasts, and all the Rocks, resound
Pyrene's Name: then sadly he prepares
Her Sepulcher, Embalming her with Tears.
Nor can the Teeth of Time destroy her Fame,
The Hills retaining her lamented Name.
Now, over the Airy Mountains, and through vast
Condensed Woods, bold Hannibal had past
The Bounds of Bebrix, and, by's armed Hand,
His Way, through the inhospitable Land
Of Volsians, breaks: until His Army stood
Upon the Banks of that Rhodanus.
unruly Flood;
Which from the Alps, and Snowy Rocks, descends
Upon the Celtae, and himself extends
Into a swelling Stream, that makes his Way
Over Land, with a large Current, to the Sea.
To its great Force mixed Arar adds, that seems
To stand (so slow his Pace) with silent Streams;
Which Rhodanus once seizing, bears away
In restless Billows, and, without Delay,
Drowns in the Main, and forces it disclaim,
Near to its Native Shore, its Countrie's Name.
But now the Hostile River all invade:
While some upon their Heads, and Shoulders, laid
Their Arms; and, breaking through the Torrent, strive,
Which, on the adverse Bank, shall first arrive.
To Skifs, (that late were Trees) their Steeds they bind,
And Waft them over: nor do they leave behind
The Elephants, whose Fears awhile withstood;
For covering, with mighty Beams, the Flood,
So much by them abhorred, and every Plank
With solid Earth o're-spreading, from the Bank
The Beasts descend; whom to the other side
Swimming (as on the Ground) they gently guide.
The River, frighted with so vast a Weight
Of the fierce Herd, the threatening Billows strait
From's Sandy Bottom turns, and all his Springs
Lets loose, and, to his Aid, with Murmurs brings.
Now the Tricassian Coast the Army gains,
And fertile Fields; now through Vocuntian Plains
They move, where swift Druentia, troubled, rolls
Huge Stones, and Trunks of Trees, and so controlls
Their pleasant March: for from the Alps it springs,
And, thence with roaring Waves devolving, brings,
Eradicated Trees, and Quarries torn
From hollow Rocks, at the Creation born;
Then, deviating, his fallacious Streams
Turns from their Course, and is not what he seems.
The Fords deceitful are, to Foot unstable,
The Chanel to small Barks innavigable:
But, then increased by fall of sudden Storms,
O'rewhelms a Multitude of Men, with Arms
Surcharged; who, sinking in the foaming Waves,
Dismembered, in the Bottom find their Graves.
But now, all Memory of Labors passed,
And Fears, the A^ps, so near in View, displaced.
All Parts with Frost, and undissolving Hail
Are cov'red, and Eternally prevail
To keep their aged Ice: the lofty Brow
Of The airy Hills is bound about with Snow;
Which, opposite to Phoebus rising Beams,
Will know no Dissolution by his Flames.
As far, as the Tartarean Abyss
Of that pale Kingdom, where the Dwelling is
Of mournful Ghosts, and Stygian Waters are
Removed, from the upper Earth: so far
Erected, through the Air, the Mountains rise,
And, with their Shadow, intercept the Skies.
No Springs, no Summer's Glories do appear:
But deformed Winter still inhabits there,
And on the Cliffs perpetually defends
Her Seat, and thither, from all Quarters, sends
The swelling Clouds, and Hail-commixed Showers.
Here all the Storms, and Winds, their furious Powers
Dispose. Beyond the Rocks no Eyes extend
Their Sight; the Hills above the Clouds ascend.
Though Athos lay on Taurus, Rhodope
On Mimas, or though snowy Pelion be
On Ossa Heaped, or Othrys were beheld
On Haemus laid; to these they all must yield.
Alcides, first, to these unknown Abodes
Aspired to go: whom, cutting Clouds, the Gods
Beheld, and cleaving highest Hills, to clime
Those Rocks, untrod-on since the Birth of Time.
But now the Soldiers their March retard;
As if those sacred Bounds, which Nature barred;
Bearing those Impious Arms, they had transgrest,
And, going forward, should the Gods resist.
Against which the General (whom nor the Height
Of The Alps, nor Terrors of the Place, affright)
To cure their Minds, with Monsters terrified,
And to recall their Courage, thus replied.
Is It not a Shame, that, through Obsequious Fear
Of Gods, You, that so many Trophies wear
Of War, now weary of Success, should yield
Your Backs to Snowy Hills, and be repelled
With idle Terrors; while no Courage warms
Your Hearts, and You to Rocks submit your Arms.
Oh! (My Companions) think, You now assail
The Walls of Rome, or Jove's high Temple scale.
This Labor will give up into Your Hands
Ausonia, and bring Tyber into Bands;
This said; the Army, moved by promised Spoils,
In haste the Mountain climb, nor think what Toils
Ensue: while He commands them to forsake
Alcides Footsteps, and new ways to take,
To tread in Paths, that might be called Their own,
And by Their Names, in future Times, be known.
Then through untroden Places, first of all,
He breaks, and, from the Top of Rocks, does call
His Troops: and where, in hard congealed Frost,
In the white Cliffs, the slippery Path was lost,
His Sword the obdurate Ice divides, and now
Into deep, gaping, Pits of yielding Snow
Whole Squadrons sink; and, from the hollow Top,
To Bury them alive, fresh Ruins drop.
Sometimes fierce Corus, on his gloomy Wings
Collecting Snow, against their Faces flings;
Sometimes, uniting all his Rage in Storms,
From the Adventurous Soldier takes his Arms;
Which, with the whirling Blasts, unto the Skies,
In Circles, that delude the Sight, arise.
The higher they Ascend, and seek to Ease
Their Steps, the more their Labors still increase:
To one great Height, a greater does succeed,
And every Hill another seems to breed.
Hence all their Sweats, and Labors, which before
They had Overcome, they durst not now Explore:
Such Fears repeated Objects do present,
And, wheresoever their trembling Eyes were bent,
The horrid Face of Winter, ever White
Appearing, gives sad Limits to their Sight.
So Mariners, that late forsook the Land,
And now amid'st the calmed Ocean stand,
While no propitious Wind, or gentle Blast,
Fills the loose Sails upon the steady Mast,
From the smooth Sea divert their weary Eyes,
And fix their Expectation on the Skies.
Above these Miseries, and sad Distress
The Places gave; in a most sordid Dress,
An Alpine Band, like salvage Beasts, their Locks
Stiff with eternal Squallour, from the Rocks
And aged Mountain-Caves, their Faces show;
And, with their constant Vigor, through the Snow,
Through Thorns, and invious Paths, by them alone
Frequented, and familiarly known,
By various Incursions, on Them pressed,
And their enclosed Enemy infest.
All Places now assume another Form:
The Snow's made red with Blood; there Ice grew warm
With purple Streams; and that, which never before
Could be overcome, resolvs, by reeking Gore.
And as, with Iron Feet, the Horse divide
The yielding Frost, their Hoofs, there fixed, abide
Within the closing Ice. Nor was their Fall
The only Mischief: but they leave withal
Their Limbs behind; which, by the piercing Frost,
Fall, as cut off, and there are sadly lost.
In this Passage over the Alps, other Authors affirm, he spent fifteen days,
and broke his Forces more, then if he had fought his way through Armies of his
Enemies; losing in his March from Rhodanus, before he arrived in the Taurine
Plains, above six and thirty thousand Men, and a vast Number of Horses.
Through all these Miseries, when they had past
Twelve days, as many tedious Nights; at last
To the desired Top they come, and there,
Hanging on broken Cliffs, their Tents they rear
But Cytherea (who, through Fear, grew Faint)
Goes to her Father, with this sad Complaint.
What stint of Punishment, I pray? what end
Of Plagues, shall the Aeneades attend?
When shall they, after Toils by Sea, and Land,
Repose? Why now does Carthage take in hand,
And labor thus, to drive my Progeny
From that Renowned City, given by Thee?
See! on the Alps they Libya impose;
Threatening our Empire's Ruin: and the Woes
Of lost Sagunthus Rome may justly fear.
Oh! whither shall we Troy's last Ashes bear?
Those sacred Ruins, and the Assarick Race,
With Vesta's Secrets? Give us, Jove, a Place,
Where we may Safely dwell. Is it so small
A thing; that they have Wandering sought, through all
The World, their Exile? Or shall Troy become,
Again, a Prey, in captivated Rome?
Thus Cytherea: whom the Thunderer
Thus answers. Erycina, cease to fear;
Nor let these high Attempts, or what is designed,
By envious Libya, perplex thy Mind.
Thy Blood possesses, and shall Long possess
The high Tarpeian Towr's: the Fates no less
Permit. By this great weight of War, will I
Perpend their Virtue, and their Valor Try.
Shall that brave Nation, that so long has been
Inured to War, that has with Triumph seen
So many their great Labors overpast,
The Honor of their Ancestors, at last,
Decline? Or shall they, whom our Seed did raise,
Who never spared their Blood in seeking Praise,
(Still thirsting after Fame) obscurely spend
Their Time, or with Inglorious Silence end
Their Days, as poisoned with the Love of Ease?
Valor suppressed does perish by Degrees.
It is a mighty Work, not to be done
Without much Toil, and Labor, that alone,
Among so many valiant Nations, Rome
Should to her self the Reins of Rule assume:
Yet shall the Time arrive, when She shall be
After the Battle of Cannae, Rome was reduced to such Distress, that some
consulted to quit their Country; but by the Virtue of Fabius, Scipio, and
others, she recovered to that Height of Glory, that afterward made her Mistress
of the World.
The Chief, Ennobled by Calamity.
Hence their great Acts shall add unto the Skies
New Stars, and Names: hence Paulus shall arise;
Hence Fabius, and Marcellus, who shall be
Pleasing, for his Opimous Spoils, to Me.
These, by their Wounds, shall raise in Italy
An Empire, that not all the Luxury
Of their degenerate Issuecan destroy.
And there is already born a Warlike Scipio Africanus, who, invading Libya,
forced Hannibal to quit Italy, to ^elieve His own Country. See Book 14.
Boy;
Who shall the Carthaginian recall
To his own Country, and, before the Wall
Of Carthage, of his Arms shall him deprive.
Then Cytherea shall thy I^sue live
Long in Command; Then, by the Cures shall
Celestial Virtue to the Stars extol
Herself: and, by their Sacred Rites, proclaim
A large Addition to Iulus Name.
Then from a Vespasian, in whose Time, and Domitian's, the Poet lived.
Sabine Stock a Branch shall spring,
Whose Father shall enable him to bring
Trophies from unknown Thule, and shall be
The first, that Caledonian Woods shall see,
With his Victorious Troops; who shall confine,
Within his hollow Banks, the swelling Rhine;
Shall govern the rebellious African,
With Vigilance; and, when an aged Man
Palm-bearing Idumea shall subdue;
Nor shall He, after Death, those Kingdoms view,
That are for ever Dark, or the Stygian Lake,
But of our Vespasian De^fied.
Honors, and this Place, partake.
Then shall a Titus made Companion in the Empire with His Father Vespasian.
Youth, excelling in his Strength
Of Understanding, on Himself, at length,
Assume the Burden of His Father's Care,
And, in His Empire, have an equal Share:
He the Iudaean War, so full of Rage,
Shall quite extinguish in his tender Age.
But, thou, Xiphilin in this contradicts Suetonius (who says, that he
performed that Expedition with admirable-Felicity) affirming, that he returned
without so much as seeing the Enemy.
Germanicus, who, though a Child,
Thy Father's Acts transcendest, and have filled
The yellow Germans with an awful Dread,
Fear not the Capitolian Fires; In the War between Vitellius, and Vespasian,
Domitian, then a Youth, hid himself in a Chapel of the Capitol, which by Chance
was set on Fire. In Memory of his miraculous Escape, He (when escaped)
Dedicated a Temple there to the Honor of Jupiter, his Preserver.
thy Head,
Amidst those Sacrilegious Flames, shall be
Preserved. Thou long, and happy days shall see:
To thee Gangetick Youth their Bows, unbent,
Shall offer up; and Bactria shall present
Her empty Quivers: from the Icy North
Thou shall, in Triumph, bring thy Chariot forth,
And through the City ride: then from the East
Such Trophies gain; as Bacchus never possessed.
Thou frozen Ister, scorning to give way
To Dardan Ensigns, shall compel to obey,
And in Sarmatick Limits shall restrain.
Thou Roman Nephews, that shall Honor gain
By Eloquence, shall in thy Speech excel:
To Thee the Learned Sisters, that do dwell
Near Thespian Springs, shall offer Sacrifice.
Thy Lyre shall sound more sweetly, then did his,
That Hebrus made to stand, and Rhodope
To follow, and shall utter things may be
Admired by Phoebus. Raised by thy Hand
On the Tarpeian Rocks, where Faith does stand,
Adored of old, Rich Capitols shall shine,
And to the Stars their lofty Turrets join.
But thou, O born of Gods! which shall give Birth
To future Deities, the happy Earth
Rule with thy Father's Power; thy Fate shall be
Retarded, and these Heavenly Mansions thee
A late, and Aged, Guest shall entertain:
Quirinus shall give place, and Thou shall gain
Between thy Brother, and thy Sire, a Throne,
And, near Thee fixed, shall shine thy Starry Son.
While Jove the Series of Times to come
Does thus unfold, the Libyan Captain, from
The unequal Hills, through Ways perplexed, descends,
And, dubiously, on Quarries moist contends
To fix his sliding Steps. No furious Shocks
Of Foes deterr him: but the obvious Rocks;
Whose prone, and threatening Cliffs obstruct the Way;
So, as Besieged, they stand, and the Delay,
And Difficulties of their March lament:
Nor would the Time allow them to Foment
With Rest their frozen Limbs. They spend the Night
In Labor, and their Shoulders all unite,
With Speed, the Forests from the Hills to bring.
The highest Mountains naked made, they fling
The Trees in Heaps together, and surround
With Flames the Rocks: which, with a dreadful sound,
Now yielding to their Bars of Iron, breaks,
And, to the weary Troops, a Passage makes
Into Latinus Kingdom. When they would past,
Through all these Miseries, the Alps; at last,
The General within the Taurine Plains
His Tents does pitch, and there Encamped remains.
In the mean time, from Garamantian Sands,
With Ammon's Oracles, and dark Commands,
Bostar, with Joy, arrives, and does appear
To glad their Hearts, as Jove himself were there;
And thus begins. Great Hannibal, whose Hand
Has banished Bondage from thy Native Land;
We have through Libya passed, where Sands arise
Up to the Stars, and lift us to the Skies.
Us Earth, more furious, then the Raging Main,
Had almost swallowed up: The barren Plain,
From the first Entrance, to the farthest Bound
Of Heaven, extends: nor can an Hill be found
By Nature raised, in all that spacious Tract,
But what, with hollow Clouds of Sand impact,
The nimble-turning Whirlwinds build: or when
Fierce Africus, escaping from his Den,
To spoil the Earth; or Corus, that the Stars,
Does with the Ocean wash, with furious Wars
Invade the Field, and with congested Sand
Make Heaps, that there in stead of Mountains stand:
Observing Stars, over this inconstant G^ound
We sail; for Day Our Voyage would confound.
And Cynosura, that a faithful Star
Does prove to the Sidonian Mariner,
The wandering Traveller, who seems to abide
Still in the Midst, through the deep Plain does guide.
But when we, weary, to the Sacred Grove,
And Woody Empire came, of horned Jove,
Where, on large Columns, stands the shining Fane;
With what a cheerful Brow our Entertain
Arisbas gave, (the God's divining Priest)
Who to his House conducted Me his Guest?
Of the Causes of the Changes of this Spring (called by Diodorus Siculus, lib.
17. The Fountain of the Sun.) see Lucretius, lib. 6. Englished by Mr. Sandys in
his Comment on Ovid, Metamorph. lib. 15.
Near to the Temple, in the Grove, a Spring
Does rise (a strange, and memorable Thing)
Which, at the Birth of Day, and its Decline,
Is Warm; when Sol, in midst of Heaven, does shine,
It soon grows Cold: but, in the Shades of Night,
That Heat is greater made, that shuns the Light.
Full of the God, these Places, then, he shows,
And Glebes, made wealthy without Help of Plows,
And cheerfully thus speaks. This Shady Grove,
These Woods, whose Tops do touch the Feet of Jove,
Connex'd to Heaven, here Prostrate, falling down,
Bostar adore; for unto whom unknown
Are Jove's famed Gifts, through all the World; the Pair
Of Doves, that in the Top of Thebae were?
Of which, the first, that the Chaonian Land
Did touch, and on Dodona's Oak did stand,
Filled it with Prophecy. But that, which over
Carpathian Seas, unto the Libyan Shore,
With Snowy Wings, repaired; this sacred Seat
These D^ves (says the Fable) once gave their Oracles, (the most ancient o^
all Greece) in a Grove sacred to Jupiter, near Dodona, a City in Chaonia: but,
quitting that place, one fled to Delphos; the other to this Grove: whence both
Places became Oracular.
The Cytherean Bird did then create:
And where you Altars, and dark Groves, behold
Standing between the Horns (strange to behold)
Of a choice Ram, the Leader of the rest
O'th Wealthy Flock, from its inspired Breast
Answers, to the Marmarick People, sung.
Then out of Earth this Wood, thus Shady, sprung;
And Groves of aged Oaks, that now the Skies
Do seem to touch: and such at first did rise,
By ancient Favor; keeping, as before,
Their Po'wr, and we with Altars warm adore.
While I these things with Admiration view,
Struck with a Noise of Terror, open flew
The Temple-Doors, and strait a greater Light
Our Eyes beheld. The Priest, arrayed in White,
Before the Holy Altars did appear,
The People all contending to go near.
Then I, as I was ordered, having prayed:
Behold! the God does suddenly invade
The Prophet; and, through all the Ecchoing Grove,
Grave Murmurs from the trembling Beams do move.
And, now, a Voice more loud, then usual, through
The yielding Air does break. For Latium you
Intend (said he) and to infest with War
The Issue of Assaricus prepare.
I see what warlike Libya intends:
And now the cruel God of War ascends
His Chariot, and his furious Steeds expire,
Toward the Hesperian Coast, a gloomy Fire,
While Blood upon their Reins does largely flow.
But thou, who do desire Events to know
Of Battles, and th'Extremities of Fate,
(Courageously attempting Toyls so Great)
The Plains in Apulia, called by the name of Diomed, near Canna; where Hannibal
gave that Memorable Overthrow to the Romans.
The Aetolian Captain's Iapygian Field
Invade, increase of Honor thou shall yield
To thy Sidonian Fathers: after Thee,
Into the Bowels of rich Italy,
No Conqueror shall further penetrate;
Till, by thy Hand subdu'de, the Dardan State
Shall tremble, and their Youth never quit their Fears,
While Hannibal alive, on Earth, appears.
These Oracles brought Bostar, and Desires
Of present Battle into all inspires.
The End of the Third Book.
Hic Puer ut patrio defixum Corpor^ Telum
Conspexit, -- rapta duris ex Ossibus Hasta
Innixum Cervice ferens humeroque Parentem
Emicat attonitae tanta ad Spectacula Turbae. Tela tenent etc:
Memoriae Illustrissm^. Celsissimaeque Arausionensium etc. Filiae Caroli Regis,
natu Maximae. Tabula Religiose Dominae Domnae. Mariae Principissae Primi,
Magnae Britt: Fra: et Hibern: Consecrata:

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Fourth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
The People's Fears, when Hannibal had past
The Alpine Hills: the Senate's Care, and Haste
TO oppose His Progress. On Ticinus Shore
The Armies meet. What Auguries, before
The Fight begun, foretold the Libyans Stay
In Italy: the Romans lose the Day.
Scipio in Fight's relieved by his Son,
Then but a Boy. The Romans, marching on
To Trebia, their Arms with Gracchus join,
And lose a second Day. The Apennine
When Hannibal had with His Army crossed,
In Cold, and Moorish Grounds, an Eye He lost.
His Son, demanded for a Sacrifice
To Saturn, by the Senate, He denies;
And promises hereafter to make good
Those Rites, again, with Noble Roman Blood.
NOW Fame Ausonia's frighted Cities fills
With Rumors; That the Cloud-encompass'd Hills,
And Rocks, that threatened Heaven, the War embraced;
That now the Carthaginians had passed
Those pathless Ways: and often does repeat,
That Hannibal, who seemed to emulate
Alcides Labors, did the Plain possess.
And thus mischievous Tumults does express,
Increasing as She goes; and, Swifter far,
Then swiftest Winds, with the Report of War,
Shakes the affrighted Towers. The People's Fear
(Apt to believe the Vainest things they hear)
The Rumor feeds. Now all with Care, and Speed,
Prepare for War, the Noise whereof is spread
Through all Ausonia, must'ring Arms, and Men.
They whet their Piles, and (Rust wiped off again)
Its cruel Splendor to the Steel restore.
The Youth their Plumed Helmets, long before
Laid up in Peace, repair: their Loops they join
To Darts; and new, from Forges, Axes shine.
With these, impenetrable Coats of Mail
They form, and Breast-Plates, destined to prevail
Against many Hands, and frustrate strongest Blows.
Some, carefully, provide Italian Bows;
While others teach the panting Steeds to wheel,
Or trot the Round; and whet on Stones their Steel.
Then with like Care, and Speed, they Stones convay
To ancient Walls, and Castles; whose Decay
Was wrought by Time: in these their Magazin
Of Arms they make, and speedily begin
With Bars of Oak their Trenches, and their Gates
To fortify; while Fear precipitates
All that they Act, and does in chief Command.
Some in the Desert Fields, amazed, stand;
Others their Houshold-Gods, and Home forsake,
And, frighted, on their trembling Shoulders take
Their feeble Parents, whose weak Thread of Life
Was almost spent. One drives before, his Wife,
With Locks disheveled, dragging a little Son,
That in each Hand unequally does run.
Thus do the People vent their Fears, nor scan
The Cause, or whence those Rumors first began.
The Senate, though these bold Beginnings filled
Their Hearts with Terror, and they now beheld,
Even in the Heart of Italy, a War,
To which the Alps, and pathless Rocks, from far
Seemed to descend, oppose a valiant Mind
Against Adversity, resolved to find
Honor in Dangers, and by Valor raise
A Name so great, of such Immortal Praise,
As Fortune never did before bestow,
Or to the best Successes would allow.
But, now, his Troops, chilled with a long Excess
Of Cold, and Tired, does Hannibal Caress
In safe Retreats, and to their joyful Eyes
Shows through rich Fields their Way, and Rome their Prize.
Yet He omits not to pursue the Cares
Of War; and, still consulting his Affairs,
He, only, takes no Rest. As, when of old
Ausonia's happy Territory bold,
And Warlike, Nations fiercely did invade,
And by their Valor to the World were made
A Terror, the Tarpeian Thunderer,
And Captived Romans, felt a cruel War.
Soon as Hannibal had passed the Pyrenaean-Hills, the Gauls, thuogh it was
Rumoured, that the War was intended against Italy, hearing how He had
subjugated Spain, betook themselves to their Arms, resolved to oppose him: but,
upon Treaty at His Camp near Illiberis (now Salsas) the petty-Kings, won by His
large Bribes to His Party, gave free Passage to His Army by their City Ruscino
(now Roussilon in Gascony) whereupon the Boii, mortal Enemies to the Romans,
immediately revolted from their Obedience, and wi^^ Him invaded Italy. See Livy,
lib. 21.
While He endeavors, with his Gifts, the vain,
And wavering, Nations to his Side to gain,
And join in Arms; the Consul Scipio from
Marseillus in Provence.
Massilia, by Sea, returning Home,
Arrived, suddenly, upon the Shore:
And these great Captains, that had tried before
The several Labors of the Sea, and Land,
Now, in the Plain, more near to Danger stand,
And join their Fates; while a most dismal Hour
Approached. For, when the Consul, with His Power,
Came to the Camp, and Fortune all Delay
Had laid aside, the Troops no longer Stay
Endure; but all, incensed with Desire
Of Fight, the Fo in view, the Sign require.
The Tyrian Captain then, to animate
His numerous Army, does aloud relate
His glorious Conquests in the Iberian War:
That not Pyrene's Hills could set a Bar
To his Commands; nor furious Rhodanus:
Sagunthus burnt; that, through the Celtae, thus
He had, conquering, made his Way, and where't had been
Alcides Labor, he in Arms had seen
His Libyan Horse insult; and, trampling on
The Rocks, with Neighing make the Alps to groan.
But, contrary, the Consul to the Fight,
And noble Actions, does his Men excite.
You have (said He) a Tired, and weary Fo,
Already half consumed with Frost, and Snow:
Who scarce can drag his Limbs, benumbed with Cold.
Go on, and let him Learn, that was so Bold
To pass those Sacred Mountains, and those high
And airy Rocks, how far this Trench does ly
Above Herculean Towers: that with more Ease
He may ascend those Hills; then break through these
Impenetrable Ranks. Let him recite
To Fame his vain Attempts, until in Fight
Subdued, and hasting to Return again
By the same Way he came, the Alps restrain
His Flight. The Gods have brought him hither, through
Those Difficulties, that he might imbrue,
With his perfidious Blood, the Italian Ground,
And that his Bones, hereafter, may be found
Scattered in hostile Land. I fain would know,
If It be another Carthage, that does now
Intend us War, or is it the same again,
That, near Aegutes, perished in the Main?
This said; the Army to Ticinus goes.
Ticinus in a shallow Chanel flows
With clear, and quiet Waters, and the Stream
So Slowly passes on; that it does seem
To Stand, as it, with Silence, glides along
TO embrace the shady Banks, where Birds do throng,
And their shrill Quires perpetually keep,
As if to charm the lazy Flood asleep.
Now, at Night's Period, the Morn begun
With shining Shades, and Sleep its Course had run:
When, to explore the Place's Nature, round
The neighboring Hill, and view the Champagn-ground,
The Consul went abroad: the Libyans too
The like resolve, and it with Care pursue.
This done, they both advance into the Field,
With Wings of Horsemen; and, as they beheld
The Clouds of Dust to rise, and heard the Sound
Of furious Steeds, that, prancing, made the Ground
To tremble, and the Trumpet's shrill Alarms,
Each Captain cries, Now (Soldiers!) to your Arms.
In both, an equal Valor, and Desire
Of Honor, shined, in both an equal Fire
To press into the Fight: and when, as nigh
They came, as from a Sling a Dart might fly,
A sudden Augury diverts their Eyes,
And Minds (all Clouds dispersed) unto the Skies.
An Hawk pursuing, from the South, the fair,
And gentle Birds, that by Venus. Doves sacred to her?
Dione are
So well beloved, with his devouring Bill,
His Pounces, and his Wings, fifteen did kill;
Nor would be satisfied: his strong Desire
Of Blood increased, and Slaughter fed the Fire;
Until, as stooping at a trembling Dove,
That knew not, in its Flight, which Way to move
To meet with Safety, from the Rise of Day
An Eagle came; and, frighting him away,
Toward the Roman Ensigns flies, and where
The General's Son (young Scipio) did appear
(Then but a Boy) in Arms, with a loud Cry
There twice, or thrice, Proclaims the Victory:
Then, with his Bill, his Helmet's Crest does bite,
And to the Stars again resumes his Flight.
Liger, who knew, by his Divining Skill,
The God's Advice, and by his Learned Quill
Could Future things declare, aloud, to all,
Exclaims. Full eighteen years the Libyan shall
The Ausonian Youth in Italy pursue,
Like that rapacious Bird, and shall imbrue
His Hands in Blood, and wealthy Trophies gain.
But yet, proud African, thy Rage restrain;
For, see! Jove's Thunder-Bearer Thee denies
Italian Scepters. Chief of Deities
Be present! may thy Eagle's Omen be
At length confirmed. For, noble Youth, to Thee
The final Fates of conquered Libya are
Reserved, and a most glorious Name in War;
Greater then Carthage, in her Height of Pride,
Unless those Birds, in Flight, the Gods belied.
But Bogus, contrary to this, does sing
All happy Omens to the Tyrian King.
The Hawk a good Presage; The Doves, that fell,
Slain in their Airy Region, foretell
The Fall, and Ruin, of the Roman State.
Thus having said, as Conscious of Fa^e,
And prompted by the Gods; He, first, does throw
With Strength, a ready Javelin at the Fo:
But, through the spacious Field, 't had Vainly flown,
And lost its killing Force; if Riding on
Full Speed, Ambitious to be first of all,
That gave the Charge, bold Catus Horse in the Fall
Had not received it, on his Face; and, though
It then was weak, he met the Fatal Blow,
And found his Ruin: for the trembling Wood,
Fixed in his Front, between his Temples stood.
Now, with loud shouts, both Armies, through the plain,
Came rushing on, and meeting, all Restrain
Their Reins, to stand the Charge. The furious Steed
Erected stands, and, struggling to get Head,
Flies, like a Tempest, through the Champagne-Field;
While to his Feet the Sand does hardly yield.
Before the rest, a nimble Active Band
The Boii were a Warlike People, inhabiting that part of Gallia, which was
called Lugdunensis, (the Territories of Lions) they were inveterate Enemies to
the Romans, and had several times invaded Italy; but, not long before, were
Triumphed over by the Consul Flaminius: after which Victory, the Romans began
to place Colonies on that side the Alps, which the rather provoked them to side
with Hannibal.
Of Boii, whom stout Chryxus did command,
Assault the Van; and Chryxus, with a Rage,
Great as his Giant-Body, does engage.
From Brennus, He his famed Original
Derived; and, now, the Conquered Capitol
Among his Titles wore: upon his Shield
The Pensive Romans, ready all to yield,
On the Tarpeian Sacred Hill behold
The Celtae, weighing their redeeming Gold.
His Iv'ry-Neck a Golden Chain did bear,
His Garments with pure Gold Embroidered were,
Bracelets of massy Gold adorn his Wrest,
And the like Metal shined upon his Crest:
By his fierce Onset, the Camertine Bands
At first were routed. Nothing now withstands
The Boii; who, in a condensed Throng,
Break through the thickest Ranks, and, mixed among
The Barbarous Senones, beneath the Feet
Of their fierce Horses, trample all they meet,
And ^trew, with mangled Corpse, the Field, which seems
To swim in Blood, that in continued Streams
From Men, and Horses, flows, and does imbrue
The sliding Steps of them, that still pursue.
Bodies half-dead, by Horses hoofs, are slain
Outright, which, flying round the fatal Plain,
Scattered from their light Heels the purple Flood,
And lave the Wretches Faces with their Blood.
Tyrrhenus, born near high Pelorus Shore,
First dying, stained with his purple Gore
A conquering Dart; for, as he did excite,
With a shrill Trumpet, others to the Fight,
Reviving Courage by the Warlike Sound,
Received, by a Barbarous Dart, a Wound
In's panting Throat: which quickly does impair
The rising Noise, yet the infused Air,
Blown from his dying Mouth, awhile, does pass
(His Lips now silent) through the winding Brass:
Picens, and Laurus, both by Chryxus die.
But yet not both alike: for Laurus by
His Sword was slain; selected near the Po,
A polished Spear, gave Picens fatal Blow.
For, as aside he turned, to Delude
(By wheeling round) the Fo, that him pursued,
The Spear, at once, both penetrates his Thigh,
And's Horses Flank; and both together die.
Next he wounds Venulus, and from his Neck
Retires the Weapon stained with Blood, to check
Thy Speed (rash Farf^rus) who by the same
Do likewise fall: with Tullus, near the Stream
Of cold Velinus bred, Ausonia's Pride,
And of a glorious Name, had he not died;
Or had the Tyrians their League maintained.
With these the great Tyburti, who had gained
Renown in Wars, and Romulus his Hand
Sent to the Shades below. Hispellas, and
Metaurus, Daunus too, his Ruin found
From him, whom, with his Lance, he thought to wound.
Nor was there room for Tyrians to engage
In Battle, with the rest. The Coltick Rage
Filled the whole Field: no Shafts from any Hand
Were sent in Vain; but fixed in Bodies stand.
Here, among trembling Files, Quirinus, high
In Courage, and disdaining Thoughts to fly,
Resolved to meet, with an undaunted Mind,
His Fate, if prosperous Fortune once declined:
Inflames his furious Courser with his Spear,
And with his Arms disperseth here, and there,
The Shafts, that him invade; thinking to make
His Way, and through the thickest Ranks to break,
TO attach the King: and, certain to receive
His Death, attempts by Valor to atchieve
That Honor, he could not survive. A Wound
Into the Groin of Teutalus, the Ground
Does make to tremble, with his weighty Fall.
Next Sarmens died, for Valor known to all:
Who his long yellow Tresses, that out-shin'd
Pure Gold, contracted in a Knot behind,
Had vowed (if He returned a Conqueror)
A Sacrifice to Thee, the God of War.
But the stern Fates, regarding not his Vow,
Him, with his Hair unshorn, to the Shades below
Untimely sent. Over all his Snow-white Limbs,
The reeking Blood, in Streams diffused, Swims,
And stains the Earth. Lycaunus, whom a Dart,
That met him, as he moved, could not divert,
Rushed in, and, waving his Revenging Sword,
With all the Strength, that Fury could afford,
Upon his Shoulder gives a fatal Wound,
Where his left Arm (by yielding Sinews bound)
Its Strength, and Motion did receive; which now
Hangs loosely down, and lets the Bridle go:
And, as he, Stooping, labored to retain,
Within his trembling Hand, the Reins again,
From's Body Vegasus lop'd off his Head,
And in his Helmet, as it largely bled,
Tied to his Horse's Main, it bears about;
The Gods saluting with a barbarous Shout.
While thus the Field the Gauls with Slaughter feed;
The Consul, mounted on a Milk-white Steed,
Into the Fight advanced, with fresh Supplies:
And first, of all, with high-rais'd Courage, flies
On the prevailing Fo, On Him attend
The choicest Youth, that Italy could send.
The Marsi, Corae, and the Latins Pride,
Sabellus, who by all was magnified
For flinging his swif^ Dart with certain Skill:
With stout Tudertes, from his Native Hill,
Devote to Mars; and the Falisci, who,
Decked in their Countries-Linen, Wars pursue;
With these, that by a silent River, near
From a famous Temple, there Dedicated to Hercules.
Herculean Walls, their wealthy Orchards rear,
With Apples crowned. Next the Catilli came,
That dwell on Banks, where Anyo's swift Stream
To Tyber hasts; and those, that from their Slings
Send Hernick Stones, hardened in freezing Springs.
Nor were they absent, that inhabit where
Casinum still is crowned with misty Air.
Thus went the Italian Youth to War, and by
The unequal Gods were destined there to die.
But Scipio, where the Fury of the Fo
Did highest Triumph in the Overthrow,
And Slaughter of his Men, spurs on his Horse;
And, as if from their Fall inspired with Force,
To their sad Ghosts kills frequent Sacrifice.
There Padus, Labarus, and Camus dies:
Brennus, whom many Wounds could scarce destroy;
And Larus, that, like Gorgon, turned his Eye.
And there Leponticus by cruel Fate,
Most fiercely fighting, fell: for, snatching at
The Consul's Reins, and, as he stood Upright
Afoot, the Horsman equaled in his Height,
With his sharp Sword his Head the Consul cleaves,
And it, divided on his Shoulders, leaves.
Next Abbatus; that, in its furious Course,
Endeavored, with his Shield, to stop his Horse;
Was by a Kick struck dead, upon the Place;
The Beast still trampling on his wounded Face.
The Roman Captain, through the bloody Plain,
Thus raging Rides: as, when the Icarian Main
Cold Boreas, with victorious Blasts, does raise
From its deep Bottom, over all the Seas,
In battered Ships, the Mariners are tossed,
And in white Foam the Cyclades are lost.
Chryxus now seeing Hopes of Life declined,
And Death's Approach, confirms his valiant Mind
With a contempt of Fate. His horrid Beard
Shined with a bloody Foam: his Jaws appeared
All white with Froth: his Locks, with flying Sand,
And Dust made squallid, stiff, like Bristles, stand.
Thus Tarius fiercely he invades, who nigh
The Consul fought, and with strong Blows does ply:
Then fells him to the Ground; for with a Spear,
(That his last Fate upon its Point did bear)
Wounded, he tumbles Headlong from his Steed:
Which moved by Fear, with uncontrouled Speed,
Drags him (his Legs fast in the Stirrup bound)
About the Field. Blood issuing from the Wound
Leaves a long winding Tract, that, with his Spear
Trail'd in his Hand, does in the Dust appear.
The Consul praised his Death, and does prepare
To vindicate his Ghost: when through the Air
An horrid Noise was heard; and he descries
Those Shouts commended Chryxus, whom his Eyes,
Scarce known before, beheld. His Anger now
Grew high, and viewing, with a troubled Brow,
His Giant-Body, with a gentle Hand
Clapping his Horse's Neck, he makes a Stand,
And thus bespeaks him. We, as yet, have made
A vulgar War, and to the Stygian Shade
Have sent down People of no Name at all:
But, my Garganus, now, the Gods us call
To greater Actions. See thou not how great
Chryxus appears? To thee I Will Dedicate
Those Trappings, that with Tyrian Luster shine:
Their Grace, and golden Reins shall all be thine.
This said: he Chryxus in the open Plain
Aloud provokes the Combat to maintain.
His willing Enemy the like Desire
Inflames. On either Side the Troops retire,
Commanded to give way, and strait beheld
The Champions in the Lists, amidst the Field.
Great as the Earth-born Mimas did appear
In the Phlegraean Plains, when Heaven for Fear
Even trembled at his Arms: from's salvage Breast
Such cruel Chryxus, here, himself expressed
With horrid Murmuring: and, to engage
His valiant Fo, with Howling whets his Rage,
And thus, insulting, speaks. Do none Survive
In Burnt, and Captivated Rome, could give
Thee Notice, what brave Hands the Progeny
Of Brennus bring to War? now Learn of Me:
And, as he spoke, a knotty Beam of Oak,
That would have shaken with its weighty Stroke
A Citie's Gates, he flings. A dreadful Sound
It makes, and, falling vainly, tears the Ground:
For, having lost his Distance, by a Throw
Too strong, it flew beyond his nearer Fo.
To him the Consul answers: Take to Hell
This with Thee, and remember, that thou tell
Thy Grand-sire, how far distant thou did fall
From the Tarpeian-Hill: and say withal,
It was not lawful for thee once to view
The Capitol. And, as he spoke, he threw
A Javelin (fitted to destroy so vast
A Fo) which, from the thong with vigor cast,
Pierced through his Cassock's numerous Folds, and through
His Coat of Mail, which Nerves confirmed, into
His Breast, whose Depth the Weapon wholly drowned:
With a vast Ruin, prostrate on the Ground
He falls. The suffering Earth beneath the Weight
Of's Arms, and Body, groans, and feels his Fate.
So on the Tyrrhene Coast the Hills, that stand
TO oppose the Billows, that invade the Land,
Struck by impetuous Storms, immanely roar,
And raving Nereus, beating on the Shore,
The Waves, divided by their furious Shocks,
Drown in the angry Deep the broken Rocks.
Their Captain slain, the Celtae all to flight
Themselves, and Hopes, commit; their Courage quite
Declines. As when, on the Pyraenean-Hill,
The busy Hunter, with Sagacious Skill
Searching the secret Dens, to rouse his Game
From their thick Coverts, fires the Thorns: the Flame
With Silence gathers Strength, and to the Skies*
Dark Clouds of pitchy Smoke aspiring rise;
Then all on fire the Hill does strait appear,
Loud Noises fill the Woods: The Beasts, for fear,
And Birds, forsake their Shelter, and from far
Through all the Vale the Cattle frighted are.
When Mago saw the Celtick Troops were gone,
And their first In this Character of the Gauls, in general (and not yet wholly
worn out in the Nation) Florus agrees with the P^ets; That in their first
Onset they seem to exceed Men; but in the second are inferior to Women.
Onset (which in them, alone,
Is vigorous) was lost, he strait does call
His Countrymen to fight: and first of all
The Horsemen; who appear on every Side
In Troops, and, without Reins, or Bridles ride.
Now the Italians fly, and then renew
The Fight. The Tyrians then for Fear withdrew,
And now advance again. These their Right Wing
In Moon-like Circles lead; The other bring
Their Left alike in Form: Alternately
In Close-form'd Globes they fight, and, when they fly,
With Art avoid the Slaughter of the Fo.
So, when the Winds from several Quarters blow,
Fierce Boreas one way drives the swelling Main,
Which Eurus meeting tumbles back again,
And with alternate Blasts, both furious, throw
The Ocean (that obeys them) to and fro.
At length in Tyrian Purple shining, wrought
With Gold, comes Hannibal, and with Him brought
Terror, and Fear, and Fury to the Field.
And soon as He His bright Callaiek Shield
Held up, and struck a piercing Light through all,
Their Hopes, and Valor both together fall.
Their trembling Souls cast off all Shame of Flight:
None care to seek a noble Death in Fight.
Resolved to fly, they rather wish to know
Death by the gaping Earth, then by the Fo.
So when a Tiger from's Cancasean Den
Descends, the Fields forsaken are by Men,
And Beasts. All, as distracted, fly for Fear,
And Shelter seek; while, as a Conqe'rour,
He wanders up, and down, the desert Plain,
And now extends, then shuts his Jaws again,
As if some present Carcass he did eat;
And, gaping wide, does Slaughter meditate.
Him nor could Metabus, nor Vfens shun:
Though Vfens, very tall, did swiftly run;
And Metabus, full Speed, on Horseback fled:
For Metabus was with his Lance struck dead;
And Vfens, falling on his Knees, did bleed
By's Sword: so lost his Life, and Praise of Speed.
Then Sthenius, Laurus, and Collinus die.
Collinus, born in a cold Climate, nigh
The Crystal Caves of Fusinus, and over
That Lake, by Swimming, passed from either Shore.
The next Companion of their Fate, that fell
Was Massicus; born on that Sacred Hill,
That crowned with fruitful Vines does bear his Name,
Near Lyris nursed, that with a silent Stream
Its Course dissembleth, and with glittering Waves,
Unchanged by Rain, the quiet Margent Laves.
But now the Heat of Slaughter grew so high,
That they could scarce find Weapons to supply
Their Active Rage; Shields clash on Shields, and Feet
On Feet do press: and, as they, Furious, meet,
Encountering close, the waving Crests, that crowned
Their Helmets, mutually their Foreheads wound.
Three famous Twins, all valiant Brothers, whom
Sidonian Barce, happy in her Womb,
In time of War, unto Xantippus bare,
Most fiercely fighting, in the Van appear.
Their Power, and Wealth in Greece, their Xantippus, who was sent by the
Lacedaemonians to be General for the Carthaginians against Regulus the Roman
Consul: whom he vanquished; and lead Captive to Carthage. See Lib. 6.
Father's Fame
(A valiant Captain) with Amycle's Name,
And Regulus, in Spartan Fetters bound,
With all that their Forefathers had renowned,
Inflamed their Minds, in Arms to prove their high
Descent, and by their Deeds to testify
That they from Lacon sprang: to visit then
The cold Taygeta, and Wars again
Allai'd, through their Eurotas sail, and see
Those Rites, Lycurgus, were ordained by Thee.
But Heaven, and three Ausonian Brothers, who
In Age, and Courage, equalled the Fo,
Sent by Aricia from those lofty Groves,
Where Numa with the Nymph his secret Loves
Enjoyed denied they should to Sparta go.
Nor would the too impartial Fates allow,
That they Diana Taurica, who had her Altars there: and after the barbarous
Scythian Manner, had Sacrifices of Humane Blood.
Diana's Altars should behold,
And Sacred Lakes. For now the fierce, and bold
Clytias, Eumachus, and Xantippus, proud
Of's Father's Name, engaged in the Crowd,
And Heat of all the Fight. As when, within
The Libyan Plains, the Lions do begin
A War among themselves, their Roaring fills
The Fields, and Cottages; over secret Hills,
And pathless Rocks, the affrighted Moor does fly;
His Wife endeavoring to suppress the Cry
Of The tender Infant, hanging at the Teat
Of her large Breast; the raging Beasts repeat
Their Murmurs, and between their bloody Jaws
Crash broken Bones: while limbs beneath their Claws,
And cruel Teeth, still fight; as if with Scorn
To seem to yield, though from the Body torn:
So the Egerian Youth, fierce Virbius, here,
There Capys press to fight; Albanus there,
Alike in Arms: Him Clytias by Chance,
Stooping to shun a Blow, strikes with his Lance,
Quite through the Belly. Strait his Bowels filled,
Extruded by his Fall, his hollow Shield.
Next by stout Eumachus was Capys slain:
Who, as if fixed, endeavored to retain
His Target; till a Sword from his Left Side
Lopped off his Arm, and by the Wound he died:
While his unhappy Hand refused to yield
Its Hold, and stuck unto the falling Shield.
Two of the three thus miserably slain,
The last great Conquest Virbius does remain:
Who, as he feigned to fly, Xantippus slew
With his keen Sword, and eager to pursue
Eumachus by his Javelin likewise falls.
And thus the Fight by double Funerals
Is equal made. Then the Survivers died
By mutual Wounds, and laid their Rage aside.
Oh happy you, whom noble Piety,
Urging your Fate, did thus persuade to die!
Such Brothers future Times shall wish to see,
And your last valiant Acts your Memory
Shall crown with Honor; if our Verses live,
Or miserable Nephews, that survive,
Shall read these Monuments your Virtues claim,
And great Apollo envy not Our Fame.
But now his Troops, dispersed through all the Plains,
The Consul, with his Voice, from Flight restrains,
While He could use His Voice. Whither d' ye bear
Those Ensigns? How are you destroyed by Fear?
If the first Place of Battle you affright,
Or you want Courage in the Front to fight,
Behind Me stand; but lay aside your Fear,
And see Me fight. Their Fathers Captives were,
From whom you fly. What Hopes can we pretend,
If once subdued? Shall we the Alps ascend?
Oh! think, you see Tower-bearing Rome, whose Head
Her Walls do crown, submissively, now, spread
Her Hands; while her proud Foes her Sons enchain;
Daughters are ravished, and their Parents slain.
And in their Blood, me thinks, I see the Fire
Of holy Vesta now (alas) expire.
Oh! then prevent this Sin. Thus having said,
His Jaws with Dust, and Clamor, weary made;
His Left Hand snatching up the Reins; the Right
His Sword; his Breast to those, that fled the Fight,
He does oppose: now threatens Them, and then
Himself to Kill, unless they turn again.
These Armies when, from high Olympus, Jove
Beheld, the noble Consul's Dangers move
His Mind to Pity. Then, he calls his Son
(The God of War) and to Him thus begun.
My Son, I fear that gallant Man's not far
From Ruin, if thou take not up the War.
Withdraw him, full of Fury, from the Fight;
Forgetful of Himself, through the Delight
Of Slaughter. Stop the Libyan General,
Who will more glory in the Consul's Fall,
Then all those Numbers, that He does destroy.
Thou see, besides, how soon that Young Scip^o.
Warlike Boy
His tender Hands in Battle does engage,
And strives by Action to transcend his Age,
Thinking it tedious to be young in War.
Thou guiding Scipio Africanus, who (but fourteen years old) in this Fight
rescued his Father, and, at twenty five years, undertook the War of Spain; and
never relinquished it, till he had subdued Hannibal.
Him, he shall hereafter dare
TO attempt Great things, and his first Trophie shall
Be to prevent his Noble Father's Fall.
Thus Jove; strait Mars from the Odrysian Field
His Chariot summons, and assumes his Shield:
Which, like a gloomy Thunderbolt, its Beams
Scatters abroad: his Helmet too, that seems
To other Deities a Weight too great:
And's Breast Plate, that with so much Toil, and Sweat
The laboring Cyclops formed: then shakes his Spear,
Stained with the Blood of Titans, through the Air,
And with his Chariot fills the dusty Plain.
The dire Eumenides, and dreadful Train
Of Furies him attend, and every where
Innumerable Forms of Death appear:
While fierce Bellona, who does guide the Reins,
Whips on his Steeds, and all Delay disdains.
Then from the troubled Heaven a Tempest forth
Does break, and in dark Clouds involves the Earth.
His Entrance even the Court of Jove does shake,
And Rivers, by his Chariots Noise, forsake
Their Banks, and, struck with Horror, backward fly
To their first Springs, and leave their Channels dry.
The Garamantian Bands, now, every where
Invest with Dars the Consul, and prepare
New Presents for the Tyrian Prince: the Spoils
Of his rich Arms, his Head, through many Toils
Of that sad Day, bedewed with Sweat, and, Blood.
While He, not to give way to Fortune, stood
Resolved, and then, more fierce with Slaughter grown,
Returns the numerous Darts against him thrown.
Till over all his Limbs the Blood of Foes,
Mixed with his own, in Streams diffused flows,
And then, his Crest declining, in a Ring
More closely girt, the Garamantians fling
Their steeled Shafts, with nearer Aim, and all,
Like Storms of Hail, at once, about him fall.
But, when his Son perceived a Dart to be
Fixed in his Father's Body (as if He
Had felt the deadly Wound) his pious Tears
Bedews his Cheeks, and Paleness strait appears,
To run over all his Body, and with Groans,
That pierce the Skies, his Danger he Bemoans.
Twice he Attempted, to anticipate
By piercing his own Breast, his Father's Fate:
As often the God of War converts his Rage
Against the Fo; with whom he does engage,
And, Fearless, through the armed Squadrons flies,
And, in his furious Speed, does equalize
The Deity, his Guide. The Troops, that round
His Father fight, give Way, and on the Ground
A Tract of Blood appears. Where er'e he goes,
(Protected by the Heavenly Shield) he mows
Whole Squadrons down. On heaps of Arms he Slew,
Such as opposed his Rage, with him that Threw
The Dart, who died before his Father's Eyes;
With many more, as pleasing Sacrifice.
Then, snatching from the Bones the fixed Spear,
Upon his Neck, from Danger, he does bear
His fainting Sire. The Troops at such a Sight
Amazed stand: the Libyans cease to fight:
Th* Iberians all give way. A Piety
So great, in tender Years, turns every Eye
Upon him, to Admire what they beheld,
And strikes deep Silence through the dusty Field.
Then said the God of War: Thou Dido's Towers
Hereafter shall destroy; and Tyrian Powers,
Compelled by Thee, a League shall entertain:
Yet never shall thou greater Honor gain,
Then this. Go on (brave Youth) go on, and prove
Thy self to be, indeed, the Son of Jove.
Go on: for greater Things reserved be;
Though better never can be given to Thee.
This said: the Sun now stooping to the Main,
The Deity returns to Heaven again,
Involved in Clouds. Darkness the Fight decides,
And, in their Camps, the weary Armies hides.
But, when in her declining Wain the Night
Phoebe withdrew, and, by her Brother's Light,
The rosy Flames from the Eoan Main
Gilded the Margent of the Skies again;
The Consul, fearing that the Plain might be
A great Advantage to the Enemy,
To Trebia, and the Mountains, takes his Way.
And now the winged Hours advanced the Day,
When with much Toil the Bridge was broken down,
(Over which the Roman Army passed) and thrown
Into the Flood: when to the Rapid Stream
Of swift Eridanus, the Libyan came;
Seeking, by marching round, through various Ways,
The Fords, and where its Course the River stays:
Trees from the Neighboring Groves at length he takes,
And, to transport his Troops, a Navy makes.
The valiant Consul (from the ancient Line
Sempronius Gracchus had then the Command of the Roman Navy to guard Sicily,
and the Coast of Italy, from the Carthaginians; whose Fleet he had dispersed:
and, leaving Sicily under the Care of King Hiero, on the Fame of Hannibal's
entering Italy, came with his Forces to Trebia, and joined with Cornelius
Scipio. Of his Death, see Book 12.
Of The Gracchi sprang, whose Ancestors did shine
In Monuments, with noble Titles crowned,
For Valor, both in Peace, and War Renowned)
Thither, from high Pelorus, came by Sea,
Incamping near the Banks of Trebia.
The Carthaginians, likewise, in the Plain
(The River over-pass'd) encamped remain,
Encouraged by Success of their Affairs:
While their insulting General prepares
Their Minds, and to their Fury still does give
Fresh Fuel. What third Consul does survive
In Rome? (said He) What other Sicily
Remains now in Arms against us? See!
All the Italian Bands, and Daunian Line,
Are met. Now let the Latin Princes join
In League with Me; now let them Laws require.
But thou, that in the Fight, unhappy Sire,
Ow'st to thy Son thy Life, so may thou live!
May thou to him again that Honor give!
May thou not die in War so old! it is I,
(When Fate shall call) that must in Battle die.
This with high Rage expressed; he does advance
With his Massilian Troops, and with his Lance,
Even at the Trenches, does provoke the Fo.
The Latin Soldiers, scorning thus to ow
Their Safety to their Rampires, and to hear
The Gates to Echo with an Hostile Spear,
Break forth: and through the Breach, before the Rest,
The valiant Consul flies. The plumed Crest
Of his bright Helmet waving with the Wind;
His Cassock stained with honored Blood behind:
He calls, with a loud Voice, the following Bands,
And, where the Fo in strongest Bodies stands,
He breaks his Way, and charge through the Plain.
As when a furious Torrent, swelled with Rain,
Falling from lofty Pindus Top, does fill
The Valleys with a Noise; as if the Hill,
By some rude Tempest, were in Pieces torn:
The Herds, and salvage Beasts, and Woods are born
Away; the foaming Waves over all prevail,
And pass with Roaring through the stony Dale.
Could I like the Maeonian ( H^mer.
Prophet sing,
Or would Apollo, to assist me, bring
An hundred Voices, I could not declare
What Slaughter here the Consul made: what there
The Libyan's Fury acted. Hannibal
Murranus, and the Roman General
Phalantus, old in Labors, and for Skill
In War all famous, hand to hand, did kill.
From Anxur's stormy Cliffs Murranus: from
Sea-wash'd Tritonis did Phalantus come.
But when, by his Illustrious Habit shown,
The Consul was engaged, Cupentus, one
Deprived of half his Sight, that with one Eye
Pursued the War, assaults him suddenly;
And fixes in the Margent of his Shield
His trembling Lance. The Consul him beheld
With boiling Rage; Now (Villain) lay aside
(Said he) what ever Mischief thou do hide
Beneath thy Ugly, and Deformed Brow.
And, as he spoke, with Aim, directly through
His glaring Eye he thrusts his fatal Spear.
No less incensed does Hannibal appear;
By whom, in silver Arms, unfortunate
Varrenus fell: Varrenus, whom of late
Fertile Fulginia's wealthy Fields with Gain
Enriched, and, wandering in the open Plain,
His curled Bulls, as white as Alpine Snow,
Returned from cold Clitumnus, a River in Tuscany, wherein such Bulls, as were
to be Sacrificed to Jupiter, were washed, and became White. See the
Continuation of the first Book.
Clitumnus Stream: but now
The Gods were angry, and those Victimes prove
Nourished in vain; which for Tarpeian Jove,
With so much Care, by him were fed before.
Then light Iberians with the nimble Moor
Advance. Here Piles, there Libyan Arrows fly;
So thick, from either Side, they hide the Sky:
And all the Space, between the River's Shore,
And Champagn-Ground, with Darts is covered over.
So thick they stand, the Wounded have no Room
To Fall, and Die. There Allius, that from
Argyripa, through Daunian Fields, with rude
Unpolished Shafts, his flying Game pursued,
Was born, into the midst of all his Foes,
Upon his Iapygian Steed, and throws
(Not vainly) his Ap^lian Darts: his Breast
The Skins of rough Samnitick Bears invest,
Instead of Steel: his Head an Helmet wore,
Fenced with the Tushes of an Aged Boar.
But him, thus Active, as if he had bin
Then following the Chase of Beasts, within
The Gargan Woods, when Mago here espied,
There bold Maharbal; they on either Side
Charge him. As Bears, more fierce by Hunger made,
From several Rocks a trembling Bull invade;
Their Fury not permitting them to share
Their Prey with Leisure: so both here, and there,
Against Allius discharged Weapons flew.
At length, through both his Sides, the Libyan Yew
Does, singing, pierce into his trembling Heart,
And Death remained ambiguous, to which Dart
It should give way; for both together there,
As in their Center, met. Now full of Fear
The Roman Troops, with scattered Ensigns, fly;
Whom to the Banks the Libyan furiously,
(A Sight of Pity!) wandering up and down,
Pursues, and in the River strives to drown.
Then Trebia to their Ruin does conspire,
And raising, at Saturnia's Desire,
His fatal Waves, begins a second War
Against the weary Vanquished: who are
By Earth, that shrank beneath them, where they stood,
Devoured, and covered by the treacherous Flood.
Nor could they from the thick, tenacious Mire,
(If once engaged) their weary Limbs retire:
But stand, as bound, and fixed within the Mud,
Until, overwhelmed by the deceitful Flood,
Or Ruins of the hollow Banks, some fall;
While others through the Slippery places crawl,
And seek through the inextricable Shore,
Their several Ways to Safety. But, as over
The rotten Bogs they fly, and Ruin think
To shun, by their own Weight oppressed, they Sink.
Here one swims swiftly, and now near the Land,
Snatching the tops of Rushes in his Hand,
To raise himself above the Flood again,
Nailed by a Javelin to the Bank, is slain:
Another, having lost his Weapon, fast
Within his Arms his struggling Fo embraced,
And in one Fate, both joined together, died.
Death in a thousand Shapes, on every Side,
Appears. There wounded Ligus backward fell
Upon the Shore; and, as the Flood does swell
With Heaps of Bodies, and his Visage laves,
He sucks in, with his Sighs, the bloody Waves.
But scarce halfway did fair Hirpinus swim,
And beckned to the rest to follow him:
When, carried by the Stream's impetuous Force,
And gaul'd with many wounds, his headstrong Horse
Obeys the Torrent, till with Labor tired,
Under prevailing Waves, they both expired.
Yet still these Miseries increase: for, as
The towred Elephants attempt to pass
Into the Flood, with Violence they fell
(As when a Rock, torn from its native Hill
By Tempest, falls into the angry Main)
And Trebia afraid to entertain
Such Monstrous Bodies, flies before their Breast,
Or shrinks beneath them with their Weight oppressed,
But as Adversity man's Courage tries,
And fearless Valor, does to Honor rise
Through Danger; stout Fibrenus does disclaim
A Death ignoble, or that wanted Fame:
And cries, My Fate shall be observed, nor shall
Fortune, beneath these Waters, hide my Fall.
I Will try, if Earth does any living bear,
Which the Ausonian Sword, and Tyrrhen Spear
Cannot subdue, and kill. With that, he pressed
His Lance into the right Eye of the Beast,
That, with blind Rage, the penetrating Blow
Pursued, and tossing up his mangled Brow,
Besmeared with reeking Blood, with horrid Cries
Turns round, and from his fallen Master flies.
Then with their Darts, and frequent Arrows all
Invade him, and now dare to hope his Fall.
His immense Shoulders, and his Sides, appear
One Wound entire, his dusky Back does bear
Innumerable Shafts; that, like a Wood,
Still waving, as he moved, upon him stood:
Till in so long a Fight, their Weapons all
Consumed, he fell, Death hasting through his Fall.
But now (although a Wound, which by the way
An Adverse Hand inflicted, did delay
His Speed a while) implacable with Rage,
Within the River, Scipio does engage.
And with unnumbred Slaughters does infest
The Enemy; while Trebia seems oppressed
With Targets, Helmets, and with Bodies slain;
And scarce does any vacant Space remain
To see the Water. There Mazeus by
His Lance, there Gostar by his Sword does die.
Then against Telgon, who from Pelops sprung,
And in Cyrene dwelt, a Pile he flung,
Snatched from the stained Torrent, and within
His gaping Mouth fixed the whole Steel. His Chin
Now falls: against his Teeth the trembling Wood
Rebounds with Noise, and sudden Streams of Blood,
Together with his Life, flow from the Wound?
Yet, after Death, no Rest his Body found;
For Trebia it to Eridanus conveys,
Eridanus it tumbles to the Seas.
With him, and others, Lapsus likewise died,
To whom the Fates a Sepulcher denied.
What then availed his rich Hesperides,
Or Groves by Nymphs frequented? What his Trees,
That, bearing Gold, extend their shining Boughs?
But Trebia, swelling, from the Bottom throws
His curling Waves, unlocketh all his Springs,
And all his Forces with fresh Fury brings:
The Billows roar aloud, and, as they fly,
Still a new Torrent does their Place supply.
The General perceiving this, his Blood
With greater Fury boils. Perfidious Flood
(Said He) severely shall thou punished be,
For this thy Insolence. I Will scatter thee
In lesser Streams, through all the Gallick Coast,
Until the Name of River thou have lost.
I Will choke thee in thy Birth: nor shall thou flow,
Through this thy Chanel, to the Banks of Po.
What sudden Rage is this, does thee invade,
And thee Sidonian of a Latin made?
Him boasting thus, the Waters in a Heap
Assail, and on his lofty Shoulders leap.
Himself against their Rage He does oppose,
And with His Shield sustains their furious Throws.
Behind, the Storm-rais'd Surges thicker come,
And cover His Plumed Helmet with their Foam.
That He should farther wade, the God denied;
While from His Feet the slippery Earth does slide.
The angry Billows, now, begin a War
Among themselves, and, striking Rocks, afar
Diffuse the Noise through all the Neighboring Coast,
And in the Fight his Banks the River lost.
Then, lifting up his streaming Locks, his Brow
Impail'd with Bull-Rushes, said He, Do Thou
So proudly threaten Thy Revenge on Me?
And that the Name of Trebia shall be
By Thee extinguished? Oh, Thou Enemy
To this My Empire! see what Bodies I
Do bear; that by thy fatal Hand were slain:
Such Heaps of Shields, and Helmets here remain,
That they my Waters from my Chanel force,
And I Am constrained to leave my former Course.
Thou see how deep with Slaughter they are stained,
And backward fly. Restrain thy killing Hand,
And pitch Thy Camp within this Neighboring Field.
This Cytherea from an Hill beheld,
And, near her, Vulcan; who themselves did shroud
From Mortal Eyes, within an airy Cloud.
But Scipio, sighing, lifts to the Skies
His Hands, and says; Ye Gods, whose Auspicies
Have hitherto preserved Dardanian Rome,
Must I, at length, a Sacrifice become
To such a Death, preserved by You of late
In so great Fights? Is it above my Fate
To fall by Fortune? Oh, deliver me
Again (my Son) unto the Enemy;
That I may die in Battle! and My End
Unto My Brothers, and to Rome, commend.
Grieved with this Language, Venus sighed, and all
Her Husband's Fury on the Flood lets fall.
Over all the Banks, the active Flames appear
Dispersed, and the Streams, that many a Year
Had there been Nourished by the aged Flood,
Most furiously devour. The Neighboring Wood
Does likewise burn, and through the highest Groves
This Fiction alludes to that of Homer, Iliad. XXI. Where the violent
Inundation of the River Scamander is restrained by Vulcan, at the Prayer of
Achilles.
Vulcan, an uncontrouled Conqu'rour, moves.
Now Fir-Trees lose their Arms; the lofty Pines,
And Alders sink, the Poplar too declines;
And from their standing Trunks those Branches fell,
Where Quires of Chanting Birds were wont to dwell.
Even from the Bottom of the troubled Flood,
The Fire licks up the Waters, dries the Blood,
Late shed upon the Banks. The parched Earth,
(As when rash Phaeton, to prove his Birth,
Did Fire the World) with Heat excessive cleaves,
And Heaps of Ashes on the Waters leaves.
Father Eridanus now thinks it strange,
That his Eternal Course so soon does change,
The Nymphs their liquid Caves with mournful Cries
Now fill, and, as the Flood endeavored thrice
To raise his scorched Head, the God of Fire,
Throwing a Lamp, constrained him to retire
Beneath his smoking Waves, and thrice his Head
Of Reeds deprives: at length, as Vanquished,
And Weak, submitting to his Conquering Fo,
'Twas granted in his former Banks to flow.
Scipio, and Gracchus, then; from Trebia, all
Their Troops, unto a fenced Hill, recall.
But Hannibal the River does adore,
And, with much Honor, sprinkles near the Shore
His Social Waters, in token, that He then received that Part of the Country
into His Protection, and Amity.
Social Waters on the Holy Grass:
Not knowing how much greater things (alas!)
The Gods would act. What Woes for Italy
Were ( Thrasimenus) then prepared by Thee.
Not long before, Flaminius did invade
The Boii, and an easy Conquest made
Over that Nation, Weak, and void of all
Deceit. But to contend with Hannibal
Required more Toil, more Vigilance, and Skill.
Him, fatal to his Country, and with ill
Presages born, Saturnia prepares
As General, while Italie's Affairs
Sadly declined: A man most worthy all
The Mischief, that did on his Country fall.
For, in the first Day, that he took in Hand
The Helm of State, and the Army did command:
As Mariners, unskilful to convey
A beaten Ship through a tempestuous Sea,
Obey the Winds, and leave to every Blast,
Or Wave, the wandering Vessel; which at last
Is driven by the Pilot's art less Hands
On Rocks, or else is swallowed up in Sands:
So, with rash Arms, Flaminius does invade
The Lydians, and those Mansions Sacred made
By ancient Corythus, a Town in Tuscany, built by King Corythus, descended of
Tyrrhenus, the Son of Atys, King of Maeonias, and Father to Lydus; from whom
the Maeonians were called Lydians, whose Colonies were planted in this part of
Italy by Tyrrhenus.
Corythus Arrival there;
And the Maeonian Colonies, that were
Joined to Italian, by their Grand-fires Blood,
And in the Catalogue of Kindred stood.
Nor did the Gods neglect to advertise
The Libyan Captain of an Enterprise,
That to his Name such Honor might produce.
For when that Sleep, over all the World, his ^uice
Of Poppy had diffused, and with his Wings
Had covered over the Tedious Care of things.
Juno the Figure of the Neighboring Flood
Assumes, and, as he slept, before him stood:
The dangling Tresses, on her watery Brow,
Encompassed with a wreathed Poplar-Bough.
With sudden Cares, she dives into his Breast,
And with this powerful Language breaks his Rest.
Oh Hannibal, most happy in thy Fame,
And unto Italy a fatal Name!
Who, if the Ausonian Land had given Thee Birth,
Deification being peculiar to the Romans.
Might with the Gods, when Thou forsak'st the Earth
Hereafter be Enthroned. While yet we may,
And Fates permit us, banish all Delay:
The great Success, which Fortune does allow,
Not long endures. Go on; the Blood, which Thou
Did to thy Father promise, when the War
Against Rome, before the Altar, Thou did swear,
Shall from Ausonian Bodies flow to Thee,
And Thou Thy Father's Ghost shall satisfy
With Slaughter, and to Me securely pay
Deserved Honors. Therefore now Obey:
For I that Thrasimenus am, that by
The Bands, from Tmolus sent, encompassed ly
Beneath high Hills, and reign in shady Streams.
By this Advice excited from his Dreams,
His Army, which the Deity does fill
With Courage, strait He leads to the Hill.
High Apenninus, who his Forehead joins
Unto the Stars, surcharged with lofty Pines,
Was covered, then, with Ice. Among the steep,
And slippery Rocks, all Trees, in Snow, as deep
As is his Height, were hid, and to the Skies
His hoary Head, with Frost congealed, did rise.
Here He commands them on: for having crossed
The Alps, all former Glory had been lost,
And quite extinguished; had they made a Stand
At other Mountains: therefore they ascend
Those broken Cliffs, whose Tops the Clouds invest
Perpetually with Showrs. Nor did they rest,
When once that Labor they had overcome;
But strait descend into the Plains, that swum
With thawing Ice, and where, in Moorish Ground,
The cold, unfrozen Waters did abound:
In these unwholesome Fens, the Gen'ral's bare,
Uncovered, Hannibal, informed that the Roman Army, under the Conduct of
Flaminius, was advanced to Arretium (now Arezo) quitted His Winter Quarters,
and passed the nearest Way to meet him through the Fens of Hetruria, lying by
the River Aruns; where the excessive Moisture of the Place (bes^des the great
Incommodities to his Army, who were constrained to lay their Baggage under them
in the Water, and sleep on it) deprived Him of His left Eye. Live. lib. 22.
Head, was shaken by the Air,
And on his bloodless Cheeks his melting Eye
In Tears descends. While, scorning Remedy,
He thinks the Time of Battle is to be
Purchased with any Danger. Therefore He
Disdains the Beauty of his Face to spare,
So He may have His Ends; nor does He care,
To part with other Limbs, if Victory
May be the Price, and thinks his single Eye
Enough; if so a Conqueror He may
Behold the Capitol: or any way
Subdue a Fo, that bears the Roman Name.
Through all these Miseries at length He came
Unto the ( s) Lake, where for His Loss of Sight
He kills unnumbred Piacles in Fight.
But now, behold, from Tyrian Carthage sent
Ambassadors arrive. The first Intent,
And Motive, of their Journey was of Weight:
Yet could they nothing of Content relate.
It was a Custom among those People, where
Exiled Elisa, first, her Walls did Rear,
The Favor of the Angry Gods to seek
This inhumane Custom was common to the Carthaginians, with other more
Barbarous People: so that when they were overthrown by Agathocles, the King of
Sicily, they believed Saturn, (to whom they offered those horrible Victimes) to
be angry with them, and thereupon Sacrificed to him two hundred Noble Children.
Diod. lib. 20.
With Humane Slaughter, and (what even to speak
Is Horror) on their flaming Altars burn
Their tender Sons. Those Lots an annual Urn
Revived; the bloody Rites to imitate
Of Thoantean Dian: to this Fate,
And Lot of Heaven, as Custom was, inspired
Of old, with Malice, Hanno then required
The Son of Hannibal, although the Fear
Of his Return, and Arms, did then appear
As present, for Revenge, to other Eyes.
Moved by this dire Demand, with mournful Cries,
Tearing her Hair, and Cheeks, Imilce fills
The Town. As when, on the Pangaean Hills,
Edonian Froes their The Feast of Bacchinals.
Treiterian Feast
Perform, and Bacchus reigns in every Breast.
Imilce so, among the Tyrian Dames,
(As if she saw her Son amidst the Flames)
Cries Io, Husband, in what Part soever
Of The World thou wagest War, Oh, hither bear
Thine Ensigns; here, here is an Enemy
More violent, more near. Thou, happily,
Even at the Wal^s of Rome, receivest now
Darts, flying, in Thy Target, or do throw
A burning Lamp, Tarpeian Towers to fire.
In the mean time, Thy Son, Thy only Heir,
Even from the Bosom of Thy Country, to
The Stygian Altar's dragged. Whilst Thou do go
To wast Ausonian Houses with Thy Sword,
Tread in forbidden Paths, break that Accord,
That League; which, once, by all the Gods was sworn:
These dire Rewards does Carthage, now, return
For Thy Deserts; such Honors unto Thee,
Ungrateful, She decrees. What Piety
Is this, the Temples thus with Humane Blood
To stain? Alas! had Mortals understood
The Nature of the Gods, this horrid Crime
Had never been known. Go, and, at such a Time,
With Holy Frankincense, just Things desire
Of Heaven; and let those cruel Rites expire.
The Gods to Men are mild: let it suffice
(I pray) that we fat Oxen Sacrifice:
Or, if the Gods resolve, that this Decree
Shall stand, to Your Desires, accept of Me,
Me that have born him; why should You deprive
Libya of those great Hopes, that in him live?
Why should Aegates more lamented be;
Or, if the Punick Kingdoms we should see
Now sinking; then the sad untimely Fall
Of this brave Offspring of my Hannibal?
This Speech, the Senate wavering 'twixt a Fear
Of Gods, and Men, invited, to forbear
Their Sentence, and to Her 'twas left to choose;
Whether She would the killing Lot refuse;
Or else the Honor of the Gods obey.
At this Imilce trembled, every way
With Fear distracted: there Her Husband's Ire
She apprehends; and there the fatal Fire.
This heard with greedy Ears: the General
Replies, Dear Carthage, What can Hannibal,
Though equal to the Gods, return to Thee,
Worthy such Favors? What R^wards can be
Invented? Day, and Night, I Arms will bear,
And make, that to Thy Temples Rome repair,
With generous Victimes, that their Blood derive
From her Quirinus. But My Boy shall live,
Heir to these Arms, and War, My only Hope;
And, while Hesperia threats, the only Prop
Of Tyrian Affairs by Sea, and Land.
And (Boy) remember that Thou take in Hand,
And wage a War with Rome, while Life does last.
Go on, behold the Alps which I have past,
Are open* Me succeed in Toils, and War,
And you my Countrey's Gods, whose Temples are
By Slaughter Holy made, who are pleased to be
Adored with Fears of Mothers, turn to Me
Your Minds, and pleased Aspect: for I prepare
Your Sacrifice, and better Altars Rear.
You Mago, to the Top of yonder Hill
Conduct your Troops; and let Chaospe fill
Those nearer to the Left; Sichaeus shall
Into those Avenues, in Ambush fall.
While, I will Thrasimenus quickly view,
With lighter Troops, and for the Gods their Due,
Of Warlike Sacrifice prepare. For now,
They, with clear Promises, great things allow,
Which having seen (dear Contrymen) you may
Into your native City, home convey.
The End of the Fourth Book.
Obiuitur telis Nimboque Ruente per Auras
Contectus, Nulli, dextra jactare reliquit
Flaminum cecidisse sua, nec pugna perempto
Vlterior^ Ductore fuit, finem que dedere.
Illustrissmo. Celsissimoque Principi, Willelmo Frederico, Principi
Arausionensium, Comiti Nassoviae Cattimel: Viand: etc: Marchion: Vlissingiae,
Bredae, etc: Faederati Belgij, Terra Marique Imperator^: Tabula humillime Dicata

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Fifth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Flaminius rash Valor at the Lake
Of Thrasimenus. The Sidonians take
The Hills, for Ambush: Prodigies foreshow,
Before the Fight, the Roman's Overthrow.
Both Armies (while an Earthquake overthrew
Cities, and Rivers turned) the Fight pursue.
But the Sicilian Troops, that basely fly
The Field: and climb the Trees for Safety, die,
Together, by Sichaeus, whose sad Fall
(Soon after by Flaminius slain) by all
The Libyans is bewailed. Scout Appius killed
By Mago, whom he wounds; what Slaughters filled
All Quarters: how Flaminius bravely died;
Whose Corpse the Romans, slain about him, hide.
NOW Hannibal, preparing for the Fight,
With secret Ambush, in the dead of Night,
The Mountains of Hetraria did invest,
And all the Passes of the Woods possessed.
On the Left Hand, there was a Lake, that swelled
Like a vast Sea, and all the Neighboring Field,
O're-flowing, covered with tenacious Slime.
Here Faun-got Aunus reigned, in Ancient time;
But, now, it is known by Thrasimenus Name,
Whose Sire Tyrrhenus was the Son of Atys, King of Maeonia, who, fearing a
Famine, resolved to disburden his own Country, by transplanting some of his
People, under the Conduct of one of his two Sons, ( Lydus, and Tyrrhenus) the
Lot, which was to determine it, fell upon Tyrrhenus; who planted himself in
that Part of Italy, which is now called Tuscany. He built twelve Cities, and
was so prudent in Establishing his Affairs, that he was feigned to be
gray headed from his Youth. He is said to have invented the Trumpet; and his
People improved so eminently in civil Government; that from them the Romans
borrowed all their Triumphal, and Consular Ornaments, with their Rods, Axes,
and other Ensigns of Authority, as likewise Music, Augury, and Rites of
Sacrificing. See Strabo, lib. 5.
Tyrrhenus ( Lydian Tmolus Fame)
To the Italian Coasts, that since do bear
His Name, Maeonian Colonies, from far,
By Sea did bring; and is by all Renowned,
For having taught those Nations, first, to sound
The Trumpet, and their Silence broke in Fight.
Yet, not content with this, he does excite
His Son to greater things; But, fired with Love
Of the fair Boy (who with the Gods above,
For Beauty, might compare) now, Chaste no more,
Agylle a small City in Tuscany.
Agylle snatched him, walking on the Shore,
Into the Stream. This Nymph's Lascivious Mind
Was still to Love of beauteous Boys inclined,
And the Italian Darts soon warmed her Breast;
But him the careful Naiades carest
Within their mossy Caves: while He the Place
Abhors, and seeks to shun their fond Embrace.
From hence the Lake, a Dowry to his Fame,
Still conscious of his Rape, retains his Name.
And, now, the Chariot of the Dewy Night,
Its Bounds approached; although the Morn her Light,
Not yet from her bright Chambers did display,
But, from the Threshold only, breathed a Ray;
And Men could less affirm, that Night had run
Her Course, then that the Day its Race begun:
When, through by-Ways, the Consul Marched before
His Ensigns; after Him, the Horse, (no more
In Order) haste: Next, in Confusion go
The light-armed Bands; the Foot, disordered, too
Forsake their Ranks: with them, though used in War,
Unfit for Fight, the Sutlers mixed are;
And Ominous Tumults through all Places spread,
Advancing to the Fight, as if they fled.
While from the Lake, a Vapor, black as Night,
Arose, and, quite depriving them of Sight,
In a dark Mantle of condensed Clouds
Involves the Skies, and Day desired shrouds.
But Hannibal, understanding the Temper of Flaminius, as a Person rash, and
violent, waited all the Country between Cortona, and the Lake Thrasimenus with
all the Miseries of War, thereby to provoke his Enemies to fight. Flaminius,
not enduring it, as dishonorable, raised his Camp before Aretium, and Marched
toward him. But he no sooner came between the Hills, and the Lake, but he
found himself encompassed by Hannibal's ^orces; and, unable to draw his Men
into Order, they were totally defeated, and the Consul slain. Live. Book 22,
Hannibal pursues His Fraud the while,
And, in His Ambush closely sitting still,
Would not permit them, in their Haste, to be
Opposed, while all the Shore appears free
From Danger, and neglected by the Fo,
Who, to their Fall, permits them on to go.
For they, advancing through a narrow Way,
(Before designed, their Safety to betray)
A double Ruin found. The Waters here
Contract their Passage: there steep Rocks appear,
And, on the Mountain's Top, within the Wood,
TO engage them, there a Libyan Party stood,
Ready to fall on any, that should ^ly
To a Retreat. So, when a Fisher, by
A Crystal Brook, an Osier Weel does twine,
The Entrance large he makes, but binds within
The Tonnel Close, contracting by Degrees
The yielding Tops into a Pyramid;
Through which deceitful Hole the Fish, with Ease,
Do enter, but return not to the Seas.
In the mean time, the furious Consul lost
His Reason, in this Storm of Fates: in Haste
He calls his Ensigns on; until, from Sea,
The Sun's bright Horses re-advanc'd the Day,
And Rosy Titan, to revive the World,
The Clouds, that over the Face of Heaven were hurled,
Had quite dispersed, and sensibly to Hell,
By his clear Rays resolved, the Darkness fell.
And then a Bird (which as an old Our Ancestors, says Tully, ( lib. De
Divinat.) never enterpriz'd a War, before they had first consulted their
Augurs. This kind of Augury (for they were several) was frequently used among
them: and, if the Birds, (which were commonly Chickens kept in a Coop) refused
the Meat thrown before them, the Augur pronounced the Enterprise not pleasing
to the Gods; but if greedily devoured it, they encouraged it.
Presage
The Latins used, before they did engage
In Fight) he took, to explore the Gods Intent,
And what should be the following Fight's Event.
The Bird, Divining future Miseries,
Refused her Meat, and from it, crying, flies.
With that a Bull (a sad Presage!) before
The Holy Altars, ceased not to roar,
And, waving with his Neck, the fatal Stroke,
Of The falling Ax, the Sacred Place forsook.
Besides, as they endeavored, where they stood,
To pull their Ensigns up, the Earth black Blood
Into their Faces spouts; as to foretell
That Slaughter, which them, afterward, befell.
Then Jove, the Sea, and Land, with Thunder shook,
And, snatching Bolts from Aetna's Forges, struck
The Thras^^enian Lake, that smoking seems
To burn, and Flames to live within the Streams.
Oh lost Admonishments, and Prodigies,
That strive, in vain, to stop the Destinies!
Even Gods, themselves, must with the Fates dispense.
And here Corvin^^, famed for Eloquence,
And of a Noble Name, (whose Helmet bore
Thy Bird, Apollo, that did long before
The Valor of his Marcus Valerius (a Youth, and a Tribune) seeing a Gaul of
extraordinary Stature advance from the rest of the Army, to challenge any
Roman to a single Combat, obtained Leave of the Consul to encounter him, and,
as he advanced to meet him, a Crow (which is the Bird Sacred to Apollo) took
its stand upon his Helmet with its Head toward his Enemy, whose Face, as
often as he assaulted Valerius, the Bird furiously invaded; till, terrified
with the Omen, the Gaul lost both his Reason, and Courage, and was immediately
slain by Valerius, who from thence was called Corvinus.
Grandfather declare,
Full of the Gods, and, troubled at the Fear
Of his Companion, intermingled than
With Counsel Prayers, and with these Words began:
By the Iliack Flames, the Fate of Rome,
Our Countrie's Walls, and by our Sons, that from
This Fight's Event the Fates as yet suspend,
Yield to the Gods, We pray thee, and attend
A Time more fortunate for Battle: they
A Field will give thee, and a better Day.
Only disdain not Thou to expect the more
Propitious Gods, and that more happy Hour,
Which shall for Libya's Destruction call;
And when, not forced, as now, our Ensigns all
Shall follow; when our Birds shall gladly feed,
And pious Earth no more so strangely bleed.
How much is left to Fortune in this Place,
Skillful in War, Thou know. Before our Face
The Fo appears: those woody Hills now threat
An Ambush; on the left Hand no Retreat
The Lake allows: the Pass is narrow too
Between those Hills. It Is Wisdom then in you
With Stratagems to strive, and fight Delay,
Until with fresh Supplies, Servilius may
Arrive, that with you, in Command, does share,
And's Forces, in the Legions, equal are.
The War with Policy we must pursue:
To the fighting Man the least of Honor's due.
Corvinus thus exhorts: the Captains were
No less importunate, and all with Fear
Divided. Sometimes for Flaminius pray
Unto the Gods: then him entreat to obey
The Powers Divine, and not their Will oppose.
With that his kindled Fury higher rose,
And hearing (full of Rage) that new Supplies
Would soon be there; Saw you not Me (he cries)
When in the Boian War I charged, and when
So great a Ruin, and such dreadful Men
Came on: that, the Tarpeian Rock again
Did tremble, then what Multitudes were slain
By me? How, then, this vengefull Hand the Ground
Bestrew'd with Bodies, which the deepest Wound
Could scarce destroy: yet were they forced to yield,
And now their scattered Bones oppress the Field.
Therefore Servilius Arms may come too late
To this brave Action, if you think not that
I cannot overcome, unless I share
My Triumphs; and, contented am to bear
A part of Honor; but the Gods do seem
TO advise us otherwise. Oh do not Dream
(You that now fear the Trumpets Sound) of Gods,
So like your selves. Our trusty Swords are odds,
And Augury enough, against the Fo.
The best Presage the Roman Soldiers know,
Is, that, in Feats of Arms, they do excel;
Must it be then resolved that I sit still
Corvinus, basely thus within a Vale
Besieged, while the Sidonians do prevail
Against Arretia's Walls, and level to
The Ground, the Tower of Corythus, and go
Thence to Clusinum, and at length may come
Untouched, unto the very Walls of Rome?
Vain Superstition! a Deformity
In men of Arms! Valor alone should be
The Goddess that should over their Souls command.
Troops of sad Ghosts, by Night about us stand,
Whose Corpse are tumbled still in Trebia's Waves,
And swift Eridanus, and want their Graves.
Thus having said, without Delay, he quits
The Assembly; and, Inexorable, fits
His last unhappy Arms: a Sea-Bulls Hide
His Helmet lines, and on the Top (its Pride)
A triple Crest ascends, and largely spr^ads
A Main, the Locks resembling of the Swedes:
Above was Scylla, waving in her Hand,
A broken Oar, and Dogs about her stand
With gaping Jaws. This noble Trophie, He
Gained near Garganus, and the Victory,
So pleased him (having flain the Boian King)
That, fitted to his Head, he used to bring
This, as his Glory, into every Fight.
Then takes his Coat of Mail, whose Scales were knit
To Chains of Steel, and studded over with Gold.
Next he assumes his Shield, where they behold
The Stains of Celtick Blood, which He before
In Battle shed: and, in it carved, he bore
A she-Wolf's Figure, in her gloomy Den,
Licking a Child's soft Limbs, as it had been
Her Whelp, and nursed of the Assarick Line
A Stem, that afterward was made Romulus Deified.
Divine.
At last, he girds his Sword, and to's Right Hand
Makes fit his Lance. Hard by does ready stand
His Horse; which, covered with a Tiger's Hide,
Champs on his frothy Bit with pleasing Pride.
Then mounted, where the way between the Hills
Was straight, thus with Encouragement he fills
His Men. Your Work, and Honor, it will be
(Dear Contrymen) to let your Parents see
Fixed on a Spear, and born, with Joy, through all
The Streets of Rome, the Head of Hannibal.
That Head may satisfy for all the rest:
Let each man therefore fancy in his Breast,
What may excite his Rage, and thus deplore;
My Brother, now, upon Ticinus Shore
Unburyed lies. Alas! my Son through all
The Po now swims, and wants a Funeral.
Thus to himself let every Man prepare
Revenge; but as to you, who have no Share
Of private Grief, let those great things, which fire
A public Soul, inflame your greater Ire.
Think they have broken through the Alpine Hills;
And then remember those Nefandous Ills
Sagunthus suffered, what a Sin it was
In them, Iberus Sacred Bounds to pass,
And now even Tyber touch. For while, in Vain,
With Birds, and Entrails, Augurs you detain;
It only wants, now, that he invade
The Capitol. This when he 'd eager said,
And seeing that his Horse, amidst the Crowd
Of thousands, raised his cloudy Mane, aloud
He cries; To fight, my Orphitus, must prove
Thy Task. What other to Feretrian Jove
Opimous Offerings can in Triumph bare?
For why should any Hand this Honor share
With Me? Then moves, and hearing a known Voice
In Fight, Far hence (said he) that Martial Noise
Shows thee to be Murranus: and I Thee
Already high in Tyrian Slaughter see.
How great a Praise attends thee? but (I pray)
Let thy Sword wider make that narrow Way.
Then knowing (born upon Soracte's Hill)
Aequanus, who in Beauty did excel,
And Arms (the Customs of whose Country were,
The Entrails thrice, through harmless Flames to bear;
When as the Pious Archer did desire
To offer Sacrifice in Holy Fire)
Noble Aequanus, may thou ever so
Unburnt, on Phoebus flaming That some Relics of this Superstition was
remaining in Pliny's Time, he testifies lib. 7. cap. 2. in these Words. Not far
from Rome, in the Territories of the Falisci, are some few Families, called the
Hirpiae; who* in an Annual Sacrifice to Apollo, on the Hill Soracte, walk
without Harm on burning Coals, and for that, by a Decree of the Senate, were
discharged from all Duty of War.


Altars go,
And conquering the Smoke, so every Year
To the pleased God (said he) thy Offering bear.
Worthy thy Deeds, and Wounds, conceive a Rage:
Accompanied by Thee, I dare engage
To penetrate through the Marmarick Bands,
Or charge Cinyphian Troops. With that he stands
No longer to advise, or to delay
With Words that Fight, which by the Romans may
Be In this Battle were slain fifteen thousand men, and ten thousand scattered
through all Hetr^ria, and many wounded. The Consul, Flaminius, slain upon the
Place, and never found by Hannibal, who diligently sought his Body to give it
Burial: all, that returned after this Fight to Rome, were received with such
Joy, that two Mothers, at sight of their Sons, fell dead in the Ecstasie.
long deplored. The Signal ev'rywhere
Is giv^n, and fatal Trumpets rend the Air.
Oh Grief! Oh Tears, which, in so long Descent
Of Ages, cannot, now, too late be spent!
I Tremble, as if now those Mischeifs all
Were acted; as if Libyans Hannibal,
And armed Asturians, from their Hills did bring,
Or the fierce Balearick with his Sling.
Now numerous Troops of Macians, Nomades,
And Garamantians sally forth: with these
The Warlike, stout Cantabrians; then whom,
With Mercenary Hands, none sooner come
To fight; or hired Arms more gladly bear:
And Gascoins too, that Helmets scorn to wear.
On this Side, horrid Rocks; on that, the Lake:
Here clashing Arms, with the loud Shouts they make,
Amaze, and urge: beside the Signal from
The Tyrian Camp, through all the Hills, does come.
The Gods, their Faces turning from the Field,
Unwillingly to greater Fates do yield.
Even Mars, thy Fortune ( Hannibal) does fear;
Sad Venus weepeth, with disheveled Hair;
Apollo, to his Delos, does retire,
And strives to ease his Grief with mournful Lyre.
Juno, alone, on Appeninus stood
Expecting Slaughter, hating Trojan Blood.
But, as if forcing Heaven, and free from Fear,
In their own Hands, the incensed Soldiers bear
Predestined Piacles, and kill again
Fresh Sacrifice, in Fight, to those were slain.
First, the Picenian Bands, when they beheld
The Cohorts dissipated, and repelled,
And Hannibal advancing furiously,
Charge Him with Courage, and, before they die,
Amaze the Conqueror (whom they invade)
To see the Slaughters, that their Valor made.
For, now, with one Consent, and Force, a Shower
Of Piles upon the Libyan Troops they pour,
And when repulsed, their fixed Targets all,
Pressed with the Weight of crooked Shafts, let fall.
This with their Gen'ral's Presence does excite
The Libyans Rage; who mutually to fight
Exhort each other, and so closely pressed
Upon their Foes, they fought them Breast to Breast.
Her Torch Bellona shaking through the Air,
And springkling, with much Blood, her flaming Hair,
Through both the Armies, up, and down, does flee,
And* from her horrid Breast, Tisiphone
A deadly Murmur sends: while to engage,
The fatal Trumpets all their Minds enrage.
These by their adverse Fortune, and Despair
Of future Safety, animated are:
Them more propitious Gods, and Victory,
Smiling upon them with a joyful Eye,
Encourage, favored by the God of War.
But Lateranus, while enticed, too far
With Love of Slaughter, furious on he goes,
At length engaged stood among his Foes:
When Lentulus, of equal Age, him spied,
Too much with Fight, and Blood, on every Side
Oppressed, and midst an Army to provoke
The Fates, with a brisk Charge, to aid him, broke
Through all the Ranks; and Baga, then about
To wound him in the Back (though fierce, and stout)
Prevented with his Spear, and does attend
The Fate, and hard Adventures of his Friend.
With cheerful Courage, now, their Arms they join,
Their Fronts, and Crests, with equal Glory shine.
When Syrticus, by Chance (for who durst move
Arms against them, unless by Stygian Jove
Condemned to die?) descending from the Hill,
Armed with a broken Oak, upon them fell:
And as the weighty Tree about he waves,
With Thirst of both their Deaths, thus vainly raves.
Not here (fond Youths) Aegates, nor a Coast
Treacherous to Seamen, nor the Ocean, tossed
By new-raised Tempests, shall on you bestow
Fortune, without a War. You now shall know,
That once were Conquerours at Sea, by Land
What Libyan Warriors are, nor us withstand
Within a better Empire. As he spoke,
At Lateranus with the ponderous Oak
He strikes, and fighting rails: when Lentulus,
Gnashing his Teeth for Anger, meets him thus.
Sooner shall Thrasimenus raise his Flood
To those high Hills, then in his Pious Blood
That thy pernicious Tree thou shall imbrue.
And, as he stretched himself to strike, quite through
His Body pierced him: through the gaping Wound
The reeking Gore flows largely to the Ground.
No less, in other Quarters of the Field,
Imcens'd to mutual Wounds, their Fury swelled.
By tall Hiertes Nereus fell: and by
Rullus brave Volunx, rich in Land, does die.
Nor Riches heaped, nor Palaces, that shined
With His Countrey's Ivory, to which were joined
His Vassal Villages, could now withhold
His Fate. What boots extorted Wealth* or Gold,
Which Men, with Thirst insatiable, pursue?
Whom Fortune richly did of late endue
With her most wealthy Gifts, is, naked, now
By Charon wafted, to the Shades below.
There Warlike Appius, though but young in Years,
Great in Attempts, the Field with Slaughter clears:
And where of greatest Strength, and Valor, none
Else durst aspire, there Honor He, alone,
Atchieves. Him Atlas meeting ( Atlas, who,
Sprang from Iberian Blood, did vainly plow
Remotest Sands) thrusts at his Face a Lance:
The Top whereof, as it does lightly glance,
And raze the Skin, tastes his Noble Blood.
Like Thunder now, or a Storm-raised Flood
He threats. New Flames, within his furious Eyes,
Are kindled: mad, like Lightning, then he flies
Through all the opposing Troops; his Wound, that sends
Blood from beneath his Cask, the rest commends
Of his stout Martial Limbs: then might you see
The trembling Youth, contending, as they flee,
To hide themselves. As, when the affrighted Deer
An Hircan Tiger follows; or with Fear
Doves fly the towering Hawk; or as the Hare,
When she beholds the Eagle, in the Air,
Ready to stoop, to Covert runs with Speed:
Here with his Sword, he lops off Atlas Head.
And his Right Hand then, raging* on does go,
Charging, more furious by Success, his Fo.
For armed with a bright Ax, and, in the Sight
Of's Father Mago, to engage in Fight
Ambitious: big with Hopes of Praise, there stood
Cinyphian Isalces, vainly proud
Of promised Nuptials, when the Roman War
Should ended be. But Appius sets a Bar
To these his Hopes, and with such Fury came
Against him; that, as he his Ax, with Aim,
Directed at his Face, so strong a Stroke
Fierce Appius, rising higher, gave, he broke
His Sword upon his Cask. Isalces too
Upon his T^^get gives as vain a Blow.
With that a Stone, which, had not Anger lent
Him S^^ength, he could not lift, now almost Spent,
At's Fo stout Appius throws: it is weighty Fall
Him backward fells, and breaks his Bones withal.
When Mago saw him fall (for near at hand
He fought) he wept beneath his Helmet, and
Groaning with Rage, came on. The Alliance late
By them contracted, and the Nephews, that
He thence expected, fire his Thoughts the more.
But as, with nearer View, he does explore
Appius his Shield, large Members, and the Rays
Of's Helmet* him a while that Sight delays.
As when a Lyo^ from a shady Hill
In haste descends, his hungry Gorge to fill,
He stands, and soon contracts his Speed, if he
Within the Plain a Bull approaching see;
Though with long Hunger pressed, he views his high,
Thick, ris^ng Neck; admires his threatening Eye
Beneath a rugged Brow, while he prepares
For Fight, and Earth, to give the Signal, tears.
First Appius spoke, as he a Javelin threw;
If thou have any Piety, pursue
Thy Contract, and accompany thy Son
In Death. With that the flying Weapon run
Quite through his brazen Arms, until it struck
His Left Arm, and in it, deep wounding, stuck.
The Libyan Return of Words forbore.
But with his Spear (which Hannibal before
Sagunthus Walls, a Conqueror had taken
From Noble Durius, there in Battle slain,
And to his Brother gave; which, with Delight,
He, a brave Trophie, bore in every Fight)
Charged him. Grief lending Force, the Weapon through
His Cask, and Mouth inflicts a deadly Blow;
And, as he strove to draw it from the Wound,
His Hands, soon bloodless, fell. Upon the Ground,
Appius, a Name through the Ma^onian Sea,
Renowned, a great Part of Rome's Ruin, lay.
And in his bloody Mouth, expiring, there
Crushed, and, with murmuring, bites the fatal Spear.
The Lake then trembled: from his Body dead,
With Waves contracted, Thrasimenus fled.
Next, with no better Fates, Mamercus dies,
And wounded falls, by all his Enemies.
For where the Lusitanian Cohorts fought,
Gained with much Blood, and Valor, as he brought
A Standard, whose stout Bearer he had slain,
And called his flying Contrymen again,
His Foes, in^ens'd at what they saw him do,
What ever in their Hands was Missile threw,
And likewise all, that Earth, then covered over
With Darts, and Spears, afforded (like a Shour
Of Hail) upon him falls, and greater Store
Of Darts no single Roman felt before.
Thus stout Mamercus fell, and at his Fall,
Vexed at his Brother's Hurt, came Hannibal,
And raging asked (when He the Wound espied)
Now him, then his Companions, If his Side
The Spear had pierced? or, if within the Wound
'Twere fixed? But, when no fear of Death he found^
Nor Danger, from the Field he strait was sent,
Covered with His own Coat, into His Tent,
Within the Camp, and free from Trouble: there
For Cure all Med'cinal Arts prepared were
By Learned Synalus, who did infuse,
Bathing the Wound throughout, the healing Juice
Of choicest Herbs, and, with a secret Charm
The Weapon strait extracted from his Arm,
Him with a crooked Snake to Sleep compelled:
All other Synalus in Skill excelled,
And for it was through all the Neighboring Land,
And Cities, famed, of the Paretonium, a Town in Libya Marmarica, lying upon a
vast Tract of Sand, abounding with Serpents. Strab. lib. 17.
Paretonian Sand.
To Synalus (his Grandfather) of old
Those Secrets Garamantick Hammon told,
And how the Bitings of wild Beasts to heal,
And deepest Wounds of Weapons did reveal.
He those Celestial Gifts, while yet he lived,
Transmitted to his Son; who them derived
To the Honor of his Heir: whom Synalus,
As great in Fame, succeeds, and, Studious
His Garamantick Secrets to improve,
(As a Companion once to Horned Jove)
With many Images, his Grand-sire's Line
Deduced. Now, when he brought those Gifts Divine
In Haste (as Custom was) his Garments round
Tucked up, with Water first he purged the Wound
From Blood. But Mago, thinking on the Spoils,
And Death, of his slain Fo, his Brother's Toils,
And Cares, with Words of Courage, thus allaies,
And eased his own Mishaps, with Thoughts of Praise.
Cease from Thy Fears (dear Brother) to my Wound
No greater Remedy can now be found:
Great Appius, by me compelled, is gone
To the Shades below, and we enough have done,
Since He is dead, I, willingly, can go
To Hell it self, after so brave a Fo.
But, when the Consul from an Hill beheld,
That this the Libyan Captain from the Field
Had, troubled, turned; that in their Trenches they
(As if the Clouds of War were vanished) lay;
With sudden Fury, for his Horse he calls,
And, from the Hill descending, fiercely falls
Upon the trembling Files; which, now grown thin,
He routs, and in the Valley does begin
The Fight again. As when the Clouds above,
Surcharged with rattling Hail, dissolve, and Jove,
Mixing his Thunder with their Torrent, shakes
The Alps, and high Ceraunian Rocks, and makes
The World (thus moved) the Earth, the Sea, the Air,
To tremble, and even Hell it self to fear:
So, like a sudden Tempest, from the Hill,
The Consul on the frighted Lybians fell.
The Sight of Him chill Horror strikes into
Their Bones; while he through thickest Ranks does go.
And, with his Sword, cuts out a spacious Way.
With that, confused Cries to Heaven convey
The Fury of the Fight, and strike the Stars.
As, when the angry Seas against the Bars
Of Hercules do beat, and roaring Waves
Throws into lofty Calpe's hollow Caves,
The Mountain groans; and, as, with furious Shocks,
The foaming Billows break against the Rocks,
Tartessos, though far distant thence by Land,
And Lixus, that by no small Sea does stand
Divided thence, at once the Echo share.
By a swift Dart, that Silent through the Air
Had passed, before the rest does Bogus fall:
Bogus, who at Ticinus, first of all,
Against the Rutuli his Javelin flung,
And vainly thought, that Clotho would prolong
His Thread of Life, and that a numerous Line
Of Nephews he should see, by the false Sign
Of flying Birds deceived. But none have power
By Augury to remove the fatal Hour.
'Mid'st Storms of Darts he falls; and to the Skies
Lifting, in vain, his dim, and bleeding Eyes,
Of The Gods, misunderstood, as he expires,
The Promises of longer Life requires.
Neither could Bagasus then boast, in Fight
That he, unpunished, in the Consul's Sight,
Had conquered Libo stripped; who vainly there
The Laurel of his Ancestors did wear.
But a Massilian Sword lops off his Head,
And, on his Cheeks as Down began to spread,
The barbarous Soldier, by untimely Death,
Suppressed his rising Years. Yet his last Breath
Did not in vain implore Flaminius Aid:
For strait, by him, his Fo was headless made:
As pleased that, after his Example, by
The same sad Death the Conqueror should die.
What God, O Muses, aptly can rehearse
So many Funerals? Or who, in Verse,
Worthy such Noble Shades, lament their Fall?
Or tell how there the Early Youth did all
Contend in Death for Honor? Or what then,
Even in the Porch of Death, more Aged men
Performed? What Courage of unconquered Hearts
They showed; when as their Breasts were filled with Darts?
On either Side, as Furious they engage,
They Frequent fell, nor would their Eager Rage
Allow them Time to Spoil, or Thoughts of Prey,
Which their Desire of Slaughter takes away.
The Consul, while, within the Camp, the Fo
The Wound of Mago kept, now Darts does throw;
Then used his Sword, and, mounted on his Horse,
Through Myriads of Men, his Way does force:
Sometimes afoot before the Eagles goes;
While Blood the fatal Valley overflows
With numerous Streams, and the hollow Rocks, and Hills,
The Noise of Horse, and Arms, with Echo fills.
Marmarick Othrys, in the Field, among
The rest, advanced to fight. His Body strong
Above all humane Strength: the very Sight
Of his Gigantick Members turned to Flight
The trembling Wings: his Shoulders, largely spread,
Above both Armies raised his lofty Head.
Rude, like an Horse's Mane, his Tresses hung
Upon his lowering Brows: his Beard as long
Over shadowing his Mouth: his squallid Breast
The horrid Bristles of a Boar expressed.
Scarce any dare look on him, or come near
To fight him. Like a Monster every where
He rangeth through the Field, from Danger free:
Till, turning his fierce Looks on those that flee,
A Cretan Arrow, mounting to the Skies
With silent Wings, in one of's glaring Eyes
Does falling fix, and turns him aside
From the Pursuit. Which, when the Consul spied
He lanceth at his Back, as he retreats
Toward the Camp, a Dart, that penetrates
(Breaking his naked Ribs) his Body through,
And in his bristled Breast the Head does show.
To draw it forth, with Have, he labors, where
The fatal shining Point did first appear;
Till, the Blood largely flowing to the Ground,
He fell, and crushed the Weapon in the Wound.
His last Breath, waving through the Field, does rear
The Dust, and heaves a Cloud into the Air.
In the mean time, a different War, the Hills,
The Woods, and Cliffs, with various Slaughter fills;
The Rocks, and Thorns, as died with Blood appear.
The Cause of their Destruction, and their Fear,
Sychaeus was: who, at a Distance, slew
Murranus with a Lance; then whom none knew,
In time of Peace, more sweetly with his Quill
To touch Orphaean Nerves, or had more Skill.
In a vast Wood he fell, and, even in Death,
Looked for the Aequanian Hills (where first his Breath
He drew) in Wine most fertile; and for fair
Surentum, where the Zephyrs purge the Air.
To his sad Fate conquering Sychaeus joined
Another's Fall: and in that new sad Kind
Of cruel Fight rejoiced. For, while into
The Wood, Tauranus, rashly, did pursue
The straggling Fo; too far engaged, as he
Secured his Back, against an aged Tree,
From Blows, and vainly his Companions calls
With his last Breath, he by Sychaeus falls:
And, piercing through his Body, in the Wood,
Behind him fixed, the Tyrian Javelin stood.
But what did You unto your selves prepare?
What Anger of the Gods? What sad Despair
Your Minds possessed? Who, quitting Fight, did fly
To Arms of Trees for your Security?
Fear, in distressed Affairs, advises still
The worst; and, whensoe're the Event is ill,
It argues want of Courage. In the Wood,
It Is Branches to the Skies extending, stood
An aged Tree: which, high above the rest,
Into the highest Clouds, aspiring, pressed
Its shady Head, and (had it stood within
An open Field) as it a Grove had been,
To a most large extent, the dark'ned Ground
Had covered with its Shade. Near that they found
An Oak, which, there through many Ages grown,
Endeavored to the Stars its mossie Crown
To raise, and from its spreading Trunk did fill
The Arms with Leaves, and shadowed all the Hill.
Hither the Cohorts, sent from Sicily,
Not daring to prevent their Infamy
By Death, and yielding up their Minds to Fear,
Contend with Speed to fly; and climbing there,
The Wavering Boughs, with their uncertain Weight
Oppressed, and all contending to be at
The safest Place, some shaken from their Stand,
Fall to the Ground, by rotten Branches, and
The aged Tree deceived; some Trembling hung
Still on the Top, among the Darts were flung
Against them by the Fo: until resolved,
That in one Ruin all should be involved
At once, Sychaeus laid his Shield aside,
His Weapons changed, and strait an Ax employed,
Late sharp'ned for the Fight. With him the rest
Hasten the Work, and all the Tree invest;
Which now, through frequent Blows declining, cracks
Aloud: and, as the weakened Body shakes,
The unhappy Troop upon it, to, and fro
Are tottering tossed. So, when the Zephyrs blow
Upon an ancient Grove, the Birds, that there,
On the weak Tops of Trees, their Nests prepare,
Are tossed, and made the Sport of every Blast.
Overcome with many Blows, the Oak, at last,
(Their most unhappy Sanctuary) does fall,
And, in its spacious Ruin, crushed them all.
Then does another Face of Death appear;
That Tree, that to their Slaughter was so near,
Shines, and is seized by active Flames: among
The Leaves, and Branches dry, and growing strong
Vulcan his Globes of furious Fire does turn
To every Side, and highest Boughs does burn.
Nor do the Libyans cease their Darts to cast;
While Bodies, half-consum'd by Fire, embraced
The burning Arms, and with them, groaning, fell.
But amidst this Destruction (sad to tell)
The incensed Consul came, and busied all
His Thoughts on Rage, and fierce Sychaeus fall.
The Danger of so great an Enemy
Prompts the brave Youth, his Fate again to try
With His Lance; which lightly on the brazen brim
Of's Shield he placed, thereby to hinder him
To pass through that Defense: the Consul, loath
To trust the Fortune of Sychaeus Death
To missile Weapons, with his Sword advanced,
And, maugre his thick Shield, so deeply lanc'd
His Side, he fell, expiring, to the Ground
Upon his Face. Death, entering at the Wound,
With Stygian Cold, through every Part does creep,
His Eyes composing to Eternal Sleep.
While thus the God of War himself applies,
To Enterchanges of sad Tragedies,
Mago, and Hannibal the Camp forsake,
And, in their speedy March, their Ensigns take
Along; most eager to repair the Time,
That they were absent, by a greater Crime
Of Blood, and Slaughter: with their furious Pace,
The Troops, advancing, raise in every Place
Thick Clouds of Dust (like Whirlwinds) to the Skies;
And with the Sand the Field does seem to rise:
And wheresoever the General bends his Course,
Like a strong Tempest, with impetuous Force,
Through the vast Air it swells, and highest Hills
Covers with horrid Darkness. Here he kills
Valiant Fontanus, wounded in the Thigh:
There, pierced quite though the Throat, stout Bucca by
His Spear was slain; the Point through the Wound appears
In's Neck behind: A City, where he was born.
Fregella him with Tears
Bewailed, renowned for's ancient Descent:
The other his fair A City in Campania.
Anagnia did lament.
Like Fate ( Levinus) thee befell, although
Thou did not choose the Tyrian King thy Fo;
But with Hiremon, who then led the light
Autololes, contend'st in single Fight:
Whom, wounded in the Knee, and Prostrate, while
Thou do keep down, and vainly seek to spoil,
With cruel Force, an heavy Javelin broke
Thy Ribs; thy Body by the fatal Stroke,
With sudden Ruin, on thy prostrate Fo
Does fall, and Both in Death together go.
Nor were the Sidicinian Cohorts then
Wanting in Valor: these (a thousand Men)
Stout Viridasius armed, whose Skill did yield
To none, to guide a Ship, or pitch a Field;
None sooner could with batt'ring Rams prevail
Against Walls, or sooner highest Towers could scale.
Him, when the Libyan General beheld,
With the Successes of his Valor swelled,
(For he Avaricus, not trusting to
His Arms, and by him Hurt, did then pursue)
His Anger rising higher, at that Sight,
He thought him worthy with Himself to fight:
And, from Avaricus as he withdrew,
His wounding Spear upon him fiercely flew,
And, piercing deep into his Breast, said He;
Praised be thy Valor, whosoever thou be;
It Is pity Thou by other Hands should fall.
The Honor, thus to die by Hannibal,
Bear to the Shades below; and, were not Thou
Born of Italian Blood, thy Life should now
Be spared: next him, he Fabius slew, and bold
Labicus, who in feats of Arms was old,
And long before, in Sicily, from the River of that Name.
Arethusa's Land,
Had with Amilcar fought, and Honor gained:
And, now, unmindfull of his broken years,
With Courage fresh, again in Arms appears:
But that He now grew cold in War, his Blows
More vain betray (the Fire, so, weakly glows
In dying Embers, that no Strength at all,
The Flame retains) him, when fierce Hannibal
(Showed by His Father's Armor-bearer) spied,
Thy former Fight's due Punishment (He cried)
Receive, by this my Hand: Amilcar now
Revenging, draggs thee to the Shades below.
This said, from's Ear, with Aim, a Dart he throws,
Which, as upon the Wound he turned, goes
Quite through his Head, the fatal Shaft again
Pulled out, his hoary Locks, a Crimson Stain,
Of Blood, receive, and his long Labors all,
In Death are ended. Next to him does fall
Herminius (a Youth) who first, there took
Up Arms, before accustomed with his Hook,
(Famed Thrasimenus) in thy Lake to prey,
And to his aged Father often convey
Delicious Food, and with his Angle, from
The Neighboring Waters drew the Fishes Home.
But, now the Carthaginians, sad, convey
Upon their Arms, Sichaeus Corpse away,
Unto the Camp, whom with a mournful Cry
Pressing along, as Hannibal does spy.
With a Presaging Grief He strikes his Breast,
What is this Sadness that is by you expressed
My Friends? (said He) of what has us the Ire
Of Heaven deprived? Thee burning with Desire
Of Praise, Sichaeus, and too great a Love
Of thy first War, does this Black day remove
From Life, and Us, by an untimely Fall?
With that he groaned, to which the Tears of all,
That bare him, do Consent, who likewise tell,
Weeping, by whose revengefull Hand he fell.
I see it in his Breast (said He) see where
The Wound was made by the Iliack Roman.
Spear:
Oh worthy our dear Carthage shall thou go,
And worthy Hasdrubal, to Ghosts below.
Nor shall thy Noble Mother thee lament,
Degenerate, from thy so high Descent.
Nor, as unlike thy Ancestors, from Thee
In Stygian Shades, shall our Amilcar flee.
But these our Tears Flaminius, this Day,
(The Cause of all) by's Death shall wipe away:
This Pomp, thy Funeral shall sure attend,
And impious Rome her self shall, in the End,
That my Sichaeus Body with her Sword
She never had wounded, any Rate afford.
Thus he his Fury vents, and, as he speaks,
From's foaming Mouth, like Smoke, a Vapor breaks
His Rage in broken Murmurs from his Breast
Extrudes that Breath, that should have Words expres^*
(So from a boiling Pot in scalding Heaps,
Like Waves, through too much Heat, the Liquour leaps)
Then with blind Rage, into the midst of all,
He Runs, and Rends the Air, as He does call
Upon Flaminius; who no sooner hears
His Voice, but to the Combat he appears,
And Mars more near approached; while Hand, to Hand,
To fight within the Lists, both Champions stand.
Then strait, through all the Rocks a sudden Crack
Does run: the Mountains all with Horror shake;
Their Tops do tremble, and the Grove of Pines
That crowned them, from its pleasant Height declines:
And broken Quarries on the Armies fall;
Groaning, as pulled from her Foundations, all
The The Poet in this, agrees with Livy, who affirms, the Fury of the Soldiers
to be such, that neither Side were sensible of that Earthquake, which subverted
a great part of many Cities in Italy, turned the Course of Torrents,
transported the Sea into Rivers, and with a terrible Noise, tore Mountains
asunder. lib. 22.
Earth does quake, and breaking strangely wide
Through the vast Gulf, where Stygian Shades discry'd,
And feared the Day again. The troubled Lake
Raised to the highest Hills, forced to forsake
Its ancient Seat, and Channel, with a Flood
Before unknown, now laves the Tyrrhen Wood:
This Storm the People, and the Towns of Kings,
Like a dire Plague to sad Destruction brings.
Besides all this, the Rivers backward run,
And fight with Mountains, and the Sea begun
To change its Tides, the Faunes now quit the Hill
Of Apennine, and fly to Floods, yet still
The Soldier (O the Rage of War!) although
The reeling Earth does toss him too, and fro,
Fights on, and as he falls, deceived by
The unconstant Ground, throws at his Enemy
His trembling Darts, till wandering here, and there,
The Daunian Youth distracted through their Fear,
Fly to the Shore, and leap into the Stream.
The Consul, who by Chance was mixed with them,
That by the Earthquake fell, their Fight, in vain,
Upbraids. What then; I pray you, does remain
To such as fly? To Hannibal thus you
His Way unto the Walls of Rome does show:
You put both Fire, and Sword into His Hand,
Against Jove's Tarpeian Tower: Oh Soldiers stand,
And Learn by me to fight; If ye deny
To fight at all, then Learn of me to die;
Flaminius to Posterity shall give
No vile Example; and while I do live,
No Libyan, or Cantabrian, shall see
A Consul's Back, although alone I be.
But, if so great a Thirst, and Rage of Flight
Your Minds invades, their Weapons all shall light
Upon this Breast; and, after this my Fall,
My Ghost into the Fight shall you recall.
While thus he vents his Grief, and does advance*
To meet his numerous Foes, with Countenance,
And Mind as Cruel, forth Ducarius came,
Who from his Ancestors derived his Name;
And, since the Boian Armie's Overthrow,
Those Wounds, which he received so long ago,
As Marks of barbarous Courage, did retain,
And, knowing the proud Conqu'rour's Face again,
Art Thou the Boians greatest Terror? I
(Said he) by this my wounding Dart will try,
If the Blood of such a Body may be shed:
Nor be You slack, more vulgar Hands, that Head
To Sacrifice to valiant Ghosts; 'twas he,
Who in his Chariot, proud of Victory,
Our captived Fathers to the Capitol
Drove: and they, now, on You for Vengeance call.
With that a Shower of Darts, that every where
Fly, like a Tempest, through the darkened Air,
O'rewhelm, and hide his Body; so that none
Could after boast, that by his Hand, alone,
Flaminius died. Thus with the General
The Fight soon ended: for the Chief of all
The Youth, as angry with themselves, and Heaven,
That to their Arms so ill Success had given,
And choosing rather once to die, then see
The Affrican enjoy the Victory,
With Hands all bloody, in the fatal Fight,
Seize on their Gen'ral's Body, in their Sight
So lately, slain, with all his Weapons; and,
United in a Ring, about him stand,
Till all, in one great Heap of Slaughter, died,
And falling, like an Hill, his Body It appears by this, that Flaminius had
laid aside all Ornaments of Consul, or General: for that his Body could not be
distinguished from any of those, that fell about him.
hid.
Now, having spread Destruction through the Wood,
And Lake, and left the Valleys deep in Blood,
To the Heap of Bodies Hannibal withdrew,
And with him Mago: and, as them they view,
What Wounds? What Deaths are here? (said he) behold,
How every Hand still grasps a Sword, though cold
In Death! The armed Soldiers, as they ly,
Seem to maintain the Fight! How these did die
Now let our Troops observe: the Threats appear
Yet in their Foreheads, and their Faces bear
Their living Anger, and, I fear, that Land,
Which fruitful is in Men so valiant, and
Of so great Courage, Fates to her decree
The Empire of the World, and She shall be
Victorious in Distress. This said, He yields
To Night: and Darkness, over all the Fields
Diffused, (while Sol into the Sea descends)
Restrains their Fury, and the Slaughter ends.
The End of the Fifth Book.
S^rranus, clarum Nomen* Tua Regule Proles
Limina pulsabat ^ari* Vetus isse Parentis
Vile^, et haud Surda tractarat proelia ^ama.
-- Serpens centum porrectus in Vln^s
Extendit ^olem atque Assultans Sydera ^ambit.
Ho^oratisso. Domino. D^. Edoardo Baroni de Hyndon Suma^ Totius Cancellario et
e Sanctioribus Regis Comiti Clarendon, Vic^^om* Cornbury Anglioe nec non
Accademiae Oxon: Consilijs. Tabula Sum^a a^ observantia D.D.D.

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Sixth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Brutius great Valor, who, before he died,
His Eagle from his Foes in the Earth does hide.
Sorranus, wounded, to Perusa's Plains
By Night, retires: him Marus entertains,
And, having dressed his Wounds, to him declares
Great Regulus (his Father's) Death, and Wars,
His Noble Courage in his Punishment.
Fabius elected General: his Descent.
The Romans Sadness, and the People's Cries,
Affrighted at the Libyans Victories.
The Conqu'rours to Linternum go, and there
The Monuments, that did at large declare
The Victories by Sea, and Land, which Rome
From Carthage once had gained, with Fire consume.
BUT, when his Steeds in the Tartessiack Main,
Loosed to give way to Night, Sol joined again,
On the Eoan Shores, and Serians, who
The first of all the World his Beams review,
For silken Fleeces to their Groves repair,
The Place of sad Destruction every where
Appears, and Monuments of furious War.
Here Men, and Arms, and Horses, mingled are,
There Hands lop'd off, still to their Lances stick,
In Wounds of Bodies slain: there Targets thick,
Trumpets, and headless Trunks, ly scattered round
Through all the Plain: with Swords, that as they woun^
Against Bones were broke. Some with be-nighted Eyes,
Half dead, in vain, there sought the enlightened Skies.
The Lake all foams of Gore, and on the Waves
Float Bodies, that for ever want their Graves.
Yet midst these Miseries, and loss of Blood,
Firm, as her Fate, the Roman Valor stood.
Brutius, whose many Wounds declared that He
Against his Foes had fought unequally,
Scarce from the Heaps of the miserable Dead,
('Mong whom he lay) had raised his wounded Head,
Striving with mangled Limbs to creep away,
His Nerves now shrinking, when the fatal Day
Was done. Him Fortune had not placed among
The Rich, nor was he honored for his Tongue,
Or his Descent: but Valiant with his Sword.
Nor did the Volscian Nation afford
Any, that had of Time recovered more:
Nor sought he, when but yet a Boy, before
The Down had clothed his Cheeks, himself to hide
For Safety in the Camp. Flaminius tried
His Courage, when in Fight he overthrew,
With better Gods, the Celtick Arms, hence grew
His present Honor, in all Wars, that he
The Keeper of the Sacred Bird should be.
Hence Glory made him to preserve with Care
The Cause of's Death. For when he did despair
Of Life, perceiving nothing could withstand
This Honor, which Brutius enjoyed, as the Reward of his Valor; was always
conferred on the first Centurion of the Triarii (who were the Reserve of the
Army) he was obliged to loose his Life with this Ensign of his Charge, which
was honored by the whole Army, and therefore styled Sacred by the Poet. The
Romans adoring their Eagles (which were sometimes of Silver, seldom of Wood,
but often woven, or painted on the Banner) as if they were Divine. Herodian.
lib. 4.
To keep his Eagle from the Libyans Hand;
Since Fate gave Way, and that the Roman Side
Was ruined in the Fight, he sought to hide,
And bury't in the Earth; but overthrown
With sudden Darts again, and falling down,
Extends himself upon it, and beneath
His Body hides it, choosing such a Death.
But, when from Stygian Night, and Sleep, the Light
Returned, he from the Neighboring Heaps, upright,
Arose upon his Spear, and Strong alone
In his Attempt, the Earth now overflown
With Blood, and softened by the standing Gore,
With His Sword he digs, and, as he does adore
The unhappy Eagle's Image, with his Hand,
Now fainting, smooths again the unequal Sand:
Then into thinner Air his Breath does go,
And his great Soul unto the Shades below.
Near him was to be seen the Sacred Rage
Of Valor, whose Deservings do engage
Our Muse to sing its Fame. Levinus, born
On high Privernum, that rich Vines adorn,
Dead, on dead Nasamonian Tyres lay;
And, when unequal Fortune had, that Day,
Deprived him of his Arms, his Spear, and Sword,
Then naked in the Fight, his Griefs afford
New Weapons. With his bloody Mouth he flies
Upon his Fo, and with his Teeth supplies
His want of other Arms, and thus he tears
His Nostrills off, bites out his Eyes, his Ears
Pulls from his mangled Head, his Forehead too
Strangely disfigures; while the Blood does flow
About his Jaws, yet this not satisfies,
Till with his Mouth, all full, he feeding dies.
While Valor sadly to the Victour's Eye
These Wonders shows, the wounded Troops, that fly,
To various Chances are exposed. Some through
By-ways of desert Woods, some wandering go
By Night, through unfrequented Fields, and there
Each little Noise, or Motion of the Air,
Or flying Birds, affright them, and they find
No Sleep, or quiet Thoughts, but still inclined
To fear, believe that Mago, with his Spear,
Or Hannibal pursues them in the Rear.
Serranus (a Renowned Name, thy Son
Great Regulus, whose lasting Fame shall run
Along with Time, to tell all Ages, how
With the perfidious Carthaginians, Thou
Thy Faith did keep) in the first glorious State
Of's Youth, had entered, with his Father's Fate
The Punick War, and now sore wounded from
The Fight, to his sad Mother, and dear Home
Alone returned; no Company to ease
His smarting wounds, but thus through devious ways
Supported by his broken Lance, while Night
Gave him Protection, he a silent Flight
Toward thy Plains ( Perusa) takes, and there
To a small Cottage, weary does repair;
(Resolved to try his Fate) and knock's at Door.
Marus, who to his Father long before
A Soldier, of no mean Esteem had been,
Leaps quickly from his Bed to let him in,
And borrowing Light from the few Coals that lay
Upon the Hearth, lifts it up, to survey
His Face, which strait he knows, and saw (sad Sight)
Those cruel Wounds were given him in the Fight.
His fainting Steps supported by his Spear:
(The Rumor of this Loss, before, his Ear
Had struck) What Wickdness is this (said he)
(Oh! born to bear too much Calamity,)
That I now see? Thee, greatest Captain, I
Beheld; when, even in thy Captivity,
Thy Looks affrighted Carthage, and thy Fall
(Which We the Guilt, and Crime of Jove may call)
Gave me so deep a Wound, that from my Heart
Not Libya's Ruin can remove the Smart.
But Oh! where are Ye now, Ye Gods, again?
Himself great Regulus offers to be Slain,
And perjured Carthage, now (Oh Grief to see!)
This rising Branch of that great Family,
Has quite, Alas! destroyed. Thus having said,
The fainting Youth upon his Bed he laid;
Nor was he ignorant (for he in War
That Skill had learned) fit Medicines to prepare:
And first with Water purged his Wounds, then Juic^
Of Herbs, of healing Virtue, does infuse;
Then binds them up, and with a tender Hand
Swaths on the Bolsters, with a gentle Band.
Thus having given him Ease, 'twas his next Care,
T'allay his tedious Thirst, and to repair
His Strength with frugal Diet: this in Haste
Performed, kind Sleep its Benefits, at last,
Applied, and gave his Body gentle Rest.
But, e're the Day again did gild the East,
Marus, as if he would cast off Age, again
Was ready to allay the burning Pain,
That then returned, with Medicines tried before,
And piously does Natural Warmth restore.
But here the Youth, lifting up to the Skies,
With Sighs, and frequent Groans, his weeping Eyes,
Said; Oh Immortal Jove! if yet thy Hate
To the Tarpeian Rock, Quirinus State
Has not condemned, with a more kind Aspect
On Italie's distressed Affairs reflect.
Our Iliads of Woes behold: for we
The Alps have lost, and our Adversity
No Limits finds. Ticinus, and the Po,
Swollen high, with Roman Slaughter, overflow:
And Trebia's by Sidonian Trophies known;
With that sad Land, that Annus did renown.
But why do I complain of this? Alas,
Our present Miseries the rest surpass.
I saw thy Waters, Thrasimenus, swell
With slaughtered Men. Flaminius, when he fell
Amidst the Weapons, I beheld* and all
The Shades below (my Gods) to witness call,
That by a Death, worthy my Father, I,
With Slaughter of my Foes, then sought to die;
Had not hard Fates (as they my dearest Sire
Refused) denied a Death to my Desire.
Thus bitterly complaining, to divert
The Rest, old Marus speaks. Most noble Heart!
Whatever be our Lot, or whatsoever
Our Fortune: it, like Romans, let us bear.
Through various Chances, such, by the Decree
Of Heaven, the Wheel of our Mortality
In a steep Path does swiftly run. Of this
Thy Family a great Example is,
And famed through all the World. That Divine He,
Thy Noble Father (whom no Deity
Excells) among all Eternal Honor gained,
For that he did Adversity withstand,
Nor shrunk from any Virtue; till his Breath
Was from his struggling Body forced by Death.
I hardly was a Youth, when Down began
On Regulus his Cheeks to sign him Man:
Yet, then, I his Companion was, and We
Our Years still passed with kind Society;
Until the angry Gods decreed that Light
Of the Italian Nation should quite
Extinguished be: within whose Noble Breast
Faith kept her Temple, and his Soul possessed.
That Sword (an Ensign of great Honor) He,
As a Reward of Magnanimity,
On Me bestowed, and Reins, you see, with Dust,
And Smoke now covered over (but yet no Rust
Their Brightness stains) such Gifts as these prefer
Marus to any Roman Cavalier.
But, above all my Honors, I must prize
That By this Relic Marus signified the old Religion of the Latins, who had
in great Veneration the Spears, or other Arms of ancient Heroes. For (as
Arnobius lib. 6. Contra Gentes) affirms, the Romans formerly adored a Spear,
instead of Mars.
Spear, to which I often Sacrifice
Streams of Lyaeus Blood, as here you see;
It Is worth your Time to know the History.
Slow Bragada plows up the thirsty Sand,
With troubled Waves: in all the Libyan Land,
No Flood more largely does it self extend,
Or, Swelling, does its Waters farther send
Over all the Fields. As thither We withdrew,
In search of Springs, of which that Land but few
Affords; upon the Banks We joyful sat,
Hard by the Stygian Grove, that did dilate,
T'exclude the Day, its Shadow every where;
And a thick Vapor, breaking through the Air,
Expired a noisome Smell: within was found
A dire, and spacious Cave; that, under Ground,
With many Labyrinths did winding run,
And, ever Dark, had never beheld the Sun.
(The very Thoughts of it my Soul invades
With Fear) That fatal Bank, and Stygian Shades,
A most pernicious Monster, (by the Rage
Of Earth produced) whose Equal in no Age
Was seen, inhabited; a Snake of Strength
Prodigious, and an hundred Else in Length:
His immense Paunch, surcharged with Poison (killed
Upon the River's Banks) or Lions filled;
Or Herds, that, scorched by the furious Heat
Of the Sun's Rays, did thither make Retreat;
Or Birds, that, by his pestilential Breath
Attracted from the Skies, there found their Death:
Bones, half-devour'd, upon the Ground were spread.
And thus, when he had plentifully fed
On diverse Prey, within his Noisome Den,
He belching lay, and when the Fire, again,
Of Thirst was kindled from his fervent Food,
He came to quench it in the Neighboring Flood,
And foaming Waves; and, e're halfway within
The Water his vast Bulk had drenched been,
His Head upon the adverse Bank would ly.
Not thinking of so great a Monster, I
With Havens, and Aquinus, forward go,
TO explore the Silence of the Place, and know
The Wood: when Horror seized, as we drew near,
Our Joints, and all our Limbs congealed were,
With a most strange, unusual Cold, and yet
We enter, and the Nymphs, and Gods entreat
Of The Flood, unknown, to favor what we do,
And thus, though full of Fear, presume to go
Into the secret Wood; when from the Mouth,
And Entrance of the Den (as from the South,
Raging with furious Storms) a Stygian Bla^t
Broke forth, and over the Flood the Tempest cast,
Mixed with an Hellish Noise. We, struck with Fear,
Gaze on each other's Face, and think We hear
The Earth to groan, and see it quake, the Den
To sink, and Ghosts to sally forth. But then
Big as those Snakes, wherewith the Giants armed
Themselves, when they the Court of Heaven alarmed:
Or that which in the Fens of L^rna Thee,
( Alcides) tried; or kept the golden Tree,
Such tearing up the Earth, and to the Skies
Lifting his Head, a Serpent here does rise,
And among the Clouds, disperseth, here, and there,
His Foam, and as he gapes, infects the Air.
We fled, and out of Breath, with Horror, strove,
In vain, to raise a Cry (for all the Grove
His Hiss had filled) when Vmbrian Havens, blind
With Fear, and much too blame (but Fate inclind
His Mind to what he did) himself betook
Unto the Body of an aged Oak,
Thinking, thereby, the Monster to deceive:
But (I my self could hardly this believe,
Had I not seen 't) the Snake himself about
The Oak straight twines, and tears't up by the Root.
Then trembling Havens, who to us for Aid
With his last Voice does call, he does invade,
And swallowing whole (this looking Back, I spied)
In his envenomed Paunch does quickly hide.
Next poor Aquinus, who, in's speedy Flight,
Himself unto the River did commit,
Swiming amidst the Stream, with fooming Jaws
He seiseth, and (a Death most cruel) draws
Back to the Banck, and there devours, while I
In the mean time, had Liberty to fly.
As much as my sick Thoughts permit, I haste,
And to the General tell all had past.
He sighed, and their sad Fate bewailed, and as
Against an Enemy, in War he was
Most eager, burning with Desire to be
Active in high Attempts, commands, that we
With Speed, take Arms, and that the Choice of all
The Horse, into the Field should quickly fall:
Himself advanced before, and gave Command,
That instantly a Target-bearing Band
Should follow, with the Engines used to be
Employed against Walls, and Towr's, for Battery.
And now, when, prancing on the Champaign Ground,
The furious Steeds began to Thunder round
His dismal Cave, the Serpent, hissing loud,
Leaps forth. A Stygian Vapor, like a Cloud,
Breaks from his smoking Mouth; from's glaring Eyes
A Flame, as terrible as Lightning, flies:
His Crest, erected High, appears above
The Tops of tallest Trees within the Grove.
His Trident Tongue, which with a Motion quick
He waveth in the Air, the Stars does lick.
But, when he heard the Trumpets sound, amazed,
His immense Body strait aloft he raised:
Then into num^rous Rings, beneath his Breast,
Contracts his Tail, and on his Back does rest.
Thus fitted for the Fight, those twisted Rings
Were soon resolved, and, as himself he flings
At Length, he suddenly, as if at Hand,
The Faces, even of those that farthest stand,
Invades. The Horses now no more obey
The Reins, or Curbs, but as they fly away
Trembling, and panting, from his Sight, expire,
From their extended Nostrills, frequent Fire.
On his swollen Neck to every Side he moves
His lofty Head; and, as his Rage improves,
Flings some aloft, some with his Weight were crushed,
And as from broken Bones the Marrow Gushed,
He licks it up, and, while the Blood does flow
About his Jaws, invades another Fo,
And half-devoured Bodies throws away:
And now the Ensigns all, as if the Day
Were lost, Retreat. Yet some, that farthest fly,
By his contagious Breath infected, die.
But your great Father, laboring to restrain
The flying Troops, thus calls them back again.
What? to a Serpent basely turn your Backs,
Italian Youth? and yield to Libyan Snakes
Ausonia's Honor? If his Breath subdue
The Cowards; or their Courage, as they view
Him gape, be lost: Alone, I Will undertake
To fight the Monster. And, as this he spoke,
From his strong Arm, a winged Javelin flies:
The barbed Point whereof between his Eyes
Not lightly wounds his Front; and, Thrown with Strength,
Within the Head of the reeling Beast, at length,
It sinks, and Trembling stands. Confused Cries,
And Shouts of Joy, now strike the Marbled Skies.
Till then the Earth-born Monster never did feel
(Though he had lived so long) the wounding Steel:
A Stranger to all Pain; and, scorning so
To yield to any, does more Furious grow.
Nor had his Rage been vain (which borrowed Force
From what he felt) if, skilled to guide his Horse,
(After the Wound) your Father had not waved
His fierce Assault, and, turning nimbly, saved
Himself: while, winding every way with Speed,
He furiously pursued the wheeling Steed.
But all this while your Marus did not stand,
As a Spectatour, with an idle Hand.
The second Spear, that wounded him, I flung.
Just as the weary Steed his forked Tongue
Licked on the Back, with all my Strength I threw
My Weapon: and, by that upon Me drew
His Fury, and the War; till all the Bands,
By our Example led, employed their Hands,
And stormed him with their Darts, that him engage
Alternately to exercise his Rage;
Till from a Warlike Engine, by a Stroke,
That would have battered down a Wall, we broke
His Strength, and yet (although he could no more,
His Back now broken, raise as heretofore
His Head unto the Clouds) more furious on,
He strove to come, till the Phalarick Stone
Into his Belly sunk, and then the Sight
Of both his Eyes, by winged Shafts, was quite
Extinguished: by those many Wounds, his Death
Approached. Then through his wider Jaws, his Breath
Infectious Poison (his last Refuge) cast.
Thus by our Darts, and ponderous Stones, at last,
Stretched on the Ground, he prostrate lay, and yet
His Jaws, extended Wide, appeared to threat,
Till, from an Engine shot, a Beam, that through
The yiedling Air, with a loud Fragour flew,
Struck off his Head, which as he gasping lay,
A pale dark Cloud of Poison (that the Day
Infected where it went) his Mouth exhaled.
The mournful River strait his Death bewailed,
With hideous Groans, and doleful Murmurs move
Upon the Waves; the Den, and Native Grove,
And Banks (upon whose Sands he used to Roll)
With a loud Echo Roar, and sadly howl.
But oh, how soon this dismal Fight we rue!
With how great Loss! What Punishment we drew,
What Plagues upon our selves? The Prophets strait
Us of our Dangers, but (Alas!) too late,
Admonish; that we had the Servant slain
Of the blew Naiades, that did remain
In Bragada's warm Streams. But then this Spear
(As Honor, and Reward for what I there
Had done) your Father gave Me, cause it stood
First fixed, and drank the Sacred Serpent's Blood.
The Noble Youth, who wept while he relates
This Story, interrupts him. If the Fates
Had suffered Him to live till now (said He)
Trebia had never o'reflown with Blood, nor we
Had seen thy Billows ( Thrasimonus) hide
So many Noble Names. Marus replied;
Yet he the Piacles of his sad Fate,
And cruel Torments, did anticipate
With Tyrian Blood. For Africa, wanting Men,
Her Wealth consumed, had begged our Mercy; when
Therapne, moved by some malignant Star
Sent forth Xantippus (born in Therapne, a small Town of Laconia) who was sent
by the Lacedaemonians, to be General, for the Carthaginians, in the first War
against the Romans: who under the Conduct of Attilius Regulus, very much
prevailed in Africa. This Character given him by the Poet, agrees with that of
Polybius ( lib. 1.) as of a Captain, who so far exceeded all of his Time, that,
by his sole Conduct, the Forces of many, that were thought Invincible, were
overthrown.
a Man to prosecute the War.
Of Stature he was low; no comely Grace
Of Mien, or Signs of Honor in his Face:
But admirable Vigor in so small
A Body; Active: one, that could the Tall,
And Larger-Limb'd, overcome. This Man, designed
To manage now the War against us, joined
To Arms strong Policy. In Deserts he
Could live, and greatest Hardship easily
Survive. Not Hannibal, who now so well
For Libya guids the War, does him excel.
Oh would to Heaven, Tayegeta! (most sad,
And fatal unto us) by thee He had,
Upon Eurota's Banks, never hardened been:
Then in victorious Flames I might have seen
Phanissa's Walls to sink, nor then the Fall
Had I lamented of my General.
Nor should (for Death, nor Fire can ease my Woe)
My Griefs bear with me to the Shades below.
Both Armies take the Field, and through the Plains
The God of War grows hot, and Fury Reigns
In every Breast. Here Regulus, in great
Attempts, lets loose his Sword, and hast's to meet
With Dangers in the midst of all his Foes,
And with his valiant Hand, gives deadly Blows.
So, when the South Wind, on his Wings does bear
A pitchy Cloud, that hanging in the Air,
Both to the Sea, and Land, a Tempest threats,
The Husbandman, and Shepherd strait retreats
For Shelter, to the Woods; and Fear prevails
With the Stout Seaman, to contract his Sails.
But the Laconian, having laid his The Roman Army, marching toward Carthage
(after the Rendition of almost two hundred Cities in Africa to the Consul
Regulus) laboring not only under Hunger, Thirst, and Diseases; but with the
Difficulties of the Places, through which they past: Xantippus drew his Forces
out of the City, and about Evening, put them into Order for a March, fell upon
the weary Romans in the Night, destroyed their whole Army, and, among other
Captives, took Attilius Regulus the General. See Appian de Libycis.
Snare,
Secured the hollow Rocks; and, leaving there
His Men, upon a Sudden, from the Fight,
Wheeling, he turns his Horse, pretending Flight,
With fained Fear. So Shepherds to secure
Their Flocks within their Folds, by Night allure
Wolves into Pits, the which they over-lay
With Boughs, and with a bleating Lamb betray.
Honor, by which brave Minds inflamed are,
And a fallacious Confidence in War.
Invited; and, drew on your Noble Sire,
Who Spurring on, as mad with a Desire
To fight, never looks, if his Companions were
Behind him, or who followed in the Rear.
When all alone, a thick, and sudden Cloud
Of fierce Laconians, that themselves did shrowed
Among the hollow Rocks, him round invest,
And the Force of his Ruin still encreas't.
Of fatal Day to Italy! to be
Marked in our Fast, as the Infamy
Of thee, Oh Mars! those Hands that to thy Rome,
And thee were born, by a most fatal Doom
Are now condemned to Chains. My Grief will be
Eternal! a Sidonian Dungeon Thee
(Great Regulus) beheld! and by the odds
Of such a Triumph, Carthage to the Gods
Seemed equal. But what Plagues sufficient are
For the Laconians Guilt of such a War?
But now the Carthaginian Fathers all
Consult, to offer to our General
New The Carthaginians, having before lost many considerable Men, made Captive
by the Romans, after this Victory, believed they might procure a Peace, on
more easy Terms; at least, an exchange of Prisoners. To this Purpose they sent
Ambassadors to Rome, and with them, Regulus; on Condition, that, if their
Offer were not accepted, he should return to Carthage. But, the Romans having
elsewhere obtained Advantages over them, Regulus persuaded the Senate to
prosecute the War, and retain their Captives, by which he frustrated the
Embassy of the Carthaginians, and returned with them to their City, where his
Fidelity to his Country, was punished with a cruel Death.
Leagues, and send him Home to mediate
A Peace; requiring that the Captivate
In War, might be returned on either Side;
And, now no more Delay: the Ship does ride
At Anchor in the Road, the Seamen are
Employed, their Oars, and Benches to prepare:
Some fit the twisted Cables, others haste
To furle, and trim the Sails upon the Mast;
Others the Anchors place upon the Prow:
But above all, Cothon, ordained to go
Chief Pilot of the Ship, in Sea-Affairs
Renowned for Skill, the Helm, and Poop prepares.
The triple-pointed Beak, its shining Rays
(Most richly guilt) over all the Sea displaies.
Weapons, and all things else that needful were
Against Dangers of the Sea, with them they bear,
Amidst the Ship, upon the Decks he stands,
That timeth with his Voice the Seamens Hands,
And bids them strike at once, and as again
They raise their Oars (that echo over the Main)
Applauds them all. Thus when they had performed
The Seamens Work, the Ship completely armed,
And the Hour arrived, to hoise up Sail, and weigh
Their Anchors, and the Wind was fair for Sea;
A multitude of Women, Children, Men,
Together flocked, and envious Fortune then
Dragged through the Throng our Noble General,
And showed him, as a Spectacle to all.
He, in their View, as smootha Fo^ehead bore,
As when he first, on the Sidonian Shore,
Arrived with his Fleet. With his Consent,
In the same Ship, I his Companion went;
Resolving his Adversity to share,
And thought it greater Fortitude to bear
Their Nastiness, ill Diet, and their poor,
Obdurate Beds, and to contend with more
Important Miseries; then to subdue
A Fo. Nor is it so honorable to
Avoid Misfortunes, by our Vigilance;
As to Overcome, by Noble Sufferance,
Whatever Fate can do. And yet (though I
Knew his severe, and rigid Constancy)
I hoped, if Heaven permitted us to come
Within our Citie's Walls, and see our Home,
His Heart might then relent, or by your Tears
(At least) be mollifi'd. Thus I my Fears
Kept in my Breast, and thought that he inclined
To weep, and had, in Misery, a Mind
Like mine. But, when we came to Tybur, I
Observed his Face, and most intentively
Beheld his Looks, which inward Sense betray.
But credit me (brave Youth) in what I say,
His Countenance amid'st a thousand Toils
Abroad, and when at Home enriched with Spoils,
And when to cruel Carthage he was sent,
And in the Instant of his Punishment,
Unaltered I beheld, and still the Same.
Then all Ausonia from her Cities came
To meet the Captive; all the Neighboring Hills,
(The Plains already thronged) their Number fills,
And Tybur to his Banks the Noise imparts:
But the Sidonian Princes (cruel Hearts!)
Strive to reduce him to their Countrey's Dress,
And so the Honor of the Gown suppress.
The Senate weeping stood; the Matrons throng,
And Youth, to show their Greifs; while He, among
So many Sighs, unmoved stands. His Hand,
The Consul on the Shore, as he on Land
First stepped, extends to help him, and to meet
With kind Respect, and his Arrival greet.
He stepping back (still careful of our State)
Requires the Consul not to violate
His Supreme Dignity, but to retire.
Then on he goes, (while Weeping we admire
His Constancy) and compassed by the proud
Sidonians, and with them a Captive Crowd,
Raised Envy in the Gods. But now, his Flame,
With her two hopeful Sons, sad Martia came;
Unhappy in her Noble Lords Excess
Of Virtue, that disdained in his Distress,
To stoop to Fortune. Her disheveled Hair,
And Robes, neglected, as she sadly tare,
Oh know thou not the Day, or can it be,
It touched thee not in younger Years (said she)
And when in Tyrian Habit (like Disguise)
Deformed she saw him, then with mournful Cries,
She fainting fell, and strait grew Cold, and Pale
In all her Limbs (Oh let our Prayers prevail!
And if the Gods be just, may Carthage see
Such the Sidonian Mothers!) then to me
He whispers, and commands that I remove
You, and your Mother, while he still does prove
Impenetrable against the strongest Blow
Of Grief, and Scorns that Yoke to undergo.
Here with deep Sighs, and Tears complaining, thus
The Youth begun: Dear Father, whom with us
No Deity excells, that does remain
In the Tarpeian Towers; if to Complain
May be allowed to Piety: Oh! why
This Comfort unto Us did Thou deny?
Or why, Oh! why (Thou too severe) that Grace
Did thou refuse to touch thy Sacred Face,
Or Kiss Thee? To join Hands, was it a Sin
So great? How much these Wounds had lighter been
If, fixed in my Mind, when I repair
To Shades below, I Thy Embrace might bear?
But I in vain these things Record; for we
Were then (my Marus) in our Infancy.
Yet, I remember well, his Form was more
Then Humane; that his Locks descended over
His Manly Neck, white as the Alpine Snow;
Stern Majesty was seated on his Brow:
The Venerable Index of his Mind;
Such as, since then, mine Eyes could never find.
Then Marus, him advising to refrain,
By such Complaints, to vex his Wounds again,
Resumes the Word. What? when he careless past
By his own Household Gods, and went in haste
To the Sidonians cursed Such Ambassadors, as came from their Enemies to the
Romans, never admitted into their City; but but treated with them in the
Temples of Mars, or Apollo, that stood without the Walls. And, though Regulus
was admitted to the Senate; yet, according to his Promise, he returned to lodge
with them, whose Quarter was on the other Side of Tiber. See Polybius, Eclog.
14.
Abode? his Eyes
The Monuments of his great Victories
Then saw hung up; as Shields, and Chariots, and
Known Darts: while at the Door his Wife does stand
And cries; Oh! whither goes my Regulus?
This is no Punick Dungeon, that Thou thus
Should fly both it, and Me. The Footsteps here
Of our Chaste Marriage Bed are yet as clear,
As at the first. Our House still entertains
Its Gods without a Crime: Then say: what Stains
In us thou find'st? The Senate gave thee Joy,
When I to thee This, and that other, Boy
Had born: Oh turn, and see! This House is Thine,
Where Thou, a Noble Consul, once did shine
In Purple Robes; and, marching from this Door,
Did see the Roman Fasces go before.
Hence did Thou go to War, and here, with Me,
Were wont the Trophies of Thy Victory
To fix, against these Posts. I ask not now
The Rites of Hymen, or Our Nuptial Vow:
Only desist Our Houshold-Gods to slight,
And to Thy Sons, at least, allow This Night
Amidst these Tears, He with the Tyrians goes
To lodge, and left Her venting thus Her Woes.
Scarce had the rising Day on Orta seen
The Place, where great Alcides Pile had been;
When for the Libyan Lords the Consul sent.
I, at the Gate beheld Regulus.
Him, as He went
Into the Temple: what the Senate there
Debated, what His last Addresses were
To the sad, weeping Court, Himself to Me
Did Cheerfully relate. So soon as He
Was entered; with their Hands, and Voices, all
Him to his wonted Seat, contending, call.
But He, the ancient Honor of His Place
Rejects; while they, about Him thronged, embrace,
And take Him by the Hand, and thus entreat;
He would restore a Captain of so great
A Name unto his Country; He might be
Exchanged for Numbers in Captivity.
And then more justly might the Tyrian Land,
And Towers, be wasted by that valiant Hand;
Which they had bound in Chains. But He, His Eyes,
And Hands together, lifting to the Skies,
Thou God of Justice (said) that govern'st all!
And Faith, whom I no less Divine may call!
And Sarran Juno! all invoked by Me,
My Promise of Return to testify!
Let Me speak Worthy of my self, and by
My Words prevent my Countrie's Ruin: I
More cheerful shall to Carthage go (said He)
If that my Promise of Return may be
Preserved, though 't be to Punishment. Oh then!
Desist to tender unto Me again
That Honor, with Destruction to the State.
My many Years, and Wars, accelerate
My Death: and now, by long Imprisonment,
And Bonds, in this my Age, my Strength is spent.
Your Regulus Was once, and did pursue
The hardest Duties of the War, when you
Did know Him such: but now within a Cold,
And bloodless Body, you a Name behold.
Oh! let not Carthage then (that House of Fraud,
That does her self in Treachery applaud)
Not knowing how great things to Us remain,
Think, for this aged Body, to regain
Her Captived Youth, Men fit for War. But go
Armed against Her Deceits, and let her know
What Rome can do; though I am Captivate:
Nor let a Peace accepted be, but what
Our Which Conditions were; That the Carthaginians should not invade Sicily;
nor any the Allies of King Hieron; That they should quit all the Islands
be^ween Sicily, and Italy; That all Cap^ives should be released without Ransom,
and that they should pay Tribute to the Romans for twenty years. See Polybius,
lib. 1.
Fathers entertained. They now require
(And gave it Me in Charge, as their Desire)
That in an equal League, the War be weighed,
And equal Laws on either Side be made.
But may I Sink to Styx, before I see
The Romans to so base a Peace agree.
This said; the Court resolving to pursue
His Faithful, Grave Advice: he strait withdrew,
Himself to render to the Libyans Ire.
Who, with a sad Repulse of their Desire
Dismissed, returned, through the Herculean Main,
Threatening their cheerful Captive, Home again.
After the Senate, now, a mournful Crowd
Of People throng, and all the Fields with loud
Complaints are filled: sometimes resolved again
To call him back, or else by Force retain,
With their just Griefs. But Trembling, 'bove them all,
His Wife, as at his sudden Funeral,
When to the Ship he went, with doleful Cries,
And Shreekings, to the Sea, as Frantic, flies.
Take Me along, O Libyans, let Me
Share both his Death, and Punishment (said She)
My Dear (I beg this One thing only, by
Those Pledges of our Loves) permit, that I
May Share with Thee whatever Dangers be
Destined by Land, or Sea, or Heaven to Thee:
I did not send Xantippus to the War,
Nor did I give those heavy Chains, that are
About thy Neck: why then do fly Me so
To Punishment? Oh! give me leave to go;
Me, and my Children, and perhaps, our Tears
May Carthage move to Pity. If her Ears
The cruel City stop, we then may all,
Thou, and thy Family together fall:
Or, if resolved to die, here die with Me;
For I a Sharer in thy Fate will be.
As thus she spoke, the Vessel by Degrees,
Loosed from the Shore, to put to Sea, She sees:
Then most Unhappy, mad with Grief, She cries,
(Lifting her weary Hands unto the Skies)
See Him that boasts, with treacherous Libyans, thus,
And Foes, to keep his Faith, but what to Us
Was promised Violates! Oh! where is now
(Perfidious man) thy Faith, and Nuptial Vow?
These Words He, unrelenting, heard. The rest
The Noise, and Dashing of the Oars, suppressed.
Then down the River, with the Stream, We run
Unto the Borders, where the Sea begun.
Over which We sail, and with Our hollow Pine
Cleave the vast Billows, foaming with their Brine.
I, dreading, more then Death, proud Libya's Scorn,
Wished that the Ship, by some rude Tempest born
Against some Rock, might split; or else that We
Might, by the raging Seas, o'rewhelmed be.
But gently-breathing Winds, the Vessel bore
Away, and Us to Libyan Rage restore:
Which I, unhappy, saw; and Home was sent,
A sad Relatour of his Punishment.
*It Was an hard Task: nor would I now relate
To Thee, how Carthage then did imitate
The Fury of wild Beasts, to vent their Spleen:
If any Age, in all the World, had seen
Any thing Greater, then that high, and brave
Example, which the Rev'rent Virtue gave
Of your great Father. 'Twere a Shame for Me
To add Complaints to those dire Torments, He,
So unconcerned, endured: and truly You,
Worthy of so great Blood, Your self should show,
By wiping Tears away. A This Engine, built in Form of a Cage, and proportioned
to his Body, is best, (though briefly) described by our Author: who,
notwithstanding, omits one exact part of his Punishment, mentioned by Valerius
Maximus, ( lib. 9. cap. 2). viz. That they cut off his Ey-Lids; so that
continual Light, as well, as those Pikes of Iron, that tormented him, might
keep him perpetually waking, till the long Variety of Pain killed Him.
Cage they build
Of Wood, whose Grates, on every Side, were filled
With equal Pikes of Steel; which sharp, and thick,
By Art, in Order, placed, erected stick.
All Sleep by this Invention was denied,
And when, through length of Time, to either Side
Dull Slumbers Him inclined, a Row of Pikes
Into his Bowels, through his Body strikes.
Oh! cease to grieve (brave Youth) suppress thy Tears.
He Overcomes, that this with Patience bears.
His Glory long shall flourish: while in Heaven,
Or Earth, to constant Faith, a Place is given;
Or Virtue's Sacred Name alive shall be.
A Day shall come, wherein Posterity
(Great Regulus) shall tremble, when they hear
Thy Fate, which Thou with so much Scorn did bear.
Thus Marus spoke, and with sad Care, again,
His Wounds fomented, to allay the Pain.
Fame, in the mean time, having sprinkled over
Her rapid Wings with Blood (as if before
Dipped in the Streams of Thrasimenus) Lies
With Truth commixing, through the City flies,
And to the People's Minds again recalls
The Loss of Allia, and Tarpeian VValls,
Stormed by the Senones. Sad Terror shakes
Her Reins, and Fear the Tempest greater makes.
Now to the Walls, with winged Speed, She flies,
An horrid Voice is heard, OUR ENEMIES
APPROACH: and then with Piles, and Darts, the Air,
In vain, they beat. The affrighted Matrons bare
Their hoary Locks, and with them, as they Weep,
The Walls, and Pavements of the Temples sweep,
And to the Gods, for Friends deceased, pray;
Too late Alas! and rest not Night, or Day.
Howling with Grief, the scattered People ly
Before the Gates, and with a careful Eye
All that return observe. About them throng,
And, as they speak, hang listening at their Tongue;
But cannot Credit give, if News of Joy
They chance to tell, and yet again their Stay
Entreat, and sometimes with sad Looks, alone,
Not Words, with such, as hasted to be gone,
Prevail for Tdings, and yet Trembling stand
To hear, what they so Earnestly demand.
Bad News does Force their Tears, and, if denied
To know, or if the Messenger replied
With doubtful Words, from thence new Fears arise.
And now when Troops returning, to their Eyes,
More near appeared, out at the Gates they run
(Fearing they had been lost) and then begun
To Kiss their Wounds, and tire the Gods with Prayer.
Among these, honored for his pious Care,
Old Marus, with him, young Serranus led.
And Martia, who since Regulus was dead,
Still kept at Home, all Company forsook,
And only for her Childrens Sake did brook
The Light, now runs into a Grief as great,
As was her former. Though distracted, strait
She Marus knew, and thus accosts him: Thou,
(Great Faiths renowned Companion) surely now
Thou giv'st me lighter Wounds: or say, has Fate
Caused the revengefull Sword to penetrate
Into my Bowels, deep? What e're it be,
So Carthage Him in Chains may never see,
Nor Sacrifice Him to His Father's Pain,
I Am pleased. Ye Gods! How often have I, in vain
(Oh my dear Son) entreated Thee, forbear
Thy Father's Courage, and His Heat in War?
That his sad Glory might not Thee engage
In Arms. I have, of too vivacious Age
The hard Afflictions undergone. But now
Spare Us, I pray, ye Gods! If any of you
For Us have fought: suppress the Enemy!
But when this sullen Cloud of Misery
Was past; the Senate with all Speed prepares
To give Support to their distressed Affairs.
All strive, with Emulation, the War
To undertake; and present Dangers bar
The Progress of their Griefs* The chief of all
Their Cares was, no appoint a General,
Upon whose Conduct shaken Italy,
And the whole Frame of her Affairs, might be
Impos^d; when now their Country did appear
To sink. For Jove resolved to defer,
Awhile, the Time of Her Imperial Power:
And, rising, looked from the Albanian Tower
Upon the Tyrrhen People, and beheld
The Carthaginian, with Successes swelled,
Preparing his Victorious Arms to invade
Our Walls. But Jove, his Head then shaking, said:
I never will permit, that Thou shall come,
Proud Libyan Youth, within the Walls of Rome.
Thou may the Tyrrhen Vales with Slaughter fill,
And make with Latin Blood the Rivers swell,
And overflow their Banks: but I defend,
That the Tarpeian Rock thou should ascend;
Or to those Walls (so dear to Me) aspire.
With that, four Times^ he threw his forked Fire;
Which shined through all the Tyrrhen Land, and cast
A Cloud upon the Army, as it past
From the divided Heaven. But, yet, all this
The Libyan to divert could not suffice.
With that the God the Aeneades possessed
With Resolution, in a faithful Breast,
The Nation to repose, and put the Reins
Of Safety into Noble Fabius Hands.
Perceiving then the Power of War to be
Entrusted to his Care; not Him (said He)
Envy, nor Fame, with Libyan Vanity
Guided; nor Spoil; nor cunning Treachery;
Nor other base Desires shall overthrow:
Skillful, and old in War, He well does know
Success, and Loss with equal Thoughts to bear;
His Mind well tempered both for Peace, and War.
Thus Jove: and then remounted to the Skies.
This Fabius, whom his Foes could never surprise
In Arms, and thus by Jove commended, thought
Himself most Happy, when entire He brought
Those Numbers Home again, which He before
Conducted to the Field; and no Man more
Desired Himself, or dearest Son to spare,
Then He did them; none with so sad a Care
Beheld their Wounds in Fight: and when again
He came, a Conqu'rour, with the Noble Stain
Of hostile Blood besmeared, his Legions all
Appeared complete, before the Citie's Wall.
His famed Original with Heaven did claim
Alliance: for when great Alcides came
From Spain, Gerion's Spoils (his Monstrous Kine
He, that Way, where the Walls of Rome do shine,
In Triumph drove. Then did Arcadius found
(As Fame reports) in Rude, and Desert Ground
His Palace, and a needy People swai'd:
When, by his Sacred Guest, the Royal Maid,
Arcas (his Daughter) overcome, with Joy,
From that her Crime of Love, conceived a Boy,
Was Fabius named; from Him, a Mother she
Became, to a Tyrinthian Progeny.
And hence three hundred Fabii once did go,
All from one House, in Arms, against the Fo;
Whose most Renowned Actions, by his Wife
Delays (which then Alone could equalize
The Libyan Conduct) this Our Fabius all
Excelled. So great, then, were Thou Hannibal!
But, while the Latins busily prepare
To raise Recruits, and reinforce the War,
The Carthaginian Captain, terrified
By Jove; and having laid his Hopes aside
Of batt'ring Rome's high Walls, his Army leads
Up to the Vmbrian Hills, where Tuder spreads,
Upon an high Descent, its hanging Walls,
And where Mevania over large Fields exhales
Thick, gloomy Clouds; and, Consecrate to Jove
Fat Bulls, through Rich, and Wealthy Pastures move.
From thence, desirous of Picenian Prey,
Through the Palladian Fields he makes his Way,
And wheresoever the Spoil invites Him, there
His wandering Troops, their plundring Ensigns bear:
Till fair Campania stopped his furious Course
And, undefended, entertained the Force
Of The War, within her Bosom. As He there
Beheld the Temple, and the Buildings near
A River of Campania, upon the Banks of which stood Linternum, small Town, made
famous by the Renowned Africanus; who, after his Disgrace at Rome, thought that
more worthy to retain his Ashes, then his ungrateful Country.
Linternus swelling Stream, he fixed his Eyes
Upon the various Pictures, where he spies,
The Monuments of the former War, maintained,
By the Roman Senate. For they there remained
Carved on the Porches, and all things expressed
In Order, and at large. Before the rest
Great Regulus appears to instigate
The War: a War, which (had he known his Fate)
He would have shunned. There Noble Appius Claudius Pulcher, Consul with C.
Norbanus Flaccus; for his Victory over Hi^ron King of Syracuse, and the
Carthaginians, that came to his Assistance, had the Honor of Tr^umph.
Appius stood
In a pitched Field, and high in Libyan Blood,
From their great Slaughter, a just Triumph, Crowned
With Laurel gained. Near these, at Sea renowned,
Cnei^s Duillius was the first, that triumphed for a Naval ^ictory, gain^d by
him over the Carthaginians: and assumed to himself, without the ^llowance,
either of Senate, or People; as a perpetual Honor, when he return^d from any
Feast, to have Torches, and a Trumpeter, to march before him.
Duillius, on a Snow-white Column Rose,
Bearing his Naval Trophies; Stems, and Prows
Of Ships, the first that Italy had known
Those Spoils (the Tyrian Navy overthrown)
To Dedicate to Neptune. Near Him stand,
His Nightly Glories, shining Torches, and
His Sacred Trumpeter, that from a Feast
Was wont with cheerful Sounds (that Joy expressed)
TO attend him to his honored Home: and then
After his Death, his Statue was placed in the Forum, and continued till the
Time of Pliny, as he affirms, lib. 23. cap. 5.
The Honors of that Noble Citizen,
Deceased, He sees. Near these does Scipio stand,
And celebrates, in the L. Cornelius Scipio, Consul, overthrew, in Sardinia,
Hanno the Carthaginian General; slew Him, and gave Him Burial. Live. lib. 17.
Sardoan Land,
The Tyrian Captain's Funerals, subdued
By Him. Then, on the Libyan Shores, He viewed
The routed Bands, in scattered Parties, fly
About the Field, and Regulus hard by,
Pursuing at their Backs: the Nomades,
The Garamantians, the Autololes,
The Moors, and Hammon lay down Arms, and yield
Their Cities up. Within a Sandy Field
Slow Bragada with Poison foams, and there
A Serpent against an Army makes a War.
Then from his Ship Our Author follows the vulgar Opinion, That, after the
Defeat of Regulus, the Carthaginians seemed highly to value Xantippus his
Service, and dismissed him with great Honor, and Rewards. But fearing a future
Reproach of the great Benefits they had received by his Conduct; they gave him
a rotten Ship newly trimmed: which, some say, sunk with him by the Way; others,
that the Seamen were instructed to drown him: but Polybius, not ignorant of
these Opinions, affirms; that, fearing their Treachery, he prudently withdrew
himself. Polyb. lib. 1.
Xantippus thrown, in vain
Calling upon the Gods, was in the Main
By a perfidious Band, most sadly drowned.
And there too late (great Regulus) He found
The Punishment of Thy unhappy Death.
The two Aegates likewise, from beneath
The Waves, they make to rise: about them lay
Torn Ships, and Libyans, floating on the Sea.
Lord of the Ocean, then Q. Luctatius, Consul, his Victory near the Island
Aegates. See before in the First Book.
Luctatius bore
Away, with a propitious Gale, to Shore
The Captived Ships. With these (in Order all)
Amilcar (Father to the General)
Stood It was a Custom among the Romans, to describe, in Picture, the Nations,
that had been conquered by them, and to bear in Triumph the Images of such
Generals, as were overthrown, and escaped their Hands. As this Amilcar, who
never was their Captive: and Hannibal, described in Scipio's Triumph. See lib.
17. infra.
bound, and, from all other Objects, drew
Upon himself the People's Eyes, to view
His stern Aspect: and then was to be seen
The Face of Peace, the Altars, that had been
Polluted with the League, and Jove deceived,
The Roman giving Laws; and, as they heaved
Their Axes up, the Libyan trembling stands,
And, begging Pardon with submissive Hands,
Swears, but in vain, the League. This, from the Sky,
Fair Cytherea, with a joyful Eye,
Beheld. But, when the Libyan General
Had, with a troubled Brow, survai'd it all;
His slow contracted Rage, that all the while
Boiled in His Breast, thus, with a scornful Smile
He vents. We, likewise, things as great, by Me
Performed, shall carved on Our Houses see.
Let Me (O Carthage) see Sagunthus, all
At once, by Fire, and Sword, together fall.
Sons by their Fathers killed, and let there be
Space, large enough, the Conquered Alps to see,
Whereon Victorious Nomades may ride,
And Garamantians. Let Me see, beside,
Ticinus overflow his Banks with Blood,
And Trebia's, and Thrasimenus Flood
Choked up with Thuscan Corpse. Flaminius, great
In Body, and in Arms, there find his Fate.
Let Consul Scipio bleeding fly, and, on
The weary Shoulders of his Pious Son,
To's Friends, be born. Let this divulged be;
Carthage shall greater things hereafter see.
Rome burnt in Libyan Flames shall there be shown,
And Jove from his Tarpeian Temple thrown.
In the mean time (as it becomes Ye) you,
Brave Youth, by whose Assistance I can do,
And have done things so Great, go quickly; burn
Those Monuments, and them to Ashes turn.
The End of the Sixth Book
Vt possessa vident infestis litt^^a proris
Att^ntae propere refluunt ad littera Nymphae
Qua procul abrupto Protheus iman^is in Antro
Cautibus objectis rejectat Caerula vates.
Honoratiss: Domino, Domino Georgio Duci Albemarliae, Comiti de Torrington,
Baroni Monck de Potheridge. Beauchamp, et Teyes: Caro: 2d^. Regi Angliae etc:
ab Intimis Cubiculis, and Sanctioribus Consilijs; Capitanto Ge^rali omnium
Exercituum Sumo^ Duc^ Magno Stabuli Magistro, et Incliti Ordinis Periscelidis
Equiti etc: Tabula Summa Cum Observatia D: D.D.

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Seventh Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Fabius is for the War Dictatour made:
The Libyan, by His Policy delai'd,
Wastes the Falernian Country, and, to gain
A Battle, several Ways removes, in Vain,
Until at length, by the Ausonian Bands
Encompassed, in a Vale, besieged, be stands:
His Stratagem, by which His Troops again
Are from this Danger freed: the Roman then,
With Mutiny demanding Battle, are
By Fabius appeared. At length the War
Is to Minutius left, who soon does yield
To their Designs, and rashly takes the Field
To fight: at first the Libyan prevails,
Till Fabius, while all other Succor fails,
Came to the Romans And, who get the Day,
And Sacrifices to his Honor pay.
BUT Fabius, the only Hope, and Stay
Of Rome's distressed Affairs, Ausonia
(Now sinking through her Wounds) and her Allies
Soon arms: and vig'rously himself applies
(Though old) the hardest Toils to undergo,
And with his Army marched against the Fo.
His Understanding more, then Man's, no Force
Of Darts, no Weapons, nor the Strength of Horse
Regarded; but he went, alone, against all
The Libyan Forces, and their General,
As yet Unconquered; keeping in his Breast,
Alone, the Strength, and Safety of the Rest:
And, if He had not then resolved to stay
The Course of Adverse Fortune, by Delay,
That, the last Age of the Dardanian Name
Had surely been, and Rome had lost her Fame.
The Favor of the Gods, that did attend
The Punick Arms, He tempered, and an End
To Libya's Conquests put. The Enemy,
Insulting in the Woes of Italy,
By his wise Conduct He debell'd, and all
The Fraud deluded of proud Hannibal.
Most Noble General! Who Troy again,
Lapsing to Ruin, do alone sustain,
And sinking Italy! Who do uphold
Evander's Empire, and whatever of old
The Labors of our Fathers gained in Wars,
Go on, and raise thy Name unto the Stars.
But, when new Titles had proclaimed the Choice
Of the Dictatour, by the public Voice,
The Libyan Prince, revolving in his Mind,
That something of Importance had inclined
The Romans to that Change of their Command,
So suddenly, desired to understand
What was the Fortune of the Man, what were
His Honors, or why Fabius should appear
Their last, safe Author, in Distress? Why He,
After so many Storms, by Rome should be
Thought equal unto Hannibal? and yet
It vexed him, that his Years did want that Heat,
That might expose him, through Temerity,
To his Deceits, and therefore instantly
He for a Captive calls, t'enquire of all
His Customs, Actions, and Original.
Cilnius, a Youth, and of a Noble Name,
From fair Aretium to Ticinus came,
In an unhappy Hour, and by a Wound,
That overthrew his Horse, fallen to the Ground:
His Neck to Libyan Chains then yielded. He,
Desirous by his Death himself to free,
The Libyan thus informs. Thou have not, now,
With fierce Flaminius (said He) to do,
Or Gracchus rash Resolves: his Family
From the Tyrinthian Gods derived; had he
Within thy Country ( Hannibal) been born,
Carthage the World's Imperial Crown had Worn.
With a long Series I Will not strive to show
Particulars: let this suffice, to know
The Fabii, by one Combat having broke
The Peace, and shaken off the Roman Yoke,
The bold Veientes brought the War's Alarms
Even to our Gates; the Consul cites to Arms
The old listed Bands; Alcides Progeny
Fills up a private Camp; one Family
Sends a The Fabii were of the Patricii, (of whom see the Comment on the second
Book) but their whole Army was not so. For the Fabii were but three hundred:
and the Clients, that followed them, were five thousand. See Festus, De
verborum significatione, in the Word Religio.
Patrician Army to the Fight,
Three hundred Captains (each whereof you might
Trust safely with the Conduct of a War)
Appear. But, going forth, they threatened are
With dire Presages. Conscious of their Fate,
The trembling Threshold of the That Gate, through which they marched out to
the Fight, formerly called Porta Carmentalis, was, in Memory of their
Misfortune, ever after termed Sc^lerata.
Guilty Gate
Sends forth a fatal Sound: that Altar roared
Where chiefly the Tyrinthian God's adored.
Yet they invade the Fo, and with so fierce
A Valor charge, that their small Number scarce
Could be distinguished, and their Slaughters are
More then the Soldiers: oftentimes the War,
In Globes compacted close, they entertain.
As often dispersed, in Parties, through the Plain,
They Dangers meet. Equal in Labors all,
And Valor, merit to the Capitol
To lead three hundred Triumphs: but, Alas,
How vain those Hopes! each Man forgetful was
How soon all things, that humane are, decline!
These men, disdaining, while the Fabian Line
Was safe, that Public Wars should waged be;
Encompassed by a sudden Enemy,
Fell, by the Envy of the Gods! but yet
Thou have no Cause of Joy, in their Defeat,
For the Surviver is enough for Thee,
And Libya: as with all their Hands will He
Alone contend; his Limbs so Active are,
So Circumspect his Industry, and Care,
Secured with cautious Ease. Not you, whose Veins,
Swelled high with youthful Blood, can with the Re
Sooner restrain, nor prick the Warlike Steed
Into the Battle, with more furious Speed.
But Hannibal perceiving, as He spoke,
He coveted to die: Thou do provoke
In vain (thou Fool) our Rage, and seek'st to free
Thy self from Bondage by Thy Death (said He)
No, Thou shall live, and straiter Chains shall press
Thy captive Neck. Thus, swelling with Success,
And the propitious Gods, he vents his Scorn.
But, by Religion, to the Altars born,
The Fathers, and the Latin Dames, their Eyes
With Sorrow filled: in ordered Companies,
A Robe, and Vows, to Juno offer, Hear
Oh Queen of Gods! lend us a willing Ear,
We, a Chaste People, pray Thee. We, who be
The chief of the Ausonians, to Thee
This fair, and venerable Garment, wrought
By our own Hands, with Threads of Gold, have brought,
And till the Fears of Mothers do decrease,
This shall Thy Vesture be. And, if Thou please,
That this Marmarick Cloud we may behold
Far scattered from Our Land, a Crown of Gold,
Enlai'd with various Gemms, to Thee shall shine.
This Goddess thus adored: to Pallas Shrine,
They proper Offerings bring, then worship Thee
Venus, and Phoebus, and the Deity
Of War: from the approach of Miseries,
So great a Reverence of the Gods does rise.
The Happy seldom to their Altars come.
While ancient Honors in Her Temples Rome
Thus celebrates: great Fabius takes the Field,
With his well-ordered Troops; and, as most skilled
In Warlike Arts, like one Secure, though Slow,
All Avenues against Fortune, and the Fo
Blocks up, and from their Ensigns suffers none
To stray; and that, which, chiefly, Thee does Crown
(Brave Roman) and thy Empire's Head so high
Has lifted, taught thy Soldiers to obey.
But, when, from far, their Ensigns, all in View,
Upon the Hills, and all the Troops in new
Bright Arms appeared: the Libyan Hopes swell high,
And Hannibal, with His Prosperity
Enflamed, believed His Victorie's Delay
Was only, that the Armies in Array
Were not drawn forth to fight. Go on (said He)
Quickly assault their Ports; let their Works be
Even by your Breasts overthrown: I Am sure the Fo
No longer has to Live, then We can go
Over the Plain between Us: for, to War
Their Sedentary old Men cited are,
With whom to fight, I am, almost, ashamed.
What you now see, are their Remains, disclaimed
As wholly useless, in the former War.
Where is their Gracchus now? Or now where are
Those Thunderbolts, the Scipios? expelled
From Italy, they never their Flight with held;
Till, frighted, to the farthest Part they came
Of The Earth, and Sea. Now, trembling at Our Name,
Both wander, and Iberus Banks defend,
And where We are not, there a War pretend.
I, likewise, from Flaminius Death may claim
Increase of Honor, and his Active Name
In War, among my other Titles lay.
How many years this Sword shall take away
From Fabius? Yet he dares, but let him dare;
I Will make, Me shall no more in Arms appear.
This spoke aloud, His Troops with furious Speed,
He leads on, and mounted on His Steed,
Sometimes with His Right Hand provokes His Foes;
Sometimes upbraids them; then, at Distance, throws
A Dart, insulting in His Armie's Sight,
Showing the Image of a future Fight.
So Thetis Achilles.
Son, in the Dardanian Field,
Bore his Vulcanian Arms, and in his Shield,
Expressed the Earth, and Heaven, and 's Mother curled
With Waves; and, in that Figure, all the World.
But Fabius, careful to delay, sits still,
And his vain Fury, on a lofty Hill,
Beholding, checks his proud insulting Mind,
And tires his furious Threats, while he declined
The Fight. So when by Night a Shepherd keeps
His Flocks in fenced Folds, and safely sleeps,
The hungry Wolves fierce Howlings round about,
Straight raise, and gnaw the Fence that keeps them out.
The Libyans Design, thus rendered vain,
Thence with his Army, through the Appulian Plain,
He slowly marched; and, sometimes, closely sat,
Concealed in Valleys, to precipitate,
His following Fo, or try, if He might be
Surpised, unwarily, by Policy.
Sometimes by secret Ways, He steals by Night,
And then Retreats in a pretended Fright.
Then from his Camp, full of rich Plunder goes,
And prodigally thus invites his Foes.
So, with innumerable turnings through
Maeonian Plains, does famed Maeander flow.
Nothing that Fraud can do, is left untried.
He trurns over all, and all his Thoughts applied,
To various Attempts. As when the Sun
Shining on Water, by Reflection,
Leaps on the Houses tops, and glistering sheds
In constant Rays, and dancing Shadows spreads
Upon the Roofs. Now mad with Grief, alone,
Thus to His Sacred Rage He makes his Moan.
If He, at first, Our Enemy had been,
The Names of Trebia, and of Thrasimen
Had never been known. Nor had they given to Us
New Titles, nor had stained Erydanus,
Troubled with bloody Waves, the frighted Sea.
But he, while we are tired with his Delay,
And he contains himself, has found a new
Strange Way to Victory. How often, in Show
Of meeting Us, has he Our Plots overthrown,
With Judgment, and Our Stratagems undone?
Thus to Himself; when the Shrill Trumpets Sound,
Midnight Proclaimed: but when the third watch, round
The Camp, new Sentinels had called to stand,
He turns his Course, and leaving Daunus Land
Behind, to the Campanian Coasts his Way
He takes, well known, as greedy after Prey.
Here, when he entered the Falernian Fields,
(That Land is Rich, and constant Profit yields
To the laborious Swains) he straitway throws
His Hostile Flames, among the fruitful Boughs.
But here, Lya^us, though great Actions be
Our Theme, the Mention of Thine Honor We
Must not pass by in Silence: but Record
Thy Praise, who do that Sacred Juice afford;
Whose Vines, with Nectar swelled, a Nobler Name,
Then the Falernian Press, can never claim.
Falernus old, in better Times, did Plow
The Massick Hills (they then no Swords did know)
The Vine-Leavs then, within the naked Field,
Did not, with swelling Grapes, green Shadows yield:
Nor knew they how to mix Lyaeus Blood
Among their Cups; but in some Crystal Flood,
Or Spring, their Thirst allai'd. An happy Hour
Thither Lyaeus, going to the Shore
Of Calpe, and the Bounds of Day, a Guest
Did bring. Nor did the Deity detest
A low, poor Cottage; but he enters, and
The smoaky Room, and Table, that did stand
Before the Chimney (as the Custom was
Of that poor Age, receive him. But, Alas,
The Host, whose cheerful Looks his Joy expressed
Did not perceive a God was then his Guest;
And yet, as his Forefathers used to do,
Spared not his Age, from running to, and fro;
Most kindly busy: till his choicest Cheer
He brought: there Cornels in neat Baskets; here
Fresh, from his watery Hort-yards, Juicy Fruits
Served in: then Hony-Combs, and Milk he puts,
As Dainties, among the rest; and, all the while,
Nothing of Blood the Table does defile:
But, Ceres Gifts brought in, he does compose
The Fire, into the midst whereof he throws,
His Sacrifice. Pleased with the Old Man's Care,
The God resolved, his Liquour should be there;
When suddenly ('t is very strange to tell)
The Cups of Beech with Wine begin to swell,
As the Reward of his poor Entertain.
The Milk-Pail too with Blushing Wine began
To overflow: and from an hollow Oak,
Into a Goblet, the sweet Liquour broke
From the well-sented Grapes: Here, take, and store
Thy self ( Lyaeus said) with what before
Thou did not know: but which Falernus Name,
For Nobler Vines, hereafter shall proclaim.
With that the God himself revealed, and round,
With Purple Rays, an Ivy Garland Crowned
His shining Front, about his Neck he flung;
His Locks, in his Right Hand a Tankard hung,
And, fallen from his Thyrsus, Vines about
The Table, with Nisaean Branches, sprout.
Nor could Falernus with the pleasant Taste
Contend, when some few Cups about had past.
Now with his Foot, or stamm'ring Tongue, he makes
The God to laugh, while the strong Liquour shakes
His Brains, and he endeavors to make good
Return of Thanks, in Words scarce understood,
Till Sleep (which Bacchus still accompanies,
Wheree're he goes) composed his struggling Eyes.
But, when the rising Sun dispersed the Dew,
The Massick Swains, with Admiration, view
Their fields with vines, like groves, most richly crowned,
And, with the Sun, the Branches shining, round
The Hill, their Glory spread, and since that hour
Rich Tmolus, and Arvisian Cups, that pour
Ambrosian Liquour forth, and thy famed Field,
Fertile Methymna, to Falernus yield.
Through this, the Libyan (like a Fury) past
And all the Country round about, laid wast:
Incited by His Men, whose Swords pursued
Their thirst of Blood. While Fabius does delude
Their General: And now a mad Desire
Of fighting, the Ausonian Camp does fire;
All covet, in that Madness to descend
Into the Plain. My Muse, let us commend
The Man, whom Fate permitted to subdue
Both Armies, and their Fury overthrew.
If Me the Senate had believed to be
Of such hot Temper, and so Rash (said he)
Or that such Clamours, easily, my Mind
Could shake, they had not, when the State declined,
Given me the Conduct of this desperate War.
My Resolutions of a Battle are
Already fixed, it shall my Conquest be
To keep you safe (that urge so eagerly
Your Fate) against your Will: none of you all
By Fabius shall have Liberty to fall.
If weary of the Light, you now desire,
That the Ausonian Name with you Expire:
Or if it grieves you, that, at such a time,
No Place is rendered Famous, by the Crime
Of some new Mischief, or notorious Blow:
Recall Flaminius from the Shades below,
A Signal, by his late Temerity,
And Auspicies you have. Do ye not see
A Precipice, and your approaching Fate?
Consider; to the Ruin of the State,
One Victorie's enough for Hannibal.
Stay then, and understand your General;
When the wished Time shall come, that may require
Your Hands, then let those furious Words conspire
With Deeds; believe Me, it is an easy thing
To go to fight: should we now open fling
Our Ports, one Hour, you all into the Field
May pour: but they, to whom the Gods shall yield
A kind, and mild Aspect, as forth they go,
Shall have that Bliss alone to escape the Fo,
And safe return. The Libyan relyes
Upon His Fortune, and His Vessel flies
With a propitious Wind, and, till that Gale
Shall slack, and cease to fill his swelling Sail,
It must of Business be, and constant Care
To seek Delays. Fortune's Embraces are
Perpetual to none; see! how much less
The Tyrian Forces are: how they decrease
In Fame, since We declined the Fight. And We,
Among other things, for this may praised be
That they, who -- But it is better far, that I
Forbear more Words: You now the Enemy.
A Battle, and Pitcht-field require. Oh! may
This Confidence be such another Day,
Ye Gods! In the mean time, excluding all
Chances of greater Dangers, that may fall
Upon you, and My Country, pray let Me,
To the whole War, alone opposed be;
These Words their furious Arms, and Rage appease*
As when his calmer Brow the God of Seas
Lifts 'bove the troubled Waves, and views the Main,
As Lord, and is by it beheld again:
The raging Winds their cruel Murmurs cease,
Nor move the Wings upon their Foreheads: Peace
Is soon diffused over all the calmed Brine,
And, on the silent Shore, smooth Waters shine.
This by the Libyan's subtle Care descried,
Strait by the Poison of his Plots, he tried
Their Minds. For Fabius, as his Father's Heir,
Plowed a few Acres, which the Name did bear
Of Massicus, Renowned for Generous Vines:
These, to advance his mischeivous Designs
(Which, through the Camp, ambiguous Rumors spread)
From Fire, and Sword his spared: this Plot soon bred
Suspicion of the Quiet of that Place,
As if that He did privately embrace
A League to lengthen out the War. But all
The cunning Stratagems of Hannibal
The wise Dictatour saw, and understood.
But among Swords, and Trumpets, thought it good
To scorn their Envy: nor, the Wounds to shun
Of Fame, the Hazard of a Fight to run.
Till wandering up, and down, and often in vain,
Moving his Camp, now here, now there, to gain
Occasion to fight, the Libyan He
Enclosed, where Woods, and rocky Hills we see,
With his divided Troops. Here Him behind
The lofty The City Formiae in C^mpania, once inhabited by the L^str^gonians,
who were of the Anthropaephag^. Cajeta a Seaport on the same Coast.
Laestrigonian Rocks confined:
There, with its Moorish Grounds, Linternum was.
No use of Soldiers, or of Swords the place
Affords; but there, severest Famine all
The Plagues, that lost Sagunthus did befall,
Exacting, them oppressed, and Fate an End
Seemed to the Arms of Carthage to intend.
Now Sleep, all Things by Sea, and Land, did hide
With His gloomy Wings, and having laid aside
The Labors of the Day, the pleasing Rest,
Granted to men by Night, the World possessed.
But the Hannibal.
Sidonian General the Cares,
That then enflamed His Heart, and watchful Fears,
Robbed of the Benefits of Night; while He
Left His unquiet Bed, and suddenly
Covering his Shoulder with a Lyon's Skin,
That lately spread upon the Grass had been,
His Pallat, in the Field, to 's Mago.
Brother's Tent,
(From's Own not distant far) directly went.
He, not degenerate in Martial Rites,
On a Bull's Hide then slept, and, by the Night's
Great Blessing, eased His pensive Thoughts, and near
Fixed in the Earth, upright, his Fatal Spear,
On which His Helmet hung: upon the Ground
His Breast Plate, Sword, and Shield, about it round,
His Bow, and Balearick Sling. Not far
From these a Youthful Troop, all tried in War,
Lay sleeping on the Earth, and near at Hand
His Horse, caparison'd, does grazing stand.
His Entrance Mago wakes. Brother, (said He)
(With that takes up his Arms) What is it, that Thee
Thus stupifies? Then Mago rose, and all
His Troop, then lying on the Ground, does call
With Speed to Arms. Then Hannibal began;
Us Fabius, that so vigilant Old Man,
The sole Delay to Our Propitious Fates,
Thus indisposed by Night, exasperates
To Cares. You see how We encompassed are
With armed Bands, and how the Soldier,
Collected in a Ring, does Us invest,
But now (since Our Affairs are thus distressed)
Consider My Design. We have within
The Camp an Herd of Oxen, that have been
Plundered from all the Country round, and now
(As Custom is) march with the Army: to
The Horns, and Fronts of some of these, will I
Give a Command dry Twigs, and Sticks to ty;
Which fired, when once the Heat shall scattered be,
The Oxen, sensible of Pain, will flee,
And on their Necks the wandering Flames will bear
Over all the Hill: then, seized with sudden Fear,
Their Sentinels will from their Stations runs
And fear, that something more by Night is done.
If this you like, (Extreme Resolves delay
Refuse) Let Us do it said; He. With that away
They go to other Tents, where in the Field,
Upon the Ground, his Head upon his Shield,
Among Horses, M^n, and Spoils, that by his Hand
In Fight were taken* and with Slaughter stained,
Mighty Maraxes lay, and in his Sleep,
A dreadful Cry, as if engaged deep
In Fight, by Chance then gave, and felt about
With His trembling Hand to find his Weapons out,
And his tried Sword. Thus warring, Mago shakes
The Man; and, with his Spear inverted, wakes:
Captain, since now it is dark, thy Fury lay
Aside, reserve thy Valor for the Day;
With Policy we now must use the Night
For safe Retreat, and to conceal our Flight:
Into the Woods my Brother does intend
With kindled Boughs tied to the Horns, to send
The Oxen, where the Passes guarded be
By Hostile Bands, and so our Army free.
Let us be gone, and this Design shall be
A Document to Fabius, that we
With Policy contend. He makes no Stay,
But, joy'd at what He spoke, they haste away
To stout Acherra's Tent; who, satisfied
With little Rest, or Ease, had never tried
His Sleep to lengthen with the Night; but still
On Horseback, as perpetual Sentinel,
Served, and was wont to ease his weary Steed,
By dressing him, and always Bridled feed.
Now all their Weapons whet, and the dried Gore
Wipe from the Steel, and to their Swords restore
Their Sharpness: what the Fortune of the Place,
And Time required, and what their Duty was
Declared; advising, that whoever did go
As Chief in the Design, might not be Slow.
Then through the Camp the Word, and Orders, run,
All mutually instruct what is to be done;
And importune, they may no longer stay:
Their Fears inciting all to haste away,
While yet the dark, and silent Night might hide
Their Flight. Then, to the Boughs the Fire applied,
From their large Horns the Flames aspiring rose.
The Mischief, in an Instant, greater grows,
And the Oxen, shaking their tormented Heads,
Fan out a Pyramid of Fire that spreads
It Is Basis largely, and o'recomes the Smoke.
The Beasts, affrighted, through the Forest broke;
Then over the Hills, and, Rocky Mountains fly,
As they were mad, and as their Nostrils by
The Flames besieged are, they labor often
In vain to bellow, while over Cliffs, aloft,
Through Valleys Vulcan wanders, and never stands
At all; but, shining on the Neighboring Sands,
As manifold appears, as when at Sea
In a clear Night the Mariners survey
Innumerable Stars: Or when upon
Garganus Top, a Shepherd, sitting down,
Beneath him sees Calabrian Forests burn,
Which Husbandmen to fertile Pastures turn;
Over all the Hills the Flames with such a Face
Appear to fly; and they, whose Chance it was
To be the Guard, believed they Wandering fled,
None scattering them, and that they, Furious, fed
Within the Hills: some thought, that Jove had thrown,
From his incensed Hand, his Thunder down:
Others, that kindled Sulphur gave them Birth,
And, from her secret Caves, the unhappy Earth,
Condemned to greater Ruins, threw the Fire.
The Rutuli, affrighted, strait retire,
And from their Station fly. Then Hannibal,
With speedy Arms, possessed Himself of all
The Passes; and, advantaged by their Fears,
Insulting in the open Field, appears.
Yet vigilant, in Conduct of the War,
The wise Dictatour had advanced as far,
As Trebia, and behind him left the Sea
Of Tuscany; that it enough might be
For Hannibal, the Roman Arms to shun,
And Fabius: who after him had gone,
And with his Army close pursued his Flight,
But that some Sacred Rites did him invite
To his Paternal It was (as Dausquejus observes) an admirable Superstition in
the Romans, to prefer their private Sacrifices to the Public Dangers. But
their Religion not only obliged them to the Observation of them for the
Public; but it was Imp^ety to omit them in Private Families, which solemnized
them in peculiar Places. So, that, when the Gauls strictly besieged the
Capitol, a Youth of the Fabian Line, issuing out, marched through them; to the
Admiration, both of his Enemies, and Friends, and performed this Solemnity on
its appointed Day, on the Quirinal-Hill, chosen for that Purpose by his
Ancestors. See Live. ^ib. 5.
Gods. Then as to Rome
He took his Way, a valiant Youth, to whom
The chief Command, and Conduct of the War
Was given, He thus with Counsel does prepare.
If by the Fortune of my Actions, Thou
( Minutius) have not yet Learned to allow
Things warily performed, nor Words can Thee
Lead to true Honor, or invite to flee
Unworthy things: Thou have seen Hannibal
Besieged. 'Twas not the Soldier, nor all
Our Wings, nor our thronged Legions, (I Thee
Attest) performed it; but 'twas done by Me.
I, from the Camp, will not be long away,
Only permit, that to the Gods I pay
A solemn Sacrifice, and Him again
Shut up by Floods, or Hills (if you refrain
From fighting,) will I give into your Hands.
In the mean time believe Me (for it stands
With my Experience) in distressed Affairs
It Is Safety to sit still, though it appears
Honor to many (and may please them too,
As the most glorious Conquest, to subdue
An Enemy by fighting,) yet to Me
To keep You safe, it shall a Triumph be.
I a full Camp leave in thy Hands, and Men
Free from all Wounds: to give them such again
To Me, thy Glory, and Renown shall be.
The Libyan Hannibal.
Lion Thou, perhaps, shall see
These Works assaulting. Sometimes offering Prey
TO entice Thee ou^: sometimes to flee away,
As if He feared thine Arms; but all the while
He thinks on Fraud, and does with Fury boil.
It Is His Desire to fight; but let Thy Stay
Within the Camp take all those Hopes away.
Let this Advice suffice: but if Thy Mind,
And Courage, my Entreaty cannot bind:
I, as Dictatour, by a pious Right,
And strict Command, conjure Thee not to fight.
The Camp, by his Advice, thus fortified
He, Pious, left; and to the City hied.
But, now, behold! with prosperous Winds before
The Laestrigonian, and Cajetan Shore
A Libyan Navy plows the Sea, and comes
Into the Port, and all the Ocean foams
With numerous Oars: when, from their crystal Caves,
Affrighted with the Noise, above the Waves,
The Sea- Nymphs rise, and see the Shore possessed
By Hostile Ships, that then disturbed their Rest:
Then, full of Fear, with Speed, they all repair,
To those known Coasts, by them frequented, where
Teleboae, a Colony of Aetolians, infamous for their Robberies, who planted
themselves in the Island Capr^ae, on the Coast of Campania.
Teleboae's Kingdoms 'midst the Ocean rise,
And hollow Thrones, where mighty Proteus lies
Within a broken Cave, and largely laves
The adverse Rocks (a Prophet) with his Waves.
He (for he all things knew, and what they feared)
When changed in various Shapes he had appeared,
And scared them, hissing like a dreadful Snake,
Then roaring like a Lion fierce, thus spoke.
What is it, Nymphs, that brings you hither? tell;
Why does that Paleness in your Faces dwell?
Why seek ye, what hereafter shall befall
To know? To this the Eldest, then, of all
The Italian Nymphs, Cymodoce, replies.
Thou know, already, whence our Fears arise.
What does this Carthaginian Fleet, that thus
Deprives us of our Coast, portend to us?
Must the Rhaetean Empire cross the Seas
To other Gods? Or, Tyrian Seamen these
Our Ports possess? Or, from our Native Seat
Exiled, must we to Atlas now retreat;
And dwell in Calpe's farthest Caves? Then he,
Rehearsing things long past, ambiguously,
Thus undertakes to show ensuing Fate.
On Ida, when the Phrygian Heards-man sat,
And, calling back his straggling Bulls to feed
In fertile Meadows, with his Pipe of Reed,
The famed Dispute of Sacred Beauty heard:
Then Cupid, who solicitous appeared
TO observe the Time, the Snow-white Cygnets, joined,
To 's Mother's Chariot, drove: a Quiver shined
Upon his Shoulder, and a golden Bow,
And, with a nod to let his Mother know
There was no cause to fear, showed he had brought
That Quiver to her Aid, with Arrows fraught.
Some of his Brothers comb her Golden Hair
Upon her ^v'ry Forehead; others are
Employed. Her flowing Garments to compose
When sighing from her Lips, that like a Rose
Blushed, to her Sons this Language fell. You see
The Day, that must a faithful Witness be
Of your great Piety to Me. Oh! who
Would e're have this believed, so long as you
Are safe, that Venus Beauty, and her Face
Should questioned be? (For now what other Grace
Remains to us?) if my Artillery,
Infected with most pleasing Poison, I
To You committed have, by which you aw
Your Grand-sire at your Pleasure (who gives Law
To Heaven, and Earth) then by my Victory
Over Juno, and Minerva, let me see
Cyprus with Idumaean Palms abound,
And Paphos with an hundred Altars Crowned.
While to her winged Boys thus Venus talks,
A gentle Echo, as the Goddess walks,
Runs through the Grove: and then the Palla^.
warlike Maid
Her Aegis laid aside, her Hair displayed
(That lately by her Helmet had been pressed)
In Curls with Art, and neatly Combed, and dressed
And, Peace enthroned in her Serener Eyes,
With Speed unto the Place appointed hies.
Juno.
Saturnia enters on the other side,
After her Brother's Bed, resolving I Would
The Trojan's Judgment, and Disdain to bear.
Last, Venus.
Cytherea, smiling, does appear,
And through the Grove, and Caves, within the (...)
Sheds fragrant Odours from her Sacred Locks.
Nor could the Judge endure to keep his Place:
But, dazzled by the Beauty of her Face,
Feared only, lest he should appear to her
To doubt. The vanquished Goddesses transfer
Fierce Wars beyond the Seas, and Troy was soon,
With her unhappy Judge, quite overthrown.
Pious Aeneas then by Sea, and Land
Tossed up, and down, in Latium takes his Stand,
With his Dardanian Gods: while Whales within
The Ocean shall swim, and Stars shall shine
In Heaven, and Phoebus from the Indian Main
Shall rise, so long his Progeny shall reign.
No Bounds of Time their Rule shall terminate:
But you, my Daughters, while the Thread of Fate
Does run, the Dangerous Sands of An Island near to Brundusium.
Sasson flee.
We Aufidus, swelled high with Blood, shall see
Driving his purple Waves into the Main:
And you, Aetolian Shades, shall, once again,
Fight with the Teucri, in that Field, so long
Ago condemned by an The Sibylline; which had foretold, that the Romans should
receive a great Loss upon the Banks of Aufidus.
Immortal Song.
Then Punick Darts the Roman Walls shall shake,
And Hasdrubal See the fifteenth Book.
Metaurus Flood shall make
To shine with Slaughter. And then He, that was
So secretly begot, by Jove's Scipio Africanus. See the thirteenth Book.
Embrace,
With a severe Revenge shall expiate,
At once his Uncle's, and His Father's Fate,
Then shall he fill with Flames Eliza's Shore,
And force the Libyan, tormenting sore
The Bowels of Italy, to hasten Home,
And Him in His own Country overcome.
Carthage in Arms shall yield to Him, and He
Shall from the Name of Africa Famous be.
From Him Scipio Emilianns.
another shall arise, by whom
The third fierce War shall be subdued, and Rome
See him Triumphant, after Byrsa's Fall,
Bring Libya's Ashes to the Capitol.
While He the Secrets of the Gods detects;
Thus in his Cave, Min^tius rejects
Both Fabius, and his Counsel, and, with Rage
Possessed, the Fo endeavors to engage:
Nor was the Libyan wanting to foment,
And feed his Fury. But, with an Intent
TO entice him, to embrace a greater Fight,
With little Loss, sometimes dissembles Flight.
As when the Fish, allured by scattered Baits
In some clear Brook, forsake their deep Retreats,
And swimming near the Water's Surface shine,
The cunning Angler, with his twisted Line,
Soon drags them to the Shore. Now Fame, which lies
Among the Romans, like a Fury, flies.
Telling the Fo was turned, and Hannibal
In Flight his Safety found: an End of all
Their Miseries, did then at Hand appear,
If they to Overcome permitted were.
But, that their Valor had no other Guide,
The one, that did sad Punishments provide
For such, as were victorious against his Will.
That He within the Camp would shut them still,
And give Command to sheath their Swords again,
That so he might a just Account maintain
In Arms, and Soldiers give a Reason, why
They dare to overcome the Enemy.
The Vulgar murmr thus: and Juno fires
The Senate's Minds with Envy, and Desires
Of Popular Air. Then, madly, they decree
Things not to be believed, and such as be
The Wish of Hannibal: such, as they soon,
With too great Danger, wish they never had done.
For now the Army is divided, and
Minutius, conspiring with some other Hot Spirits of the Army, accusing Fabius
to the People of Cowardice, and Sloth, obtained by their Suffrage, to be made
equal with him in Commission, and to have Alternate Command, whence this Loss
ensued. Live. lib. 22.
Minutius shares with Fabius in Command.
The old Dictatour, free from Passion, saw,
And feared the Ills, that rash Resolv might draw
Upon his Country: therefore, full of Care,
And Pensive, to the Camp returned, and there
Sharing his Social Forces, all the Hills,
Adjoining, with his Neighboring Eagles fills;
And there, at once, observes the Libyan's Power,
And Roman Army, from a lofty Tower.
While Mad to perish, or destroy his Foes
With sudden Fury rash Minutius throws
The Ramparts down: and when, on either Side,
Here the Dictatour, there the Libyan spied
Him marching forth; their Minds with different Care,
This to destroy, that to preserve him, are
Inflamed. But He to Arm with Speed commands;
And leads, from all Defense, his hasty Bands.
The Libyan Captain pours into the Fight
His Forces all, and thus does them incite:
While the Dictatour(Soldiers) is away,
Go on, and bravely use this fighting Day.
Behold! the Gods now to your Wishes yield,
Offering a Battle in an open Field.
And, since this Opportunity is gained,
Your Weapons cleanse, that have so long been stain
With Rust, and satisfy your Swords with Blood.
This Fabius observing, as he stood
Viewing the Champagn Ground, (And Thou, Alas!
Oh Rome! did sadly Learn what Fabius was
In so great Danger) this rash Boy (said he)
Now my Colleague in Arms, shall punished be,
As he deserves, that through so blind, and mad
A Vote, with so much Danger, durst invade
Our Fasces. Peevish Tribes! how slippery are
Your Pulpits, see? with what vain men the Bar,
And Forum 's thronged! Now let the Offices
Of War by them be equaled, and Decrees
Ordain the Sun to yield unto the Night.
Their Weakness, the rash Error of this Fight
Shall quickly rue, and all the Wrongs, which they,
Upon our common Parent, bring this Day.
With that he shook his Spear, and, as a Flood
Of Tears gushed from his Eyes, with Tyrian Blood
(Said he) my Son, these sad Complaints must be
Suppressed by Thee. Shall I endure to see
A Citizen destroyed before my Face,
And these our Troops? Or, while I am in place,
Permit the Libyan conquer? If my Heart
Were such, they would seem less Guilty, that did part,
And equal us: but this, my Son, believe,
And from thy aged Sire, as Truth, receive;
To be incensed, against our Country, is
A Sin so great, that none, to the Abyss
Of Hell, can with a fowler Crime descend.
This our Forefathers did to us commend;
And thus how good, how great, exiled from home,
And banished long, did thou ( Camillus) come
Into the Capitol! How many there
By thy condemned Hand then slaughtered were!
Had not thy Thoughts been calm, or had thy Mind
At all, to Anger, or Revenge, inclined
Aeneas Throne had changed its Place, and thou
Great Rome had not, upon thy Hills, as now
Stood Head of all the World. Therefore, my Son,
Let all Displeasure, for my Sake, be gone;
Let Us have to aid them with our Social Arms.
With that, the Trumpet's intermixed Alarms
Sound through the Camp; and all with such a Force
Rush on, they bruise each other in their Course.
First, the Dictatour all Things, that withstand
His Speed, the Gates, and Bars, with his own Hand
O'returns, and to the Battle breaks his Way.
With such a Fury Winds contend at Sea,
When Boreas sally's from the Odrysian Coast,
And, with like Rage, by Africus is crossed:
The Sea's distracted, and to several Shores
Each drives the Billows; while the Tempest roars,
And the whole Ocean, wheresoever it goes,
Obeys now here, now there, with furious Throws.
So much of Honor could not rise from all
Phoenicia subdued, or Byrsa's Fall;
As this great Injury, which first did spring
From private Envy, did of Glory bring
To the Dictatour. For, by's Conduct there,
At once, He all those Difficulties, Fear,
Envy, and Passion, with malicious Fame,
And Hannibal, and Fortune, overcame.
When Hannibal perceived them run amain,
Down from the lofty Camp, into the Plain,
His Courage trembled; and, with Sighs, soon all
His former Hopes of their Destruction fall.
For He the Romans had encompassed round,
With numerous Bands; not doubting to confound
Them, so enclosed, by Darts, that on them fall
On every side. And, then, their General
Already, grieved for that unhappy Fight,
The Stygian Waters, and eternal Night,
Had entered in his Thoughts, with sad Despair:
Ashamed to hope, that Fabius would be there*
To his Assistance. But two valiant Wings,
Circling the Battle, the Dictatour brings
To His Relief, and then, encompassing
The Libyan Army with a larger Ring,
Their utmost Troops behind invests; and those,
That late besieged the Romans, does enclose.
Alcides made him Higher rise in Fight,
And to appear much Greater to their Sight:
His lofty Crest, ('t was strange) ejecting Rays,
In active Vigor soon it self displaies
Through all his Members; while He Jav'lins throws,
And storms, with Clouds of wounding Darts, his Foes.
(Such, before he was Old, in Prime of all
His years, in War the Nestor*
Pylian General
Appeared.) Then, rushing on, he Turis sent
To Hell, and stout Maleo, confident
To Cope with any; who was known to Fame,
And by his Spear had gained himself a Name.
Then Butes, Maris, Arses, Garadus,
Long-hair'd Adherbes, and conspicuous
For Height, 'bove both the Armies, Tylis dies;
Who, on the highest Fortress, could surprise
The Battlements. These, at a Distance, all,
With Darts; but Saph'arus, and Monesus, fall
By 's Sword: with them, Morinus, as he sounds
To Fight with his shrill Brass, he deadly wounds
On the Right Cheek; and, by the dying Blast
Expelled, the Blood quite through the Trumpet past,
From's wounded Jaws, Idmon, the next to him;
Who, used over Nafamonian Sands to swim,
Died by his Lance: for slipping, where he stood,
Upon a Place, o'reflown with reaking Blood,
Endeav'ring to recover's Feet again,
And shun that slippery Place, Fabius, amain,
Upon him spurs his Horse, and to the Ground
Nails him with his Spear; which, left within the Wound,
Though trembling with his Motion, firmly held
His Carcass down, and fixed it to the Field.
Honor's Example likewise fires the Mind
Of Sylla, Crassus, and Metellus, joined
With Fannius, and Torquatus, strong in Fight
Above the rest: all these, in Fabius Sight,
Engage amid'st their Foes. But here, in have
Retiring to avoid a Stone was cast
Against him, Bibulus, unhappy, on
An Heap of slaughtered Friends fell backward down,
And where his Brigandine was gaping wide,
Unhasp'd by frequent Blows, quite through his Side
A Weapon's point, that in a Body stuck
By Chance, upright into his Bowels struck.
Sad Fate! he would 'scap'd Marmarick Troops, and all
The Garamantian Darts, that he might fall
By a neglected Lance, that was not thrown,
With an intent to wound him. Breathless down
He tumbled, horrid Paleness strait involved
His youthful beauteous Face, and Life dissolved,
Through all his Limbs; his Arms hang loose, and Sleep,
With Stygian Darkness, through his Eyes does creep.
From Tyrian Sydon, sprang of Cadmus Race,
Excited by his Nephews, Cleadas
Came to the War, and, proud of the Command,
Among his Aids, a brave Eoan Band
Of Archers led: rich Gems all over deck
His golden Cask, and Chains about his Neck:
Such, when late washed, and from the Ocean raised
The Lucifer.
Usher of the Morn, by Venus praised,
Contends with other Stars. In Purple He,
His Horse in Purple, all his Company
In Tyrian Purple shined. He, as he wheeled
His Steed to the Right, and Left, about the Field,
Deluding Brutus, eager of the Fight,
That, by his Hand, a Name so famous might
Extinguished be, an Arrow, Parthian-like,
Backward lets fly, nor does it vainly strike;
But in his Armor-bearer Casca's Chin
It sticks, and, penetrating deeply in,
The Point, obliquely wounding, upward struck
To his moist Pallet, and within it stuck.
But Brutus troubled at his Friend's sad Fate,
Him, that so often, did thus disseminate,
In seeming Flight, his cruel Shafts, no more
Sought with his nimble Courser, as before,
To overtake: but, his whole Fury to
His Lance committing, the swift Weapon threw
From the loose Thong, and where the Chains divest,
Loosened by running to, and fro, his Breast,
Into the upper Part, a deadly Wound
The fixed A Spear made of that Wood.
Cornel gave: down to the Ground
He dying sinks, and in his Fall lets go,
From his right Hand the Shaft, his Left the Bow.
But, with a better Fate, Charmelus (who
Soracte's Honor was) did then pursue
The Fight; for he his Sword with Blood had stained
Of Bragad', who over King of Mauritania.
Iuba's People reigned:
Zeusis (who of Spartan Phalanthus Race;
A Race implacable, derived was,
And whom his Mother, a Phoenician, bare
TO a famed Laconian) by him likewise there
Was slain. But Nampsicus, not daring to
Appear in Fight, before so fierce a Fo,
Nor yet, as Fear persuaded, thence to fly,
Crep'd through the Bushes to an Oak, that nigh
Did stand, and climbing to the Top, among
The shady Leaves concealed himself, and hung
Upon the Boughs, that trembled with his Weight,
Him begging, earnestly, to shun his Fate,
And leaping, fearful, often from Bough to Bough,
Furious Carmelus with a Pike quite through
The Body pierced (the Fowler so in Groves
His Lime-Twigs laid, when as his Mark removes
In silence strives, on tallest Trees with Aim
To strike, with his increasing Shaft, his Game)
His Life, and Blood gush out, and, as it flows,
The pallid Corpse hangs on the bending Boughs.
The Romans, now the Tyrians put to Flight,
Closely pursue. When of stupendous Height
Upon a sudden, a most dreadful Moor
Breaks forth, his Limbs black as the Arms he wore.
Their lofty Mains his sooty Horses rear,
And all his Chariot, with new Arts, that Fear
Might move, adorned, like to their Backs appears.
Like Plumes upon his Crest, like Robes he wears:
As when of old, to his Infernal Bed
The dreadful King of Night eternal, fled,
And, in his Stygian Chariot, bore away
From Aetna's Fields, ravished Proserpina.
But Cato, then a Youth, and the Renown
Of the high Walls of that Tusculum, built by Telegen.
Circean Town
Where famed Laertes Nephew did command:
Although he saw the Latins make a stand,
All troubled in the Front, undaunted, He
Spurs on his starting Steed, that sought to flee
His Way, affrighted at the Stygian Shade.
With that, he quits his Back, and does invade
On foot, the Chariot, and the flying Moor,
Behind: when strait his Sword, that trembled over
His Neck, his Whip, and Reins, together fall,
And, suddenly, an horrid Paleness all
His Limbs, through loss of Blood, does overspread;
When Cato, with his Sword, lops off his Head,
And bears it, as a Trophy, on his Lance.
But, now, the fierce Dictatour does advance,
And, through a Globe with Slaughter breaking, where
(A woeful Sight!) the Minutius.
General did appear,
Sinking through many Wounds, and loss of Blood,
And poorly begging Quarter; with a Flood
Of Tears, lamenting to behold him so,
Protects him, with his Target, from the Fo:
And, calling to his Son; My valiant Boy
(Said He) now let thy Valor wipe away
This Stain: let us to Hannibal return,
(For his great Kindness, that he did not burn,
And wast our Fields) a due, and just Reward.
The Youth, with these Encouragements he heard,
And's Father's Arts rejoiced, the Troops, that round
The Libyan stood, constrained to quit their Ground
With His Conquering Sword, and cleared the Field again;
While Hannibal was forced to quit the Plain.
As when a greedy Wolf, with Hunger pressed,
The Shepherd stepped aside, or taking Rest,
Has seized a Lamb, and holds it, Trembling, fast
Between his Jaws: if then the Shepherd haste,
Hearing it bleat, to meet him in the Way;
The Wolf, now fearful for himself, his Prey,
Panting between his Teeth, lets fall again,
And hungry to the Woods retreats amain.
At length the Stygian Darkness, that was spread
Over all the Earth, by a rude Tempest, fled.
Their Hands were weary, and they all confess
They did not merit Safety; with Excess
Of sudden Joys their Minds distracted were:
Like such, that by some sudden Ruins are
Oppressed, when they are freed again, and Night
Retires, then wink, and fear to see the Light.
This done, his Army numbered in the Plain,
To 's Camp upon the Hills, with Joy, again
The old Dictato^r, makes a safe Retreat:
And then, as rescued from the Hand of Fate,
The Youth, loud Shouts raise to the Stars, and all
TO express their Joy with Emulation, call
Fabius their Safety, Fabius their Renown,
Fabius their common Father, and the Crown
Of all their Hopes. Then he, that lately shared
His Troops, to thank them with this Speech repaired
Most Pious Father, if it lawful be
That we complain, to Life restored by Thee,
Oh why did Thou permit us to divide
Our Camp, and Forces? Why did thou abide
So patient, so calm, those Arms to yield
To us, which thou alone art fit to weild?
Sinking beneath that Charge with loss of Blood,
We near the Shades Eternal lately stood.
Hither your Eagles, hither quickly bear
Your rescued Ensigns; Here Is our Country, here
In this one Breast the Citie's Walls abide!
And thou, Oh Hannibal, now, lay aside
Thy Frauds, and known Deceits, the War with (...)
By Fabius alone must managed be.
This said, when strait (a Reverend Sight it was)
A thousand Altars rise, of Turfs of Grass
Composed, and none or Meat, or Wine essai'd
To touch, before Devoutly they had prayed,
And on the Sacred Table, to the wise
Dictatour's Honor, paid a Sacrifice.
The End of the Seventh Book.
SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Eighth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
By Juno sent, to ease His present Cares,
The Goddess Anne, to Hannibal repairs:
By whose Advice, to Cannae He removes.
Elected by the People, Varro proves
A Fatal Consul, the Delays upbraids
Of Fabius: A List of all the Aids,
That with the Romans join. The Army goes
To Cannae: Fabius Counsel's to oppose
Rash Varro. What sad Prodigies foreshow
In Heaven, and Earth, the Romans Overthrow.
NOW Fabius, the first, that made them see
The flying Backs of Cadmus The Carthaginians.
Progeny,
Was by the Roman Camp, and Soldiers all,
Their common Parent styled: by Hannibal,
His only Fo. Impatient of Delay,
The Libyan raves. For that, to have a Day
Of Battle, the Dictatour's Death must be
Expected, and the Aid of Destiny
Was to be Wished: for while in Arms he stood,
While Fabius lived, to hope for Trojan Blood,
Was vain. For now the Soldiers brought again
Their Eagles, and, united, all remain
Under his sole Command. With him alone
He must again contend: and what upon
His Thoughts lay heaviest, was, that, by Delay,
He took the Fury of the War away;
And, by his Art of sitting still, had made
The Plenty of the Tyrian Army fade.
And, though an End, by Fighting, could not be
Obtained, or Battle, he his Enemy
Had by his Conduct lately overcome.
Besides, the boasting Celtae toward Home
Began to look: a People of a light,
Unconstant Mind: Fierce, at the first, in Fight;
But, if withstood, soon quelled. They grieved to see
A War should be maintained, from Slaughter free:
(A thing to them unknown) and while they stood
In Arms, their Hands were stiff, and dry from Blood.
To add to this, an inward Grief, and Wound
Of civil Envy, did his Thoughts confound;
For Hanno, thwarting all he did intend
At Home, would not permit the Senate send,
Hannibal, not able to obtain his Desire of Battle, (the Hopes of which had
till then kept his Army together) had Thoughts of returning into France (says
Livy, lib. 22.) if the Consuls, that succeeded Fabius, had used the same Arts
with him to avoid fighting. For Hannibal, strongly opposed at Home by Hanno's
Faction, had no Supplies thence: and, in Italy most of the Cities opposing him,
he could not find Provisions to sustain his Men; till the following Victory,
at Cannae, gave Him all, that He wanted.
To his Assistance, any Aids at all.
Torn with these Cares, and fearing now the Fall
Of his Affairs; Juno, who knew the Fate
Of Cannae, and with future things elate,
Him with fresh Hopes of Arms, and War inspires,
And fills his Thoughts, again, with mad Desires.
For The Sister of Dido.
Anna, called from the Laurentine Lakes,
In this mild Language her Instructions takes.
There is a Youth, in Blood allied to Thee,
Called Hannibal, and from our Belus he
His Noble Name derives: make Haste away,
And the rude Surges of his Cares allay;
Shake Fabius from his Thoughts, who is alone
The Stop, that Italie's not overthrown.
Fabius is now dismissed, with Varro he
Hereafter must contend; the War must be
With Varro waged. Let him not wanting prove
To Fate, but quickly all his Ensigns move:
I will be present; let him haste away
To the Iapygian Plains: there Trebia,
And Thrasimonus Fates shall meet again.
Anna a Neighbor to the Gods, that reign
In those chaste Woods, thus answers. It would be
Unjust in Me, should I delay (said She)
Your great Commands; but yet permit, I pray,
The Favors, to my ancient Country, may
With Caution be retained; and that the Will,
And Charge, of my dear Sister I fulfill.
Though Anna be esteemed Divine, among
The Latin Deities, yet Time with long
Ambages, turning, in Obscurity
Has drowned the Reason of Antiquity;
Why Temples the Ausonians should ordain
To Tyrian Powers: Or why, where Trojans reign,
Eliza's Sister should be there adored.
But, keeping close to Time, I will record
What ancient Fame reports; and, briefly, all
The Story tell, from its Original.
When Tyrian Dido, by her Trojan Guest,
Forsaken was, and all her Hopes suppressed:
Within a secret Place, in Haste, with Cares,
And Love, distract, a Funeral Pyle she rears;
Then takes the Sword (that fatal Gift) that by
Aeneas.
Her Husband fled was given, resolved to die:
When strait Hyarbas, whom before She had
Rejected, as a Lover, does invade
Her Kingdom, and his Arms, Victorious (while
Her Ashes yet were warm) fixed to the Pyle.
Who durst, while thus the Nomades fierce King
Prevailed, to their Distress, Assistance bring?
Battus, by Chance, the Reins of Chief Command
Over Cyrene, a City situate between the great Syrt, and Marcotis, from which
all that part of Libya is called Cyrenaica.
Cyrene, with a gentle Hand
Then held: this Battus was by Nature Kind,
And Humane Chances easily inclined
With Tears, to pity, and, at first, when Anne
A Suppliant before Him came, began
The fickle State of Kings to apprehend,
And to relieve her, did his Hand extend.
Here She two Harvests passed, but could no more
Enjoy the Aid of Battus, and that Store
His Bounty did afford: for then a Fame
Was spread, Pygmalion to her Ruin came
By Sea. She therefore from that Kingdom flies,
And (as if hated by the Deities,
And no less hateful to her self, that She
Her Sister's Death, did not accompany)
By fatal Tempests, on the Sea, was tossed,
Till, with torn Sails, to the Laurentine Coast,
She driven was, and, sadly Ship-wrack'd, there
A Stranger to the People, Soil, and Air,
A fearful Tyrian stood, on Latin ground.
When now behold Aeneas, having crowned
His Labors with a Kingdom, to the Place
By Chance, with young Iulus came: His Face
She quickly knew, and when he spied her there,
Her Eyes fixed on the Earth, and full of Fear,
Fallen prostrate at Iulus Feet, whose Eyes
O'reflow'd with Pity, helping her to rise,
To's House, he with a gentle Hand conveyed,
And when, with kind Reception, he would allayed
Her Fears of Danger, with a pensive Care,
Desired unhappy Dido's Fate to hear.
Then she, with Language fitted for the Time,
And Tears her Words protracting, thus to him
The Story told. Thou Goddess-born, alone,
Were the true Cause, my Sister, both her Throne
And Life enjoyed: her Death, and Funeral Fire
(Alas that I, in it, did not expire)
Can witness this: for when She could no more
Behold thy Face, sometimes upon the Shore
She sat, sometimes she stood, and, as her Eyes
Pursued the Winds, with loud, and mournful Cries
Aeneas called, and only begged, that she
Might in the Vessel bear thee Company.
Soon after, troubled in her Thoughts, again
She to her Marriage-Chamber runs amain,
Where, as she enters, she is seized with such
A sudden Trembling, that she dares not touch
Her Nuptial Bed: then, mad with her Embrace,
The starry Image of I^lus Face
She hugs, then Thine; on which, at length, she dwells
With fixed Eyes, and her sad Story tells
To Thee, and hopes an Answer to obtain.
But, when Love laid all Hopes aside, again
The House she quits, and flies unto the Shore,
Hoping the shifting Winds might Thee restore.
At length, fallacious Levity invites
Her, even to Magic Arts, and the dire Rites
Of the Massilian Nation to descend.
But Oh! What wicked Errors do attend
Such Prophets! while they Stygian Powers allure
From Hell, and promise to her Wounds a Cure.
What a sad Act did I, deceived the while,
Behold! She throws upon the horrid Pyle
All Monuments, and fatal Gifts by Thee
On her bestowed. With that thus lovingly
He interrupts her; By this Land I swear
(Which in my Wishes you did often hear)
By mild I^lus Head (to Her, and Thee
Once held so dear) I most unwillingly,
Often looking back, and troubled in my Mind,
Your Kingdom left. Nor had I then declined
My Marriage Bed, had I not threatened bin
By Mercury, who with his Hand Me in
The Cabine placed, and drove into the Sea,
With furious Winds, the flying Ship away.
But why (though all Advice is now too late)
Did you permit, at such a Time as that,
That She, without a Guard, in Love should be
So Furious? In broken Murmurs she
(Among her many Sighs) to this replies,
With trembling Lips. I then a Sacrifice
To Stygian Jove, and his Infernal Queen,
To try, if my poor Sister might have been
Eased in her Lovesick Mind, prepared, and to
The Altars, with all Diligence, I drew
The coal-black Lambs, with mine own Hand: for I,
The Night before, was filled with Horror, by
A Dream: for thrice my Sister called on you
With a loud Voice, thrice on Sychaeus; who,
Leaping for Joy, with a most cheerful Face
(I thought) appeared. But, while I strove to chase
These Fancies from my Mind, and, as the Day
Began, that what I saw, might prosper, pray
The Gods; She, Frantic, runs unto the Shore,
And on the silent Sands, where you before
Had stood, her frequent Kisses fixed, and pressed
Your Footsteps with a kind embracing Breast:
As Mothers, late deprived of their Sons,
Their Ashes hugg. From thence away she runs,
Like a rude Bacchinal) her Hair displayed,
To that high Pile, which she before had made,
Of a vast Bulk, from whence she might explore
All Carthage-City, with the Seas, and Shore.
Then putting on the Phrygian Robe, and Chain,
Enriched with Gems, when she to Mind, again,
Had called the Day, wherein she first had seen
These Presents, and the Banquets, that had been
At your Arrival made, and how the long
Labors of Troy you told, while on your Tongue,
With Pity, her still-listning Ear depends;
Then to the Port her weeping Eyes she bends;
And, Offering to the Gods, in Death, her Hair,
Thus speaks. Ye Gods of lasting Night! who are
By our approaching Death much Greater made,
Be Present, I beseech you! and my Shade,
Overcome with Love, and weary, now of Life,
Receive, with kind Aspect, Aeneas Wife,
And Venus Daughter; who to avenge the Guilt
Of my Sychaeus Death, these Towers have built
Of lofty Carthage: now the Shade to you
Of that great Body come. My Husband (who
Was famed for his kind Love) perhaps Me there
Expects, and would renew his former Care.
This said, the Sword (that fatal Sword!) which she
Thought a sure Pledge of Dardane Love to be,
Into her Breast she thrusts; her Servants, who
Beheld her, with sad Cries, and Shreeking, through
The Palace run. The Noise, unhappy, I
Receive, and, frighted to the Palace, fly.
Like one distracted, with my Hands, my Face
I tear, and strive to climb up to the Place.
Thrice, with that Sword, I thought my self to kill,
As often I, sounding, on my Sister fell.
But, when the Rumor of her Fate was spread
Through all the Neighboring Cities, thence I fled
To famed Cyrene, and, by Fate still crossed,
From thence upon your Coast, by Tempests tossed,
I now am cast. The Trojan Prince, inclined
To Tears at this, resolved to be more kind
To Her: and now all Sadness, Grief, and Care,
Was laid aside, and Anne no longer there
A Stranger seemed to be. But, when the Night
All things by Sea, and Land, had covered quite,
Her Sister Dido seemed with sad Aspect,
These Words to Her, then sleeping, to direct.
Can Thou (Oh Sister!) can Thou long endure
Within this Family (Oh too secure!)
TO indulge Thy self to Rest? And do not see
What dangers Thee surround? what Plots against Thee
Are laid? Or do Thou not, yet, understand
How fatal to Thy Kindred, and Thy Land
The Trojans are? So long as Spears above,
With Rapid Turning-round, the Stars shall move,
And with her Brother's Light the Moon shall shine,
Upon the Earth between the Trojan Line,
And Tyrians, there shall be no Peace: Arise,
Be gone from hence, Lavinia was the Daughter of King Latinus, whom Aeneas
married.
Lavinia's Jealousies
Now secret Plots contrive, and in her Mind
Something of Mischief against Thee is designed.
Beside (nor think that this is but a Dream)
Hard by, Numicus, with a gentle Stream,
From a small Fountain, through a Valley flows:
Have quickly thither, and Thyself dispose
To Safety; there the Nymphs, with Joy, shall Thee
Receive into the Flood, and Thou shall be,
In Italy, Eternally Adored
A Goddess. And, as Dido spoke that Word,
She vanished into Air. Anne, frighted by
These Prodigies, awakes; and instantly,
Through Fear, cold Sweat over all her Limbs is spread.
Then, clad with a thin Garment, from her Bed
She leaps, and through a Window, that was low,
Into the open Fields does, speedy, go:
Until Numicus in his sandy Waves
Received, and hid her in his Crystal Caves.
Now, when through all the World its Beams the Day
Had spread, and in the Trojan Chambers they
The Tyrian Lady missed, with Cries through all
The Latian Fields they run, and Anna call.
At length Her Footsteps to the Neighboring Flood
They follow, and, as there they Wondering stood,
The River from his Chanel strait expelled
The Stream, and in the Bottom they beheld
Among the Coerulean Sisters, Anne, who broke
Silence, and to the Trojans kindly spoke.
Since that, when first the Year begins, is She
Divinely worshipped through all Italy.
When to this Fight that did so fatal prove
To Italy, the spightfull Wife of Jove
Had Her instructed, in her Chariot, light,
Up to the Stars again she takes her Flight,
Hoping full Draughts of Trojan Blood she may
At length receive. The Lesser to obey
The greater Goddess hasts, and strait to all,
Besides, unseen, repairs to Hannibal.
Sequestered from all Company, alone
She finds Him, sadly ruminating on
The dubious Event of His Affairs,
And War, with anxious Sighs; to ease His Cares
With this kind Language She salutes Him. Why
(Most Mighty King of Cadmus Progeny)
Do Thou persist to vex Thy self with Care?
Know, that the angry Gods appeased are
To Thee: and now an Eye of Favor cast
On the Agenorides. Away, make haste;
Draw Thy Marmarick Forces out to fight.
The Fasces now are changed, and Fabius quite,
By a Decree of Senate, now has laid
The War, and Arms, aside: it may be said,
With a Flaminius Thou have now to do.
Me the great Wife of Jove (nor doubt it True)
To Thee has sent, I, in the Oenotrian Land
Religiously adored, a Goddess stand,
Sprang from Your Belus Blood. Then quickly go,
And all the Thunder of War's Fury throw,
Where high Garganus does it self display
Through I^pygian Fields unto the Sea;
The Place is not far distant, thither all
Thy Ensigns bear; that Rome, at length, may fall.
This Victory shall Libya suffice.
This said, into the Clouds again She flies.
By these Assurances, of promised Praise,
Does Hannibal His Thoughts dejected raise:
Great Nymph (said He) the Glory of Our Line;
Then whom by Us no Goddess more Divine
Is held! most happy with such Tidings fraught!
Thee (after I victoriously have fought)
At Carthage, in a Marble Temple, I
Will place, and, in her Statue, Dido, nigh
To Thee, shall be adored. This said, He then,
Full of glad Thoughts, thus animates his Men.
Now all your tedious Cares, your Sense of ill,
And slow-tormenting Pains of sitting-still
(My Soldiers) lay aside. We have appeased
The Wrath of Heaven, the Gods with Us are pleased.
Hence is it, that I Fabius can declare
Discharged of his Command: the Fasces are
In other Hands. Now let Me see those great,
And valiant Acts, which often, with so much Heat,
You promised, when excluded from the Fight.
Behold! a Libyan Deity, this Night,
Has promised greater things, then We have done.
Then pull Your Ensigns up, let Us march on
After the Goddess, and that Land invade,
That, by the Name of Diomed, was made
Most fatal to the Phrygians. While they,
Encouraged thus, to Arpos marched away,
Varro, by stolen Plebeian Voices made
A Consul, who the The Pulpit, wherein stood such, as spoke to the People in
their Assemblies^
Rostra did invade
With Tyranny, opens a spacious Gate
To Ruin, and draws on the Citie's Fate.
This Fellow, basely born, his Parent's Name
Unknown, into the The Pleading-Place.
Forum, Bawling, came
With an immodest Tongue, and made by Bribes,
And Rapine rich, humored the inconstant Tribes,
By railing at the Senate, and so far
Prevailed in Rome, then shaken by the War;
That He (by whom, had he with Victory
Returned, it had been Shame for Italy
To be preserved) of all Affairs the Weight
Assumed; sole Arbiter of her great Fate.
Him among the Fabii, and those Names renowned
In War, the Scipios, and Marcellus crowned
With Spoils to Jove, blind Suffrages (a Stain)
Placed in the The Roman Kalenders.
Fasti, while the Love of Gain,
And The Place where they Assembbled.
Mars's Field, a greater Mischief bred
For Cannae, then the Arms of Diomed.
He, as he was Seditious, busy still
To foment Envy, and devoid of Skill
To plead, so was he weak in Martial Arts,
And neither famed for Courage, nor for Parts
To manage such Affairs, hoped yet, among
The Valiant, to be honored for his Tongue,
And from the Rostra urges for a Fight.
When therefore to the People, full of Spite,
Varro was no sooner elected Consul, but he told the People, that the War had
been brought into Italy by the Nobility, and would be kept in the Bowels of it,
if the Fabii had the Command of their Armies. See Live. Book 16.
He had upbraided Fabius for Delay,
Against the Senate too this boasting Plea
He undertakes: A Compellation frequently used to the People by such as
flattered them.
Quirites! You to whom
Belongs the chief Command, to you I come,
Your Consul, for Commission now to Fight.
Shall I sit still, or, wandering over the Height
Of Hills, beneath me Garamantians see,
And parched Moors to share in Italy?
Or shall I use that Sword, which now I wear,
Given by your Suffrage. Good Dictatour, hear
What it is the Martial People now command.
It is their Will, that the Ausonian Land
Be eased of Libya's War, and of the Fo.
Do they to War precipitately go;
Who, having suffered much, now the third Year,
With saddest Miseries consumed appear?
Have then, take Arms, brave men; your sole Delay
To Triumph, is a little March. That Day,
Which first shows you the Fo, shall overthrow
The Senate and the Libyan War. Then go
With Speed; I, bound in Latian Fetters, through
The City Hannibal, in Fabius View,
Will lead. This boasting said, out at the Gates,
Rushing to Arms, he, strait, precipitates:
Like one, that unacquainted with the Arts
To guide a Chariot, from the Barriers starts;
Gives the full Reins with one, with to'ther Hand
The Whip imploys, while he does tottering stand
Unequal to the Steeds: the Axel-tree,
Pressed by the ill-turning Wheels, appears to be
On fire, and smoaks: the Chariot to, and fro,
Is tossed; with it the Reins, entangled, flow.
Paulus, (who then for Peace, and War, was joined
His Colleague) well perceived the State inclined
To Ruin, and, by his unhappy Sway,
Its Strength, and Glory quickly would decay.
But the unconstant Fury of the rude,
And troubled People, and a After Paulus Aemylius had subdued King P^rs^us, and
spoiled seventeen Cities in Illyrium, at his Return to Rome, the People accused
him of converting much of the Booty to his own use (as they did, a^terwards,
Scipio Africanus) since which time he never took any Public Employment, till
made Colleague with Varre.
Wound renewed
Fresh in his Memory, Complaints suppressed,
And kept his swelling Griefs within his Breast.
For when, in younger Years, he had subdued
Illyrium, the envious Multitude
Upon his Conquest foul Aspersions cast,
And, with unjust Reports, his Laurel blast.
Thence of the cruel People he did bear
Still in his Mind a Rev'rential Fear.
But, to the Gods allied, his Pedigree
From Heaven, by famed Progenitors, might be
Derived. His Chief, Amulius, could prove
Assaracus his Ancestour; he, Jove.
And none denied, who Him in Arms had seen,
That that His great Original had been.
To Him, as then he was about to take
The Field, and quit the Town, thus Fabius spoke.
If that thy greatest War thou do believe
To be with Hannibal, thou will deceive
Thy Country, Paulus (I am loath my Mind
To speak thus freely) but, Im'e sure, thou wilt find,
Within the Camp, worse Conflicts, and a Fo
More fierce, or I, in vain, have sought to know
Events of War so long. I lately heard
Him promise (and, if I the Ruins feared,
That we shall suffer, I could weary be
Of Life, and my old Age) so soon as He
Could see him, he would fight the prosperous Fo.
Oh Paulus, should the eager Libyan know
This Speech, how near would our Destruction be!
I do believe, that now the Enemy
Stands ready in the Plain, and hopes to find
Another Consul, of Flaminius Mind,
To fall into his Hands. What men will Thou
Provoke, mad Varro? Or, unskilful, how
Can thou, forthwith, their Camp, and Arms before
Discover? and, by thy Delays, explore,
How much the Customs of the Fo may Thee
Avail? How great his Magazine may be?
Or what the Place's Nature? Thou their kind
Of Weapons soon wilt know, and Fortune find
Standing on all their Points. Paulus, thy just
Resolves to all his devious Courses must
Opposed be: if it be just in him
TO afflict his Country, can it be a Crime
In Thee to save it? Hannibal is now
Straightened for Victuals: His Associates grow
Now weary of his Friendship, since the Heat
Of War's allai'd: here He finds no Retreat
To better Quarters: here no Cities are,
To whose Fidelity he can repair.
Nor can he here recrui^ his Youth again:
When Hannibal marched from Rhedanus, his Army consisted of eight and thirty
thousand Foot, and about eight thousand Horse: but, through the Difficulties
which he encountered in his Passage over the Alps, he scarce brought half of
them into Italy. Polyb. lib. 3. Livy affirms, scarce a third part.
Scarce a third part of all those men remain,
That with him from Iberus came: Oh then
Continue firm, and to our Wounds, again
The Medicine of a Cautious War apply.
If in the mean time The art invited by
Any propitious Air, and Heaven approve;
Near to thy better Fortune quickly move.
Paulus, with Sadness, briefly thus again
Answers. This Piety shall still remain
With me: thy Mind (unconquered General)
Against the Libyan I Will still bear. Withal,
I know there is such Reason to withold
From Fight, that Hannibal, now waxing old,
Through thy Delays, perceivs the War to be
Almost suppressed, and at a Stand: but see
The sad Displeasure! see the Wrath of Heaven!
One Consul (I believe) to Rome is given
To 'ther to Carthage: He draws with Him all
Affairs, and madly fears, that Rome should fall
By any other Hand, then by His own:
She, cruel, from the Tyrian Senate, none
Could more destructive choose: no Warlike Steed;
To carry Him against the Fo, has Speed
Enough. It grievs Him, that His March should be
Retarded, by the Night's Obscurity.
With Swords half drawn He marches, that no Stay,
To draw a Sword, His fighting may delay.
But ye Tarpeian Rocks, and Towers that be
Sacred to Jove, through him allied to Me!
And my thrice happy Countrie's Walls, which now
I standing leave, the Witness of my Vow!
Where e're the common Safety calls me, I
Will go, and greatest Dangers will defy;
But, if still deaf, to what I shall advise,
The Camp will fight, I shall no longer prize
The Enjoyment of my Sons, and dearest Home,
Nor, like to Varro, me shall wounded Rome
Returning see. Thus high in Discontent
The Generals, both, to the Army went.
The Libyan within the Aetolian Plains
(As by His Dream advised) encamped remains.
Neither had Italy e're sent a Force
Greater for Number, both of Foot, and Horse,
Into the Field: for then they feared the Fall
Both of the City, and the Nation; all
Varro having resolved to fight, wheresoever he met Hannibal, the People gave
him an excessive Liberty to raise men: so that he had a greater Army, then ever
the Romans levied before; to the number of eighty eight thousand men. See
Plutarch in Fabio.
Their Hopes upon one Battle did depend.
Therefore the Faun-got Rutuli did send,
Joined with Sicanian Arms, their Sacred Bands
Into the War. Those, that possess the Lands
Of Daunus, and Laurentine Palaces,
And famed Numicius Waters, joined with these.
From Castrum likewise, to the War, they came;
And Arde^a, once fatal to the Ardea, was a wealthy City of the Latins,
(distant from Rome eighteen Miles) when Aeneas entered Italy, Turnus was King of
it, who gave Battle to Aeneas, and was slain by him, Tarquimus Superbus
besieged this City, when his Son left the Camp, and posted to Rome, to ravish
Lucretia; which not only forced him to raise the Siege, but subverted his
Dominion over the Romans. See Live. lib. 1.
Name
Of Phrygians; and, Lavinum, where of old
(Built on a lofty Hill) they did behold
Great Juno's Temple; and, Collatia where
Chaste Brutus took his Birth: with those, that are
Wont to frequent Diana's cruel Diana's Grove near Aricia, a Town situate
behind the Alban Hill, upon the Via Appia. In this Grove Numa pretended his
Private Conference with the Nymph Egeria.
Grove;
And that the Mouth of the Tiber.
Tyrrhen River love.
They likewise, that in Almo's warmer Stream
Cherish Almo, a small Brook, that flows into Tiber; wherein, once a year, the
Image of Cybele was washed.
Cybele, to the Army came.
Thy Tybur too, Catyllus, mustered; and
Praeneste, built by Praenestus, the Son of Latinus, and Nephew to Ulysses, and
Circe: where there was a Temple Dedicated to Fortune, and famous for its
Oracles.
Praeneste, that upon an Hill does stand,
Sacred to Fortune; and Antemna, famed:
Before Crustumium, from the River named.
With the Labici, skilled to Plow, and those,
That dwell where now Imperial Tiber flows;
With Anyo's Neighbors, and the People, where
The Fields with cold Simbrivium watered are;
And the Aequicolae, for Tillage known.
Their Captain, Scaurus was; whose Chin the Down
Then newly covered: but his rising Worth
Began to future Times to set him forth.
These were not wont with Steel to point the Spear,
Or Quivers full of winged Shafts to bear;
Piles, and short Swords, they love: their Heads with Brass
Defended are, their Crests all else surpass.
But those, which Setia, that is reserved alone
For Bacchus Table, and The Velitrini, upon the Confid^nce of a Prophecy, that
told them, a Citizen of their City should one day obtain the Dominion over all
Italy, did very often contend with Rome: but were still worsted; until
Augustus, who was born there, obtaining the Empire, fulfilled the Prophecy.
Velitrae, known
By many Battles, from her Valley sent,
With such as Cora listed, and that went
From Signia, full of hurtful Wines; with those,
Where the black Fen of Satura o'reflows
The Pontine Level, with a noisome Flood;
Which, running through the Fields, all stained with Mud,
Vfens within his Chanel strait collects:
And with the Slime the Neighboring Sea infects,
Were under valiant Scaevola's Command;
Who, Great in's Ancestors, nor of that Hand
Unworthy held, whose honored Figure He,
Carved in his Target, wore: where they might see
The flaming Altars, 'midst the Tyrrhen Bands,
Now angry with himself, bold Mutius Scaevola, who, when Rome was besieged by
Tarquinius Superbus, and Porsenna, issued out of the City by night, resolving
to kill Porsenna, and passing, disguised, through the Guards, coming into his
Tent, not knowing the King, slew one of his Nobles, and finding immediately his
Error, in a Rage, burnt his Hand, for the Mistake. Live. lib. 1.
Mutius stands,
And Valor, in his Image, seemed to be
Turned into Rage: Porsenna, instantly,
Having escaped the Blow, to Arms returns,
While He his erring Hand, for Anger, burns.
Then, from the famed Circaean Hills, and from
Anxur (high-standing on a Rock) they come:
With those, that Plow the Hernick Stony Fields,
And fair Anagnia, that such Plenty yields
Of Wheat. But Sylla the Terentines, joined
With Privernates, led. Then, those, that shined
In their bright Arms, from Sora lately sent.
Next these, the Fabraterian People went,
And Scaptian Youth. Atina too was there,
From her cold Hill; and Suessa, worn with War:
And, from the Plough, Trusino, not to be
Esteemed, as weak. But those, that Lyris see,
Mixing his sulfurous Waters with the cold
Fibrenus, and, with silent Streams, by old
Arpinum glides; with the Venafrian Bands,
And him, that with the Larinates Hands
Brings his Auxiliaries, and the vast
Aquinum of her Men does quite exhaust,
Tullius to War, in brazen Arms, did bring:
A Noble Youth, that did from Tullus spring,
And of so great a Wit, that Fate ordained,
That He should give to the Ausonian Land
Marcus Tullius Cicero, The famous Orator.
One of his Race, that should be understood
Beyond the Indies, and their famous Flood
Of Ganges: whose great Voice the World should fill;
Who, by the Thunder of his Tongue, should still
The Noise of War; nor shall Posterity
Er'e hope the like, for Eloquence, to see.
But from Theramnean Blood, of Clausus, sprung,
Inimitable for ^rave Deeds, among
The Chief, was Vid. Lib. 15.
Nero: Him the Troops, that came
From Amiternum, and, which takes her Name
From Bactrians, Casperula, with all
From Foruli, and, which we Sacred call
To the Mother of the Cybele.
Gods, Reate, and
Nursia, that as besieged by Frosts does stand,
And Troops from Tetricus cold Rock, to the Field
Attend, all armed with Lances, and their Shield
Made, Globe-like, round: no Plumes their Helmets bear,
And their left Legs with This kind of Armor on the left Legs, was peculiar to
the Sabines, among the Italians; and Aetolians, among the Greeks.
Boots defended are.
These, as they Joyful marched, some Praises sung
To Thee, great Sanctus was the Father of Sabus.
Sanctus (for from Thee they sprung)
Some, Sabus, honor Thee, who first of all
Thy People, from Thy Name, did Sabines call.
But Curio, rough with 's scaly Coat of Mail,
And on his Helmet's Crest an Horses Tail,
Into the War so great Assistance brings;
That not the Raging Sea more numerous flings
Its foaming Billows up: nor Bands more light,
And Active, when She imitates a Fight,
Riding through numerous Troops, with Moon-like Shields,
Amazon.
The Warlike Maid leads through the Scythian Fields,
And makes Thermodoon, and the Earth, resound
The Noise. Here those, that in thy Stony Ground,
Numana, dwell, and those, that near the Shore
With flaming Altars, Juno, who had there a Temple.
Cupra, Thee adore,
Were to be seen. They likewise thither send,
Their Aids, who the Truentine Towers defend
By the adjoining River, and the Sun,
From their bright Targets, by Reflection,
At Distance, raised a bloody Light: and there
Ancon as rich in Purple did appear,
As are the Libyan, or Sidonian Looms.
Then, watered by Vomanus, Adria comes.
And, near to them, the Ensigns they behold
Of churlish Asculum, which (famed of old)
Vepicus, sprung from Saturn, built: Him, by
Her Charms, Phoebean Circe forced to fly,
Deprived of his own Turned into a Wood-pecker by Circe.
Figure through the Air,
With yellow Plumes. Once the Pelasgi there
Inhabited, and Aesis (as by Fame
We learn) their Ruler was, and left his Name
Unto the River, and his People all
Began Asili, from himself, to call.
Nor, coming from their hollow Hills, with worse
Supplies, did Vmbrian Swains the Camp enforce.
These Aesis, Sapis, and, with rapid Waves,
Rolled over lofty Rocks, Metaurus Laves:
Clitumnus too, that Bulls for Sacrifice
Washes in Sacred Streams; and Nar, that flies
Foaming to Tiber; and, whose Waters run
Ingloriously, Tinia, and Rubicon,
With Clavis, and which, from the Senones,
Was Senna called: but Tyber, 'midst of these,
With Banks unshaken, near the Imperial Walls,
Swells high, and thence into the Ocean falls.
Their Cities, Arna, and Mevania, rich
In spacious Meads, Hispellum, Narnia, which
Upon a steep, and rocky Hill does ly;
Inginum too, of old infected by
Moist Clouds; and, lying in an open Plain,
Fulginia, wanting Walls. Near these remain
A warlike People, Amerini named:
And Camers, near to them, for Arrows famed;
With wealthy Sarfina, renowned for Store
Of Milk; and the Tudertes, that adore
The God of War. These, a stout Race of Men,
Contemning Death, were led by Piso, then
A Youth, and there in such an Habit shined;
But equalling, by his sagacious Mind,
The Ancient, and in Policy his Years
Excelling, at the Armie's Head appears
In Parthian-painted Arms, and Golden Chain;
Whose Gems a Luster cast through all the Plain.
But then a Legion of Hetrurian Bands,
Complete, stout Galba (a great Name) commands:
From Cretan Minos He his Pedigree
Derived, and from Lustful- Pasiphae,
Silius, in this, agrees with Virgil, in his Bucolicks, that the Bull fled from
Pasiphae; till Daedalus made a Cow of Wood, where in the Qu. was enclosed, and
the Bull deluded.
So hated by the Bull; and from that Line
His Noble Ancestors in Order shine.
Then Cere chosen Bands, Cortona then
(Proud Tarcon's Family) send chosen Men;
With old Graviscae, Alsium, by thy Streams
Grecian Alesus, loved, and that, which seems
Besieged by a rude Plain, Fregellae: nor
Was Fesula (the Famed Interpreter
Of Thunder) wanting, with her Sacred Bands.
And, near to them, Clusinum Mustered stands,
Once a great Terror to the Walls of Rome;
When thou, Porsenna, Armed, did thither come,
And did endeavor to restore, in vain,
The expelled Tarquinii to the Throne again.
Then Luna, from her Snow-white Quarries, pressed
Her laboring Youth: Luna, before the rest,
Famed for her spacious Port; which can contain
Ships without Number, and shuts in the Main.
Not far from these, the Vetulonian Band
(The Glory once of the Maeonian Land)
Which first ordained twelve Fasces to precede
The Consuls; and, to strike a silent Dread,
As many Axes added: it was She,
That first adorned with polished Ivory
Triumphal Chairs: Her Nobles first arrayed
In Tyrian Purple, and that Trumpets made
Courage by them in Battle to inflame.
Next these the Nepesinian Cohorts came,
And Just Falisci; and, Flavinia, those,
That keep thy Fires. Near whom Sabaca goes,
In Fens abounding; and, that near thy Lake,
Ciminus, dwell; with them, that Sutrium take
For their Abode; and those, that to the Rites
Of Phoebus high Soracte often invites:
Caps of the Skins of Beasts their Heads defend;
Two Darts they carry, and their Spears commend
Before the Lycian Bows. These, all in War
Most expert: but the Marsian People are
Not only Valiant; but can likewise Charm
To sleep the banefull Adder, and disarm
The Viper of her Teeth, by Herbs, and Spells.
Anguitia first (as Fame the Story tells)
Oetes Race, those hurtful Simples showed,
And with her Touch, all Poison's Force subdued.
She from her Sphere could shake the Moon, and Floods
Stop with her Voice; and, calling down the Woods,
The Mountains naked make. But, full of Dread,
Who being vanquished by Apollo, in his Contention of Music, had his Skin
stripped over his Ears.
Marsyas, when he the Phrygian Creni fled
By Sea, unto that People gave his Name;
When, with a Lute, Apollo overcame
His shrill Mygdonian Flute. The Chief of all
Their Ci^ies they, from ancient Marus, call
Marruvium; and, for Corn in moister Fields,
More inward, Alba store of Apples yields.
The rest were little Towns obscure in Fame;
But in their Numbers greater, then their Name.
Among which, Pelignus, and cold Sulmo sent
Their Cohorts; nor, then these, less diligent
Were those of Cales, born, near them in Blood,
From Calais (as by Fame it is understood)
The Noble Founder of a City fair,
Whom Orithyia (ravished through the Air)
For Boreas nursed in Getick Caves. No less
Active in War, then these, Vestini press
Their Youth, inured to Hardship by the Chase
Of salvage Beasts. They likewise War embrace,
That in thy Towers, Fiscellus, dwell: and, now,
They also arm, that fertile Pinna mow;
And thy rich Meads, Avella, that so soon
Sprout up: and then in Emulation
Of the Frentani, the Marrucins drew
Corfinium's People, and Theate too.
All these, with Rustic Weapons armed for Fight,
Could, with their Slings, a Bird, in highest Flight,
Strike down: the Skins of Bears, about their Breast,
In Hunting killed, they wear. And now the rest,
That were for Wealth, or Ancestors renowned,
In all the Tract of the Campanian Ground,
Appear in Arms, or their Assistance send.
The Osci in their Neighboring Plains attend
The Arrival of the Generals: and there
Warm Sinuessa, and Vulturnum, were;
Whose River like a Torrent falls into
The Sea; and, whom her Amyclae, a City of the Sabines, having had frequent
false Alarms of their Enemies Approach, that they might be no more disturbed,
made a Law, That none should any more dare to give the Alarm. The Enemy coming,
no man daring to violate the Edict, the City was taken.
Silence overthrew,
Amyclae. Fundi, and Cajeta, where
Lamus was King. Thy People too were there,
The Bay of Cajeta.
Antiphates, that is by the Sea comprest.
And, which the rotten Fens, and Pools invest,
Linternum: and the Cumae, that of old,
Conscious of Fate, all future things foretold.
There was Nuceria, there was Gaurus, good
For Shipping; there, derived from Grecian Blood,
With many Soldiers was Parthenope,
With Dicarchenian Bands: and Alliphe,
And Where Marcellus gave Hannibal a notable Repulse.
Nola; to the Libyan hard to pass.
Slighted for Clanius, there Acerrae was:
There the Serrastes: there were to be seen
Mild Sarnus Riches, and the Troops had been
Listed in Phlegra, fat with Sulphur; and
Misenus, and the Ithacesian Band
Of Baius, burning with the Giants there vanquished, and buried by Hercules.
Giant's Breath.
Not Prochyte, nor, which Typhaeus Death
In sulfurous Flames, Inarime, beheld,
Nor ancient Telo's Stony Isle, this Field
Avoids. But thither does Calatia, from
Her little Walls, thither Surrentum come;
And, poor in Corn, Avella. But, of all
The Chief was Capua; that, too Prodigal
(Alas!) not knowing in Prosperity
To keep a Mean, was lost in Luxury.
These for the future War by Scipio formed;
He gave them Piles; and then with Iron armed
Their Breasts: from Home, (as was their Father's Wont)
They lighter Weapons, Shafts of Cornel, blunt,
Without an Head of Steel, but hardened by
The Fire, with Hurl-Bats, which they can let fly,
And, with a String, retire, as they invade
The Fo, and Axes for the Country made.
Nor was he wanting, 'midst them all, to show
Great Signs of future Praise. Sometimes He threw
An hardened Stake, or leaped a Trench to scale
A Wall, or, armed, by Swimming would prevail
Against impetuous Streams: these great, and bold
Examples of His Valor all behold.
Often, in the open Plain, with wondrous Speed
Would he outrun the spurred, and fleetest Steed:
Often, cross the Camp, would He a Javelin throw,
Or weighty Stone. He had a Martial Brow;
His Hair was soft, and gentle, which behind
Hung in long Tresses; His Aspect was kind,
And gentle; and His Eyes a pleasing Dread
With sparkling Rays, on the Beholders, shed.
The Samnites often rebelled against the Romans, and, after this Defeat,
discovered their ancient Enmity, by revolting to Hannibal.
Samnis was likewise there, not yet inclined
To Hannibal, yet keeping in her Mind
Her ancient Anger; Batulum, and those,
That dwell where Mucra by Liguria flows.
With them, that Bovianian Caves frequent,
Or Caudine Straits, and which Esernia sent,
Or Rufre; or, obscure Herdonia, from
Thy Fields, soon after Herdonia was burned by Hannibal, fearing it would
revolt to the Romans, and the chief Citizens slain, for having had Conference
with Fulvius. See Live. lib. 27.
wasted, armed come.
Alike in Courage, there, the Brutii stand,
With them from Lucane Hills, a lusty Band;
And Hirpine Youth, who, covered over with Hides
Of Beasts, and Darts, like Bristles by their Sides,
Are all by Hunting fed; and, ever, dwell
In Caves, and in a River Thirst expel,
And get their Sleep with Labor. Calaber,
And the Salentine Cohorts, added are
To them; near whom Brundusium does stand,
A famous Period to the Italian Land.
A Legion bold Cethegus there commands,
Of Social Aids, and intermingled Bands.
Now, from Leucosia's Rocks, the Soldiers show
Themselves, and from Picentian Pesto too,
And from Caryllae, that soon after fell
By Hannibal's dire Rage: with those, that dwell
Near Silarus, where Fame reports, the Flood
To turn to hardest Stone the drowned Wood:
He both the stout Salernian Fauchion, and
The unpolished Club, that, fitted to his Hand,
The strong Buxentian used, commends. While he
(As was the Custom of his Family)
His Arm barred to the Shoulder, joy'd to ride
A stubborn Horse, and in his hard Mouth tried
His Strength of Youth, by Wheeling to* and fro.
And you, ye wasted Nations of the Po,
Your Vows then by the Gods neglected, all
Rush into Arms, by Fate decreed to fall.
Placentia, ruined by the War, contends
With Mutina, and Where Virgil was born.
Mantua, that sends
Her Levies, sought Cremona to excel:
Famed Mantua, where the Thespian Sisters dwell;
Which, Emulous of Smyrna's Homer
Muse, is praised
For Audine Songs, and to the Stars is raised.
The next, by Athesis encompassed, went
Verona; and Faventia, diligent
Still to preserve the Pines, that Crown her Fields:
Vercellae; and Pellentia, that yields
Store of black Wool; and Ocnus Family,
Which against Turnus once assisted Thee,
Aeneas; and Bononia, that lies
Near little Rhene: with him, that laboring plies,
With ponderous Oars, the muddy Streams, that by
Ravenna flow, which among the Fens does ly.
Then, sprang, of old, from the Euganean Land,
( Antenor's Country) came a Trojan Band.
There Aquileia, with Venetian Arms,
Are eager for the Fight: there the Alarms
Of The Fo, the swift Ligurians attend;
And, scattered on the Rocks, Vageni send
Their hardy Nephews, there ordained to be
The Honor of the Libyan's Victory.
Brutus, in whom these People, all, repose
Their greatest Confidence, their Leader goes
Into the Field, and against the Enemy
Excites their Rage. A pleasant Gravity
Adorned his Forehead, and a serious Mind
With Valor, not to Cruelty inclined.
The unpleasant Praise of churlish Rigor He
Did not affect, or harsh Austerity,
Nor Glory by ^inister Courses sought.
To these three thousand expert Archers, brought
From flaming Aetna, the King Hieron.
Sicilian King,
Most faithful, adds: but Il^a did not bring
So many men; and yet She did afford
Her Cohorts, which, selected for the Sword,
And armed with Native Mettle, thither came:
They Varro's Zeal to fight would hardly blame,
Whoever so many Arms at once beheld.
Such Numbers raged through the Rhaetean Field;
When Troy the great Mycenae did invade,
And, when a thousand Ships their Anchors weighed,
And sailed through Hellespont. So soon as they
Arrived at Cannae, where the Ruins lay
Of an old City, they encamped, and there
Their most unhappy Ensigns fixed: nor were
The Gods then wanting to foreshew to all
Those Ruins, that soon after did befall.
The affrighted Soldiers see their Piles to burn,
The Turrets on the Rampires overturn,
And fall. Garganus, from a lofty Crown,
Trembling, the Woods, and Forests, tumbles down.
From his deep Bottom Aufidus began
Panting to roar: amidst the Ocean,
Remote Ceraunian Rocks with Flames affright
The trembling Mariners; and then, the Light
With sudden Stygian Darkness covered over,
Calabrian Sipus Gropes for Land, and Shore,
The Owl with fatal Houting often alarms
The Camp, even at the Gates; and Bees, in Swarms,
Like Clouds, involve the Eagles: in the Air
Comets, the Fall of Kings, with flaming Hair,
Shine fatally: and salvage Beasts by Night
Break through the Camp, and Works, and, in the sight
Of The frighted Soldiers, through the Neighboring field
Scatter the Limbs of the Sentinel they killed:
Deluded by the Image of their Fear,
From their dark Graves, the Ghosts of Gauls appear
To break: and then the high Tarpeian Rock,
As torn from its Foundation, often shook:
The Temples of the Gods with Streams of Blood
Were wet: Quirinus Statue, as it stood,
Wept largely: Allia, greater then before,
Swells higher then the Banks: the Alps no more
Stand still, nor Apennine, which Night, and Day,
Shook with vast Ruptures, and where Libya
Extended lies, even from the very Pole,
Against Italy, the flaming Meteors roll.
Such horrid Thunderclaps the Heavens above
Divide, that they detect the Face of Jove.
The Lemnian God his Lightning likewise threw
From Aetna, and, as broken Quarries flew
Up to the Clouds (as in the Giant's Wars)
Knocked his Phlaegraean Head against the Stars.
But, 'midst them all, as conscious of the Fight,
He looks, and Sense-distracted with the Fright,
With horrid Cries the Camp a Soldier fills,
And, panting, thus expressed the future Ills.
Spare us, ye cruel Gods! the Fields I see
Too little for the Heaps of Slaughter be.
Through thickest Ranks the Libyan Captain flies,
And His swift Chariot over Companies
Of Men, and Arms, drives on, and drags along
Their Limbs, and Ensigns: while the wind, with strong
Impetuous Blasts, a furious War does make
Against our Eyes, and Faces* From thy Lake
(Sad Thrasimen!) unmindfull of his Years,
In vain, Servilius, now reserved appears.
Whither! Oh whither, is it that Varro flies!
Oh Jove! among the Stones, see! Paulus lies,
The last great Hope of Rome's declining State:
These Ruins, Trebia, now, exceed thy Fate.
Behold, a Bridge is made of Bodies flain,
And silent Aufidus into the Main
Rolls mangled Corpse: over all the Plains I see
The Elephants insult with Victory.
Our Consul's Axes, and our Fasces, stained
With Blood, a Tyrian Lictor in his Hand,
After our Custom, bears. To Libya
The Pomp of Roman Triumph's born away.
Oh Grief! Yet this, ye Gods, that we behold,
Is your Command: while by congested Gold,
Torn from left Hands, victorious Carthage sees
Mago sent to Carthage with the Tidings of this Victory, carried with him a
Bushel (says Livy, others more) of Gold Rings, then worn only by Roman
Gentlemen.
The Measure of the Roman Miseries.
The End of the Eighth Book.
In Vacuas vitam senior disperserat auras.
At Solimus simul ense fodit praecordia et atrum
Sustentans vulnus, mananti sanguine signat
In cl^peo mandata Patris, fuge praelia Varro
Ac summi tegmen suspendit Cuspide teh
Defletumque super prostemit membra Pa^ente^.
Honoratissimo Domino Dno. Thomae Comiti Southampton; Baroni Wriothesley de
Tichfeild, Sum^o totius Angliae Thesaurario c Sanctioribus Regis Caroli 2^i.
Consilijs* atque Inclyti Ordinis Periscelidis Equiti etc. Tabula sum^a cum
observantia DDD.

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Ninth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Consul Paulus, as advised, declines
The Fight, forbidden by unhappy Signs.
Rash Varro urges for a Day. A Son,
In that sad Night, before the Day begun,
His Father, flying from the Libyan Side,
Unhappy kills; who bids him, as he died,
Forewarn the Romans to avoid the Fight:
His Son this Warning on his Shield does write,
And kills himself for Grief. The fatal Field
Is fought; the Romans miserably kill'd^
The Libyans have the Day. While before his Eyes
His Men are slain, the Coward Varro flies.
WHILE Italy, thus vexed with Prodigies,
The Signs (in vain) of future Ruin sees,
Discovered by the Gods, as if they might
Prove happy Omens of the following Fight;
The Consul, waking, spends the Night: and, now,
Throws in the Dark his Jav'lins; then, as slow,
Upbraids his Colleague; and, while yet 'twas Night,
Would have the Trumpets sound a Charge, and fight
The Libyans, no less eager to engage.
Urged by the adverse Fates, with sudden Rage,
Out from the Camp they sally, and begin
To Skirmish. For the Macae, that had bin
Dispersed, for Forage, through the Neighboring Plain,
A winged Shower of Shafts, like sudden Rain,
Pour on the Romans: and, before the rest,
Mancinus (who to be the first had pressed,
To dip in Hostile Blood his Weapon) died:
And with him many gallant Youth beside.
Nor yet, though Paulus, sadly, did declare,
How cross the Auspicies, and Entrails were,
Would Varro from the Battle have abstained,
It had anciently been a Custom among the Romans, where both the Consuls were
together, to command alternately, by Months; but Varro, and Paulus, had
otherwise agreed to command the Army by Alternate Days. Paulus, on his Day,
kept the Army from engaging; but soon as Varro took his turn, he, without
consulting his Colleague, immediately gave Battle to the Libyans.
Unless the Lot, by which they did command
The Camp, by Turns, had thwarted his Desire,
And forced the hasty Fates a while retire.
But yet, no longer, then a Day, could be
Between a thousand Deaths, and their Decree
Allowed. Into the Camp the Troops return
Again: while Paulus cease not to mourn,
Seeing the Reins of the next Day's Command
Were to be trusted in a frantic Hand;
And, that those Souls were, then, preserved in Vain
From Slaughter. For enraged, and mad again,
For that he had the Battle then delai'd,
Do Thou, thus now, Aemilius ( Varro said)
Thy Gratitude, and the Reward repay
Of that thy guilty Head? Or else have they
From Thee deserved such a base Return;
Who snatched Thee from the Laws, and threatening Urn?
Command them to surrender to the Fo
Their Arms, and Swords; or, when to fight they go,
Cut all their Right-Hands off. But you, whom I
Have often Weeping seen, commanded by
The Consul to retire, or shun the Fo,
No more expect the Signal, when you go
To fight, or slow Commands: let every Man
Be his own Leader, and go boldly on
In his own Ways. When first the Sun shall shed
His Morning Rays upon Garganus Head,
These Hands the Ports shall open for you all:
Then charge them quickly, and this Day recall,
Which you have lost. Thus he, with mad Desires,
To Fight, the discontented Camp inspires.
When Paulus, not the same in Mind, or Face:
But, as if, after Fight, he would seen the Place
Strewn with his slaughtered Friends; and, as if there
In View the Miseries ensuing were:
As when all Hope of her Son's Life is past,
In Vain, his yet-warm Body, in her last
Embrace, a Mother huggs, and seems to be
Senseless with Grief. By Rome's dear Walls (said He)
So often shaken! by those Souls, which now
Night with a Stygian Shade surrounds, and know
No Guilt, forbear I pray, to run upon
Your Ruin, till the Wrath of Heaven be gone,
And Fortune's Fury be consumed. 'Twill be
Enough, if our New Men shall dare to see
The Fo without a Fear; or if, at all,
They will endure the Name of Hannibal.
Saw thou not, when, within the Neighboring Plain,
His Voice was heard, how soon the Blood again
From their Pale Faces fled? and how their Arms
Fell down before the Trumpets shrill Alarms?
Fabius, as you suppose, was dull, and slow,
To Fight; yet all those Soldiers, that did go
With those blamed Ensigns, now in Arms appear:
So do not those, that with Flaminius were.
But Heaven avert such things! and, if you are
Resolved my Counsel to resist, and Prayer;
Yet hearken to the Gods: for know, of old,
This the Grynaean Sibylla, called Grynaea, from an Attribute of Apollo, who
inspired her.
Prophetess foretold
To all the World, in former Ages; Thee,
And this thy Headlong Rage, presaging, She
Divulged: and, as another Prophet, now,
I plainly to thee here thy Fate avow;
Unless to Morrow's Ensigns be by thee
Restrained, Thou, with our Blood, wilt ratify
The Sybil's Words: nor shall these Fields be famed
(If thou persist) from Diomed, but named
FATAL, from thee. Thus Paulus, in whose Eyes,
Enflamed with Grief, the Tears began to rise.
And then a wicked Error stained the Night;
For Satricus, made Captive in a Fight
In Libya, to Xantippus was a Slave;
Who him (for's Valor prized) soon after gave
To the Autololian King. At Sulmo he
An House possessed, and left two Sons to be
There Nurtured by their Mother: one they call
Mancinus; to other Solymas, to all
Known for his Trojan Name: for his Descent
Was Dardane, and his Ancestour, who went
After Aeneas Fortune, built, and Walled
A City fair, which Solymon he called,
From his own Name, and, among Italians famed,
By them, corruptly now, is Sulmo named.
This Satricus, the Autololian King,
Among his Barbarous Troops, did thither bring,
And, on Occasion, used him there to teach
Getulians to know the Latin Speech.
But, when he found a Possibility
Pelignian Walls, and's Native Home to see,
To second his Attempt, he takes the Night,
And quits by Stealth the Camp. Yet in his Flight
He took no Arms; being fearful to betray
Himself by's Shield, and Naked went away.
But, when the Spoils, and Dead within the Field,
He spied; Mancinus stripped: his Arms, and Shield,
He strait puts on, by which his former Fear
Was lightened: but the Body, which he there
Had Naked made, and he, whose Spoils he wore,
Was his own Son, there slain not long before,
By a fierce Macian Fo: Night growing on,
'Bout the first Sleep, behold! his other Son
(Young Solymus) appointed, by his Fate,
Then to relieve the Watch, without the Gate,
From the Ausonian Camp, advanced with Speed,
To seek, among the Heaps of the scattered Dead,
Mancinus Body, and by Stealth Interr
His dearest Brother: but he had not far
Advanced, when armed from the Sidonian Side,
Coming up to him, he a Man espied;
With which surpised, into thy Tomb he flies
( Aetolian A Companion of Diomed's, buried there.
Thoas) and there Skulking lies.
But when he saw no Soldiers in the Rear,
And that alone in the Dark he wandered there,
Out from the Sepulcher he leaps, and throws
At's Father's Naked Back, as on he goes,
A Javelin, not in vain. His Father, who
Thought that some Tyrian Troop did him pursue,
And gave the Wound, about him looked, to know
The Author of that unexpected Blow;
But, when, with Speed, the Conqueror advanced,
And from the Arms, well-known, a Luster glanced,
And, as the Moon did then Assistance yield,
He plainly saw, it was his Brother's Shield.
Enflamed with Rage, I Am not thy Son (said He)
Oh Satricus of Sulmo! Nor should be
Mancinus Brother: nor deserve a Name
Among those Nephews, that directly came
From Dardan Solymus; should I now thee
Permit (false Libyan) with Impunity
To 'scape this Hand. Shall I endure thee wear
My Brother's Spoils before my Face? or bear
The Arms of a Pelignian House away,
While I survive, or, guilty, see the Day?
No (my dear Mother) these I Will bear to Thee,
A grateful Present, and most fit to be
A Comfort to thy Griefs, for thy lost Son;
That thou may them for ever fix upon
His Sepulcher: and, as he spoke that Word
Aloud, he rushed upon him with his Sword.
But, Satricus, who now could hardly stand,
And faintly held his Weapon in his Hand,
Hearing his Country named, his Wife, and Sons,
And Arms, cold Horror through his Members runs,
And stupifies his Sense: his dying Mouth,
At length, this Language to the Furious Youth
Breaths forth; O spare thy Hand, I pray thee, spare;
Not that I beg for longer Life; it were
A Sin in me to ask it: but the Stain
Of this my Blood, I wish may not remain
Upon thy Hand. I am that Satricus,
Captive to Carthage, sprung from Solymus,
Now to my Country, by the Tyrian brought.
I know, my Son, 'twas not in thee a Fault,
When first thou did thy Spear against me throw:
I was a Libyan then; but from the Fo
I fled to you, and hasted now to see
My dear Wife's Face, prevented thus by Thee.
This Target, as I came, I took away
From thy dead Brother; but be sure to lay
This with his Arms, excused, upon his Tomb:
But, first be careful, soon as Thou shall come
Into the Camp, my last Advice to bear
To General Paulus, that he have a Care
Still to protract the War, and Fight decline
With Hannibal; whose Auguries Divine
Swell Him with Hopes, that He shall shortly see
An Immense Slaughter. But, let Varro be,
I pray, restrained: For he, as Fame does tell,
Is eager still your Eagles to impell.
It Is a great Comfort, as my Life now ends,
That I have given this Warning to my Friends.
But thy last Kisses, now, bestow upon
Thy Father lost, and found at once, my Son.
Thus as he spoke, his Helmet off he cast,
And, with his trembling Arms, the Neck embraced
Of's Son; amazed, and strove, with Words, his Shame
To cure, and to excuse the Weapon's Blame,
That gave the Wound. Who knows (said he) my Son,
Or who can testify what we have done?
Does not the Night conceal the Error? Why
Do tremble so? Thy Breast more close apply
To mine. Why do thou at such Distance stand?
Even I, thy Father, do absolve thy Hand,
And pray, my Labors ending, it may close
Mine Eyes. The Youth, oppressed with sudden Woes,
Gave no return of Words to what he said:
But, sighing deeply, labored to have staid
His Blood, and (strangely weeping) to have bound,
With his torn Shirt, the deep-inflicted Wound.
At length, among his many Sighs, thus he
Breaks into sad Complaints. Does Fortune Thee
(Dear Father) to thy Country, and to Us,
Thus bring again? Or does She, cruel, thus
Me to my Father, Him restore to Me?
Happy my Brother was, thrice happy He,
Who thought our Father was destroyed by Fate:
But I, by Tyrians untouched, too late
Now know him by a Wound. It would have been
At least some Comfort, Fortune, to my Sin,
Had it been still left doubtful: but my Woes
No longer shall be left to the Dispose
Of the unequal Gods. While his Complaints,
Distracted, thus he vents, his Father faints
Through loss of Blood, and into empty Air
His Life resolves: the Youth, with sad Despair,
Then lifting to the Stars his Eyes; Thou Moon,
Who art sole Witness of what I have done,
By this polluted Hand; who by thy Light
Did guide my fatal Javelin, in its Flight,
Into my Father's Body: these mine Eyes,
And cursed Sight (said He) while in the Skies
Thou reign'st, no more shall thee contaminate.
With that his Sword his Breast does penetrate;
Yet he endeavored to sustain the Wound,
Till, the Blood largely-flowing, on the Ground,
His Father's last Commands he thus did write
Upon his Target, VARRO, SHUN THE FIGHT,
Then on his Jav'lin's Point his Shield he hung,
And himself, dying, on his Father flung.
The Gods these Omens, of the following Fight,
To the Ausonians gave; and, as the Night,
Conscious of all this Wickedness, gave way
Her Shades retiring, to the rising Day,
The Carthaginian Captain cites all
His Troops to Arms; the Roman General
The like performs: and such a Day, as in
No Age before, for Libya does begin.
You need no Words (said Hannibal) t'excite
Your Courage, or provoke you to the Fight:
But we have come from the Herculean Bounds,
With Conquest to these Ia^pygian Grounds.
We stout Sagunthus have destroyed; to Us
The Alps gave way; and proud Eridanus
(The chief of Rivers in Italian Ground)
Flows in a captive Chanel; Trebia's drowned
In Humane Blood: Flaminius, who was flain
By Us, (a Burden to the Tyrrhen Plain)
Lies buried there; and all the Fields are filled
With Roman Bones, and since were never tilled.
But, now, behold a Day, more bright, then all
These Titles, and which to our Wishes shall
Afford more Blood. This Fight's Renown to Me
A true Reward, and Great enough shall be.
All other things your Conquest shall become;
And, without Chance of Lots, whatever Rome
Has hither, from the rich Iberian Coast,
Brought, as her Spoil; or what She else can boast
In her Sicilian.
Aetnaean Triumphs, or what more
Sh' has basely ravished from the Libyan Shore,
Your Swords shall gain; and you shall carry Home,
All, that to your Victorious Hands shall come.
Nothing of their vast Wealth will I, as due
To Me (your General) demand: for You
Has the Dardanian Spoiler plundered all
The conquered World so long. Whoever can call
Himself a Native Tyrian, or can claim,
From his Original, a Sarrane Name,
If him the fair Laurentine Land, which now
Sigaean Swains (your future Slaves) do Plow,
Delight; or, rather, the Buxentian Fields,
Where Corn, an Hundredfold, the Goddess yield:
I Will give him Choice of Lands, and add to them
These Banks, which Tyber with his conquered Stream
Does largely water. But then whosoever
(My dear Companions) does now appear
In Arms, and brings from Byrsa's farthest Land,
As an Ally, his Aids: if He his Hand
Stained with Ausonian Blood, shall show to Me,
He shall a Citizen of Carthage be.
Nor let Garganus, or this Daunian Land
Deceive you; at the very Walls you stand
Of Rome: though far that Citie's lofty Site
Be distant from this Place, where we shall fight;
Here shall She fall this Day, and henceforth I
Shall need no more your Valor to employ
In War (my Soldiers) but from hence You shall
Directly march into the Capitol.
This said: their Works, and Rampires down they throw,
And over all Delays of Trenches go;
While he, the Place well viewed, in ordered Ranks,
Draws up his Troops, upon the winding Banks.
The Barbarous Nasamonian Bands were placed
In the left Wing, and the Marmarick, vast
Of Body, the fierce Moors, and Macians,
Massilian Troops, and Garamantians,
With them the Adrimachides, that give
Themselves to War, and love by it to live;
Then all those People, that inhabit on
The Banks of Nile, and from the scorching Sun
Shelter their Tawny Bodies: These their Head,
And chief Commander, stout Nealces led.
But the right Wing did valiant Mago guide;
Placed where swift Aufidus does wandering glide,
By winding Banks, with crooked Streams: and there
The Active Troops of rough Pyrene were,
And with confused Murmurs filled the Shore:
There shined the Warlike Youths, that Targets bore.
Before the rest, Cantabrians appear,
And Gascoins, that no Helmets use to wear,
With Betick Troops, and him, that, fighting, flings
His flying Lead from Balearick Slings.
But the main Battle Hannibal Commands:
Which, with His Father's old Victorious Bands
He strengthens, and Blood-thirsty Celtae, who
Their Troops often muster on the Banks of Po.
But, where his Course the River turned away,
So that the Files unflank'd, and Open lay,
His Libyan Elephants in Order stood,
Their dusky Backs all charged with Towers of Wood;
Which, when they forward marched, up to the Skies,
Like Battlements, or moving Walls, did rise.
But, the Numidian Horse were left to Scout
On every Side, and scour the Field throughout:
While he new Force to his incensed Men
Inspireth, and, Insa^^able, again
Exhorting, fires their Thoughts by boasting, He
A present Witness to each Man would be,
And every Person by his Actions know,
And what Right Hand a singing Dart did throw.
Now, from their Works, the Legions Varro drew,
From whence the Rise of their Destruction grew;
While joyful Charon busily made Room,
In his pale River, for the Souls to come.
The Van, affrighted at the Signs of Blood
Upon the hanging Shield, like Statues, stood:
Fixed at the Omen. Near to that, a Face
Of Dread, two Bodies dead in their Embrace.
The fatal Wound within his Father's Breast,
With his Right Hand, the Son, to hide it, pressed.
At this they wept, and then (Alas!) too late
Lament Mancinus in his Brother's Fate.
Then the sad Augury, and Looks alike,
In the dead Bodies, a fresh Sorrow strike;
At length, their Errour's Guilt, and Fates to be
Lamented, and the Arms, that bid them flee
The Battle, to their General they show.
His Thoughts now all a fire; To Paulus go
With these (said He) for him (whose Fears now stand
In his unmanly Breast) that guilty Hand
May move, which, stained with cruel Slaughter, when
The Furies Punishment demanded, then
Perhaps, with his Father's Blood this Charm did write.
This said, with Threats, his Orders for the Fight
Through all the Army run, with Speed: and where
Nealces led his Barbarous Nations, there
Himself with Marsians, Samnites, and with those
The Iapygians sent, He does oppose.
The Poet agrees with Livy, in the Nomination of the Commanders of the Roman
Army. But Polybius adds Marcus Attilius to be joined with Servilius in the
command of the Battalion; and affirms Hanno, instead of Maharbal, to lead the
right Wing of Hannibal's Army.
But, in the Middle of the Field, where he
Perceived the Libyan General to be
Against him, he Servilius commands,
To lead the Vmbrian, and Picenian Bands.
Paulus the right Wing led, and beside these,
TO attend the Plots of nimble Nomades,
Scipio, a party took, with Charge, where e're
He spied their Troops within the Plains appear,
He should Advance, and Fight. Both Armies now
Drew near, and by the Running to, and fro,
The confused Neighing of the fiery Steeds,
And clashing Arms, a sudden Murmur spreads
It self through all the troubled Troops: as when
Loud Conflicts 'twixt the Winds, and Seas, begin
Their inward Rage; and Storms, that lave the Skies,
The Billows strait let loose: and, as they rise,
Their threatening Noise, through all the trembling Rocks,
From their Foundations shaken by the Shocks,
Expire; and Surges, from the Bottom thrown,
With angry Foam, the laboring Ocean Crown.
Nor was this cruel Storm of Fate alone
The Labor of the Earth, Dissension
Crept into Heaven, and Gods to War incites.
Here Father Mars, and here Apollo fights,
And Neptune there: vexed Cytherea here,
And Vesta, and Alcides angry, there,
For lost Sagunthus. Old Cybele too,
And Gods of Mortals made* Quirinus, who
First raised the Roman State; with Faunus: then
Pollux, that lately, with his Brother-Twin,
Had shifted his Alternate Life: but there,
'Girt with a Sword, Saturnia does appear;
And Pallas, among the Libyan Waters born:
And Hammon too, whose Temples with an Horn
Are Circumflex'd, and many lesser Gods
Beside; who coming, from their blessed Abodes,
To see this Fight, with their Approaches shook
The Earth; and all their several Stations took.
Some on the Neighboring Hills, while others shrowed
Themselves, from Mortal Eyes, within a Cloud.
The Heavens were empty left, while all to Wars
Descend: and strait to the forsaken Stars
As great a Clamor rose, as when, within
Phlegraean Plains, the Giants did begin
The Fight with Hercules; or Jove, for all
His Thunderbolts, did on the Cyclops call,
When the bold Earth-born Army did invade
His Throne, and Mountains upon Mountains laid.
The Charge so fierce: no Dart, or Spear before
The rest was thrown; but an impetuous Shower
Of Shafts together fell, with equal Rage:
And, as they, thirsting after Blood, engage,
The Storm a Multitude of both destroyed.
But, where the Sword more closely was employed,
The greater Number died: on whom the rest
Stood to maintain the Fight; and, as they pressed
To strike a Fo, would spurn them as they groan.
The Sea as soon, with raging Billows thrown
Against Calpe, might remove it from its Seat;
As all the Libyan Rage to a Retreat
Could force the Romans: or the Romans make
The Libyan Bands their Station to forsake.
So close they fight, no Space was left at all
For Blows to miss; or, when they died, to fall*
Helmets against Helmets clash, and every Stroke
Excuss'd the hidden Flames. Targets are broke
Against Targets, Swords by Swords are hacked, and Feet
On Feet do tread; so furiously they meet:
Breasts against Breasts are bruised, and where they stood
Earth could not be discerned, o'reflown with Blood:
And the thick Clouds of Arrows, as they fly,
Take from their Eyes the Day, and hide the Sky.
Those of the second Rank, as if they fought
In The Front, with their long Pikes, and Lances, sought
To wound the Fo: and those, that farthest stood,
With missile Weapons labored to make good
The Fight, with those were foremost: all the rest,
With Clamor, their Desire to Fight expressed,
And, with their horrid Shouts, the Enemy
Provoke. And now all sorts of Weapons fly:
Some hardened Stakes, Pines burning others fling,
And weighty Piles. These Fatal Pellets sling;
Those Darts: and, which would shake the strongest Wall,
Huge Stones from the Phalarick Engines fall:
And through the Clouds the singing Arrows fly.
How can I hope (ye Goddesses whom I
Religiously adore) this Day to show
To future Times? Can you such Power allow
(Ye Learned Virgins) to my Mortal Song?
And trust the Cannae to a single Tongue?
If you affect our Fame, nor shall decline
To give Assistance to our high Design;
Hither from your Parnassus, hither all
Your Sacred Lays, and Father Phoebus call.
But may thou (Noble Roman) still appear
As Constant, and thy future Triumphs bear
With as great Courage, as Adversity
Thou then did meet! Such may Thou ever be!
Nor tempt the Gods to try, if those, that are
Derived from Troy, can bear so great a War;
And thou (O Rome) no more with Tears deplore
Thy dubious Fate; but rather, now, adore
Those Wounds, that shall Eternal Praise to Thee
Produce: for ^hou shall never Greater be;
But sink in thy Success, and by the Name
Of former Miseries defend Thy Fame.
Now Fortune, shifting Sides, between them went,
Deluding, with sad Doubts of the Event,
The Rage of Both; and furious Mars, so long
As Hope, between, in equal Balance hung,
Raged in their Arms alike. So have I seen
The standing Corn, while ye^ the Stems were green,
Moved by a gentle Wind, wave to, and fro,
The Weighty Ears, which, as they Nodding go
To this Side, then to that, alternately
The several Motions of the Wind obey.
At length Nealces, with confused Shouts,
Brings on his Barbarous Troops; and, Charging, routs
The adverse Wing: the Ranks disordered, through
The Intervals, the fierce victorious Fo
Breaks on the trembling Files; and strait a Flood,
(That like a Torrent rushed) of reeking Blood
Runs on the Plain. None, falling, are by Spears
Thrust on their Faces: for the Roman fears
This has been frequently observed of the Romans, when they have seen their
Case desperate: particularly in Cataline's Army; where every man, that dyed,
fell with his Face toward his Enemy. See Salust.
Wounds on the Back, and on his Breast receives
His cruel Death, and Life with Honor leaves.
Among the first, affecting still to be
In The hottest of the Fight, and equally
To meet all Dangers, stood brave Scaevola;
Who, scorning to survive so sad a Day,
Sought worthy his great Ancestour to fall,
And die beneath that Name: perceiving all
Was lost, Our Life, how short soever it be,
Now in despite of Fate, let Us (said he)
Extend. For Valor is an empty Name;
Unless, in Death's Approach, a lasting Fame
By suffering bravely, or by Wounds, we gain
Surviving Honor. Speaking thus, amain
Into the Midst, where the fierce Libyan's Hand
Cut out his Way, through those, that did withstand,
He, like a Tempest, falls; and, there he slew
Tall Calathis, and with his Sword quite through
His Body pierced, as boasting, he put on
The Arms of one there slain: strait down upon
The Ground he tumbles, biting with his Teeth
The Hostile Arms; the Tortures of his Death
By that suppressing, as he grovelling lay.
Neither could Gabar, or stout Sicha stay,
With their joint Valor, his Impetuous Rage.
For valiant Gabar, as he did engage,
Lost his Right Hand, but Sicha, mad with Grief,
And coming rashly on to his Relief,
Stumbling by Chance upon his Sword, does wound
His Naked Foot, by which upon the Ground
He falls, and by the Hand of's dying Friend
Lies prostrate. This his Fury, in the end,
Nealces fatal Rage upon him brought,
Who, by so great a Name incited, sought
The Honor of his Fall, and strait a Stone,
Torn from the Neighboring Rock, and tumbled down
By the swift Torrent, from the Mountain, took,
And threw it at his Face: his Jaws were broke
Asunder with the Weight; his Face no more
Its Form retains: mixed with thick Clots of Gore,
His Brains flow through his Nose, and both his Eyes
Dashed from his mangled Front, he falls, and dies.
Then Marius fell, endeav'ring to relieve
Casper his Friend, and fearful to survive
His Death: Both Youths, in Age alike, both poor
Alike, and both Sacred Praeneste bore:
They joined their Labors, and both jointly tilled
Their Neighboring Fields, they both refused, and willed
Still the same things; their Minds alike, through all
Their Life. A Wealthy Concord in a Small
Estate. They fell together, and expired
In Fight together, as they both desired.
Their Arms, the Trophy of Simethus were.
But such a Benefit of Fortune there
The Libyan could not long enjoy. For now
The valiant Scipio with a threatening Brow
Came on (sore grieved to see his Cohorts fly)
And Varro (Cause of all their Misery)
With Curio yellow-hair'd, and Brutus, from
The first great Consul sprung, that rescued Rome;
These by their Valor, had the Field regained,
Had not the Libyan General restrained
With a fierce Charge, his Troops, about to fly.
Who when far off, He Varro did espy
Engaged, and near him moving to, and fro,
The Lictour, in his Scarlet Coat, I know
That Pomp, I know the Ensigns of your State
(Said He) such your Flaminius was of late;
Thus speaking, by the Thunder of his Shield,
His Fury he Proclaims, through all the Field.
Oh wretched Varro! Thou might there have died
With Paulus, had not angry Heaven denied
That thou by Hannibal, should there be slain.
How often to the Gods might thou complain,
That thou did escape the Libyan Sword? For there
Bringing thy Safety, when thou did despair
Of Life, upon Himself brave Scipio all
The Danger turned: nor was fierce Hannibal
Unwilling (though by that Diversion, He
The Honor of Opimous Victory
Had lost) Thee for a greater Fo to change,
And by that offered Combat, to Revenge
On Him, the Rescue of his Father, near
Ticinus. Now the Champions both appear
From several Quarters of the World, then whom
Earth never yet beheld two Greater come
Within the Lists; in Strength, and Courage held
Both equal; but the Roman Prince excelled
In Piety, and Faith. Then from the Cloud
(Wherein from Mortal Eyes, the Gods did shroud
Themselves) leaped forth (to view the Fight more near)
For Scipio, Mars, and Pallas, full of Fear,
For Hannibal. The Champions both abide
Undaunted, but their Entrance terrified
The Armies. Round about thick gloomy Fires,
Where Pallas moves, her Gorgon's Mouth expires,
And dreadful Serpents hiss upon her Shield:
Her Eyes, like two great Comets, through the Field
Disperse a Bloody Light, and to the Skies,
From her large Crest, the waving Flames arise.
But Mars, the Air disturbing with his Spear,
And covering with his Shield the Plain, does wear
His Mail; which, by the Laboring Cyclops made,
Aetnean Flames through all the Field displayed:
And, with his radiant Cask, does, rising, strike
The Stars. The Champions, on the Fight, alike
Intent, though traversing with watchful Eyes
Their Ground, perceived the Armed Deities
Approach; and, glad that they Spectatours were,
Increased the Fury of their Minds. And here
A Javelin Pallas from the Libyan's Side
Lets fly, with a strong Force: which, soon espied
By Mars, instructed to afford his Aid,
By that Example of the furious Maid;
Strait his Aetnean Sword into the Hands
Of The Youth, he puts, and greater things Commands.
At this the Maid incensed, her Visage burned
In Flames of Rage, and She so strangely turned
Her glaring Eyes, that in her Dreadful Look
She Gorgon overcame: as then, She shook
Her Aegis, all her Snakes their Bodies reared,
And, at her first Assault, even Mars appeared
A little to give Ground: the Goddess still
Pursued, and Part of the adjoining Hill,
Torn up, with all the Stones, that on it grew,
Against Mars, with all her Force, and Fury, threw.
The Horror of its Fall, diffused over
The Plain, frights Saffon with a trembling Shore.
But, when the King of Gods this Fight's Intent
Perceived, involved in Clouds, He Iris sent,
With Speed, their too great Fury to allay,
And thus instructs her. Goddess, haste away
To the Oenotrian Land, and there her Rage
Command thy Sister Pallas to assuage;
Bid her not hope to change the fixed Decree
Of Fate: and likewise tell Her, that, if She
Desist not (for the Poison, and the Fire
Of Her fierce Mind I know) and check her Ire,
Against the Roman, She shall understand,
How much the dreadful Thunder of my Hand
Excells her Aegis. When Tritonia knew
This, a long time Uncertain what to do,
And doubtful in her Thoughts, if She should yield
TO Her Father's Arms: Well, We will quit the Field
(Said She) but, when W* are thus expuls'd, will Jove
Hinder us to behold from Heaven above
Garganus Fields reeking with Blood. This said:
Under an hollow Cloud, the furious Maid
To other Places of the Battle took
The Libyan General, and Earth forsook.
But Mars, the Goddess gone, recalls again
Their Courage, and, dispersed through all the Plain,
(Encompassed with a Cloud, as black as Night)
With his own Hand, strait recollects the Fight.
The Romans now their Ensigns turn, and, Fear
Quite laid aside, the Slaughter every where
Renew. Then Aeolus, who over the Winds
Is King, and them within a Prison binds,
Who Boreas, Eurus, Corus, Notus, and
The Rest, even Heav'n-disturbing, does Command,
At Juno's Suit, whose Promises were great,
Furious A strong South-East-Winde blowing frequently in that part of the
Country (and so called by the Inhabitants) which, gained in this Fight by the
Carthaginians, did exceedingly incommodate the Romans. See Livy, Book 22.
Vulturous (whose Imperial Seat
Is in the Aeolian Plains) into the Fight
Let Us loose: (for then the Goddess took Delight
By him to vindicate her cruel Ire)
He having dived in Aetna deep, and Fire
Conceived, strait raising up his flaming Head
Into the Air, with horrid Roaring fled
From thence, and through the Daunian Kingdoms blows
Clouds of congested Dust, and, where He goes,
The dark'ned Air from all, (as if the Day
Were spent) their Sight, Hands, Voices took away.
Then against the Italians Faces Globes of Sand
(Sad to relate) he drives; and his Command
To fight against them does with Rage pursue;
And, with that Weight of Ruin, overthrew
The Soldiers, Arms, and Trumpets, and reverts
Upon the Rutuli their flying Darts,
And frustrates, with his adverse Blasts, their Blows:
But all the Weapons, that the Libyan throws,
He seconds; and their Jav'lins, and their Spears,
As with the Loop assisting, forward bears.
The Soldiers, now, chok'd with thick Dust, and Breath
Stopped 'twixt their Jaws, that poor, ignoble Death
Lament; while, hiding in the troubled Air
His yellow Head, and, strewing all his Hair
With Sand, Vulturnus, with his roaring Wings,
Sometimes flies at their Backs, and sometimes flings
Himself against their Faces, in a Storm,
That whistling loud whole Cohorts does disarm:
Some, that pressed on, and ready, with a Blow,
To fix i'th'Throat of the now-yielding Fo,
Their Swords he, in the very Stroke, withstands,
And, entering to a Wound, pulls back their Hands.
Nor was 't enough, that thus the Roman Arms,
And Men, he spoiled; but with loud bellowing Storms,
Against Mars himself, his Fury he expressed
And twice with Whirlwind shook his lofty Crest.
While thus Aeolian Fury did engage
The Latin Troops, and Mars provoked to Rage:
Pallas, near whom Saturnia stood, to Jove
Thus speaks. Behold! What Billows Mars does move
Against the Libyans! With what Slaughters he
Himself does glut! Is It not your Will (said She)
I pray, that Iris now to Earth descend?
Though I, when I was there, did not intend
The Teucri to destroy (for let your Rome
Reign with my Pledge, and my Palladium
There still remain) yet was I loath the Light
Of my dear Libya, Hannibal, should quite
Extinguished be, or that, in Prime of all
His Years, so Great Beginnings now should full:
Here Juno took the Word, and, from a Sense
Of her long Labors, Yes (said She) that hence
The World may know, how great Jove's Empire is,
How much his Power, how much his Wife by this
All other Gods excells! Now let thy Fire
The Towers of Carthage, (nothing We desire)
Destroy: the Tyrian Army sinking down,
Through gaping Earth, in Stygian Waters drown;
Or else o'rewhelm them in the Neighboring Main.
To whom Jove mildly thus replies. In vain
You strive with Fate, and feeble Hopes prolong,
That Youth (Oh Daughter!) against whom so strong,
So furious thou did fight, shall overcome
The Africans, and shall from that assume
That Nation's Name, and shall transport withal
The Libyan Laurel to the Capitol.
And He, on whom such Courage (Wife) by thee
Such Honor is bestowed (so Fates decree)
Shall turn his Arms from the Laurentine Land,
Nor do the Limits of his Mischief stand
Far off; the Day, and Hour approach, with Haste,
Wherein He Will wish, that he no Alps had past.
This said, He Iris sends away with Speed
To charge the God of War, he should Recede,
And quit the Fight. He not at all contends
With those Commands, but, murmuring, ascends
Into the Clouds, though Trumpets in the Fight,
Wounds, Blood, and Arms, and Clamours him delight.
The Gods no more contending, and the Plain,
Now cleared from Mars, the Libyan again,
From the Remotest Part, where he to shun
Celestial Arms, retired, came furious on;
And, with loud Shouts, along his Foot, and Horse,
His Towred Elephants, and all the Force
Of's batt'ring Engines drew, and as he spied
A Valiant Youth, that with his Sword destroyed
His lighter Troops, his Anger, sparkling in
His Bloody Cheeks, What God (said He) again,
Or what dire Furies Thee, Minutius, thus
Drive, on thy Fo? That thou, once more to Us,
Dare trust thyself? Where now is Fabius, made
Thy Father by Our Arms, to give thee Aid?
Wretch! it is sufficient once to escape from Me;
With this proud Language, He a Lance lets flee,
That swift, as from an Engine thrown, his Breast
Pierced through, and with the Stroke, his Speed suppressed.
Nor is it enough the Sword does Rage: they send
Fierce Beasts, and the Italian Youth contend
With Monsters. For, well mounted, Lucas Rid
Up to the Moor, that with his Spear did guide
The Elephants, commanding him to excite,
With greater Speed, the Heard into the Fight.
The warlike Beasts, then driven on, and goar'd
With frequent Wounds, made Haste, and strangely roared:
With Flames, and Men, and Darts, the lofty Towers
On their pale backs were armed; whence furious showrs
Of Stones fell on the Troops, and where they move
Thick Storms of Shafts (as from the Clouds above)
The Libyans from their flying Castles throw;
While a long Wall of Teeth (as white as Snow)
Runs through the Ranks, and, with their Points declined,
From the bowed Top, the Spears of Ivory shined.
Here, among others, full of Fear, a Youth,
Called Vfens, through his Armor, by the Tooth
Of one of them was struck, and born through all
The troubled Ranks; while he in Vain does call
For Help, the Point, where, quilted thick, was tied
His Breast Plate, lightly pierced by his Left-Side,
And, his unwounded Body lifting high,
Clash'd against his Shield. His Magnanimity,
The sudden Danger not at all dismaies
But, turning that Misfortune to his Praise,
Now, near the Forehead of the furious Beast,
Through both his Eyes his Sword he quickly pressed.
When strait enraged by the fatal Wound,
Rising upright, she tumbles to the Ground,
The Tower drawn backward by its Weight: and then
The Elephant deprived of Sight, the Men
And Arms (a Spectacle of Terror) all
Are crushed together in her sudden fall.
The yet-prevailing Roman to withstand
The Fury of these Monsters, gives Command,
That burning Torches wheresoever they go,
Should be opposed, and Sulfurous Flames to throw
Into their Towers. This, with all Speed, obeyed,
The Elephants they suddenly invade:
Whose smoking Backs, with Flames collected shined,
That, driven on by the Tempestuous Wind,
Through their high Bulwarks Fire, devouring, spread:
As when on Rhodope, or Pindus Head,
A Shepherd scatters Fire; and through the Groves,
And Woods, like an hot Plague, it raging moves:
The leavy Rocks are fired; and all the Hills,
Leaping now here, now there, bright Vulcan fills.
But, when the burning Sulphur once begun
To parch their Skins, the unruly Monsters run,
Like mad, and drive the Cohorts from their Stand:
Neither durst Any undertake, at Hand,
To fight them; but their Darts, and Jav'lins throw
At Distance: burning, they impatient grow,
And, through the Heat of their vast Bodies, here,
And there, the scattered Flames increasing bear;
Till by the smooth adjoining Stream, at last,
Deceived, themselves into 't, they Headlong cast,
And with them all their Flames, that still appear
'Bove the tall Banks, till both together, there,
In the deep Chanel of the Flood expire.
But, where the Fight continued still, nor Fire
Had vexed the Elephants, from fatal Hands
Now Darts, now Stones, on the Rheteian Bands,
And winged Lead, at Distance fall, like Hail.
As when an Army does a Fortress scale
Through steep Ascents, or storms a fenced Tower.
Worthy himself, and a more happy Hour,
Here Mutius raised his Hand, and nearer goes,
(In his Attempt unhappy) to oppose
Their Fury with his Sword; but, with a Breath
Expiring Heat, and Murmurs threatening Death,
A furious Monster caught him from the Ground,
And in her winding Trunk his Body bound;
Which tossed, aloft, into the Air, and lashed
Often against the Earth, was all to Pieces dashed.
Amidst these Slaughters, soon, as Paulus spied
Varro in Arms, upbraiding him, he cried;
Now let us meet with Hannibal, whom Thou
Placed: before thy Chariot, bound in Chains, did vow
To give the City. Oh unhappy Rome!
And People, fatal in thy Favor! whom
From the foul Guilt of so great Ills no Time
Can e're absolve, or purge Thee from this Crime.
Which should thou, rather, wish had never been born
Varro, or Hannibal? Thus, with sad Scorn,
While Paulus spoke, the Libyan furiously
Advancing, at the Backs of them, that fly
(Even in their Gen'ral's View) all Shafts provokes.
The Consul's Helmet, by their furious Strokes
Bruised, and his Arms all shattered, Paulus throws
Himself, more fierce at this, among his Foes.
But Varro, having lost his Courage quite,
(While Paulus to another Place the Fight
Pursued) strait wheels about, and, with his Hand
Turning his Horse, said; Thou do justly stand
Corrected, Rome, that did to Varro give
Command in War while Fabius is alive.
But now, what civil Discord in my Mind,
What sad Dissension of my Fate, I find?
What secret Fraud of Destinies? I all
These Torments will determine in my Fall.
But, Oh! some God my Sword withholds, and Me
Reserves (Alas!) for greater Misery!
Shall I live then? and to the Tribes again
The Fasces, stained with Blood of Contrymen,
And broken thus return? And, as I go,
My Face to other angry Cities show?
Or, (then which Naught more Cruel could for Me
By Hannibal be wished) fly hence, and Thee,
Oh Rome! behold? More his distracted Fear
Had uttered; but the Enemy drew Near,
And Charging him more Close with Darts, his Steed
Snatched the loose Reins, and fled the Field with Speed.
The End of the Ninth Book.
Hinc citus ad Tumulum donata^e Funera Paulo
^bat, et Hostilis Lethi Iactabat Honorem.
Omnibus Exequijs Nudo jamque Annibal Unus
Sat Decoris Laudator Erat. etc:
Honoratisso: Domino Dno. Iacobo Compton Baroni de Compton. Comiti Northampto^:
Tabula sum^a cum observantia. D.D.D.

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Tenth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Paulus great Valor, and what Slaughters he
At Cannae made. He is advised to flee;
But Thoughts of Flight rejects. By Hannibal,
Christa, with his six Sons, together fall.
Servilius, by Viriathus slain,
By Paulus Hand is soon revenged again;
And, fighting 'midst his Foes, at length he dies:
The Libyan Celebrates his Obsequies,
Commends his Valor, and his Noble End.
Their Counsels, who their Country did intend
To quit, by Scipio are suppressed. To Rome,
Without all Pomp, does Consul Varro come.
The Multitude, incensed against him, are
By Fabius appeased. The Slaves for War
Are Armed: the Senate passes a Decree,
That none, that Captived are, shall ransomed be.
WHEN Paulus saw, the Adverse Fight encreas't;
As, when, with Spears encompassed, a wild Beast
Leaps on their Points, and by his Wounds does know,
Where to direct his Rage, and choose a Fo:
Into the thickest of the Globes he goes,
And to all Dangers does himself expose,
And seeks a Death from every valiant Hand:
Upbraiding thus his flying Men; Oh! stand,
Stand stoutly to 't, and in your Breasts receive
The Sword; nor, wounded in your Backs, thus leave
The World: there nothing now remains, at all,
For Us, but the sole Glory of our Fall.
Me, to the Shades below, you all shall find
Your Leader. Then swift, as the Northern Wind,
Or winged Shafts (which, in dissembled Flight,
The Parthian backward shoots into the Fight)
And, where, unmindfull of his tender Age,
Paetus (like Mars, in Courage) did engage,
He rushed into the midst of all his Foes,
And the Youth, whom light Vascons did enclose;
And fierce Cantabrians did with Darts surround,
Freed from their cruel Arms: while they gave Ground,
And Trembling fled. As when a Goat, in View,
Through a large Plain, the Huntsmen close pursue;
And, in the Chase, the weary Beast so nigh
Approach, they think to caught: if suddenly,
Gnashing his Teeth, a Lion, from his Den,
Before their Eyes appears; their Color, then,
And Blood flies from their Cheeks, their Weapons all,
Inferior to their Danger, they let fall,
And, flying, think no more upon their Prey.
Now, with his Sword, on such, as in his Way
Oppose, he pressed: and such, whom baser Fear
Made fly, with Darts he follows in the Rear.
Fury, and Rage delight him; and, to Crown
His Deeds with Honor, by his Hand alone
A multitude of Nameless People fall.
And, if another Paulus, there, among all
The Dardan Tro^p^ had been Cannae its Name
Had surely lost, and Ha^nibal his Fame.
At length, his Wing declined, and suddenly
The Front gives Way, and all together fly.
There Labi^nus fell^ whom Cingulum
Sent from her lofty Walls: there Ocris, whom,
With Opiter, Vine-bearing Setia sent,
From fertile Hills. Their Deaths were different,
Though the Sidonian joined the Time: for there,
Shot through the Hip, fell Labien^^; here
One through the Shoulder, to other through the Knee
The Brothers, wounded, him accompany.
And there Macaenas; who, of ancient Fame,
Through the Maeonian Land, his Noble Name
From Tyrrhen Kings derived, wounded quite through
The Groin, a Tyrian Javelin, likewise Slew.
But, through the thickest, Paulus, ^corning all
Desires of Life; and, ^eeking Hannibal,
Charged furiously, and thought his Destiny
Could only cruel be, if he should die,
And Hannibal survive. Fearing this Rage
(For that, if once in Fight they did engage,
So great a Storm, and Tempest could not be
Without great Mischief) Juno instantly,
Vid. infra, page.. 12.
Frighted Metellus Shape assuming, Why
Consul (said She) sole Hope of Italy!
Do thou Renew thy Rage in Vain, while Fate
Resists? if Paulus live, the Roman State
May stand; if otherwise, thou draw'st with Thee
All Italy. Oh Paulus! Can it be
That thou will, while the State thus totters, go
To hazard against so insolent a Fo
Thy Sacred Head? For, now, so flushed in War
Is Hannibal, that with the Thunderer
He dares contend: and Varro (I beheld,
When first He wheeled about) has left the Field,
Himself reserving for a better Day.
Allow the Fates their Time, and, while you may,
From Death redeem your Soul, that is greater far
Then Ours; You soon may have another War.
To this, with Sighs, the General replied.
And is it not Cause enough (if Naught beside
Did move Me) that I now should wish to die
In Arms, when to an Act, so Monstrous, I
Metellus urging hear? Thou, Fool! away.
Fly; Oh! fly hence with Speed, nor (Heaven I pray
Thee in the Back may Hostile Weapons wound!
But with thy Varro may thou safe, and sound,
Enter the Walls of Rome! Do Thou think Me
Worthy so base a Life, and not to be
As worthy (Coward) of a Nobler End:
Because the Libyan, who dares contend
(Forsooth!) with Jove, permits it? Oh, thou base
Degenerate Issue of a Valiant Race!
When should I choose to fight? With whom should I
Desire to Cope, but such an One, that by
My Hand subdued, or I by his, might give
To Me a Name, that after Death shall live?
Thus chiding, among his Foes himself he threw:
And, as Acherras covertly withdrew
From the thronged Maniples, and sought Retreat
To the Main Body, with more nimble Feet,
Him through the thickest Ranks, with Targets filled,
And constipated Arms, pursued, and killed.
So Belgic Hounds an hidden Boar pursue,
And with Sagacious Noses, drowned in Dew,
Through devious Ways, the doublings of the Beast
Detect, and all his Footsteps closely pressed,
Through thickest Groves, where Hunts-men cannot come
To beat, still follow, nor desist they from
The Chase, until they have him in the Wind,
And, in some Thicket, close at Covert, find.
When Juno saw, that Paulus could not be
By Words diverted, but went on, strait She
Gelastes Shape puts on, and Hannibal,
As Slow, exciting, thus to Fight does call.
This way thy Weapons turn; hither thine Aid,
Eternal Fame of Carthage, bring (She said)
To such, as it implore: the Consul near
The River fights, and horrid Slaughter there
Commits: nor can thou greater Honor gain
By any Fo, that shall by Thee be slain.
Thus She to several Conflicts does divide
The furious Youth; while, near the River's Side,
Old Christa, with his six Sons, their valiant Hands
Employed, and sore oppressed the Libyan Bands.
Tuder, where he was born, no wealthy Town
Was held, yet (not Obscure) was of Renown,
As Warlike, among the Vmbrian People, where
Her Youth in Feats of Arms, and Slaughters, were
Trained up; whence this old, cheerful Captain led
A Valiant Phalanx: who, when they had fed
Their Swords with Humane Slaughter, overthrew,
With frequent Wounds, an Elephant, and to
Her Fall add Flames, that instantly devour
(A joyful Sight to them) her armed Tower
When, strait, an Helmet's Lightning struck their Eyes,
And they perceived the trembling Plumes to rise
On the large Crest. Old Christa, by that Light,
Soon knew the Man, and drew into the Fight,
His Troop of Sons, commands them all to throw
Their Darts, and not to fear the Flames, that flow
From his fierce Countenance, or burning Crest.
As, when an Eagle, careful, in her Nest,
To nourish such a Brood, as may be fit
To bear Jove's Arms, against the Sun does set
Their Faces, and, by their undazled Eyes,
Through those bright Rays, her doubtful Issue tries.
And now, to teach the rest, what they should do,
With a weak Force, a single Dart he threw;
Which (though it Nimble past the middle Air)
But lightly pierced his Golden Mail, and there
Stuck loosely, and by that weak Stroke betrayed
The old Man's Hand. To whom the Libyan said,
What Rage thy Hand, with Age now bloodless grown,
To vain Attempts provokes? Thy Cornel thrown
So feeble is, that our Callaick Gold
It scarce can raze: thy Weapons now, behold!
I, thus, to Thee return. Better by Me
In War the Memorable Youth shall be
Instructed. Speaking thus, He forward pressed,
And pierced, with his own Dart, old Christa's Breast.
But, from the other Side, six Darts are thrown,
From six Right Hands; and then six Spears come on,
With equal Fury. As, in Libya, when
A Lyone^s is chased into her Den,
Her angry Whelps leap forth, and strive, in Vain,
With tender Teeth, the Combat to maintain.
But Hannibal, with Arms encompassed round,
Consumed their Shafts, and weighty Spears (that sound
At every Stroke with Horror, through the Field)
Strongly su^tains, and with his battered Shield
Repells: nor can those many Wounds, that he
Has given, nor all those Slaughters satisfy
His Rage; unless He with the Father join
The Sons in Death, and quite cut off the Line.
Then Abaris, who bore his Arms, and there
Enflamed the Fight, and him did every where
Attend, He calls: With Shafts supply Me still;
For there 's a Troop, that must be sent to Hell,
And frets with Darts my Mail: they, instantly,
Shall find the Fruits of Foolish Piety.
This said; the Eldest ( Lucas) with a Dart
He penetrates: the Point pressed through his Heart,
Upon his Brother's Arms He backward sinks:
Next Volso, who, in Haste advancing, thinks
To draw the Fatal Weapon from the Wound,
A Pile (that among the Dead, by Chance, he found)
He, through his Beaver, strikes into his Nose:
Then Vesulus, who slipping, as he goes,
Fallen in his Brother's Blood, he with his Sword
Cuts off, and (barbarous Valor, and abhorred)
His Helmet, filled with his dissever'd Head,
Flung, like a Missile Shaft, at those that fled.
Next Telesinus, stricken with a Stone,
Upon the Back, where to the twisted Bone
The Joints are Knit, fell, and beheld withal
His Brother Quercens, by a Sling, to fall,
Dead to the Ground, while he expires the Light
Of Life, and shuts his dubious Eyes in Night.
But Perusinus, weary through his Fear,
Running, and Grief, though still he angry were,
With feeble Steps, retiring through the Plain,
And, sometimes standing to resist, was slain
By a Fire-hard'ned Stake, which he, that bare
The Arms of Hannibal, snatched newly there,
From a slain Elephant: the half-burnt Oak
Fixed deep into his Groin; the furious Stroke
Turned him upon his back. His cruel Rage
The Youth, with Prayers, endeavored to assuage:
But, as he gaped, his Mouth with Stygian Fire
Is filled, and in his Lungs the Flames expire.
At length, with all the rest, Christa, a Name
Through all the Vmbrian Land, of ancient Fame,
Fell, like a lofty Oak, that long had stood
Observed, and Holy in its Native Wood,
When struck by Jove, and sulfurous Flames devour
The Old, and Sacred Branches, to the Power
Of The Fire, at length it yields, and covers all
The Trees beneath it, in its spacious Fall.
While Hannibal thus rages near thy Flood,
(Famed Aufidus) the Paulus.
Consul, with much Blood,
Having revenged his future Death, the War
Pursued, as if He had been Conqueror.
There lay huge Phorcus, among a thousand Dead,
Come from Herculean Calpe: Gorgon's Head
Carved on his Shield, about that dreadful Face
The Goddess's Original, and Race:
Him, daring to oppose, and vaunting high
The ancient Names of the monstrous Family
Of Famed Medusa (whose dire Looks alone
Converted the Beholders into Stone)
As he, too forward, stooped, and at 's left Thigh,
Too eager, reached, the Valiant Consul, by
The Helmet caught, and dragging Headlong down
Upon his Knees, deep in his Back does drown
His Sword, where 'bout his Reins his Belt was bound:
He, from his gaping Bowels, on the Ground
Spews Streams of Blood, and the Aetolian Field,
To the Atlantic Prince, a Grave does yield.
Amidst the Slaughters, furious in the Rear,
With sudden Terror, other These were Numidians, in number five hundred (says
Livy, Valerius Maximus four hundred) who, hiding short Swords under their
Coats, their Targets hanging at their Backs, (as was the Custom of such as
revolted in Fight) fled from their own Side to the Romans: who, taking from
them their Shields, and Darts, commanded them to the Rear; but they, soon as
they perceived all Men intent on the Fight, furnished themselves again with the
Targets of such as fell, and suddenly assailing the Romans at their Backs,
hewed them down at the Ham-strings with a great Slaughter, and were a great
Occasion of the following Victory. Live. lib. 22.
Troops appear,
And charging fiercely, unexpected, fall
Upon the Romans. These had Hannibal
Instructed in all Fraud, and to that Art
Of Fighting trained: who (faining to desert
The Punick Camp, armed with Deceit, their Hands,
And Arms had yielded) on the Roman Bands
Then Busy, in the Slaughter, with a Rage
United, fly, and all their Rear engage:
Nor did they Weapons want, Slaughter affords
A large Supply of Jav'lins, Darts, and Swords.
But Valiant Galba (whose still pious Love
To Virtue, no cross Fortune could remove)
Seeing an Ensign taken by the Fo,
Pursues with Speed, and with a fatal Blow
The Conqu'rour fells: but, striving to regain
The Eagle, which his dying Hands retain,
(And would let go, but slowly, at the Last)
Pierced by Amorgus Sword, who came in Haste
To's Friend's Relief, he fell, and in those great
Attemps, unhappy, sadly met his Fate.
But now, as if Enyo's Rage were still
Unsatisfi'd, Vulturnus, in one Hill
Of Dust, rolls all the Field; and the white Sand
Throws up: and such as Labored to withstand
His Fury, with strong Blasts, that strangely Roar,
To the farthest Part of all the Champagne bore,
And against the Hollow Banks their Bodies thrown,
And bruised, within the swelling Flood did drown:
And, here, unhappy in his silent Fate,
The River Curio's Life does terminate.
For, while, with inward Fury boiling, He
Labors to stop the Roman Troops, that flee,
And in their Way, himself opposing, stood,
Driven Headlong by the Throng into the Flood;
In The troubled Waves he sunk, and born away
Dead, in the Adriack Sands, Inglorious, lay.
But the brave Consul, whose unshaken Mind
The worst of Ills could bear, who never inclined
To stoop to Fortune, meets the Conquering Fo
With equal Fury, and himself does throw
Amidst their thickest Arms; encouraged by
A Martial Heat, and Confidence to die:
When Viriathus, whom the Iberian Land
Obeyed, pursuing with a Fatal Hand,
A Fo, now tired, and wearied in the Fight,
Near unto Raging Paulus, and in 's Sight,
Cuts off. Oh Grief! Oh Tears! Servilius Galba, had been Consul with Acilius,
and that day commanded the main Body of the Romans, where He dyed, bravely
fighting, at the Head of his Men.
Servilius there,
Next Paulus, the best Part of all the War,
Fell by a barbarous Hand, and in his Fall
Alone, with Envy, We may Cannae call
Unfortunate. The Consul his sad Ire
No more endures, and, though the Winds conspire
To rob him of his Arms, and blind his Eyes
With Dust, yet through a Cloud of Sand he flies,
And him, then tuning, (as it is used among
The Iberi) on his Shield a barbarous Song,
Invades, and, through his left Pap driving, past
His Weapon to his Vitals: this the last
Of all his Slaughters was, no more could He
In Fight his Hand employ: nor ( Rome) for Thee,
In future Wars, must Noble Paulus stand.
For an huge Stone, thrown from a private Hand,
Dashed on his Head, and deep into his Skull
His battered Helmet beats, and fills it full,
And all his Face with Blood: retreating then,
Against the Neighboring Rock as he does lean,
Now almost choked with Dust, before his Face,
Besmeared with Gore, his Target he does place,
Like a fierce Lion (lighter Shafts represt,
And scorned) when, piercing deep into his Breast,
At length he feels the Steel, amidst the Field
He trembling stands, and patiently does yield
To every Weapon: while about his Nose,
His Jaws, and Main, a bloody Riv'let flows;
And, sometimes, turning his weak Limbs about,
From his wide Mouth, he foaming Goar does spout.
But, then, fierce Hannibal spurs on his Steed,
Where e're the Storm, or Conquering Sword does lead;
Where furious Troops, and where those Monsters are,
That with their Ivory Teeth maintain the War.
Here, overwhelmed with Darts when Piso spied,
The Libyan Captain over Bodies ride,
Raising himself Upright upon his Spear,
Pierced through his Horse's Flank, attempting there
(In Vain) to leap upon him being down.
To whom the angry Libyan (who soon
Himself recovered, though his Plunging Steed
Pitched him upon his Shoulder) When they are Dead,
Do thus the Roman Ghosts revive (said He)
To fight? In Death nor will they Quiet be?
This said, into his Body, as He strives
To rise, up to the Hilts, his Sword he drives.
But, his Foot wounded with a Cretan Shaft,
As Lentulus, full Speed, on Horseback left
The Field; the Stones besmearing with his Blood,
And, with a stern Aspect, to the Stygian Flood
Sinking he Paulus spied: at that sad Sight,
His Mind's distracted, He Is ashamed of Flight.
Then Rome appears to burn, and Hannibal
Even at the Gates to stand: then, first of all,
The Field, that Italy devoured, He saw.
What then remained, but the next Day might draw
The Tyrians to the Town? At length, he spoke
To Paulus, thus; Do Thou the Helm forsake
In such Distress? The Gods my Witness are,
Unless thou guide us through this cruel War,
And live (though against thy Will) in such a Storm,
Paulus, (Grief made his Language sharp) more Harm,
Then Varro, Thou will do. Then take, I pray,
(Of Rome's now sinking State Thou only Stay)
This Horse: upon my Shoulders I will take
Thee up, and set Thee safe upon his Back.
As this he spoke, the Consul, spitting Blood,
From his torn Mouth, replies: Go on, make good
Thy Father's Virtues; why should we despair,
So long, as such brave Souls remaining are
In Romulus his Empire? Spur thy Steed,
Which Way thy Wounds permit thee. Let with speed
The City-Gates be shut; for suddenly
This sad Destruction to the Walls will fly;
And (pray) advise, that Fabius may Command
In Chief: blind Rage my Counsel did withstand.
And what of my spent Life remains now;
But that to the rude Multitude I show,
That Paulus dares, and knows well how to Die?
For, thus consumed with Wounds, to them shall I
Be born? What would the Libyan give, that Me,
Turning my Back in Fight, He once might see?
Paulus has no such Thoughts: nor will I go
So poor a Soul unto the Shades below.
No, I am one: but why do I delay
Thee thus, with mild Complaints? Haste thee away,
Hence quickly with thy Steed, with Service spent.
With this grave Charge, strait to the City went
Sad Lentulus: nor yet did Paulus die
Without Revenge; but, as when, mortally
Wounded, a Tiger does, at length, retreat,
And falls to struggle with approaching Fate,
He opens wide his weary Jaws to bite
In vain, and in Attempts, beneath the Height
Of his great Rage, licks, only, with his Tongue
The Lances, and the Darts against him flung.
And now Ilerthes, who insulting near
Approached, and shook, secure of Wounds, his Spear,
He rising, with his sudden Sword, does wound;
And, then, for the Sidonian Captain, round
About him, looks, desiring in his Hands
To quit his struggling Soul: but strait the Bands
Of Nomades, of Garamantians, Moors,
With Celtians, and Asturians, thick Showr's
Of Darts upon him powered, on every Side,
Oppress the Man. Thus Noble Paulus died;
Thus that high, valian^ Heart, whom (if the War
He sole had ruled) perhaps we might compare
With Fabius: his brave Death a Grace became
To Rome, and placed among the This is only an Hyperbole expressing the great
Merit of Paulus, and the Fame of his Death: for the Romans Deified none,
before Julius Caesar, after that Imposture of Proculus, persuading them first
to make Romulus a God.
Stars his Name.
But, when the Romans Hopes were lost, and all
Their Courage, ruined in the Consul's Fall;
To cruel Arms the Headless Paulus, who commanded the Right Wing, and
Servilius, who led the Left, being both slain, and Varro flying at the first
Decline of their Fortune, the Army was Destitute of Commanders.
Army yield
Their Backs: Victorious Africa through the Field
Rages in Blood: Picenian Cohorts here,
And Warlike Vmbrians fall; Sicanian there,
And Hernick Troops: those Ensigns scattered are
Upon the Ground, which Samnites, fierce in War,
Which the Sarrastes, and the Marsi brought*
There Targets pierced quite through, and, as they fought
Broke each against others Shields, and Helmets lay
With useless Swords, and Bridles torn away
From the fierce Horse's Mouths: the Neighboring flood
Throws up his Billows, swelling high with Blood,
Into the Fields, and all the Bodies slain
Returns, with Fury, to the Banks again.
See a Egyptian.
Lagaean Ship, that, Island-like,
Floats on the Sea, if it by Chance do strike
Upon a Rock, while cloudy Eurus blows,
And Shipwreck over all the Ocean throws,
Strait Planks, with Oars, and Tackle, and tall Masts,
Pendants, and Sails, torn with impetuous Blasts,
And miserable Seamen, that again
Spew up the Waves, are scattered on the Main.
The Libyan, by His Slaughters in the Fight,
Had measured out the Day: but, as the Night
The Aid of Light to His great Rage denied,
At length, he laid the cruel War aside,
And from the Toil of Slaughter spared his Men:
But yet, with Cares, his Mind still waked: nor then,
Amidst such Favor of the Gods, could He
Endure to rest; His Thoughts continually
Prompt him to enter Rome: and the next day,
Thence with drawn Swords, in Haste, to march away,
Is his Design: while yet their Blood was warm,
And Slaughter stained the Troops. Now with His Arm
The Gates He seiseth, fires the Walls, and seems
To mix with Cannae the Tarpeian Flames.
Conscious of Jove's Displeasure, and the Fate
Of Italy, Saturnia, troubled at
What He designed, endeav'ring to restrain
The Youth's rash Heat, and in Desires so vain
To curb his greedy Hopes, strait from His deep,
And silent Empire, She the God of Sleep
(By whose Assistance, She had often closed
Jove's weary Eyes, and them to Rest composed)
Summons, and, smiling, said; I call not Thee
(Great God) to hard Designs: nor that to Me
Thou give up Jove, by thy soft Wings subdued,
Do I require: nor, that thou should delude
And shut, in Stygi^^ Night, his thousand Eyes,
That Io kept, and did thy Power despise.
But into Hannibal n^w Dreams inspire;
Nor now ^o visit Rome let Him desire:
Or Walls forbid, where Jove denies, that He
Should enter. Her Commands he instantly
Pursues, and Poppy, in a crooked Horn,
Mixed with some other Juice, through Darkness born,
He silently descends, and to the Tent
Of the Barcean Prince directly went.
Then, hovering over his drooping Head, he spreads
His drowsy Wings, and Slumber gently sheds,
Like Dew, into His Eyes, and with his Hand
Unto His Temples the Lethean Wand
Applies; when suddenly prodigious Dreams
Possess his furious Breast: and now he seems
To compass Tyber, with his numerous Bands:
But, as, insulting, at the Walls he stands
Of Rome, he, frighted, sees Immortal Jove
Shining, on the Tarpeian Rock, above,
And, in his threatening Hand, he Thunder shook,
While all the Neighboring Fields with Sulphur smoke;
Blew Anyo, in cold Waters, trembling lies,
And often (a dreadful Sight) before his Eyes,
Flashes of Lightning fly, then through the Air
A Voice was spread; Thy Progress, Youth, forbear;
Thy Honor's great enough, that does arise
From Cannae, Thou as soon our Marble Skies
May cleave, as through those Sacred Walls (when stormed
By Thee) break way. Thus Juno's Will performed,
Sleep left Him, terrified with what He then
Had seen, and fearing greater Wars: nor, when
The Night was done, did Day absolve his Mind
From that dire Image, which it left behind.
A midst these Troubles of His Sleep, and vain
Disturbance, Mago tells Him, they had taken
The Roman Camp, by Night, and brought away,
With their remaining Troops, a wealthy Prey:
Livy attributes this Advise to Maharbal, whose Counsel (to march away
immediately with his Horse, and to prevent the Fame of his Victory, by
appearing at the Gates of Rome, before they apprehended His Coming) when
Hannibal rejected, he replied, Thou know, Hannibal, how to conquer, but not
how to use Thy Victory.
To Him then promising a joyful Feast,
Within the Capitol, when, to divest
The World of Day, the fifth Night should arise,
The General, concealing the Advice
Of Heaven, and His own Fears, their Wounds in Fight,
And Strength exhausted pleads, and that they might
Not be too Confident of their Success.
The Youth dejected from his Hopes, no less,
Then if he had commanded Him to flee,
Even from the Walls, and draw from Victory
His Ensigns, said, With all this Toil, not Rome
(As She believed) but Varro's overcome:
By what sad Fate, so great Success in Fight
Do Thou neglect, and thus Thy Country slight?
Let the Horse march with Me, and (I will Pawn
My Head) the Iliack Walls shall be Thine Own,
The Gates shall opened be without a War.
While these by furious Mago urged are,
And by his wary Brother not believed,
The Latin Soldiers, flying, were received*
Within They were not above four thousand Foot, and two hundred Horse, that
fled in a Body, and were received into Canusium. The rest came scattered
several Ways, and had only Lodging given them by the Citizens. But all other
Provisions were bestowed on them by a Noble Lady, called Paula Busa; who, the
War ended, was publicly honored by the Roman Senate, for her seasonable
Bounty.
Canusium's Walls, and there apace
Began to fortify. Inglorious Face
Of sinking Fortune! there no Eagles stand,
No Ensigns among the Troops, no high Command
Of Consuls, nor by Lictours Axes born.
But faint with Fear, and, as with Ruin torn,
And maimed, their Bodies on weak Members strive
To keep their Stand: often sudden Clamours rive
The Air, and often deep Silence, with their Eyes
Fixed on the Ground: here naked Companies
With broken Targets stand; the Valiant there
Want Swords: then all the Horsemen wounded are;
From their high-crested Casks their glorious Pride
Was torn, and Mars his Honor laid aside.
Their Corslets pierced with many Spears, and in
Their Mails Maurusian Shafts were sometimes seen
To hang: sometimes they sadly call upon
Their Friends, were lost: here Galba they bemoan,
Piso, and Curio, worthy of a far
More Noble Fate, and Scaevola, in War
Most fierce; all these of Course: but Paulus Fate,
As of a common Father, they regrate,
How He never ceased, with Truth, their present Woes
To Prophecy, and Varro's Mind oppose:
How often, in Vain, that Day from Rome He sought
To turn; and, then, how valiantly He fought.
But such, who Care of future Things do take,
Either are busi'd, 'bout the Walls to make
Their Trenches, or to fortify the Gates,
(As Need required) and where the Field dilates
A plain, and easy Entrance to the Foes,
Firm in the Earth they fix Fire-hardned Boughs,
Like Horns of Stags, and secretly beside,
To wound them in their March, they Calthrops hide.
'Bove all these Miseries, and Wounds, that are
Not to be cured, the Relics of the War,
And such as 'scap'd the Fo, through impious Fear,
And a more fierce Erynnis moved, prepare
(The Climate changed) the Punick Arms, by Sea,
Sidonian Swords, and Hannibal to flee.
The Chief of this Design, for Exile, was
This was L. Caecilius Metellus, who, joining with L. Furius Philo, and some
other of the young Nobility, resolved to fly to some foreign Prince, and for
ever quit their Country; discouraging all Counsels of future Defense, till
Scipio, attended by some other of best Resolution, breaking into Metellus
Lodging, where he with his Associates, were in Counsel, with his Sword in his
Hand, forced them all to take an Oath to prosecute the War against Hannibal,
and so broke their Design. Live. lib. 22.
Metellus, sprung from no ignoble Race.
The wavering Winds of that degenerate Crew
In War, to Counsels base, and strange, he drew:
To look for Lands, where they themselves might hide,
As in another World, and there abide,
Where they might never hear the Libyan's Name,
And whither their forsaken Countrie's Fame,
Might never come. But, when this News was brought
To Scipio, with like Rage, as when he fought
In The Field against Hannibal, his Sword he snatched,
And to the House, where they this Mischief hatched
Against Italy, he hasts, and breaking down
The Doors; and, entering, with a dreadful Frown,
Shaking his Sword, before their frighted Eyes,
He thus begun: Thou Chief of Deities!
Who dwell'st on the Tarpeian Rock, a Seat,
The next to Heaven! and Thou, Juno, not yet
Changed with the Woes of Troy, and thou fierce Pallas.
Maid
Upon whose dreadful Aegis are displayed
The Gorgon Furies, and you Gods, that sprung
From Mortals, and are willingly among
Our Deities adored, and (which by Me,
Is equal held to any Deity)
By my great Father's Head, I swear, I never
Will the La^inian Land forsake, nor e're
Permit, that it forsaken be, while I
Survive. Now then Metellus instantly
Attest the Gods, that, if in Libyan Fire
These Walls shall burn, Thou never wilt retire
Into another Land: unless thou swear
To this; although armed Hannibal were here,
Whom Thou do dread, the Fear of whom does break
Thy Sleep, Thou sure shall die, nor will I take
A greater Pride, in any Libyan's Fall.
These Threatenings crushing that Design, they all
A Sacramental Oath, as was enjoined,
Swear to the Gods, and to their Country bind
Their Souls, and from that Crime their Breasts absolve.
While thus the Latins their Affairs revolve,
With troubled Thoughts: Victorious Hannibal
The Fields again survays, and numbers all
His own dire Acts; searching with greedy Eyes
Their Wounds, and to the cruel Companies
Of Libyans, that round about Him stood,
Yields joyful Spectacles of Roman Blood.
At the last Gasp, sore wounded through the Breast,
With Darts, lay valiant Claelius among the rest,
Expiring his departing Soul to Air,
And laboring, faintly, his pale Face to rear:
Scarce, with his feeble Neck, from Earth his Head
H'ad lifted, when his Horse, that knew him, Neigh'd
Aloud, with prick'd-up Ears, and, Bounding, threw
Headlong upon the Ground Vagesus, who
Upon his Captive Back was born, and then
Flying with Speed over Heaps of slaughtered Men,
And through the slippery Paths, with standing Gore
Made fat, and Bodies changed with Wounds, before
His dying Master stands, and there his Neck,
And Shoulders bowing, offers him his Back,
On bended Knees, as he was wont to do
And, trembling, seems his inbred Love to show.
None could more neatly mount a metled Steed,
This Kind of recreation (formerly in use among the Romans) is now (says
Mounsieur Baudier, in his History of the Serraglio) common among the Turks, who
teach their Horses to kneel, and receive them on their Backs, and in full
Carrier, to leap from one Horse to another, to ly along upon them, or to stand
upright on their naked Backs, while they run at full Speed: and this to be done
frequently in the Hippodrome at Constantinople.
Then he; none surer, as he ran full Speed,
Lay backward all along, or stood upon
His naked Back, or, when he chanced to run
A Race, more happily performed the Course.
But, not a little, wondering at the Horse
That equaled Humane Sense, the Libyan strait
His Name, and Honors, who with adverse Fate
So bravely did contend, desired to know,
And, to dispatch him, gave the Mercy-Blow.
Then Cynna (for He to the Tyrians Side
Had turned his Arms) who near him then did ride,
A Slave to Fortune, answers: Sir (said He)
His Story worthy of your Ear may be.
In former Times, that Rome, which now disdains
With so much Scorn, to bear the Tyrian Reins,
Was under Kings; but, hating Tarquin's Sway,
Soon as She had his Scepter thrown away,
Strait mighty Armies, from Clusinum came,
(If either Cocles, or Porsenna's Fame,
Or Lidyan Camps, by Chance, thine Ear have found)
He, with Maeonian Aids, encompassed round,
And Tyrrhen People strove again to bring
By War, into his Throne, the banished King;
Much, they, in vain, attempted: at the Gate
The Tyrant pressed; when, Peace concluded, strait
All Hate's compressed, and by a League aside
The War is laid, and Faith by Pledges tied.
But, yet (good Gods!) the Roman Hearts, that know
Not how to yield, prepared to undergo
The worst of Ills for Honor! Claelia, who
Not yet the Age of twice six Summers knew,
One of the Latin Maids, that did remain
A Pledge of Peace, among the Virgin-Train
Transmitted to the King: She (not to speak
Of what the Men performed) that King, the League,
Her Years, the Flood contemning, fearless, over
Admiring Tyber, from the Hostile Shore,
Swum, and the Billows broke with tender Hands.
Had Nature changed her Sex, the Tyrrhen Lands
Porsenna happily should never again
Have seen; but (that I may no more detain
You in her Story) from her Stock He came,
And from the famous Virgin took his Name.
As He this Story told, a sudden Cry,
On the Left Hand, broke forth, appearing nigh,
Where Paulus Body, among the Arms of Men,
And mangled Corpse, in Ruin mixed, they then
Dug up, amidst the Slaughtered Heaps. Alas!
How altered? how unlike to Him he was,
That, lately, with his Shafts the Punick Bands
Had routed? Or, when the Taulantian Lands,
With Honor, he had vanquished, and did bring
Into Subjection the Illyrick King?
His hoary Locks all black with Dust; upon
His Beard dry Clots of Gore; a Mural Stone
His Teeth had broke: His Body all one Wound;
Which when, o'rejoy'd, the Libyan Captain found,
Fly, Consul Varro, now, securely fly;
And live (said He) since Paulus, here, did die:
Fly; and to lazy Fabius, to the State,
And People, Cannae's Story all relate.
If Thou desir'st, so greedily, the Light
Of Life, I Will grant Thee such another Flight.
But He, whose valiant Heart (that justly claimed
Me, for a Fo) so brave an Heat enflamed,
With the last Rites of Funeral, by Me,
And Decent Sepulture, shall Honored be.
How Great here Paulus do Thou ly? Whose Fall,
Alone, is greater Joy to Me, then all
The Thousands We have slain; and so, when Fate
Me, with the Safety ( Carthage) of thy State*
Shall call, do I desire to die. This said,
TO Interr his Friends, when the next Morn displayed
Her Blushes from her Bed, and to prepare
A Pyle of Arms (that to the God of War
Were to be burnt) He gives Command: then all,
Though weary, to the Work commanded fall,
And strait in several Heaps the Groves are laid,
And, on the shady Hills, tall Woods are made
To Echo with their Axes: here to Ground
They fell the Ash, and shady Pop'lar, crowned
With hoary Leaves, and there the Holm, that took
Root in their Grand-sire's Age, and firmest Oak;
With Pines, that flourish by a River, and
Sad Cypress, that near Sepulchers do stand,
A mournful Ornament. These to the Field
They bear, and there, with Emulation, build
The Funeral Pyles (an Office to the Slain,
Fruitless, and sad) till in the Eastern Main
Sol drenched his panting Steeds, and, by his Flight
From Heaven, with Stygian Darkness raised the Night.
But, when again the Phaethontian Reins
Shed their first Beams on the Eo^an Plains,
And did to Earth its Colors all restore,
They Flames apply, and Corpse, distilling Gore,
Burn, in an Hostile Land: an horrid Dread
Of various Chance, seizing their Thoughts, is spread
With Silence through their Hearts, lest Fortune, by
An adverse Fight, might cause them there to die.
But Sacred ( Mars) to Thee, up to the Skies,
Like a vast Hill, a Pyle of Arms does rise:
The General himself lifts up a tall
And flaming Pine, and thus on Thee does call:
Great Father Mars! who, now, have heard my Prayer;
These Sacrifices of a Prosperous War,
And First Fruits of the Fight, within this Flame,
I, Hannibal, over the Ausonian Name
Victorious, burn, to Thee, and living Bands
Offer these chosen Arms, with grateful Hands.
Then, throwing in the Torch, the greedy Fire
Devours the Pyle; and strait a flaming Spire
Breaks through the Smoke, and to the Stars ascends,
And a clear Light through all the Field extends.
Thence, hasting to the Tomb, and Funeral
To Paulus given, the Honor of his Fall,
Insulting, boasts. A lofty Pyle, there, They
Had raised, and softer Beds, composed of Hay:
Gifts likewise added are, to the Valiant held
A Funeral Honor: His dire Sword, and Shield,
(Of late a Terror, and a stately Sight)
Then Fasces torn, and Axes taken in Fight.
No Wife, no Sons, no Troops of Kindred near
Allied, were there; nor on the lofty Bier
(As Custom was) old Images precede,
And grace the Exequies: But, now, instead
Of other Pomp, was Hannibal, alone
Sufficient, to Eternize His Renown:
Shining with richest Purple (to the rest
Upon the Pyle) He, sighing, threw his Vest,
And, after that, His Gold-embroider'd Cloak:
Then to His Shade, with this last Honor, spoke.
Ausonia's Glory! go Thou thither; where
Souls, great in Deeds, and Virtue, seated are;
Thou, by Thy Noble Death, have Honor gained:
Fortune, as yet, with her unconstant Hand,
Our Labors guids, and does command, that We
Of future Chances ignorant should be.
Thus He, and, strait from crackling Flames, into
Aetherial Air, the joyful Soul does go.
Now Fame, her Voice increasing, to the Skies,
The Sea, and Earth, and chiefest City flies^
So great (says Livy, lib. 22.) was the Lamentation, and Confusion through the
City, that Fabius, whose present Courage gave Counsel to the rest, was
constrained to confine the Women to their Houses, and in that great
Consternation, to omit the Anniversary Sacrifice to Ceres.
They now distrust their Walls, and, trembling, all
Hope Safety only in the Capitol.
For now, for their Defense, no Youthful Bands
Survive; an empty Name Ausonia stands,
Without a Body: that the Enemy
Not yet broke through the Gates, they think to be
Delay, through Scorn: their Houses now appear
To burn, the Temples spoiled, and every where
Their Sons, in cruel Slaughter, to expire
Before their Eyes, and the sev'n Towers on Fire.
One Day lamented the approaching Falls
Of twice an hundred Senators.
Chairs, and sinking Walls
Of now-exhausted Rome, deprived of twice
Three hundred thousand Youth besides; and this
After sad Trebia, and the Tuscan Thrasimene.
Flood:
And of Allies, as great a Loss of Blood.
Amidst these Griefs, the Pious Senate all,
By Lot, to their appointed Charges fall:
Old Fabius, super-vising what was done
With Diligence, the Affrighted calls upon.
Believed, there 's now no Reason to delay;
We must be speedy, that the Libyan may,
TO approach our armed Walls, attempt in vain.
By Sitting-still cross Fortune Strength does gain
Among the Fearful, and Adversity
Through Fear grows greater. Go, go speedily,
Such Arms, as were taken from their Enemies, had long been preserved, as
Trophies in their Temples: but, in this Exigency, they were constrained to make
use of them to Arm their Slaves.
Snatch from the Temple Arms (Brave Youths) go make
The Courts, and Porches, naked; quickly take
The Targets from the Walls, were gained in War:
Enough our Numbers for our Country are,
If we loose nothing through our Fear to fight:
In open Fields, that horrid Plague may fright
Perchance; but the light-naked Moor shall never
Break through these Walls, or boast his Triumphs here.
While Fabius thus excites their Minds, with Dread
Dejected. 'Bout the Walls a Rumor 's spread,
That Varro was at Hand, and every Breast
With secret Trouble, and with Doubt, 's possessed.
As, when, a Vessel wracked, safe from the Sea,
Alone, the Pilot, swimming, makes his Way
To the open Shore; the People trembling stand,
Uncertain whether they should lend an Hand
To help Him, or refuse Him, and, the rest
So lost, his sole Survival all detest.
How great his Infamy, who durst come near
The Ports, so sad an Omen to their Fear!
These Discontents, and Troubles to a^swage,
And turn the wavering People from their Rage,
Fabius declares; How Base it was to be
Vexed at Misfortunes in Adversity,
It did un-manly seem, in those to bend,
Who their Original from Mars pretend,
Who could not hide their Griefs, but were intent
To remedy their Woes by Punishment:
But, if they would permit him, to upbraid,
To Him that Day more Dismal shined (he said)
When He saw Varro marching to the Field,
Then that, wherein Dis-arm'd he Him beheld.
This Language all their Threats allayed, and strait
Their Hearts were turned. Now they condole his Fate,
Now, sum up all the Comforts from them taken
By the Sidonian, in two Consuls slain.
At Varro's Return, lest the People should grow insolently-cruel, at the
Misfortunes of their Generals, the Senate gave him Thanks, that he had not
despaired of the future good Fortune of the Commonwealth.
Then, to congratulate Him, out they run
In Troops; protesting, that whatever was done,
They did believe, proceeded from a great
And valiant Mind; That trusting to the Fate
Of their Forefathers, and their mighty Power,
He not despaired of the Tarpeian Tower.
No less sad, for his Crime, and full of Shame,
Toward the Walls, the Consul, weeping, came:
Not daring his dejected Looks at all
To raise, to see his Country, and recall
Their Griefs. The Senate, and the People, that
To meet Him went, seemed not to gratulate
His Safety: but sad Parents to require
Their Sons, and Brothers; or, enflamed with Ire,
To tear the Consul's Face, appeared to come:
And therefore, with a silent Lictour, Rome
He, Private, enters, and through Grief contemned
That Honor, which the Gods, so late, condemned.
But Fabius, and the Senate does provide
Speedy Relief, all Sadness laid aside;
And strait the These Slaves were in number ten thousand (some say eight
thousand) and bought from their Masters at the Public Charge, and made free,
that they might not dishonor the Roman Militia.
Slaves are armed: nor does that Shame,
For common Safety, move them to dis-claim
The Camp. But to reduce the Aenei^n State,
By any Means, within the Laws of Fate,
It is Decreed, and for the Sacred Tower,
Honor of Freedom, and Imperial Power,
Even Servile Hands to Arm. Now, they divest
Boys of their Garments, and their Shoulders pressed
With Arms, to them unknown: stiff Helmets close
Their tender Cheeks, and in the Blood of Foes
They are commanded to grow up to Men.
But, when 't was moved the Captive Troops again
Should Ransomed be at easy Rates (for there
Of such, that sought it, many thousands were)
That for the Future, their Soldiers might either die, or conquer, the Romans
refused either to redeem the Captives at the public Charge, or permit their
Redemption by their private Friends: by which means they were most of them
cruelly destroyed by their Enemies, who forced many of the chief, and the
nearest relating in Blood to fight as Gladiatours, and be a Pastime to them,
while they killed each other. Appian. Hann.
They to the wondering Libyan left them all.
So much the Possibility to fall,
Armed, into Bondage, did all Crimes exceed,
All other Guilt surpass. Then, 'twas Decreed,
That whosoever should Convicted be,
TO have fled the Fight in farthest Sicily,
Should serve, until the Fo the Ausonian Land
Should quite relinquish. Such then Rome did stand!
Next whom, Thou, Carthage, had the Fates thought good
To change her Manners, might, as Chief, have stood.
The End of the Tenth Book.
At Decius ^um Vincla ligant n^cte ocius inquit;
(Nam sic Annibalem decet intravisse) caten^s:
Nec plura effari concessum; obnubitur atra
Vest caput, trahiturque ferox ante ora suorum:
Nec Venerem interea sugit ex optabile tempos
Spargere tela manu mandat fallentianatis.
Honoratisso. Domino Dno. Guli^lmo Wentworth, Com. Straffordi^^, Vicecom:
Wentworth, B^roni Wentworth de Wentworth, Woodhouse New-march. Oversley, et
Raby. atque Inclut^ Ordinis Periscelidis Equiti etc. Tabula summa cum
observantia. D D.D.

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Eleventh Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
What People, after Cannae's Loss forsake
The Roman Leagues, and part with Libya take.
The Capuans proud Demands at Rome: which She
Contemning, forced the Messengers to flee
With a Repulse. Strait Capua entertains
The Libyans, which Decius disdains:
His Faith, and Noble Courage: He is sent,
In Chains, to Carthage: whither, as he went,
By Storms, upon Cyrene, he is cast;
Where, rescued from the Libyans, at last
He dies. With wanton, and luxurious Feasts
Loose Capua entertains her Libyan Guests.
Amidst their Mirth, the Death of Hannibal
Pactulus Son conspires. Mago, with all
The Spoils of Cannae, is to Carthage sent,
The People's Acclamations, and Content,
When he arrived. He new Supplies demands
Of Men, and Moneys: Hanno this withstands.
In fine, Mago prevails, and all, that He
Requires, the Senate grants by a Decree.
BUT now what People to the Libyan Side,
And the Sidonian Camp, themselves applied,
Through Cannae's famous Loss, let me unfold.
When Fortune fails, no Mortals long will hold
Their Faith. Their Hands now, openly, they strive
To the perfidious Libyan to give,
Too ready in Misfortune to despair^!
Before the rest, the cruel The Samnites, a People inhabiting between Campania,
Apulia, and Picenum, had often contended with the Romans, and sometimes had
over them very memorable Victories (as at the Caudin^ Straits, where they made
two Consuls, with the whole Army, pass under the Yoke; that is, March Man, by
Man, dis-armed, and without their Belts, under two Spears erected, and a third
lying cross, like a Gallows, in token of Bondage) and, though more often
overthrown by the Romans, never laid aside their emulous Hatred of them, till
utterly subdued, and in a manner extirpated, by Sylla the Dictatour.
Samnites are
Most eager, on Occasion, to renew
Their Hate, and long-concealed Rage to show.
Next, the unconstant The Brutii were the first, that revolted to Hannibal, and
continued with Him, till He left Italy, and some of them accompanied Him into
Africa. They were originally Shepherds to the Lucanians, and, rebelling
against their Masters, planted themselves in the farthest part of Italy, and
became a numerous People. But this Defection reduced them to their Pristine
Condition of Servants; their best Employment, ever after, being to carry
Letters.
Brutians, who, with Shame,
(Too late) did afterward the Fact disclaim.
Perfidious Apulians, next to these,
With their ambiguous Arms: then, hating Peace,
The vain Hirpini, who unworthily
Their Faith infringed. A general Treachery
(Like the Contagion of some foul Disease)
Through all the Nations spreads: and now with these
Atella, now Calatia (common Fear
Depressing Justice) with their Troops appear,
In the Sidonian Camp. Then, with as bold
Inconstancy, Tarentum (that of old
Phalanthus built) the Roman Yoke denied:
Her friendly Gates high Croton opened wide,
And taught the Thespian Nephews, at the Beck
Of Barbarous Africans, to yield their Neck.
Like Rage possessed the Locri, and the Coast,
Where Graecia Major This part of Italy was called Graecia Major, for that it
was subdued ^y the Greeks, who built there several ^^ties, as Croton, Arpi,
Thurium, ^^rentum, etc. beginning at Locri, and ^^tending its Limits eighty two
Miles.
Argive Walls does boast,
And Windings, washed by the Ionian Sea.
These, following the Success of Libya,
And Fortune, in that Error, fearful, swear
To lend their Arms to the Sidonian War.
And, now, the stubborn Bord'rers on the Po,
(The Celtae) strive to increase the Romans Woe
Again; and, mindful of their ancient Hate,
With all their Strength, themselves associate.
But, whither is it more just, this impious War
To the Celtae, or the Boii to refer?
Or rather Capua's Madness; so to please
The Cruel Nation of the Senones?
And who would think those Walls, that, first, did rise
From Dardan Hands, and did, till then, despise
The Friendship of a Barbarous Tyrant, now,
At such a Time, so great a Change should show?
But Luxury, and Ease, that long had bin
Nursed in their Brothels; and, through frequent Sin
All Shame, all Modesty consumed, beside
Infamous Honor, that, alone, relied
On Wealth, with Idleness, the City, void
Of Laws, and lazy People, quite destroyed.
And then a cruel Pride provoked their Fall:
Their Vices want no Aids; for none, of all
The Ausonian People, had a larger Store
Of Gold (so full a Sail their Fortune bore)
Then they: their long-Sleev'd Robes Assyrian Die
Enriched; they Feast, with high Regality,
Even in the midst of Day; soon, as the Sun
Diffused his Light, their Banquets they begun;
Their wanton Lives all Stains of Vices bear:
Beside, the Senate to the People were
Severe: the People, through the Senate's Hate
Incensed, Seditions raise; and, with Debate,
Divide their Hearts: The Headstrong Youth, meanwhile,
Their Crimes increase; and greater Sins defile
The Aged. And then such, as were of Base
Extraction, and whom an Ignoble Race
Defamed, their Falling Countrey's Reins desire
To guide, and to the Chief Command aspire.
With Slaughter, likewise, 'twas their Use, of old,
TO exhilarate their Banquets, and behold
Dire Spectacles of such, as with the Sword
Contend, mixed with the Feast; while on the Board,
Besmeared with Gore, the very Goblets swell
Not more with Wine, then Blood of those, that fell.
With Cunning, These (that to the Tyrians He
Their Minds, depraved, might turn more eagerly)
The Libyan Prince attempts. Because He knew
Rome (notwithstanding all that Chance could do)
Would never yield. 'Twas easy to procure
What He desired: Pactulus (not obscure
For Guilt in this) He Counsels to require
A Share in Government, and to desire,
That, with a Sociate Consul, he might bear
Alternate Fasces. If an equal Share
To Him, in Power, and Honor, they denied,
Nor to behold two Axes would abide,
He, a Revenger, in their View, would stand
Of that Repulse. Therefore a Chosen Band
With Speed was sent, and Virius (who the rest
In Eloquence excelled) himself addressed,
Chief in the Embassy. His Birth, indeed,
Was mean; But yet his Fury did exceed
All else. Scarce what was impiously desired
By the frantic People had He told, and fired
Their Ears with swelling Words, when a loud Cry,
From the whole Counsel rising, did deny
His Message with unanimous Disdain.
Then every One upbraids him, and the Fane,
Through the Contention of their Voices, shook:
And here the brave Torquatus, with a Look,
Grave as his Grand-sire's, said. Do Thou presume
(Oh Capua!) such Messengers should come
Within the Walls of Rome? Against which to bear
Their Arms, nor Hannibal, nor Carthage dare,
After their Cannae? Has 't not touched your Ear,
That, when in the Tarpeian Temple, here,
The Latins proudly urged the like Demands:
Not with a Vote, or Words, but furious Hands
They were repulsed, and He, who hither brought,
And with proud Language uttered what they sought,
With so great Violence, was Headlong thrown,
Out at the Temple-Gates, that, bruised upon
The fatal Rock, he there did expiate*
In View of Jove, his Language, by his Fate?
And I, his Offspring, This Torquatus (who is commended by the Poet for his
Austerity) was descended of the Consul Manlius, whom the Roman Militia dreaded
for his overmuch Severity in Command. He it was, who, when the Latins (as now
the Capuans) demanded to have a Consul of their Nation in Rome, forced Annius
their Ambassador out of the Capitol. and (as some affirm) broke his Neck down
Stairs --.
who that Orator,
Then, from this Palace of the Thunderer
Expelled, and Consul, with his naked Hand,
Defender of the Capitol did stand,
This Madman, who appears, with threatening Eyes,
To view these Trophies of Rome's Victories,
And his Fore-Father's Faction to pursue. --
Vexed Fabius seeing, that He fiercer grew,
In this Dispute, thus interposing, said,
Oh Impudence! Behold that Seat is made
Vacant by Storms of War, and whom of all
Your Crew (I pray) do you intend to call,
And substitute in Noble Paulus Place?
Does thy Lot, Virius, with the Senate's Grace,
Cite Thee, before all other? Or does now
The Purple to our Bruti Thee allow
As equal? Go thou Fool, go thither, where
Perfidious Carthage may, for Thee, prepare
Her Fasces. As with Heat he this Expressed,
Impatient even with Sighs, within his Breast
Longer to keep his Anger (that thus broke,
Like Thunder, forth) aloud Marcellus spoke.
How dull a Patience ( Varro) does thy Mind
Possess? Confounded with this stormy Wind
Of War, so much, that, now a Consul, Thou
These mad, vain Dreams, art able to allow?
Why do thou not, from hence, these Headlong throw
Out at the Gates? and make these Half-men know
How great a Power the Consuls have, that be
Created by Our Custom? And, let Me
Advise (Thou, never-sober Youth! whose Fall
Is nigh) fly quickly hence. Our General
Shall, Armed, before your Walls an Answer make,
Such, as is meet. With that, they all forsake
Their Seats, and, with loud Clamours, press upon
The Capuans, who hasted to be gone;
While Virius, vexed at that Repulse, lets fall
In murmured Threats, the Name of Hannibal.
But Fulvius, the Presages of whose Mind
His future Honor at that Time Divined,
And falling Capua's Image before his Eyes
Appeared, Replies; Though, Crowned with Victories,
Thou, Hannibal, His Neck in Chains, to Rome
Should bring; Yet never, hereafter, shall Thou come
Within these Sacred Walls: then take Thy Flight
(I pray Thee) whither Thy sick Thoughts invite.
At length, this angry Answer of the vexed
Senate they bore away, with Threatening mixed.
Is it thy Will, Great Jove, that Fates should ly
Still Buried in so great Obscurity?
An Age more happy shall hereafter come,
When a Campanian Consul Pious Rome
Shall gladly entertain, and shall afford
Secure those Fasces, of Her own Accord,
To valiant The first of Foreiners, that had the Honor of being Consul, was
Cornelius Balbus, born in the Territories of the Carthaginians. But, after him,
many others were admitted* and among them L. Fulvius, a Tusculane, immediately
after his Country had rebelled against Rome, and he was the Ancestour of that
Fulvius, who reduced Capua to their Obedience. See infra, Book 13.
Nephews, that were long denied
Through Arms, and War: but of their Grand-sire's Pride
This shall a lasting Punishment remain.
Rome shall as soon the Suffrage entertain
Of Carthage, as of Capua. This Reply
When Virius, intermixing cunningly
Fiction with Truth, did, with the Fates, declare:
The Fatal Signal of a Bloody War
Was given, and the Campanian Youth, inspired
With Fury, Arms, and Hannibal desired.
The People, flocking from all Parts, invite
The Libyans to their Houses, and recite
What mighty Things the Libyan Prince has done:
How He, like Hercules, had overrun
The Alps; and, in His Course, had passed those high
Aspiring Rocks, that to the Gods are nigh.
Who had, a Conqueror, choked up the Stream
Of Po, with Slaughter: And, how He (the same
Great Conqu'rour) troubled with Ausonian Blood
The Lydian Lake: and Banks of Trebia's Flood
Transmitted had, with an Eternal Name,
To Fame: How He Flaminius overcame,
And Paulus ( Consuls) whom in Fight He slew.
Beside, how He Sagunthus overthrew,
In His first War. And then Pyrene's Heights,
Iberus, and His Father's Stygian Rites
They all ex^oll, and the War, which long before
He, in His Childehood, at the Altar swore.
And, then, so many Generals overthrown
In Fight; so many slain, that He, alone,
By all the Weapons of the Gods did stand
Untouched, in Battle. While He did command,
With such a Person therefore, they should join
Their Hands, and with Him, in a League, combine:
But, if that Bloodless People's high Disdain,
Vain Contumacy, and that Citie's Reign,
That equal Laws, and Fasces had denied,
(As to their Servants) Capua would abide:
Varro was then to be preferred, that He,
Consul, in Purple, might more Glorious flee.
Thus boasting, they, by Lot, choice Men prepare
To send, that with the Tyrians might swear
A League: but Decius, then, the sole Renown
Of Capua, in his Breast reserved, alone,
Unconquered Courage: and, received into
The Midst of the Assembly (for He Knew
He might not long delay) Why do ye make
Such Haste, dear Countrymen (said He) to break
Our Father's Laws? And, thus, to entertain
Into your Families that guilty Man,
For breaking of the League, condemned by
The Altars? How is thus all Memory
Of Justice lost? It Is Noble, still in great
Affairs, with private Men, or with a State,
To keep Faith in Distress. Time does invite
Us now, for the Rutulians to fight:
Now should our Armies move, our Ensigns fly,
While their State totters, and a Remedy
Their Wounds require. That Kindness is, alone,
That Is offered, when Prosperity is done,
And that gives Aid, where Fortune is declined.
For it is no Honor to a gallant Mind,
To hug the Fortunate. Then hearken now
To Me, their Souls like to the Gods I know,
And Hearts still greater, then their greatest Ills.
Believe Me, Them nor Thrasimenus fills,
Cannae, nor Paulus Memorable Fate:
Even These are they, that with their Arms did beat
The Samnites, extremely vexing the Capuans by their Incursions into their
Borders, and at length fortifying the Hill Tifata, and defeating their Army, in
the adjacent Plain, the Capuans with Tears desired Aid of the Romans, who sent
two under the Conduct of their two Consuls, Valerius Corvinus, and Cornelius
Cossus, who triumphed over the Samnites, and freed the Capuans. Live. lib. 7.
The Fo, fixed on your Walls, and Capua
From the proud Samnites rescued: These are they,
Who gave you Laws, who all your Fears expelled,
And which the Sidicinian Army quelled.
Then what Allies, through Malice, do you fly?
Or, rather, whom do you entertain? Shall I,
A Trojan, who from Father Capys came,
To whom he left his Sacred Rites, and Name
From Jove, of great Iulus Kin, shall I
Among these Half-men ( Nasamonians) ly?
Or among the barbarous Garamantians (which,
In Grinning, salvage Beasts resemble) pitch
My Tent; mixed with Marmarick Troopers? Or
Shall I endure a General, that for
The League, and Justice takes his Sword? and Praise
From Blood alone unto Himself does raise?
No; Right, and Wrong, your Decius does not mix
With such Indifference, that he should fix
On such a Choice: you with no Good so great
Has cruel Nature Armed, as with the Gate
Of Death; which, alwaies-open, gives you Power
To leave a tedious Life, at any Hour.
Thus, to their Ears averse, while Decius spent
His Breath in Vain, a chosen Regiment
Made League with Hannibal: and, strait, a Band
Of light Autololes, with Noise, at Hand
Appeared, sent by the General before,
While He, with a great Body, Marches over
The Plains with Speed; and Decius again
Exclaims, Come; now is the Time (dear Countrymen)
The Hour's arrived, while, following Me, you may
Perform an Action, worthy Capua.
Now let Us all those Barbarous Troops destroy;
Let every one strive soly to enjoy
That Honor; if the Fo approach, the Gate
Obstruct with Carcases, and expiate
This Error with your Swords. Such Blood alone
Can purge your guilty Souls from what is done.
While this (in Vain) to all unpleasant, He
Expressed; informed of his Severity,
With an Heartfull of Rage, the Libyan stands
Before the Walls, and, instantly, Commands
The Deputies into the Camp to send
For Decius, whom rough Valor did commend,
And a Breast armed with Faith; a Soul inclined
To Justice, and then Capua a Mind
More great; who, with undaunted Courage, took
Those menacing Commands: and, with a Look
Most fierce, as bitter Words returns again.
The Libyan Him, so full of brave Disdain,
Amidst so many Arms, and Ensigns, thus
Aloud upbraids: After Flaminius,
And after Paulus, We are challenged! See!
Alas! mad Decius would contend with Me,
To give a Fame, and Honor to his Fall!
But hence, my Soldiers, quickly march, with all
Your Ensigns, and, in Spite of Him, to Me
Let the Campanian City opened be.
What new Wars He can raise I Would, gladly, try
Against Us, to whom the Alps did openly,
And Rocks, that strike at Heaven, over which a God
Alone (before Impregnable) had trod.
With that He, angry, blushed, and from His Eyes,
Through Fury kindled, sudden Flames arise,
And, foaming at his Mouth, deep Sighs he draws,
That break, in dreadful Murmurs, from his Jaws.
By the whole Senate thus attended, He
The City enters; and, his Face to see
The People flocking round, He venteth all
The Storms of his dire Rage, and burning Gall;
While the approaching Dangers more inflame
Brave Decius Mind, who saw the Instant came
Of Time, wherein He was to vanquish all
The Praise of an Unconquered General.
Him neither Flight, nor Barricado'd Doors
Conceal. But Free, as if no Libyan Powers,
No Hannibal, were then, within the Town,
He, with a Fearless Look, walks up, and down;
When strait, with cruel Arms, a furious Band
Seized Him, and forced Him at the Feet to stand
Of Hannibal; who, on a lofty Throne,
A Conqu'rour sat, and, with a Thundering Tone,
This bitter Language vents. Do Thou presume,
Alone, to under-prop declining Rome,
And rescue Her from Ruin? Thou Fool, say;
Which of the Gods from Me shall take away
So great Enjoyments? Or, was I, to be
Subdued, reserved (dull Decius) to Thee?
Weak Decius! To whom no Woman, born
In Agenorean Carthage, but would scorn
To Yield. But Him (for why such high Disdains
Should We endure?) Fast in deserved Chains
(My Soldiers) bind. Scarce He an End had made
Of Railing; when stout Decius they invade,
And bind, with Chains, His Hands upon His Back.
Then, as a Lion, on the lofty Neck
Of a young Bull, amidst the Herd, does leap,
And murmuring with Rage, Victorious, deep
Into his trembling Flesh his Claws has pressed,
There hanging, feeds upon the groaning Beast:
So Decius raging, while His Chains they bind,
Come speedily (for such We ought to find
Thy Entrance Hannibal) these Chains, the Prize
Of this unhappy League, close bind, (He cries)
So Decius may a Worthy Victime fall:
For it is not fit, that Thou, who placest all
Delight in Humane Blood, should Sacrifice
Bulls to the Gods. Let Capua, in this,
Behold thy Right Hand; see thy League: as yet
The Court Thou have not entered, nor have set
Thy Foot with in the Temples; but We see
The Prison's opened by the Cruelty
Of Thy Commands. Go on, and give Increase
To Thy Beginnings, by such Acts, as these:
Fame shall to Me, when Dead, hereafter tell,
That Hannibal in Capua's Ruins fell.
But, here, they stopped His Speech, and over His Head,
To blind His Eyes, a When any Person was condemned, the Judge gave Sentence in
these words; Go, Lictour, bind his Hands, muffle his Head (which was done by
throwing a Cloth over it) bind him to the cursed Tree, etc. which was the
Judgment given against Horatius, for killing King Tullus. Live. 1.
Fatal Robe was spread,
And strait He 's dragged away, in View of all
His Friends: and then Triumphing Hannibal,
With a more quiet Mind, and calmer Look,
Goes on; and, viewing all about Him, took
Survey of all the Buildings in the Town,
And Temples, and, what is worthy to be known
Enquires; Who built the Walls; What Numbers are
In Arms; How Great their Treasure was for War:
What was their Strength of Horse; How great withal
Their Infantry? To Him their Arcenal
They show, and Of this Name there were two Fields. The one near Capena, in
Etruria, whence a Tribe was taken into Rome, and called Stellatina. This other,
lying near Capua, was so fertile, that it was a great Relief to the
Commonwealth, capable to support twenty thousand Men; as Dausquejus, out of
Suetonius, observes.
Stellate Fields with Store of Corn.
The Day now Phoebus to his Bounds had born,
With weary Steeds, and Hesp'rus, by Degrees,
Obscured his Chariot, hasting to the Seas:
When they (as Custom was) their Feasts prepare,
And, through the City, crown with Royal Fare
Their stately Tables Of the Honor He,
And Entertainment of a Deity,
Thought worthy, sits aloft upon a Bed
Of Purple; that far off its Rays does spread.
Nor was the Troop of Servants single; some
Serve in the Meat; others burn rich Perfume;
The several Dishes some, in Order, join;
Some serve in Drink, and Antique Goblets shine,
Of massive Gold, upon the Tables; Night,
By numerous Tapers Flames, is put to Flight:
With Noise of those, that Up, and Down, do go
The high-Roof'd Palace rings. A Stranger to
Such lautious Banquets, with a wondering Eye,
The unknown Face of Stately Luxury
The Tyrian Soldier views: with Silence Hannibal.
He
Feeds on, and blames such Prodigality
In Banqueting; and, that such Troops of Guests
Were entertained, at their delicious Feasts.
But when, at Length, His Hunger was allayed,
And His rough Mind, with Wine, more Frolic made;
When Mirth upon His smoother Brow did rest,
And weightier Cares were banished from His Breast:
Cymaean Teuthras his Euboick Lyre
Tuned, and His Ears, dulled, with the Trumpet's Dire
Alarms, in War, with pleasant Eyrs delights.
Now Jove he sings, and his stolen Loves recites:
Electra's Bed (of Atlas Race was She)
From whence sprung Dardanus; a Progeny
Worthy the Gods: how, to Immortal Jove
Thence Ericthonius did a Nephew prove:
Whence Tros, whence Ilus came, and, in a long
Descent, Assaracus: at Length, He sung
Capys, who equal was in Deeds, and Fame,
To All, and gave unto those Walls their* Name.
The Carthaginians, and Campanians, all
Applaud his Lays: and, first, the General,
With all due Rites, a Goblet Crowned with Wine
Pays to the Honor of the Powers Divine;
The Rest Him follow, and, instructed by
Their Custom, Bacchus Juice flows lib'rally
Upon the Boards, and fires their swelling Veins.
And, now, the Tyrians having given the Reins
To Mirth, a Valiant Soul, untouched with Wine,
(For willingly, brave Youth, Thy high Design,
Worthy all Memory, I Will not pass by
In Silence; nor deserved Fame deny
To Thy Attempts, which, though Imperfect, yet
Were clearest Demonstrations of a Great,
And Noble Courage) from all Venom free
Of Drink, the Honor pondered, silently
Within his Breast, of a Sidonian Fight,
And Death; and, that this Sacred Motion might
The rather be admired, This young Man, called Perolla, was the Son of Pactulus
(or Pacurvius) Calavins, who, though he had married the Daughter of Appius
Claudius, and had likewise given his own Daughter in Marriage to Livius, was
the Chief of the Faction, that caused the Capuans to revolt to Hannibal. Live.
lib. 23.
Pactulus Son
Condemned those Arts His Father had begun.
He, closely following behind His Sire,
Who, with the Feast oppressed, did, Slow, retire
From the thronged Palace, when He found a Time
To open what He thought, and tell to Him
His new Design; and when the Place was free
Behind Them, from the Palace: Hear (said He)
My Resolution, worthy Capua,
And Us, (with that, turning His Gown away,
He showed His Armed Side) I now intend,
With this My Sword, this cruel War to end,
And bear the Libyan's Head to Jove: this Sword
Shall ratify this Infamous Accord,
Made such by His Deceits; but, if Your Age
Cannot, in so great Spectacles, engage,
Or, tired with greater Deeds, now fearful be,
You may securely Home retire, and Me
Leave so my Thoughts. Thou Hannibal do prize
As Chief, and to the Gods do equalize:
But how much Greater, then a Libyan Name,
Will Thy Son be? With that a Dreadful Flame
Seemed from His Mouth to issue, and the Man
Already in his Mind the War began.
But the Old Man, who, with a troubled Ear,
The Weight of a Design, so great, did bear,
Trembling, before Him fell, upon the Place.
And, as He did, with Kisses, often embrace
His Feet, Dear Son, by what remains to Me
Of Life, and by a Father's Rights (said He)
And by thy Safety (dearer far, then mine
To Me) desist (I pray) from this Design;
Let me not see Our Hospitality
With Murder stained, nor Friendly Cups to be
Filled up with Blood, and Tables overthrown
In Fury of the Fight. Can Thou alone
Him, whom nor Armies, Walls, nor Cities dare
Withstand, when He comes near, and every where
Ejecteth Rays, like Lightning? Him, who throws
Something like Thunder from His Head, oppose?
If, when thy Sword is spied, that Dreadful Voice
He should cast forth, by which He often destroys
Whole Squadrons in the Field? You but deceive
Your self; if Him, thus Feasting, you believe
Disarmed. Gained by so many Slaughters, by
So many Wars, Eternal Majesty
The General Arms. If you approach Him, then,
That Cannae, Trebia, and dire Thrasimen,
And Paulus mighty Shade before Thee stands,
Thou will admire; Will His Companions Hands.
Or those about His Person, in so great
A Danger Idle be? I Thee entreat
Forbear, nor wish Superiority
'Bove Him, over whom Thou can not Victour be.
Do not those Fatal Chains, that late did bind
Decius, instruct Thee to compose Thy Mind?
Thus talking, when He saw the Youth to be
Inflamed with Love of Greater Fame, and free
From Fear; I nothing more (said He) request:
Come let us return, with Speed, unto the Feast.
Thou can not pierce the Breasts of all that Ring
Of Tyrian Youth, that now defend the King.
Try in this Throat Thy Hand; for first Thy Blade
(If Thou intend'st the Libyan to invade)
Must through My Bowels pierce. My tardy Age
Contemn not Thou; My Body I Will engage
Against Thee, and that Sword, which cannot be
Extorted now, I, by My Death, from Thee
Will force. With that He wept, and Hannibal,
By Heavens great Care, reserved was to fall
By Scipio's Arms. Nor then did Conscious Fate
Allow, a foreign Hand should perpetrate
An Act so Great. But, of what Praise was He
Deprived, whose Glorious Magnanimity,
Worthy to Act in Deeds most famous, won
So much Renown, for what He would have done?
Then, both together, to the Feast they went
Again, and cleared their Brows from Discontent,
Till Sleep dissolved their Banquet, and their Mirth.
But, as the next bright Morning to the Earth
The fiery Steeds of Phaethon did raise,
His Chariot on the Surface of the Seas
Reflecting; famed Amilcar's Active Hannibal.
Son
Already on His great Affairs begun
To think. Fierce Mago's Ordered to repair
To Carthage, to the Senate to Declare
What Hannibal had done. With Him the Prey,
And Captivated Men, are sent away,
And Spoils, that to the Gods Devoted are,
As Sacrifices of a prosperous War.
The next Part of His Care was to convey
Brave Decius (Alas!) to Libya,
Reserved, at his Return, a Sacrifice
To his slow Rage, had not the Deities,
Pitying his undeserved Punishment,
The Youth, by Storms, to Cyrene.
Battus City sent.
Here The Ship, driven by Tempest into the Port of Cyrene, (then under Ptolomy,
King of Egypt) Decius fled to the King's Statue for Sanctuary, which obliged
his Keepers to carry him to Alexandria to Ptolomy, who, understanding the
Injustice of his Captivity, released him. Live. lib. 23.
Ptolemy's Pellean Power the Man
Rescued from their dire Menaces, that than
His Keepers were, and freed his Neck from Chains:
But the same Land, that saved his short Remains
Of Life, from Slavery, soon after gave
His Bones, inviolate, a quiet Grave.
In the mean Time, the Paphian Goddess finds
The wished for Hour, to involve the Libyans Minds
In secret Ruin, through Prosperity,
And their insulting Hearts, by Luxury,
To tame; and, therefore, She her Sons commands,
Enticing Darts to scatter from their Hands
Abroad, and silent Flames to send into
Their Breasts. Then, smiling on the wanton Crew,
Now let proud Juno Us despise (said She)
(And it is no Wonder, for now What are We?)
Let Her go on, driven with propitious Gales.
She with her Hands, She with her Arms prevails:
We small Shafts only, from a Childish Bow,
Expel, and from Our Wounds no Blood does flow.
But, now, be doing; now is your Time: take Aim
(My Sons) and, with your silent Darts, inflame
The Tyrian Youths; that Army, which nor Fire,
Nor Sword, nor Mars, with slackest Reins, can tire,
With store of Wine, Embraces, and by Sleep,
Must be subdued. Into His Bowels deep
Let Hannibal imbibed Pleasures drink.
To ly on painted Beds, let Him not think
It Shame, and with Assyrian Sweets his Hair
Perfume; let Him, that, in Hybernal Air,
Boasted, to lengthen out His Sleeps, delight
In Houses, rather, to consume the Night:
And let Him Learn to give the Idle Day
To Bacchus; and, when cloyed with Feasts, He may
Be charmed with Music, and Luxurious Nights
Or sleeping spend, or waking in Our Rites*
This Venus; which the wanton Troops commend,
And strait, from Heaven, with Snowy Wings descend:
The Libyan Youths, soon, feel their fiery Darts,
And the discharged Shafts inflame their Hearts.
Now Bacchus Gifts, and Banquets they desire,
And warbling Songs to the Pierian Lyre.
Now through the Plains no sweating Courser flies;
No Lance, thrown through the Air, does exercise
Their naked Arms: in gentle Baths to rest,
Their lazy Limbs they cherish, and, oppressed
With miserable Wealth, rough Valor's gone:
The General Himself, but breathed upon
By flattering Desire, begins to Feast
Anew; and, often invited, 's made a Guest.
And, by Degrees degenerate (His Mind,
Corrupted by those secret Shafts) declined
His Countrie's Arts. With equal Honor, all
Now Capua another Country call,
Another Carthage. Their Affections, free
Before, to greedy Vice, through Victory,
Now yield. Nor do the Capuans Measure keep
In Luxury; but, drowned in Riot, heap
Lust upon Lust, and in their Feasts, between
Each Course, add Sports, and often change the Scene.
So 'bout the Lotos, on Laegaean Banks,
The Phrygian Minstrels, with lascivious Pranks,
Spartan Canopus fill. And, first, their Ears
With his sweet Eyrs. (while Hannibal appears
Extremely pleased) famed Teuthras, for his Skill
Most eminent, Delights with Voice, and Quill;
And, when he saw the Libyan Prince admire
The warbling Nerves, then the Aonian Lyre,
With Praise, he celebrates; and, as he sung,
His well-tun'd-Harp conspiring with his Tongue,
The Music that of dying Swans exceeds,
And those sweet Lays among many (for the Deeds
Of ancient Heroes best the Ear affect)
Most pleasant for the Banquet does select.
Once by the Argive People (strange to tell!)
A Lute was heard, that did the Rocks compel
To follow, and the flying Stones to stand,
Fixed into Walls. Touched by Amphion's Hand,
This raised the Theban Walls; while to the Skies
Flints, of themselves, in Heaps, congested, rise
TO enchanted Towers. Another by his Lays
The Phocae tamed, becalmed the raging Seas,
And Protheus drew through all his Shapes, and bore
Arion, on a Dolphin's Back, to Shore.
But that, whose Sound, in the Peliack Cave,
A Bridle to the Minds of Heroes gave,
And great Achilles Thoughts, the The Centaure Chiron, Tutour to Achilles.
Centaure loved,
And when, upon the Strings, his Finger moved,
Hell's, or the Ocean's Fury 'twould allay.
He Chaos, and the World, once wanting Day,
Or Light, a starless Lump; and then how God
Diffused the Waters of the Deep abroad,
And bound the Globe of Earth amidst the Frame;
How high Olympus to the Gods became,
By his appointment, a Secure Abode,
And chaster Age of Father Saturn showed.
But those sweet Nerves, by Orpheus touched, to whom
The Gods, and Shades below, did listening come,
Their Quill emerited, now shine among
The brightest Stars. His Mother his sweet Song
Admired, and her Aonian Sisters too;
His Music the Pangaean Hills pursue.
Hemus, and farthest Thrace, Beasts, with their Woods,
Him follow, and the Mountains with their Floods;
Unmindefull of their Nests, Flight laid aside,
Birds, Captived, in the unshaken Air abide.
And, when the Pegasaean Ship (before
The Sons of Earth were skilled beyond the Shore)
Refused the Sea to enter, by His Song,
Enticed up to the Poop, the Waters throng.
He those pale Kingdoms, whither Ghosts retire,
And Acheron, that with Eternal Fire,
And Flames, still Echoes, by His Lays alone
Subdued, and fixed the ever-rolling The Stone, which Sisyphus rolls in Hell.
Stone.
Thus Teuthras, with His Thespian Lays their Hearts,
Hardened in War, to softer Ease diverts.
But, in the mean time, with propitious Gales,
Mago unto the Coast of Libya sails;
And the desired Port, with Laurel bound,
The Vessel enters, as in Triumph, Crowned
With captive Arms: the lofty Prow displaies
A Luster over all the Neighboring Seas:
The Seamen in the Road the Ecchoing Shores
With Clamours fill, and, as they tugg their Oars
Against their Breasts, raised by their numerous Blows,
The Foam over all the broken Ocean flows:
To catch their Joys, the eager People press
Into the Waves, and, proud of the Success,
With great Applause, and Emulation, all
Their Welcome celebrate. The General
Is with the Gods compared: Him, every where,
Matrons, and Nephews, (that instructed are
To Honor Him) commend: by Young, and Old,
The Senate, and the People, He Is extolled;
And likewise, by slain Heifers, thought to be
Worthy the Honor of a Deity.
Into His Country thus proud Mago came,
And Gates, triumphing in His Brother's Fame,
Entered: the Senate to their Place resort,
And, with a full Convention, throng the Court:
There (as an ancient Custom did enjoin)
All Veneration to the Powers Divine,
And the Assembly, paid; I bring (said He)
News of that broken Force, which Italy
Against Us used, and of that War, wherein
Your Mago no mean Part of Toil has bin;
And, when We fought, the Gods Our Wishes crowned.
There is a Place, from Diomed Renowned,
Possessed of old by Daunus, the moist Grounds
Their Aufidus with rapid Streams surrounds,
And, through the Plains o'reflowing, cuts his Way
With Speed into the Adriatic Sea,
Where falling with great Noise, he beats again
The yielding Billows back into the Main:
Here Varro, and (a Name of Honor held
Among the Latins) Paulus, took the Field,
Before the Day had chased away the Night,
And kindled with their shining Arms the Light
Of the then rising Morn. Desire, to engage
Enflamed My Brother, and with equal Rage
Our Ensigns hasten on: Earth trembles, struck
With Horror; high Olympus, groaning, shook:
And here the General (then whom the Earth
Unto a Greater never yet gave Birth)
In Slaughter hid the River, and the Field;
And, as He furious charged (this I beheld)
Even with the very Noise, that He came on,
Scattered, through all the Plains, to Him alone
All Italy gave Way: even I beheld,
When Coward Varro basely fled the Field,
And threw his Arms away: brave Paulus too
I saw, when standing over his Friend, and through
His Body pierced, with Darts, at length He fell.
Aegates, and those Servile Leagues, that tell
Our former Infamy, that Glorious Day
With Streams of Roman Blood has washed away.
If such another Day We live to see;
Then Carthage, surely, Thou the Head shall be
Of every Nation, and shall be adored
By all the World! These Trophies shall Record
The Slaughter; which, a Badg of Honor, there,
On their Left Hands the Noblest Persons wear.
With that pours forth (they wondering to behold)
Rings, among the Romans, were peculiar to their Knights to wear, and on their
Left Hands; in this Battle were slain five thousand six hundred, and thirty of
that Order: and, by the Consent of many Authors, their Rings filled three
Bushels.
A mighty Heap of shining Rings of Gold,
And ratifies His Words: and then again
Assumes His Speech; What then does now remain,
But, that (said He) from its Foundation turned,
Rome, with the Ground, should levelled be, and burned?
Let Us endeavor this, and now repair
Our Troops, that by so many Dangers are
Exhausted. Let the Treasures opened be,
With greatest Freedom, to such Hands, as We
Have gained in War. Our Elephants (a Sight
Of Terror to the Romans) now are quite
Decayed, and all Provisions grow low.
As this He mentioned, with an angry Brow,
He turned to Hanno, (whom the rising Fame
Of The General did long ago inflame
With bitter Thoughts) Now we have given (said He)
Proof of our Valor, and Designs to Thee.
Is it now fit, that I a Latin Swain
Should serve? Or must We Hannibal again
Deliver up? Unhappy Wretch! forbear
Thy Poisonous Envy, and Thy Thoughts, that are
Swelled high with Stygian Gall. Behold! that Hand
(At Length Crowned with so many Trophies, and
So many Titles) even that Hand, which Thou
Would have given up to Roman Tortures, now,
Their Shores, Lakes, Rivers, and their Fields with Blood
Has filled. Thus Mago, while the Senate stood
Inclined to favor Him in what He spoke.
But Hanno, whom both Envy did provoke,
And Anger, thus replies: I not, at all,
Admire the railing Language, now let fall
By that rash, foolish Boy. His Innate Pride,
And Brother's Spirit may be soon descri'd
In Him, and the vain Venom of His Tongue:
But, lest You should think Me so changed, among
His Vanities, as to desist, I say;
That now is the very Time, that We should pray
Their Peace, and this destructive War forbear:
And I beseech You to consider here
What 't is He brings; (there 's nothing else beside
Left to Your Censure) it is, that We provide
Arms, Ships, Men, Money, Elephants, with Store
Of Corn. If Conquered, We could give no more,
We have with Trojan Blood, already, cloyed
Rutulian Plains, and Italie's destroyed:
Now then (good Conqueror!) let us lay aside
Our Cares, and in Our Country safe abide;
Let not Our Families, that often have been
Made empty, be exhausted now again
By the Expenses of a wastfull War.
And, now, I Am sure, the fatal Day's not far
Removed (I wish, that my Presage may be
False, and my Mind with a vain Augury
Deluded) but Their furious Hearts I know,
And see the future Anger that will grow
From what they suffer. And, for my Part, I
Even Cannae dread. For lay Your Ensigns by,
Try what is to be done: demand a Peace;
'Twill not be given. Our Ruins will increase
From what they feel: and they would sooner yield
To League with Us; if they had won the Field,
Then now, when overcome: But Thou, who do,
With such proud Language, so Great Actions boast,
And, with such swelling Noise, invad'st the Ears
Of The Ignorant, Thy Brother, (who appears
Equal to Mars in Arms, then whom the Earth
Unto a Greater never yet gave Birth,
For War) Why has not He (I pray thee say)
Unto the Walls of Rome yet Marched away?
We Children, not yet fit the Weight to bear
Of Arms, may, from their Mothers, force to War,
And Rigg a thousand Ships at His Command,
And seek for Elephants through all Our Land;
That Hannibal, thus armed, His Empire may
Prolong, and Reign unto His dying Day.
But You, my dearest Contrymen (for Us
No hidden Dangers compass) do not thus
Spoil Your dear Families; but moderate
The Arms, and Wealth of such, as in the State
Have Power; let Peace, that is the Best of things
To Mortals known; Peace, that more Honor brings,
Then Myriads of Triumphs; Peace, that can
Our common Safety keep, and make This Man
Equal to That: into Our Country be
At Length recalled, and let the Infamy,
And Name of Treachery be banished from
Thy Walls ( Phoenissa) but, if You're become
So greedy of a War, and still persist,
Not to give up your Arms, at the Request
Even of your Country, truly I advise,
That hence your Fury may have no Supplies:
And this let Mago to His Brother say;
More He Would have said (for Speaking could not lay
His Anger) but the Clamours of the Rest,
Divided in their Votes, his Speech suppressed.
At length, 'twas answered: If that the Renown
Of Libya ( Hannibal) excelled by none
In Arms, be Cause of Anger unto Thee,
Even at the very Bounds, must therefore We
Be wanting to the Victour? Or our Aid
Refuse, that one Man's Envy may be made
A Bar unto that Empire, which We now
Have gained? With that they readily allow
Whatever for War is needful; proud, that so
Their Favor, in His Absence, He might know.
Then to Iberia they decree the same
Should be conveyed; while Envy did defame
The General's Immortal Deeds, and made
His Honor to be lessned by this Aid.
The End of the Eleventh Book.
Jupiter Aethiopum remeans tellure minantem
Romuleo vt Poenum vidit succedere vallo.
^ulminaque et tonitrus, et nimbos concitatatros,
Quo vnis oveco^s^ maioraque bella capessis
Nortali quam far datum? Juno inquit, (...) dimouit nubem, Ver^que apparuit
ore.
Honoratissimo Dn^. Domino, Edoardo Comiti Manchestriae, Vicecomiti Mande (...)
de kimbolton Dn^. Camerario Hospitij Dn^. Regis, Cancellario Academiae (...)
Sanctioribus Consilijs, et Inclyti Ordinis Pericelidis Equiti, Tabula sum^a cum
Observantia D.D.D.

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Twelfth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Through Luxury, and Ease, the Lybians, made
Effeminate* Parthenope invade,
And are repulsed. From thence to ^umae, then
To Putzol, on they March, and are again
Repulsed: the Sulfurous Soil, the Pools, and Lakes
Described. From thence the Libyan Captain makes
His Army march to Nola, where they are
Or'ethrown. What Contributions for the War
At Rome are made: such as, would Service fly
In War, are punished with Infamy.
Torquatus prospers in Sardinia.
The Libyan, wasting Countries in his way,
And burning Towns, goes to Tarentum; where
The City is betrayed: the Romans are,
For Safety, fo^c^d to fly into the Fort.
The Ships, by them blocked up, within the Port,
By a new Stratagem unto the Sea,
Over the Hills does Hannibal convey.
By his Host's Treach'ry brave Graochus falls,
In vain endeav'ring the besieged Walls
Of Capua to relieve. The Libyan goes
To Rome; where Storms, and Lightning him oppose.
NOW the sharp Winter, in the Earth again,
His Icy head, his Temples swelled with Rain,
And Cloudy Brows had hid; and Spring, with clear
And warmer Air, and Winds, began to cheer
The fertile Fields; when forth the Libyan breaks
From Capua, and with Panick Terror shakes
The neighboring Towns. As Serpents, that lay still
Concealed, while the Riphaean Winds were chill,
In warmer Days roll from their secret Beds,
And, shining new, erect their Radiant Heads,
And, from their lofty Jaws, their Venom Spout.
But soon as Libya's Ensigns Shined about
The Fields, through Fear, all Desolate was made,
And strait in Works, as Terror did persuade,
Despairing Safety, they themselves enclose,
And Trembling, on the Walls, expect their Foes.
But then that Vigor, that did Armed invade
The Alps, and, breaking through, a Passage made,
That Trebia enjoyed, and stained, with Blood
Of Bravest Romans, the Maeonian Flood,
Was lost. Their Limbs with Wine, and Pleasure made
Effeminate, and, dull with Sleep, decai'd:
Those, that were wont in coldest Nights to ly
Laden with Arms, beneath a Stormy Sky,
And often, when Showers of Hail came Rushing down,
Contemned their Tents: who never by night were known
To lay their Quivers, Darts, Swords, Shields aside,
And Arms, as useful as their Members tried;
Their Helmets, now, an heavy Burden call,
Their Targets Weighty seem, their Jav'lins all
So weakly thrown, that they with Silence fly.
The first of all, that was a^saulted by
Their Arms, was Fair Naples.
Parthenop^e, a Town
Not Wealthy; but for Strength of some Renown:
But the convenient Port the General, who
Sought to secure the Ocean, thither drew;
That Ships from Carthage, there, might safe arrive.
The Citizens did then in Pleasure live,
And entertained, in Peace, the Muses, free
From weight of Cares: Siren Parthenope,
From The Sirens were the Daughters of Achelous, and Melpomene.
Achelous sprang, whose Music long
Reigned in those Seas, when Her delightful Song
Destroyed the Mariners, that near Her came,
Left, to those Walls, Her memorable Name.
Assaulting this behind, (for by the Sea
The Front was Safe) the Libyan no way
With all his Strength could force. Inglorious in
The loss of that Design, He does begin,
With Rams, to Batter the obstructed Gates:
And there, that Conqueror, that even the Fates
At Cannae had Subdued, did stand, in Vain,
Before a For that anciently it was Peopled with a Greek Colonie.
Grecian Bulwark: and again
A cautious Resolution does approve
By that Event; for that He did not move,
After the Daunian Field (that sadly swum
In Trojan Blood) unto the Walls of Rome.
Now You, that call me Idle, and that say,
I know not how, to give the Fates their Way;
For that I would not suffer you to Climb
(Said He) the Walls of Rome, even at a Time
When you had newly Fough^* now enter, and
Within these Houses, which a Grecian Band
Only defends, give Us that Festival,
Which once you Promised, in the Capitol.
While thus He them upbraids: incensed with Shame
(Should He desert the place) of future Fame,
He every thing attempts, and eager Whets
Their Swords, with his accustomed Deceits.
But sudden Flames upon the Walls, and through
The Air, at every Breach, swift Weapons flew.
As, when an Eagle hides upon an High
Imperious Rock her Young, if silently
A Serpent thither crawl, and gaping wide,
By his Approach, her Brood is terrified,
She with her Bill, and Talons (wont to bear
The Arms of Jove) still Watchful, every where,
Resists her Enemy, and flies about
The Circle of her Nest, to keep him out.
Weary, at length, to Cuma's Port He took
His Way, by various Motion to provoke
Fortune, and wave that Blow to His Renown.
But Gracchus, then Commander of the Town,
Was its Defense, and forced Him to retreat
Even from the Walls, not suffering Him to set
Before the Gates, or hope for Entrance there.
Then, mounted on a nimble Steed, Despair
Seizing His Mind, He views, and searches all,
And thus again does on His Soldiers call,
With Arguments of Praise: Good Gods! (said He)
What Period (Friends) what Measure shall We see
Of Standing, thus, at Cumae, and Naples
Grecian Towns, while none
Of You remember, what You once have done?
Is it because a greater Bulk does stand
Before You, then the Alps? and I command,
That You should climb again those Rocks, that strike
At Heaven? Should We another Land, that is like
To that now find, where sudden Rocks, and Snow
Invade the very Stars, would You not go;
And boldly Arms, where're I lead You, bear?
These Walls (Alas!) and Cuman Rampires, here,
Despairing Gracchus hold, I who, perceive,
Even in the least of Danger, dare not leave
Those Ports: but shall the World then think what You
Have gained by Toils, you did by Chance subdue?
I, by those Gods, that at the Tyrrhen Lake
Propitious were, entreat; for Trebia's sake,
And by Sagunthus Dust, Your selves now show
Worthy Your present Fame, and Cannae to
Your Thoughts recall. As thus He sought to raise,
And fix with Words, their Minds, with wanton Ease
Made dull, and through Prosperity decayed;
And, as he there the Avenues survai'd,
A shining Temple, on the Top of all
The Tower He spied, whose famed Original
Thus, Capua's cruel Captain, Virius told.
In this Our Age, that Fabric You behold,
Was not (said He) erected, greater Hands
Built it: when Daedalus lived in the Lands
Of the Minos, King of Crete.
Dictaean King (thus Fame does say)
To quit the Earth, by flying, He the Way
First found; none else, in all the World, did dare,
On borrowed Wings, himself into the Air
To lift, and show men how to fly. But He,
His floating Body poising equally
Amidst the Clouds, soon mounted out of Sight;
Like a strange Bird, affrighting in His Flight
The very Gods. His Son likewise assumes,
By his Advice, the Shape of borrowed Plumes,
To try the ways of Birds. But Him again
He fallen beheld, beating the troubled Main
With his unhappy Wings, and broken Oars
Of Quills; and, as Indulgent, he deplores
His sudden Fate, moving his Hands unto
His Breast, unmindefull whither He would go,
Sorrow his Flight delayed: but, to appear
Grateful for his Cloud-wandring Passage, there
To Phoebus he first built that Holy Fane;
And laid aside his daring Wings again.
This Virius. But Hannibal each Day
Passed without Action Numbers, of that Stay,
And cross ashamed he Sighs, and Quits the Town,
Resolved to satiate his Grief upon
The Dicarchaean Putceli.
City: but even there
The Sea, and Industry of those, that were
Within, and lofty Walls, repel his Rage.
And, while a Tedious Labor does engage
His Army, there to force a Passage, through
The rough obstructed ways, He takes a view
Of the Mirac'lous Pools, and Soil not far
From thence. The Chief of Capua present are;
And one among the rest begins to show,
Whence the warm Baiae were so called, and how
One of the Famed Dulichian Ship, which came
Upon that Coast, left to that Pool his Baius, one of Ulysses his Companions,
buried there.
Name.
Another tells, the Lucrine Lake of old
Was called Cocytus; and commends the Bold
Adventure of Alcides, 'midst the Sea,
When He dispersed its Waves, and brought away*
The Iberian Heard: how Styx its Ancient Name
Had to Avernus changed, of greatest Fame
Among those Silent Lakes: then the Dark Face
Of Groves, and Shadows, that invest the Place.
Fatal to Birds, it breaths, into the Air,
A dire Contagion, and is every where
Renowned, for Stygian Worship. Near to this,
(As Fame reports) a Dreadful Pool there is,
Which leads to Acheron, and, opening wide
With a Deep Gulf, divides, on either Side,
The gaping Earth, and sometimes does affright
The Ghosts below with unexpected Light.
Not far from this, the Place all Dark, they tell,
Where the Cymmerian People long did dwell,
In a Tartarean City, under Ground,
Pressed with Infernal Clouds, and Night profound.
At length, they show those Famous Fields, that Fire,
Sulphur, and boiling Brimstone still expire.
From the parched Entrails of the Groaning Earth
Black Vapors break, like Waves, and, at their Birth,
Into the Air cast Stygian Blasts, that from
The trembling Caves, with dreadful Murmurs, come.
And as, sometimes, the Fire beats round about
Those hollow Rooms, and Labors to get out,
It sadly Bellows, with a threatening Sound,
And tears the mangled Entrails of the Ground,
Destroys the shaking Mountains, eaten through
With Flames. The Giants there (if Fame say true)
The Phlegraean Field, where the Giants were overthrown by Hercules.
Subdued by Hercules, the Earth that is cast
Upon them shake, and, often breathing, Blast
The Fields, and, when they Threaten to prevail,
And break their Chains, the very Heavens grow Pale.
There cruel Mimas Prison; Prochyte
Appears: and, farther off, Inarime;
Which, with Black Storms, fuming Iapetus down
Does press. While frequent sulfurous Flames are thrown
From his Rebellious Mouth, and, if he should
At any time get loose, again He would
Against the Gods, and Jove, the War renew.
Not far from these Vesuvian Cliffs they show,
And on the Top the Rocks, devoured still
By Flames, with Ruins, round the broken Hill,
And Stones, that equal Aetna's Fates: and there
He sees Misenus, in his Sepulcher,
Keeping his Trojan Name, and on the Shore
The Herculean Bauli. Thus does he explore.
With Wounder, both the threatenings of the Sea,
And Labors of the Land. These seen, away
To the Pherecyades high Walls he hasts,
And the Nysaean Top of Gaurus wastes,
Fertil^ in Generous Vines. From thence amain
His Troops he leads to Nola; (in a Plain
Nola is situate, encompassed round
With numerous Towers, guarding the Level Ground
With a deep Trench) but there Marcellus, who
Assumed not Arms to be protected so
By Towers, who would have Valor only made
Their Wall's Defense, brought them both Strength, and Aid.
He, when far off the Libyan Fleet he spied,
Which thither Steered, and toward the Walls applied
The Flower of all their Force; To Arms, said He;
The cruel Fo draws near. And instantly,
Exclaiming thus, his Arms he takes in Hand;
And strait the eager Youth about him stand,
And in a Rage (as Custom was) put on
Their bloody Casks. Then, running up and down,
The Troops he orders thus; Nero, by Thee
That Port, on the Right Hand, shall guarded be:
Thou Tullus, who the Volsci's Glory art,
Thy Larinantian Ensigns shall divert,
And Country Cohorts, to the Le^t; and, when
I give the Word, with sudden Fury then,
And Silence, force the Gates, and pour into
The Fields your Showers of Darts against the Fo;
Into the Midst of them I Will charge, and force
From the open Gates the Skirmish of their Horse.
As thus Marcellus spoke, the Libyans strove
The Bars, and Pallisadoes, to remove,
And the despised Walls to scale. Then, round
The Town, the Trumpets, and shrill Cornets sound,
With Shouts of Men, hoarse Horns, and clashing Arms
Against their furious Limbs. With these Alarms
The Elephants advance, incited by
The Darts upon them thrown: and suddenly,
Like a rude Storm, the Troops of Horse came on,
And charged. As when, the Banks, and Locks, overthrown,
Unruly Rivers Inundations make:
Or, driven by Boreas, foaming Billows break
Against the Rocks: Or, an Eruption made
From their dark Prisons, Winds the Land invade
Nor with that dreadful Sight of Arms, and Men,
Could Libya hope to gain the Place. For then,
On's frighted Steed, the Marcellus.
Dardan General
Advanced, and at their flying Backs, withal
His Fury, pressed His Lance: invoking thus
His Friends; The Gods, and Time, now favor Us.
Go on, this leads to Capua's Walls. And then,
Turning upon the Enemy again;
Stay, whither haste Ye^ I do not (said He)
Upbraid thy flying Men, but rather Thee,
Perfidious Hannibal; for in our Hands
The War, this present Field, and Army stands:
I Will quit Thy Troops from Slaughter, let Them see
A single Combat between Thee, and Me.
Marcellus this demands! This said, the Fame,
And Value, of the Danger did inflame
Him with the Libyan to begin the Fight.
But this to Juno was no pleasing Sight;
Who Him diverted, hasting to His Fall,
From what He then designed: while Hannibal
Strives all He can to Rally, and to Stay
His frighted Troops. Such then from Capua,
And from those fatal Mansions, do We come?
(Said He) Oh stand, ye Wretches; You, whose Sum
Of Glory, is Dishonor! Credit Me,
No Place will Faithful prove to You, that flee:
You have deserved, that all Ausonia now
Should rise against You; and it is from You,
You, that with so great Terror routed are,
That all may both of Peace, and Life despair.
His Voice suppressed the Trumpet's Sound; and, though
Obstructed, through their Ears, his Clamours go.
In Grecian Arms young Pedianus stood,
Most fierce in Fight, and from that Trojan Blood
Himself derived, that from Antenor came.
Nor less, then His Original, in Fame
Was He, A River, that descends from the Alps, and, running more then forty
Miles under Ground, breaks out again near Venice, and emptieth it self into the
Adriatic Sea; the Euganean Lake not far from it.
Sacred Timavus Glory, and
A Name beloved in the Euganean Land.
To Him, nor Father Po, nor those, that boast
Their Aponus, nor the Venetian Coast
Could any Equal find. Whether he fought,
Or in a studious Life the Muses sought,
Or turned Aonian Ditties with his Quill,
Not any was more famous for His Skill:
As He, in full Career, did close pursue
The Libyans at their Backs; and, near them, knew
The Cask, and Noble Spoils, of Paulus slain,
Worn by young Cinyps, who rejoiced (in vain)
In that great Favor of his General.
This Cinyps was beloved by Hannibal:
None was, then He, more Beautiful in Face,
None in the Forehead had a greater Grace;
So shines that Ivory, that, in the Air
Of Tibur bred, Time never can impair;
Or Gems of the Red Sea, which in the Ear,
For Whiteness of admired Price, We wear.
Him Glorious in His Helmet, and His Crest
Well known, in the last Rank, among the Lest,
When Pedianus spied, and to His Eyes
Paulus, from Shades below, appeared to rise,
Gnashing his Teeth, he charged him; Must (said He)
The Trophies of that Sacred Head by Thee
Be worn; which not, without the Crime of all
The Gods, and Envy, even your General
Could wear? See Paulus! (and, with that, upon
The Ghost of Paulus calls to see it done)
And, as he fled, his Lance, with all his Force,
Thrusts in his Side; then, lighting from his Horse,
Tears off the Cask, and Trophies of the Great
Consul, with his Right Hand, and, while he yet
Could see, despoils him of his Honor: all
His Beauty is dissolved in his Fall.
And strait a Stygian Color over-casts
His Snow*white Limbs, and all the Glory blasts
Of His admired Form; His Amber Hair
Disordered falls; His limber Neck can bear
No more its former Weight; but, as oppressed,
Sinks with His Head into His Milky Breast.
So, when then Lucifer.
Cythereian Star again
Rising, refreshed, from the Eoan Main,
Himself to Venus boasts, if Clouds invade
His Face, the Luster of his Beams will fade,
And soon, decreasing in that Mask of Night,
Retires his languishing, and fainting Light.
Even Pedianus, as he takes in Hand
His Helmet, at his naked Face does stand
Amazed, and checks his Rage, and then away
Bearing, with Shouts, unto his Friends his Prey,
He Spurs his furious Steed; which Stains with Gore,
From his fierce Mouth, the frothy Rems he wore.
But, then Marcellus, fierce in Arms, came on,
And meeting Him, the Honor He had won
Thus gratulates. Go, Antenorides,
Go on; and by such valiant Acts, as these,
Surpass thy Ancestors* it now (said He)
Remains, the Spoils of Hannibal should be
Our Prize. Then, fired with Rage, his fatal Lance,
With dreadful Noise, he threw; nor had, perchance,
His Wish been vain, had not the Obvious Force
Of Gestar with his Body stopped the Course
Of The flying Shaft: for, while He, fighting near
At Hand, defends his General, the Spear,
Not aimed at Him, past through Him, ending all
His mighty Threatenings in His changed Fall.
With that the General, with Speed, withdrew,
Struck with the Danger of his Death, and to
The Camp retired. Then, with a Headlong Rout,
The Libyan Army turned their Arms about,
And all contend, who shall most Speedy fly:
Their Enemies Pursue, and satisfy
The long-contracted Anger of their Woes;
While every Man with Emulation shows
To the Revenging Gods, and Heaven, His Sword,
All stained with Blood. The Reputation of this Victory was of greater
Consequence, then the Victory it self (though some say the Carthaginians lost
two thousand three hundred, and the Romans but one man) for from thence the
Roman^s took Courage, scarce believing before, that Hannibal could be
vanquished in open Fight.
That Day did first afford
That, which even from the Gods none durst believe
Before; that it was possible to give
A Stand to Hannibal in Fight: but then
They took His Chariots, Eleph^nts, and Men,
And stripped the Living; and, thus joy'd to see,
That Hannibal did from the Slaughter flee,
Return. Marcellus to the God of War,
In Honor, is compared; and Greater, far,
In Triumph marched, then when He once did bring
His Victory over Viridomarius, King of the Gauls. See above in the first Book.
Opimous Spoils to the Tarpeian King.
But, when the Libyan Prince, with much ado,
Had from His Trenches forced the Conquering Fo;
When, and with how much Hostile Blood, shall I
Wipe off this Stain? Ausonia saw Me fly.
Oh Jove! (said He) do thou conclude, that I
Am worthy, after Trebia, thus to die?
And You, My long-unconquer'd Troops! who are
(Alas!) now Vanquished without a War
By Capua's Wealth; I, not degenerate
From former Acts, have seen You turn of late
Your Conquering Ensigns from the Latins, and
Showed them Your Backs: and, when I called to stand,
And fight, from Me You fled, Affrighted, all,
As if from the Italian General.
What then of the ancient War remains (said He)
In You, who can, when I recall You, flee?
Thus Hannibal, while, with loud Shouts, their Prey
The Roman Troops to Nola bear away.
But Rome, which had been long inured to hear
The sad Disasters of their Friends, and never
Enjoyed Success, the joyful Tidings brought
At Length, how Happily they then had fought,
With that great Favor of the Gods erects
Her drooping Head, and Courage recollects.
But, first, those Coward Youths, that slowly to
The War were drawn; and, while it raged, withdrew,
And hid themselves from Danger, punished be
For their Concealment. Then with Infamy
They Mark all those, that, through a fond Desire
Of Life, had Arts invented to retire;
Or, in a League with Hannibal had bin
Involved: and purge the Nation from that Sin.
That fatal Counsel's punished, and Thy Crime
( Metellus) who consulted in a Time
Of Danger to desert Thy Native Land.
Such then the Hearts of Men: the Women stand
Resolved to equal them, and to require
A Share in Glory. Then their Antique Tire,
And Gems, which did their Heads, and Hands adorn,
And Carkanets, that from their Necks were torn,
The joyful Matrons bring, and to the War
With Emulation Sacrifice; nor are
The Men unwilling, they should share so great
A Lot of Praise, and, to perpetuate
That Act, rejoice to give them Place. Next whom
A Noble Troop of Senators does come,
And all into the Public Treasure heap
Their private Riches: none desire to keep
A secret Stock, in Store, for better Days:
But, even the Vulgar strive the Banks to raise,
And with the Spoils of their poor Lares come.
Thus all her Limbs, and Her whole Body, Rome
At once employing, raised again to Heaven
Her Bloodless Face: besides the Answer given
At This Answer of the Oracle was brought by Q. Fabius Pictor, who, ^^^^ructed
by the Priest, wore a Wreath of Laurel, as he entered the Temple, to enquire the
Oracle, and, when he recieved Answer, went directly to his Ship, on the Poop
whereof he placed it, and never removed it, until he arrived in Rome, where it
was deposited on the Altar of Apollo, with great Solemnity. Live. lib. 23.
Cyrrha adds new Hopes, and seems to allay
Their Woes; the Messengers reporting, they
Had joyful Tidings heard, when from the Den
A Sacred Voice, like Thunder, broke, and when,
Inspired by Phoebus, the Prophetic Maid
This bellowed out; Let all your Fears be laid
Aside, fair Venus Race! Whatever remained
Of Misery, in your sad War sustained,
Exhausted is: Light Labors are behind,
And, without Dangers, Fears: be still inclined
To Prayers, and to the Gods Devotions pay;
Warm Sacrifices on their Altars lay:
Nor yield to Misery; for Mars will you
Assist, and the (p) Cyrrhaean Prophet (who
Was ever prompt to ease the Trojans Woes)
Will all those Ills, that threaten you, oppose;
But let an hundred Altars, first of all,
Be Crow'nd with Fire, as many Victimes fall
To Jove; He this dire Cloud, and Storms of War
Shall, Violent, to Libya drive. From far
Your selves shall see Him shaking, for the Fight,
His Aegis, which shall all the World affright.
When this, at Cyrrha sung, they did Proclaim,
And to the People's Ears Apollo came,
Up to the Capitol they flock amain,
There, prostrate to the God, the Holy Fane
With Blood they Honor, Paeans sing, and Jove
Entreat, the Answer may Authentic prove.
In the mean time, Torquatus, old in Arms,
Sardinia, with his Countrey's Force, Alarms:
For there (his Name from Trojan Blood derived)
The Sardinians had yielded to the Obedience of the Romans at the End of the
first Punick War, and now at the instigation of Hanno (not the Enemy of
Hannibal's Family) rebelled, under the Conduct of Oscus, and Hasdrubal. In two
several Conflicts the Sardinians lost the Day: and in the later, twelve
thousand men were slain, among them the King's Son Oscus; three thousand, two
hundred taken Prisoners, and with them Hasdrubal, Mag^, and Hanno, three
eminent Carthaginians, and the Island reduced to its former Obedience.
Hapsagoras unto the War, revived,
The Tyrians called: brave Oscus was His Son,
Worthy a better Father, who, upon
His forward Youth relying, trained His Young,
And tender Years (as Custom was among
Those Barbarous Nations) in Arms. When He
Torquatus saw Advancing, furiously,
With hasty Ensigns, greedy to begin
The Fight; strait fallying forth, experienced in
The Advantage of the Place, a nearer Way
He takes, and, where thick Forests did display
Their shady Heads, through devious Paths, He flies,
And, in an hidden Vale, in Ambush lies.
The Isle, Man's Foot resembling, by the Sea
Encompassed, and assaulted every Way
By Billows, and by Waves compressed, contains
Vast Tracts of Land: at first the Grecian Swains
Called it Ichnusa; But, soon after these
(Boasting His Blood from Libyan Hercules)
From Himself, Sardus on the Land His Name
Imposed; the Teucri likewise thither came,
And, there dispersed through all the Sea, when Troy
Was overthrown, did forced Abodes enjoy.
Then likewise, Iolaus, to the Land
No little Fame did add; when with a Band
Of Thespians, in thy Father's Navy, there
Thou did arrive. It Is said, when Cynthia Fair
Was by Actaeon in the Fountain seen,
And, all his Members torn, his Crime had been
Sadly Revenged, affrighted at his strange
Unusual Fate, and his prodigious Change,
His Father Aristaeus fled by Sea,
And to Sardinia came: they tell the Way
Unto that Coast, to Him before unknown,
Was by His Mother famed Cyrene shown.
The Country is from Serpents free, and void
Of Poison; but with Bogs, and Fens annoyed,
The Air 's unwholsom; where it looks upon
The Italian Shore, with Rocks, and Hills of Stone,
It breaks the sparkling Waves. Within, the Plains
With sultry South-Winds, when hot Cancer reigns,
Are Pale, and too much parched; but all the rest
Is Fertile, and with Ceres Favors blessed.
Through this rude Tract of Land, and Pathless Groves,
The Fo, Torquatus often deluding, moves,
And in Expectance of Iberian Aid,
And Tyrian Weapons, for the Battle stayed.
At Length, the Fleet arriving, and his Men
Encouraged more, without Delay, again
He from his Covert leaps: and then at large
The adverse Troops drew out, and seem to charge,
And join, though Distant; and no Space between,
For hasty Darts, at Distance could be see:
Till, trustier Weapons, their tried Swords they drew,
And then a cruel Slaughter does ensue.
They kill, and fall alternately, and, on
Their fatal Points, descend to Acheron.
I cannot hope their numerous Slaughters, and
So many horrid Acts, for a Command
So High, so Great, to utter, as I ought,
Or equal with my Words their Rage, that fought.
But Thou, Calliope, my Labors bless;
That, to Eternity, I may express
Our Poet's Noble Deeds, but little known
As yet, and Consecrate His due Renown!
Ennius, of King Mesapus ancient Line,
Who to the Honor of the Latin Vine
Did, by His Valor, add, led the Forlorn
To fight, sent thither from Calabria; born
Among the ancient Rudiae, now known
In His surviving Memory alone.
He (as, of old, the Orphsue.
Thracian Singer, who,
When Cizycus with War shook Argos, threw
His Rhodopeian Darts, when He had laid
His Quill aside) with no small Slaughter made
Himself to be observed, when first he Charged,
And from the Slaughters of his Hand enlarged
His Fury. Oscus hoping, if that Stain
He wiped away, Immortal Praise to gain,
Upon Him flies; and at Him throws his Spear,
With all His Force: Apollo, sitting near
Within a Cloud, derides what He designed,
And, driving far the Shaft into the Wind,
Fond Youth (said He) Alas! Thou do aspire
Loo high, to let His Spoils be thy Desire:
He Is Sacred, and the Muses greatest Care,
A Poet worthy Phoebus; who shall dare
The first, in Noble Verse, Italian Wars
To sing, and raise their Captains to the Stars:
He Helicon, with His Immortal Lays,
Shall make to Echo; nor shall He in Praise,
Or Fame, unto the Old He^iod.
Ascraean yield.
Thus Phoebus; and through Oscus Temples thrilled
A swift Revenging Dart: his sudden Fall
Makes the whole Army face about, and all
The Troops, affrighted, through the Champagn fled.
The Father, hearing that his Son was dead,
Groaning with Rage, pierced his own panting Breast,
And to the Shades below his Footsteps pressed.
But, Hannibal in Fight thus broken, and
Crushed by Marcellus, wastes the Neighboring Land,
And turns His unjust Arms upon the Poor
Acerrae; which to Fire, and Sword, given over,
With no less Rage He on Acerrae, and Nuceria, were both destroyed by Hannibal.
The first (the People stealing out by Night, and flying into other Cities of
Campania) found empty, was burnt by Him: The later, after an hard Siege,
yielded on Conditions, That all the People might march away, every Man with two
Garments; but no sooner came they out of the City, but He forced them into
Sulphurous Pits, where they were choked with Smoke, and Vapors. Live. 23.
Neuceria falls,
And levels with the Ground her stately Walls.
Next, Casilinum, (now Casteluccio) held out a long Siege, until they had eaten
all things Edible (even to their Bridles, and all things covered with Leather)
but, at length, having some small Relief of Nuts, which the Romans put into
Barrels, and sent floating down the River Vulturn^s (which ran through the
Town) Hannibal (who before was deaf to all Conditions) was induced to give them
their Lives for Ransom, and upon Payment gave them safe Conduct to Cumae. Live.
23.
Casilinum's Gates, that long had bin
Stoutly defended by their Arms within,
By Fraud with much ado he gained, and sold
Unto the starved Besieged their Lives for Gold.
And then into the Daunian Fields He falls,
And, to what Place soever His Malice calls,
Or Plunder does invite, His Fury turns.
Then, smoking in Her Fall, The Petilians (whose City was built by
Philocteles, to whom Hercules bequeathed his Quiver) of all the Brutians, only
kept their Faith to the Romans. Which caused Hannibal to use them with the
greater Severity; burning their City to the Ground, and slaying most of the
Citizens: eight hundred of which, escaping His Fury, were, after His Departure
from Italy, with great Care, and Honor, replanted by the Romans, in their
Country. Appian. in Hannibal.
Petilia burns,
Unhappy in her Faith, the next to sad
Sagunthus Fate, and Proud, that once She had
Alcides Quiver kept. To the Libyan Side
Tarentum, after this, her self applied,
And gave them Entrance; but a Latin Band,
Relying on the Place's Strength, remained
A strong Reserve within the Citadel.
The Citadel of Tarentum, placed within one of the Havens (for there were two,
divided by an Is^hmus) held out sometime after Cononeus, had betrayed the Town
to Hannibal: So, that, to hinder their Relief by Sea, He made use of this
Stratagem to convey Ships over the Isthmus, and so streightning them on all
Sides, to Extremity, at last received that likewise to His subjection.
Here he removed his Navy (strange to tell)
That ready Rigged within the Harbor lay;
For, at two narrow Mouths, the crowded Sea
Breaks out between two Rocks, and, with a Large
Recess, a secret Ocean does discharge
Into the Plains: But He the Ships (that there
Blocked up, by the Arcenal Commanded were)
By Stratagem, recovered from the Sea's
Embrace, another Way by Land conveys.
First slippery Planks on every Oaken Wain
Were laid, and Hides of Oxen newly slain:
The nimbly-turning Wheels, through Meadows, drew
Their Load, and then over lofty Hills, and through
Thick Groves, the Fleet arrived, upon the Shore,
And swum, brought to the Sea, without the Oar.
But Fame (the Navy by no usual Way
Transported) Him, that terrified the Sea,
Now fills with frequent Cares (while He pursued
The War far off, and hoped to have subdued
The The Tarentines.
Oebalian Race) that Capua was then
On every Side besieged, the Bars again
Of The Gates forced open, and quite overthrown,
And the whole War upon that Wretched Town
Was turned. Enraged, He quits that Enterprise;
And, Shame, and Anger, Wings affording, flies
The next Way thither, with prodigious Haste,
And Threatening, to the Fight, desired, past.
So, of her Young deprived, a Tigress flies
From Covert, and with Rage-inflamed Eyes
Explores all Caucasus, and in few Hours,
With the like Speed, over Ganges Borders scours;
Till in her Course, their Tract She apprehend,
And on her Fo, surpised, her Fury spend.
Him, in his March, Centenius (rashly prone
To all Attempts, and Dangers) falls upon
With sudden scattered Troops, but yet with small
Honor to the Sidonian General:
For, Rich in Latin Vines, the Pesants He
Had round about Him raised, and suddenly
An half-Arm'd Band opposed against the Fo.
Twice sev'n were slain, and still they forward go:
Then twice sev'n thousand Fulvius (then He
No more expert, but of a Family
Renowned in Arms) all well Appointed led:
But He still over Heaps of scattered Dead,
A Conqueror, goes on, and cuts his Way
Through all; nor in his March admits Delay.
But the Ambitious vain Desires to raise
Unto Himself the empty Name, and Praise,
Of a Brave, Generous Mind, upon Him call
To solemnize a joyful Funeral.
For, while a Parley Flavius Lucanus, wsio entertained Gracchus in his House,
pretending some of the chief Lucanians would come to a certain place to treat
with him, prevailed, that He went out to meet them, and was betrayed into the
Hands of Hannibal, who admiring his great Valor (for that, when he saw himself
betrayed, he resolved not to be taken alive) at his Death celebrated his
Funerals with great Solemnity, and sent his Bones to Rome.
Gracchus did demand,
And the perfidious Promise entertained
Of the Lucanian People, (Sad to tell)
By His Host's Treachery, surpised, He fell;
And Hannibal with Greediness assumed
The wished for Praise, to see His Corpse entombed.
But, soon as it was known, that, with such Haste,
To the Campanian Walls the Libyan past,
Affairs no where stand still. Both Consuls take
The Field with Speed. Nola, and Arpis make
What Strength they can; Young Fabius, among
The Rest, His hasty Forces brings along.
There Nero, here Syllanus, Day, and Night
Their Cohorts speed to the desired Fight,
And from all Quarters come; resolving all
Their Generals to oppose against Hannibal
Alone. While, nearer to Tifata, He
Advances, where the Hill's Vicinity
Pressed on the Neighboring Walls; and, looking down
From that near Height, survays the lower Town.
But, when such numbers of Allies He found,
Which with their Arms the Gates encompassed round,
That Entrance was denied to Him alone,
And that they could not sally from the Town,
Doubtful of the Event, sometime He thought
Through all, that then opposed Him, to have fought
A Passage with His Sword; and then declined
Again whatever before He had designed;
And seeks those Myriads by Policy
To draw from the besieged Gates, and free
The enclosed Walls. Thus therefore His resolves
He with Himself debates, and Cares revolves.
Oh! whither tend My troubled Thoughts? Shall I
In this unequal Place new Dangers try,
And Capua see Me fly? Or sitting still,
Upon the Top of this adjoining Hill,
Shall I endure this Town of My Allies
To be destroyed, and fall before mine Eyes?
Such Me nor Fabius, nor Minutius found,
When I escaped from Hills encompassed round
With armed Troops: With Victory, compelled
The affrighted Herd to scatter, through the Field,
Flames from their burning Horns, wheree're they run.
Nor yet are all My Arts, and Projects done:
If Capua cannot now defended be
By Us, yet Rome may be Besieged. When He
Had thus His Resolution fixed, before
The Sun had raised from the Eoan Shore
His Horses, breathing Day, both with His Hand,
And Voice, He draws His Troops together, and
Declares His high Design. Go on (said He)
My Soldiers, let all Difficulties be
Surmounted by Your Valor, and (as fast,
As You can March away) now boldly haste;
To Rome You go: this March the Alps to You,
This Cannae did decree. Go, and into
The Iliack Walls your Targets drive, and there
Retalliate Capua's Ruins, which so dear
Shall cost, that you shall see high Towers, and Jove
From his Tarpeian Temple to remove^:
Instructed thus, away the Army hies:
Rome in their Ears, Rome only in their Eyes
Is fixed; and they believe the Diligence
Of Hannibal that Action did commence
More aptly, then had He conducted them
From the Cannae.
Aetolian fatal Field. The Stream
Of swift Vulturnus overpast, the Rear,
To stop the Italians, that behind them were,
Burn all their Boats; and then, with nimble Bands,
March over all the Sidicinian Lands,
And Thracian Cales, that its ancient Name
Did from thy Son (fair Orithya claim:
Then Alifanus, that great Plenty yields
Of Bacchus Fruits, and the Casinian Fields,
Inhabited by Nymphs; and straitway, near
To those, Aquinas, and Fregellae, where
The smoking Giant buried lies, in Haste
They overrun: Then, with like Speed, they past
Over lofty Hills, where Warlike Frusino
Sticks on hard Rocks, and where Anagnia too
Hangs on a rising Hill, and Plenty yields
Of Corn. At length, into Labicus Fields,
And Plains, He enters, and those Walls declines,
Battered by Telegon. His high Designs,
Admit no Stop: nor pleasant Algida,
Nor yet Gabinian Juno's Towers can stay
His March; but on, like a rude Storm, He goes
To those low Banks, where Anyo gently Flows
With sulfurous Waters, and, with Silence, to
Old Tiber's Arms. When here the Line He drew
Of's Camp, and set His Standard up, and shook
The Banks with 's Cavalry; first, Ilia, struck
With Fear, flies to her Husband's Sacred Cave,
And all the frighted Nymphs the Waters leave.
But the Italian Dames, as if they had
No Walls at all, Affrighted run, like Mad,
About the Streets; and, figured by their Fear,
Those wounded Ghosts before their Eyes appear,
That at sad Trebia, and Ticinus Stream,
Were slain; brave Paulus, Gracchus, and with them
Flaminius seems to wander up, and down.
The Ways, and all the Passes of the Town
Are thronged. The Stately Senate troubled to
Behold their Fear, endeavor to subdue
Their sad Distraction with an angry Frown;
Yet Tears sometimes, with Silence, trickle down
Under their Helmets, as they Doubtful are,
What Fortune threatens, or the Gods prepare.
Through their high towers, the youth dispersed, thought
Affairs were then to such a Period brought,
That 't was enough, for Rome, Her Walls to keep.
But Hannibal, who scarce the whole Night's Sleep
Had to His weary Soldiers granted, rose
Betimes, an Enemy to all Repose,
And thinking whatsoever Time was spent
In Slumber, that so much from Life was rent,
His Radiant Arms puts on, commands His Light
Numidians to break forth: and then, in Sight
Of frighted Rome, with Nimble Coursers, round
About her trembling Bulwarks, with a Sound,
Like Thunder, Rides. Sometimes the several Ways
The Avenues, and Passes He survays:
Now against the Barricado'd Gates His Spear
He strikes, and seems delighted with their Fears:
Then, Pleased, He to the lofty Hills retires,
And, entering with His Eyes the Town, enquires
Of Places, and their Causes: and in that
Survey had taken Time to penetrate
Into all Parts, and every thing had seen;
Had Fulvius, with a strong Relief, not been
At Hand: nor was the Siege of Capua quite
Relinquished; but the Libyan, with the Sight
Of Rome much satisfied in His Desires,
With His insulting Troops, to the Camp retires.
But, when the Night from Heaven was chased away,
And with the first Appearance of the Day
The Ocean blushed, and Morn revived again
Their Labors, breaking down the Works, amain
He pours His Forces out, and with a Cry,
As loud as He could make; Oh Soldiers! by
Our many Trophies, and our Hands in Blood
Now Sacred, make (said He) Your Wishes good:
Equal Your own Desires; Attempt, and Dare
As much in Arms, as Rome has Cause to Fear.
Destroy this Heap, and there is Naught for You
In all the World beside left to subdue:
Nor let the Fame of their Original
From Mars retard You; You that City shall
Now take by Myriads, entered long ago
Of Warlike Senones, accustomed to
Be taken; and, perhaps, amidst their Fears,
When the Gauls entered Rome, the Senate placed themselves in their Chairs, and
Habit, at their several Doors; believing that Venerable Sight might qualify
the Fury of the Barbarous Gauls, or, at least, they might die in State. At the
first, the Reverence of their Persons, and Posture, amazed the Gauls; till a
Gaul, stroaking the Beard of one of them, the Senator ^rapped him on the
Fingers, with his Staff, at which the Gaul incensed, slew him, and by his
Example all the rest, before thought Gods, were slain.
Their Senators in their Triumphal Chairs,
Like their Forefathers, sit, expecting by
Your Hands a Noble Death, resolved to die.
Thus He: but the Oenotrian Youth require
No Language of their General, to fire
Their Thoughts: their Wives, and Children, with their Dear
Parents, that up to Heaven, lamenting, rear
Their feeble Palms, sufficiently excite
Their Courage; and, presenting to their Sight
Their Babes, even penetrating with their Cry
Their Hearts, their armed Hands with Kisses ply.
On they desire to go, and to oppose
Their Bodies, for their Walls, against their Foes:
Then, on their Friends reflecting, swallow down
Their Tears. But, when the Gates were open thrown,
And the whole Army sallyed forth, a Cry,
Mingled with Prayers, and Groans, invades the Sky,
From the high Walls: the Matrons, with their Hair
Disheveled, howl, and lay their Bosoms bare.
But, Fulvius, flying out before the rest,
Exclaims, Who knows not, that the Libyans pressed,
Through a Necessity, to come before
Our Walls? He flies from Capua's Gates: -- As more
He would have said, with horrid Murmurs, from
The broken Clouds, loud Cracks of Thunder come.
For, when the threatening Libyan Father Jove
(As He from Aethiopia did remove)
Beheld approaching near the Roman Walls,
The other Gods he strait together calls,
Commands the Dardan Temples to defend,
And quickly into the sev'n Towers descend.
Himself, high seated on the Capitol,
Musters up all his Forces, summons all
The Winds, and Clouds, with Storms of Hail: then powr's
Thunder, and Lightning down, with Stygian Showers.
The Poles with Horror shake, the Heavens are quite
Obscured; the Earth is covered over with Night;
The Tempest blinds their Eyes; and Rome, though near,
To the approaching Fo does disappear.
Flames, from the Clouds, upon the Army, thrown,
Continue still their Noise, and hiss upon
Their blasted Limbs: here Notus, Boreas there,
And Africus, with Cloudy Wings appear,
And War with such a Rage, and Fury, move,
As might suffice the Wrath, and Mind of Jove:
Then sudden Cataracts of Water fall,
Mixed with black Storms, and Blasts, and cover all
The Neighboring Champagn with a foaming Flood.
Jove on the Top of all the Mountain stood,
And, as He Thunder poised in his Right Hand,
It against the Shield of Hannibal (His Stand
Not yet resolved to quit) with Fury throws:
His Lance's Head strait melts, and His Sword flows,
As from the Forge it were but newly taken.
At length, His Arms thus burnt, He does restrain
His Men, declares the Vanity of all
That secret Fire, that from the Clouds did fall,
And Murmurs intermixed with Winds: But, then,
After so many Miseries of His Men,
And Ruins, poured from Heaven, the Fo not seen,
Nor Sword in all the Storms, that there had been;
He bids His fainting Army to retire
To Camp, and sadly thus revives His Ire.
Well: to the Winds, and Winter-Storms, Thou now
(Oh Rome) the Safety of one Day do ow:
But Thee the Morrow's Light shall not defend
From Us; though angry Jove himself descend
To Earth, to guard Thee. And, as this He spoke,
From the clear Heavens a sudden Luster broke,
And all the Clouds dispersed. The purged Sky
Shined out again, the Romans instantly
Perceived the God, and straitway, laying all
Their Arms aside, to the high Capitol
Erect their humble Hands; and, Pious, round
The Sacred Hill, their joyful Laurel bound:
And then the cheerful Face of Jove, bedewed,
Of late, with no small Sweat, thus praying, Viewed.
Grant Father Jove (say They) Thou Chief of all
The Gods! O, grant, that Hannibal may fall
By thine own Sacred Shaft, in Fight! for none
Can Him destroy, We fear, but Thou alone.
As thus they prayed, the Evening 'gan to invest
The Earth with Shades, and Silence stopped the rest.
But Night, by Sol dispersed, as from the Sea
He raised his Lamp, and use of Life, with Day,
Restored to Mortals, Hannibal again
Came on: nor did the Roman Youth within
Their Trenches keep. But, when they came as near
To fight, as one might well have thrown a Spear,
Their Swords scarce drawn, the Light of Heaven began
To fail, thick Darkness suddenly o'reran
The Skies, the newborn Day was put to Flight;
And Jove began again to arm for Fight,
The Winds blew high, and a thick Globe of Showers,
By Auster driv*n along, grew Hot; Jove pou'rs
His Thunder down, by which he Atlas shakes,
With Taurus, Pindus, Rhodope: the Lakes
Of Erebus it heard, and, buried far
In Darkness, once again Celestial War
Typhaeus saw. Now Notus, whistling loud,
Comes on, and whirling round a pitchy Cloud,
Full fraught with Hail, the Libyan charged, in Vain
Struggling, and threatening, and Him forced again
Into His Camp: but He no sooner there
Had laid His Arms aside; but strait a clear,
And joyful Face of Heaven again was shown:
Nor could you think mild Jove his Bolts had thrown,
Or had with Thunder torn the Peaceful Sky.
All this He, vexed, endures with Constancy,
And often affirming, the ensuing Day
No more should be against them. Only they
Their Valor of their Country must assume,
And, lest they should believe to ruin Rome
Might prove a Sin, Where was (I pray, said He)
The Thunder of their Conqur'ing Jove, when We
With these our Swords the Aetolian Champagn strow'd
With Slaughter? when the Tyrrhen Pools o'reflow'd
With Humane Blood. If now the King of Gods
Fights for the Roman Walls, with so much Ods
Of Thunder thrown; Why strikes He not at Me,
Who fight against Him 'midst this Noise? No; We
Most poorly turn Our Backs to Storms, and Wind:
Oh! (pray) resume that Courage, and that Mind,
Which, while as yet the Leagues, and the Decrees
Of Senate were in Force, did prompt Us these
Our Arms to take in Hand. Thus every Breast
He fires, till Sol his weary Steeds releast.
The following Night could not His Cares allay;
Sleep durst not once approach Him: With the Day
His former Rage returns, and then again
He summons to the Fight His frighted Men,
And strikes His dreadful Shield; the Noise, and Storms
Of Heaven so imitating, with His Arms.
But when He found, that Rome so confident
Was of the Gods, that She Supplies had sent
Unto the Betick Coast, and that by Night
The Troops marched from the Walls full of Despite,
And Rage, that the Besieged such Leisure had,
(As now secure of Hannibal) more Mad
He presses forward; and Advances near
The Walls: when Juno, almost sick with Care,
Thus Jove with Counsel seeks to qualify.
Sister (said He) and Wife, most Dear to Me,
When will thou check this Tyrian Youth? or when
Will thou restrain this furious Man again?
Let it suffice, Sagunthus to destroy,
To level the high Alps, and to annoy,
And Chains impose upon the Sacred Po*
And to pollute the Lakes. He Is ready now
Into Our Temples, and Our Towers to break.
Stop Him, for you may see (as now We speak)
How He prepares, how He for Fire exclaims,
To imitate Our Thunder with His Flames.
To this Saturnia giving Thanks, through Air
(Much troubled) to the Earth descends, and there
Seizing the Youth's Right Hand; Whither, said She,
Thou Madman, do Thou run? and, not to be
Maintained by Mortals, do a War pursue?
It Is Juno speaks to Thee: (with that She drew
Her Vail of Clouds away, and showed her Face)
Thou have not now with Phrygian Swains (Alas)
Or the Laurentines, to contend: behold!
(For 'Ile remove the Mist awhile, to unfold
All Things to Thee) observe, and see Thou where
That Hill's high Top ascends into the Air,
(The Palace called of the Mount Palatine, where King Evander the Arcadian
dwelt, and Apollo had a Temple.
Parrhasian King)
By Phoebus it is possessed; who, menacing,
Prepares his Ecchoing Quiver, and his Bow
For Fight: but where upon the lofty Brow
Of Neighboring Hills, the Another Hill in Rome, where Diana had a Temple.
Aventine does rise,
See! how Diana shakes, before thine Eyes,
Her Torches, fired from Phlegethon! how She
Has stripped her Arms for Fight! Then that way see,
How Mars, in cruel Arms, that Campus Martius.
Field, that bears
His Name, has filled! there Ianus, furious, Wars;
And here Quirinus: every Deity
Fights from his Hill; but then observe with me,
How Jove his Aegis, breathing Storms, and Fire
Shakes, and with how great Flames he feeds his Ire:
Or this way turn thy Face, and, if Thou dare,
Behold the Thunderer, what Tempests are
Beneath his Nod! or, when he shakes his Head,
What Thunder falls! what dreadful Flames are shed
Against Thine Eyes! at length, give Way unto
The Gods, nor such Titanian Wars pursue.
This said, the Man, intractable to Peace,
Or Rule, yet wondering at the stormy Face,
And fiery Members of the Gods, with Pain
Away She drew, and Peace to Heaven again,
And Earth, restored. He, looking still behind,
Retires, and to the Camp, much vexed in Mind,
Commands His Ensigns strait to march away,
And threatens to return another Day;
When through the Air a clearer Light displaies
It self, and Phoebus gilds the trembling Seas.
But, when the Romans from the Walls beheld
Far off, that Hannibal had left the Field,
And pulled His Ensigns up, they, Silent, view
Each other's Face; and, Nodding only, show
That, which as yet, through Greatness of their Fear,
They durst not then believe, nor willing were
To think Him gone; but rather, that He then
Practiced His Punick Frauds, and Arts again.
In this Suspense each silent Mother stands,
Kissing her Children, till the Punick Bands
Quite vanished from their Eyes, and, Fear removed,
All his suspected Plots but Fancies proved.
Then to the Sacred Capitol they throng,
And, mutually embracing, chant a Song
Of Triumph to Tarpeian Jove: and, there
Adorn the Temple of the Thunderer.
Now all the Gates fly open, ev'rywhere
Those Joys, which they so lately did despair,
The People rush to see: these view the Place,
Where the Sidonian King's Pavilion was,
And where He proudly, from a lofty Throne,
Spoke to his summoned Troops; those look upon
The Place, where Warlike Astur lay, and where
Fierce Getes, and cruel Hanno Quartered were.
This done, their Bodies purged in living Springs,
Each Hand its Aid, to build up Altars, brings
To the Anienian Nymphs; and, Joyful, then
Hallowing the Wall, return to Rome again.
The End of the Twelfth Book.
Succedunt Simulacra virum, concordia Patris,
Vnanimique Simul Patrui-ruit ipse per vmbram
Oscula vana petens Iuuenis. Fumoque volueri
Et nebulis similes animas apprendere tentat,
Honoratissimo Dn.o Dn^o Ioanni Comiti Bathoniae Vice^omiti Lansdowne Baroni
Grenuile de Kilkhampton and Bideford Custodi and Gardiano Stannariorum Capitali
Seneschallo Ducatus Cormiciae Gromettae Stolae and primo e Cubiculo D^^i Regis
Generoso. Tabula summa cum Observantia D D.D.

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Thirteenth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Repulsed by Storms, and Lightning, from the Gates
Of Rome, resolved to try again the Fates,
The Libyan returns. Agrippa shows
What Miseries, and Plagues attended those,
That fought against the Places, that contained
The famed Palladium. By this restrained,
Away He marches to the Rhegian Coast:
In the mean time besieged Capua's lost.
What Wealth, and Trophies, there the Romans gain,
In Spain two Noble Scipioes are slain.
Grief, for his Friends, oppressing Him, and Cares,
Young Scipio to Autonoe repairs.
Apollo's Priestess, who, by Magic Spells,
Cumaean Sybil's Ghosts does raise, which tells
To Him ensuing Fates, describes Hell,
And where the Blessed Souls, in Pleasure dwell.
THE Capitol's high Top He scarce discerned
In His slow March, when strait the Libyan turned
Toward the City His fierce Eyes again,
Preparing to return, and in that Plain
Encamped, where Bankless Thuria overflows
The level Meadows; and, Inglorious, goes
Into the Thuscan Sea, a silent Stream.
Here sometimes on his chiefest Friends the Blame,
Sometimes upon the God's commands, he lays,
Then on Himself. Tell me at length (He says)
Thou, by whose slaughtring Hand the Lidyan Lake
Increased, who made the Daunian Land to shake
With Thunder of thine Arms, discouraged now,
Into what Country back again, do Thou
Thine Ensigns bear? What Sword Thy Breast, what Spear
Has pierced? Should Towred Carthage now appear
Before thine Eyes, what Reason could Thou yield
Soldier, unwounded thus to quit the Field?
Would Thou allege from Storms (dear Country) I
From Tempests mixed with Blood, and Thunder, fly?
Let this Effeminate Stain be far, Oh far,
From Tyrian People, as unfit for War,
But in fair Weather, and in Air that is clear.
The Army, though as yet a Panick Fear
Of The Gods possessed them, and a recent Smell
Of Lightning on their Arms, as yet, did dwell;
And before their Eyes the Fight of angry Jove:
Yet still a Vigor to obey, and move,
Wherever He should them command, appears,
And, by degrees diffused into their Ears,
(By what He said) Desire in every Breast
To bear their Ensigns back again, encreast:
As when a Stone the Water breaks, it makes,
At first, small Rings; but as its Motion shakes
The trembling Liquour, while it still descends,
The numerous Orbs increase, till it extends
The curling Circle, every Way, so wide,
That it may touch the Banks on either side.
But, contrary to this, Agrippa (who
His famed Descent from Diomedes drew)
Among the Oetolian People, much Renowned,
And of a Noble Name, with Riches Crowned,
But Faithless, and, when Rome's Affairs declined,
With the successful Libyan had joined;
Revolving these Traditions, that of old
To him his Ancestors before had told,
Thus pleads; When Teucrine Pergamus with long
Protracted War was shaken, and among
The Grecian Soldiers, unengag'd in Blood,
The God of War before the Rampires stood,
Calchas (for this, full often at the Request
Of Daunus, King of Apulia, Father-in-Law to Diomed.
Daunus, kept within his faithful Breast,
Amidst their Feasts did Diomed express)
Calcas assured the doubtful Greeks, unless
The fatal The Palladium was the Image of Pallas.
Image of the Warlike Maid,
Kept in the Arcenal, they thence essai'd
To gain, the Spartan Arms should never prevail
Over Troy, nor should they, with their Honor, sail
Back to Amycle. For it was by Fate
Ordained, that none those Walls should penetrate,
That did possess that Image, and then Our
Diomed.
Tydides, joined with Ithacus, the Tower
The Greeks, admonished by Calchas, that they should never take Troy, nor
return Home; while the Palladium (which was the Image of Pallas, made of Wood)
continued there. Diomed, and Ulysses by Mines, or Vaults, passed by Night into
the Tower, where it lay, and stole it thence. This was generally received,
unless we should rather believe, that to be the true Palladium, which was found
enclosed in a Wall by Fimbria (in the War against Mithridates) who (as Appian
affirms) made a more sad Destruction in Troy, then the Greeks under Agamemnon.
Of the Palladium, see Virgil, lib. 2. Aentil.
Entered by Stratagem, and having slain
The Guard, just at the Entrance of the Fane,
Thence the Celestial Image strait convai'd,
And Troy unto our Fates was open laid.
But, when, on the Oenotrian Coast, he built
A City, troubled at his former Guilt,
TO appease the Phrygian Goddess with His Prayers,
And Ilian Gods, Devoutly He prepares.
Then, on a lofty Tower, a Temple strait
(To Trojan Pallas, a most hateful Seat)
Was raised. When, 'midst his Sleep, the threatening Maid,
Discov'ring her great Deity, thus said;
This Fabric, Diomed, which here you raise,
Unworthy 's of the Honor of such Praise.
To Us Garganus, nor the Daunian Land
Are due: Him rather seek, whose Pious Hand
Now the first Walls of better Troy does rear
In the Laurentine Fields. Go thither, there
That captived Relic of their Fathers lay.
Troubled at this advice, He hasts away
To Saturn's Kingdom, where Anchises Aeneas.
Son,
A Conqu'rer, then, Lavinium built by Aeneas, and so called from his Wife
Lavinia.
Lavinian Troy begun,
It was a Custom anciently, after a War ended, or a Country subdued, to hang
the Arms in their Temples; or, before they were built, in Groves, where they
raised their Altars.
And's Dardan Arms, in a Laurentine Grove,
Had fixed. But, as the Daunian Fleet did move
Near Tiber's mouth, and Diomedes there
On Shore had pitched his shining Tents, with Fear
The Trojans trembled, till, in his Right Hand
A Pledge of Peace extending to the Land,
(An hoary Olive-bough) Tydaeus Son,
Amidst the Trojans Murmurs, thus begun;
Thy mindeful Rage ( Aeneas) and thy Fear
Now confidently lay aside; whatever
At Troy, at Simois, or Xanthus Flood,
Or near the Scaean Port, with so much Blood,
And Sweat, by Us was done, was not (Alas!)
Our Crime: the Gods, and Fate it brought to pass.
Now think on what remains; why do not We,
With better Auspicies of Time, agree
To live? Let Us join our peaceful Hands. This shall
Be Witness of our League: and showed withal
Trojan Minerva from the Poop. By Her
Fell the Bold After the Gauls had sacked Rome, and besieged the Capitol,
Camillus came upon them, from Ardea (whither he had been banished) with a small
Army (in the very Interim, when they were weighing the Gold, which was to
ransom those in the Capitol) and made so great a slaughter of them, that there
remained not so much as a Messenger to carry the Tidings of their destruction
into Gallia. See Live. lib. 5.
Gauls, that Rome invaded, nor
Of that Great People did there One remain,
That to his Native Land returned again.
Dismayed at this, the General his Bands
(Much joy'd, that they should March away) Commands
To pull their Ensigns up, and to remove
Into those Fertile Plains, where in a Grove
Wealthy The Religion of this place, where Juno Feronia was Worshipped, sprung
from a Miracle; for, the Grove by accident being fired, the Inhabitan^s would
have removed her Image, when straight the Grove recovered its former Verdure.
There was afterward a Temple, whither such Slaves as were enfranchized,
repaired, and, their Heads being shaved, received a C^p, the token of their
Liberty, hence she was called The Goddess of Liberty. This Temple, enriched by
Devotion, was spoiled by Hannibal. See Live. lib. 26.
Feronia's Worshipped, and over all
The Grounds Capena's Sacred Waters fall.
From Birth of Ancient Faunus (as it is said)
Through a long Tract of time, together laid,
Great Wealth, by frequent Gifts increased, and there,
Alone, preserved by a religious Fear,
The Gold untouched for many Ages lay:
Their barbarous Hearts, and greedy Minds, the Prey
Pollutes, and arms them to contemn the Gods.
From thence it pleased him through remoter Rodes
To turn, where Fields, Plough'd by the Brutian Swain,
Extended are to the Trinacrian Main.
While, Discontented, thus the Libyans go
To the Rhegian Coast, Brave Fulvius (the Fo
Removed from's Country) at the Walls appears
Of Capua, and to the Besieged bears
The unwelcom News. Their Miseries were than
Extremely high, when Fulvius thus began
To all of Name in Arms: Take this Disgrace
Away by Valor. Shall this Treacherous Place,
(To Us another Carthage) after all
Her violated Leagues, and Hannibal
Sent to our very Gates, Her proud Demand
Of an alternate, equal Consul, stand?
And from her lofty Turrets, now dismayed,
Still look for Libyan Cohorts to her Aid?
Deeds to his Words he adds, and, straight, he calls
For Towers of Oak, (...) the highest Walls
He could surmount, and, instantly, commands
To join huge Beams with Cords, and Iron Bands,
By which the tallest Posts of Gates He brake,
And all Delays of Bars would quickly shake.
Here, fenced with Starlike Piles on every Side,
A Mount is raised, and there they are employed
To raise the This Work was by the Romans called Vinea, and covered over with
Timber, Hurdles, ^raw Hides, etc. the Soldiers went under it securely to
undermine Walls.
Vinea, armed above, and all
Soon done, which he could Necessary call,
He gives the Sign to scale the Walls, and fills
The Town with Terror of impending Ills;
When suddenly an happy Omen shined
On His Attempts: an Hind (which rare We find
Of such a Color) that the Swans, or Snow,
Surpassed in Whiteness; which, when with his Plow
Capys the Circuit of those Walls designed,
A Countrey-Present, taken with its Kind
Familiarity (when Young) he fed,
And a kind Sense of Man had in it bred.
All Wildness lost, She used to take her Stand
To feed at Table; by her Master's Hand
When stroak'd, much pleased, often the Campanian Dames
Smoothed her with Combs, and in the Neighboring streams
Renewed her Whiteness: thus the Hind became
The Deity of the Place, and had for Name
Diana's Servant; and, as to a God,
With holy Ensigns they the Altars load.
Lusty, and strong in Life (though Aged) She
A thousand Years, with great Felicity,
Had past, and Houses built by Trojans there
Equaled in Age; but not her Death was near:
For chased by cruel Wolves, that suddenly
Into the Town, (a doleful Prodigy
In War) by Night had entered; as the Day
Began to break, out at the Gates, away
She ran, and, frighted, fled into the Plain,
Near to the Walls; where, by the Soldiers taken,
(Who joyfully contended in the Chase)
To Thee, Latonian Goddess, on the Place
The General offering her (for unto Thee
He knew that Sacrifice must pleasing be)
Prayed His Design might, by thine Aid, be crowned:
And strait, relying on the Goddess, round
The City moved his Troops, and where into
An Orb the Walls were bent, obliquely, drew
A strongly-guarded Trench, and kept them there
Enclosed with Arms, like Beasts in Toils. While Fear
Increased in others, with a stately Plume
Out at the Ports does Warlike Taurea come,
Chafing His foaming Steed (to Him, for brave
Exploits, Maurusian Shafts the General gave
But lately, and an Autololian Band)
He spurring on his Steed, which scorned to stand,
Hearing the trembling Cornets, when so near
He came, that He perciev'd the Fo might hear
His Neighboring Call, said Claudius, (who in the Art
Of War excelled, and Honor, with Desert,
In many a Fight had gained) if yet upon
His Valor He rely, may He alone
Enter the Field, and fight with Me. What stayed
The Roman, when 'twas heard what He had said,
Was, that it was Ordained before, on Pain
Of Death, that none should dare to entertain
A single Fight, without the General's Leave.
But soon as Fulvius His Permission gave,
Into the open Plain, with Joy, he flies,
And strait thick Clouds of Dust, like Billows, rise.
But scorning all Assistance of the Thong,
Or Loop, to make His Weapon fly more strong,
Taurea, with his bare Strength, His Spear advanced,
And it with Headlong Rage, and Fury, lanc'd
Into the Air: while, of another Mind,
The brave Ru^ulian, seeking where to find
A certain Place to give a Wound, now shook,
Then couched His Spear, and many a threatening Stroke
Pretends; till fixed in's Shield his Javelin stood:
But was deprived of the desired Blood.
Then instantly he drew his Sword, when strait
Taurea, to fly the Menaces of Fate,
With his steeled Heel drives on his nimble Steed.
While, at his Back, the Roman with a Speed,
Great as his Rage, pursued, and very near
Giving the Reins, approached him; and, as Fear
The Conquered, so the Conqueror Desire
Of his deserved Blood, Honor, and Ire
Into the Gates invite; and, while they there
Scarce Credit what they see, that He should dare,
Alone, to break into their Walls, and haste
So boldly through the amazed Town, he past
Through the adverse Port, and to his Friends retired.
With that the Minds of all the rest were fired
With the like Heat, and Industry to invade
The Walls; and where he had a Passage made,
To enter, Flames, and Swords strait shine; then Showrs
Of Stones, and Darts, assault the highest Towers:
None could the Rest in Courage to engage
Excel, all Hands were equaled by their Rage.
Dictaean Shafts fly through the Air, and fall
With Wounds in the midst of the Town. The General
Is pleased to find, that they had left no Room
For his Encouragement; they all assume
So eagerly their Task. Whom when he spied
So well resolved, and Fortune made a Guide
To all; up to the Gate he, Furious, came,
And sought with Danger to increase his Fame.
Three Brothers (Twiris) who each a chosen Band
Had of an Hundred men, at their Command,
Guarded that Pass, and there their Station held:
Of these in Beauty Numitor excelled,
Laurens in Running, and Laburnus Tall
Above the other: but their Weapons all
Were different; One Renowned for his Bow;
For's Spear the other, wont in Fight to throw
His poisoned Lance, and not to trust his Sword:
But Lamps, with Flames, and Sulphur mixed, the Third
Composed. So (famous in a former Age)
That horrid Monster of a Triple Rage,
Gerion, fought on the Atlantic Shore,
Whose three Right-Hands three several Weapons bore;
One cruel Flames; Behind him the other drew
His Bow; the third his trusty Javelin threw:
And dealt three several Ways, at once, a Wound.
When these, thus varying Fight, the Consul found
With different Arms, the Slaughter, that appeared
At the Entrance of the Gate, and Posts besmeared
With Blood of such, as thither did advance,
With an enraged Force his twisted Lance
He throws. Importing Death, the Italian Yew
Cuts through the Air, and, where (as then he drew
His Bow, and from above his Arrows plied)
Stout Numitor was Naked, pierced his Side.
But, not Content to fight, besieged there,
In War Unskilful, though still apt to dare,
With headlong Heat, rash Virius open threw
The Gate, and broke into the Field, and to
The Conqu'rours Rage his miserable Men
Exposed: these Scipio fiercely charged. But then,
As he the offered Troop, insatiate, kills,
Calenus, born upon Tifata's Hills,
Bred up to bold Attempts, His Courage great,
As was His Body, often wont to beat
Lions, to fight bare-Headed, to Contend
With Steers, and down the winding Horns to bend
Of fiercest Bulls, by Force, unto the Ground,
And for his vigorous Fate before Renowned:
He, while bold Virius from the Town expelled
Some rash Assailants, whether, that He held
His Breast Plate useless, or to shun Delay,
Into the Field had, Naked, made His Way,
And, nimbler now, the panting Fugitives
O'retakes, and several Ways, Victorious, drives:
And now, already, Veliternus through
The Belly he had thrust; and Marius, who
With equal Sport was wont to exercise
Equestral Fights with Scipio, by him dies,
Struck backward to the Ground by an huge Stone,
Torn from the Earth. Expiring, with a Groan
H'implores his Friend; and, Gaping, underneath
The Rock was crushed. But, Sorrow for his Death
Doubling his Strength, while all his Face o'reflows
With Tears, his singing Cornel Scipio throws,
Hasting to his Expiring Friend, to show
The wish'd*for Comfort of a dying Fo.
The Shaft, as if a Bird the liquid Air
Divided had, past through his Breast, and there
Dissolved his mighty Frame: swift, as its Way
A nimble Galley makes upon the Sea,
Which flies more nimbly, then the Winds, as often
As, to their Breasts reduced, the Oars aloft
The curling Surges strike, and with the Strength
Of one joint Struck runs farther, then her Length.
But Volesus Ascanius (who had cast
His Arms away, that he might lighter haste
Unto the Walls, as through the Plain he fled)
Pursues. Strait severed by his Sword, his Head
Drops at the Owner's Feet: but, by the Force
Of running forward, in its speedy Course,
The following Trunk, at length, beyond it falls.
No longer, now, to keep their open Walls,
Did the Besieged hope. When strait about
They Face, and shut their own Companions out,
That beg to be received. Their Hinges then
They turn, and strive, too late, their Bars again,
And Bolts to fix. At this the Italians pressed
More fiercely on, and the Besieged infest.
And, had not Earth been taken from their Sight,
Wrapped in the Stygian Bosom of the Night,
The Soldiers their Assault so furious made,
The broken Gates had then been open laid.
But yet the Darkness brought not equal Rest
To all. These Fearless Slumbers (such, as blessed
With Victory, Men know) enjoy; but there
With doleful Cries of Women, every where,
With dire Complaints, and trembling Parents Groans,
Capua affrighted, her sad Fate bemoans,
And prays a Period of her Woes to see.
The Head, and Author of her Treachery
(The Senate) murmurs. Virius, all Cares
Of Life, now, laid aside, aloud declares
No Hopes of Aid from Hannibal. Said He;
I hoped to rule over Rome, and did agree,
If Gods the Libyan Arms, and better Fate
Assisted had, to Capua to translate
Trojan Quirinus Empire. It was I,
That sent that Force to shake their Walls, and high
Tarpeian Towers. I had the Courage there
To ask an equal Consul, that might bear
The Fasces, in Our Name. It hitherto
Suffices, We have lived; and, while We now
Have Night enough, whoever in his Mind
Affects it, at Acheron may find
Eternal Liberty: let Him repair
Unto my Table, and My Cates, and there
Drenching himself in Bacchus Fruits (his Mind
Subdued) he soon a Remedy may find
For all his Woes; the Sting of Death may charm,
And, with that pleasant Poison, Fate disarm.
This said; a Multitude attend him Home.
Amidst his Palace, in a spacious Room,
A mighty Pyle of Wood did still remain,
The common Receptacle of the Slain.
But, yet the People Grief, and Fear, distract;
While now, too late, on Decius they reflect
Their Thoughts, and his brave Valor, punished by
A cruel Banishment. Then from the Sky
Divinest Faith looks down, and vexes their*
Fallacious Hearts, and strait through every Ear
A secret Voice is spread: Break no Accord,
Or Oath (Ye Mortals!) with the cruel Sword;
But keep Your Faith Inviolate: for This
Then Thrones, that shine with Purple, better is.
For who with Fallacies delights to break
A League, or shall the slender Hopes forsake
Of his afflicted Friend; his House, his Wife,
Perpetual Trouble shall attend: his Life
Shall never want Tears; but both by Night, and Day,
Despised, and violated Faith, by Sea,
And Land pursuing, shall him still torment.
Then, in a Cloud disguised, Erinnys went
To all Assemblies, touched their Tables, and
Sits down, and feeds, and then, with her own Hand,
Bowls, froathing up with Stygian Gore, prefers,
And largely Plagues, and Death, administers.
But Virius (while yet Ruin She pretends,
Diving into his Soul) the Pyle ascends,
And sticks in her Embrace, commanding strait
To Kindle it, and so to join their Fate.
The Night her Limits touched, and now, amain,
The furious Conqueror came on again.
When the Campanian Youth upon the Walls
Milo, who thither his Companions calls,
Beheld: Affrighted, strait, they open threw
The Gates, and such, as wanted Courage, to
Avoid their Punishment by Death, with low
And trembling Knees, now entertain the Fo.
The Town her Houses, by the Tyrian Guest
Polluted, opening, her blind Rage confessed.
Women, and Children, in Confusion, run,
With the sad Senate (that their Woes begun)
And vulgar Crew by none lamented; whiles
The Army all stood leaning on their Piles,
To view those Men, who nor Prosperity,
Nor Misery could bear: sometimes to see
Them sweep the Ground with Beards, which Trimmed they wear
Down to their Breasts; with Dust their Whiter Hair
To stain, and, poorly Weeping, to entreat
Most shamefully, and yielding Air to beat
With their affeminate Howlings. But, while these
Unmanly Acts the wondering Soldier sees,
And, still Incensed, expects the Signal to
Overthrow the Walls, behold! Religion through
Each Breast, with silent Sense of Pity, goes,
And their fierce Minds does by her Power compose.
A gentler God does sensibly inspire
Their Hearts, to lay aside all Thoughts of Fire,
And their destructive Torches: not to burn,
And into Dust, at once, the Temples turn.
He likewise then suggests (to all unseen)
That that proud Town's Foundation had been
By Capys laid of old: He tells them there
Fair Houses, fit for Habitation, were
Extended far into delicious Fields.
Thus, by Degrees, their former Fury yields
To milder Thoughts, and, quickly mollifi'd
In every furious Breast, all Anger died.
The Trojan Houses willing safe to keep,
Jove, likewise, thither sent the God of Sheep,
Pan, who still seems as he were Hanging, and
Scarce on the Earth imprints, wheree're he stand,
One horned Foot; his Right Hand wanton plays
In the Festivals of Pan, which were called Lupercalia, the Priests cut the
hide of the Goat, that was sacrificed, into thongs: wherewith, running naked
about the Streets, they struck such Women, whom they met, and desired to be
with Child, upon the Bellie^: out of opinion, that this caused them to be
fruit^ull. Rosin. Antiq. Romans lib. 3.
With a Tegaean Hide, and in cross Ways,
Wagging his Tail, desired Strokes bestows.
A Pine surrounds his Hair, and Shady Brows:
On his red Front arise two little Horns;
His Ears upright; a squallid Beard adorns
His Chin; a Past'ral Staff he always bears,
And a slick Do-Skin on his Left Side wears:
No ragged Rock so Steep, and High does rise,
On which, his Body poised, like one that flies,
He will not dare, through pathless Ways, to tread:
Sometimes, he laughing, backward turns his Head,
To see the Sportings of his bushy Tail
Upon his Back; then lifts his Hand to vail
His Forehead from the Sun's too fervent Rays,
And Pastures with his shadowed Sight survaies.
He, when he had the God's Commands fulfilled,
Their raging Hearts appeased, and Fury stilled,
To the Arcadian Groves away He speeds,
And his loved Maenalus, where on shrill Reeds
He sweetly plays, and with his Rural Song
Leads, from the Sacred Hill, his Flocks along.
But, Fulvius commanding that the Fire
Should from the Gates be kept, and leave entire
The Walls, the Ausonian Legions, to show
The noble Temper of their Minds, withdrew
Their Flames, and Swords; but from the Temples, and
The Houses, that enriched with Gold did stand,
A wealthy Prey they took, with that, which fed
Their Riot, and by which they perished,
Effeminate Garments, that their Men arrayed,
And Tables rich, from foreign Lands conveyed;
With Goblets, that provoked to Luxury,
Set with Eoan Gems: nor could they see
An end of Silver, and the carved Weight
(Expressly made for Feasts) of golden Plate.
Then came the Captives, in a numerous Train,
With all their Coin, sufficient to maintain
A long-protracted War: with Servants, that,
In Multitudes, did at their Banquets Wait.
But, when from Plunder of the Town, again,
The General, by the Trumpet's sound, His Men
Had called (a Noble Cherisher of Great
Attempts) to Milo, from his lofty Seat,
He thus began: Dausqueius has in this Judi^iously corrected the corrupt Copy
of our Author, wherein Lavimum is put for Lanuvium, where Juno Sospita (so
called from (...), signifiying to Preserve) had her Temple: for which the
Lanuvini were received into the Protection of the Romans, and the City freed,
on agreement that the Grove, and Temple might be equally free to the Romans,
who often sacrificed there, as may be observed in Livy.
Lanuvian Youth, whom We
From Juno Sospita receive, from Me
This Martial Honor, for thy Victory,
Accept, and 'bout thy Tower'd Temples try
This This Crown, or Wreath, was of Gold (though not so honorable, as some of
other Inferior matter, says Pliny) and given by the General to him, who first
made his way over the Walls into any Town taken by assault. Aulus Gellius, lib.
5.
Mural Crown. This done, he streightway sent
For all the Nobles, that first Punishment
Had merited, and, for their treacherous Deeds,
Beneath his juster Ax each Guilty bleeds.
But, that fierce Valor, Taurea (for to hide,
Even in a Fo, that Honor had been tried,
Were base) with a loud Voice exclaims; Shall Thou,
Thus Unrevenged by Me, deprive Me now,
(A Soul more Great, then Thine) of this My Sword?
Or by the Lictour (when thou giv'st the Word)
Shall this most Valiant Head dissever'd fall
At such base Feet? On Us this never shall
Be by the Gods allowed. Then with a Look
Threatening, and full of Rage, he sudden struck
His Warlike Sword quite through his Breast, and died.
To whom the Roman General replied;
Go, and the Ruin of thy Country thus
Accompany in Death. What Minds in Us
Remain, what is Our Valor, what We are
(Each Man of Us) shall be discerned in War.
If thou do think it Shameful to abide
Just Punishment, thou might have fighting died;
Thy Country suffering, at the very time,
With Streams of Blood for her unhappy Crime.
But, mixing Joys with Sorrows, the dire Hand
Of Fortune, then in the Iberian Land
Two Noble Scipioes had destroyed, that there
Great Griefs, and Honors to their Country were.
By Chance a Youth, of that Illustrious Name,
Into the Puteoli.
Dicarchaean City came,
After Extremities of War: and there
Resided. Fame, reporting to his Ear
His Friend's sad Destiny, and Tears, (though He
Never used to stoop under Adversity)
Beating his Breast, he tears his Garments: nor
Could Sense of Honor, or a Soldier,
Nor the Persuasions of his Friends prevail;
But still his angry Piety does rail
On the unequal Gods; hates all Relief,
And usual Comforts of increasing Grief.
And now some days were spent in sad Complaint,
And still his Father's Ghost seems conversant
Before his Eyes, and therefore he intends
To raise the Souls, and Manes of his Friends,
And by Discourse with them, at length, the Rage,
And Smart of his great Sorrows to assuage.
So, by a Neighboring Lake invited, where
The Acherusian Liquour does Declare
The horrid Entrance to Avernus, strait
His Thoughts are fired to know ensuing Fate.
And therefore to Autonoe (who then,
Under Apollo's Name, the sacred Den,
And Tripods kept) He goes, and open lays
The Counsels of his troubled Breast, and prays
To see his Father's Face. Without delay,
The Prophetess commands him strait to slay,
To the Shades below, the usual Sacrifice,
Two Coal-black Lambs, as Day began to rise;
And, while they yet were Breathing, as they died,
The flowing Blood within the Earth to Hide,
Then shall the Stygian Empire send to Thee
Her People. What thou more desir'st (quoth She)
To know, a greater Prophetess shall Sing.
For I to Thee true Oracles will bring
From the Elysian Fields, and Thou shall see,
Amidst old Sibyl's Rites performed by Me,
That famed Phoebean Breast's Prophetic Shade.
Go then, and, when the dewy Night has made
Her course beyond her middle Line, then bring
The aforesaid Victims to the Stygian King,
Chaste, to Avernus Entrance. Likewise join
To them choice Honey, and the purest Wine.
He, quickened by Her Counsel, and no less
With the great Name of the promised Prophetess,
The Sacrifices for his dark Design
Prepares, and, when to the appointed Line
The Night arrived, and what was finished
Equaled the following Darkness, from his Bed
He rose, and to the troubled Entrance went
Of the Tartarean Port; where, Diligent
To keep her Word, the Prophetess had then
All things fulfilled, and sat in the Stygian Den.
Then that Way, where at first the broken Ground,
A Cave, that never by Sun was seen, is found,
And sadly groaning, from its hollow Mouth,
Belcheth Cocytus bitter Streams, the Youth
Into It She leads; commands him, in the Ground
With His Sword to dig an Hole; and, Trotting round,
Mutt'ring a secret Charm, She bids, that all
The Beasts for Sacrifice, in order, fall.
To Pluto first a Bull; to Hecate,
With a That had never born Yoke.
chaste Neck, an Heifer; then to Thee,
Alecto, and Megaera (ever sad)
The chosen Bodies of two Sheep, that had
But two years lived: on these they Milk infused,
Honey, and Wine. The Youth stood still amused,
While the old Prophetess exclaimed, She well
Perceived each Face, that did with Pluto dwell.
I see, said She, all Hell approaching, and
Now the third Empire in my View does stand.
Behold what various Shapes, and whatsoever
Was born of Man, and died together, there
From deepest Chaos come. The Cyclops see!
Scylla, and those, that with such Cruelty
Their Thracian Horses fed with Flesh of Men!
Attend, and mark; and, without Fear, again
Put up thy Sword. Those Souls, that in such Haste
March on before, the Off'red Blood to Taste,
Let pass, till the chaste Sibyl's Shade appear.
In the mean time, Behold! how Speedy there
Comes that Unburied Ghost to speak to Thee,
And has (as when Alive) the Liberty
To use its Voice, till on the Funeral Wood
Its Body burn, if it has touched no Blood.
This noble Scipio saw, and, troubled at
The sudden Apparition, said; O what
Sad Chance Thee from thy sinking Country, when
Our horrid Wars require such Gallant Men,
Renowned Captain, snatched? for none could Thee
( Appius) in Valor, or in Policy
Excel. Ten times the glorious Lamp of Day
Has rose, since I returned from Capua,
And saw Thee, then, Bathing thy Wounds, and sad
Only, that they continued still so Bad,
Thou could not go unto the Walls, and quite
Deprived Thee of the Honor of that Fight.
To which the Ghost replied: The ensuing Day
The pleasant Horses of the Sun away
From Me (then fainting) turned, and banished Me
To the dark Waters for Eternity.
But while vain Vulgar Rites the tedious Care
Of Friends pursues, my Body they forbear
To burn; that far about, at length, they may
It to my Father's Sepulcher convey.
But by thy glorious Deeds (which emulate
Those of our Father Mars) I Thee entreat,
Let Drugs, that keep the Bodies of the Dead
Entire in other Lands, be Banished
From Me, that so my Wandering The ancient Opinion was, that such, as continued
Unburied, wandered upon the Banks of Acheron, and were not suffered to go over,
till an hundred years were expired.
Shade may soon
Go freely to the Gates of Acheron.
Most noble Branch of ancient Claudus Line,
None of my Cares shall be preferred to Thine,
The Youth replies, although they are not small,
That now Afflict Me: for I know, through all
The Nations of the World, a various Sense
Of Tombs, and Ashes, keeps a difference,
And varies much the Fun'rals of the Dead.
In the Iberian Country (as it is said)
An ancient Custom it is, that Vulturs tire
On their Dead Bodies. When their Kings Expire,
The Hyrcanian People think it best t'expose
To Dogs their Members. The Egyptians close
Among the Egyptians were three sorts of preserving their Dead. The Poor People
only took out the Guts, and dried the Body with Salt for the space of seventy
days. The more Wealthy never cut open the Body, but injected into the Belly a
Clyster of the Juice, that distills from Cedar, which had the Virtue, after
seventy days, to draw out with it all the Entrails, through the Side. The
Carnous parts, in the mean time were consumed by Nitres, and the Skin and Bones
only remained. But those of the best quality, first, with a crooked Iron, drew
out the Brain through the Nostrils, then took out the Guts, and filling both
Cavities with Myrrh, Casia, and other Perfumes ( Frankincense excepted) they
again sewed up the Body, and buried it seventy days in Nitre: when all moisture
consumed (and therefore by the Poet Metaphorically termed, Stone perfumed) it
was taken up, and in a wooden Case (shaped to its proportion) placed against
the Wall, in some room of the house, where, even in their Banquets, they had it
in their view; not to check their Mirth, but to invite them to enjoy
themselves, while alive. Herodot. lib. 2. Euterpe.
In Stone perfumed their Bodies, after Fate,
And hardly from their Tables separate
The Bloodless Ghosts. In Pontus they Ordain,
The Heads of Men to empty of the Brain,
And so Embalmed, for many Ages, keep.
What should We say of those, that Buried deep
Dig naked Garamantians up in Sand?
Or of the Nasamonians, that command,
Their Dead to bury in the cruel Seas
Upon the Libyan Coast? The Celtae please
Their empty Skuls with Gold about to ring,
And such for Cups unto their Tables bring.
But the Cecropians did by chance Ordain,
That such, as in their Country's Wars were Slain,
Should be together Burned. Opposed to these,
Time only does interr the Carcases
Of Scythian People; who, on Stakes of Wood
Impaled, hang melting with corrupted Blood.
As thus he talked, Autonoe (the Shade
OF the Sibyl rising) Set a Period, said,
To your Discourse. Behold that Priestess; who
So much of Future things, when living, knew,
That even the Gods, that they knew more, denied.
And now it is time your Men should go aside,
That You, and I, the Beasts may burn. This said;
With Myst'ries filled, the old Sibyl.
Cymaean Maid,
After the Sacrificed Blood her Mouth
Had touched, and tasted, viewing well the Youth
(Whose Face was Beautiful) began: When I
Etherial Light, not idly, did enjoy,
My voice was heard in the Cymaean Den
To answer People; and Thee ( Scipio) then,
In future Ages, and in Rome's Affairs
Concerned, I sung. But yet thy Father's Cares
Scarce merited my Words: for they nor made
A due Enquiry after what I said,
Nor yet observed it. But now mark; since Thou
Desir'st to know the Fates of Rome, which now
On Thine depend (for I thy Diligence
To take the Oracles of Life from hence
Perceive) and here thy Father's Manes see:
On the armed Iberian Thou, with Victory,
Thy Father shall Revenge: to Mars before
Due years entrusted; and thy Sword the Moor
Shall of his Joys deprive. Thou shall rejoice,
When Thee, as Omen to the War, the Voice
Of Rome shall choose: when, in the Iberian Land.
Carthage Thou shall subdue. Then to command
More eminent Thou shall be raised, nor Jove
From Thee his Care, and Kindness shall remove,
Till the whole War He into Libya drive.
And there to Thee even Hannibal shall give
To be Subdued. But, oh Ungrateful Rome!
Which after all these Honors Thee of Home,
And After Scipio had subdued Hannibal, and broken the whole Force of Carthage,
and, with his Brother, overthrown Antiochus, he was afterward accused, by a
Faction, of defrauding the People of the wealthy Spoils of Antiochus* whereupon
He, in a voluntary Exile, retired to Linternum, where he dyed, commanding this
Inscription to be set on his Tomb. Ungrateful Country, thou have not so much,
as Bones
Country shall deprive. As this She spoke,
She turned her Steps toward the Stygian Lake.
Whatever ill Chance of Life attends Me, I
(The Youth replies) will my Endeavors try:
Yet may my Breast be free from Guilt! but now
I pray thee (since the only Cause, that Thou
Did live, was Humane Labors here to Aid)
A while thy Steps restrain (renowned Maid)
And unto Me the silent Shades report,
With all the Terrors of the Stygian Court.
She soon assents to that, which he required,
But Thou a Kingdom, not to be desired,
(Said She) do open: Hell described.
for the Darkness there
People, that once Innumerable were,
Inhabit, and through endless Shadows fly,
And yet make up but One great Family.
IN the midst a dark, and airy Space, of large
Extent, there is, which common Death does charge
With all, that from the Teeming World's first Birth
The fiery Air produced, the Seas, or Earth.
Thither all things descend, what has, or shall
Perish, that gloomy Field devoureth all.
Ten Gates this Kingdom compass, whereof One
Receives the Warlike Sons of Mars alone:
Another those, that Famous Laws have made,
And the Foundations, first, of Cities laid.
The Third 's for Ceres harmless Tribe, that go,
By Fraud unpoison'd, to the Shades below.
Next Those, that pleasant Arts did first invent,
And Way of Living, full of all Content,
And (which not Father Phoebus would Disdain)
Verses composed, their proper Gate maintain.
The next the Shipwreck Port, (for so that Gate
Is Named) is kept for such, as meet their Fate
In Winds, and cruel Storms. Another wide,
And near this stands, for such as Guilty died,
And there confess their Sins: Their several Pains
Even at the Entrance Rhadamanth Ordains,
And empty Death inflicts. The S^venth to Bands
Of Women, that flock thither, open stands:
Where her pale Groves the Chaste Proserpina
Maintains. And, near to this, another Way,
And Gate there is, well-known by Infants Cries,
To them assigned, and all those Companies,
That in the Port of Life extinguished are:
And Virgin Troops, whose Nuptial Tapers were
Turned into Funeral Flames. But then, remote
From this, there is another Gate, of Note,
Which, Night dissolving, shines like rising Day,
And, through the Shadow of a secret Way,
Leads to the Elysian Fields: Here, nor to Hell
Subjected, nor in Heaven the Pious dwell.
But quite beyond all Seas, upon the Brink
OF the Sacred Fountain, thither throng to Drink
Forgetfulness of Mind, in Lethe's Streams.
The Last, with Gold refulgent, feels the Beams
Of Light, and Shines, as if the Moon were there.
This way the Blessed Souls to Heaven repair,
And, when a thousand Lustra Time has past,
Forgetting Dis, into their Bodies haste:
Death, his black Jaws wide opening, to and fro,
Through all these Ways, and Ports, does wandering go.
Then a slow Gulf, without a Body, far
Extended, and dark muddy Lakes there are,
Where The Rivers of Hell.
Phlegethon with swelling Waters burns
The Banks, on every side, and, Roaring, turns
The flaming Quarries up, with Storms of Fire.
Then, in another Quarter, with as Dire
A Rage, The Rivers of Hell.
Cocytus rolls black Waves of Blood,
And runs, a Torrent, with a foaming Flood.
But Styx, which Jove himself, and all the rest
Of the Immortal Gods, do still Attest,
Dreadful with Pitch, and Sulphur, smoking Mud
Drives through his Chanel. But (then These a Flood
More dismal, froathing with Corruption, and
Thick Poison, Belching up the gelid Sand,
With horrid Murmurs) Acheron, through all
The Pools, with a black Stream, does slowly fall.
This Venomed Three-mouth Cerberus desires,
This for her Drink Tisiphone requires:
This dire Megaera craves; nor yet can they,
With all their Drink, their raging Thirst allay.
But the last River breaks out before
The Entrance, and inexorable Door
Of Pluto's Palace, from a Fount of Tears.
There a fourth Tribe, in several Paths, appears
Of Monsters, still to Watch, and Terrify
The trembling Ghosts with their confused Cry.
Devouring Grief; and Leanness, that on ill
Diseases waits; with Sadness, feeding still
On Tears; and Paleness without Blood; with Cares,
Base Treachery, old Age, that nothing bares
Without Complaint; Envy, with both her Hands
Crushing her Throat; and Poverty, that stands
Deformed, and Prone to any thing that is Bad;
With wandering Error, and Dissension, glad
To mingle Seas with Heaven; Then Briareus,
That with his hundred Hands the Gates does use
Of Hell to open; Cruel Sphynx, with Blood
Her Virgin-mouth Besmeared; the furious Brood
Of two-formed Centaurs; with fierce Scylla there,
And the Rebellious Giants Ghosts, appear:
Here the three-headed Dog, when he has broke
His Chains, and off a thousand Fetters shook,
And up and down, through Hell, does Wandering go,
Neither Alecto, nor Megaera, though
With Fury swelled, come near; while 'bout his Loins
His Vip'rous Tail, he fiercely Barking, twines.
On the Right Hand, a Yew, that like a Wood
Its Branches spreads, and, by Cocytus Flood
Watered, more Leavy grown, there stands: here dire,
And fatal Birds, Vultures, that rav'ning tire
On Carcases; and numerous Owls reside:
Schreech-Owls, with Specks of Blood their Pinions died,
And greedy Harpyes build their Nests, and thick
Among the Leaves on all the Branches stick,
And make the Tree with doleful Cries to nod.
Among these dreadful Shapes, the Infernal God
Sits on a Throne, examining the Crimes
Of Kings, and what they did in former Times.
Enchain'd they stand, and before the Judge repent
Too late, while all the Forms of Punishment,
And Furies, round about them fly: and now
How glad would they their Scepters disavow!
Those Souls, which, when on Earth, unworthy, and
Unequal things endured, with harsh Command
Insult, and what they living, did not dare
To utter, now Complain of, freely, there.
Then Prometheus.
One in cruel Chains is bound upon
A Rock, Sisyphus.
another rowls a restless Stone;
While, with her Snaky Whip, Megaera still
Pursues him, laboring up the lofty Hill.
Such bloody Tyrant's Punishments shall be:
But now the Time's arrived, that We to Thee
Must show thy Mother's Face, whose Shade in Place
The first appears, and hither comes apace.
This Opinion (says Valerius Maximus) arose from his Custom of going to the
Capitol, and spending some hours in the Chapel of Jupiter, before he
enterprized any thing public, or private. Whence a Report went current; that,
before his Mother was with Child, a Serpent frequented her Chamber, and, as
soon as any man appeared, vanished. This they fancied to be the God, who, in
that shape, begat Scipio, whom some Authors affirm to have been the first
Caesar (that is; cut out of his Mother's Womb) though Polybius writes the
contrary.
Pomponia, pregnant by Jove's Stealth, drew nigh.
For, when the Libyan War, in Italy,
Fair Venus knew, endeav'ring to prevent
All Juno's Plots, a silent Flame She sent
Into her Father's Breast: which had not She
Foreknown, the conquered Roman Altars We
By Tyrian Virgins kindled now had seen.
But, when the off'red Blood had tasted been,
(As the old Prophetess advised) and both
Each other's Faces knew, thus first the Youth
Began: My dearest Mother, who to Me,
Like some great Deity, appear'st; that Thee
I might have seen, how willingly would I
Have died! Oh! what was our sad Destiny,
When that first Day, that gave Me vital Breath,
Thee, without Honor, snatched away in Death.
As thus He spoke, his Mother thus again
Replies: O Son, my Death was free from Pain:
For when the Burden of my Womb was laid,
By Jove's Command, Me Mercury convei'd
To the Elysian Fields, and gave Me there
An equal Place, where Laeda now, and where
Alcmena by his Sacred Bounty dwell.
But, since We now have time (my Son) to tell
Whence thou did spring (that thou no Wars may fear,
Nor doubt to Heaven by Deeds thy self to rear:
Know this; when I, by Chance, in midst of Day,
Retired to repose, and Sleeping lay,
A sudden close Embrace my Members bound,
Not such, as I before my Husband's found,
Nor easy unto Me, and then I clear
(Although my heavy Eyes in Slumber were
Involved) great Jove beheld (You may believe
This Truth) nor could his borrowed Shape deceive
Me then, though, turned into a scaly Snake,
He, coyling, did a thousand Circles make.
But, soon as Thou were born, that I should die
It was Decreed, and then how much did I
Lament, that I to Thee could not declare
These things, before my Soul resolved to Air.
At this, to embrace her Neck he thrice Efsai'd
In vain, and lost as often the fleeting Shade.
This done, two Ghosts of Men, that well agreed,
His Father's, and his Uncle's, strait succeed.
While, through the Shadows pressing on, he there
Vain Kisses sought, and strove those Ghosts, that were
Like flying Smoke, and Clouds, to apprehend:
Oh Thou! on whom our Empire did depend
(My dearest Sire) what God, an Enemy
To the Ausonian Land, did us of Thee
Deprive (said he) Oh Woe to Me! for why,
Was there the least of Time, that, Cruel, I
Should absent be from Thee? thy Death I might
Have changed, by this my Breast, opposed in Fight.
What Groans the Italian People, every where,
Give at your Funerals! The Senate rear,
In Mars's Field, to each of you a Tomb.
Amidst his Speech, the hasty Ghosts assume
The Word: and first his Father's Manes barred
His farther Language thus; A fair Reward
Is Virtue to her self; yet it descends
Sweet to the Shades below, when among our Friends
The Glory of our Lives survives: nor our
Due Praises dark Oblivion can devour.
But say, how great a War does Thee molest?
(Our dear Renown!) how often does Fear my Breast
Invade, when I but think how fiercely Thou
Go on, when Dangers meet thee! but I now
Conjure thee, by the Cause of our sad Fate,
(Most valiant Youth) thy Rage to moderate,
And thy Desire to Fight; sufficient be
The Examples of our Family for Thee.
For the eighth Summer then had reaped the dry,
And rusling Sheavs of Corn, when conquering I
These Scipi^es, who commanded in Spain, dividing their Forces were there, with
their Armies, both destroyed, by Indibilis Massanissa, and Hasdrubal, Generals
for the Carthaginians. See Live. lib. 25.
Had all suppressed, and the Tartessiack La^d
The Yoke accepted from my Brother's Hand.
Her then reviving Walls, and Houses, we
To poor Sagunthus gave. They Baetis, free
From Foes, then Drunk: often Hasdrubal to Us
His Back had turned. But, oh their barbarous,
And still corrupted Faith! When Victour I
Advanced against Hasdrubal, with Misery
Almost Destroyed (a sudden Change) Behold!
The Spanish Troops, which with his Libyan Gold
(A Mercenary People) Hasdrubal
Had made, breaking their Ranks, their Ensigns all
Forsook: then straitway Us, deserted by
Our Auxiliary Bands, the Enemy
With a thick Ring (more numerous in Men)
Encompassed round; nor did we Poorly then,
Or Un-reveng'd, the last of all our Days
On Earth conclude, but ended it with Praise.
To this his Brother thus began to join
His own Mishaps, and said; In the Decline
Of our Affairs, a lofty Castle I
For a Retreat desired, and thereto try
Our last Attempt* a thousand Torches they
With Lamps, and smoking Firebrarnds, every way
Into it threw. For what concerns my Fall,
I of the Gods make no Complaint at all:
For they my Body The Carthaginians, after they had destroyed the two Scipioes,
secure, and negligent; Lucius Martius, collecting the scattered Romans, fell
upon them in the night, slew 37000. of them, took 80. thousand prisoners, and
recovered what was so lately lost. See Live. ibid.
burned, and to a Grave
Of large Extent, my Arms fixed on it, gave.
But I am grieved, lest, since We both are slain,
The Libyans should o'rerun oppressed Spain.
To which the Youth, his Face with Tears o'respread,
Replies. Ye Gods! as She has merited,
May Carthage all just Punishment endure
For these foul Deeds! But He, who under your
Command was tried, brave Martius, has restrained
The fierce Pyrenean Troops, and entertained
Our weary Friends, and with known Arms the War
Maintains: and, it is famed, the Hasdrubal.
Conqueror
In Battle lately was overthrown, and all
Due Piacles exacted for your Fall.
Much joy'd at this, the Generals went again
To those sweet Places, where the Blessed remain.
The Youth, adoring them, with eager Eyes
Pursues them: and now Paulus Ghost supplies
Their Room, scarce to be known, as then he stood,
Among many Ghosts. But, having drunk the Blood,
He thus began: Thou Light of Italy,
Whose Martial Deeds, then one Man's greater, I
Have seen. Who now has instigated Thee
These Kingdoms, where once All must dwell, to see?
To whom again sad Scipio thus replies;
Great General, how long, with weeping Eyes,
Did Rome thy Fate lament? how near with Thee,
Falling to Stygian Darkness, did we see
Oenotrian Palaces! The Tyrian Fo
Did on Thee Dead a Sepulcher bestow,
And in thy Honor sought for Praise. With Tears
While Paulus thus his Hostile Burial hears,
Before their Eyes Flaminius, Gracchus, and,
With a sad Countenance, Servilius stand,
At Cannae slain. A great Desire he had
To speak to them, and farther Language add:
But stronger Inclinations to know
More ancient Ghosts made him desist, and now
Brutus, the first Consul, whose Sons, conspiring with other young Noble Men to
restore the Tarquins, were by him put to Death. See Live. lib. 2.
Brutus, that merited immortal Fame
By's cruel Ax; Camillus then, that came
Near to the Gods in Praise, and, hating Gold,
Marcus Curious, refusing a great sum of money offered him by the Samnites, in
Pyrrhus his name, replied, I had rather Command over the Wealthy, then be Rich.
He first Triumphed over the Samnites, and forced Pyrrhus out of Italy.
Curious he sees, (their Names the Sibyl told,
And showed their Faces, as they came) That Is He,
That, though of Sight deprived, the Treachery
Appius Claudius Coecus, who would never hearken to any terms of Peace with
Pyrrhus; but still persuaded him, not to rely upon his force, and friends in
Italy, but to return home, and then by Embassy treat of Peace with the Romans.
Of Peace, and Pyrrhus from the Gates repelled:
And that, the Bridge behind him broken, held
Horatius Cocles, who, with two others, defending the Gates, at the Bridge over
Tyber, stopped Porsenna's men, who then pursued the Romans, till the Bridge
behind him was broken down so, that the Enemy could pass no farther: which
done, He leapt armed into the River, and returned safe into the City.
His Station valiantly, and did exclude
Returning Scepters, when the King pursued
To Tyber's Banks. If you desire to see
The Man, that in the former War (said She)
The League with Libya made, Lutatius there
Behold, with Naval Arms, a Conqueror.
But, if Amilcar's cruel Shade you would know,
See! That is it, that stands far off; his Brow
(Not smoothed by Death) as yet his rabid Ire
Retains: to talk with him if you desire,
Tasting the Blood, with your permission, He
May speak; which granted, and when Greedily
The thirsty Shade had drunk; first Scipio thus
With angry Looks upbraids him: Such with Us
(Thou Sire of Fraud) are then thy Leagues? with Thee,
Captived, on the Sicanian Coast, did We
This Contract make? Against all Leagues, thy Son
Ausonia, with War, does overrun,
And comes upon Us, breaking through the Bars
OF the Alps. All Italy with barbarous Wars
Is now inflamed, and back, obstructed by
Sad Slaughters, to their Springs our Rivers fly.
To this the Shade replied: So soon, as He
Was ten Years old, the Latin War, by Me
Commanded, He espoused. Nor must He now
Deceive those Gods, attested to the Vow
Made to his Father. But, if now with Fire
He Italy destroy, and still aspire
To overthrow that State, derived from Troy.
O Piety! O holy Faith! O Boy,
Indeed mine Own! and would to Heaven He might
Repair that Honor, We have lost in Fight!
Seeming to swell, with Speed (as this he said)
He vanished, and retired a greater Shade.
Next these, the Prophetess those Ghosts disclosed,
That, Armed, to conquered Nations disposed
Their Laws: with those, that first the Romans taught
The Romans, having changed the Government of Consuls to that of the Decemviri,
sent three Ambassadors; viz. Sp. Posthumous, S^r. Sulpitius, and An. Manlius,
to Athens, to take an Extract of their Laws. Which they performed, and those
Laws, digested (with such of their own, as the Romans esteemed wholesome) into
twelve Tables, ten of Brass, and two of Stone, were ever after their Rules of
Justice.
Those Sacred Laws, from Pallas City brought.
Scipio, well-pleased, with an insatiate Ey
Views all their Faces, and would willingly
Have talked with all, had not the Prophetess
Informed him, that their Troops were numberless.
What Myriads in all the World do Thou
Believe descend to Hell, since here you now
All these behold? A boundless Torrent there
Of Shades continually run down, and are
In Charon's spacious Vessel wafted ore;
And that base Boat's sufficient, were they more.
Many past by, the Virgin to his View
Presents a Youth. This is that Alexander the Great.
Wanderer, who
His Ensigns, where He marched, did Conquering bare;
By whom the Bactrii, and the Dacae were
Subdued; who Ganges drunk on conquered Ground;
With a Pellaean Bridge Niphate bound,
Whose Alexandria in Egypt.
Walls now stand where sacred Nile does run.
To him Aeneades: Thou certain Son
Of Libya's horned Hammon! Oh, how far
Does thy indubitable Fame, in War,
All Generals excel! The like Desire
(Renowned Shade) has set my Breast on Fire,
To know which Way thou took'st thy self to raise
To that proud Honor, and great Height of Praise.
To whom the Ghost: A dull Sedulity,
In War, is base. Thou by Activity,
And Daring, may accomplish greatest Wars.
Slow Valor never yet unto the Stars
Her self has raised. Do Thou precipitate
The time of thy great Deeds. Black Death does wait
Upon the Active Man. Thus having said,
He vanished. Strait succeeded Croesus Shade,
Rich, when alive; now, levelled with the Poor.
But when, arising from the Elysian Shore,
The Manes of a Beauteous Youth he spied,
Whose Tresses, with a Purple Fillet tied,
Flowed on his radiant Neck: Divinest Maid,
Tell me (said He) who is that glorious Shade,
Whose sacred Forehead with a Light's indu'd,
To him peculiar, and a Multitude
Of Souls, admiring, follow, and, about
Him thronging, seem to give a joyful Shout?
Oh, what a Face! did I not see him here
In The Stygian Shade, I easily should swear
He were a God. Nor art deceived (quoth She)
He has deserved to seem a Deity:
Nor in so great a Breast was there a small
Divinity. For He in Verses all
The Seas, and Earth, with Heaven, and Hell comprised,
And in his Song the Muses equaliz'd,
The most eminent of all Poets; who, of very mean Birth, was constrained to
Shift for his Livelihood by teaching a Schole, till by a Disease in his Eyes,
while yet a Yong-man, he was made Blind, wandering through several Cities of
Graece, He sometimes subsisted by repeating Verses, casually composed, to the
People: and at length entertained by several Persons, that admired his
Learning, he compiled those Immortal Works of his Iliads, and Odyssees. He dyed
in Ion, (in his Voyage to Athens) where the Inhabitants built him a Tomb. Vide
Heredo^. de Homero
In Honor Phoebus: when he could not see,
All this unto the World, in order, he
Divulged, and raised your Troy unto the Skies.
Scipio, the sacred Shade with joyful Eyes
Beholding, said; Would but the Fates allow,
That through the Universe this Prophet now
Might sing the Roman Deeds; how much more great
Would the same Things, with his Certificate,
Pass to succeeding Times? Thrice happy You,
Achilles.
Aea^cides, to whom it happened, to
The World by such a Tongue to be expressed:
For by his Versethy Valor still increased.
But what is that Troop, that such Applauses give,
Seeking the Ghosts of Heroes, and receive
The Greater Shades? With that Achilles He,
And mighty Hector, is amazed to see.
And then the Valiant Ajax stately Pace
Admires, and Nestor's venerable Face.
But he was pleased, when he beheld the Two
Renowned Agamemnon, and Menelaus.
Atrides, and Ulysses, who,
In Prudence, equaled great Achilles Deeds.
To these Ledaean Castor's Shade succeeds,
About to live; for then Alternate Light
Pollux in Heaven maintained. But, to his Sight
Presented, strait* Lavinia's Shade withdrew
His Face: for then the Maid advised him to
Consider Women's Shades, lest rising Day
Should summon Her (protracting Time) away.
This Venus happy Being Wife to Aeneas, Son to Venus and Anchises.
Daughter is (said She)
That Trojans long-deriv'd Posterity,
Joined to the Latins. Would you see the Bold
Quirinus Bride? Hersilia there behold,
Once by Her Sheepherd Husband ravished, when
When Romulus had built his City, and the Inhabitants so increased, that it was
now time to form a civil Society: He sent Ambassadors to his Neighbors to
demand of them Women, which they then wanted. But, his Embassy every where
rejected, He, pretending the Celebration of Games to Neptune, the Sabines
coming with their Wives and Children, invited as well by Curiosity to see the
News, as Devotion, while they were intent on the Celebration of the Festival,
the Romans, seizing all the Virgins that came with them, forced the rest out of
the City. The Sabines returning armed to revenge this Violence; these Virgins,
now their Wives, became Mediators between their Husbands, and Parents, and
made the Romans and Sabines one People.
Their Neighbors scorned such rough, unpleasant
Yet She, well-pleased, his homely Cottage saw, (Men,
And lay with him on Pallets made of Straw,
And angry Sires, from 'vengeful Arms, withdrew.
But now Carmenta was a Prophetess, in whose honor the Roman Matrons (as to a
Goddess) celebrated an Annual Feast called Carmentalia.
Carmenta's Godlike Gesture view;
She was Evander's Mother, and Divined
Your present Labors. If you have a mind
To see the Face of Tanaquil, who animated her Husband Tarquinius Priscus (a
Stranger at Rome) to repair thither, to offer himself after the Death of
Martius Ancus to be their King, and as they came to the Gates, sitting with his
Wife in their Cart, an Eagle gently took off his Cap, and, hovering awhile over
his head, put it on again: by which Omen encouraged, Tanaquil persuaded him to
enter the City, and, not long after Ancus dying, he was elected King.
Tanaquil: that is She,
Whose Chaster mind prevailed in Augury,
And to her Husband did his Throne foreshew,
And in the Bird the Gods propitious knew.
There see, of Roman Chastity the Grace,
Lucretia, glorious in her Death, her Face,
And Eyes fixed on the Ground still bears. Thou ( Rome)
Must not, alas! nor does it Thee become
To wish the long Fruition of so great
A Praise. Near Her, Virginia see; who, yet
The Wound retaining, in her bleeding Breast,
(Sad Monument, that Chastity expressed
Defended by the Sword!) Virginia, the Daughter of Virginius; who being
vitiated by Appius Claudius, her Father to provoke the people against him,
bringing her into a public Assembly, stabbed her; and, showing the Knife all
bloody to the people, declared, he rather chose, that his Daughter should so
die, then not be free from the violence of Appius. See Live. lib. 1.
her Father's hand
Applauds, in that dire stroke. Next her does stand
The famous Claelia, who to fly thy Yoke
( Porsenna) her Weak Sex contemned, and broke
The Lidyan War, and Tyber: such, as She
(A Virgin) Rome once Wished her Men to be,
This sudden Apparition much Dismayed
Young Scipio, who, more enquiring, said;
What may those guilty Manes be, and why
Are they Tormented? She gave this reply.
That Tullia, the Wife of Tarquinius Superbus, who drove her Chariot over the
body of her Father Servius Tullius, whom she had murdered, to raise her
Husband to his Throne.
Tullia, who with her Chariot tore,
And broke her Father's Members, and stood over
His trembling Face with her contracted Reins,
That She may never be free from lasting Pains,
Swims in hot Phlegethon, that, rapid, springs
From smoking Furnaces, and upward flings
Burned Rocks, made harder by the River's Heat,
And still with Flaming Flints her Face does beat.
But She, whose Lungs a Bird's sharp Bill destroys,
(Hark! with his beating Wings how great a Noise,
Returning to his Food, the An Eagle.
Bird of Jove
Now makes!) Oh horrid Wickedness! for Love
Of Gold, the Capitol, that Treacherous Maid
Tarpeia, the Daughter of Tarpeius Keeper of the Capitol; who contracted with
the Sabines to betray to them the Capitol, on Condition, she might have all
that they wore on their left Arms (meaning their Bracelets) the Sabines
entering, as she opened the Gates, threw upon her so many Shields from their
left Arms, that she was pressed to death with the weight of them.
( Tarpeia) to the Sabine Troops betrayed.
Then do not see. (for lighter Crimes our Laws
Scarce touch) dire Orcus still with hungry Jaws
Does bark? Of old the monstrous Guardian He
Of the Iberian Gerion.
heard, and eagerly
Assaulteth with his Teeth, and fiercely Trails
The Entrails out with his polluted Nails.
Yet is the Punishment inferior to
The Sin, that Those Vestal Nuns were chosen into that Order at sixteen years
of age, and were to continue so thirty years, after which they might marry
(though few did) but if, while Devotes, any chanced to violate their Vow, they
were buried alive.
Vestal voluntary threw
Her Virgin Zone away, and sacred Rites
Of Vesta stained. But now these several Sights,
Which you have seen, sufficient are, I strait
To Thee (concluding) will enumerate
Some Souls, that now Oblivion drink (they are
But few) and so again to Night repair.
That The Sibyl, having showed him the Souls of such as had lived on Earth, now
following the opinion of Plato (in Phaedo) that Souls created must have some
place of abode before they entered Bodies, shows him the Souls, which after they
had drunk of Lethe (that is ^olly, and Forgetfulness of their Original) were to
live on Earth. Among other, Marius, who of a mean Person came to be General in
the War against the Cimbri, over whom he triumphed, and, after strange variety
of Fortune, dyed in his seventh Consulship.
Marius (for the Time's not long when he
Shall go into Etherial Light) shall be
Your Consul, and shall long Command procure
From humble Birth. Nor shall Sylla endure
Long to drink drowsy Lethe, or Obey.
Fate, which no God can Change, and Life away
Him call. He first shall Seize, as by Assault,
The Empire, but the glory of his Fault
Sylla, who, after he had cruelly afflicted the Commonwealth, and assumed to
himself absolute Authority over the Lives, and Estates of the Romans,
voluntary laid down his Dictatourship, and retired to Puteoli, where he lived
privately, and restored them to their Liberty.
Shall be, that he shall it restore alone,
And in so great a Name there shall be none,
That shall desire to second Sylla. He,
Whose Hair erect on's rugged Front, you see
Is Pompey, a most glorious Head on Earth,
And by the World beloved. But He, that Birth
Of The Gods, who lifts his Starry Head so high,
As Caesar, of Iulus Progeny,
When these break from their dark Abodes, by Sea,
And Land, how great, how mighty things will they
Attempt? Alas, how often will they Contend
In Fight through all the World? nor in the End,
Shall thou (the Conqueror) less Guilty die,
Then He, over whom thou gain'st the Victory.
Then Scipio, Weeping, said: It grieves me much,
That the sad Order of Affairs is such
For Italy. But if, when Life is done,
There be no Pardon, and even Death must run
The hazard of Desert; say, in what part
Of Phlegethon, his Sins still burning smart
Shall Hannibal endure? or, tell me, where
Shall a fit ravenous Fowl for ever tare
His Limbs, which for her Food shall still increase?
Oh! fear no that, exclaims the Prophetess,
A Life inviolate he shall not lead,
Nor in his Country shall his Bones, when Dead,
Be laid to rest. For when he shall in Fight
Be Vanquished, and all his Forces quite
Dispersed, he shall endure to be Overthrown,
And beg inglorious Safety. Macedon,
For War, shall give him Hopes again to rise
In Arms; and then (condemned for Treacheries)
His constant Wife, and Son forsaken, He
Shall Carthage quit, and through the Ocean flee
In a small Ship. Cilician Taurus then
He Will visit. But (alas!) how foolish Men
Will rather choose hard Servitude to bare,
The Hot, and Cold Excesses of the Air,
With Hunger, Flight, and Seas; then once to Die.
He, after these great Wars, in Italy,
A Servant to the Assyrian King shall be,
And thence, deprived of his Desire to see
Ausonia embroiled, with doubtful Sails
Shall put to Sea, until, with lazy Gales,
Brought to the Prusiack Coast, grown weak with Age,
He in another Service shall engage,
And, through that Kingdom's Aid, a Shelter find:
Till, that their Enemy may be resigned
The Romans urging, secret Poison there
In Haste he drinks, and from continual Fear
Absolve the doubtful World. Thus having said,
To hollow Shades of Erebus the Maid
Again withdraws; and Scipio strait ascends
Unto the Port, and his rejoicing Friends.
The End of the Thirteenth Book.
Flagrantom Luxu, and miscentem turpia duris
Iurati obtruncant Iunenam.
Nec ^am Modus Ensibus addunt
Faemineam Caedem, atque msontum rapt^ Sororum
Corpora prosternunt Ferro.
Honoratissimo Dno. Domino Ioanni Berkley, Baroni de Stratton in Comitatu
Cornubiae. Tabula Summa cum Observantia D. D. D.

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Fourteenth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Sicilia described: the wanton King
Is slain. The Libyans, and the Romans bring,
Into that Land, their Arms. What Victories
Marcellus gained. Both sides have their supplies
From the divided Land. By Land, and Sea,
To Syracusa's Walls the Romans lay
Close Siege. What Arts by Archimedes were
Found out, for their repulse. New Aids appear
From Libya by Sea. A Naval Fight,
Wherein some Libyan Ships are put to flight,
Some Captive made, some sunk. Both Armies are
Infected by a Plague* which ceased, the War
The Romans strait renew. To one Assault
Rich Syracusa yields: the Soldier's Fault,
Who Archimedes, as He Figures drew,
Studious, upon the Sand, not knowing, slew,
The General deplores. What praises He
Deserved, whose Mercy crowned his Victory.
YE Powers of Helicon, now turn your Lays
To Sicily, and the Ortygian Seas:
Sometimes to Daunian Kingdoms your Resorts
To make; sometimes to the Sicanian Ports,
Or Macedonian Palaces to see,
And the Achaick Land, your Task must be:
Or wandering, where Sardoan Floods enfold
Your Steps; or, where in Cottages, of old,
The Tyrians reigned, to go; and farthest Day
To visit; and where Earth's vast Globe by Sea
Is Limited: all this the Scenes of War,
That, in their several Quarters, Acted are
By Mars, require. This therefore We must do,
And, where the War, and Trumpets call, pursue.
Of large extent, a Port of Italy,
Sicilia was anciently called Trinacria from the three I romentories, Pachynus,
Pelorus, and Lilybaeum. It was an old Opinion, that it was once joined to Italy
by that Neck of Land, where Rhegium (now Rezzo) stands; but to be torn from it
by the violence of the Sea.
Trinacria was, till once Assaulted by
Notus, and raging Waves, against it heaved
By the Coerulean Trident, it received
The Ocean in: for, by an hidden way,
The Earth's torn Entrails the impacted Sea
Asunder threw, and, breaking through the Land
With a full Tide, at once the People, and
The Cities, by the Tempest's secret Force
Bore quite away. Since, keeping that Divorce,
By an impetuous Flood, the unruly Main
Permits not the Disjoined to meet again.
But yet the space, that the two Lands divides,
As Fame reports (so narrow are the Tides,
That run between) Barking of Dogs, and Lays
Of early Birds, to either Side conveys.
So rich the Soil, that it the Garners fills
Of Husbandmen: with Olives shades the Hills,
Titles creats to Bacchus, and swift Steeds,
That will endure the sound of Trumpets, breeds.
Cecropian Tapers Hybla, every where
Renowned, from her sweet Nectar, kindles: there
Paeonian Streams with secret Sulphur spring;
There, by the Muses graced, famed Poets Sing
Worthy Apollo, who their Lays diffuse
Through Sacred Groves: whose Syracusian Theocritus, born in Syracusa; whom
Virgil imitated in his Bucolicks.
Muse
Makes Helicon resound. The People are
In Language prompt; but, when emploi'd in War,
Their Ports are Crowned with Trophies, from the Seas.
After the Reign of dire Antiphates was King of the Laestrigonians, who were
Anthropophagi, Man-Eaters.
Antiphates,
And Cyclops Rule, Sicanian Plows began
First to turn up the untilled Ground, and then
From high Pyrene thither People came;
Who on the vacant Land imposed the Name
Of an Iberian River. After these,
There soon arrived stout Bands of Ligures,
By The Ligurians, vexed by their Neighbors the Brutii, and other People of
Calabria, under the Conduct of Siculus, past over into Sicilia (then called
Sicania, from the Spaniards, that had planted themselves, and called it so from
a River, or rather from their Leader Siculus) and, settling there, changed the
former Name to that, which now it bears. See Dionys. Halicar. lib. 4.
Siculus Commanded, who by War
Possessed the Land, that still his Name does bare.
Nor was it Loss of Fame, or held a Shame
For Siculus to change Sicania's Name.
Next Neighboring Minos, making his Demands
Of Daedalus, his Eteocretian Bands
Led to the hapless War: and, after He
A Judge of Hell, through cruel Treachery,
And Plots of the Cocalides, was made,
Weary of making War, his Minos (feigned by the Poets to be one of the Judges
of Hell) pursuing Daedalus into Sicily, the King Cocalus treated with him, and
promised to perform all he desired, invited him to his Palace, and stifled him
in a Bath; (as Diodorus Siculus affirms) though the Poet follows the Report,
that he was murdered by the Daughters of Cocalus. After his Death his People,
wanting their King, and their Ships, all burned by the Sicilians, laid down
their Arms, became Sicilians, and built a City, in Memory of their King, called
Minoa.
People laid
Their Arms aside, and dwelt in Sicily.
Trojan Acestes, then, his Progeny
Had mixed with Trojan Helymus, who there
(Some Bands of Youth soon following) first did rear
Those Walls, that since from Them retain the Name.
Neither are Zancle's Walls obscure in Fame,
Which Saturn, laying down his Sickle there,
The Land about that City being very fertile; the Poets feigned Saturn to have
dropped his Sickle there.
Renowned. But in the Ennaean Land none are
More famed, then those were Founded by the Name,
That thither from Sisyphus was King of Corinth; whence Archius came with a
Colonie, and built Syracusa.
Sisyphian Istmus came,
And, in the Corinthian.
Ephyraean Offspring, all
Does much Excel. Here does Alphaeus fall
Into his Arethusa's fishy Springs,
And of a Sacred Crown the Figure brings.
But in Trinacrian Caves the Vulcan.
Lemnian God
Delights, and there has fettled his Abode.
For feeding, under ground, in Forges vast,
Lipare from her hollow Head does cast
A sulfurous Smoke. But her continual Fires
Aetna, inflamed, from trembling Rocks expires;
While, with included Groans, the raging Sea
She imitates, and restless, Night, and Day,
Through secret Ruptures murmuring Thunders. So
From Phlegethon the flaming Billows flow,
And from the melting Caverns rolls (among
Those pitchy Tempests) half-burnt Rocks along.
But though, within, it boileth with so Dire
A Storm of Flames, and still-encreasing Fire:
Yet White upon the Top, it is strange to tell,
How near those very Flames the Snow does dwell;
How the burning Rocks are with Eternal Cold
Congealed, and horrid; and how they behold
Perpetual Winter on the Mountain's Head,
And Snow with glowing Ashes overspread.
What should I say of the Aeolian Land?
That Dwelling of the Winds, and Bars ordained
Against Storms? Here, washed by the Ionian Main,
Turned to that Land where Argos.
Pelops once did Reign,
An High Promontory.
Pachynus Cliffs appear: There opposite
To Libya, and the raging Strong West-winds.
Cauri's Spite,
The noble Lilybaeum has in view
The bending The Arms of the Celestial Scorpion.
Chelae. A third Frontier to
The Shore extended, and to Italy
Opposed, upon the other Side, the high
Another Promontory of Sicily.
Pelorus rises, with an Hill of Sand.
Here long in Peace did Hieron command
His People, with a mild, and easy Sway,
And never the Hearts of those, that did Obey,
With cruel Fears perplexed! *nor could He be
Induced to violate that Faith, which he
Had at the Altars sworn. For many Years
His Social League, with the Ausonian Peers,
Entire he kept. But, when the Fates dissolved
His aged Life, the Fatal Crown devolved
To's eldest Nephew, and unto that Court
(Of late so Good) unruly Minds resort.
This young King, given over to Luxury, which soon after drew him into Tyranny,
fell into such a Dislike with his People, that they rebelled against him, at a
time when they were divided among themselves: some resolving on Defection from
the Romans; others to adhere to them. But his Death gave the Romans the
Advantage, of which Marcellus made Use, to the subduing of all Sicily, in
taking Syracuse.
Not sixteen Years of Age the King had known,
When he Eclipsed the Glory of his Throne;
Unable to sustain his Kingdom's Weight,
Too Confident of his too fickle State.
In a short time all Crime's protected by
The Force of Arms; there all Impiety
Familiarly was known: the very Name
Of Justice banished, and a modest Shame
Was in the King held Vile. His Mother's high
Descent from Pyrrhus, the great Family
Of ancient Aeacus, and Thetis Son,
(In Verse Eternal) spurred this Fury on
To that so great a Precipice. And strait
His Breast's invaded by a sudden Heat,
To favor the Designs of Libya,
And, this his Sin admitting no Delay,
He makes new Leagues; by which it was agreed,
That the Sidonian Army should recede
From Sicily, if they the Conquest gained
But yet his Punishment for this remained
Still fixed, and dire Eirnnys him a Tomb
Even in that Land denied, where he no room
Would yield to his Ally. For some, whom Ire,
And daily Fears, invited to Conspire,
(Resolved his Youth no longer to abide,
Inflamed with cruel Lusts, and bloody Pride,
And adding to his Tyranny abhorred,
And vilest Acts) him slew. And then the Sword
No measure knew. To this the Slaughter they
Of Women add, and seizing, as a Prey,
His guiltless Such was the Rage, and Fury of the People, that, after they had
slain the King, they sought out all of the Royal Family; and murdered them
likewise, viz. his two Sisters: and a Daughter of Hiero (his Grandfather) with
her Daughters. Live. 24.
Sisters, kill them. Thus rag,d new*
Recovered Liberty in Arms, and threw
The Yoke away. Some Punick Camps require;
Some the Italian, and known Friends desire:
Nor was there wanting some, that, full of Rage,
Refused in League with either to engage.
Such were Trinacria's Broils, such was the State
Of Sicily, by the young Tyran's Fate;
When high in Honor (for, as *twice before,
Then, a third Time, He Latian Fasces bore)
At the very time that Marcellus came into the Harbor of Zancl^ (which was
capable of six hundred Ships, such of the Syracusans, as desired Peace with the
Romans, sent their Ambassadors to Appius (the Praetor) but before he had
dispatched to the Consul Marcellus, Tidings came, that the Carthaginians Fleet
arrived near Pachynum, which encouraged their Party within the City to break
off the Treaty.
Marcellus with his Fleet arrived upon
Zanclaean Coasts: and, when all things were known,
The Murder of the King; the ambiguous Mind
OF the People; and what Places Arms had joined
With Carthage; what their Strength; who firmly stood
In Amity with Rome; what vain, and proud
Conceits then Syracusa, so called from the River.
Arethusa entertained,
Who at the Gates his Entrance did withstand;
Close to the War he falls, and, with an high
Incensed Breast, lets the whole Fury fly
Of's Arms, through all the Neighboring places. So
Himself, from Rhodope, does Boreas throw,
And with Tenth Waves against the Earth does raise
The Main, and, following the ejected Seas,
Raves with his roaring Wings. By the first War
Leontine Territories wasted are;
A Land, where once the cruel Laestrigon
Did reign. The General went, Furious, on;
To whom it seemed all one, if slowly He
Subdued the Grecian Forces, as to be
Overcome. Through all the Plain they, Frighted, fly
So, as you would think they were a Company
Of Women, that his Men at first withstood,
And Ceres Fields made Fertile with their Blood.
In every Place they 're slain: nor, as they run,
Would furious Mars permit them Death to shun.
Such, as hoped Flight some Safety might afford,
The General prevented with his Sword:
And, urging on his Troops, that seemed too slow,
With his Shield's Point, exclaims: Go, quickly Mow
With your keen Swords that coward People down;
That in their Wrestling Exercise, alone,
Are Skilled; whose lazy Youth with Joy affect
The slender Praise, to be with Olive decked;
When they those easy Conflicts, in a Shade,
Have undergon, and a poor Conquest made.
This must your only Honor be, if You
The Enemy, as soon as Seen, subdue.
This from the General heard, the Army, strait,
More furiously fall on, and press on Fate:
Now the sole Contest among themselves remained,
Who should the Foremost be; what valiant Hand
The rest Excel in noblest Spoils. Not more
Enraged, the Billows of Euripus roar,
Broken against Caphareus: Propontis so
The bellowing Sea, with Violence, does throw
From its strait Mouth: nor near the farthest Sun,
With greater Tumult, does the Ocean run,
And strike the Herculean Pillars. Yet in Heat
Of Blood, and Fury of a Fight so great,
Was the mild Grace of Noble Valor famed.
A Tyrrhene Soldier, Asylus Named,
At Thrasimenus Lake once Captive made,
The mild Commands, and easy Bondage, had
Of Berra undergone, and Home again,
With his kind Master's leave, returned: and then,
Resuming Arms, his former Misery
Revenged in the Sicilian War: while He
Was mingled, in the midst of all the Fight,
And did by Chance on's Master Berra light,
(Who, to the League from Carthage sent, did there,
Entering the Social War, an Helmet wear
Of Brass, that, shutting close, secured his Face)
The Youth He with his Sword invades, and as,
Fainting with feeble Steps, he left his Stand,
And Backward went, o'rethrew him on the Sand.
Hearing the Conqu'rour's Voice, poor Berra, strait
His fearful, lingering Soul from instant Fate
Recov'ring, from his Chin the Fastening tares
Of his then treacherous Helmet; and to Prayers
Had farther Language added: but, amazed
At that so sudden Sight, Asylus gazed
On his known Face, and, as his Sword he stayed
With His Hand, with Groans, and Tears obortive said;
Oh! beg not Life, I pray, or Doubtful so
Entreat: it is just, that I defend my Fo.
He the best Soldier is, who first, and last
In War, defends his Faith. Me, first, Thou have
Rescued from Death, and, not preserved by
Thy Fo, did him preserve. I Would not Deny
My Self (who have endured so much of Ill)
To be Unworthy, and deserving still
To fall into things Worse, should this my Hand
Not make thy Way where Fire, and Sword withstand.
And kindly raising him, as this he said,
With Life the Benefits of Life repaid.
His first Attempts in Sicily thus blessed
With Quiet; Troops Marcellus forward pressed,
And his Victorious Eagles turning to
The Ephyreian Walls, he strait way drew
About the Syracusian Towr's a Line:
Yet did his love of Fighting now decline.
With grave Advice he strives to take away
Their blind Resolves, and Fury to allay.
But (lest perhaps they might refuse, or fear
To credit Offers, that so Gentle were)
The Siege with strictest Guards still forward went,
And He, with cautious Arms, then more intent,
Watched, fearless, in the Front, with secret Care
Designing Dangers, not expected there.
So in the Po, or in Cayster's Streams,
Swims the White Swan, and, while her Body seems
Unmoved, with the prone River forward goes,
And with her Feet through silent Surges rows.
But, while the Town, Besieged, still doubtful stands,
What to resolve; their Arms, and Social Bands,
The excited People, and the Cities sent
TO enforce the Camp. Thither Messana went,
That lies upon the Sea, from Latian Ground
Too far disjoined, by Oscan Tribes renowned:
Then Catine, too near Typhaeus Flame,
And for two pious Catine, lying just at the foot of Aetna, was thence fired.
When two Brothers ( Amphinomus, and Anapius) took their aged Father, and
Mother, and carried them, through the Flames, into Safety. Their Statues were
after honored with an Epigram; (more lasting, then the Brass, or Marble) by
the Excellent Claudian, too long to insert here.
Brothers known to Fame;
And Camerina, not by Forbidden to be stirred by the Sibylline Oracles.
Fates to be
Once moved: then Hybla, that presumes with Thee
( Hymettus) Hives of Nectar to compare.
Selinis, that so many Palms does bear;
And Mile, once a Port secure, but now
The Shore alone a Refuge does allow,
And dangerous to such as escape the Sea.
Then lofty Eryx and Centuripe,
From her high Mountain, with Entella, came,
Entella plentiful in Wine, a Name
To Troy's Acestes dear. Then Tapsos, and
Acra, that high on Icy Hills does stand.
With these an Agathyrnian Band was there,
And Tyndaris, that glories in her Pair
Of Laeda's Castor, and Pollux.
Sons, and Agragas, that breeds,
And brings her numerous Troops of Warlike Steeds,
That all the Air inflame with Neighing loud,
And roll unto the Walls a dusty Cloud.
Their Leader Grosphus was, whose carved Shield
The Monument of ancient Torture held;
A fierce Bull's Image; which, while Bodies, burned
By Flames put underneath, to bellowings turned
Sad Groans, and you would believe some Oxen goar'd,
And driven from their Stalls, then truly roared.
But, this revenged, Perillus, who invented for Phalaris (the Tyran of the
Agrigentines) a Bull of Brass, into which when the Condemned were put, and Fire
placed underneath, their Cries imitated the bellowing of a Bull. Of this
Torture Perillus, the Inventour, made the first Experiment, condemned to it by
the Tyran.
the Inventer of so Dir^
An Art; did, bellowing, in his Bull expire.
Thither came Hesa, thither Gela came,
Gela, that from the River takes her Name:
And the Near Palica (now called Palicenia) was a Temple (dedicated to the Gods
Palici) in which were certain Springs, called Cups, not very large, but
extraordinary Deep; the Water of a fiery Color, perpetually boiling up, but
never increasing, or diminishing. The Religion of the Place was, that, when any
eminent Controversy happened, that could not be decided, but by the Oaths of
the Parties, they were brought by the Priests to the Cups, into which they cast
Tablets, on which they writ what they asserted by Oath. The Tablets of such, as
swore Truth, swum: the other sunk: and, before the perjured got out of the
Temple, they were miraculously punished by Blindness, Lameness, or some other
Judgment of Heaven upon them. See Diodorus Siculus,. lib. 11.
Palici, where the Perjured are
Tortured by present Punishment: and there
Trojan Acesta was, and ( m) Acys, who
Through Aetna's Vales into the Sea does flow,
His dear Nymph washing with a pleasant Stream,
Once in thy Flame a Rival, Polypheme:
But, while He fled thy Barbarous Rage, into
Small Streams dissolved, at once, he escaped his Fo,
And his victorious Waters mixed among
His Galathea's Waves. With These, along
Came Those, that murmuring Alabis; and those,
That Hyspa drink, and the perspicuous Flows
Of clear Achates: Vagedrusa too,
And Hypates, whose Chanel runs so low:
Pantagya likewise, easy to be past,
Through his small Current; and, which runs so fast,
The Yellow-Stream'd Simethus. Thermae then,
Of old enriched with Muses, Armed her Men,
Where Hymera, rising out of the Mountain Nebrodes (now called Maduvia) runs
North, and South, the Branches differing in their Nature. That, which runs
Northward, and falls into the Libyck Sea, is Salt: and the other, which falls
into the Tyrrhen, is Fresh Water.
Hymera descends into the Seas:
For it divides itself two several Ways,
And runs to East, and West, with equal Force.
Two-Crown'd Nebrodes keeps this Divorce;
Then which, no Hill with a Sicanian Shade
Does rise more Rich: this lofty Enna made
A sacred Fortress to the Groves of Gods.
Here a dark Path to Stygian Abodes
A Cave, that opens wide the gaping Ground,
Detects, through which a strange new Lover found
A Way to unknown Coasts. Pluto this way,
Inflamed with Lust, durst venture up to Day,
And, leaving doleful Acheron, above,
On the forbidden Earth, his Chariot drove.
Then, having Ravished the Proserpina. Of which see the excellent Claudian.
Ennaean Maid;
In Haste, retiring, his black Steeds, affrai'd
To view the Face of Heaven, and flying Day,
Drove back to Styx, and hid in Shades his Prey.
Petreia Roman Leaders then desired:
And Roman Leagues Callipolis required;
And Eugion, arched with Stone: and there they see
Hadranum, and Hergentum, Melite,
Proud of her stately Webs, and wealthy Store
Of Wool: Melacte, with a Fishy Shore:
And Cephalaedias, near the stormy Main;
Whose boisterous Coast, in the Coerulean Plain,
Feeds the vast Whales: the Tauromenians too,
Where Ships by dire Charybdis, in their view,
In quick-devouring Gulphs are swallowed down,
And from the Bottom strait again are thrown
Up to the Stars. These Latin Arms approved,
And under the Laurentine Ensigns moved.
The rest of the Sicilian People there,
With Libyan.
Elysaean Vows, in Arms appear.
A thousand were the Agathyrnian Bands;
As many Strongylos, that Southward stands:
A thousand sent Fascellina, the Seat
Of the Thoantean Diana.
Goddess: Thrice as great
A Number gave Panormos; some, that killed
Wild Beasts in Chase; and some in Fishing skilled;
And some, that could the Birds from Heaven allure.
Herbesos then, nor Naulochum secure
Of Danger sat: nor, with her Shady Plains,
Morgentia from this treacherous War abstains.
Joined with Nemaean Forces, thither came
Amastra; thither Thisse small in Name;
Netum with these, and Micite combined;
With these Achetum, and Sidonia joined;
And Depane; and, vexed with roaring Waves,
Helorus; and This Defection of the Slaves in Sicily came to that height, that
(with an Army of more then twenty Thousand) having wasted many Towns, and
Cities in that Country, and among others Triochala (or Tricala) eminent for its
Strength: they made one Salvius (to whom they gave the Name of Trypho) their
King, and under his Conduct defeated Lucius Lucullus. Trypho dying, one Athenio
succeeded, and prevailed against Lucullus his Successor, C. Servilius, and
continued thus in Arms four years, till C. Acilius, who was Consul with C.
Marius, subdued, and totally suppressed them. See Diod. Sic. 36.
Triochala, by Slaves
Soon after Wasted; Arabeia fierce;
Ietas high; and Tabas, to converse
With Arms most ready; and Cossyra small,
And Mute, which not Megara at all^
Exceeds in Bigness, came, with joint consent,
To Libya's Aid; with Caulon eminent
For her calm Sea; when She the The Bird called the King-Fisher.
Halcyon hears
Singing, and the scarce-moving Water bears
The swimming Nests on Surges strangely stilled.
But the famed City ( Syracusa) filled
Her spacious Walls with various Arms, and Men,
Collected from all parts. The People, then
Facile, and ready Tumults to desire,
Their Leaders with this boasting Language Fire;
That their four Towers, and Walls, no Fo, as yet,
Had entered; That their Fathers saw how great
A Cloud, so inaccessible a Town,
Through situation of her Port, had thrown
Upon the The Athenians, after the vain Expedition of Xerxes, became so
powerful, that they freed all Greece from the Persian Yoke, and, after,
invaded Sicily: where, after several Conflicts in a Naval Fight before
Syracusa, under the Conduct of Nicias, they were overthrown, and their whole
Force repulsed, and beaten out of Sicily. See Diodor. lib. 13.
Salaminian, Victories,
And Eastern Trophies; when, before their Eyes,
Three hundred Ships, and Athens, in whose Aid
The Ruins of the Persian King were made
To serve, in one great Wrack, while they sustain
No Loss at all, were swallowed in the Main.
Two Hippocrates, and Epicydes, whose Grandfather was banished from Syracuse,
and fled to Carthage, where they were born, their Mother being a Carthaginian.
See Livy, lib. 24.
Brothers (born in Carthage, and allied
To Carthaginians, by the Mother's side,
Whose Father, a Sicilian, banished
From Syracuse, had them in Libya bred;
In whom Sicanian Levity conspired,
With Tyrian Fraud, the giddy People fired.
Which when Marcellus saw, and that no Cure
The Wounds of their Sedition would endure,
(The War still growing, from the Fo, more high)
He straight attests the Gods of Sicily,
Thy Fountains, Arethusa, and the Lakes,
And Rivers; That unwillingly he takes
The War in hand, and that those Arms (which He
Never of himself assumed) the Enemy
Forced him to bear. With that, the Wall he storms,
And Thunders on the City with his Arms.
An equal Fury them together all
Draws on: on either side they Fight, and Fall.
Of this, and other Engines, made by Archimedes, in opposition to Marcellus,
see Plutarch in the Life of Marcellus.
With many Cov'rings seeming to invade
The Stars in height, and by a Archimedes.
Grecian made
Ten Stories high, which Shades of many a Grove
Consumed, a Tower there was, from whence they strove
To roll down mighty Stones, and Engines, which
With Fire were Armed, and power down scalding Pitch.
Here Cimber, at a distance having thrown
A burning Lamp, the Fatal Weapon on
The side had fixed: The Fire, assisted by
The Force of Wind, quite through the Tower does fly,
And through the lofty Machine's several Floors,
Increasing, climbes, and trembling Beams devours
With rapid Flames, which (Smoke, like Billows, thick
To Heaven ascending) soon Victorious, lick
The shining Top. All places, filled with Smoke,
And Clouds of Darkness as, with a fierce Stroke
Of Thunder dashed, none scaping it, they all,
In one vast ruin, into Ashes fall.
Like Fortune on the other Side, by Sea,
The Ships attended. For, when nearer they
Unto the City, and the Houses, drew,
Where the Port brings the calmed Waters to
The Walls, a Mischief Unexpected there
Fills (by a new Device) their Hearts with Fear.
A Beam (exactly Smooth, and every where
Like a Ship's Mast, the Knots shaved off) did bear
Strong Grapples, firmly fixed, and seizing all
That Fought, from the high Rampart of the Wall,
Caught them aloft with Hooks of Ir'n, and to
The midst of all the City, backward, threw.
Nor did this Force thus toss the Men alone,
But, when the Steel, impuls'd, was downward thrown
Upon a Ship, and the impetuous Stroke
Fixed the tenacious Teeth within the Oak,
Aloft the Vessel's tossed, and suddenly
The Chains, with Art, let loose (most Sad to see)
With such a Force into the Sea again
Is thrown, that it there sinks with all the Men.
Beside these Stratagems, the Wall, by Art
Made hollow, narrow Loop-holes did impart;
Through which, upon the Fo they might, secure,
Discharge their Weapons, from the Counter-Mure:
And this so cunningly Contrived, the Fo,
Through the same Way, no Shafts again could throw.
Thus Archimedes.
Grecian Policy, and Art excelled
Their Arms, and both by Sea, and Land, repelled
Marcellus, with his mighty Threatenings, and
Before the Walls a dreadful War does stand.
The Man (the Isthmiack Swains Immortal Fame)
In Wit, with ease, all other overcame,
That then the World produced. Not rich; but One,
To whom the Heavens, and all the Earth was known.
He, by the Sun's obscured Rays, at Birth
Of Day, could tell what Storms would fall: if Earth
Were Fixed, or did Instable hang: why, bound
By certain Leagues, this Globe's encompassed round
By Thetis Waves: the Labors of the Sea,
And Moon, what Laws the Ocean's Tides obey.
Nor is it vain to think, that He the Sand
Of the vast World could Count; who, by the Hand
Of a weak Woman, could, with so much Skill,
Archimedes, to show an Experiment of his Art to King Hieron, caused a very
great Ship to be sunk with its ordinary Burden: and, sitting on the Shore with
a small Engine, which himself only moved, drew it out of the Water upon the
Land. See Plutarch, ibid.
Draw Ships, and heaps of Stones against an Hill.
While thus, with Stratagems, He wearied all
The Teucri, and the Roman General;
An hundred Sail of Tyrian Ships their Way
Made toward their Relief, and plowed the Sea.
Erected now with sudden Hopes, their Fleet
Lanch'd from the Port, the Syracusians meet,
And join with them: nor, on the other Side,
Was the Ausonian backward to provide
His Navy; but, with drowned Oars, apace
Cuts through the Ocean, whose beaten Face
With frequent Strokes grows White, and, where they cleave
The Billows, a broad Path of Foam they leave.
Both, equally, insult upon the Main;
And Neptune's Empire with new Storms again
Trembles, through which their Shouts, and Clamours sound,
And Echoes, full as loud, from Rocks rebound.
And now, drawn out for Fight, the Warriors stood,
And compass with their Wings the spacious Flood,
And with their Naval Toils the Watery Plain
Include. Both Navies, in like Form amain,
Came on, and with their Moon-like Circles crow'd
The foaming Waves. Now, no Delay's allowed;
The dreadful Murmurs of the cruel Brass,
Sounding the Charge, through all the Ocean pass:
Which rouzing Feigned to be Neptune's Trumpeter.
Triton, frighted him; their Yell,
And Noise, contending with his crooked Shell.
Scarce they the Sea rememb'red, with so prone
A Fury to the Battle they go on,
And, standing on the Gallie's Margents, throw
Uncertain Darts, still nodding to and fro:
The Sea between them is with Weapons strewn;
While the tall Vessel rising, as they rowed
With laboring Strokes, the foaming Billows cleaves
With the black Keel, and so their Aim deceives.
But some in Fight were torn, and with the stroke
Of the Assaulting Ship their Oars were broke;
Some swiftly through the Bulk of others strike
With their sharp Prows, and in the Breach alike
Are stopped, and stop. But then, amidst them all,
A Gally (terrible to Sight, and Tall
Above the rest, then which none had before
More large been Lanch'd from the Sidonian Shore)
Strikes with four hundred Oars, at once, the Main,
And, Proud of her large Sails, that could retain
Strong Boreas, and gather every Blast
With her wide Yards, but very slowly past,
If only driven with Oars, She put to Sea.
The Latin Ships, more ready to obey
The Pilot's hand, and charged with fighting Men,
Made Way with more Celerity. Which when
Himilco, through the calmed Ocean, spied,
Advancing, and commanded on his Side
To give the Charge, obliquely with their Prows,
All the Sea-Gods invoking to his Vows
(As was his Custom) strait an Arrow to
The extended Nerve he fits, and against a Fo
Directs it with his Ey, and when, again
His Arms released, he showed the flying Kain
Its Passage through the Air, his steady Look
Pursuing, brought it to a Wound; and struck,
Nailing it to the Helm, the Pilot's Hand;
Which, now, no more was able to command,
So maimed, the yielding Stern, where he was placed:
And, while unto his Aid the Seamen haste,
As if the Ship were taken, 'midst them all,
With the like Fate, and Nerve, a Shaft does fall
Again, which Taurus, as he undertook
The vacant Helm, quite through the Body struck.
But now, at length, a Cuman Ship broke in,
Which Corbulo commanded, and had been
With cheerful Youths at Stabiae filled, of late.
The It was anciently their Custom to have their Tutelar Deities at the Poop of
their Ships.
Guardian Goddess (neighboring Venus) sat
On the high Poop. This charging very near,
The Object of all Shafts, amidst them there
Sinking, the yielding Waters does divide;
And their Mouths foaming Nereus (as they cried
For Aid) fills with his Brine, and, as they strove
In vain, the Sea them sucking in, above
The Waves their Hands appear. But here, behold!
With an huge Leap, quite cross the Billows, bold
With Rage, leaped Corbulo upon the Decks
(For now the Galleys, which strong Bands connex
Of Ir'n, a Tower of Oak brought up) and there,
Like a dire Comet, shaking, in the Air,
On the high Top, a flaming Pine, the Fires
With Brimstone fed, with which the Wind conspires,
Throws among the Libyan Flags. The Lemnian God
Soon enters, and their Hatches, all abroad
Diffused, strait fills: the Rowers, full of Fear,
Forsake their Benches; yet, although they were
So hard Beset, the Noise of that so great,
And fatal Mischief, did not Penetrate
To those below, till running fiercely down,
By unctuous Lamps, and Torches thither thrown,
Victorious Flames whizz through the Hold. Yet where
From Dardan Fire, and Smoke, as yet, they were
Untouched, and Free, the dire Himilco held
His Gallie's Fate, and them with Stones repelled.
And here poor Cidnus, while a flaming Brand
In The Air He brandished, from Lichaeus Hand
Into the Ocean, by a Mural Stone,
From the Decks, slippery with Blood, was thrown.
Then, with a filthy Stink, a Lamp the Air
Pollutes, and Hisseth on the Waves: and there
A missile Weapon Sabrata lets fly,
From the adored Poop: the Deity
Of The Libyan Ship was Hammon, who survay'd
With his Horned Brow the Sea. Now, Father, Aid,
And grant (Thou Garamantick God) that We
May against the Romans fling sure Darts (said He.)
Then from the trembling Throng, as this he spoke,
A Cornel came, that through the Visage broke
Of Neptune's Neighbor, Telon: nev'rtheless
He, in the Gate of Death, does forward press
On those, who Flying, in a Crowd, retired
Into a part of the Ship as yet not fired.
But, when the inevitable Fire had past,
Like Lightning, through whatever was next, at last,
The whole Ship to victorious Flames was made
A Prey: but first Himilco, by the Aid
Of a Sea-Rope (where Vulcan had not yet
Raised to extremest height his Stygian Heat)
A little scorched, slips down into the Sea,
And, by the Oars of Friends, is born away.
Next, wretched Batho, did thy Fate deprive
A Ship of a good Pilot, who could strive
With roughest Seas, and Weather by thy skill
The highest Storms; He could prevent what chill
Boreas next day, or Auster did intend:
Nor, Cynosura, could thou, though thou bend
Thy Course obscurely, his still-watchful Eye
Deceive. When he perceived their Misery
No Measure had; Thou, Hammon, who do see
This our unequal Fate, receive (said He)
My Blood. With that, into his Breast he drives
His Sword, and in's Right Hand the Blood receives,
Which largely, 'twixt his Sacred Horns, he pours.
Daphnis, among these, unhappy Fate devours,
(An ancient Name) who chose to leave the Woods,
And changed his Farms for the perfidious Floods.
But how much more, under a Shepheard's Name,
Did the first of that Race excel in Fame?
To Daphnis the The Muses of Sicily.
Sicelides inclined,
And a Castalian Pipe to him the kind
Apollo gave; commanding, when he laid
Himself along upon the Grass, and played,
To Daphnis the joy'd Flocks, through Medows, and
Through Fields, should haste, and Rivers Silent stand.
When on his sevenfold Reeds he played, the Woods
He charmed, the Sirens, in their briny Floods,
Forgot to Sing, and Scylla's Dogs no more
Would bark, a quiet Face Charybdis bore,
And among the Rocks, the Cyclops, overjoyed,
Would hear his Lays. But here, by War destroyed,
Fell the whole Progeny, and that great Name,
So Amiable for his sacred Flame.
On smoking Planks fierce Ornytos away
Then swum, and lingered out a Death by Sea.
So Ajax, when her Thunder Pallas threw,
Did rising Waves with burning Arms subdue.
Marmarick Scyron, wounded by a Stem's
Sharp Point quite through the Belly, part of's L^mbs
Swim under Water, part above, and so
Through all the Ocean, on the Fatal Prow,
Is born away. The Ships the Fight pursue
Close, on both sides, and with a bloody Dew
From laboring Oars the Faces dash of those
That fought. With such fierce strokes Marcellus goes,
That his stout Gally overcame the Wind,
Which, as Libaeus seizing fast behind,
With eager Hands, endeavovur'd to have stopped
With a sharp Ax his Members off were lop'd,
And, sticking to their Hold, were born away
By the swift Vessel. In this bloody Fray
Aeolides Podetus did engage,
In a Sicanian Ship, although his Age
Not yet arrived to Man. He, whether by
Sinister Gods drawn thither, or his high
Hot spirit, and desire of War, not yet
Full ripe for Honor, painted Arms did fit
To his white Shoulders, proud so, with his tall
Chimaera, to disturb the Sea. Now all
Rutulian Ships, now all the Libyan, He
Better in Oars, and Darts Triumphantly
Outstrip'd, and Nessus had already drowned
In cruel Waves; Nessus with Turrets crowned:
Alas! vain Glory! that did then so ill
Persuade a Boy to Fight, which wanted skill.
While for Marcellus Crest, which then he wore
On's dreadful Caske, and Spoils, he does implore
The Gods, as he, too rashly, did advance,
A deadly Wound by a returned Lance
He took. Oh how much praised, whither he threw
The Discus was a round Quoit os Lead, Stone, or the like: which was used for
Exercise, much like the Sledg among our Country People.
Discus, shining near the Stars; or drew
His Bow, and to the Clouds his Arrows sent:
Or run with winged Feet, and as he went
Scarce touched the Ground: or over the measured Plains
By leaping past, taught by continual pains:
Enough of praise (fond Youth) did thou acquire,
In such safe Conflicts, why did thou aspire
To greater Deeds? When he was beaten down
And sunk, through numerous Darts against him thrown,
Under the Waves, his shipwrack'd Corpse, the while,
Deprived of his Syracosian Pile,
Cyclopean Rocks bemoan, with Cyane,
Anapus, Arethusa, and the Sea.
But Tiberinus, in another place,
Where then the Libyan Admiral did pass,
Drives on his Ship, and straight they Io cried,
And cast their Grapples in on either side:
The Ships stand bound unto the Combat; nor
With Shafts, and Darts, at distance thrown, the War,
Do they pursue; but Fight it near at hand,
And with the Sword, as in a Fight at Land.
Where the first slaughter opened, and did show
A passage, the Italian Ships broke through;
While the vast Chains, and Iron Bands his Friends
Maela advised to break, and so intends
Such, as had Boarded him, to bear away
Farther, from their then equal Arms, to Sea.
Young Polypheme in an Aetnean Cave
Was bred, and thence affected still to have
The Name of ancient Fierceness, nurtured by
A She-Wolf, when a Child; his Stature high,
And terrible of Bulk; a cruel Mind;
Rage ever in his Face; his Heart inclined
To Blood, as all the Cyclops: He, at length,
The Chains got loose, with all his Body's Strength,
Had driven on the Ship, and, in the Sea
Drowning his Oars, had born her quite away,
Had not Laronius, with a sudden Blow
Of's Lance, as he his Body raised to row,
Nailed him to's Seat. Scarce he, in Death, forsook
What he begun: for, as its wonted Stroke
His Hand, then languishing, did still pursue
Upon the surface of the Sea, he drew
The lazy Oar; struck with the adverse Prow,
On one side, to the other, from the Fo
The Libyans thronged; when with their sudden Weight
Oppressed, Waves leaping in, on that side, strait
The Vessel under Water sinks, and there
Targets, and Crests, and useless Darts, that were
Pointed with Steel, with Guardian Gods, upon
The Ocean float. All Weapons lost: here One
Fights with a broken Plank, and so again,
By Shipwreck, Arms himself for Fight; and then
Another, whom blind Rage too rashly heats,
Spoils of her Oars the Ship, teras up the Seats
Of The Seamen, and with no Distinction throws.
Neither from breaking Sterns, nor yet from Prows,
To deal intended Wounds, do they abstain,
And snatch up Weapons swimming on the Main.
The Waves at gaping Wounds break in, which strait
Their fleeting Souls with Sighs regurgitate,
Into the Sea. Some in a strict Embrace
Are drowned, and, where no Weapons else have Place,
Kill, in their Death, their Foes. The Rage of those,
That from the Bottom rise, more Cruel grows,
And they resolve, for Swords, the briny Flood
To use, while Whirl-pits, coverd over with Blood,
The turning Corpse devour. Loud Clamours here
Are heard: sad Deaths, and Flight, and Groanings there,
With cracks of breaking Oars, and Stems, that beat
The Air with dreadful Echoes, as they meet.
Thus chafed, and overspread with War, the Sea
Grew hot; when, in a little Bark, away
Himilco stealing, weary of the Fight,
Toward the Coast of Libya, takes his Flight.
At length, both Greeks, and Libyans quit the Sea,
And now the captived Ships are born away,
In a long Train, together linked, to Land,
While some amidst the Deep still burning stand.
The Lemnian God shines over the glittering Seas,
Which brandish up, and down his trembling Rays.
There known at Sea burns Names of Ships.
Cyane, and here
The winged Siren burns, Europa there,
Who, in a white Bull's Shape, by Jove was born,
And crossed the Ocean, holding by his Horn.
And Nereis, who, with Hair disheveled, rides
A crooked Fish, and through the Ocean guides
The watery Reins: there Phyton wandering over
The Waves, and Hammon burns; with That, which bore
Eliza's Image, and, on either Side,
With twice three Oars, did over the Billows ride.
But chained Anapus to his Native Shore
Is dragged, with nimble Pegasus, that bore
His Gorgon Wings up to the Stars; and that
Tall Ship, where Carved Lybia's Image sat,
And Triton Captivate, and Aetna high
With Rocks (where buried, deep in Flames, does ly
Panting Enceladus) is dragged away,
With their Cadmaean Sidon. Nor had they
To break into their trembling Walls delayed,
Nor from the Temples of the Gods had stayed
Their Conquering Engines then, if suddenly
Raised by the Envy of the Gods, and by
Their Toils at Sea, a dire Contagion, and
Devouring Sickness, had not set a stand
To all their Joys. For Sol with flaming Hair,
And influence of Fiery Stars, the Air
And Cyane, that open lies, and swells
With Fenny Waters, round, with noisome smells
Of dire Cocytus fills, and so pollutes
Autumn, the Flourishing with store of Fruits,
And it inflames with Lightning: the thick Air
With Clouds of Darkness smoaks. Earth, every where,
Parched, with a vitiated Face appears,
Affords no Food, nor any Shadows bears
For fainting Man, and in the Pitchy Air,
Black Vapors move. Dogs are the first, that bear
The fury of this Plague; next, as they Fly,
Birds fall with flagging Pinions from the Sky;
Then Beasts within the Forests die; at last
It creeps into the Camp, and there does wast
The Infected Troops: their tongues dried up, cold sweat
Creeps through their Entrails, over their Limbs: the Meat
Appointed for their sustenance, their dry,
And parched Jaws refuse to swallow: by
Sharp Coughs their Lungs are torn, and, Thirsty, from
Their panting Throats, a fiery Breath does come.
Their Eyes, scare able to endure the Light,
Sink from their crooked Noses, while they spit
Corruption mixed with Blood; a shrivel'd Skin
Covers their Bones, the Flesh consumed within.
Oh Grief! in their known Arms renowned, by
A lazy Death, the valiant Soldiers Die:
Their stately Trophies, gained in many a War,
Are thrown into the Fire, no Medicines are
Of Power, but all too weak for the Disease.
Heaped up, the Ashes of the Dead Increase
To a vast Hill, though Bodies every where
Forsaken, and Unburied ly, through Fear
To touch infected Limbs. Thus sadly fed,
The Acherusian Plague does farther spread,
And shakes with no less Grief Trinacrian Walls,
And on the Libyan Camp as fiercely falls.
Now, equal in their Ruin, every Place
The common Wrath of Heaven, and the same Face
Of Death frequents: and yet no Force of all
These Ills could vanquish (while their General
Was safe) the Romans: He, alone, secure,
Does balance all the Woes, which they endure.
Soon, therefore, as the burning The Dog Star.
Dog allayed
His deadly Heat, and the Contagion stayed
The greedy Hand of Death, (as when the Seas,
The South-Winds ceasing, their rude Waves appease.)
The Fisher drives his Bark into the Main.
So his Youth, wasted by the Plague, again
At length Marcellus Arms, and every Band,
Purged with due Sacrifice, now Cheerful stand
About their Ensigns, and o'rejoy'd appear,
That they then lived the Trumpet's Sound to hear.
Against the Fo they March, well-pleased, that they
(If Fates determine so) in Battle may
Die by the Sword; it grieves them for their Friends,
Who, like to Beast, by such Inglorious Ends,
Their un-commended Souls expired in
Their Fatal Beds. Then to their Tombs again,
And worthless Funeral Piles, they turn their Eyes,
And rather wish, then see by Maladies
To be overcome, to have no Graves at all.
The first, whose lofty Ensigns to the Wall
Advanced, the General was. Their Faces in
Their Helmets hide that Leanness, which had bin
Contracted by their lying still: and so
That Paleness, which might animate the Fo,
Is from their Sight concealed. Then on they fall,
And in thick Bodies scale the battered Wall.
So many Houses, and strong Towers by War,
Before unenter'd, by the Soldier,
See Plutarch.
At one Assault, are now surpised. The Sun,
Wheree're his Chariot through the World does run,
Could not behold a Town, that might compare
No City in the world was held to be more Wealthy, having, till that time,
never suffered under the Fury of a Foreign Enemy, but enriched by many Victories.
With Syracusa then: so many were
The Temples of the Gods, within the Wall
So numerous their Havens, and withal
Their Marketplaces, and their Theaters,
On lofty Columns raised, and mighty Bars
Contending with the Sea. Then add to these
Innumerable stately Palaces,
That, in long Rows, most spacious, appear
Like Countries; with the Groves, which Sacred were
To Sports the Youth, which Limits large enclose
With ample Galleries: then captived Prows,
And Stems of Ships adorn the Temples, mixed
With numerous Arms, that to the Gods were fixed;
Which or the Marathonian Fo had lost,
Or else were brought from Conquered Libya's Coast.
And there Agathoclean Trophies shined;
There Hieron's great Riches: there they find
Antiquity by Artists Sacred made.
Not any Place, in any Age, ('it is said)
More glorious was in Pictures: there they take
All Works of Brass, that Corinth.
Ephyre could make;
Garments with Yellow Gold contending, where
The Images in Texture breath: and, there,
What Babylon could boast engraved, or Tire,
Proud in embroidered Purple, could admire;
What in Attalick Arras Needles wrought,
And varied with Art, or could be bought
From Pharian Looms, with Silver Goblets, rich
With Gems, and Images of Gods, the which
The Deity, first given by Art, retain:
Beside the Spoils of the Erythraean Main
Was made their Prey, with Fleeces, which from Trees
The Serian Women card. This Wealth, and these
Rich Houses, when the Roman General
Had taken; standing High, upon the Wall,
The City (Trembling with their Shouts) he views,
And, when he found it left to his Refuse,
Whether the Fabrics, there, of Kings should be
Left standing, or the following Day should see
No Walls at all, he sadly Groans: and then,
Marcellus wept, both in detestation of the Fury of the Soldiers, and in
Commiseration of the Death of Archimedes; who, notwithstanding the great
Tumults, at the Entrance of the Romans into the City, was so intent in drawing
some Mathematical Lines on the Sands; that, not minding a Soldier, who asked
him, Who he was, (for Marcellus commanded Archimedes should be saved) he was
slain by him.
Grieved, that so much was left to cruel Men,
He speedily recalls the Soldiers Ire;
Commanding, that the Houses stand entire,
And that the Ancient Gods their Temples there
Inhabit still. The Conquered thus to spar^
Was better worth then Spoil, and Victory stood
Content, and clapped her Wings unstained with Blood.
Tears, for Thee, likewise, from the General
(Thou famed Archimedes.
Defender of thy Country) fall,
Whom, drawing Lines, and Figures in the Sand,
(While in so great a Ruin thou do stand
Untouched, and Idaeas do pursue)
By Chance an Ign'rant Common Soldier slew.
But now again their minds the People give
To Mirth, in which the Conquered seem to strive
Even with the Conquerours. Marcellus.
He, emulous
Of The nature of the Gods, preserving, thus,
The City, built it: which still stands to be
A glorious Trophy to Posterity,
And shall continue, that the Manners, so
Of ancient Generals the World may know:
Happy the People, if, as Anciently
In War, our Towns could now preserved be
From Spoils in Peace! for if his Care, by whom
The Poet here flatters Domitia^.
We now, enjoy our Peace had not overcome
That boundless Rage of Plundring all: the Hand
Of Rapine had quite barred both Sea, and Land.
The End of the Fourteenth Book.
Cum Subito assistunt dext^i Laeuaq
Hinc Virtus, Illinc Virtuti Inimica Voluptas^
Occupat inde prior Promissis Fisa Voluptas.
Tum Virtus, quas nam Iuvenem Florentibus, inquit
Pellicis in Frauds Annis?
Honoratissimo Viro Edoardo Nicholas Equiti Aurato Serenissimis Carolo jm^ and
2.d^. Magnae Brittaniae etc: Regibus Secretario. and e Sanctioribus Cousilijs.
Tabula Summa cum Obseruantia D.D.D.

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Fifteenth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Scipio (his Father, and his Uncle, slain)
Made Consul, undertakes the War of Spain;
Though but Twenty five years.
five Lustra old. The vain Delights.
Of Youth, to which fond Pleasure him invites,
He flies, and Virtue follows. Then by Sea
To Spain he hasts: and, in one happy Day,
An Omen to his future Conquests makes
New Carthage, which he, sudden, storms, and takes.
His Chastity: that to her Princely Spouse
A Captived Beauteous Maid, untouched, allows.
The Macedonian King incu^sions makes
Upon the Grecian Coasts. Old Fabius takes
Tarentum. The Numidian T^oops surprise
Marcellus by an Ambush, where he dies.
His Obsequies by Hannibal performed.
The Libyan Camp, in Spain, by Scipio stormed.
Young Hasdrubal over Pyrene flies:
Persuades the Gauls with him, in Arms, to rise,
And Italy invades, where he again
Is by the Romans overthrown, and slain
By Nero, who his Head upon a Spear,
In Triumph, to the Roman Camp does bear.
BUT a new Care Rome's Senate now perplexed
(The Nations trembling at their Loss) who next
Should Rule, and undertake the War of Spain.
By a proud Fo both After the two Scipioes were overthrown in Spain, (though
Martius had recovered very much) yet was the Terror of the Libyan Arms (joined
with the Infidelity of the Natives) so great, that all Men at R^^^ waved the
undertaking of that War.
Scipioes were slain
(Two Warlike, Valiant Brothers) hence a Fear,
Lest the Tartessiack People should adhere
To Tyrian Laws, and dread the War, at Hand.
The State thus shaken, sad the Senate stand:
Looking about for Remedies, and pray
The Immortal Gods to give them One, that may,
With Courage, in the shattered Camp succeed,
As General. The Noble Youth, indeed,
Eager his Father's, and his Uncle's Shade
To vindicate, sad Troops of Friends dissuade,
And, adding by their Sorrows to their Fears,
Sadly recount the Number of his Years:
Should he into that Fatal Country go,
Amidst the Ashes of his Friends; that Fo
He there must Fight, who had the Counsels foiled,
And Arms of two great Generals, and boiled
With Pride of his Success. Nor was it for
His tender Arms to Manage such a War;
Or that Command, at such Unskilful Years,
To undertake. The Youth these Cares, and Fears,
(Alone, retiring to the farthest Part
Of all his House) revolved in his Heart,
Under a Laurel Shade. When suddenly,
Here Virtue, Pleasure there, (her Enemy)
Descending through the Air, on either hand,
Exceeding Humane Stature, by him stand.
The One breathed Persian Odours from her Head;
Her Amber-Hair upon her Shoulders spread;
Shining with Yellow Gold, a Tyrian Vest
She wore; the Beauty of her Front expressed
The Bodkin's Art; and from her Wanton Ey
The frequent Flames, with dubious Motion, fly:
A different Habit did the Other wear;
Her Forehead rough, and never changed by Hair
Composed; a steady Look; her Gesture nigh
To Man's, and such her Face; with Modesty
Cheerful; upon her lofty Shoulders shined
A Snow-white Robe. Then Pleasure first (inclined
To promise Much) thus seizes him. What Rage,
What Fury's this (brave Youth) thy Flower of Age
Thus to Consume in Fighting? Art thou so
Unmindful of dire Cannae, and the Po?
Or Thrasimen, then Styx more grievous far?
To what end do you Thus the Fates, by War,
Provoke? The Atlantic Kingdoms you prepare
To try, and Tyrian Houses. But forbear
(Let me advise) to strive with Dangers so,
Or thy Self rashly, as before, to throw
Into those Storms of Arms; unless you shun
Those Rites, sad Virtue, here, will bid you run
Into the midst of Armies and through Fire.
It Is She, that (Prodigal) thy noble Sire,
Thy Uncle ( Paulus) and the Decii, down
Into the Lakes of Erebus has thrown;
While Titles to their Ashes She proclaims,
And gilds their Tombs with Memorable Names.
Yet are their Souls Insensible what She
Performs. But, Youth, if Thou will go with Me,
In a smooth Path thy Days (allowed by Fate)
Shall pass. No Trumpet's Sound shall violate
Thy troubled Sleeps: nor Northern Frosts, nor Heat
Of burning Cancer shall thou Feel. Nor eat
On Tables, often composed of bloody Grass.
Dire Thirst, Dust, swallowed under Casks, shall pass
By Thee, and Labors, undergone with Fear.
But bright thy Days, and all thy Minutes clear
Shall run. Thou may grow Old with dainty Fare.
What mighty things by God provided are,
For Man's more cheerful Use? what Joys has He,
With a f^ll Hand, bestowed? and Him to be
The Example of a Quiet Life we find,
Living at Ease, with an untroubled Mind.
I Am She, that Venus, near to A River near Troy.
Simois Stream,
Joined to Anchises, whence the Author came
Of your Great Race. Even I am She, for whom
Jove sometimes has been willing to become
A Bird, sometimes a Bull; and this Advice
Observe. Life swift from Mortals runs; nor twice
Can any Man be born: away Time flys;
And Hell's swift Torrent, swallowing all, denies,
That You, if any thing has pleased you here,
It to the Shades below, from hence, shall bear.
And who is He, that grieves not, at the last
(Too late alas!) that all my Hours are past?
When She was silent, and an End had made
Of Speaking. In what Darkness ( Virtue said)
What Cheats of Life, this Youth, in 's prime of Age,
Do thou endeavor (flattering) to Engage?
Unto whom Reason, by the will of Heaven,
And a great Mind's celestial Seeds are given.
As much as Gods above do Men exceed,
So They all other Creatures. For, indeed,
Such Nature to the Earth, as lesser Gods,
Has given: and has Condemned to Hell's Abodes,
By fixed Decree, degenerate Souls. But All,
That keep their Heavenly Seed's Original
Entire, shall enter Heaven. What should I tell
Of great Alcides, who did all debel?
Or Bacchus; whose Triumphal Chariot, through
The Cities, fierce Caucasean Tigers drew;
After the Seres, and the Indians He
Had Conquered, and brought Home, with Victory,
His Ensigns from the East? What should I say
Of those famed Castor, and Pollux.
Twins, to whom the Seamen pray
In Danger? or of your Quirinus? See
How God to Heaven has raised Man's Face, which he
Erect has made! While Birds, and Beasts, with all
Of baser Kind, upon their Bellies fall.
Thrice Happy and (if they the Gifts Embrace
Of The Gods) to Honor born is Humane Race.
Do but consider this; (I Will not repeat
Too many things) by Valor, now, how Great
Is Rome become? once, much Inferior to
The Fidenae were a Colony of the Veientes, seated on the other side Tiber,
near the old Territories of the City of Rome, In the time of Tolumnius, King of
the Veientes, they (having been before subdued by the Romans) revolted to the
Veientes, and slew four Roman Ambassadors. Then joined with the Falisci, and
Veientes, threatened the Ruin of the Romans: who, notwithstanding, under the
Conduct of Mamercus Aemilius, defeated them, and Tolumnius was slain by
Cornelius Cossus; who, by that Victory, gained the next Opimous Spoils after
Romulus.
Threatening Fidenae, and Content to grow
In a poor Sanctuary. Then behold,
What wealthy Cities Luxury, of Old,
Has overthrown! For not so much the Ire
Of all the Gods, nor Swords, nor Foes conspire,
To Ruin; as when Pleasure seizes on
The Mind alone. Thy sure Companion
Is Drunkenness, with Riot: and on Thee
Still, with black Wings, waits Infamy. With Me
Is Honor, Praise, and, with a cheerful Ey,
Glory, with fair Renown, and Victory,
Unstained, as are her Snow-white Wings. His Head
With Laurel compassed, Me does Triumph lead
Up to the very Stars. My House is Chaste,
And on a lofty Hill my Dwelling's placed.
The Way, that up the stony Cliff does go,
At first is rough (I Am not Accustomed to
Deceive) and they must Labor, that intend
To enter there. Nor does that Wealth ascend
With them, which faithless Chance has given, and can
Force back again. Strait the whole Race of Man,
(Standing above) beneath Thee, thou shall see,
And all things contrary to that, which She
Does, flattering, promise, must be undergone.
You sleepless Nights, under the Stars, (upon
The hard Ground lying) must Endure. You must
Hunger, and Cold subdue: so strictly Just,
That, whatsoever things you take in Hand,
Think that the Gods as Witnesses shall stand
Of all your Deeds. Then, when your Country's, or
The Dangers of the State require, for War
Be you first ready, Hostile Ramparts scale
The first: let neither Gold, nor Swords prevail
Upon your Mind. Robes stained with Tyrian Dye,
And sweet Perfumes (in Men unhansome) fly;
I Will bring to pass, that He, who now the Land
Infests with cruel War, shall by thy Hand
Be vanquished, and, the Libyans quite Destroyed,
Thy Laurel in By an Ancient Custom, after the happy finishing of a dangerous
War, and Confirmation of Peace, the Laurel of the General was deposited in the
Capitol, in the Lap of Jupiter Capitolinus.
Jove's Bosom shall be laid.
This sung by Virtue, from her Sacred Breast:
The Youth, whose Looks approved what She expressed,
With these Examples joy'd, She turns: but yet
Pleasure holds not her Tongue, but, in a Heat,
Exclaims. I weigh You not at all, 'twill come,
My Time (I Am sure) will come, when easy Rome,
With all her Might, my Empire will obey,
And unto Me alone will Honor pay.
Thus having said, shaking her wanton Head,
Into dark Clouds, from them, away she fled.
But the Youth, full of Precepts, and inflamed
With Love of Virtue, so appearing, aimed
At Mighty things, within his Heart: and then
Ascends the Rostra, and, while other Men
So hot a Service shunned, desires to bear
The heavy Charge of that ambiguous War.
The Minds of all intent upon him were:
Some think his Father's Eyes, some think they there
Behold again his Uncle's furious Look.
But yet (though, with deep Silence, Terror struck
Their Hearts) sad with great Dangers: with their Fears
That War's great Weight they ponder; then his Years
Their anxious Favor numbers. But, while they
These things, with their confused Murmurs, weigh;
From a cross Quarter of the Heaven, behold!
A Serpent, shining Bright with Spots of Gold,
Seems among the Clouds to pass, and, through the Air
Rays from the flaming Tract diffusing, where
The Clime to Heav'n-supporting Atlas tends,
The Pole resounding with the Noise, descends.
As the Romans never enterprized any thing of Moment without consulting their
Augurs, so (the Oblata Auguria) the Auguries, that happened of themselves
(Good, or ^ad) were more observed by them. And therefore (though not mentioned
in History) the Poet makes the ^^^s concerned to give Scipio an Omen both of
Thunder, and the Apparition of a Snake, before mentioned, as the Shape, wherein
Jupiter begot him.
Jove to the Augury adding twice, or thrice,
A shining Bolt, the scattered Thunder flies
Through all the shaken World. Then they command,
That, instantly, he take his Arms in hand;
And, humbly prostrate on their Knees, full low
Salute the Omen, and now bid him go
Whither (as it appeared) the Gods did lead,
And the Path, showed him by his Father, tread.
And, now, with Emulation, such as are
Joined in Affairs, and Ministers of War,
Together flock, and Earnest are to share
The hardest Labors: the same Arms to bear
With him, is Honor held. Then strait to Sea
Goes a new Fleet: on him Ausonia
Attends, and is transported into Spain.
As when dire Wars on the Coerulean Plain
Fierce Corus makes, with hollow Floods, he heaves
The lofty There are many Isthmi; but here* by way of Excellence* that of
Pelop^nnesus (as the most eminent of Europe, sep^^^ting the Aegean, and Ionian
(...)) is intended.
Isthmos up, and with rude Waves
Forcing, at length, through groaning Rocks, his Way,
Mingleth the Io^ian with Aegean Sea.
Stately, in Arms, shines Scipio, and, within
The foremost Ship, to Neptune does begin.
Thou, God of Seas! through whose deep Empire We
Are ready now to pass; if just it be,
Which I intend, grant that this Navy may
Go forward (Father!) and vouchsafe, (We pray)
Our Labors to Assist! an Holy War
It is, which now, I through the Ocean bear.
This said, strait gentle, and propitious Gales
Breath out, and forward drive the swelling Sails.
And now the Fleet, where Tyrrhene Billows roar,
Had Nimbly passed from the Ausonian Shore,
And by the Coast of the Ligurians plied
With speedy Prows. When, far at Sea, they spied
Earth (the high Alps) the Stars invading: then
Massilia, now Marcellis (in Provence) first built by a Colony of Greeks, from
Phocidis, (a small Region near the Crissaean-Bay) Commended by Tully (whom our
Poet follows) for their strict Observation of their Ancient Civility of
Manners, kept Entire; notwithstanding they were encompassed by Barbarous
Nations, till they fell under the Government of the Romans.
Massilia's Walls, built by the Grecian,
With Nations proud begirt, and whom, with Rites,
That Cruel are, her barbarous Neighbor frights.
But Hospitable, She, among those bold
And Warlike Nations, still retains the old
Rites, Manners, Habit, of Phocensian Greeks.
Hence Scipio, by the Ocean's winding Greeks,
Coast's on: at length, a lofty Hill appears,
Where, on her Woody Top, Pyrene bears
Thick Forests, in the Clouds, and then he sees
Emporiae, a City of Hispania Tarraconensis ( Castile.)
The Emporiae, that, by ancient Pedigrees,
A Grecian People are: Then Tarracho,
Where the Vines.
Nysaean Fruits in plenty grow.
Then in a Port his Fleet, secure, he lays,
And quits the Toils, and Terror of the Seas.
Now welcome Night, did Sleep, like Death, bestow
On Men, when, standing before Scipio,
His Father's Ghost appeared, and thus begun.
Dear Son, thy Father's safety once: dear Son
Thy Father's Glory, after Death; by Thee
The Land, that to these Wars gave Birth, shall be
Subdued; if they desire to Fight with Thee,
And all the Troops for Battle Mustered are:
Who is it, that the Triple Force can bare
Of Furious Men? All dubious Acts by you
Must be forborne: but Better things pursue
With Diligence. There is a City Walled,
And built of old by Teucer, Carthage called,
By Tyrians now possessed; and, as there is
Of Libya one, so of Iberia this
Is the Metropolis: in Wealth excelled
By none, or Port, or Situation; held
As Rich, as any, in her fertile Fields,
And, with as active Vigor, Weapons yields.
The absence of the Carthaginian Generals (employed in reducing other Parts of
Spain, having placed here a strong Garrison, and, in it, [as by Nature almost
inexpugnable] much of their Wealth, with the Hostages of the Spaniards gave
Scipio, both Time, and Courage to attempt it. The lat^er so much prevailing,
that he spent only a Day of the former. The Governor Arris (some call him
Mago) yielding at the second Attaque. It was first built by Teucer, and much
decayed in the time of Hamilcar ( Hannibal's Father) whose Successor Hasdrubal
so well repaired it; that he was by some held to be the Founder, and called it
New Carthage.
This, while the Generals are turned away,
Invade; no Fight so much of Fame, or Prey,
Can give. These Counsels by his Father were
Declared, and still he seemed to advise more near;
When strait the vanished Shade, and Sleep forsook
The Youth, who, rising, humbly does invoke
His Father's Manes, and the Powers, that be
In Stygian Groves, by Name. Be You (said He)
Our Captains in this War, and lead us to
The City you have mentioned. I for you
Will seek Revenge, and, when Iberia
I have subdued, due Sacrifice I Will pay
To You, in Sarrane Purple richly clad,
And Sacred Games unto your Tombs will add.
Then hasting on, with a swift March, his Bands
He leads away, and over-runs the Lands.
So from Pisean Stables, once got loose,
A Metled Courser, as a Conqu'rour, goes
Before his Fellows, and (as if by Wind
Begot) runs through the Air, and leaves behind
The rest so far, that not the quickest Sight
Is able to overtake him in his Flight:
Now the seventh Day, by bright Hyperion's Flame,
Arose, when sensibly they nearer came
To the Town's Towers; whose Tops increased, as they
Approached, and Laelius, who then Commanded Scipio's Fleet, was appointed,
with the Tide, to approach the City on that Side; but, his Scaling-Ladders not
well reaching the extraordinary height of the Walls, he was constrained, with
some Loss, to retire. See Livy lib. 16.
Laelius, at his Time, by Sea
Arriving (as before the General
Appointed had) his Navy to the Wall
Draws up, and with his numerous Ships, behind,
The Town invests. Carthage, by Nature's kind
Assistance, has high Walls, which by the Sea
Encompassed are, and, toward the rising Day,
A little Isle, its narrow Mouth does close.
But, where it looks to Phoebus fall, it throws
Up standing Pools, into a muddy Plain,
Which coming Tides increase, and Ebbs aga^^
Abate. But, where it Fronts the Northern Bear,
Standing upon a lofty Hill, it there,
Steep, to the Neighboring Ocean descends,
And with Eternal Floods her Wall defends.
But the bold Soldiers, as if, marching in
A Plain, they Conquering Ensigns brought, begin
To climb the Hill. Arris Commanded there
In Chief, and, had against them, through a Fear
Of some Distress, himself with Aids supplied,
And all the Hill, and Castle fortified.
A Fo the nature of the Place does prove,
And with small Force, of those that fought above,
The Assailants tottering, through the places High,
And Steep, are tumbled down, and maimed Die.
But, when the turning Tide retired again,
And, with a rapid Fall into the Main,
The Billows fled; where tall Ships, lately, Plough'd
The Waves, safe Passage Nereus there allowed
A Foot. And this Way noble Scipio,
Consulting with his Thoughts, resolved to go,
Draws through the Sea his Men, and suddenly
Up to the Walls does through the Waters fly.
And, when with Speed, behind, they hasten on,
Where Arris, trusting to the Sea, the Town
Had left without a Guard; strait (sad to tell)
His Neck in Chains, the Libyan Prostrate fell,
And bade the People all, disarmed, to yield.
This City Titan, when he rose, beheld
Circled with Camps; and captived saw the same,
They began the Assault in the Morning; and, about Noon, when the Tide was
gone, Scipio Commanded longer Ladders to be brought (while the Enemy, fearing
little on that Side, was wholly intent on the Land) and entering the City
there, had it, before Sunset, in his possession.
Before in Western Seas he hid his Flame.
The ensuing Morn from Earth had chased away
Night's Shades, when first they Altars raise: then Slay
Unto the God of Seas, for Sacrifice,
A Bull; and so to Jove. Then equallize
Rewards to all Deserts: and, gained with Blood,
Valor her Crown receives. Here, shining, stood
One with rich Trappings on his Breast; and there
Another, on his Warlike Neck, did wear
A golden Snake: this with a Mural Crown
Was honored. But then, Laelius (in renown
Both of his Family, and Valor, all
Excelling) is created Admiral.
Besides a Gift of thirty Oxen, and
The Libyan's Arms that did, in Chief, command.
Then Spears to some, and Martial Ensigns are
To others given (as they deserved) and share
Of Spoils. And when the Praise of Gods, and Men,
Was perfected, their Captive Riches then
Survay'd, and Prey laid up; this Gold was for
The Senate, and those Talents for the War.
This Kingdom they for Donatives Design;
That for the Temples of the Powers Divine
Is Chiefly kept: whatever else remains
Rewards the Soldiers Valor, and their Pains.
Then the Iberian King, whose Among the Captives a Virgin of incomparable
Beauty, was brought to Scipio: who, finding her betrothed, to Luceius (a Prince
of the Country) not only restored her Inviolate into his Hands; but gave with
her a very large sum of Money (presented to him by her Parents in token of their
Gratitude) as a Dowry from Him. See. Livy, ibid.
Sponsal Flame
Was fixed deep in his Bones, as summoned, came;
To whom, much joy'd, his Spouse, a Virgin Fair,
And Pure, he cheerful gave. Then, free from Care,
Their Tables spread upon the Neighboring Shore,
And feasting High, with solemn Sports, before
The rest, thus Laelius. Brave General,
Go on, adored, for thy Chaste Mind, through all
The World! To Thee the Glory, and the Praise,
And (celebrated in Immortal Lays)
The Valor of great Heroes shall give Way.
That Agamemnon.
Captain, who a thousand Ships by Sea
From the Mycenae drew, and Argive Arms
Joined with Thessalian, through a Woman's Charms,
Infringed his The small City Lyrnessus, taken by Achilles, in the Expedition
against Troy, Hippodamia (or Brisaeis) the King's Danghter became Achilles
Prize; but Agamemnon, who was Generalissimo, Enamoured of her, took her from
him.
Social League, and they beheld
All Tents, within the Phrygian Army, filled
With Captive Beds. A Barbarous Maid by Thee
Alone, more spotless, in Virginity
Is kept, then Troy's Cassandra. Thus the Day,
In Talk, they spent, till Night in dark Array
Raised her black Steeds, inviting all to Rest.
In the mean Time, Aemathian Broils infest
The Aetolian Land, invaded suddenly
By Philip, King of Macedon, entering League with the Carthaginians, fell upon
the Allies of the Romans, and wasted all the Grecian Coast; till at length,
recalled by Broils at Home, and the ill Success of the Carthaginians, he was
constrained to accept a dishonorable Peace from the Romans.
Macedonian Ships: an Enemy,
With whom the Acarnanian quickly joyn^d.
For then King Philip, in a League combined
With Libya, against the Roman Name
Those new Commotions had raised. The Fame
Of his Descent, his Ancient Crowns, and Throne
From the Aeacides, and Achilles, from whom he descended.
Thetis Son,
(His Grand-Sire) puffed him up. Now, He with Fear
Of's Arms, by Night, filled Oricon: and where,
On the Illyrick Coast, Taulentians dwell,
In small, and nameless Walls, upon them fell.
With furious War. Thence passing on by Sea,
Tesprotian Borders, and Phoenicia
Alarmed: with vain Attempts, he Epire viewed,
Then on the Coast of Anactorium showed
His Ensigns: then the Ambracian Bay, and Shores
Of Pella scoured with rapid War, his Oars
Beating Leucate's chafing Waves, he straight
At Actium saw Apollo's sacred Seat.
Nor left he Ithaca ( Laertes Throne)
Untri'd: nor Sames; nor those Rocks whereon
White-foaming Floods the Cephalenians see.
And Neriton with Rocky Fields: then He
To Pelops Country went, glad to behold
Achaian Walls, and Caly^^^ of old
Affected by Diana. After these
To the Caretes, and Oeni^^^s,
With promise, to the Greeks, against Italy,
To use his Arms, he went: then Ephyre,
Patrae, and Princely Pleuron he survay'd:
Two-crown'd Parnassus, and (by Phoebus made
To speak) Prophetic Rocks; and, though again,
Often by War called homeward: sometimes when
In his absence both Sarmatians and Thessalians (Dolope*) invad^d his Country.
Sarmatian Orestes did infest
His Kingdoms, or fierce Dolopes oppressed
His Country, yet unwilling to forbear
His vain Designs, the shadow of a War
He carried up, and down, the Grecian Coast;
Till all his hopes, placed in the Libyans, lost
By Sea, and Land, a Suppliant, he signed
A League, with the Romans.
Dardanians, nor declined
From them, in his own Kingdom, to receive
The Governor of Tarentum was a Bruti^^ (a Nation formerly observed to be of
an Inconstant Faith) who, enamoured of a Tarentine Woman (whose Brother was a
Soldier under Fabius) was induced by her to betray the City to Fabius. See
Plutarch, in the Life of Fabius.
The Law: But then Tarentum's Fortune gave
To Italy increase both of Renown*
And Riches. For, at length, that treacherous Town,
Was by old Fabius conquered, and of all
His Titles, of a Wary General,
The last became. For then his Industry
Gained that safe Honor, that the City He
Had taken without Blood. And, when 'twas known,
That a Sidonian Captain, in the Town,
Burned with a Woman's Love: and that, through Ease,
A silent Treason thence might Valor please:
To his loved Sister, strait, her Brother (who
Then bore Rutulian Arms) is forced to go,
Instructed to subdue the Woman's Mind
With ample Promises, if She inclined
The Libyan to betray the Gates. And, thus
The Libyan overcome, old Fabius
His Wish enjoyed, and, through the unguarded Walls
By Night, into the Town the Army falls.
But who, that heard Marcellus then was slain
In Fight, would think, that Sol should join again
His flaming Steeds, so turned away from Rome?
That noble Person, that brave Breast, in whom
The God of War inhabited, who never,
In its most horrid Shape, did Danger fear,
In Combat fell: in his renowned Fall,
(Alas) how great a Blow to Hannibal!
In him thy Terror Carthage prostrate lay,
Who had perhaps from Scipio born away
(Had but the Gods been pleased awhile to spare
His Life) the Name of finishing the War.
Which seated, then, within the Daunian Land,
Between both Camps, a little Hill did stand.
Crispinus with Marcellus bore like Share
In Cares, and Honors, and the Common War
Pursued: to whom Marcellus thus began.
I have a Mind to view those Woods, and on
The Hill to lodge our Men; lest first it be
Possessed, in Ambush, by the Enemy.
I would Crispinus (if you please) that you
Would share in this Design; for seldom two
In Counsel fail. When this they had Decreed,
Each Man contends to mount his eager Steed.
Marcellus, when he saw his Son, among
The rest, put on his Arms, and in the Throng
Joyful, and Brisk: Thou do appear more Great
(Said He) then Me, by thy admired Heat.
May this thy early Labor Happy be!
Such, as, at Syracusa once, I Thee
Beheld, before thine Age would Thee allow
As fit for War, engaging with a Brow,
Like mine. Oh! hither come (my Glory) stand
Close to thy Father's side, and by my Hand
Learn a new Way of Fighting. Then he laid
His Arms about his Neck, and briefly prayed.
Grant, from the Libyan General (Oh! thou King
Of Gods) that on these Shoulders I may bring
Opimous Spoils to Thee! As here he ends;
From the clear Sky a bloody Dew descends,
And Jove the Fatal Drops had sprinkled on
His (then succesless) Arms. Scarce had he done
His Speech, when through the Straits, advancing up
The Fatal Mountain, strait a nimble Troop
Of Nomades upon them fly, and pour
Their Darts, as thick, as an Etherial Shower:
While, from their secret Ambush, they supplied
The Fight, with armed Troops. On every side,
When Valor found her self thus close beset;
And nothing, now, remaining, as a Debt
Unto the Gods: He only sought to go,
With a great Name, unto the Shades below.
Then, at a distance, his contorted Spear
With all his Force he throws: now fights, more near
At Hand, with his Sword; and had escaped, perchance,
That cruel Storm of Danger, if a Lance
Had not transfixed the Body of his Son.
But then (alas!) the Father's Hands begun
To shake, and, weak through Sorrow, loosely bare
His hapless Arms, until an obvious Spear
Pierced through his naked Breast; by which sad Wound
He falls, his Face imprinting on the Ground.
When Hannibal perceived (amidst the Fight)
The Fatal Lance within his Bosom light,
Aloud he cries: now Carthage, cease to fear
The Roman Laws; the Name of Terror here
Lies prostrate, and the Though, in the time of Marcellus, there were in Rome
many Eminent Captains, yet none did exceed him, in Conduct, Strength, or
Courage. For which, his Fortune made him particularly Renowned; having fought
many single Combats, and in all been a Conqueror. Plutarch observes, that he
was called Marcellus ( quasi Martialis) as* most excelling Warrior Hannibal so
much honored him for his Valor, that he burned his Body (after the Roman
Manner) and sent his Ashes to Rome.
Column of their State.
But that brave Hand (so like mine own of late)
Shall not obscurely to the Shades be sent.
True Valor's void of Envy. Strait they went
About to build his Pyle, which to the Skies
By mighty Oaks, brought from the Woods, does rise.
You might believe the Libyan General
Had died! then Incense, Cates, his Shield, withal,
And Fasces (his last Pomp) are brought, and while,
With his own Hand, the Taper to the Pyle
The Prince applies; Eternal Praise (said He)
We have acquired. For of Marcellus We
Have Italy deprived. Perhaps they may
At length, now, lay down Arms. Go then, and pay
To that great Soul, and to his Dust, all Dues
Of Funeral. I never will refuse
Thee this (O Rome) that thou the Sepulcher
Of one, whose Valor made him Great, in War,
With Titles may adorn: and lasting Fame,
Among Rutulian Nephews, crown his Name.
Such is your other Consul's Fate, whose Steed
Him, breathless, to your Camp conveyed, with Speed.
Such, then, Affairs did in Ausonia stand.
But not the same, in the Iberian Land,
Was the Event of Arms. The quick Surprise,
And Conquest of New-Carthage, terrifies
The Nations round about. The Generals there,
Unless they join with Social Aids, despair
Of Safety: since Young Scipio had fought
(As if He Thunder in his Arms had brought
From Italy) with so great Auspicies,
That he a fenced Town (whose Height their Eyes
Could hardly reach, as on an Hill it stood)
Had taken in one Day, and filled with Blood.
While, even their Warlike Hannibal, before
He overthrew Sagunthus, that for Store
Of People, and for Wealth might not appear
As Equal unto that, had spent a Year.
To his great Brother's Deeds aspiring still,
The next was Hasdrubal, Brother to Hannibal, was by him left sole Governor of
Spain, (when he began his March toward Italy) with two thousand Horse, twelve
thousand Foot, and fifty Ships.
Hasdrubal; who on a Hill
Encamped, encompassed with a rocky Wood.
Here, his chief Strength, fierce Cantabrians stood;
Mixed with rebellious Africans: and there,
Then the swift Moor more swift, Asturians were.
And with as much of Majesty did he
Iberia rule, as then in Italy
His Brother Hannibal with Terror lived.
It chanced, a Tyrian Solemn Day revived
Their ancient Honor, and the Time, wherein
The Walls of Carthage they did first begin,
And a new City of small Houses raised.
His Nations Rise the General much pleased
Thus to commemorate, his Ensigns all
Adorned with Laurel, kept the Festival;
And the Gods appeased. Loose from his Shoulders hung
His Brother's Gift (a Mantle) which, among
Some other Presents, as a Complement
Of their strict League, Trinacria's Prince had sent,
A stately Robe, among Aeolian Kings.
An Eagle, through the Clouds, with golden Wings,
Snatched up (in Texture hovering) to the Sky
A Boy. A spacious Cave there was hard by,
Which, in the Purple, there, the Needle made,
The Cyclops House: here Polypheme was laid
Along, and swallowed Bodies, dropping Gore,
Between his Deadly Jaws. About him store
Of broken Bones; which, chewing, forth he threw.
Then for his Drink, his Hand extended to
Laertes Ulysses.
Son, he calls: and, belching up
Crude Blood, with Wine commix'd it in the Cup.
Conspicuous in this Robe, at Altars made
Of Grass, the Peace of the Gods the Tyrian prayed.
When riding in, amidst them all, behold
A Scout, that Hostile Arms approached them, told.
The Worship of the Gods unfinished,
With troubled Minds, they from the Altars fled.
All Sacred Rites broke off, all Night they lay
Encamped. But, when the dewy Morn the Day
First raised, a furious Fight began, and there
Stout Sabbura first felt the thrilling Spear
Of Scipio. Both Armies seemed to be
Moved with the Omen. The first Victim We
In The Field (Ye sacred Shades!) to you have slain,
(Exclaims the Roman General) Now again
Into the Fight, and Slaughter (Soldiers) go,
As with best Captains you were wont to do.
This said; they all fall on: by Lena's Hand
Falls Myconus; Latinus, Cirta: and
Stout Maro Thysdrus kills: and Catiline
Incestuous Nealces does disjoyn
From his own Sister's Bed. Then Cartulo
(A Libyack Prince) is sent to Shades below,
By fierce Nasidius. Thee (likewise) Thee
Laelius (thou great Renown of Italy)
Things, scarce to be believed, performing there,
Amidst the Carthaginians, full of Fear,
Pyrene's Land beheld. Nature bestowed
On him all Happy things, which were allowed
By all the Gods. When he was heard to plead
At the Bar, not Nestor could in Speech exceed:
Or when the Fathers, and the Court did stand
In Doubt, and his Opinion did demand,
He led the Senat's Hearts, as with a Charm.
But, when the Noise of Trumpets did Alarm
His Ears, within the Field, with such an Heat,
He rushed into the Fight, and Armies, that
You Would think, he had been born for War alone;
And nothing, without Praise, by him was done.
From a stolen Life the Gala fighting threw:
He was designed to be Sacrificed at Carthage; but his Mother gave another
Child in his stead.
Whom 's Mother once, by changing him withdrew
From Byrsa's cruel Rites. But quickly all
Such Joys, as rise from Gods, so cheated fall.
Then Murus, Alebis, and Draces, who,
With an Effeminate Cry, for Life did sue,
By him were slain. Poor Draces, as he prayed,
And begged; his Head cut off, the Murmurs stayed
In his dissever'd Throat. But Hasdrubal
Had not the like desire to Fight. Not all
The extreme Loss, and Slaughter of his Men
Him moved. But to the Woody Hills again,
And lurking Holes of pathless Rocks, he flies,
And to the Alps, and Italy his Eyes
Are turned: the great Advantage of his Flight.
The Signal silently is given, and Fight
Quite laid aside, they are Commanded through
The Woods, and Hills to fly dispersed, and who*
Soever escaped should to Pyrene's Top
Ascend, their Chief, and sole remaining Hope.
All Marks of Honor, as a General,
Then laid aside, disguised, with a small
Iberian Targe, first Hasdrubal ascends
The Hills, and, flying, quits his wandering Friends.
To the forsaken Camp the Romans strait
Their Ensigns send. No City captivate
Could yield more Spoils; and did their Rage withdraw
From Slaughter, as the Libyan foresaw.
So in some Brook surpised, when he despairs
Of Safety, from his Groin the This may very well be reckoned among Vulgar
Errors. The Testicles of the Beaver being in no wise so valuable, as his Skin.
Besides, that they are not only out of his reach, lying close to his Spine;
but not at all attempted by him, when hunted.
Beaver tares
The parts, that caused his Danger, and away
Swims from his Fo. Intent upon his Prey
When thus the Libyan had with Speedy Flight,
Trusting to Rocky Woods, in Shades, like Night,
Himself concealed: strait back again they go
Unto a greater War, to meet a Fo
More sure to be subdued. But first upon
Pyrene's Hill, with this Inscription,
A Shield they fix, When the Romans had utterly subdued an Enemy, they
Triumphed: when only put him to Flight, they in the Place erected a Trophy,
which was commonly (as out of Tacitus his second Book may be observed) of heaps
of Arms, taken in the Field, with an Inscription on a Table (as here Scipio)
fixed over them.
SCIPIO A CONQUEROR,
HASDRUBAL'S SPOILS UNTO THE GOD OF WAR.
In the mean time, beyond the Hills (all Fear
Now laid aside) Bebrycian People were
By Hasdrubal soon armed: who Prodigal
To purchase Hands for Aid, and ready all
Prepared to thrust into the War, with Store
Of Gold, and Silver, thither sent before
And with long Labors gained, in Wealthy Lands
Had raised their Warlike Minds. Hence active Bands
Hasdrubal took the Field with such Forces, as, at first, he hired of the
Ligurians (about eight thousand Men) and soon after the Averni, and other
Gauls, with the People of the Alps, joined with him: so that he became no less
formidable, at Rome, at that time; then Hannibal.
Filled the new Camp. All Mercenary Souls:
Those, that where Rhosne.
Rhodanus swift Billows rowls
Delight to dwell; with those, where Arar flows
Most softly through the Fields. And, now, the Snows
Of Winter all resolved, the Year retains
A milder Face. Then through the Celtick Plains,
Entering a speedy March, he goes: admires
The Conquered Alps, and pervious Heights: enquires
The very Footsteps, where Alcides trod:
Compares with the Adventures of the God
His Brother's Ways. When to the Top of all
He came, and in the Camp of Hannibal
Sat down: What higher Walls (said He) do Rome
Invest? which, after these once overcome
By my great Brother, stand yet safe? Oh, may
The Glory of so brave a Hand (I pray)
Prove Happy! nor, let it the Envy be
Of any angry Deity, that We
The Stars approached! Then, where a safe Descent
The Hill declining showed, strait down he went,
With hasty Arms. Through all, so great a Dread
Not the Beginnings of the War had spread.
Two Hannibals they now report: and two
Strong Camps, on either side: and glutted, through
Success, with Roman Blood, the Chiefs the War
Jointly pursue. The Armies doubled are,
And to the Walls the Fo would quickly haste,
And, sticking on the Gates, they Jav'lins, cast
From Elysaean Hands, should shortly see.
Much vexed at this, the Land of Italy
Thus with her self. Alas! ye Gods, must I
With so great Fury of the Libyans ly
Despised? who Saturn, when the powerful Hand
Of Jove he feared, concealed: and in my Land
An Empire gave! Now the tenth Summer's Corn
Appears, since thus I have been sadly torn.
And, now, a Youth, who wants nothing more,
But to invade the Gods, the farthest Shore
Of The World has left, and 's Arms against me bends,
And, the high Alps profaned, with Rage descends
Into my Land. How many Corpse have I
Of Slain entombed? Alas! how often by
My flaughter'd Sons deformed? I have no Trees
With pregnant Buds: his Corn the Peasant sees,
Yet Green, cut down with Swords: the Towers of all
My Villages into my Bosom fall,
And by their Ruins is my Land defaced.
Yet, now, must I endure this Youth at last,
By whom my wasted Coasts invaded are,
Who seeks the ruthful Relics of the War
To burn. Then wandering Africans may rend
My Bowels with their Ploughs, and Moors commend
The Crops, which the Ausonian Furrows yield.
Unless their Troops, insulting through the Field,
I, in one Grave, interr. As, thus, She then
Her Woes revolved, and Night both Gods, and Men
Composed to Rest, to Nero's Camp She went.
He, with a Neighboring Trench, was then intent
The Libyan from Lucanian Coasts to keep.
The Youth, here, Latium's Image, in his Sleep,
Accosts. O Nero! Thou, who art become
( Marcellus lost) the greatest Hope of Rome!
The Clausus was a General of the Sabines, who, after Peace was made between
Romulus, and the Sabines, came with five thousand Clients, and encorporated
them with the Romans, with whom they they equally enjoyed all Privileges of
Citizens; but suffrage in Creating Magistrates. From this, Clausus came both
the Claudian Tribe, and Family.
Clausi's Glory! shake off Sleep; by Thee
Something of Moment must attempted be,
(If thou will add unto thy Country's Fates)
Which even the Conquerours (when from the Gates
The Foe's repulsed) shall wonder to be done.
With shining Arms (behold!) Hasdrubal, Brother to Hannibal.
Amilcar's Son,
Like a dire Deluge, overruns the Plains,
Where Sena still her Gallick Name retains:
Unless thy winged Troops Thou thither strait
Draw out to Fight, thine Aid will come too late
To ruined Rome hereafter. Rise; be gone:
I have condemned Metaurus Region,
And all those spacious Fields, to Libyan Bones,
And Graves. This said: She vanishing, at once
Appears to draw him after Her, and through
The broken Gates to drive his Troops into
The Field. With that he wakes, and Troubled stands
With an enflamed Heart, and then, with Hands
Lifted to Heaven, He prays the Earth, and Night,
The scattered Stars, and Moon, with silent Light
To be his Guides. Then, choosing proper Hands
For such a Work, through The Larinates, Frentani, Marrucini: all Borderers on
the Upper, or Adriatic Sea.
Larinatian Lands
(Coasting upon the Vpper-Sea) and where,
Hardy in War, The Larinates, Frentani, Marrucini: all Borderers on the Upper,
or Adriatic Sea.
Marrucine People were,
And the strict The Larinates, Frentani, Marrucini: all Borde^ers on the Upper,
or Adriatic Sea.
Frentane, that his Faith maintains
In Social Arms: where the Praetutian Swains
(Pleased with their Labor) dress their Vines, he flies,
Swift as a Bird; as Lightning from the Skies;
As Torrents with Hybernal Billows flow;
Or Arrows, from an Parthian.
Achemenian Bow.
Each Man himself exhorts. Go on, and haste;
For in thy Feet the doubtful Gods have placed
Rome's Safety: whether She shall stand, or fall.
Thus crying, on they go; the General
Best Exhortation, being Foremost, gives:
While every one, his Speed increasing, strives,
By following, to equal him, and Day,
And Night, un-wearied, nimbly March away.
But the Report of those increasing Ills,
Of The adverse War, all Rome with Terror fills.
That Nero hoped too much, they now complain.
That by one Wound that Life, that did remain,
Might soon be lost. Nor Money, Arms, nor Men,
Nor Blood to lose, there now remained. And then,
Who had not strength to deal with Hannibal,
Alone, in Fight, should fall on Hasdrubal.
That now again (soon as the Libyan saw
His Arms diverted from the Camp) he would draw
His Forces to their Gates. That he was come,
Who, in the Glory of destroying Rome,
Would strive with his Proud Brother. With one mind
Thus frets the Senate; yet in Counsel joined,
To keep their Honor, and themselves to Free
From threatened Chains, and angry Gods to flee.
Amidst these Sighs, Nero, protected by
An obscure Night, unto the Camp drew nigh;
Where, near to Hasdrubal, within the Field,
Marcus Livius had formerly been unjustly Censured, and Banished by the People;
who, now in want of such Captains, recalled him, and made him Consul with Nero,
with whom he afterward Triumphed for this Victory.
Old Livy lay. He Warlike once, and skilled
In Feats of Arms, flourished in former Times,
Famous in War; but, falsely charged with Crimes
By the Unequal Tribes, in Discontent,
His Days obscurely in the Country spent.
But, when a sadder Weight, and Fears began,
Through nearer Dangers, to require the Man,
After so many Valiant Captains slain;
Then, to his Country called, to Arms again
His aged Valor He had vowed. But all
These Plots of new Supplies to Hasdrubal
Were known, and what the Wings of Night concealed
The Signs of Dust upon their Shields revealed.
Besides their hasty Running to, and fro:
Their Horse, and Men prepared, and Trumpets show
(As they the Signal sound) the Camp to be
Commanded by two Generals. But (said He)
If yet my Brother live, how can they now
Their Social Forces join? Yet, till I know
The Truth, it only now remains, that I
The Time protract, and Chance of Fighting fly.
Nor, with base Fear, this poor resolve of Flight
Did he delay. But, when from Cares the Night
(Mother of Rest) had freed the Breasts of Men,
And Darkness dreadful Silence nourished, then
Forth from his Camp he breaks, and his mute Bands
To follow with a silent March commands;
Who, through the quiet Plain, protected by
The gloomy Night, all Noise avoiding, fly.
But shaken, by a Motion so great,
The Italian Land, perceiving their Deceit,
Involves them in dark Errors in the Place,
And (Night conspiring) in a narrow Space
Still leads them round. For, where, with winding Waves
His crooked Banks the Flood obliquely laves;
And, through rough Creeks returning, falls again
Into it self, there toiling, all in vain
With fruitless Wanderings, a small Circuit they
Had made, and, in the Errors of their Way,
(The Benefit of Night now lost) the Light
Comes on, and to their Foes detects their Flight.
With that a furious Storm of Horse, the Gates
Thrown open, and a Shower of Steel dilates
It self, over all the Field. Arms, yet, they none,
Nor Hands had mixed: But Shafts, at distance thrown,
Drink Blood. To stop the flying Libyans, here
Dictaean Arrows fly: and Lances there,
Like a black Tempest, and on whom they light
They Death inflict. And, now all thoughts of Flight
Quite laid aside, about they, frighted, Face,
And close drawn-up, their Hopes in Fighting place.
Amidst them all, the General, mounted High
(For now He saw their sad Extremity)
On a tall Steed, his Hands, and Voice extends:
By all those Trophies gained by You (my Friends)
Under the farthest Pole; my Brother's Praise:
Make it appear, I You beseech (He says)
The Brother of Great Hannibal is come;
For Fortune labors, now, to give to Rome
Sad Documents, and show how strong an Hand
You, that have conquered the Iberian Land,
And at Alcides Pillars used to War,
On the Rutulians turn. Perhaps, not far
From hence, my Brother to this Battle may
Arrive. Oh! hasten worthy him (I pray)
A Spectacle; with Bodies fill the Plain.
Each General is by my Brother slain,
That might be feared, in War: and now their sole
Remaining Hope, drawn from his skulking Hole.
Decrepit Livy (a condemned Head)
Is offered to you. Oh! go on, strike Dead
That General, cut off his Feeble Age,
Against whom 'twere Shame my Brother should engage.
But Nero contrary exhorts: Why are
You slow, the Labors of this mighty War
To end? Nero, having intercepted Hasdrubal's Letters to Hannibal, marched very
hard, for several Nights together, (while Hannibal wasted the Countries of the
Larinates, Frentani, etc.) to join with Livy, before Hasdrubal should enter
farther into Italy, or Hannibal have tidings of his Arrival.
Your Feet already Praise have gained,
Now crown these high Beginnings with the Hand:
The Camp you, rashly (all the Bars overthrown)
Have left, except you perfect what is done
By Victory. Your Glory hasten: show
That your Arrival overthrew the Fo.
But Livy, in another Quarter, where,
His Helmet taken off, his hoary Hair
Was seen to all, cries; Come (my Lads) and Me
Observe in Fight, and wheresoever you see
My Sword shall make your Way, there enter; so
The Alps (too open to the wastful Fo)
Shut with your Swords, at length. Unless we quite
Destroy this Army, by a sudden Flight,
That Thunderbolt of Carthage ( Hannibal)
Will soon be here. Then who is He of all
The Gods, that Us from Stygian Shades can free?
Then he resumes his Cask, and instantly
His Sword confirms his Words, and ('s Age from sight
Again concealed) He enters first the Fight.
Him through the thickest Bodies of the Field,
Breaking through closest Ranks: who, furious, killed
As many, as he Shafts discharged; with Dread
The Macae, and fierce Autololians fled:
With Bands of Rhodanus, their Hair unshorn.
Among the Prophetic Sands of Hammon born,
Secure of Fate, there Nabis fiercely fought,
And mighty Trophies (as if then he thought
The Gods protected him) to fix at Home,
Had vainly promised. From the Tyrian Loom,
Flaming with Garamantick Gems a Vest
He wears (so shine the Stars in Heaven) his Crest
With Gems, with radiant Gold his Shield enchac't;
On's horned Cask the hanging Fillets cast
A sacred Dread, and Honor of the Gods:
A Bow, and Quiver, which with Shafts he loads
In Cerasts steeped, hang at his Back; and, so
With Poison Armed, to Battle does he go
Then leaning, backward, on his Horse (as he
His Country's Custom used) upon his Knee
Resting the Weight of his Sarmatick Spear,
It, prone, upon his Foes he thrusts, and there
With that vast weapon, through his Arms, and through
His Body, wounded, in the Consul's view,
Sabellus, with loud Shouts, he bears along
In Triumph, praising Hammon in his Song.
But the old Consul, who so great a Pride,
And Rage, in Barbarous Breasts could not abide,
A Weapon lanc'd, and both his Life, and Prey
A Conqu'rour, from the Conqu'rour took away.
Hearing the Cries of his sad Fall, amain
The Libyan Prince came on, and from the Plain
As Arabus was then about to take
His Spoils, made Stiff with Gold, and Gems, at 's Back
A Weapon aimed, and through the Chine him struck,
Just as, in both his Hands, in Haste he took
His Prize, and left his trembling Body bare.
He fell, and all the Sacred Garments, there,
And golden Threads restored (unhappy) to
The Dead, and died upon his spoiled Fo.
But Canthus, Owner of much Libyan Sand,
Where their Unconquered Name unto the Land
The famed The Cyrenenses, and Carthaginians contended for Bounds between their
two Cities, separated by a vast Sandy Plain. After many sharp Conflicts it was
agreed, that, on a certain Day, two from each City should set out at a certain
hour, and where they met, that Place should be their Bounds. The Phileni were
two Carthaginian Brothers, who got much Ground by their Speed, of the
Cyrenenses; who, cavilling, that they came out before their time, it was at
length agreed; that, if the Phileni would be content to be buried alive, where
they met, that Place should be their Bounds. To which they consented, and to
their Memory, besides other Honors at Home, the Carthaginians built Altars on
the Place.
Phileni gave, Wealthy in Sheep,
Killed Rutulus, where lofty Folds did keep
A thousand bleating Lambs, spending his Days
In easy Care. Sometimes the Sun's hot Rays,
He from his Flocks would break, in some cool Flood:
Sometimes retiring to a shady Wood,
Shining, as white as Snow, their Fleeces shear'd.
Or when, at Night, they Home again repaired
From Pasture, was much pleased to see the Lambs,
Within the Flood, distinguishing their Dams.
Deceived He fell, through his brass Target struck,
And grieved too late, that he his Folds forsook.
At this the Romans forward pressed, and came
More Furious on. Like Torrents, Storm, or Flame
Of Thunder* swift as Waves from Boreas fly,
Or hollow Clouds run on, when to the Sky
Eurus throws up the Ocean's briny Flood.
Tall Cohorts, with their Celtick Ensigns, stood
In The Van; which, with their wedg-like Files, their fierce
Impulse, and sudden Force they soon disperse:
And tried with Wandering, and the scorching Sun,
And tedious Labors they had undergon,
A native Terror makes them all to fly.
The Romans, at their Backs, their Weapons ply,
And with their following Shafts so instant are,
That they no Flight allow. Strait, Tyrus there
Fell with one Wound. By more fell Rhodanus,
With Arrows pierced. A Lance thrust Morius
Down to the Earth. Whom Livy, that full speed
Came on, as he was falling, struck, and 's Steed
Into the Troops, as they were flying, spurred.
There Mosa's swelling Neck he with his Sword
Cut off: his Head, within his Helmet bound,
Falling so high, shook with its Weight the Ground;
While the yet-setting Trunk his Steed conveyed,
Frighted, into the Fight. Here Cato said
(For he among the thickest fought) If He
Had first the Tyrian Youth opposed, when We
In Battle lost the Alps, alas! how great
An Hand from Italy had found Retreat?
How many Funerals to Libyans, slain,
Might the sad Suffrage of that Fatal Plain
Have given? But, now, the Armies 'gan to yield.
An universal Terror, through the Field,
The Celtae's Fear had spread. The Tyrian Side
Declines, and Victory her self applied
To the Rutulian Arms. The Consul high
As in his prime of Years, Triumphantly
Went on, and still more great appeared to all.
But now, behold, the Libyan General
Comes on, and with him brings a Troop, all White
With Dust: and, lancing Darts, exclaims; Your Flight
Forbear; who is this Fo, from whom you fly?
Do you not blush? Our Troops are routed by
An old Man's Feeble Arms. Am I (I pray)
Now grown Degenerate in War? or say
Are Ye grown Weary of Me? Me? who am
Of Belus Race, allied to Dido's Name.
Amilcar was my Sire, in War to all
To be preferred; my Brother Hannibal,
To whom the Hills, Lakes, Plains, and Rivers yield.
I am the next to Him, at Carthage, held.
Me Baetis in her Coasts, and Nations, where
My Arms have been, do, even with Him, compare.
As this he spoke, He rushed into the Fight,
And soon, as with his shining Arms in Sight
The Consul came, too hastily, at Him
A Javelin threw; which, passing through the Brim
Of's brazen Shield, and, at the Top of all
His Breast Plate entering, lightly, in its Fall,
His Shoulder wounded, drawing little Blood;
Although the Libyan thought, it would make good
His vain Conceits. The Romans were dismayed
At this. When thus the Consul, to upbraid
His weak Attempt (You might believe that in
Some Women's Broils, or Boys, he scratched had been)
Cries; Go, my Lads, and let them understand,
How great the Wounds are, that a Roman Hand
Inflicts. Then suddenly a mighty Shower
Of Darts, whose Shadow hides the Sun, they pour
Upon the Fo, and all the spacious Plain
Alternate Slaughter strews with Bodies slain:
Whose Heaps increasing, in the River, joined
The Banks. So, when Diana has a Mind
To hunt in shady Groves, and Sport to show
To her pleased Mother, and the Woody Brow
Of lofty Pindus shakes, or takes a View
Of Maenalus, with Arrows charged, a Crew
Of Nymphs about her flock, and strait surround
The Pathless Cop'ces. There the Quivers sound,
And loosely hanging, all the Shafts drawn out,
Leap at their Backs; while still they beat about
The Fields. Then on the Rocks, in Coverts, in
The Valleys, Rivers, and the Dens, (still Green
With Moss) the Slaughtered Beasts in Plenty ly.
Then on some Mountain, with a joyful Eye,
The Prey collected, pleased, Latona views.
But furious Nero, when he heard the News
Of Livy's Wound, breaks through the thickest, and
Perceiving, that the Fight did Equal stand.
What now unto the Fates of Italy
Is left? (said He) If you this Enemy
Do not or'ecome; how will you Hannibal
Subdue? With that, as Mad, amidst them all
He rushed: and, when he Hasdrubal beheld
Among the foremost Troops, with Fury swelled.
Like a Sea Monster, that has long been tossed
In the vast Deep, quite void of all repast,
When among the Waves a Fish, far off, She spies;
She boils within, and then, with eager Eyes,
Pursuing in the Flood her swimming Prey,
Swallows, with Fishes mixed, the Briny Sea.
Now no delay of Darts, or Words. Thou Me
No more shall 'scape; Pyrene's Woods (said He)
Haesdrubal, was formerly so shut up in his Camp by Nero (between Illiturgi^,
and M^ntissa, in Spain) that he could no way be relieved: and therefore Treated
with him for many Days, on Conditions to draw all the Carthaginians out of
Spain, and protracted that Treaty, till he had, by Degrees, in the Night, given
his whole Army means to escape over the Hills, into places of Security. See
Livy, lib. 16.
Shall not deceive Me here; nor yet, with vain,
And faithless Promises, shall thou again
Delude; as, captived in the Iberian Land,
With a false League, thou once did fly my Hand.
Thus Nero: and withal he threw a Dart,
And not in Vain. For in the lower Part
Of's Side it stuck. With that, on him he leaps
With His Sword: and, as with his Target-Point he keeps
His trembling Body down, If now (said He)
At the last Gasp, Thou do desire it, We
Unto thy Brother thy Commands will bear.
To whom the Libyan replies; I fear
Not Death: make use of this thy Victory;
Till to my Shade a swift Revenger He
Arrive. But, if unto my Brother Thou Will bear my last Desires, then say; that now
I bid him burn the Capitol, and there
Mix, with the Ashes of the Thunderer,
My Bones, and Dust. As more he did desire
To add, his Heart still boiling-up with Ire,
The Conqu'rour pierced him with his Sword, and then
Cut off his Faithless Head. With that, his Men
(Their General slain) are routed, and the Fight
No more pursue: and now, at length, the Night
The Sun, and Day obscures: when they repair
With moderate Food, and Sleep, their Strength, and bare
(The Way they came) their Conquering Ensigns, er'e
The Day returned back to the Camp, for Fear
Shut up. Then Nero (as He did advance
The Libyan's Head, aloft, upon his Lance)
Said; Cannae, Trebia, Thrasimenus We
With this thy Brother's Head have now to Thee
Repaid (O Hannibal.) Thy Treacherous War
Ingeminate, and hither call from far
Thy doubled Troops. Such their Reward shall be,
Who (the Alps crossed) desire to join with The^e
But Hannibal, who did his Tears suppress,
By Constant bearing, made his Sorrows less:
And vows, in time, fit Sacrifice to pay
Unto his Brother's Shade. Then, far away,
His Camp removes: and so, dissembling right,
His Griefs by Quiet, shuns a Dubious Fight.
The End of the Fifteenth Book.
Si tibi non segnes contra tua fulmina sa^^e
Visi stare sumus; dignam te (nate Tonantis)
Affe^imus dextram: tum dextra Scipio dextram
Amplexus fatur magna sunc te praemia clarae
Virtutis, Masanissa manent: ^itiusque vel armis
Quam stratae studio vincetur Scipio Mentis
Honoratissimo viro Edoardo Stanley Armigero Illustrissimo Domini Dn^i Iacobi
Comitis Derbia qui Sub Rebellibus Martijrium passus est Filio natu Secundo.
Tabula Observantissime D.D.D.

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Sixteenth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Libyan Army to the Brutian Land
Retires. What full Obedience the Command
Of Hannibal obtained. Two Generals
In Spain or'ethrown: a Third, a Captive falls
Into brave Scipio's Hands. Prodigious Flames
Crown Massanissa's Head; who strait disclaims
The Libyan Side, and with the Roman joins.
Both Hasdrubal, and Scipio their Designs,
In Syphax Court, pursue. The League again
Confirmed with Syphax; Scipio goes for Spain:
Where, all subdued, with great Solemnities
His Father's, and his Uncle's Obsequies
He celebrates. Contending for Command,
Two Brothers give a Combat Hand to Hand,
And both are slain. To Rome the Consul goes,
Where his Designs old Fabius does oppose.
But, by the Senate his Desire approv^d,
The War is, into Libya, removed.
BUT Hannibal, who for his Country grieves,
And's own Mishaps, the The Brutians first revolted to Hannibal. See before in
the eleventh Book, page 296.
Brutian Land receives.
Where, he, entrenched, the Time considers, when
The War, suspended, he might raise again.
As, when a Bull the Stalls forsakes, and quits
His Empire of the Heard, and Straying gets
Into some Wood enclosed; on wandering Fights
He ruminates, and, fiercely Bellowing, frights
The Groves: then over the lofty Rocks he goes;
Tears them up with his Horns, and Trees or'ethrows.
While Trembling Shepherds on high Hills, from far'
Behold him thus preparing a new War.
But, now, that Vigor (which had quite destroyed
Ausonia, had He other Helps employed)
Through a base Envy (laboring to retract
Their Minds at Carthage) was constrained to Act
Without their Aid; and, through the length of Time,
In his Affairs to wax more Dull. Yet him
The Fear, and Terror, by his valiant Hand,
And by so many former Slaughters, gained,
As an Inviolable, Sacred Head
In Battle, still preserved. So that, instead
Of all their Arms; their Aids of Camps, and all
Their fresh Recruits, the Hannibal had nothing now left him, but the
Reputation of his former Deeds, to keep his Army together; which, though very
much straightened, and Hopeless of all Relief from Carthage, and all Italy (the
Brutians excepted) their Enemies; continued Faithful, through a Veneration of
his Worth, and Valor, till he was recalled to relieve his Country.
Name of Hannibal
Alone sufficed. So many Troops, that there
Differed in Speech; So many Hearts, that were
Divided in their Barbarous Customs; all
Stood firm, a Reverence of their General:
Kept their Minds Faithful, when Affairs declined.
But the Dardanian Arms not only find
Success in Italy, but Phoenix was one of the four Generals, who, after
Hasdrubal (the Brother of Hannibal) quitted Spain, maintained the War there:
but was soon after forced to retire likewise into Africa.
Phoenix yields
Iberia, beaten from those Golden Fields.
And This Mago was Brother to Hannibal; who, as the former Generals, beaten out
of Spain, retired to Gades; and thence went with some few Forces by Sea into
Italy, to join with Hannibal.
Mago, having lost his Camp, in haste,
Urged by his Fears, by Sea to Libya past.
But Fortune, not Content with what before
For Scipio She had done, reserved in Store,
Another Honor. This Hanno (not that great Enemy to the Barcean Family) after
Mago left Spain, was sent thither by the Carthaginians; but, soon after, his
Camp was invaded by Syllanus, one of Scipio's Lieutenants, his whole Army
destroyed, and himself, taken Prisoner.
Hanno then amain
Advanced, and leading on a Barbarous Train,
With rattling Shields, the Native Spaniards brought
Too late. Yet (had he not with Scipio fought)
Nor Valor, Art, nor Policy, in War
Was wanting in Him. But all Force so far,
With greater Weight, the Roman General
Depressed, as Phoebe's Light surpasses all
The lesser Stars; as Sol does Her excel;
As Atlas other Hills; as Nile does swell
'Bove other Rivers; or the Ocean
The Narrow-Seas exceeds. While he began
TO encamp, as Evening with Un-equal Shades
Olympus veiled, the Roman him invades;
And, in the sudden Tumult, every where
The imperfect Works are overthrown, and there
The weighty Turf, and Earth, oppressing those,
That fell, the Honor of a Grave bestows.
But with a Courage, that might worthy be
Of more then One, and which Posterity
Deserves to know, and to commend to Fame
Is worth our Pains, Cantabrian Larus came.
Who, for his Mind, and Body's Bulk, might be
A Terror, though Unarmed. Most fiercely He
(After his Country's Custom) his Right Hand,
Armed with an Ax, the Combat still maintained:
And (though the routed Bands about him, round,
And his one Country Troop destroyed he found)
The Place of those were slain supplied Alone;
And, if he fought at hand, would often upon
The Forehead wound his Fo. And, when aside
They him assailed, with oblique Blows employed
His Ax reflex'd; If he assaulted were
Behind, a furious Conqu'rour, free from Fear,
His Fatal Weapon, he could Backward throw:
In every part of the Fight, a dreadful Fo.
At him with mighty Force (the Brother to
The General) his Lance Young Scipio threw;
Which, with his Cap of Fence, his flowing Hair
Cast down: For, driven strong, the Fatal Spear
Sunk deep, and far the lifted Ax was thrown.
At which the Youth, whose Anger now was grow'n
A mighty Weapon, leaping on him, gives
A Shout, and Home the Barbarous Weapon drives.
The Armies trembled, while his battered Shield
Sounds, with that Warlike weight, through all the Field.
Nor was it in vain: For with his Sword, as from
His Stroke the Spaniard drew his Right Hand Home,
Cut off, and Dead, with its loved Weapon, down
It fell. Which Wall, when it was overthrown,
The Trembling Troops an Universal Flight
Scatters, through all the Plain. No show of Fight;
But the sad Face of Punishment of those,
That fell, on every side, by Conquering Foes.
But now, behold! the Libyan Prince, his Hands
Behind him bound, through midst of all the Bands
Is dragged along, and begged (Oh flattering Light
Of Heaven!) that Captivate in Chains he might
Have longer Life. To whom the Roman thus.
See these are they, who once required over Us
So great a Power; to whom thy Sacred Race
Must yield ( Quirinus) and the Gown give Place!
But, to submit to Bondage if you are
So Easy, why did you begin the War?
As this he spoke, an Horsman Tidings brought,
That Hasdrubal, the Son of Giscon, the last of the Carthaginian Generals in
Spain; and Father of Sophonisba. See Livy.
Hasdrubal, not knowing they had fought,
Came on with Speed, to join his Arms, and Fate.
Scipio snatched up his ready Ensigns strait,
And when, or'ejoy'd, he saw the Fight (so much
Desired) approach, and Troops to Death with such
A furious Speed advancing, to the Sky
Lifting his Eyes; No more (Ye, Gods!) do I
Of you this Day require, since now I see
This Fugitive is drawn to Fight (said He)
Our other Wishes by our Valor may
Be gained. Then haste (Companions go,) I pray,
Behold my Father here, my Uncle there
With Rage, upon you call. Oh you, that are
My Deities in War, our Leaders be.
I Will follow you: Assist! and you shall see
(If my presaging Mind deceive me not)
A Slaughter worthy of your Name. For what
Shall else give Period to our Fighting here,
In the Iberian Land? When shall appear
That glorious Day, when at the fierce Alarms
Of the approaching War, and these mine Arms
I ( Carthage) thee shall trembling see? This said
Hoarse Trumpets, with shrill Murmurs, strait invade
The Stars, with Echo. With fierce Clamours then
They meet, with such a Violence, as when
Notus, and Boreas, or fell Auster raves
By Sea, and drown whole Fleets in swelling Waves.
Or when his deadly Flames the Dog expires,
And burns the fainting World with wasting Fires.
Such Slaughters their fierce Fury by the Sword
Commits, the gaping Earth could not afford
A Space, the Ruins of the Fight to hide.
No Rage of Salvage Beasts had er'e destroyed
So many in their Fatal Dens. And, now,
With Blood the Fields, and Valleys overflow;
Their Weapons all are dulled: The Libyans are
Cut off, and the Iberi, that in War
Delight. And yet, though shattered much, a Band
There was, that struggled still, and kept their Stand,
Where Hasdrubal did with his Spear contend.
Nor had their constant Valor made an End
That Day; but that an Arrow chanced to fall
Upon his Breast-plate's top. The Wound, though small
Persuaded him to fly. Then strait he quits
The Fight, and on his nimble Courser gets
To Shelter, and along the Shore, by Night,
To the Tartessiack Ports directs his Flight.
The next to him in Arms, and Valor, there,
To the Fight (He the Massylian Scepter bare,
For's League, and Friendship to the Roman Name,
Soon after famous) Masanissa, after his defection to the Romans, maintained
Inviolable Friendship with them, during his whole Life. See more in the
Continuation, second Book.
Masanissa came.
Upon his radiant Head, as, tired with Flight,
By Night he slept, a sudden, shining Light
Appeared to compass, with a gentle Flame,
His curled Hair, and to diffuse the same
Upon his rugged Brow. His Servants strait
Run in, and haste the Fire (that did dilate
It self about his Breast) with Water to
Suppress. But his old Mother, who foreknew
The Omens of the Gods, Your Wonders (cries)
Thus, thus still hide, propitious Deities!
Long may that Light abide upon his Head!
Neither do Thou, my Masanissa! dread
Those happy Wonders of the Gods: nor fear,
When 'bout thy Temples Sacred Flames appear;
This Fire a League with the Dardanian Race,
And Empire, greater then thy Father's was,
Does promise, and, at length, shall give to Thee;
And with the Latin Fates thy Name shall be
Involved. Thus spoke the Prophetess. The Mind
Of The Youth, to these clear Prodigies inclined,
Never thought on Honors from the Libyan Side,
For ^is great Valor. And, besides the Pride,
Of Hannibal in Arms, now, less became,
And, every Day, the War decreased in Fame.
From the dark Heavens the Morn began to chase
The Clouds, and scarce had Crimson-dy'd the Face
Of the Atlantic Sisters: when he goes
To the Ausonian Camp (as yet his Foes.)
Where when he entered, and kind Entertain
Received from Scipio; thus the King began.
The advice of Heaven, my Mother's Prophecies,
And thy great Valor, to the Deities
So dear, (Brave Roman) me have hither brought
(Most willingly) from those, for whom I fought.
If against thy Thunder I Have appeared to stand
With Courage, here I offer Thee an Hand,
Worthy thy Name, thou Son of Jove! nor Me
Do wavering Thoughts, or vain Inconstancy
Of Mind, to this invite. I Treachery,
And, perjured from their Birth, a People fly.
And, when Thou at Alcides Bars have made
An End, the Mother of the War invade
With Me. For Him, who Italy ten Years
Has now possessed, and Scaling-Ladders bears
Against the Walls of Rome, You back must bring
With Fire, and Sword, to Libya. Thus the King.
To whom (their Right-Hands joined) If glorious We
(The General replies) in Arms to Thee
Appear; more glorious much We Romans are
For keeping Faith. Then ( Masanissa) far
Thy double-Tongu'd Associates from thy Mind
Remove. Thy famous Valor, hence, shall find
A great Reward: and sooner Me subdued
By Arms, then overcome in Gratitude,
Thou shall confess. But that, which you persuade,
That We should Libya with Fire invade,
Time shall effect. My Thoughts are often inclined
To that, and Carthage fatigates my Mind.
Then to the Youth a rich embroidered Cloak,
And Horse, which he from conquered Mago took,
And had himself his Mettle tried, withal
A Cask, and Golden Cup, which Hasdrubal
Used to the Altars of the Gods to bring
With Sacrifice, He gives. Then, with the King
A Social League confirmed, He strait employed
His Thoughts, that Byrsa's Towers might be destroyed.
The richest King in the Massylian Land,
And Valiant held, was Of Syphax, see the Continuation, first Book.
Syphax: whose command
Un-number'd Nations, and the farthest Seas,
Obeyed. His Territories vast; in these
He Store of Horse, and Monstrous Beasts, that are
In Fight a Terror, and choice Youth for War,
Possessed. None Him surpassed in Ivory,
Or Gold, or Garments of Getulian Die.
Desirous, therefore, to his Side to bring
This Strength (the Danger weighing, should that King
To Carthage turn) He puts to Sea, and in
His Thoughts, already, does that War begin.
But when, at length, his Ship arrived before
The Port; fled thither, by the nearest Shore,
In a weak Bark, was Hasdrubal, who sought
New Leagues, for his distressed Affairs, and brought
Massylian Ensigns to the Tyrian Side.
But, when to Syphax it was signified,
That the two Generals of two Nations (who
With all their Might contended to subdue,
Each, to their Laws, the World) into his Land
Were come: big in his Thoughts, he gives Command,
They should be strait conducted to his Court;
Proud, that his Throne was Honored with Resort
So great. Then, as, with joyful Eyes, he ran
Over Scipio's Face, to him he first began.
Brave Dardan, famed for thy clear Soul! how Thee
I, willingly, Embrace! how gladly see!
How much I Am pleased old Scipio's Face to Mind
To call! thy Father in thy Looks I find.
I speak of the Herculean Gades now;
When, Curious to observe the Ocean's flow,
And Ebb, to the Erythraean Coast I came.
With Kindeness strange, at Baetis neighboring Stream,
Those two great Captains came to see Me; where
They Presents of their Spoils (the Best that were)
On Me bestowed: as Arms, and (which within
My Kingdom, until then, unknown had been)
Bridles for Horse, and Bows, with which we may
Our Country's Darts compare. Besides these, they
Masters of ancient Discipline, that might
In Order form our scattered Bands, in Fight,
( For Infantry: of which the Massylian knew nothing.
After your Country's Manner) to me gave.
I Gold, and Ivory (of which We have
Great Plenty in our Land) on them again
Would have bestowed. But all my Prayers were Vain:
Only two Swords, which carved Ivory
Ensheath'd, they took. Now therefore cheerfully
My Palace enter; and since, hither now
The Libyan General my Fortune, through
The Seas, has brought, consider what I say
With Candid Thoughts: and Thou (whom all obey
At Carthage) Hasdrubal thine Ears to me,
And Senses turn. What Storms, through Italy,
Of Arms, like Torrents, run, and spread the Fears
Of Ruin through the Land? And how ten years,
Sometimes Sicanian Earth, sometimes thy Shore
( Iberus) has been drunk with Tyrian Gore;
To all is known: Now, therefore, let the War
Be laid aside, and jointly Arms forbear;
Be Thou content with Italy, and Thou
In Libya to contain thy Self. And now,
If to a League of Amity you please
To turn, no mean Procurer of your Peace
Will Syphax be. As more he would have said,
Scipio, no suffering Him, before him laid
The Customs of his Country, and the Will
Of The Senate: showed him, that the Fathers still
Determined such Affairs: wished him to lay
All Hopes of that Design aside. Thus they,
In arguing, the Day remaining spent,
And then unto their Cups, and Viands, went.
The Banquet ended, every Man repairs
To Rest, and the hard Fetters of his Cares
Throws off to Night. But, when the Morn gave Birth
To a new-Day, by her first Beams on Earth,
And Sol His Horses from their Stable drew
Unto their Yoke; Himself, not mounted to
His Seat, but only, with his early Rays,
Then breaking forth, enchac'd the Eoan Seas:
Scipio leaps from his Bed, and, with a fair
Aspect, to Syphax Lodgings does repair.
He (as the Custom of his Country) bred
Young Lions up; which lost, so Tamely fed,
Their Native Rage, and, at that very Time
Their Yellow-Necks, and Mains, while they with Him
Were Wanton, strok'd, and handled, without Fear,
Their dreadful Jaws. But, when he came to hear,
That Scipio was at Hand, he strait puts on
His Robe: and Royal Ensigns of his Throne,
In his Left Hand, assumes. White Fillets tied
About his Temples, and to his left Side
A Sword (as was their Custom) girt: He strait
Invites him in; where privately they sat,
The Sceptered King, and the Ausonian Guest,
In equal State. when Scipio thus expressed
His Mind. It was my First, and Chiefest Care,
So soon as the Pyrenean Nations were
Subdued by Me, into thy Land to haste
(Most mighty Syphax) nor (which I have past)
Could me the cruel Seas, between, retard.
Now, what I shall demand is neither Hard,
Nor yet Dishonorable to thy Throne:
With the Ausonians let thy Heart be one;
A firm Ally to their Successes be:
Not the Massylian Nations can Thee,
Nor Territories stretched to Dangerous Sands,
Nor Power of thy great Ancestors in Lands
Of vast Extent, more Glory yield, then will
The Roman Valor, still Invincible
In Faith, and Honor of the Latin Name.
For (not to mention more) none, that can claim
Equality with the Immortal Gods,
Over the Dardan Arms can compass Odds.
The King this hearing, with a cheerful Face,
Seems to assent, and, with a strict Embrace,
Let Us confirm this happy Omen (cries)
And our joint Vows propitious Deities
Assist! Both Horned, and Tarpeian Jove,
Let us invoke. With that, they forward move
To Sacred Altars, built of Turfs of Grass,
Where ready for the Ax the Victim was.
When suddenly the Bull the Altar flies,
Leaps from the broken Cords, and with loud Cries
Fills the whole Temple, and, his dismal Note
Ingeminating (from his bellowing Throat)
Through all the trembling Palace Terror spreads.
Then strait the Fillet, that adorned the Heads
Of his great Ancestors, without the Touch
Of any, falls from the King's Temples. Such
Sad Signs by Heaven of his declining State
Were given, and heavy Omens of his Fate.
This done: returning to the Port again,
Scipio, with prosperous Gales, arrives in Spain.
The greedy Nations met. Pyrene sent
Her several People: all in Complement
Salute, and call him King, which the Supreme
Honor of Virtue was, in their Esteem.
But with a mild Aspect their Offers were
By Him rejected, and He did declar^
His Country's Customs, and (which well-became
A Noble Roman) that the very Name
Of Kings was Odious at Rome. Again
Turned to that only Care, that did remain
(No Enemy now left) the Latin Bands,
With those, which Baetis, and which Tagus Sands
Enrich, he convocates, and to them thus,
'Midst the Assemblies, speaks. Since Heaven has Us
So blessed, that, from the farthest Part of all
The World thrown out, the Libyan should fall;
Or in these Plains; or, from the Hesperian Lands
Exiled, should fly to see his Native Sands.
I now the Fun'rals of my Friends desire
To celebrate, and Peace, which they require,
To dearest Shades to give. Consent (I pray)
With Me in this, and list to what I say.
When the seventh Sun again the Skies shall gild,
Whoer'e in Arms, or in the Sword is skilled;
Or can with Art the Chariot drive; or by
Swiftness of Foot hopes Conquest; or lets fly
Darts, that impell the Winds: let such appear,
And for the Crown contend with Honor here.
I Rewards worthy, of the choice of all
The Tyrian Spoils, will give. No Person shall
Depart without Reward. Thus with Desires
Of Gifts, and Praises, he the Vulgar fires.
And now the Day arrived, when all the Plain
With the vast Concourse sounds, and with a Train
Well ordered, the pretended Obsequies
Scipio, with Tears Obortive in his Eyes,
Leads on. All Soldiers of the Latin Name,
And all the Iberian, with their Offerings came,
And threw them on the flaming Pyles: while He
Goblets of Sacred Milk, and Bowls, that be
With blushing Bacchus filled, devoutly pours,
And strews the Altars over with flagrant Flowers.
Then the excited Shades he invocates
With Tears, their Praises sings, and venerates
Their glorious Acts. This done: from thence he goes
Into the Cirque, where first he does propose
The rapid Race of Steeds, and does Commence
The Sport. The wavering People in the Sense,
And Rage of Favoring Sides (the Bars not yet
Thrown open) Fluctuate to and fro, and fret,
Like murmuring Seas, and still their Eyes confine
T'observe the Horses stand. Soon as the Sign
Was given, the Bars resound, and to the Skies
(Scarce the first Hoof appearing) Clamours rise,
With dreadful Noise: while prone, and eager all
As those that run, they to the Chariots bawl,
And Steeds. The Cirque with their Contention shakes,
And Heat in some, from others Courage takes.
Exhorting they drive on, and, clam'ring loud,
Their Horses guide, and then a Yellow Cloud
Mounts, from the sandy Tract, into the Air,
Obscuring, with its Darkness, every where
The Horses Way, and Drivers Pains. Here one
Rails at his Headstrong Steed: and this upon
The Master. Some the Country's Favor; some
The ancient Stable's Name, from whence they come,
Inflames; and some with Hopes tormented are
Of the Young Steeds, that Harness newly bear.
Some with old Age are pleased, and praise the Steed,
Known for long Years. Starting, with rapid Speed,
Callaick Lampon, through the Air, before
The rest, flies out, and runs, insulting over,
Much Ground, and leaves the Winds behind. They Shout,
And with Applause grow hot; nor seem to doubt,
That, with the Start, h'ad gained the better part
Of his Desires. But such, as in the Art,
And Knowledge of the Race more Skillful were,
Against their Clamor, at the first, declare,
And at great Distance blamed, with vain Complaint,
His ill-spent Pains, which made his Horses faint.
Oh! whither, rashly, Cyrnus (for 'twas He
That drove the Chariot) whither do thou flee?
Forbear the Whip, take up the Reins, alas!
His Ears are Deaf, and He does forward pass,
Still of his Steeds secure; nor thinks upon
The space of Ground, that yet remained to run.
At Distance from the foremost, but the space
Of's Chariot length, the next Panchates was.
Asturian born; his Sire's White Ensign bright
Upon his Forehead shined, his Feet all White
Alike, his Mettle very great, not Tall
His Members, and his Body's Grace but small:
But then He Wings assumed, and, with Disdain
Of Reins, runs on, with Fury, through the Plain.
You Would think his Limbs grew Greater, he more High.
His Spanish Guide shined in Cinyphian Dye.
The third, that equal with Pelorus run
Afront, was Caucasus; most fierce, and One,
That scorned on's flattered Neck the Hand's applause:
But, foaming, loved to champ with Bloody Jaws
Upon the Bit. But, easier to obey
The Reins, Pelorus never from the Way
The running Chariot, deviating, drew,
And in the Tract went on directly to
The Mark. His Crest was deep, and, to and fro,
Upon his Neck an Ample Main did flow.
No Sire he had: Him Harp, when anew
In the Vectonian Meades the Zephyrs blew,
Brought forth. This Chariot gallant Durius in
The Race urged on. On Atlas, who had been
His Master long, did Caucasus rely.
Him thither then Aetolian Tide (by
Tydides built) had sent, and thought indeed,
That his Descent was from that Trojan Breed
Of Steeds, which from In this the Poet discovers the Care of the Ancients in
preserving a Race of good Horses, such as were those so celebrated of old,
taken by Diomed from Aeneas, at the Siege of Troy. After which, Diomed raising
several Colonies, and building several Cities, was not only renowned with
Posterity, but in some Places adored, and among the Venetians had a White Horse
Sacrificed to him. See Strabo, Geogr. Book the fifth.
Aeneas Diomed
Near Simois took, and home with Conquest led.
Now, as almost amidst the Race they drive,
In Space enlarged, Panchates, fierce, does strive
TO or'etake the foremost Horses, and to tend
Yet higher, and behind seems to ascend
The Chariot, that before him went; while He,
Striking on the Callaick Axle-tree,
Shakes it with his Forefeet. But, though the last,
Old Atlas, toward the Goal, as nimbly past,
As Durius. You might think they Peaceful were;
So equally their Fronts, and Reins they bear:
But, when the Iberian, who then next him went,
Perceived, that the Callaick's Strength was spent,
Nor, as before, the headlong Chariot leaped,
But with continual Violence, and Whipped,
The smoking Steeds went on. As, from high Hills,
A sudden Storm the lower Valleys fills,
Stretched to his Horses Necks, and hanging over
Their Heads, Panchates, that he should no more
Delay, but bear his Reins with good Success,
H' excites, and, lashing on, does this express.
While thou contend'st, shall an Asturian gain
The Prize? Stir up; fly nimbly through the Plain.
For Lampon, who, as winged, but lately went,
In's panting Breast declines: his Breath is spent;
Nor, gaping, has enough to bear him to
The Mark. Thus having said, the Horse anew
Himself collects, as if he newly then
Had started from the Barriers, and began
The Race, and Cyrnus striving, as he passed,
To cross, or equal him, behind him cast.
Heaven, and the Cirque, with the Spectatours Cries,
Murmurs, while through the Air Panchates flies,
And raising his Triumphant Neck more strong,
And High, his Fellows (foremost) draws along.
Atlas, and Durius, in the Rear, their Arts
In Wheeling try. This to the Left converts
His Reins, the other to the Right does bend,
And strives to pass: and both, in vain, contend
Each other to deceive; till, on his Strength
Of Youth relying, Durius turned, at length,
His Reins, and headlong drives his Chariot on,
Cross Atlas Axle-tree; which overthrown,
He, weak with Age, complaining justly, cries;
Whither do go? or what mad Way is this
Of running Races? both my Steeds, and Me
To kill thou do Endeavor. Thus while he
Exclaims, the Ax-tree broke, upon his Face
He falls, and's Steeds, now drawing several Ways,
Run headlong through the Champagne (Sad to see!)
While, in the open Plain, with Victory,
The Reins unto his Friends Pelorus heaves,
And shakes, and 'midst the Sand, behind him, leaves
Atlas, endeav'ring there to rise. Nor far
Had he to equal Cyrnus weary Carr.
Past whom (learning too late to guide his Steeds,
And marching slow) with nimble Wheels he speeds.
His Friends with Shouts, and Cries, his Chariot make
To go more Swift. And now upon the Back,
And Shoulders of the Iberian Charioter
His mouth the Horse had laid; who, full of Fear,
By the strong Vapor of his Breath, and Foam,
Soon feels his Back oppressed, and Warm become:
While Durius plied the Race, and lashed amain
His Horses on, nor seems to strive in vain,
On the Right Hand, to reach the Steeds before,
And equaled them; and, then transported more
With so great Hopes, cries out. Pelorus now,
That Zephyrus was thy Sire, it is time to show:
And let them learn, that can the Pedigree
Of Steeds, by Name, derive, how much in Thee
A Breed Divine excels. A Conqu'rour, Thou
Shall Altars raise, and Offerings shall bestow
Upon thy Sire. And if, as this he said,
Through joyful Fear he had not been betrayed,
By his too great Success, and letting fall
His Whip, perhaps to Zephyrus he all
His Vows had paid, and Altars raised. But then,
As if h'ad gained the Crown, and it again
Had tumbled from his Head, Unfortunate,
His Anger turning on himself, He strait
Across his Breast his golden Garment rends,
And dire Complaints, most sadly weeping, sends
Up to the very Stars. And now no more
(His Lashing ceased) the Chariot, as before,
Obeyed his Hand: but on the Horses Backs,
Instead of the Whip, the Reins he, vainly, shakes.
While, now secure of Praise, Panchates came
Up to the Goal, and the first Prize did claim.
The Wind with his large Main, which Nature laid
Over his Neck, and Shoulders, gently played:
While, snatching up his subtle Limbs, about
He praunc'd, and triumphed with a mighty Shout.
An Ax, in solid Silver carved, to all,
Alike, was given. The rest the General,
Distinguishing with several Honors, gave.
The First a nimble Courser did receive,
Which the Massylian King a Present made,
Of high Esteem. The next in Merit had
Two Golden Cups, of the Tyrian Spoils (which there
In Plenty lay) and, rough with Yellow-Hair,
A Lion's Skin, and (with like Dread expressed)
A Tyrian Helmet, with an horrid Crest.
The Third in Honor, in Reward the last,
Was Atlas; who, though from the Chariot cast,
(Pitying the sad Misfortune of his Fall,
And his Decrepit Age) the General
Presented, and, in's Prime of Age, a Slave,
And Bonnet, of his Country's Fashion, gave.
This done, the General the Race proclaims
A Foot, and Hearts with Prizes fixed inflames.
To the first a Cask, which, late, upon the Head
Of Hasdrubal, did Pannick Terror spread
Through all the Iberian Bands. To him whose Speed.
Next Merited, a Sword there was Decreed,
Which from Hyempsal slain his Father took.
And to the Third, a Bull. The rest forsook
The Cirque: each Man well-pleased, and Proud, that they
Two Darts of Native Metal bore away.
Then Hesp'ros, and Tartessos, Lovely Boys,
At once appear with the propitious Voice
Of all the Cirque. Of Tyrian Blood, they came
From Gades. Next (to whom the River's Name
By Corduba Cordua, Situate on the River Baetis.
was given, when yet a Child)
In that great Contest, Baeticus was filled
With joyful Hopes. And then, with Yellow-Hair,
(But with a Skin, whose Whiteness might compare
With Snow) did Eurythus with Clamours fill
The Lists. He, bred upon her lofty Hill,
Was thither sent by Setabis, and there,
With trembling Piety, his Parents were.
Then Lamus, and then Sicoris (thy Brood,
Warlike Ilerda) and that drinks the Flood,
Which, under Lethe's Name, with Silence laves
The hollow Banks with its forgetful Waves,
Thereon appears. And, when they all upon
Their Feet stood ready, and with Bodies prone,
And panting Hearts, with Heat of Praise elate,
Received Signal by the Trumpet: strait,
Starting through Air, as swift as Arrows, by
Extended Nerves enforced, away they fly.
And now the Shouts, and Parties diverse are:
The Fav'rours by their Fingers hang, and, where
Each Man affects, by Name their Friends excite;
While the fair Troop speeds through the Plain, so light,
Their Feet leave no Impression on the Sand.
All in their Prime; in Face all Comely; and
All swift of Foot; all Worthy to Or'ecome.
Now eager Eurythus the foremost, from
The middle Tract, advanced; yet foremost past
But a short Space: when Hesperos as fast
Came up, and pressed upon his Heels, while he
Conceived it was enough for him to be
The Foremost. The Other it sufficed he might
Yet hope to get before. With that, more light
Their Steps they gather, and with vigorous Minds
Drive on their Bodies. While their Beauty finds
Increase from Labor. When with easy Pase
Thereon, who ran the last of all the Race,
Finding his Strength sufficient for the Course,
His Un-spent Vigor with a sudden Force
Employs, and breaks into the Air, so fleet,
You Would think that Mercury with winged Feet
Went his Ethereal Course. Now these, then those,
(The People all admiring) He out-goes;
And lately last, now the Third Victour, pressed
By his swift Steps, do Hesperos infest.
Nor whom he follows only: but the Rings
Prime Hope, (advancing with such active Wings)
Amazeth Eurythus; when, Fourth in place,
Tartessos, vainly toiling (if the Race
The other three pursued, as they began)
With fiery Thereon, that betwixt them ran
His Brother pressed. Which Thereon now no more
Enduring raised Himself, and got before
Enraged Hesperos. Then only One
Before him went. And now the Goal begun
With nearer Incitations to inflame
The vexed behind. When up they furious came,
And all the Force, that either Toil, or Fear,
Piercing into their Hearts, had left (while there
Could any thing be hoped for, in a Space
So short) collect. The foremost Two the Race,
With equal Speed pursue, and happily,
The Prizes of a double Victory
(Coming together to the Mark) had won
With Merit, had not Hesperos (who run
Close behind Thereon, and through Anger made
Most Cruel) seized upon his Hair (displayed
On's Milky Neck) and drawn him Back. While thus
The Youth detained, Triumphing Eurythus,
A joyful Victour, for the Prize appears,
And the fair Present of an Helmet bears
Away. Their fixed Rewards the other found,
And with green Wreaths their un-cut Tresses bound.
Each had two Shafts with Native Metal steeled.
This done; more cruel Conflicts stain the Field.
The Sword's drawn Hand to Hand, and a fair War
They represent. Not such, as Guilty are,
Nor vicious Men are to the Sword designed:
But such, whom Valor equaled, and a Mind
Inflamed with Love of Praise. A perfect Face
Of their past Labors, and of Mars his Race
A worthy This Spectacl^, much more Memorable, then those, where the Guilty,
and Condemned contended, was presented by two Spanish Princes, (Brothers, by
the Father; named Orbis, and Orsua) who, disputing for the Sovereignty of a
City, were resolved to determine the Controversy at this Solemnity by the
Sword: and though the Poet, in imitation of that samed Dispute, and Funeral of
Eteocles, and Polynices, says, they both dyed, yet Livy affirms the Elder (
Orbis) overcame the Younger.
Spectacle. Among these were
Two Brothers, who (what will not Princes dare
To act? what Crimes do Scepters want?) engage
In a full Cirque (while the whole Pit their Rage
Condemns) in single Combat for a Throne.
'Twas a dire Custom in their Country, known
Where Orphan Sons their Father's Royal Seat,
With Hazard of their Lives, invade. Both meet
With all the Fury, that a Mad Desire
Of Rule affords, and both at once expire;
Bearing to Ghosts below ambitious Hearts,
Glutted with Blood: and in their Inward parts
With one joint Thrust, their Swords, pushed on, are drowned:
And, adding railing Language to each Wound,
Struggling, their angry Souls fly into Air.
Nor could their Ghosts this Enmity forbear:
For, when their Bodies were together brought
Unto one Pyle (as if they still had fought)
The Bodies of Eteocles, and Polynices, who contended for the Sovereignty of
Thebes, both slain in one Battle, being thrown upon the Pyle, the Flames
arising from them, divided themselves, as if their Souls had still maintained
their Power over them.
The Impious Flames ('it is strange) asunder fly,
Nor would their Ashes there togetherly.
The rest with several Gifts, as was their Share
Of Courage, or of Force, rewarded are.
Some Oxen, that, with Ploughs impressed, could Till
The Earth: Some Youths, among Tyrian Spoils, with Skill
Accustomed to explore the Dens of Beasts:
Some Silver Plate, with wealthy Robes, and Crests
Rising on shining Helmets, bore away,
The Spoils, and Trophies of the Libyan Prey.
Then with the Dart they Honor sought (the last
Of these Circensian Games) and strove to cast
Beyond the Mark. Here, Neighbor to that Land,
Where Tagus Pale becomes with golden Sand,
Was Burnus, Famous for his long Descent,
And Line: with Glagus, who the Winds out-went
With his strong Arm. Aconteus too, whose Dart,
In its most speedy Course, the nimblest Heart
Never missed. With them Indibilis was a petty, but Warlike King, of Spain;
who, after he had performed many notable Exploits against the Romans, made
Peace with Scipio: but soon, as he removed thence, rose again in Arms; but was
subdued, and slain by Scipio's Lieu-tenants.
Indibilis, who long
In War delighted, now esteemed among
Confederates of Rome: who often slew
With his sure Shafts the towering Fowl, that flew
Among the Clouds. And stout Ilerdes, who
Could easily surprise the flying Do.
Burnus, who in the Mark first fixed his Dart,
Damum received; a Maid, that mixed with Art
The milky Fleeces with Getulian Dye.
But, who the next was Honored, and that nigh
Unto the Mark a Shaft* had thrown, with Joy,
Ilerdes, for Reward, received a Boy.
The third Palm brave Aconteus had, a Brace
Of Dogs, that would the Boar with Mettle chase.
But, when Applause, and Shouts these Honors had
Approved: in Scarlet, Laelius, richly clad,
And Younger Scipio, with a cheerful Look,
The Names, and Manes of the Dead invoke:
Then, strait, their Jav'lins throw; delighting so
All Honor to their Sacred Dust to show,
And add that Ceremony to the Games.
At length, the Scipio.
General (whose Face proclaims
His inward Joy, when he their Pious Hearts
Rewarded had, with Gifts to their Deserts,
And given a Weighty Corslet, all of Gold,
Unto his Brother, and a Pair of bold
Asturian Steeds to Laelius) rising, threw
With Force his Conquering Javelin, and, to show
The Shades were truly Honored, as it flies
Amidst the Field ('it is strange) before their Eyes,
Fixed in the Earth, the Javelin stands, and strait
With Leaves the lofty Boughs themselves dilate.
But now its Shadow, wide, the growing Tree
Extends: the Augurs all, with Prophecy,
Command them on to greater Things to go,
Which, by those Signs, the Deities foreshow.
With this Presage, the Libyans all from Spain
Repulsed, to Latium he returns again;
His House, and Country both revenged, while Fame
The Triumph leads. Nor other Cares inflame
The Roman Breasts, then Libya to commit,
And Sacred Fasces, to his Youth. But yet
The Graver ^ort, and, particularly Fabius, either through Envy, or too much
Caution, opposed Scipio in his design to invade Libya. See Livy.
The Graver Sort, who fallen in Courage, or
Success had wanted in that dubious War,
Opposing his Designs as Rash, with Fear
Their Dangers magnify: and, as he there,
High in the Dignity His great Exploits in Spain had gained him not only the
Consulship, but the Favor of the People: so, that, notwithstanding the Power
of Fabius Acilius, and others in the Senate, he obtained the Commission he
desired.
of Consul, prayed
Authority of Senate to invade,
And ruin Carthage with his Arms; this grave
Reply, aloud, the Elder Fabius gave.
I hope, I need not fear, that I, who am
Laden with Age, and Honor; who in Fame,
And Years abound, should by the Consul be
Esteemed a Person, that maliciously
From his Just Praises would detract. My Name
Is with sufficient Splendor raised by Fame.
Nor wants what I have done, with such Success,
New Praise. But, while I live, 'twere Wickedness,
To my dear Country to be wanting, or
Conceal my Mind in Silence. You the War
Intend to Libya to transferr. For We
Now want an Enemy in Italy.
Nor is it enough, that we have Hannibal
Subdued. What greater Honor can in all
Eliza's Land be found? but, if you are
Spurred on by Glory, what should you Debar
To reap this Harvest? Thee for Deeds at hand
Fortune has Fit, and Worthy made. Our Land
Even thirsts, to drink the Blood of Hannibal.
Whither the War, or Ensigns do you call,
Extinguish first the Flames of Italy.
You plainly quit a weary Enemy,
And, at that Instant, Rome must Naked stand.
But, when you waste the Syrts, and barren Sand,
Will not that horrid Plague, with Fury, move
Against these known Walls? invade Tarpeian Jove,
Deprived of Arms, and Men? Of how great Weight
Is it, should you give Way, and leave the State
To the Emerited? and, when we are
Struck with the Thunder of so great a War,
Must We (as Fulvius from proud Capua) Thee
From Libya's Coast recall? Get Victory
At Home, and Italy, that has with Tears
Deplored the Funerals of Fifteen Years,
Absolve from cruel War; then take your Way
To remote Garamantians. You may
Your Nasamonian Triumphs then design.
But Italy, distressed, must now Decline
All such Attempts. Your Valiant Father (He,
That so much Honor to your Family
Did add) when, Consul, he was bound for Spain,
Himself against Hannibal (who then amain
Descended from the Alps) did first oppose,
His Army all recalled. From Conquering Foes
You ( Consul) would retire; that so you may
From Us the Libyan withdraw. But, say,
He will, secure, sit Quiet; nor pursue
You, and your Arms to Libya: will not You
Condemn these blind Resolves, when Rome shall be
Surpised? Or else suppose, that, troubled, He
Should turn his Ensigns, and your Fleet pursue;
He the same Hannibal will be, that You
Entrenched have seen before this Citie's Wall
This Fabius, and the like was urged by all
The Elder sort. The Consul strait replied.
By a joint Death two Valiant Captains died,
When Spain, possessed, embraced the Libyan Yoke.
Not Fabius then, nor Any, that have spoke
His Sense, afforded Aid. I know, it is Truth,
The War's whole Fury I, when but a Youth
Endured, and to the falling Shafts alone
My Head exposed, and drew all Dangers on
My self. And then the Seniour Sort, and even
This Prophet murmured, that the War was given
Unto a Boy, and blamed Our rash Design.
But I all Praises to the Powers Divine
(By whom a Trojan People we remain)
With Thanks return. That very Boy, those vain,
And Childish Years, that Scipio, who was then
Unripe for Arms, to You, un-hurt, again
Has given all Spain; the Libyans thence by Force
Repulsed, and, following the farthest Course
Of Sol to Atlas Bounds, the Libyan Name
Expelled from the Hesperian Orb; nor came
With his Victorious Ensigns Home, before
He Phoebus saw, upon the Roman Shore,
Loosing his Flaming Chariot, near the Main.
The same to you did foreign Kings regain.
And Carthage now remains, the last of all
My Toils. This Jove declares. See! Hannibal
Old Age now shakes, or fainting Fears does frame;
Lest to our Ruins, of such Length, my Name
A Period should produce. My Valor I
Have surely tried, and Strength, augmented by
My Prime of Years. Then seek not to delay:
But rather suffer, that this Lot I may
Pursue. This the Immortal Gods for Me
Have kept, to wipe away the Infamy
Of former Woes. It is a fair Renown,
For Wary Fabius not to be or'ethrown:
And the Delayer has effected all
For Us by sitting still. But Hannibal's Brother.
Hasdrubal,
Mago, nor Hanno, nor yet Another Hasdrubal.
Giscon's Son
Had turned their Backs, if we the like had done:
Or, Idle, close entrenched, spun out the War.
Could a Sidonian Boy, who scarce did bear
The Down of Youth upon his Cheeks, invade
Laurentine People? Walls approach, were made
By Trojan Hands? and drink the Sacred Stream
Of Yellow Tyber? and in Latium seem,
By a long War, to share? and shall We stand
Thus backward to transport to Libya's Land
Our Ensigns? and the Tyrian Towers destroy?
Their Coasts, secure of Danger, openly,
And all the Land a rich Tranquillity
Enjoys. At length let Carthage (wont to be
A Terror) learn to Fear, and understand,
That, though from Hannibal the Oenotrian Land
As yet's not free, we want not Arms. Even I
This Man, that has, so long, in Italy
(Till He Is grown old through cautious Counsels) stood,
That has three Fifteen Years.
Lustra, largely, shed our Blood,
Him, fearing Cruel things, and trembling, I
Back to his Country, that in Flames shall ly,
Will turn. The Shameful Marks of Tyrian Hands
Shall Rome view on her Walls: while Carthage stands
Free, and secure, and hears our Misery,
And wars with open Gates? The Enemy
May batter then with their Sidonian Rams
Our Towers again, if first in Roman Flames
They hear not that their Country's Temples fall.
The Fathers, by this Language, and the Call
Of Fate inflamed, to what the Consul said,
At the same Time, assent; and, when they would prayed,
That it to Italy might happy prove,
Permit the War to Libya to remove.
The End of the Sixteenth Book.
Patria invehitur sublimi tecta Triumpho
Ipse astans curru, atque auro* decoratus, e^ostro^
Martia praebebat spectanda Quiritibus ora
Honoratissimo Viro EDVARDO MANSEL Baronetto de Comitatu Glamorgen Tabula
observantis D.D.D.

SILIUS ITALICUS OF The Second Punick War. The Seventeenth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
From Phrigia Cybele's brought to Rome
With Sacred Rites. Chaste Claudia does presume
(To vindicate her self) to draw alone
The standing Ship, by which her Virtue's known.
From Sicily the Consul Scipio sails
To Libya, where his Army still prevails.
Syphax, and Hasdrubal (their Camps in one
For Battle joined) by Scipio overthrown,
Syphax is Captive made; a Pannick Dread,
From that great Overthrow, through Africa spread.
The Carthaginians call, to their Relief,
The General from Italy. His Grief
Expressed at his Return. The Armies fight,
And Hannibal by Scipio's put to flight.
Carthage, at length, receives Laws from Rome.
Great Scipio returns, in Triumph, Home.
THE Sibyl's ancient Oracles foreshow;
That then the Ausonian Land the Foreign Fo
Should quit, when from Her Phrygian Seat, to Rome,
Cybele (Mother of the Gods) should come
To be adored: and that the Deity,
Arriving, should by Him received be,
That should, selected from among the rest
Of all the Senate, be esteemed Best
Then living in the Present Age. A Name,
Better then Triumphs, and of greater Fame.
And now the thing arrived, which they had sought:
Cybele, in a Latian Ship, was brought.
When This Scipio, surnamed Nasica, was the Son of that Scipio, who was slain
with the Father of Africanus, in Spain. A Person most eminent for his singular
Virtues, particularly so free from Ambition, and Avarice; that, when his
Soldiers would have given him the Title of Emperor, and the Senate decreed to
him a Triumph for his Victories in Dalmatia, he refused both and, when he dyed,
the Wealth he left behind him, was not enough to bury him. For these, and many
other Excellent Qualities, he was judged the fittest Person to fulfill the
Oracle of the Sybil, viz. Matter abest: Matrem jubeo, Roman, requiras;
Cum veniet, casta est accipienda manu.
The absent Mother, Rome, I thee command
To seek; Receive her with the chastest Hand.
She was brought from Pessinus, a Town in Phrygia, where She had a stately
Temple of White Marble.


Scipio, fearless (while the Senate all
Gave way) was ready to obey the Call,
To meet the appointed Rites. The Son was He
Of The General's Uncle, Chosen then to be
The Chief Commander in the Africa Wars:
Illustrious in his many Ancestors.
When, far at Sea, the Deity this Youth
Devoutly had received, and to the Mouth
Of Thuscan Tyber brought: the Vessel, strait,
A female Band succeeds, and, with its Freight,
The lofty Gally through the River drew
With fast'ned Cords. Then, round about them, through
The Air, the hollow Sounds of tinkling Brass,
With the harsh Timbrel's Noise contending, pass:
And dancing Satyrs, which inhabit where
Chaste, from the Goddess, Cybele, whose Rites were there most solemnly
performed.
Chaste Dindymus two lofty Hills appear,
And use in the Dictaean Caves to Sport,
And unto I Would, and silent Woods resort.
Amidst this Noise, the Sacred Vessel, known
By Cheerful Shouts, refusing to go on,
Retracts the Ropes, and, on a sudden, stood
Immovable, and fixed within the Flood.
With that, the Priest (as in the Ship he stands)
Exclaims; Forbear, with your Polluted Hands,
To touch the Cords, and, I advise you, far
From hence, Oh! far depart, whoever are
Profane, nor in this Chaster Labor join;
While it suffices, that the Power Divine
Gives this Advise: but, if there any be,
That in her chaster Mind excells, if She
Be Conscious to her self, Her Body's Pure,
Her Hand alone this Pious Task, secure,
May undertake. Here Claudia was of the Sabine Patrician Family, which first
incorporated themselves with the Romans. She was a Vestal Virgin; and,
suspected of Incontinency, made this Miracle the Test of Her Chastity; and was
ever after Honored, as the most Virtuous Matron of her Time.
Claudia, who her Name
From the ancient Clausi drew, by common Fame
Traduced, unto the Ship her Hands, and Eyes
Converting, said; Mother of Deities,
Thou Power Divine, who did for Us give Birth
To all the Gods, whose Offspring Heaven, and Earth,
The Seas, and Shades below, do rule by The Lot between Jupiter, Neptune, and
Pluto; by which each of them received his Empire.
Lot.
If this my Body be without a Spot,
Great Goddess be my Witness! and let Me
By this thy easy Bark absolved be.
Thus having said; the Cable, free from Fear,
She seized, and, suddenly, they seem to hear
The Lion's Murmur, and a Sound more Grave,
Untouched by any Hand, the Timbrels gave.
The Ship advanced so fast, you would think the Wind
Had forced it on, and Claudia's left behind,
Though against the Stream it ran. And Hopes, that far
All else exceed, cheer up their Hearts: the War
And all their Fears, at length, shall ended be.
For active Scipio, leaving Sicily,
Hid with his winged Ships the spacious Seas:
But, with an off'red Bull, did first appease
The God, on whose blew Waves the Entrails swum.
Then Thunder-bearing Birds, descending from
The Gods Abodes, through the clear Air, in view,
Begin to lead the Navy, and to show
Their Course by Sea. A Joyful Augury
Their Cries afford; and, as they foreward fly
Under a liquid Cloud, the Ships pursue
As far as they could keep them in their View;
And the Perfidious Coast of Cadmus Land
Attain. Nor yet did Africa Idle stand;
But, since so great a Storm upon her came,
A dreadful Power under a mighty Name,
Against their Fury had prepared to bring
The Arms, and Force of the Of Syphax. See the Continuation, Book the First.
Massylian King.
Libya's sole Hope, and Latium's only Fear,
Syphax, the Fields, and Valleys, every where,
And Shores had filled with Nomades, that scorn
Their nimble Steeds with Trappings to adorn;
Who with their singing Shafts, that, as they fly
Through Air, like Clouds, surcharged, obscure the Sky.
Of the Right Hand, which he had given before,
And League, that He upon the Altar swore,
Unmindeful; Rites of Hospitality,
And Feasts, that what was done could Testify
His Faith, and Trust, changed by an Impious Flame
Of Love, He had infringed, and's Crown became
The purchase of his Bed. Great Hasdrubal
A Virgin Daughter had, Esteemed by all
As Beautiful, as her Descent was famed,
She taken to his Bed, as if inflamed
With his first Nuptial Taper, suddenly,
His Forces all to Carthage turned. The Of this League see above in the
Sixteenth Book.
Ty
Of Amity with Rome He violates,
And to the Fo his Dotal Arms translates.
But Scipio, careful to advise the King,
Bids him be Faithful to observe the thing,
That he had Sworn, and not to violate
The Laws of Peace, but firmly to his State,
And Kingdom stand. To call the Gods to Mind,
And Deeds, that Hospitality did bind.
That far his Nuptials, far his Tyrian Bride
Would be among Roman Arms, if He denied
What they demanded, he should quickly find,
That weak Obedience of too soft, and kind
A Husband, and his Bed's so ardent Heats
Should stand in Blood. Thus, intermixing Threats,
Scipio advised the King, whose Sopho^isbae.
Wife before
Had stopped his Ears. And, when Advice no more
Took place, He summons all his Swords again,
Attesting the Chaste Altars of the then-
Polluted League, and in the War proceeds
With various Arts. With Huts of slender Reeds,
And Fenny Flags, such as the Rustic Moor
Selects to thatch his Homely Cottage over,
The Libyan Camp was fill^d. This he assailed
By Stealth, and secret Flames with Targets veiled,
Scattered in Dead of Night, which, as they run
Diffused (like a Contagion) and begun
With mighty Noise, through the Unctuous Food their Way
To make, through all the Air their Light display,
And by their active Heat the Rafters fall.
The Hostile Mischief, like a Storm, through all
The Camp goes on, and on the arid Reeds,
With frequent Cracks, devouring Vulcan feeds.
Sad burnings in all Quarters rise, and some,
Before they could perceiv't, excited from
Their Sleep, are seized by Fire, and, as for Aid,
In vain, they call, their Faces Flames invade.
The Lemnian God appears in every Place
A Conqueror, and in his dire Embrace
Destroys both Arms, and Men. The Plague swells High
And through the Clouds the half-burnt Camp does fly,
In glowing Ashes: Then, with dismal Sounds,
And a prodigious Leap, the Fire surrounds
The Assault of the Romans, setting the Huts of the Numidians Camp on Fire,
was so sudden; that Syphax fled, Naked, out of his Bed, and very hardly escaped
their Hands, after which, he joined his Camp with the Carthaginians.
The King's Pavilion, and had sadly there
Devoured the Man, had not his Guards, through Fear
Of Danger, (while amazed He much inquired)
Him from his Sleep, and Bed, by Force, retired.
But, when, within one Camp, the Tyrian, and
Syphax their Strength had joined, and through the Land
Called thither, all in Arms, the Youth, again,
The Wounds of that sad Night had eased: then
Shame, Anger, and (a third pernicious Fire)
His Wife into his Mind new Rage inspire.
And now, He, threatening, storms, his Face should be
Blasted by burning of his Camp: that He
Should, Naked, hardly escape the Fo by Flight,
Amidst his trembling Troops. But in the Light,
In clearer Day, and less perfidious View
Of Heaven, no mortal Syphax could subdue.
Thus Foolishly he rants: while Fate his Pride,
And Breath concluding, would no more abide;
But cuts the Thread of this vain swelling Tongue:
For soon, as He (like Floods, that draw along
Whole Groves, and Rocks, and like swift Torrents, go
Through devious Ways, and all the Banks overflow
With foaming Waves) leaped from his Camp, He pressed
His furious Courser on, before the rest
And bids his Troops advance. The other Side
(A noble, sober Army) when they spied
The King far off, snatched up their Arms, and strait
March on, and singly with themselves debate.
See there: See how this proud Massylian King,
Insulting, at his Army's Head, does bring
Them on, and for the Combat calls. Oh! may
This my Right Hand that Honor gain to Day.
The Sacred Altars of the Gods he has
Defiled, and has infringed his League, and Faith,
With our chaste General. Oh! may it be
Sufficient (Gods) that once, already, He
From his burnt-Camp escaped! This in their Hearts
Resolved, they all, contending, lance their Darts.
In the Fire-breathing Nostrils of his Steed,
A Javelin, that surpassed the rest in Speed,
Was fixed: By which the Beast erected stood,
And with his bounding Heels (his Jaws with Blood
Or'eflowing) beat the Air; then backward to
The Ground he fell, and, with a Spear pierced through,
As every Way he tossed his Limbs, betrayed
His Rider to the Fo: who Him invade,
As He, in vain, endeavored from the Ground
To rise, and fly; and, drawing from the Wound
The Weapon, seize Him. Then the Shame of Chains,
And Gyves, they add; while He to all remains
A great Example, never to rely
Upon Prosperity. And now, they ty
In Manacles his Scepter-bearing Hands:
And He, that, lately, saw so many Lands
Beneath his Feet: that Scepters, and the Sea,
That to the Ocean's bounds extended lay,
Under his Nod beheld, thrown from the Head
Of all his Kingdoms, is in Triumph led.
His Strength thus overthrown, the Libyans are
Cut off: while hated by the God of War.
And known for frequent Flight, (that Enterprise
Condemned) with Speed, the Tyrian Captain flies.
After this overthrow, there was nothing left to relieve Carthage, but the Army
under Hannibal, in Italy, whither they immediately sent to recall him.
Carthage on one sole Man (her Members all
Thus ruined) now relied. And Hannibal,
Even with his absent Name, the Frame sustained
Falling with so great Noise: now, what remained
Was, that even Fainting, and distressed for Aid,
They should invite him Home. To this, afraid,
They all assent, when they perceived, they were
Forsaken by the Gods. And strait they are
Dispatched, who with the Ship, the Briny Main
Might pass with Speed, to call him Home again,
And with the Senate's Mandate thus advise.
Haste Hannibal; lest, through Delay, thine Eyes
Carthage in Ruins see. Oh! be not slow
T'assist thy falling Country, and the Fo
From these our Walls repel. Thus charged, away
They sailed, and, on the fourth ensuing Day,
The Ve^sel brought them to the Italian Shore;
Where cruel Dreams the General's Mind full sore
Disturbed. For as by Night, oppressed with Care,
He slept, Flaminius, Gracchus, Paulus: there,
Seemed with their naked Swords t'assault him, and
Together drive him from the Ausonian Land.
With these, of dreadful Ghosts, an Army: all
That did at Thrasimen, and Cannae fall,
Appear to chase him to the Sea. While He
Endeavored to the well-known Alps to flee.
Then Italy embracing in his Arms,
To it he stuck, until Prodigious Storms
Forced him to Sea, and in a Tempest sent
Him Home again. Thus deep in Discontent,
And with his Dreams perplexed, to him they came,
And their Instructions, in the Senate's Name,
With the great Danger of the State declare.
How the Massylian Forces routed were;
Their Prince, his Captive Neck, with Chains oppressed
Kept See the Continuation, Book the First.
a new Pomp for Jove: and, how distressed
Carthage, by Hasdrubal's not single Flight,
Was shaken, and how they, in dead of Night,
(Sad to relate) had seen both Camps (conjoined)
Afire, while the impious Flames through Africa shined.
And that the furious Youth (while Hannibal
Still kept the Brutian Coast) then threatened all
With Fire to Ruin: That the Fall drew nigh
Of Carthage. To what Country should they fly?
And his great Deeds (what Slaughters he had made
In Italy) relate? When this they would said,
And all their Woes, and Fears had laid before
His Eyes; they wept, and his Right Hand adore,
Like some great God. He, with a stern Aspect
Fixed on the Ground, hears all, and does reflect
With Silence on their Words, and weighs with Care,
If Carthage of so great a Value were.
At length, He thus replied: Oh Envy! Thou
Dire Fo to Man, who never wilt allow
Increase to things, or, that great Praise should grow
Unto a greater Height. Not long ago
I level with the Ground could Rome, subdued,
Have laid, and Captive into Servitude
Have led the Nation, and on Italy
Our Laws imposed. But, while at Home to Me
(Their General) they Pay, and Arms deny;
Nor my Troops, wasted with Success, supply
With fresh Recruits; and Hanno thinks it good
My Cohorts to defraud of Corn, and Food:
All Africa is on Fire, and Roman Spears
Push at Cadmeian Gates. Now, it appears,
That Hannibal's his Country's Glory, and
Her sole Support: and now, in this Right Hand
Ly all your Hopes. Well, Homeward turn, with Speed,
Our Ensigns, as the Senate has decreed.
I both my Country's Walls, and ( Hanno) Thee
Together will preserve. All this when He
Had thundered out, strait from the Shore to Sea
He lanc'd his Fleet, and When Hannibal was at Sea (says Livy) he often looked
back toward Italy; accusing both the Gods, and Men, for reducing his great
Designs to that Necessity.
Sighing sailed away.
None durst their Backs, as they put off, invade,
Or Him recall. Heaven seeming to persuade,
He should, of's own accord, thus haste away,
And Italy, at length, be freed: they pray
For Winds, and think it is enough again
To see the Coast so freed of Foes. As, when
Auster does his impetuous Blasts restrain,
And, by retiring, calms the foaming Main,
The Seaman then, not Prodigal of Prayers,
Desires not so much as gentle Airs;
Content, that Notus should entirely cease,
And by the Sea's smooth Course esteems his Peace.
The Tyrian Soldiers, all, their Faces bent
Toward the Main. But Hannibal, intent,
With fixed Eyes, held Italy in view,
While silent Tears, with frequent Sighs, bedew
His Cheeks; as if he had been driven from
His Country, and had left his dearest Home,
Forced to some Desert Lands. But when, with Sails
Tacked close, the Ships made Way with swifter Gales,
And by Degrees, the Hills began to draw
Their Summits down, that now He neither saw
Hesperian Mountains, nor the Daunian Coast:
Thus, fretting with himself; What have I lost
My Sense, unworthy to return (said He)
Even thus, when ever I from Italy
Withdraw my self: in Flames first Carthage all
Should perish, and the Name of Dido Fall.
Was I not Mad, when, after Cannae's Field,
From the Tarpeian Temples I withheld
My burning Weapons, nor the Thunderer
Dragged from his Throne, through the sev'n Hills, from War
Now free? my Flames might have scattered then,
And on that haughty Nation brought again
Troy's Ruins, and their Grand-sires Fate. But, why
Should this Afflict me? Who forbids, that I
Should now invade them with my Sword, and go
Directly to their Walls? It shall be so:
And, through those very Lines returning, where
I once encamped lay, I will repair
To Anyo's Waters, by a Way to Me
Well-known. Then turn your Prows for Italy,
And tack-about the Fleet; I Will make, that Rome,
Besieged, shall call again her Scipio Home.
But, when the God of Seas perceived, he burned
With so great Rage, and that they now had turned,
Toward the Shore again, their shining Prows,
^^rait, shaking his Coerulean Head, he throws
^^ves from the Bottom, and the swelling Main
^^^rudes beyond its Bounds. Then Winds, and Rain,
With black Aeolian Storms, from Rocks arise,
And cover from their Sight, with Clouds, the Skies.
Then, with his Trident, moving all the Sea,
Blew Tethys from the Rising of the Day,
And Fall, he drives, and the whole Ocean's Face
Distracts. The foaming Billows rise apace,
And make the Rocks to snake, on which they beat.
First Auster, from his Nasamonian Seat,
Leaps for^h, from the loose Sands the Water flings,
And leaves them bare. Him, on his gloomy Wings,
Fierce Boreas, bearing high a broken Sea,
Pursues. Then thundering, in another Way,
With adverse Blasts, Cloud-raising Eurus rowls
Part of the Ocean on: the cracking Poles
Bellow aloud; while frequent Lightning flies,
As if upon the Fleet the angry Skies
Would fall. The rage of Winds, and Lightning, Rain,
And Waves consent, and Darkness on the Main
Imposes Night. Now, coming from a Rock
A furious Whirl-winde, raised by Notus, struck
The Yards, and whistling Dreadfully among
The Shrouds, a Billow, like a Mountain, flung
Against the General's pale-Face. His Eyes
He turning to the Sea, and to the Skies,
Exclaims; O Happy Brother, Hasdrubal,
And to the Gods made equal, in thy Fall!
Thy valiant Hand in Fight did thee afford
A noble Death, Fate did to thee accord,
That with thy Teeth, at least, on Italy
Thou dying might lay-hold. But unto Me,
In Cannae's Field, where noble Paulus died,
And those renowned Souls, Death was denied,
Nor, when I would have fired the Capitol,
Could I by Jove's Tarpeian Thunder Fall.
While thus he moans, with several Blasts impelled,
The Waves, on either Side rushed on, and held
With their dark Heaps the Vessel down, as drowned
By that rude Shock. Strait, Whirling swiftly round,
The Sands, raised high into the Air, it flung
Again, where, poised by the Winds, on Waves it hung.
But against rough Stones, and Rocks (sad to behold)
Notus two Galleys with hard Fortune rolled.
The Prows cracked with the Fall, and with a Sound
Of Dread, the broken Barks aloft rebound
From the Sharp Stones. Strait, over all the Sea,
A various Face of things. Here Helmets they,
Arms, Crimson Crests, and Capua's Treasure see,
And a rich Prize, with Care reserved, to be
A Trophy for the Generals Triumph. There
Tripods, and Tables of the Gods appear,
And Sacred Statues, that, in vain, before
The Miserable Latins did adore,
When Venus, frighted, that the Ocean
So high was moved, to Neptune thus began.
This Fury, and these Threat'nings (Father) may
Suffice for greater things; now spare (I pray)
Thy Seas, lest envious Carthage boast, that She
A Man has generated, not to be
Subdued in War, and, that to work the Fall
Of Hannibal, the Romans needed all
Thy Rage, and Seas. Thus Venus spoke, and strait
Their Fury all the swelling Waves abate,
And toward the adverse Camp the Navy drive.
Their General, old in Arms, and skilled to give
Encouragement with Praise, their Minds, inspired
With Anger by these furious Words, and fired
Their Breasts with Flames of Honor. Thou, to Me,
Flaminius bleeding Head, when slain (said He)
Did bring. I know thy Hand: Thou, first of all,
Came in to strike, at mighty Paulus Fall,
And in his Bones did fix thy fatal Spear.
The Opimous Spoils of stout Marcellus were
Thy glorious Prize: and falling Gracchus stained
Thy Sword. But, there, behold that Valiant Hand;
Which, with a Javelin, Warlike Appius (who
Then stormed the Walls of wealthy Capua) threw
Dead from the lofty Ramparts: and here see
Another Thunderbolt of Valor! He
It was, who Fulvius, a Name renowned,
Pierced through the Breast, not with a single Wound.
Stand thou here in the Van, who did in Arms
Consul Crispinus kill, Me, through the Storms
Of Fight, do thou attend, who (I the thing
Remember well) pleased in thy Rage, did bring,
At Cannae's Field, the Paulus.
Gen'ral's Head to Me,
Fixed on a servile Lance. Brave Youth, I see
Thy burning Eyes, and Aspect, that has more
Of Terror, then thy Sword; such, as before,
Thee (when a Tribune, that in vain withstood,
Crushed by thy strong Embrace, in the cruel Flood
Of famous Trebia drowned) I did behold.
But Thou, who, first, did at the Banks of cold
Ticinus, in old Scipio's Blood imbrue
Thy Sword, thy former Enterprise pursue,
And the Son's Blood present me now. Shall I
Fear even the Gods themselves, when Thou art by,
Should they come to the Battle? I beheld,
When thou did trample on the Hills, that swelled
To Heaven, and over the highest Alps did go
With Speed. Since, by whose Sword, and Hands I know
The Field of Cannae. See above, Book the Ninth, and Tenth.
Argyripa's capacious Fields were fired:
Will thou more slowly now, by Me desired,
Go on, who first of all did lance a Dart
Against the Dardan Walls? nor willing art
To join unto our Praise? must I again
Thee now excite? Thee, who against Storms of Rain,
Thunder, and Lightning, and, when I did stand
Jove's Fury, did, as fierce as He, command
To Endure those vainer Storms, and wentst before
Thy General to the Capitol. No more
Need I exhort you now, who, by a War
So famed, Sagunthus overthrew; and are
Renowned for those Beginnings: now again
(As it becomes your selves, and Me) maintain
The former Praises of your Valor. I
In The favor of the Gods, and Victory
Grown old, now, after Fifteen Years, on You
Relying, to my falling Country, to
Those Household Gods, that in so long a space
Of Time I have not seen, to the Embrace
Of my Chaste Wife, and Son return again.
This the last Battle is, that does remain
To Libya, and to Rome. This Day our Sword
Shall give to the disputed World its Lord.
Thus Hannibal. But, as their General
Began to speak, the Roman Soldiers call
For Battle, and the Signal; nor abide
Delays of Words. All this when Jove espied
His Wife, at distance, in a Cloud of Air,
Behold, and that her eager Looks did wear
Something of Sadness, to her with this kind
Address He goes. What Torments of the Mind
Afflict Thee now? I pri'thee, let me know;
Is it the Libyan Captain's overthrow*
Or Care of Carthage grieves Thee^ do but weigh
Within thy Thoughts the Rage of Libya
Against the Trojans fatal Power, and Progeny,
In violating Leagues. Say what will be
The End of this Rebellious People? None,
Not Carthage, more of Ills has undergone,
Or Labor, then thy Self: who long have toiled
For the Cadmaean Race. Thou have embroiled
The Seas, and Earth, and into Italy
Have sent a furious Youth, while we might see
The Walls of Rome stand trembling, and of all
Mankind, for Sixteen Years, was Hannibal
The Chief. It Is time the Nation to compose,
The Period is come, and we must close
The Gates of War. The suppliant Queen replied.
Nor in that hanging Cloud did I abide,
With a Design, a Day prefixed, at all,
To change; nor yet the Armies to recall;
Nor War extend: but what You can bestow,
(Since now all Favor toward me is low,
And our first Love's decayed) against Fates Decree
I nothing ask. Let Hannibal now flee
His Enemies, as you are pleased t'ordain,
And let, in Carthage, Roman Ashes reign.
By the mutual Pledges of a double Love,
Thy Wife, and Sister, I this only ( Jove)
Entreat, that my brave Captain may survive
All Dangers, and be kept, by Thee, Alive.
Nor let him, Captived, Latian Fetters wear;
But, let these, my dear Walls, that battered are
With Mis'ries (though the Tyrian Name decline)
Stand, and, for Honor's sake, be kept as Mine.
Thus Juno. To whom Jove this short Reply
Vouchsafed. The Walls of lofty Carthage I
Will, for some time, forbear, as you desire,
And grant them to your Prayers, and Tears, entire
To stand. Yet know (dear Wife) at what a rate
I this indulge; not long, that City's Fate
Endures. For there will come a General,
Who, under the same Scipio Aemi^ianus, who, in the last Carthaginian War,
took, and razed Carthage.
Name, will ruin all
These Towers preserved. And, from this fatal Fight
Escaping, Hannibal Ethereal Light
(At this Entreaty) may enjoy a while.
He Will seek the Stars, and Ocean to embroil,
And with returning Arms to fill the Earth.
I know his Heart, still pregnant with a Birth
The War, which afterward ensued under Antiochus. See the Continuation, Bo^k
the Third*
Of War. But to this Boon this shall remain
A Law: He never must behold again
Saturnus Empire; nor to Italy
Return. From instant Death now let him be
Removed, with Speed; lest, if in the open Plain
He join in Battle, he should not again,
By all thy Power, from Scipio's Hand be freed.
While thus their Fates the Thunderer decreed,
Both to the City, and to Hannibal;
The Armies to the Fight advance, and all,
With Shouts, invade the Skies. Earth, in no Age
Before, two mightier Nations did engage
In Fight: nor greater Generals had seen,
Equal in Arms, contending. While, between
These two, their famed Dispute's un-valu'd Prize
Was whatsoever is covered with the Skies.
The Tyrian, rich in Purple, 'bove the rest
Raised his proud Head: upon his Crimson Crest
A waving Plume. A cruel Dread precedes
From his great Name: his Sword a Lightning sheds*
Well-known to Italy. On the other Side,
Scipio, in radiant Robes, in Scarlet died,
His dreadful Target shows; where, breathing War,
His Father's Image, and his Uncle's are
Engraved: Huge Flames from his high Forehead fly.
And thus the Hopes of all, and Victory
(Under so great a Force of Arms, and Men)
Stood in the Generals alone. And then
Thus Fear, or Favor (as it is often seen)
Suggests. If valiant Scipio had been
In Libya born, the Empire might have come
To Agenorean Nephews. Or, had Rome
Given Birth to Hannibal, then doubtless He
The World had subject made to Italy.
Now rapid Storms of flying Shafts brake through
The Air, and with them Clouds of Horror drew:
Then to the Sword more close each Army came,
And Fight it Face to Face. A dreadful Flame
Burns in their Eyes, and those, that in the Van,
Contemning Danger, first the Charge began,
Between both Armies fell; and, long before
Not seen by them, the Earth drunk Native Gore.
But here, in Courage hot, as He was Young,
Stout Masanissa flings himself among
The Macedonian Cohorts, and flies round
About, with his winged Darts, the Champagn Ground.
So, when the painted Britain goes to War,
He circumvents with his hook-bearing Carr
The thronged Bands. A Grecian Phalanx then,
In a close Body, had drawn up their Men,
(As was their Country's Use) and firmly stood,
With intermingled Spears, to make it good.
Unmindeful of the Compact he had made
After the League, these Philip, King of Macedon: of whom see Book the
Fifteenth, Page 430.
Philip to the Aid
Of Cadmus shaken City sent. And now,
Broken with many Wounds, the Soldiers grow
More thin, and, as on every Side they lay
Prostrate upon the Ground, an open Way
Between the Weapons leave. Then, with a Stroke,
Of Ruin, in the Ausonian Cohorts broke,
And cancel all their Grecian Perjuries.
Archemorus by Rutulus; Teucer dies
By stout Norbanus, in declining Age:
Both by their Mother Mantua sent t'engage
In Arms. But Samjus brave Calenus slew:
And Selvis Clytuis (a Pellaean) who
Vainly insulted in his Country's Name.
But alas Clytuis! 'twas not The City, where Alexander the Great was born.
Pella's Fame,
That could from Daunian Darts defend thee here.
But Laelius, with Upbraidings more severe
Then these, the Of these see above, Book the Eleventh, Page 296.
Brutian Bands, of Latin Race,
Destroys. Was Italy so Vile a Place,
That it, with Tyrian Oars, You thus (said He)
Through the rude Seas, and raging Waves should flee?
But it is enough, that you are fled. Will You
With Latin Blood a foreign Land imbrue?
This said: He Silarus, active in the Fight,
Prevented with a Shaft, that in its Flight
Stuck in the Bottom of his Throat: so hard
It flew, that it, at once, the Passage barred
Of Life, and Voice. Vergilius destroyed
Caudinus. By Amanus Sarris died.
Their Looks, and Habit of their Arms, well-known,
And Language, that concorded with their own,
Inflamed their Rage. Whom when Amilcar's Son
Perceived inclining from the Fight to run,
He cries; Betray not thus our Nation; stand:
Then charged, and turned the Battle with his Hand.
As when a Parethonian Snake, that long,
In The Garamantian Fields, was fed among
The fervent Sands, with Poison swelled, does rear
His Neck, and spouts, through the infected Air,
The flowing Venom to the Skies: so He
Herjus (that with his Spear continually
Dealt Wounds, who of Marrucian Lineage came,
And in Theate had a noble Name)
More nimble, stops, and, as he something high
Attempted, seeking with his Enemy
An equal Praise, with a swift Hand, quite through
His Body drives his fatal Weapon to
The Hilts. The Wounded falls, and, as he lies
Prostrate, his Brother seeks with dying Eyes:
When Young Pleminius came on apace,
And, brandishing his Sword before his Face,
Enraged at his sad Fall, with a loud Cry,
Threatening, demands his Brother. This Reply
Gave Hannibal; I shall refuse no more
(If you think fit) your Brother to restore,
On this Condition, that from Shades below
You Hasdrubal recall. Shall I forego
My juster Hate against such as Romans are?
Or shall I let my Heart relent? and spare
One, born on the Italian Ground? then may
The Ghosts me, as a Fo, from thence where they
Abide, expel! Then may my Brother M^
For ever banish his Society
In dark Avernus! Speaking thus, he ran
With all the Weight of's Shield upon the Man,
And where the Earth, made slippery with the Blood
Of's Brother, failed him, as he Fighting stood,
Fel'd, and with his Sword dispatched him on the Place:
While with extended Hands in his Embrace
He prostrate Herius held, and eased his weight
Of Grief, by sharing in his Brother's Fate.
The Libyan then a Body mixed in Fight
Invades, and rushing on, his Foes to Flight
Turned a long way. As, when, with Thunder hurled
The Aetnean Bolts of Jove affright the World,
And his high Palace shake, a Pannick Fright
Makes all Mankind to quake, the Obortive Light
With Horror shines, and Jove seems ready, by
Each Man, at him to let his Lightning fly.
But in another Quarter, as if there
Where Scipio fought, the only Danger were,
A bloody Fight new Forms of Death Creates
In various Shapes. A Sword this penetrates,
And down he falls: That lamentably Groans,
A Stone in pieces crushing all his Bones.
Some, basely flying, on their Faces are,
Through Fear, Precipitated. Against the War,
Others, with Valor armed, their Breasts oppose.
While the Rheteian General forward goes
Over the dead Heaps. As when the God of War
With Slaughter pleased, shakes his Bistonian Carr,
Near frozen Hebrus, and the Getick Snow
Melts with warm Blood, and Ice, by The North-Winde.
Aquilo
Augmented, with his rattling Chariot's weight
Asunder breaks. Now with a dreadful Heat,
Looking about, He every valiant Name
With His Sword as^ails. There through the World for Fame
Of Slaughters known, among their Weapons, falls
On every Side, the Youth, that stormed thy Walls
( Sagunthus) and a War most Cruel in
Thy miserable Ruins did begin.
There, who the Sacred Thrasimen with Blood
Had stained, and the Phaetontian Flood
Polluted, who the Boldness had to move
Their Arms, to sack the House, and Throne of Jove,
In one vast Ruin fell. There they were slain,
Who did the Secrets of the Gods profane,
And first the Alps, prohibited, had pressed
With mortal Steps. The Army, all possessed
With Fear, in haste discouraged retire.
As, through a Citie's Houses, when the Fire
Diffused runs, and ventilated by
A rapid Wind, the active Flames do fly
Up to the Skies, struck with a sudden Fear,
And Trembling, as the City captive were
The People run, distracted every Way.
But Scipio, now grown weary with Delay,
So to pursue those scattered Combats, or
To be detained in so light a War,
Resolved his Force upon the Cause of all
Those Ills, and War to turn. For, Hannibal
Alone that Day surviving, it would be
No Benefit at all to Italy,
Should Carthage Walls be set on Fire, and all
Their Armies overthrown. But should He fall
Alone, not all their Arms, and Men would ought
Avail the Libyans. Him he therefore sought,
And searched, through all the Field, with busy Eyes.
Then to the thickest of the Fight he hies,
Wishing, that all Ausonia, if He there
Should him encounter, the Spectatours were.
And bold, with a fierce Voice, his Fo does cite
(Upbraiding him) unto another Fight.
Which Language when affrighted Juno hears:
Lest it should touch the Libyan Captain's Ears,
Sh' informs a Roman Shape, which strait a^sumes
The Italian Prince's shining Crest, his Plumes,
And Shield, and spreads his radiant Cassock's Grace
Upon his Shoulders. Then She adds his Pace,
And Habit; such, as him She did behold
Provoking to the Fight: and Motion bold,
Without a Body, gives. At length, a Steed,
Like false, and vain, She forms, that runs with Speed
Through devious Ways, and offers to the Sight
The Image of a Warlike Shade, in Fight.
Thus Scipio, feigned by Juno, proudly to
The Fight advanced, and brandished in the view
Of Hannibal his Sword; who, pleased, his Ey
Beheld the Roman General so nigh,
And hoping mighty things were then at Hand,
Strait claps his Heels against his Courser, and,
With sudden Force, a Javelin at him throws.
The winged Shade turns back, and flying goes
Quite cross the Field, beyond the Armies. Then,
As if possessed of's Chief Desire, again,
With his steeled Heel, the insulting Libyan makes
His Horse to bleed, and still pursuing shakes
The enlarged Reins. O! whither do thou run
Forgetful, that it is our Dominion
( Scipio) where now thou Fly'st. Libya ^o Thee
Affords no skulking Hole. Thus, proudly, he
With his drawn Sword still followed, as it Fled,
Until, deluded, by it, he was led
Into another Field, far distant from
The place of Battle; where no sooner come,
But the Delusive Shade to Air resolves.
What God (said angry Hannibal) involves
Himself in that dark Light to Me? Or why
Does he concealed within that Monsterly?
Is then my Glory to the Gods become
So opposite? Yet never shall thou from
This Hand compel, or force my Fo (said He)
By all thy Arts, whatever God thou be,
Who stand'st for Italy. With that he wheeled
His nimble Steed about, and to the Field
Enraged returns. When strait, with secret Dread
Of sudden Mischief shocked, upon his Head
Down fell his Courser, and, by Juno's care,
Breathed from his panting Breast his Life to Air.
But then, Impatient, This again (said He)
This is your Plot (ye Gods) nor do you me
Deceive: I better by the Rocks had bin
Overwhelmed; I better had been drowned in
The Waves, and Seas. Was I preserved then
To this vile Death? while those unhappy Men,
That have my Ensigns followed, and from Me
Alone received a Battel's Augury,
Are slaughtered, and I, absent, understand
Their Groans, their Voice, and Words, as they demand
Their Hannibal. What Stygian Torrent is
Sufficient to wash off my Sin? As this
He spoke, on's Right Hand with an earnest Ey
He looked, enflamed with a Desire to Die.
But Juno, pitying the Man, assumes
A Sheepherd's Face, and, on a sudden, comes
From the thick Woods; and, as he thought to Die
A Death Inglorious, thus accosts Him: Why,
So armed, to these Our Woods do you repair?
Would you go to that cruel Battle, where
Great Hannibal in Arms the rest subdues
Of the Ausonian Armies? If you will choose
The speedy, and compendious Way to go
Into the Thickest of them, I will show
The nearest Tract. To this He strait agrees,
And onerates with ample Promises
The, Sheepherd's Breast: and tells him, that the State
Of Carthage would his Pains remunerate
With large Rewards, and He would give as great.
Thus Eager, hasting over the next Retreat
With largest Steps, the Goddess him conveys,
Deceived by Intricacy of the Ways,
In Circles, and, her self concealing still,
Gave him unwellcome Safety against his Will.
But the Cadmean Troops, forsaken all,
And full of Fear, seeing no Hannibal,
Nor the known Conflicts of their furious Chief,
Some think him slain, others are of Belief,
That He, concluding all was lost, withdrew
From the Sinister Gods. And now, in View,
The Roman General (like a Storm) amain
Came on, and chased them thorough all the Plain.
Carthage her self then trembled: Pannick Dread
Through Africa by the routed Troops is spread.
And, without Fighting, as they Headlong fly,
To their extremest Bounds they, frighted, hie.
Some to Tartessiack Coasts dispersed are;
Others to Battus Lands, and Nile repair.
So, when, by secret Force overcome, at last
Vesuvius to the Stars his Flames does cast,
Through many Ages fed, over Sea, and Land
The Fire's diffused: the Eoan Seres stand
Amazed, beholding a Prodigious Sight,
Vesuvius, the Famous Mountain near Naples, has had sever^^ Eruptions of Fire,
to the great Terror, and Detriment of the Inhabitants of Campania, and other
Parts; the Ashes flying almost incredibly (as Dio affirms) from thence into
Africa, and Asia, as far as Syria: and, at one time covering two Towns,
Herculaneum, and Pompeios, with the Inhabitants, as they were in the Theater.
See Ambrosius Leo, De Agro Nolano: and of its last Conflagration, in our
Memory, see Salvat^r Varo, Vesuviani Incendii Neap. 1634.
Their silken Groves with Latian Ashes White.
But now, at length, the weary General
To the neighboring Hill Saturnia brought, where all
The Face, and Signs o'th bloody Fight more near
He saw. Such as Garganus did appear;
Such as the Tyrrhen Lake, and Trebia's Flood,
And swift Eridanus, with Humane Blood
O'reflowing, he beheld. Such a dire Face
Was shown of Myriads slaughtered on the Place.
Then troubled Juno re-ascends the Sky,
And, climbing up the Hill, the Fo drew nigh;
When Hannibal thus with himself: Though all
The Fabric of the Heavens dissolved should fall
On this my Head; and Earth should open wide:
Yet shall the Fame of Cannae ( Jove) abide;
And sooner from thy Empire shall Thou fall,
Then in the Deeds, and Name of Hannibal,
The World be silent. Nor, from this my Hand,
Secure (O Rome) shall thou for ever stand.
I, against Thee, my Country's Hope will live,
For a new War. For that Thou now do thrive
In Fight, is 'cause thy Foes sit still. To Me
More then enough it is, that Italy,
And Dardan Mothers, while I live, will there
Expect Me, and never lay aside their Fear.
Then, with a few, that fled away, he gets
Back to the Hills, and more secure Retreats.
Here the After this overthrow all parts gave Way to Scipio, and Carthage it
self submitted to the Power of the Romans, who deprived them of all things,
but their own Laws: after which they permitted them to live; their Impious
Rites of Sacrificing Humane Blood excepted. For this I take to be the meaning
of Improba jura adempta; (though Dausqueius otherwise) since, through the whole
Carthaginian Story, we do not find them in Use, after the Romans were their
Masters; though they were Superstitious in them not long before, as appears by
our Poet'^ Declamation against them, in the Fourth Book.
War's Period was. To Scipio
Strait, of their own Accord, they open throw
Their Gates. Their Impious Rites abolished are.
Their Arms he takes away, and Laws, that were
Engraved. Their Strength in Riches, and their Pride
Is overthrown, and Elephants aside
Their Castles lay. At length (to Libya
A dismal Sight) their Fleet is fired: the Sea
Burns with the sudden Tempest, and the Flame
Nereus affrights. The General, with a Name,
That equal shall with Time, for ever, stand,
With the first Title of that conquered Land,
Sure of that Empire, goes, by Sea, to Rome,
And, in great Dausqueius needed not to have mentioned his slight Mutation of
Arma, into Arva; for it is Obvious, that the Carthaginians did not carry all
their Arms into the Field, but that a sufficient quantity was left to defend
them, had all other things been equal to resist the Romans, who, after took
from them all things, that could contribute to a War. See more in the
Continuation, Book the First.
Triumph, to his Native Home
Is born. Before him Syphax, Captivate,
Upon a Bier, his Eyes dejected, sat;
His Neck in golden Chains preserved. And here
Hanno, and Young Phoenician Nobles were:
Then Macedonian Princes: next to these
The Moors, with parched Skins: then Nomades,
And Garamantians known to Jupiter Hammon.
Horned Jove:
Where they the Sands survay, and Syrts, that prove
Destructive still to Ships. Of this Triumph, the most acceptable of all, that
Rome yet had seen, as that, which confirmed her in her Imperial Power, see, at
large, Appian, in Libycis.
Next, lifting to
The Stars her conquered Hands, did Carthage go.
Then the Effigies of the Iberian Land,
Now Peaceable: with Gades, that does stand
The Period of the Earth; and Calpe, that,
Of old, Alcides Praise did terminate:
With Baetis, which the Horses of the Sun
Is wont to bath in Streams, that gently run:
And high Pyrene, that gives Birth to Wars,
And lifts her leavy Head unto the Stars.
With rude Iberus, that, with Fury, flings
Against the Sea the Rivers, that he brings.
Yet nothing more delights their Minds, and Eyes,
Then Hannibal, as in the Field he flies.
But standing in his Chariot, to the View
Of Rome, his Martial Face does Scipio show;
In Gold, and Tyrian Purple, richly dressed:
As, when descending from the spicy East,
With Bridled Tigers, Bacchus drove along
His Vine-bound Chariot: Or, when, among
The slaughtered Giants, in Phlegraean Wars
Alcides walked, and touched the very Stars.
Hail, thou Un-conquerable Parent! who,
In Praise, art equal to Quirinus, to
Camillus in Deservings! nor, when She,
Among the rest, commemorateth Thee,
The Offspring of the Gods, does Rome belly
TARPEIAN JOVE'S IMMORTAL PROGENY.
FINIS.
A CONTINUATION OF SILIUS ITALICUS TO The DEATH of HANNIBAL, In Three BOOKS; By
THOMAS ROSS, Esquire

LONDON* Printed by THO. ROYCROFT, 1661.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM EARL of STRAFFORD, etc.
My LORD,
MY Obligations to your LORDSHIP have long since called for such
Acknowledgement, as ought to appear under the Title of the Noblest Subject. Had
any, within the Prospect of my Fancy, been more Eminent, then this of HANNIBAL,
I had made choice of it, as Adequate to your Merits: but, none appearing, I
have selected what SILIUS left untouched, to raise out of it this little
Monument of my Gratitude; having no other Means to express it. I confess, I, at
first, intended to adventure on the THIRD PUNICK WAR; which, though of less
Continuance, then this SECOND, had in it as gallant Actions (especially in that
famous SIEGE of CARTHAGE) as any HISTORY does mention: but, Conscious of the
Weakness of what I have already built, I feared, that, by raising, too many
Stories, It might fall under its own Bulk, and my self under the Censure of
Ambition, in aspiring to so great a Work. I have therefore rather chosen to
desist, and fix this little Piece under your LORDSHIP'S Name, as a VOTIVE Table
to testify to the World, how much I am,

My LORD, Your LORDSHIP'S Most humble, and Faithful Servant, THOMAS ROSS.

Nunc Han^ibal oscula Na^o^
Libat^ in Amplexu charae nunc Conjugis haere^
At tandem Ingrat^e Fugiens Carthaginis Art^s
Abripitur dubios et quos in Littore-Nautas
Invenit, eludit, Samno Vinoque Sepultos,
Atque Novis pandit Velox sua Carbasa Fatis.
Dignissimo Viro Gervasio Holles de Grimsby in Comitatu Lincoln: Armig:
Flagrante Rebellione; Regijs in Exercitibus fortissmo: Chiliarcho extincta
tana^ Libellorum Supplicum Regis Magistro. Tabula Observantiss: D.D.D.

A CONTINUATION OF SILIUS ITALICUS To the DEATH of HANNIBAL` The First Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Roman Piety, and Zeal to pay
(At Scipio's Return) the Vows, which they
In War had made. King Syphax Captive dies
By voluntary Famine. The sad Cries
Of Carthaginian Dames. Their Citie's quite
Disarmd. ^milce's parting Tears. By Night,
Great Hannibal his Treacherous Country flies;
Sails to Cercinna: and, in Sacrifice,
A Day consumes. Fearing to be betrayed;
Those, whom he d^ubts, by Wine asleep are laid.
NOW had great Scipio brought his Trophies Home,
And with loud Triumphs filled the Streets of Rome:
The People to their numerous Altars bring
Their pleasing Offerings, and glad Paeans sing.
Such Store of Sweets, in every Temple smoke;
As if not Libya only felt the Yoke
Of this great Conquest: but Arabia there
Her Tribute gave, and the Sabaeans were
Their Vassals. Or, as if to Prophecy,
That all the World, in Time to come, should be
By them subdued, and Rome, Triumphant, stand
The wealthy Storehouse of each conquered Land;
Bulls, that with Snow, for Whiteness, might contend,
Washed in Clitumnus, a River in Tuscany, in the Territories of the Falisci
(now called Civita Castellana) where such Bulls, as were designed for Sacrifice
in Triumphs, were washed, and became White. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 103. asserted by
Virgil, Georg. 2.

Hinc Albi, Clitumne, greges, etc. But, this Virtue vanishing, they supplied
the want of White, with Red Bulls.

White Herds, and Victims of the best Esteem,
Bulls, washed ( Clitumnus) in thy Sacred Stream,
The Roman Triumphs to the Temples lead:
But this Virtue, etc.

Clitumnus sacred Streams, ascend
The Capitol: their curled Foreheads Crowned
With flowery Wreaths, their Horns with Fillets bound.
These all in solemn Order, round the Hill
Thrice, slowly, lead: the Joyful People fill
The trembling Air with Shouts: then enter, while
The Gods seem pleased, and in their Statues smile;
Pleased, that Devotion with Success they see
So duly mixed, and grateful Piety
It was a Laudable Custom among the Romans, after a Victory obtained, to
command a Festival of Nine Days, wherein all the People abstained from Work,
and Sacrificed to the Gods for their Success. Polyb. lib. Excerpt. Legate. cap.
16.
To pay those holy Vows, which first arose
From Fears of Ruin, and insulting Foes.
First, to the Queen of Gods, a Purple Vest,
Whose rich Embroid'ry all the Art expressed
Of the Sidonian Dames, and then a Crown
Of Gold, which, hapless Syphax overthrown,
His Sophonisba wore, the Matrons bring;
And, Offering at her Shrine, thus, Pious, sing.
Sister, and Wife of Jove, Celestial Queen,
Whom we, so long, so full of Wrath have seen;
That Rome, almost despairing of her Fate,
Saw these her Walls besieged; let not thy Hate
To Trojan Blood still prompt Thee to despise
Our Piety: but, with serener Eyes,
Behold Us now, and hear Us, when We pray,
And our Oblations on thine Altars lay.
Why should thy Love to Libya still inflame
Thy Rage against Us, who from Aeneas came?
Let it suffice: We, to this very Time,
Have expiated, with our Blood, that Crime
Of Paris. Oh! believe him now to be
In Us, repenting his Disdain of Thee.
Be then appeased! thy Mercy will no less,
Then does thy Power, thy Deity confess:
And, if at length, with other Gods, and Fate
Thou will comply, to bless the Roman State;
As Thou on the Supreamest Throne above
The Heavens art seated: so, here, next to Jove,
Thou shall be worshipped, and the World shall come
To bring their Offerings unto Thee at Rome.
The Flamen, while they thus invoke, his Hands
Displayed to Heaven, at Jove's high Altar stands,
And thus exhorts. Oh! may We ever see
Religion thus to Crown thy Victory,
( Quirinus Progeny) these Pious Charms
(Oh Rome) will force the Gods to bless thine Arms.
Then, O, then, let thy Piety increase,
As now, when War is ended, and thy Peace
Confirm: Impiety alone the Fates
Provokes, and flingeth open The Temple of Ianus was always open, while the
Romans were in War, and never shut; but when in Peace with all the World: it
is observed not to have been shut above thrice. First, by Numa. Secondly, after
the Second Punick War: and, Lastly, by Augustus Caesar.
Ianus Gates.
This said: an hundred Bulls at once are slain,
Which, with their Blood, an hundred Altars stain.
Their Entrails all, inquired for what is to come,
Promise a lasting Happiness to Rome:
That She the Head of all the World should stand,
And next to Jove the Universe command.
Though (as Plutarch observes) some other Triumphs had exceeded this of Scipio,
in their Pomp, and Wealth; yet none was entertained with so much Joy, the
Romans being not only absolved from the Despair of forcing Hannibal out of
Italy, but Carthage likewise wholly subdued.
The Gods thus served; they all begin to Feast,
And in their costly Banquets spend the rest
Of The Day. The Senate seated are alone,
And to great Scipio's Honor, one by one,
A stately Goblet quaff of Massick Wine.
His Cheeks, mean while, with modest Blushes shine;
As if they would Fire the Laurel on his Brow,
Unwilling those Just Praises to allow.
So, in the Giants War, when Heaven again
Was free from Fear, and mighty Typhon slain,
To Mirth themselves the Gods disposed, and, round
The Tables, Hebe with Nepenthe crowned
Their Cups: while all Apollo's Skill proclaim,
Commend his Bow, his Shafts, and certain Aim,
By which the Giants fell; when they upon
The Stars had seized, and Jove's Celestial Throne
Almost possessed. But, back again to Hell,
Struck with these Heavenly Arms, the Rebels fell.
The solemn Day thus spent: the Night succeeds,
Inviting all to Rest. While Syphax bleeds
Within: the Trumpet, which their Triumphs sounds,
Grates on his Ears, strikes to his Heart, and wounds
His very Soul. Sometimes, He thinks upon
His former Syphax was the greatest of all the Kings of Libya, having (besides
his own Inheritance of the Massili, and Mauritania) usurped part of Masanissa's
Kingdom of Numidia; which moved Masanissa to revolt to the Romans.
State, when, sitting on a Throne
Of Native Ivory, He did command
Those Nations, which the Ethiopian Land,
And Nasamon confines, with those, that by
The Carthaginian Bounds, and Hammon ly;
With all, that Southward dwell near Nile, and those,
Where the Herculean Sea against Calpe throws
Its foaming Waves: when he could summon, to
The War, whole Myriads of Horsemen, who
On naked Steeds did ride, and gave them Law:
And between Rome, and Carthage when he saw
The World disputed was, that He had been
The Umpire of their Quarrel, and had seen
Them both his Friendship seek, until his Flame
Of Love the Ruin of his Throne became.
Sad with these Thoughts, that, in his troubled Breast,
Swell like a raging Tempest, and all Rest
Deny: at length his Sighs (that, as a Wind,
Within the Bowels of the Earth confined,
Shakes the whole Fabric, until forth it breaks
Into the Air) make Way, and thus he speaks.
Is then the Birth, and Title of a King,
(Ye Gods, from whom Kings, sprung) so vain a thing;
That, with one Shock of Fortune only, I
Must fall so low, into Captivity,
As to become their Slave to whom, of late,
I was a Terror? Are the Laws of Fate
Of so great Force, that whatsoe're's Designed
By them, by all must be obeyed? must bind
The Deities themselves? Alas! if so,
Why do poor Mortals to their Temples go,
And vainly crave that Aid, which cannot be
Confirmed, unless the Fates the same decree?
How often did I, before I took in hand
This War, their Counsel, and Consent demand?
As often, their Tripods what I asked allowed.
And I, as often, to their Honor vowed
Dardanian Spoils. But, since I am or'ethrown,
It Is not my Crime they want them, but their own?
From them it was, that By this Marriage with Sophonisba, he was induced to
quit his League with the Romans, and engage against them with the
Carthaginians.
Sophonisba's Charms
Prevailed, and Headlong thrust me into Arms:
Against that Faith, which I to Rome, before,
Religiously had sworn. I would no more
Of this complain, had we together died.
Or, had not Masanissa both my Bride,
After this Overthrow, and the Submission of Carthage, Masanissa was restored
to his own Estate, and, ^or a Reward, had a great part of Syphax his Kingdom
conferred on him, by the Romans.
My Throne, and Crown enjoyed. Ye Gods, You were
If not Unjust in this, at least, Severe.
Else wherefore did I not, when Hostile Fire
Had seized my Camp, within those Flames expire?
Then might I to the Shades below have gone,
At least, a King. Then I had only known
The Fate of being conquered, not the Shame:
Nor then had Rome recorded Syphax Name
Among her Captives. Nor, then, had these Hands,
That shook a Scepter over so many Lands,
Been thus bound up in Chains. But, why do I
Complain of Life, and not resolve to Die?
What? though they study to preserve me still,
A living Trophy here; yet is my Will
Free, as the Conquerours's: and Rome shall find,
I still retain the Empire of my Mind,
That stands above her reach, where I alone
Will rule, and scorn to live, but on a Throne.
This said; a sudden Silence seized his Soul:
And, as deep Waters in still Channels roll,
And, murmuring less, into the Ocean flow;
So the Resentments of his Griefs, that grow
Too great to be expressed, through every part,
Like a swift Fever, runs, till his great Heart,
Resolved to bear that Load no more, denied
Nature her common Food, and, starved, He died.
And, as a Lion, that has long in Blood
Maintained his Empire in some Libyan Wood,
Surpised at last in Toils, and kept to be
The Pastime of the Cirque, raging to see
His Native Freedom lost, does, roaring, round
His Prison walk, and (with that dreadful Sound,
Was wont all other Beasts to Terrify,
And, with their Flocks, make trembling Sheepherds fly)
Shakes all about. But, when he finds, at length,
That nor his Rage prevails, nor yet his Strength
Can his Escape procure; all proffered Food
He growling flies, forgets all thirst of Blood,
And, in Disdain of his Captivity,
Resolves in sullen Silence there to die.
So that great King, to whom, not long before,
Rich Gems were from the Erythraean Shore,
For Tribute brought: to whom, with Lions Tame,
And towred Elephants, Getulians came,
And, prostrate at his Feet, Obedience paid:
At first in Love, then War, a Captive made,
In a dark Dungeon died, and the sole Fame,
That he dyed by Abstinence, is consonant to the Opinion of Appian: his great
Heart not brooking the Shame of being lead in Triumph. That he was a Spectacle
in this Triumph, Mariana d^nies, though Polyb. ( lib. 16.) and Livy (whom
Silius follows) consent.
That he against Scipio fought, preserves his Name.
But while, at Rome, their Triumphs still increase,
At Carthage the sad purchase of their Peace
Shows them a Face of things, which they deplore
As much, as those deep Wounds they had before
In War received, and Zama's fatal Plain,
On which so many Libyans were slain,
And Hannibal disarmed. For now they see,
That nor in Peace, nor War, they can be free.
Not all the Wealth their numerous Conquests gave,
Nor Subjects, gained by Hannibal, could save
Their own at Home: for, while his conquering Hand
O'return'd Sagunthus, and the Iberian Land
Subdued, and when his Troops Pyrene past,
The Celtae gained, and Italy did waste,
Their Victories abroad (still calling for
Recruits) as costly proved, as if the War
Had been in Libya made: only their Fear
Of Utter Ruin was not then so near.
It was not now enough, that they had seen
Those wealthy Trophies, that had thither been
From Sicily, from the Herculean Bars,
And farthest Nations, in preceding Wars,
By great Amilcar sent, transported all
To Rome, and there, within the Capitol,
Among Aegates Spoils, hung up, to be
Eternal Monuments of Infamy.
Their dreadful Elephants, that had, so long,
Against all stranger Nations, been so strong
A living Wall: with all the Arms, which there,
Since Dido first Phoenician Walls did rear,
Had been stored up, and had a Pannick Dread*
Over the Alps, and high Pyrene, spread,
Are yielded to their Foes, with trembling Hands:
And conquered Carthage, now, as Naked stands,
As when Eliza first her Walls begun,
Or when enraged Hyarbas overrun
(Full of Revenge) her narrow Bounds, and, while
Her Ashes yet were warm, upon her Pyle
Fixed his victorious Arms: Nor can they see,
By Land, a Period to their Misery.
Earth has not space enough, whereon to lay
Their Chains, which now, extended to the Sea,
Confine the Force of Carthage; that no more
It can, from Africa, to Europa's Shore
Terror diffuse: but melts into a Name,
Like Troy, in Ruin only known to Fame.
At the Burning of the Carthaginian Navy (which is said to be five hundred
Sail) the Cry, and Lamentation of the People was as great, as if all Carthage
had, at the same time, been utterly destroyed. Plutarch, in the Life of Scipio.
That Navy, which (before the Fate of Rome
Prevailed) had brought unvalu'd Treasures Home;
Which through the Seas, from East to West, had flown,
And where the Roman Eagles were not known,
Under its swelling Wings Sidonian Dies
Had often born, and changed for such Supplies,
As Meroe, and black Syene yields,
With whatsoever renowns those spicy Fields,
Where Ganges flows; by which the Libyan Land
(Though they dire Serpents, in the barren Sand,
Plough up) as great a Plenty every where
Enjoyed, as theirs, whose Harvest, twice a Year,
Their Garners fills: is, by this Storm of Fate,
Contracted to so small a Number, that
They now despair, e're more, with Hostile Oars,
To fright from Latian, and Sicilian Shores
The trembling Nymphs; but must, for ever, stand
Condemned, as Slaves, to a parched Barren Land.
As some hot Plague, by a Malignant Star
Diffused into a Universal War,
First the wide Air infects, next Beasts, and then
The Commons, till, at last, the Best of Men
Are snatched away, by the same cruel Fate,
Which none but Heaven knows, where it will terminate:
So, when the Roman Fury, in whose Hand
Alone, the Fate of Carthage seemed to stand,
Had stripped them of all Force by Land, and Sea,
And nothing now was left, but to Obey;
At length, their Spirits, by a dreadful Doom,
Are seized: the Best of all their Youth to Rome
(As Pledges of their Faith) must strait be born,
And Libyan Mothers Tears become the Scorn
Of Latian Dames. It had been better they
(While Hannibal in Italy did stay)
Had granted been to reinforce his Bands.
They then their Country not with fettered Hands,
But armed had left, and might have Fighting died,
Nor thus been Sacrificed to the Pride
Of an Insulting Fo, whose Malice knows
No Bounds; but, fed, still more Insatiate grows.
But now the Fatal Day arrives, and Fears
Wound every Breast, fill every Eye with Tears.
The weeping Mothers with disheveled Hair
Run through the Streets, and, vainly, beat the Air
With loud Complaints. Sometimes they call upon
The Gods: then strait exclaim, that there are None,
At least, that they are Deaf; else might their Tears
Prevail, and their Oppressions touch their Ears.
Sometimes the Author of the War, and those
Infernal Altars, that, at first, their Foes
Provoked, they curse. Sometimes those Men they blame,
Whose Envy, without Reason, to the Name
Of Hannibal, had fixed Victorious Rome
In that great Height, and brought those Ruins Home,
Which Jove himself once feared; whose only Hand,
With Thunder Armed, could Hannibal withstand,
And keep the Capitol. But Oh (Ye Gods)
What boots it now (say they) that so great Ods
Carthage did once enjoy, above the World:
Since, from the Height of Glory, She is hurled
Into the depth of Shame. But thus you still
Are Prone to give things Great, yet never will
Preserve them so. In vain (alas!) the Toils
Of our great Fathers have, with wealthy Spoils,
Enriched your Temples, and, with noble Wounds,
The Power of Carthage stretched beyond the Bounds
Of Africa, and with such dreadful Aw
Her Name had spread, that all the World their Law
Expected from her Hand. But (Oh!) how small
A Shadow, now, remains to Us of all
Our former Glories? We are Mothers made,
That, by this Blessing, We might be betrayed
To a far greater Curse, and add more weight
Unto our Ruin, and Unhappy Fate.
Had these upon your cruel Altars died,
Religion might perhaps have satisfied
Our Loss, and We, at least, might Home return
With this Content, that in their Native Urn
Their Ashes were preserved. But these are born
To be the Grief of Carthage, and the Scorn
Of Rome, whose now they are, and not our Own:
Nor will they be for such hereafter known;
But taught their Country's Manners to disclaim,
And bury in the In the Number Appian dissents from Livy. The first allowing
them only to be one thousand five hundred; the latter, two thousand: but they
were of the Noblest, whom the Romans (as was their Custom) were careful to
educat^ in their Manners, and Habit, as the readiest Way to a Conquest, as well
over the Minds, as the Estates of Barbarous Nations.
Gown the Tyrian Name*
As thus they sadly to the Gods complain,
The Wind the Roman Navy to the Main
Invites. The Masters for the Captives call;
While at their Feet the weeping Parents fall,
And, Prostrate, thus implore. If yet that Ire
Appeased be, that did your Breasts inspire
At Zama's Field; wherein our Fates gave Way
To Yours, and Crowned You with an happy Day;
Now mildely hear our Prayers: and, as you are
Raised, by the Gods, to this great Height in War,
That by their Blessing You may Higher rise,
Be Merciful, like them: do not despise
The Tears of such, as fall; their Cries the Scale
Of Fortune often turn, and may prevail
With Heaven to break the Chain of your Success,
If, whom the Gods afflict, You shall oppress.
The bravest Souls no longer will pursue
Their Rage, then while it serves them to subdue.
And, when the Conquered do submit, they find
A Sanctuary in a Noble Mind.
When therefore our Unhappy Sons shall come
(Sons not for Carthage born, but Conquering Rome)
Within your Walls, Oh! be not too Severe,
Lay easy Chains upon them, think they were
Once free, as You: so may a better Fate
Your Issue bless; so may You propagate
Your lasting Names to Honor, and, near crossed
By Fortune, keep that Freedom We have lost.
As thus they plead, from their Embraces torn,
Two hundred Noblest Tyrian Youths are born
Away to Sea, at Rome ordained to stand
The faithful Plegdes of their Native Land.
But, while all other Breasts with Grief, and Care,
Are filled, and every one, with sad Despair
Of future Liberty, resolves the Yoke
To bear with Patience, and no more provoke
Those Arms, which, after such expense of Blood,
And Wealth (too late, alas!) they understood
Superior to their own: Revenge puts on
Amilcar's Shape, and thus, by Night, his Son
Excites to War. O Hannibal, can Thou
(After the Fame of thy so early Vow
To prosecute this War) sit still, and see,
By Rome, upon thy Country's Liberty
Such heavy Yoaks imposed? Can thou, my Son,
Tamely desist from what Thou have begun?
And see that Wealth, which, from so many Lands,
By our great Ancestors Victorious Hands
Together heaped, enabled Thee to spread
Thy Conquering Ensigns over Pyrene's Head;
And over the pathless Alps to make thy Way,
Become the Prize of Rome; Yet thou that Day
Survive? At length, awake, and let me find
Thy Valor, fierce, and active, as the Wind
On Adriatic Seas. Let not the Tears
Of trembling Mothers, or the vainer Fears
Of Utter Ruin, move thee to conspire
So much with Hanno's Wish, or Rome's Desire.
That Hannibal should now sit still, is more,
Then all the Victories they had before:
Those only did subdue thine Arms; but This
Over thy Mind a greater Conquest is:
And all, that Scipio now, at Rome, does boast;
Where he at Zama, when the Field was lost,
Thee flying shows, and, afterward regains,
And thy Pale Image loads with golden Chains,
(As he great Syphax led in Triumph) Thou,
Resolving thus to bear it, do allow.
Nor will the World condemn what Hanno says;
While, in the Senate, he upon thee lays
The Crimes of all these Ills; records the Rit^s,
We once performed to Hecate; excites
The People's ^age, while he does on them call:
Where now is your Victorious Hannibal?
Where is that Arm, that could alone defend
These Walls? that durst with Fate it self contend?
Where are Sagunthus Spoils? or those, which He
From Spain has brought? or conquered Italy?
If yet that Arm survive, let him from Rome,
Rescue our Captived Sons, and bring them Home.
Or if those Spoils, which he at Thrasimen,
Trebia, or Cannae gained, remain; why then
Do We for our exacted Talents grieve?
Nor rather, with that Wealth, our selves relieve?
But, if, consumed through his Ambition, We
Have, with our Riches, lost our Liberty;
Why should that guilty Head, to whom we ow
These Ruins, and the Curse of all our Woe,
Amongst Us still remain; and, with a Pride,
Hannibal when he saw the Senate, and People excessively Lament the Payment of
their Tribute (which was very great) Laughed at their Follies, who, more
bewailed the emptying of their Purses, then the loss of their Liberty, and
Honor.
Great as the Conquerours, our Tears divide?
Consider this: and, as infused Oil
Does heighten Flames, hence let thy Fury boil;
Create more Spleen within Thee; make Thee rude,
As Caucasus, till thou have fully showed
The amazed World, thou were not born to bear
The Roman Yoke. But do, what others dare
Not think, and against the Latin Name, where're
There shall be War, do Thou in Arms appear;
Till Fate absolve thy Vow, and Thou shall be
Crowned with a Noble Death, or Victory.
When thus the Fury had her self inspired
Into his Soul, with Night She strait retired
To Hell. While He, now void of all Repose,
Soon as from Tithon's Bed Aurora rose,
To that famed Stygian Temple does repair,
Where, when a Child, his Father made him swear
The War. Soon as He comes into the Grove,
Strange, horrid Murmurs, round about him, move.
The Goddess called to Mind, what he before
Had offered there, and now expected more.
Then over all the Place a Cloud She casts,
Which thither calls the Night again, and blasts
The rising Day. At length, She open throws
The Temple-Gates, while on he, Fearless, goes;
Till at the Entrance, from her Gloomy Cell,
The aged Priestess thus bespeaks him. Tell,
What is it, that so early hither Thee
Invites? and, who thou art? For well I see
Thou come to offer to the Powers below,
And therefore, with this Horror, they foreshow
Thy Welcome: tell me then, what is thy Name?
Though, now, thou know Me not, I Am sure my Fame
(Said Hannibal) long since has filled thine Ears.
I am that Hannibal, who, e're my Years
Two Lustra had fulfilled, a War, before
These Stygian Altars, against the Romans swore;
The rest the World has told Thee: and I now
(In prosecution of that Sacred Vow)
Am come to know, what yet remains by Me
To be pursued, and what the Fates decree.
The Priestess thus. I know Thee now: nor can
The Universe afford another Man
More dear unto the Powers, which we adore:
But we our Rites cannot perform before
The following Night has finished half her Reign.
Now therefore to thy House make haste again,
And my Advice embrace. For often Woe
Have of the Gods inquired concerning Thee,
Whose thread of Life is twisted with the Fate
Of Carthage, and in That her better State
Consists: and hence it is Imperious Rome
By her Ambassadors, who, now, are come,
Will not so much for Masanissa plead,
As join with Hanno, to obtain thy Head,
Or cast Thee into Chains: therefore till Night
Returns, be Wary, and prepare for Flight;
And when Boots has his lazy Wain
Turned half about the Pole, hither again
Repair, and I shall then enquire the Mind
Of The Gods, and what they have for Thee designed.
Pensive with this Advice, strait Home He goes,
And, ruminating on his Country's Woes,
His Chamber enters, with a troubled Face;
When, almost drowned in Tears, to his Embrace
Imilce flys, and thus begins: What now
Thy Mind disturbs? what on thy Angry Brow
Creates that Cloud? which, wheresoever it be
Discharged (my Hannibal) must Ruin Me.
I know it is War: for such the dire Alarms
Of lost Sagunthus snatched I he from mine Arms.
So from my Bed, before the Night was done,
To meet their Sallies, thou were wont to run.
While Fury armed thee, and pale Death did wait
Upon Thee, as upon the Hand of Fate.
But then Thou were protected; Heaven did then
For Thee, and Carthage fight: if now again
The Gods would hear our Prayers, and bless Thee so,
How gladly would I yield to let Thee go?
But they (alas!) are Angry, and no more
Will lend their Thunder, as they did before,
Unto Thine Arm. Rome now their Ears has charmed
Against Thee, and Thy Fortune quite disarmed.
Naked against the World Thou now do stand:
All have submitted to Her Conquering Hand.
Carthage is Hers, nor Libya, nor Spain,
Pyrene, nor the Celtae can again
Afford Thee Aid. Philip King of Macedon, who with the Acarnanians made several
incursions upon the Allies of the Romans: but his Success not answearing his
Ambition, he made a dishonorable Peace with the Romans, in which the
Carthaginians lost all Hopes of his Assistance.
The Macedonian King,
Who to our fainting Hopes appeared to bring
Some Shadows of Relief, while He o'reran
The Bounds of Athens, and a War began
With that sad Omen, that Sagunthus turned
To Ashes, and the The Abydenians strictly besieged by Philip, and despairing
of Relief, after the Example of Sagunthus, burned themselves, with all their
Wealth.
Abydenians burned,
On Pyles of their own Wealth, is forced at last
To yield to Fortune, and himself to cast
A Prostrate at Rome's Feet, and Peace implore.
Content with those great Acts, that He before
Had done, He now resolves, at Home, to attend
His Fate: and, would my Hannibal now lend
A Pity to these Tears, Thou should no more
That Hand of Fortune try, which Thee before
In one Day thrust from that great Height, to which
The Toil of seventeen Years had raised Thee. Rich
In Fame thou art, and, though all else is gone,
That Is such a Treasure, that for it alone
The World may envy Thee, and Times to come
Shall put thy Name in Balance against Rome,
And all her Generals. But what of Life
(After such Deeds) remains, unto thy Wife,
And Son should be allowed: and, if thy Breast
With Thoughts of sworn Revenge be still possessed,
(Since Fortune courts the Young, and Thou art now
In Years, to which She seldom does allow
Her Smiles) derive thine Anger to thy Son,
Instruct him here, at Home, what is to be done
To perfect thy Desires, and at thy Death,
Into His Breast, with thy Departing Breath,
It was anciently a Custom in many Nations, to receive the last Breath of their
Expiring Friends.
Inspire (my Hannibal) thy mighty Spirit,
That so He may entirely Thee Inherit,
And live the Fear of Rome. But, if Thou fly
From hence, and leave Us to the Cruelty
Of Our insulting Foes, Our Captived Names
Will strait become the Talk of Roman Dames,
'Midst their Triumphal Feasts; or be in Scorn
Suppressed, as if We never had been born.
This, with a thousand Sighs, and all the Charms
Of Kisses, mixed with Tears, between his Arms,
Speaking, She sinks: while, with that constant Face,
With which He entered, in a strict Embrace,
He holds Her up, and thus replies; Thy Love
(My dear Imilce) is so much above
The Value of my Life, that I would all
Those Dangers stand, which can upon Me fall,
TO enjoy Thee here: But this our Enemies
Will not allow. Domestic Treacheries
Have now so far above the Arms of Rome
Prevailed, that I a Captive shall, at Home,
In Peace, be made, and hence in Chains be born,
(Snatched from thy dear Embrace) to be the Scorn
The Custom of leading Captives in Triumph was first introduced by the Romans;
and among them only in use: the Principal Captives, in Chains, passing before
the Chariot of the Triumpher, and (for the most part) as he entered the
Capitol, they were led to Prison, and, on the same Day, he laid down his
Authority, and they their Lives. See Cicero, In Verrem.
Of second Triumphs, and when that is done
(A Pride peculiar unto Rome alone)
I shall not die like Syphax, from the View
Of all the World; but they will something New
For Me invent. Whatever was by Us,
Before, Inflicted on their Regulus,
Will be esteemed too Little; I shall be
In Parts divided through all Italy,
And feel, in each, a Death, and yet not all
Their Malice satiate, when to Mind they call
The Fun'rals of their Friends. But, that I may
Their Plots avoid, and keep a better Way
Still open to my Fall, I now must fly
M'Ingrateful Country, or resolve to die,
This Day, before thine Eyes: for in this Hand
Of Mine, alone, my Fate shall ever stand.
Nor shall the World believe, the Life, and Death
Of Hannibal depends upon the Breath
Of Rome. As this He spoke, She stopped the rest
With Kisses, and, reclining on his Breast
Her drooping Head (whilst Tears, like April-rain,
Into his Bosom flow, by Sighs again
Dried up) Since so it is (said She) no more
Will I (my Hannibal) thy Stay implore.
Go, and be Happy! may those Gods, who Thee,
With such Severity, deny to Me,
Protect Thee, when Alone: go, Happy! may
Thy wished Return be speedy! But I Pray
For what I cannot Hope; those Gods, who now
Us separate (alas!) will not allow,
That We should meet again. As from her Tongue
These last Words fell, about his Neck She flung
Her Arms, and, after many Kisses past,
While both contended, who should give the Last,
With a long Silence (for with Grief each Heart
Too big for Language swelled) at length they part.
Now Night the middle of her Course had run,
Between the Rising, and the Falling Sun;
When Libya's anxious Champion at the Fane
(All things prepared for Flight) arrives again;
There finds the Priestess; from her hoary Head
Tresses, like curling Serpents, overspread
Her wrinckled Neck: a Mantle cross her Breast,
In which forsaken Dido's Death, expressed
By her fair Sister's Hand, and there bequeathed
As Sacred (with the Sword, She, Frantic, sheathed
In her own Bosom) fastn'd by a Charm
On her left Shoulder, and her other Arm
Quite Naked, waving round a Stygian Wand,
With which, by adding Words, She could command
The Powers of Hell, She meets him at the Door,
And leads him in. The Sacrifice before
Prepared, and She (no Minutes now delayed)
Invoking some Infernal Names, to aid
The Work, strait horrid Voices rend the Air;
Some mornful Groans; some Sighs of sad Despair:
Then, as if Hell were near, the Noise of Chains,
With doleful Cries, which their inflicted Pains
Extort. For all the Ghosts of Cadmus Race,
Whom Guilt had stained, frequenting still the Place,
To the un-kindled Altars brought Supplies
Of Bloodlike Flames, which of themselves to rise
Appear, and by their gloomy Light, and Smell
Of Sulphur, show, that they were brought from Hell.
At length, the Sacrifice was open laid,
Whose Entrails when the Priestess had survay'd,
She thus the Gods declared. "If Hannibal
" Be from his Country free, He never shall
" Become a Slave to Rome. His very Name
" Shall make the Syrian Armies owned by Fame,
" And Italy once more shall fear, lest She
" By his Invasive Arms should ruined be.
" Scipio shall not more Fortunate at Rome
" By the World be held, then Hannibal at Home.
" One Year shall give a Period to their Breath,
" And each find Satisfaction in his Death.
" In Latian Ground shall Scipio's Ashes ly,
" On Libyssaean Hannibal shall die.
With this ambiguous Oracle, his Mind
As Great, and High, as when he first designed
The War, as if the Gods were still the Same,
Away he speeds? Thoughts of his former Fame,
And Victories, all present Fears allay,
And, with reviving Hopes, his Faith betray
To a vain Confidence, That He, alone,
If armed, could shake the World, and Rome unthrone.
Ambition, and Revenge think naught too great
For their Attempt, and, whilst he does repeat
The Actions, which achieved his former Fame,
He counts all Easy, that is within his Aim,
Nor weighs the Incertainty of Fates to come.
Those civil Factions, that, before, at Home,
Weak'ned his Arms, now, undistinguished, groan
Under that Yoke, which Rome for Him, alone,
So long prepared: so that even He might boast
A Victory, when Envious Carthage lost
Her Liberty, and Captived Hanno found,
No other Hand could cure that Fatal Wound,
But Hannibal's alone; who, now, got Free,
Would search the World to find a Remedy.
Thus, cheerful with the Gods, misunderstood,
(As a fierce Tiger, thirsting after Blood,
Far from his Covert rangeth, seeking Prey)
Over the Vocanian Plains he took his Way,
And, through the Thapsian Fields, his Course pursued:
Where (still the Gods resolving to delude
His Thoughts with dubious things) he Waking dreams
Of future Fates, and, swiftly Posting, seems
This Language, from the Genius of the Place,
To hear. Fly hence, fly Hannibal apace.
Let Asia, no longer now attend
Thine Arm, the World's great Quarrel to defend.
Delay the Mother is of Doubts, and Fears,
And he, that long the Yoke of Bondage bears,
Forgets, that he was Free, and entertains
A Servile Love of Safety with his Chains.
Thy Presence shall increase the Noble Fire
In Syrian Breasts, and they, at length, conspire
Against Rome with Thee, and Carthage entertain
An Hope by Thee her Freedom to regain.
That War, which Thou did, with so great Applause,
Wage as Thine Own, is made the Common Cause
Of the whole World, and all Mankind is now
Provoked to be Assertours of thy Vow.
Of Roman^ Blood, all Seas, all Lands shall taste,
And Where Scipio, the ^last of the Pompeian Generals, was overthrown by
Caesar: in which Battle ten thousand of the Pompeians were slain.
Thapsus, among the Chief, in Fame be placed.
No sooner did the Blushes of the Morn
The Stars extinguish, and the Day was born,
When they arrived near to that Fatal Shore,
Where trembling Seamen hear the Billows roar
These Syrtes are two, whereof the less is not far distant from Carthage, and
against it is the Island Ce^cinna, whither Hannibal fled. Of its Dangers, and
Site, see Strabo, Geogr. lib. 17.
Against those Syrts, which, moving to and fro,
Bring certain Ruin, wheresoever they go.
Charybdis, nor dire Scylla's Rage, so great
A Danger to Sicilian Vessels threat:
Sometimes themselves, above the Waves, they heave,
And stand like Promontories to deceive
Unskilful Mariners; strait, falling back,
Choke up the Chanel, and prepare a Wrack
Under smooth Waters, where, with all their Pride
Displayed, tall Ships of late might safely ride.
But Hannibal less fears the Treacherous Sand,
Or raging Seas, then the more Treacherous Land,
Which, Confident of better Fate, he quits,
And to a little Bark himself commits.
The Seas, as Conscious, that he was too Great
To be their Sacrifice, their Rage forget.
The Syrts retire, and the Conspiring Gales
Pursue the Bark, and swell her pregnant Sails.
The careful Pilot for Cercina steers,
Scarce knowing, that the Freight his Vessel bears,
Once balanced the whole World; yet wonders Heaven,
In that tempestuous Track, a Course so even
Allowed: so much the flattering Destinies,
With a smooth Vizor of Success, disguise
Intended Ruin; that even Hannibal
Measures, from hence, what ever might befall
Himself, and, while they yet the Africa Shore
(On which the Fates resolved henever more
Should tread) in View retained: I now am Free
(Perfidious Country) both from Rome, and Thee;
My better Fortune now (says He) does stand
Not in a Senate's Vote, but in this Hand,
This Hand, which (maugre thy Ingratitude)
Shall Thee (if Me the Gods do not delude)
Redeem; and Thou, at length, confess, that none
Can break thy Yoke, but Hannibal alone.
Now from the flying Ship the Land withdrew:
The Libyan Shore descends; no more in View
Those Altars, which Ulysses once did rear,
To rescue his forgetful Friends, appear.
Unhappy Men! who in those Dangerous Fields
Found out those strange Delights, that In these Syrtes inhabited Lotophagi,
among whom Ulysses his Companions, bewitched with the Taste of the Lotus,
desired to dwell, till Ulysses there raised Altars to Sacrifice for their
Recovery, the Ruins whereof were to be seen in the Time of Strabo. ( lib. 17.)
and Homer ( Odyss. lib. 9.)
Lotus yields,
Whose Taste all other Pleasures far exceeds,
Man nothing more to make him Happy needs;
In this all dear Delights at once they found,
And Memory of Friends, and Country drowned.
No sooner these were lost, but to their Eyes
Cercina, 'midst the Waves, began to rise.
Approaching near the Port, some Ships they found,
Whose Carthaginian Owners, Homeward bound,
Soon as the Prince they spied upon the Shore,
Haste to salute Him, and almost Adore.
The Memory of his high Deeds, within
Their Breasts still lived: how great He once had been,
To Mind they call, and pay unto his Name
Those Honors, which, they know, his Merits claim;
Though now his State be less: for with a Cloud
O'recast, or else Eclipsed, the Sun 's allowed
To be the same in Virtue, as before,
When it shined Brightest; nor was He the more
To be neglected, 'cause the borrowed Rays
Of Train, at which the Common People gaze,
And great with Envy swell, aside are laid.
He still is that famed Hannibal, who made
So many Barbarous Nations to submit
To his Commands, and Native Rites forget;
While fierce Massylians, with Iberians, stood
In Fight, Revengers each of others Blood;
While rude Cantabrians, with the Celtae, came
TO assert his Quarrel, and beneath his Name
United lived, as if one Clime their Birth
Had given, and nurtured them on Fertile Earth.
Here all are busy to express their Care
To entertain Him, and to such, as were
Inquisitive to know, what did invite
Him thither, cunning, He, replied: I might
(Indeed) have gone to Tire another Way;
But none so near I judge, since I this Day
Must spend in Sacrifice, to the Powers above,
That what I there must prosecute, may prove
Propitious to the State, which thither Me
Has sent, and since, within this Island, We
Few Trees for Shelter find, let Me entreat
Your Sails, this Day, to shroud Us from the Heat
O'th'scorching Sun. No sooner said, but all
Their Hands employ; some from the Masts let fall
The Sails; some lift them with their Yards to Land,
On which extended straight, for Tents, they stand.
And now whatever Rare the Isle affords,
Makes up the Feast, and round the hast'ned Boards
Lyaeus flows: and first, To Liberty
A Bowl is crowned, which all as greedily
Quaff off, as if in it they thought to find
Their Wish, and Sense of Bondage from the Mind
Expel. And, as the sparkling Liquour warms
Their Blood, each man, as if he were in Arms,
Defies the Power of Rome; now scorns to bear
That Yoke, which, in a Sober mind, his Fear
Would prompt him to embrace, and what before
He durst not Think, he now dares Act, and more.
All former Fears are banished: This exclaims
Against Hanno's Pride; and That his Country blames
For want of Courage, bids the Prince again
Attempt to take away that Fatal Stain,
For which, as in the inflaming Juice he steeps
His Brains, he in a Drunken Pity weeps.
But Hannibal, whose Thoughts were far from thence
Removed, and entertained a nobler Sense
Of what they suffered, then themselves, mean while,
Looks on their Follies with a scornful Smile,
And, with repeated Cups, still feeds the Flame;
Until, as he designed, he overcame
Their Strength, and, while their Hands as yet retained
The Blushing Bowls, Sleep all their Senses chained.
The End of the First Book of the Continuation.
Infaustis Masanissa rapit Connubia taedis*
Praecipitatque suae Sophonis bae Fata. Veneno
Hausta Romanos, metuens Nova Sponsa Triumphos,
Servata infelix, it Liberate sub Vmbras.
Dignissimo Viro Gulielmo Wiseman de Magna Canfeild in Comitatu Essex Baronetto
Iabula observantiss: D.D.D.

A CONTINUATION OF SILIUS ITALICUS To the DEATH of HANNIBAL, The Second Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
To Hannibal Isalces does relate
King Masanissa's Love, and the sad Fate
Of Sophonisba. Rome dreads the Report
Of a new War. In the Ephesian Court
Scipio, and Hannibal are entertained,
And meet, as Friends. The City, Temple, and
Its Wealth described. Great Alexander's Deeds
Eumolpus sings. Whence a Discourse proceeds,
Who the best Captains we^e. Past Actions are
Revolved. The King resolves upon a War.
WHILE thus pretended Piety beguiles
The Vulgar, and the glad Deceiver smiles
At the Success; Secure, that none could bear
The Tidings of his Flight, before the Fear
Of being stopped was past, to Sea again
He hastens, hoises Sail, while yet the Reign
Of Night continued, and the Cynosura, (or Vrsa Minor) which the Tyrians
observed in Sailing, as the Greeks did Helice (or Vrsa Major) according to that
of Ovid, lib. Trist.

Two Bears there are, of which the Tyrian seeks
The Less, the Greater guides the wandering Greeks.

Tyrian Star
Lent faithful Beams to guide the Mariner,
And as, well pleased with what had past, his Friends
Discoursed, how much their Mirth had made Amends
For all Delays, his sure Numidian Guide
(Who once attended on great Syphax Bride)
Began. But He inspired above the Rest
To Me appeared, who did so much detest,
And scorn their Names, who, through a shameful Dread
Of Dying, had submitted to be led
In Triumph, and, in Chains, before they Died,
Had tamely Sacrificed unto the Pride
Of Roman Conqu'rours. How He did declame,
For this, against Syphax! how adore the Name
Of Noble Sophonisba! who did bear
A Face as Cheerful, as I carry here,
(Said He) and, to avoid that Shame, was seen
To drink her Death, and fall a Glorious Queen.
I well observed his Zeal, and, I confess,
(Replied Great Hannibal) could little less
Then weep, at Mention of so dear a Name.
But since we only have, by Common Fame,
Her Story heard, and You a Witness were
Of all that past, to Us her Fate declare.
Then He. When Syphax was overthrown, and all
Numidia lost, through his Unhappy Fall,
False Masanissa less ambitiously
Aspired unto his Empire, then to be
Successor in his Bed, and when h' had gained
The Queen into his Power (the King enchain'd,
And kept a Trophy to Young Scipio's Pride)
Impatient till h' enjoyed so fair a Bride,
His Mind he thus discovers: If the Throne
Of Syphax, or Numidia's Wealth, alone,
Had been the Object of mine Arms, I now
Whatever the Gods, or Fortune could allow
To my Desires, possessed: but know my Aim
(Fair Queen) is Higher, and a Nobler Flame
Reigns in my Breast, the Roman General
May this (perchance) an Happy Conquest call,
Because his Eagles, now, securely fly
Over the Numidian Plains. But nothing I
Have gained, though this late Victory restore
Whatever Syphax did, from Me, before
Usurp; though Hammon, and Tarpeian Jove
Conspire to make Me great, unless your Love
This Happiness confirm. For this did I
From Libya's to the Roman Ensigns fly,
Knowing no other Means to win You from
Masanissa, in his Youth Educated in Carthage, and observed to be a Person of
singular Accomplishments, Hasdrubal (the Son of Giscon) betrothed to Him his
Daughter Sophonisba (as eminent for her Beauty, as Birth, and imediately
procured Him the Command of an Army in Iberia. But afterward, finding Syphax a
more powerful Prince, inamoured of Her. He bestowed Her on him, which (among
other things) incited Masanissa privately to make Peace with Scipio, and turn
his Arms against Carthage. Appian, Liby^.
My Rival's Arms, and since He is by Rome
Thrown from that glorious Height, and can no more
Be Worthy held of what He did before
In You enjoy (since none, but He, that wears
A Crown, and in his Hand a Scepter bears,
Can Merit such a Bliss) that You may live
A Queen, and (what lost Carthage cannot give,
Nor Sophonisba take, but from my Hand)
Be still adored through the Numidian Land.
Accept my Love, by which, You can alone
Shun Roman Chains, and still possess a Throne.
To this the Queen (though an extreme Disdain
Of what He offered in Her Soul did Reign)
Fearing to be a Spectacle at Rome,
More then to Die, replies. It Is to presume
Too much upon your Victory, if You
Imagine it as Easy, to Subdue
This Heart, as late our Arms: and though, by Force,
You have already made a sad Divorce,
Yet know the Memory of Syphax Name
Will, in this Breast, admit no other Flame,
While He survives. But, rather then be led
To Rome in Triumph, I confess the Bed
Of any born of Libyan Blood may be
Preferred: yet, if the adverse Fates decree,
That, to avoid that Shame, I must the Crime
Of hasty Nuptials add, a little Time
(Me thinks) you ought, in Justice, to allow,
To expiate, with Tears, my former Vow.
With this Reply, which neither gave Assent
To his Demand, nor yet denied, Her Tent
He quits, advising Her to shun Delays,
In her Resolve; for that, e're many Days
Should pass, the Captives must be sent to Rome,
And Her Consent would, then, too Tardy come.
At these last Words, as when our Libyan Darts
A Tygress strike, at first, amazed, She starts,
And growling stands, but when the wounding Steel
Is deeply fixed, and She begins to feel
The Anguish of a Wound, She rends the Air
With Cries, and, laboring with her Teeth to tare
The Weapons forth, augments her Pain, then flies
To some known Covert, and there, Raving, dies.
Struck to the Heart (as if She then had seen
The Gorgon's Head, or, like Amphion's Queen,
Congealed to Marble) Statue-like She stands,
A while, and Silent weeps. At length, her Hands
Invade her Head, from which She, frantic, tears
The lovely Hair, and, furiously, impairs
The Beauty of that Face, which by two Kings
Had been adored. At last, Her self She flings
Upon her Bed, and, with a mournful Cry,
On her dear Syphax calls. Which hearing, I
Stepped in, and found her turning to and fro,
Her Eyes: now dry, and fired with Anger, so,
When Pentheus scorned the Trieterick Feast,
Agave's Looks Her inward Rage expressed.
Amazed, a while, I Silent stood: till She,
Sighs making Way for Words, at length to Me
Her Speech directs. It Is not, because Uncrown'd,
( Isalces) that I grieve; a deeper Wound
My Soul afflicts, and I am wracked between
Two dire Extremes. Oh! had I never seen
Numidia's Court, or had I never been led,
By Hymen's Tapers, to my Syphax Bed,
The World, perhaps, had never heard that one,
Born of Great Hasdrubal, was from a Throne
To Rome a Captive led, but I must now
(Oh cruel Fate!) renounce my Nuptial Vow,
To yield up (what my Lord esteemed above
Numidia's Throne) the Treasure of my Love
To Masanissa, and in his Embrace
Those Sacred Ties dissolve, or in the Face
Of Rome, the greatest Trophy of the War,
Exposed be, and the Triumphal Car
Of the proud Conqueror, in Chains attend.
Ye Gods! what greater Mischief can Ye send
Upon this Head? Your Thunder cannot give
A Blow so Fatal, if you let Me live
To see that Day. As thus She spoke, her Eyes,
With sudden Streams of Tears, her Tongue surprise.
When I perceived, that Masanissa's Flame
(Though yet an Enemy) was still the same,
He had before professed; hoping the Charms
Of such a Beauty might regain his Arms
To Carthage, as they Syphax had withdrawn
From Roman Leagues, after a Solemn Pawn
Of Faith, before the Gods: I thus begun.
Had Heaven left any other Means to shun
The Power of Rome, and that prodigious Shame,
Which proudly they on all of Tyrian Name
Inflict, I should resolve, whatever it be,
To share Your Fortune. But since, now, You see
The Conqueror your Captive is, You may
Redeem your Self, and give a better Day
To Your lost Country. 'Twas for this alone,
Hasdrubal placed you on Numidia's Throne,
The Cause is still the Same, nor is it a Crime,
Which Fate Necessitates, and which in Time
You may a Signal Piety avow
To all the World. Even Syphax will allow
It such, and die Content, if You restore
Entire to Libya what She lost before.
Persuaded thus; as when a Seaman finds
Nothing, but certain Ruin from the Winds,
Which on the Ocean storm, resolved no more
To trust their Fury, for ^ome Neighboring Shore
He steers, and, to secure Himself, does choose,
Upon a Sand, the laboring Bark to loose:
So, from Rome's Rage, the Queen resolves to throw
Her self, for Safety, on a gentler Fo;
Who now approached, while She puts on a Face
Might move his Pity, and a God's Embrace.
So, when her Memnon died, Aurora threw
Over her Rosy Cheeks a Veil of Dew,
Through which dissolving Crystal, from Her Eyes
Day did more sadly, yet more Fragrant rise.
Soon as He entered, Prostrate at his Feet
She falls, and thus now sues his Love to meet.
If my distracted Piety did swell
Too High, if what I uttered did not well
Beseem a Captive (mighty Prince) I here
Beseech You pardon Me, not wont to bear
So weighty Griefs, and, since the Immortal Gods,
Above my Syphax Fate, on You these Odds
(Due to your Valor, and good Fortune) have
Bestowed, whatever be my Doom, I crave
It may proceed from You. And as you are
A King, and with my Lord did lately share
In the Numidian Name, let Me not be
Exposed to any Roman's proud Decree.
As I am only Wife to Syphax, I
Would rather any Libyan's Mercy try,
Then trust a Stranger. But withal you know
What I, a Carthaginian, Daughter to
Great Hasdrubal, may from a Roman fear.
If then no other Remedy appear
Within your Power, I here beseech you still,
By Death to free Me from the Romans Will.
Scarce this (with all Allurements, that could move
At once the Conqu'rour's Pity, and his Love)
She had declared, when He wipes off her Tears
With fervent Kisses, and her future Fears
Allays, with Promise to preserve her Free
From Roman Hands. But pleads Necessity
(To be Secure) that Night to Consummate
Their Nuptial Rites. Unwillingly, to Fate,
And his Desires She yields, and at the Time
Her doubtful Heart, as Conscious of a Crime,
Calls back her Blood, then sends it forth again
Into her Cheeks (so shines a Scarlet Stain
On Ivory) ashamed to have it said,
One Day a Captive her, and Bride had made.
And now the Weary Horses of the Sun
To the Tartessiack Shore their Course had run;
When Masanissa, with all Sacred Rites,
The Presence of the Marriage God invites.
But no good Omen showed him to be there;
The Fire the Incense flies; the Altars are
Smooth'rd in Stygian Smoke; a dreadful Sound
Through all the Temple runs, and shakes the Ground*
And, as from thence into their Chamber they
Retire, the Holy Tapers, all the Way,
With Sputt'ring Flames (as if Alecto shed
Sulphur upon them) lead them to their Bed.
All this, intent upon his Mistress Eyes,
He either did not see, or did Despise.
Concluding what He should enjoy would all
Those Miseries outweigh, that could befall
Before this Fatal Night was spent. The Fame
Of Masanissa's hasty Nuptials came
To Scipio's Ear; He, fearing to give Way
To such a growing Mischief, soon as Day
Had chased away the Stars, by Laelius sends
A Summons, and, thus sharply reprehends
His Levity. It Is my Belief, (said He)
That when We first contracted Amity
In Spain, and then in Africa, when Thou
Did both thy Self, and all those Hopes, which now
Thou callst thine Own, to Me commit, that then
Something in Me thou did 'bove other Men
Worthy that Trust conceive. But I in none
Of all these Virtues, that did prompt Thee on
To seek my Friendship, more of Glory placed,
Then in my Temperance: That with a Chaste,
And Sober Mind, I could suppress the Flame
Of hottest Lust; and this, I then did aim,
To other thy rare Virtues might be joined.
For trust Me, Noble Prince, We cannot find
So much of Danger from our Armed Foes,
As from those stronger Pleasures, that enclose
Us round: and whotsoer'e repells their dire
Assaults, and can by Temperance his Desire
Within Himself Subdue, a Victory
Of greater Honor gains, then that, which We
Over Syphax have obtained. Those Noble Things,
Which Thou, with Valor worthy greatest Kings,
Have in my Absence done, I did, of late,
To all of Name in Arms commemorate
With all due Praise, and still shall keep in Mind.
But I had rather Thou on what is behind
Would with thy Self reflect, then Blush to hear
Me give't a Name. It plainly does appear
To all the World, that Syphax was or'ethrown,
And Captived by the Auspicies alone
Of The Roman People. Whatsoever He
Possessed: his Kingdom, Wife, and People, We
May challenge as our Prize, and none a Share
Of Right, can claim. Though Sophonisba were
No Carthaginian born; or did not We
Her Father General of their Armies see:
Yet must She (who a King, that was our Friend,
An Enemy has made, and in the End
Against Us drawn to Arms) be sent to Rome,
And there the Senate's, and the People's Doom
Attend. Strive therefore to subdue thy Mind,
Shake this lewd Passion off, so much inclined
To draw Thee into Ruin; nor the Grace
Of all thy Virtues, with one Vice, Deface;
Nor by one Crime deprive thy Self of all
Those Thanks, at Rome, for which thy Merits call.
Struck to the Heart (as if some sudden Flame
Were darted through his Blood) the Fire of Shame
Flies to his Face: Yet nothing He replies,
But strait retires with Sighs, and swelling Eyes;
And, knowing, that what Scipio had decreed
Must stand Irrevocable, sends, with Speed,
For Me, and with a Box, into my Hand
A fatal Poison puts, with this Command:
Bear this to my Dear Sophonisba, say,
That Masanissa was resolved to pay
That Faith to Her, which kindest Husbands ow
To their Dear Wives. But, since the Fates have so
Decreed, that They now countermand his Will,
To whom it is subjected; He is still
Resolved his second Promise firm shall stand:
And, that, Alive, into a Roman's Hand
She may not fall, advise, that with her Drink
She intermix this Poison. Bid Her think
Upon the General (her Father) and
Her Country: think how, once, She did command
The Hearts of two great Kings, to whom Sh'hath been
In Marriage joined, and let Her Die a Queen.
The baneful Drug to my Dear Mistress I,
With this harsh Message, brought. Prepared to Die,
And with Undaunted Mind the Worst to bear,
That Fate could add, She, with Attentive Ear,
Listn'd to what I said, and, as She took
In her fair Hand the Poison, with a Look
Moor Cheerful, then when She a Bride was made
To Masanissa, I accept (She said)
His Nuptial Present: nor is it to Me
At all Unwelcome, since (my Husband) He
Can nothing Greater on his Wife bestow:
But yet, withal, I pri'thee let Him know,
That Sophonisba would more pleased have Died,
If, at her Death, She had not been his Bride:
For then my Country might upon my Tomb
Have writ, that, thus, I Triumphed over Rome.
No sooner spoke, but to her Lips She joined
The deadly Cup, and, Greedy there to find
A speedy Death, swallows it; all and, while
We, Trembling, stand about Her, with a Smile,
Which made her Lovely even in Death (her Heart
Recalling now the Blood, from every Part,
To its Relief) She sinks, and, as She lies
Upon her Couch, gives one Great Sigh, and dies.
As the Numidian this sad Story told,
The Day began to rise. They now behold
The Tyrian Coast, by which they Steer unto
That City, whence the Carthaginians drew
Their famed Original, when Dido from
Her Brother fled. Received, as if at Home,
With all the Joy, that could express the Pride
They had conceived, in being near allied
To that Great Hannibal, who late the Fear
Of all the World had been; when he had there
Himself refreshed, again He hoists his Sails
For Antioch: from thence, with prosperous Gales,
At Ephesus arrived; where, glad to find
The Syrian King, who, with a dubious Mind,
His Hate, conceived against the Roman Name,
Pursued, at length he fixed, and by his Fame
In Arms, appearing like a Martial Star,
Guided his wandering Thoughts into a War.
And now, over all the Syrian Cities, Fame
Her lofty Head had raised, and with the Name
Of Hannibal awaked the God of War:
When strait the several Nations, which from far
Their Tribute to the Syrian Crown did bring,
And gave the Title, Antiochus, the Sixth from Seleucus, (who was Alexander's
Lieutenant in Syria) much enlarged his Dominions by his several Conques^s, and
was therefore called The Great: Appian. Syriac.
GREAT, unto their King,
Fly into Arms, and to the Ephesian Court
The Princes, and Ambassadors resort.
All promise Aid; secure, that He was come,
To stand a Bulwark against the Force of Rome,
And Asian Towers defend with greater Odds,
Then all their Arms, or Tutelary Gods.
All his great Merits plead, and, fondly, raise
The Value of his Virtues with their Praise.
No Errors are allowed in all, that He
Has done. So little do the Vulgar see
A Fault, where they affect, or know to State
The Reasons of their sudden Love, or Hate.
Carthage (though now in Chains) Unpiti'd stands:
The Gods are praised, that her Ungrateful Hands
He had escaped. For his late Overthrow,
And Fight, they cast not on the Public Fo,
But Homebred Treachery; as not the Crime
Of Fortune, but the Envy of the Time.
Envy, which still detracts from greatest Deeds,
And on the Ruins of the Virtuous feeds;
Which first, against the God's rebellious Wars
Had raised, and made the Giants Storm the Stars.
She Honor still pursues wheree're it goes:
Wheree're it treads, She Stygian Poison throws;
That its fair Footsteps quickly does Deface,
And raises her own Trophies in its Place.
With this Applause the Court, and City, ring.
Some invocate the Gods, others the King
Importune to the War. Then strait their Bands
They List, and levy Troops in several Lands.
Nor were those Aids to Syrian Bounds confined:
But Names, and Nations to their Arms were joined,
Parthians.
Who, when the Strength of Rome was greater far,
The Fates decreed, should in a Marcus Crassus with his whole Army was
overthrown, and Himself slain by the Parthians.
future War
Her Power, though backed by all the World, restrain,
And with a Consul's Blood her Eagles stain.
With those the Medes, who even on Conquering Foes
Their Manners, and their Habit did impose,
From the Medes, the Persians (as also the Armenians) learned their Arts of
Riding, Shooting, and likewise their Habit, and Custom of adoring their Kings.
Strabo in his Eleventh Book.
From whom the Persians first Tiaras wore,
And, falling Prostrate, did their Kings adore:
Whose mighty Monarchs their Imperial Throne
Had fixed upon the Walls of Babylon,
Till, weak'ned with Delights, that Empire, which
Semiramis, Queen of Babylon, renowned for Her many Great Victories in Asia,
over the greatest part whereof She Reigned forty two Years, and at the Age of
Sixty two Years was slain by her Son Ninus, who degenerating (as likewise most
of Her Successors) from her Virtue, the Empire fell first into the Power of
the Persians, who left it to Alexander. Of Her, see Iustine, in his Tenth Book.
A Woman raised to so admired a Pitch,
By Men less Valiant lost, the Prize became
Of the Pellaean Youth, and crowned his Name.
And, as if all, that Asia could prepare,
Where Hannibal appeared, too little were
TO attend his Fate; as if the Earth alone
Too Narrow were, for Him, to Fight upon.
Though Europe gave her Aids, and Warlike Thrace,
Must'ring her Chariots, did the War Embrace,
Cilician, and Phoenician Ports are thronged
With Ships for War, and those where Hero longed
So often to see Laeander from the Seas
Rising (like Hesp'rus, when he sought to please
The Paphian Queen) until returning Day
Revived her Fears, and called her Love away.
But when the Rumor of so great a War,
So many Nations joined, though distant far,
Touched the Italian Coast: as swift, as Thought,
To Rome it flies, and, soon as thither brought,
Fear through all Quarters runs, in several Shapes
Affrights their Minds, commits a thousand Rapes
Upon their Sense, and greater Prodigies,
Then all before, abused Fancy sees,
What ever did Portend their former Ills,
Seems now again to fright the World, and fills
The People's Ears. Sometimes the Alps are said
To tremble, while Trinacrian Flames invade
The Italian Shore: as if, from Aetna's Womb,
The Infernal Gods, themselves, had threatened Rome.
Etrurian Augurs, strait, consulted are,
And, from these vain Reports, divine a War;
While Nature, sporting, to confirm their Fears,
Makes Lions bring forth Lambs, and Wolves teem Bears.
Then, as if Carthage had her Chains again
Thrown off, and arming her Revenge with Spain,
The Boii, Celtae, and those Nations all,
That Rome had reason still her Foes to call,
Did Italy Invade: the Roman Dames
Run to the Temples, and with Holy Flames
The Altars Crown, and thus to Heaven complain.
If these our Walls yet merit to remain
(Great Father Jove) if Sybil's Prophecies
Shall be confirmed, and thou do not despise
Tarpeian Towers,: Ah! then, why should not We,
After so many Wounds, and Toils, be Free?
Was Rome exalted to so High a State,
Through so much Blood, that She might be to Fate
A richer Sacrifice? and must She fall
By None, but by the Hand of Hannibal?
Rather to those her Walls her Power confine,
And with the Tarquins let Porsenna join:
Or to the Rage of Senones, or Flames
Of Brennus give Us up. Let not those Names,
That with such Valor have your Temples* here,
So often preserved, and were esteemed so Dear
To Heaven, be now made Victims to the Hate
Of One proud Man; who, to accelerate
Our Ruin, has disturbed the Peace of all
The World. If Fates Decree, that Rome must fall,
Give Her a Fo, whose Virtues may exceed
Her Own, and let our Crimes, and Vices bleed
By a more Pious Hand, such, as from Blame
May free your Justice, with a better Name.
He, Perjured, from those Holy Altars flies,
Where Peace was sworn, and does that League despise,
Which in the Name of all the Gods was signed,
And now his Arms has with a People joined,
Where We that Fate, which He at Capua found,
Shall undergo; where Vices will abound,
As Victories increase, and We shall be
Lost, by our Triumphs, in their Luxury.
After the Romans had advanced their Conquests into Asia, they were soon
entangled in the Delights of those Provinces, and brought their Vices into
Italy, to the Ruin of the Ancient Roman Virtue.
Thus will perfidious Carthage, not by Arms,
See her Revenge on Us, but Asia's Charms.
Mean while great Scipio, who their former Fears
Had drowned in Carthaginian Mothers Tears,
(Whom Heaven, to balance Hannibal, to Rome
Had lent, and in his Hand had placed the Doom
Of all the World) with gently-breathing Gales,
From the Italian Shore, to Asia Sails,
TO explore the King's Intent. At length, He came
To that famed City, where Diana's Name
In a fair Temple more Devotion moves,
With gentile Rites, the Thoas, King of the Taurick Region in Scythia, where
Diana had her Altars, on which they offered Humane Blood. The same likewise was
a Custom at Carthage. See Silius in his Fourth Book.
Thoantean Groves.
No weeping Mother here to Heaven complains,
While her Son's Blood the Cruel Altar stains.
But the bright Goddess, under Silver Shrines,
As Pleased appears, as when Her Brother joins,
With full reflected Beams, her radiant Horns,
And, more then all the Stars, the Night adorns.
In a large Plain, through which Maeander brings
His Winding Waters, in a thousand Rings,
To the Myrtoan Main, the City stands;
First built (they say) by Amazonian Bands,
That from Thermodo^on, with Moon-like Shields,
Victorious marched, through the Trachean Fields,
Commanded by an Oracle before,
To build a City, where a Fish, and Boar
Should, Dying, show the Place; Fate was their Guide
This Way: where, sitting on the Ground, they spied
Some busily employed their Living Prey
To broil, late taken from the adjoining Sea.
When strait a Fish throws, with a sudden Leap,
A burning Coal, upon a Neighboring Heap
Of Straw; which turned to Flame, a sleeping Boar
Beneath it they beheld. Earth None before
More Terrible had bred; as Big, as that,
Which both Diana's, and Althaea's Hate
Who slew the Boar, sent by Diana to Plague Caledonia, and disputing the Trophy
of his Head with his Mother's Brothers, slew them also; for which, by the
Sorcery of his Mother Althaea, He likewise dyed Languishing. Ovid. Met. lib. 8.
On Meleager drew. But this was there
With better Omen found, to Instruct them, where,
The Goddess would on Earth most Pleased abide,
And make famed Ephesus great Asia's Pride.
They all, amazed, his weighty Bulk admire:
And, as He, Grunting, starteth from the Fire,
A ready Hand a well-aim'd Javelin throws,
Which in his Shoulder fixed (as He arose)
A Deadly Wound. But yet awhile He fled,
And they with Shouts pursued, till, falling Dead,
The Oracle was by his Death fulfilled,
And they their City there resolved to build.
Now do the Sacred Ploughs the Walls design,
And to the Stars the lofty Turrets join
Their shining Tops. The Goddess to renown,
And to Immortalize their Labors, down
From Heaven her This Image is said to be of a Blackish Wood, very rude in
Form, but imposed on the People as fallen from Heaven, as is mentioned by St.
Paul ( Acts xix. 35.) and kept in the Sanctuary of this Magnificent Temple, so
renowned through all Asia. It was the Work of above an hundred Kings, and not
only endowed with Inestimable Wealth, but with Privilege of Refuge, whose
Bounds were enlarged, or diminished, according to the Devotion of the Princes,
that governed, until abolished by Augustus, as a Nursery of Villains.
Image sent, which with it more
Of Riches brought, then if another Shower
(Like that of Danae's) Jove powered again
Upon the Place: or, if to Silver Rain
The very Stars dissolved. For soon as Fame
The Presence of the Goddess, and her Name
Through Asia had divulged: Devotion brings
From Ganges, and Hydaspes greatest Kings,
Who sweetest Spices, which their Fields adorn,
Culled from the Bosom of the Rising Morn,
With Gold, and Ivory, devoutly lay
Upon her Shrine, and as their Tribute pay
All Treasures, that the Womb of Asian Earth
Enrich: all, that the Seres, at the Birth
Of Day, could gather from their silken Trees:
What the Sabaean, or Arabian sees,
Dropping from fragrant Boughs: with whatsoever
From shining Rocks, or Shells the Indians bare
To Eastern Kings, into the Sacred Fane
Are heaped: which now no longer can contain
Its Wealth. And therefore they a Work begun,
Then which the Rising, nor the falling Sun,
None greater viewed; whose Structure did excel,
What ever Fame of Babylon does tell,
Or Pharian Pyramids; which by one Age
Could not accomplished be, but did engage
Succeeding Kings, who in that Work alone
Employed the Riches of the Syrian Throne,
And puzzled Art, to find out Ways, to show
Their Pious Bounty. There, as White as Snow,
Tall, polished Alablaster Pillars shine
(As purest Emblems of that Power Divine,
Was there adored) upon whose carved Heads
An Ebon Roof the curious Builder spreads.
This, like black Night, hung over the Place, until
Myriads of Silver Stars the Frame did fill;
And, to express her Empire in the Skies,
With a full Orb, a Crystal Moon did rise.
Through this, as Mother to Succeeding Day,
Clear Light flowed in, and did at large display
The Temple's Glory. There you might behold
High Altars, not adorned, but built with Gold.
The Hearths were of the bright Pyropus made,
Whose Flames the Sacrifices on them laid,
Seemed of themselves to burn: all other Fire
As vanquished by their Luster, to retire;
All Gems thus were, or beautiful, or Rare
(As if their Native Quarries had been there)
In greatest Plenty shine, in every part
So placed, their Value is increased by Art,
Their lively Figures as exactly stand,
Composed of several Stones, as if the Hand
Of some rare Painter, to express his Skill
In Colors, did the Walls, and Pavement fill.
Through a large Plain of Em'rads, with her Crew
Of Cretan Nymphs, Diana does pursue
The flying Game: their Arms, and Shoulders bare;
Their Tyrian Vests tucked to their Knees, their Hair
In lovely Tresses, yet neglected flows
Upon their Backs: some armed with golden Bows;
Some carry Darts, some Spears, whose points, instead
Of Steel, with Diamonds, make the Beasts to bleed.
This wounds a Panther, that a Tiger, this
A Lion kills, not any Hand does miss
The Beast at which it aims, and thus with Chase
Of various kinds, they beautify the Place.
Above the rest a secret Chapel (where
The Eunuch-Priests alone permitted were
To enter) did delight, and Terror move.
In a fair Fountain shadowed by a Grove
Of varied Agats made, encompast round
With naked Nymphs, the Heart, Actaeon, found
Bright Cynthia bathing; 'bout her Snow-white Thighs
The purling Waters play: with fixed Eyes
At first, He peeping stands behind a Tree,
But Curious, anon, more near to see,
He farther steps, and stepping is betrayed
By rusling Leaves. Startling, the Delian Maid
Looks back, and spying him, Anger, and Shame
To be so seen, at once her Face inflame.
As Red She looks, as when her Brother's Light
Denied, She does The Women of Thessaly, when the Moon was Eclipsed, were wont
to make a Noise with all sorts of brazen Instruments, believing by it to assist
her in her Agony.
Thessalian Dames affright.
And now her Rage no longer will delay
His Fate, but strait his Form she takes away:
Longer his Head, and Ears, upon his Brow
Large Horns, his Arms, and Thighs more slender grow;
No more Erect, but prone toward Earth he goes:
In all a Beast, but yet, alas, he knows
He is not what he was; when strait the Cry
Of his Molossian Hounds persuades to fly.
The Nymphs, all laughing, urge them to pursue
The Chase: He flies, they follow, and in View,
Pinched in the Haunch, (to show Diana's Power)
He falls, and they their Master changed devour.
Here his two Guests, then which the World had none
Then Greater seen, whose Presence more his Throne
Renowned, then all the Trophies he had gained,
The King with Cheerful Welcome entertained,
And to their Eyes, as to invite his Foes
To a new Conquest, prodigally shows
His Empire's Riches. For no King before
That had the Syrian Scepter swayed, did more
Possess: He was of all the Richest Heir,
That did Great Alexander's Trophies share,
And that vast Wealth not only kept Entire,
But greater, which his Conquests did acquire,
Heaped on his Throne. As if, to entertain
Those famous Heroes, Fortune did ordain,
That past, and present Ages should combine
To yield their Spoils, and in that Honor join.
It was a Day, when to commemorate
The King's Nativity, the Ephesian State
With annual Rites their Loyal Joys expressed.
The King (as Custom was) a Stately Feast
Prepares: the Nobles all, invited, come,
And there the Fates of Carthage, and of Rome
( Scipio, and Hannibal) the Banquet grace,
And now meet, not to Fight, but to Embrace.
So when Aeneas fled from Ruined Troy,
And sought a fore in Conquest to enjoy,
Met by Tydides on the Oenotrian Shore,
They laid aside that Fury, which before
Reigned in their Breasts, which Xanthus Yellow Flood,
And the Dardanian Plains had stained with Blood,
And, with new Friendship, what they both had done
In Arms, repeat, since that sad War begun.
They now are glad each others Face to know:
Each counts the other Worthy such a Fo:
Whose constant Courage nothing of Success
In War could heighten, nor of Loss depress.
Whose Virtue in all Fortunes was the same,
And owed its Titles to no other Name.
Who, in pursuit of Honor, sought not to
Destroy a Noble Fo, but to subdue.
And, when in Arms, would do what Man could dare
TO attempt, and after Victory would spare
The Conquered Blood: nor vainly sought to praise
His own brave Deeds, and blast another's Bays.
Such in the Ephesian Court these Heroes shined,
And with as free, and strict Embraces, joined
Their Valiant hands, as if nor Trebia's Flood,
Nor Cannae had been stained with Roman Blood
By Carthaginian Swords; Nor Hannibal
So lately had beheld his Countrie's Fall
In Zama's Wounds. Nor Scipio his Fate
Deprest upbraids: nor Hannibal his Hate,
At Stygian Altars sworn, discovers now.
But Sacred Concord on each Hero's Brow
Sits, as Enthroned, and over all the rest
Her Wings display's, to inaugurate the Feast.
And now the Face of Mirth appears through all
The Court. Th'invited in a spacious Hall
At Ivory Tables sit, and richly there
Their Senses feed, with whatsoever Rare
The Asian World affords. The Seas, the Earth,
And Air, to gratulate so high a Birth,
Their choicest Tribute send, and all, that Art
To heighten Nature's Bounty could impart,
Was liberally employed. Amazed to see
The strange Excess of Syrian Luxury,
Soon cloyed with different Thoughts, the Heroes are
Affected, and perpend the future War.
The Romans, pleased to think how weak in Fight
Those Arms will prove, which softened with Delight,
All Virtue so disarmed: How easily
The Roman Swords, their Way to Victory
Would find, where Honor led them on, and Spoils
So wealthy, were the Trophies of their Toils.
But Hannibal, more sadly thoughtful, calls
To Mind the Fate of Capua, and the falls
Of those brave Libyan Bands, that had so far
Advanced his Name, till a more cruel War
Of Ease, and Riot, at effeminate Boards,
Un-nerv'd their Valor, dulled their Conquering Swords,
Blasted those Laurels, that before had crowned
Their warlike Brows, and, as in Lethe, drowned
All Memory of themselves, in these soft Charms
So lost, they quite forgot the Use of Arms.
As thus they ruminate, Eumolpus brings
His Ivory Lute, and to the warbling Strings
Accords his Voice, and chants, in smoothest Lays,
The King's Descent, and Alexander's Praise.
How first the Horned God his Libyan Grove,
And Sacred Springs, for fair Olympia's Love,
Forfook, and how, from that Divine Embrace,
Small Pella was by a Celestial Race
Renowned, and while descending to the Earth
Among other Powers Divine, to assist his Birth,
The Ephesian Goddess, busyed wholly there,
Kept not her Famous Temple in her Care,
In that Night, when Alexander was born, the Temple of Ephesus was fired by
Herostratus; who, upon the Wrack, confessed He did it to make himself Famous)
whereupon Timaeus (as Cicero) or Magnesius (as Plutarch affirms) said, that the
Goddess (called Lucina, when She acts the Mid-wife's part) was so busy to bring
Alexander into the World, that She could not have time to save her Temple. Cic.
de Not. Dear. lib. 2. Plut. Alexander.
An Impious Hand, to build it self a Name,
With Sacrilegious Flames the admired Frame
Destroyed. But, when Lucina's Care had given
To Earth a mighty Conqueror, to Heaven
In that Night, when Alexander was born, the Temple of Ephesus was fired by
Herostratus; who, upon the Wrack, confessed He did it to make himself Famous)
whereupon Timaeus (as Cicero) or Magnesius (as Plutarch affirms) said, that the
Goddess (called Lucina, when She acts the Mid-wife's part) was so busy to bring
Alexander into the World, that She could not have time to save her Temple. Cic.
de Not. Dear. lib. 2. Plut. Alexander.
A future Deity, and he began
To show the World, that he was more then Man,
By his great Deeds, to his Immortal Name
As humbly prostrate, as to the bright Flame
Of rising Day, the admiring Persian bowed.
To him Sabaeans, and Arabians vowed
Their richest Gums: to him the Parthians brought
Their Bows un-bent, and conque'rd Quivers, fraught
With fatal Shafts: him all, from Ganges Shore,
To those, that Nile's mysterious Streams adore,
Their Lord obeyed, and, next the God of Wine,
For Wonders done acknowlegd'd as Divine.
But when he was for Earth too mighty grown,
And summoned hence to a Celestial Throne,
Heaven, that the Syrian Monarchy might stand
For ever firm, into Sele^cus Hand
The sacred Scepter gave. Since none, but he
Was worthy to succeed a Deity,
Who could Himself subdue. An act that far
Transcends whatever can be done in War,
And Man Immortal makes. For, who the Force
Of Beauty can withstand, or can divorce
Love from his wounded Breast, may justly more
Of Conquest boast, then Gods have done before.
Yet He, when by expiring Sighs he found
Those very Eyes his Pious Son did wound,
That his own Souls surpised, and that the Name
Antiochus, the Son of Seleucus, fell in Love with his Mother in Law,
Stratonica, and ashamed to reveal his Passion, fell desperately Sick.
Erasistratus, the Physician, finding it a Disease rather of the Mind then
Body, and observing that while Stratonica was present, his Pulse, and Sp^^its
were stronger, discovered the Cause of his Malady to his Father, who readily
assented to his Desires, and from them came the race of this Antiochus.
Of Stratonica had the hidden Flame
Revealed (to show how much a Noble Mind
'Bove Cupidinean Shafts prevails) resigned
Into his Arms his Love, and rescued from
The hand of Fate, a Race of Kings to come.
Hence to our Royal Line this solemn Day
We consecrate, and grateful Honors pay.
Thus the Ionian sung; and as among
The rest, the lofty Subject of His Song
The Libyan applauds: the Roman thus
To him began. Though 'twixt the Gods, and Us,
Great is the difference, yet Virtue may
Raise Men, to those Felicities, which they
In Heaven enjoy, and none so worthy are
Of that high Bliss, as those whose Name in War
Has placed them here, on Earth, above the rest
Of Humane Race. Fate cannot such divest
Of Immortality. For, with Applause,
The World adores them, and obeys their Laws.
From these all Arts, and Virtues, that the Mind
Of Man enrich, at first took Birth, and find
Their just Rewards. For when Immortal Jove
Had framed the World, though all the Stars above
In Order placed, and struggling Nature saw
All things created here, her certain Law,
And Times obey; yet, guided by their Will,
Mankind among themselves a Chaos still
Retained. No Bounds of Justice to repress
The Hand of Rapine: Vices in, Excess,
Reigned in all Minds, the Names of Right, and Wrong
Unknown to all; the Virtuous were the Strong.
Nor then did Man to greater Good aspire,
Then what seemed such, suggested by Desire.
But, lest a Custom, in Licencious Deeds,
The use of Reason, and Celestial Seeds
Should quite deprave; that true ( Promethean Fire,
The Breasts of some Brave Heroes did inspire
Those Monsters to subdue, and to compel
The too Licencious under Laws to dwell:
The Ill to punish, and the Good to Crown
With due Rewards. Hence Honor, and Renown
The Minds of Mortals, first, from baser Earth
Raised toward Heaven, from whence they took their Birth.
But since Lyaeus, and Alcides Wars
The World with Trophies, and the Heaven with Stars
Adorned, who (tell me) has the greatest Name
In Arms deserved, and an Immortal Fame?
If such their Praise, if such their Merits are,
The Libyan replies: No Hand in War,
So worthy Fame, so mighty things has done,
As the Pellaean Youth: whose Valor won
More Victories, then Time had Years to Crown
His Life allowed: The Force of whose Renown
His Laws on farthest Nations did obtrude,
And Kingdoms, which he never saw, subdued.
For who, that heard, how great his Conquests were,
How small his Force, would not, with Reason, fear compast round
Those Arms, which Persia's When some of Alexander's Captains saw the vast
Number of his Enemies, they advises him to fall upon them by Night: but He
replied, he scorned to steal a Victory. Quintus Curtius.
Monarch
With Troops, so numerous, that all the Ground
'Twixt Tigris, and Euphrates, scarce could yield
Them room to stand) subdued in open Field.
Scorning to Fortune, or to Night to ow
A Victory, He, in full Day, the Fo
Assails, while God, and Men together stand
Spectatours of the Wonders of his Hand,
And see each Macedonian Soldiers bring
A Nation captivated to their King.
But, not to speak of Battles, where his Skill,
And Conduct, all subjected to his Will,
No Town, no City (though the Sea, and Land
Conspired against his Force) could Him withstand;
The City of Tire was so obstinate in holding out against Alexander's whole
Force, that he resolved once to raise the Siege; but, fearing it might stain
the Glory of his former Victories, after seven Months Siege, and many terrible
Attacks (wherein He lost a great part of his Army) He took it. See Quintus
Curtius in his Fourth Book.
Our Tyrian Walls alone the Glory have
To have resisted well: and that They gave
A longer Stand to the Torrent of his Rage,
Then all the Persian Powers, that did engage
Against his Arms. No Object was above
His Courage; whose Example would remove
All Obstacles, that others might deterr:
And though in great Designs he would confer,
The Best, he followed his own Thoughts alone,
And so made all his Victories his Own.
And may He have the Praise: for none has more
In Arms deserved, perhaps no God before.
Next him that Noble Epirote, that came
To the Tarentines Aid, the Crown may claim.
His Courage, when a Youth, Pantauchus found
Above his Strength, though for his Strength renowned.
While in two Armies View (as once before
His mighty Ancestour, on Xanthus Shore,
Great Hector slew) He, his proud Fo subdued,
And, to the wondering Macedonians, showed
All things, that they had seen in former Times
Pyrrhus was invited into Italy, by the Tarentines, to assist them against the
Romans. He was a Prince, eminent for his Valor, and Esteemed by the
Macedonians, as the likest Alexander of any of his Successors. He slew
Pantauchus, Demetrius his Lieute^ant, in single Combat. See Plutarch in the
Life of Pyrrhus.
In their so glorious Prince, except his Crimes.
Nor were his Victories by Arms alone,
Where Fortune more, then Virtue often is known
To give the Bays. His Wisdom Conquest finds,
Where his Sword could not reach, and over the Minds
Of Men his Triumph gains; and thus he drew
From Roman Leagues Italian People to
His side. They thought themselves more Safe within
His Camp, then they in fenced Towns had bin
Under the Roman Laws. For he first taught
That Art, and Camps to their Perfection brought.
But if a Third you Seek, who has no less,
Then these deserved (though Envious Gods Success
Denied) Me here, Me Hannibal behold,
Who with as early Courage, and as bold
Attempts, a War against the Roman Name
Pursued, and from the farthest Gades came,
To seek a Fo, which future Times might call
Most Worthy, to contend with Hannibal.
Not soft Sabaeans, or Arabians, or
A People, that the Rites, and Toils of War
So little knew, that charged with rich Perfume,
More then with Sweat, or Dust, did more presume
On Numbers, then their Arms; or such, whose Ease
And Lusts, must prove the Conquerour's Disease,
And future Ruin. I through Nations born
In War, and nurtured in it, with a Scorn
Of Fate, and Fortune, over Pyrene, over
The dreadful Alps, Victorious Ensigns bore.
And found that Fo, with whom I might contend
With greater Fame, who boast, that they descend
From Man's himself, and to the World no less
Appear; by their great Valor, and Success.
As when Tarentum, Capua, and other Cities contended for Superiority with Rome,
and gave Opportunity to foreign Enemies to enter Italy, when Hannibal came
against them, all parts of Italy, with Sicily, Sardinia, etc. united under the
Roman Laws.
Nor was it, when some other Citie's Pride
With Rome for Empire strove, and did divide
Their scattered Force: but when all Italy
Her Strength united to encounter Me.
I shall not open those deep Wounds again,
Which then (an Enemy) I gave, or stain
Our Sacred Mirth with mention of each Flood,
Whose Streams ennobled were with Latian Blood,
Shed there by Me (and still perhaps, when I
Am named, affrighted to their Fountains fly)
I Will only say, more then three Lustra there
(In spite of all the Arts, and Arms, that were
Employed against Me) I Victorious stayed,
And, (after many Towns, and Cities made
My Vassals, and three Valiant Consuls Fall)
Shook Jove Himself within the Capitol
With Terror of my Arms, and, had not Rome,
By a base Envy of my Deeds at Home,
More then by her Own Valor, been relieved,
Our Carthaginian Mothers had not grieved,
To see their Sons in Chains, but had by Me
Been made, what Romans are, at least, been Free.
To this the Roman, with a Smile, replies.
If Thee the Glory of thy Victories,
With these Immortal Heroes, thus has joined,
I pri'thee say: what Place shall be assigned
To Me, who after I through Spain had fought
My Way, and, Conquering, into Libya brought
The War, the Greatest of Numidian Kings
Subdued, and Captive made, and, on the Wings
Of that fresh Victory, toward Carthage (where
But by thy Hand alone they did Despair
To be secured) marched on, and, in one Day,
Took all thy former Laurels quite away.
It Is true (said Hannibal) but, since the Fate
Of Virtue is, to want an Advocate,
If once Deprest, think me not Vain, when I
Those Merits plead, that are transcended by
Thy Fortune only. Had I conquered Thee,
The World no other Conqueror, but me,
Had known, even Those I named their Place had lost
In Fame, and Rome the Triumphs She does boast.
As thus they mutually their Merits plead,
The Sun began to hide his Flaming Head
In the Hesperian Main, and the oppressed
With Mirth and Wine, the Night invites to Rest.
To which, when all retired, the King (whose Heart
Was fixed on War) to Hannibal, apart,
Thus breaks his last ^esolve. I should forget
My Honor ( Hannibal) if what, as yet,
I have consulted only, I should now
Delay. The Prosecution of thy Vow
Is with my State involved, and Rome shall see,
It Is not thy Fortune We Embrace, but Thee.
That, which, through Servile Fear, has been denied
By thine own Carthage, shall be here supplied
By Me, and since we know how Various are
The Chances, and Events of Dubious War,
Why should we think the Fates will Favor more
The Romans now, then they have Thee before?
Fortune assists the Bold, and whosoer'e
Attempteth Coldly, loses by his Fear.
It Is therefore now decreed no more shall Rome
On Zama's Field, and Nabis Fall presume,
We Nations, great as any She has known,
The Parthians, Medes, admired Babylon
Already have subdued, and Warlike Thrace
(Where Mars inhabits) does our Laws embrace.
My better Fortune, what thy Fate has crossed,
Shall give thee, and redeem what Thou have lost.
This said; to enjoy the Benefits of Night
They both withdrew: but nothing could invite
The Libyan Prince to rest. His thoughts pursue
His hoped Revenge, and in themselves renew
The promised War. Impatient of Delay
He counts the Minutes, and desired Day
Implores. As promised Nuptials waking keep
A longing Lover, and quite banish Sleep,
Until Enjoyment satiates his Desire,
And both gives Fuel, and abates the Fire.
The End of the Second Book of the Continuation.
Perfidiam fugiens Infidi Regis, ad Vmbras
Festinat Stigias, Invicta Mente triumphans
Hannibal: et propria gaudens succumbere Dextra,
Anticipat, quos Roma Sibi Speravit, Honores.
Dignissimo Viro Gulielmo Wentworth de Wentworth-woodhouse in Comitatu Ebor:
Armig: Tabula Observantiss: D.D.D.

A CONTINUATION OF SILIUS ITALICUS To the DEATH of HANNIBAL. The Third Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Syrian Rome defies, both Scipio's are,
By choice, appointed to pursue the War.
Contagion wastes the Roman Navy, while
The Syrian Fleet's detained near Venus Isle,
By adverse Winds. The Syrian Lords, a Shore
With Hannibal, the Cyprian Rites explore.
The Winds again invite both Fleets to Sea.
They meet, and fight. The Syrians lose the Day.
The Libyan Captain to Bethynia flies,
Where, to shun Treason, He by Poison Dies.
BUT when the Empire of the Night was done,
And sleep the Scepter yielded to the Sun,
The Ephesian Peers, as if the sprightful Wine
Had raised in every Breast a War, combine
With Hannibal, to shake off all Delay,
To hasten on the Fates, and take away
Their Fears of Peace, and strait the Syrian Kings
Antiochus, resolving to hold what He had won in Greece, sent to treat with the
Roman Ambassador, his Favorite, who (as Livy says in his Thirty fifth Book)
wholly Ignorant of Foreign Affairs, instead of composing Differences, made them
wider, by Upbraiding the Romans for intermedling with his Master's Concerns,
and Defying their Power.
Defy proud Minio to the Roman brings.
Minio, sublime in Syrian Blood, then swayed
His Master's Counsels; Him the World obeyed:
Nothing above him, but the Syrian Throne
He saw, all things, beneath it, were his Own.
Whatev'r was done, whatever was designed,
Was not the King's, but Haughty Minio's Mind.
Thus, favored with High Insolence, He sold
Rewards of Virtue, all things uncontrolled
Disposed. His greedy Avarice suppressed
All Thoughts of Bounty in his Master's Breast:
The Name of Merit in that Gulf was drowned,
And, as he pleased, the suffering People found
Ease, or Oppression, to such Mischiefs may
A single Favorite Kings, and Crowns betray.
When He a Period to the Syrian Pride,
And Hopes of Carthage, as he then defied
The Power of Rome, had vainly given: with Rage,
Which nothing, but their Ruin, could assuage,
The Roman Prince to the Myrtoan Main
Descends, and seeks Italian Shores again.
Soon as arrived, the Voice of War through all
The City flies. The careful Consuls call
A frequent Senate: Scipio repeats
Syria's vain Boast of Power, and vainer Threats
Of a proud Favorite, and how the Name
Of Hannibal their Courage did inflame;
What aids by Land, and Sea prepared were;
What Carthage thence might hope; what Rome might fear:
All which in Counsel weighed, and War decreed,
'Twas hard to say, what Shoulders should succeed,
To bear that Burden: Unless employed in some other War, the Consuls were to
be Generals; so that Scipio Africanus, not being Consul, could not pretend to
that Command.
Scipio was then
Debarred by Law to take that Charge again;
A Name that so much Virtue did include,
That Hannibal could never be subdued
Without its Influence, nor Carthage cease
To emulate Rome's Triumphs, and her Peace.
Laelius, a Person very Eminent for his singular Virtue, next under Scipio,
Commanded both in Spain, and Africa, and their Friendship was so Great, that it
was drawn into Example for such as would contract Inviolable Amity so, that
Cicero makes them the Subject of his Discourse De amicitia.
Laelius great Virtues, through the World were famed,
And, where the Noble Scipio was not named
Deserved the Bays. The Younger The Younger Scipio, called Lucius, though of
excellent Endowments, had not yet been renowned (as was Laelius) for any
Military Actions, but was then chosen Consul with Laelius.
Scipio known
More by his Brother's Actions then his Own.
Desired to do, as He had done before
To vanquish Kingdoms, and by Conquests more
Scipio Africanus, was but twenty four Years old, when he took New-Carthage, in
Spain.
Then Years to count his Age. But some, whom fear
Of Syria's Force, and (what cost Rome so dear)
The Name of Hannibal, then moved, did stand
For a more knowing, and experienced Hand.
One whose great Virtues by his Deeds were known.
Supported by no Merits, but his Own.
And, such was Laelius held by Land, and Sea,
For whom Acilius, this Important Plea
Assumes. If We Rome's Safety seek, and more
Then Private Names, the public Peace adore,
Whence Fathers this Dispute? whence this Delay?
Why should we leave to Fortune what we may
Prevent with Reason? when Distempers are
Grown Great, the Wise strong Remedies prepare.
Let not those Seeds of Virtue that appear
In Younger Breasts, be valued at the Fear
Of Public Ruin The Temerity of Flaminius, and Minutius. See the Fifth, and
the Eight Books of Silius.
We Have already found
What Mischief Youth (not by a single Wound)
May through their Heat produce, and still do feel
The Anguish of those Wounds, the Libyan steel,
Through them inflicted: which, if now again
Torn open, will ingeminate the Pain.
One Error all our former Ills recals,
And brings the World against Us to our Walls.
For Rome (alas) can boast no Strength of Friends
Abroad, but what on her Success depends.
Her Virtue only must her Wealth defend,
Her Wisdom to employ it, her Best Friend.
Then let not Favor to a Private Name
Anticipate your Reason. I disclaim
All Envy to those honored Heads, that have
Enriched Us with their Trophies, and that gave
New Titles to our Fasti. May they live
Still glorious in them, and all Time survive.
But let not Us Heaven's Blessings so confine,
As if Entailed upon a single Line.
Our Laws have so ordained, that all, that are
Deserving, may in Public Honors share.
Hence Libyan some; some Gallick wreaths have crowned:
By several Lands, are several Names renowned.
Our Fathers still the Burden of the State
Imposed on Shoulders, equal to the Weight.
The Greatest Heroes ever would contend,
When Prudence, more then Fortune, might commend
Their Deeds. For, though the great Alcides killed
Serpents in's Cradle, yet till he was Skilled
Through many Labors, how his Strength to guide,
He never with the Antaeus.
Libyan Monster tried
His God-like Courage. Let such Honors be
Bestowed, when Dangers, in a less Degree,
Shall threaten Us, and when these Foreign Storms
Cannot resist, but exercise your Arms.
What skilful Pilot, by late Tempest tossed,
His Vessel torn, some Sails, and Tackle lost,
While still the rude Winds rage, the Billows roar
(Though now he has in view his Native Shore)
Will Idle, too secure of Safety, stand,
And trust the Helm to a less Skilful Hand?
No; let this Senate's Wisdom so provide,
That what We want of Strength, may be supplied
By Conduct: then, if it be decreed the State
Shall suffer, We may not be blamed, but Fate.
This said; his Silence a deep Silence through
The Senate struck, and on great Scipio drew
The Eyes of all. In him it lay to turn
Their Choice to Votes, or Fortune of the The Box, into which they put their
Lots, was so called.
Urn.
This did Young Scipio, Laelius that desire:
Laelius, confident of his Party in the Senate, was desirous to put it to the
Vote, Lucius Scipio to draw Lots (which were the two ways of choosing
Officers) till encouraged by his Brother Africanus to le^ve it (...) the
Senate's Choice, resolving to offer himself to be his Lieu-tenant, which
determined the Dispute.
As confident, the Senate would require
A Man, whose former Actions might commend
Their Choice, and Rome upon his Care depend.
After some Pause, and struggling 'twixt the Names
Of dearest Friend, and Brother, while each claims
In his divided Soul an equal Share,
Thus Africanus does himself declare.
I should forbear to speak, did I not see
(Grave Fathers) that your Eyes are fixed on Me;
On whom a Province lies more Weighty far,
Then was the Burden of the Africa War:
For there Rome's Fortune with mine own did join;
But this Intestine Conflict's wholly mine;
While, for my Blood, l'gainst my Soul contend;
Distinguished 'twixt a Brother, and a Friend.
A Friend, whom Rome may boast, that he was born
In her Embrace: whose Virtues do adorn
The Present, and the future Age will bless.
Whom, as my better Genius (I confess)
I ever entertained: his Counsels still
Pursued as Oracles, and never will
My Laelius from my Soul divide. But now
Even what Acilius pleads will not allow,
That to his Conduct we this War assign.
This, only, to our Name, the Powers Divine
Reserve. If greater Wars shall threaten Rome,
The Honor of Command will best become
My Noble Laelius; and, when War shall cease,
He Will be her Chiefest Ornament in Peace.
Though now the Title, GREAT, the Syrian King
Assumes, and to his Aid all Asia bring,
Yet, if the Libyan Captain be not there,
Too mean a Province that for Laelius were.
The Gods their Blessings, as the Stars bestow
Their Influence on Men, and Things below,
Do sev'rally dispense. Some Fatal are
To those, that be the most renowned in War,
Yet by less Warlike fall. Not to repeat
Foreign Examples, or to tell how Great
In Arms, even by a Woman, Cyrus fell.
Things nearer to Us (Fathers) may compel
Your Wonder. After our best Captains slain,
Your Scipio undertook the War in Spain,
When scarce five Lustra old, and all those Lands
Subdued, where Hannibal those dreadful Bands
Amassed, that shook your Walls. What since I Have done
Becomes not Me to speak, whater'e I won
Under Your Auspicies, was the Decree
Of Heaven, should only be achieved by Me.
Nor censure me as Vain, who arrogate
So great a Partage in the Roman Fate,
To say, that, where the Libyans are your Foes,
You must a Scipio to their Arms oppose.
Carthage will ever threaten these our Walls,
Till Heaven our Scipio Nasica, in the last Punick War, took Carthage, Sacked
it, and rased the Walls.
Name unto her Ruin calls.
Then it is not, that I emulate my Friend,
But for Rome's Safety (Fathers) I contend:
And, if the Arguments of Youth dissuade
Your Choice, let my maturer Age be made
The Balance of your Doubts, my Brother's Years
Mine own exceed, when I your greater Fears
Allayed, with Victory; and, that again
You may the same assurance entertain,
Me his Lieu-tenant make, and fear no more
Those Arms, which I subdued for you before.
This said, loud Clamours, with a full Assent,
The Temple shook, and through the City went.
Thence through all Italy the swift alarms
Of War excite the active Youth to Arms.
No Region from those Hills, whose frozen Heads
The Stars invade, to where blew Neptune spreads
His frothy Arms about the Rhegian Walls,
Their Aid denies. The Name of Scipio calls
The most Luxurious from their Choice Delights,
And to meet Dangers, under Him invites.
All, who their Country; all, who Honor love,
His Ensigns seek to follow, and to prove
What Fortune, and the Gods for them ordain.
And now with numerous Ships the Neighboring Main
Oppressed, groans under their vast Weight, and feels
The Fate of Carthage from their brazen Keels.
Which, often as the rebellious Billows rise,
Dash them to pieces: while the Wind supplies
With favorable Blasts their swelling Wings,
And to the Asian Coast the Army brings.
While Rome for future Triumphs thus provides,
Envy, (the Plague of Courts) not Reason guides
The Syrian Counsels. What the Wise persuade,
The Ignorant reject. The Courtier's made
The Soldier's Judge. What he concludes does find
Its Influence upon the Prince's Mind.
Not all the Mighty things, which Hannibal
Had done, which Rome even trembled to recall
To Memory, could make his Sense prevail
The Envy of the Syrian Nobility traduced Hannibal to the King, as if his
Counsel to invade Italy proceeded from his Ambition, once more to see himself,
at the Head of an Army there. So that they wholly diverted him from that
Advise, and Hannibal was ordered to go with the Navy, while the King went in
Person with the Army toward Greece.
To quit the Syrian Kingdoms, and assail
The Fo at Home. Though whosoever so
Invaded is, lends Courage to his Fo,
And Strength to vanquish him. But strangely Blind
To his own Fall, the Syrian King's inclined,
Rather on his own People, all those Ills
To bring, with which Invasive Fury fills
A miserable Land. And strait his Fleet
Is ordered under Hannibal to meet
The Roman, where Crete.
Ionian Billows move
About that Island, where the Wife of Jove
Was born, and by the Careful Nymphs was bred,
Till called by Hymen to her Brother's Bed.
Juno.
She, although Conscious of the Fates to come,
Retaining still her Ancient Hate to Rome,
Her Empire of the Air with As the Roman Navy, came near Phaselis (a
Promontory on the Coast of Pamphylia) a Disease siezed them, and destroyed many
of their men; while the Syrians were detained in their Course toward them by
contrary Winds.
Mischief fills,
And on the neighboring Isles sad Plagues distills.
The unhappy Season with her Wrath conspires,
'Twas when the Dog breathed his Contagious Fires
On fainting Men, depriving Beasts of Food,
And turning into Poison purest Blood.
The attracted Air their Entrails scorcheth, fills
Their Veins with Flames, and, e're expired, kills,
Such hasty Fates, that Time does scarce know how
'Twixt Life, and Death, his Minutes to allow.
While some, whom decent Piety invites
T'interr their Friends, for their own Funeral's Rites
Prepare, and strait from their departing Breath
Infected fall, and share a sudden Death.
The Roman Soldier, whose great Valor scorned
To stoop to Foes, whose Trophies had adorned
His Native House, who never before had known
To yield his Arms, now weak, and feeble grown,
Let Us fall his Shield, and Conquering Sword, and dies,
Even in his Arms, disarmed. This Plague's Surprise
So sudden is, that, as the Master stands
To time, with his loud Voice, the Seamen's Hands,
On his half-Deck he prostrate falls, before
The Word's expressed. Extended at the Oar,
The Seaman, in a laboring Posture, dies,
Not known, if Dead, or rowing, as he lies.
From this so fatal Coast, that did afford
To Death far greater Triumphs, then the Sword,
The Roman Navy, flying the Disease,
Retires, and trusts their Safety to the Seas.
But Venus, fearing lest Saturnia's Hate
From this might greater Mischief propagate,
If then the Syrian Fleet should on them fall,
Thus to her Aid the God of Winds does call.
Great Aeolus, whose mighty Empire lies
Over all the vast Extent, beneath the Skies,
Assist Me now. I ask not, That thou make
Earth tremble, and the World's firm Fabric shake;
Nor that her Stony Entrails thou so wide
Should rend, that Ghosts below may be descri'd;
Nor that the Seas (as in the Giant's Wars)
Thou hurl in watery Mountains against the Stars.
Juno for such Revenge perhaps may call
Against Us, t'exalt her single Hannibal.
I only covet to preserve mine Own,
And to effect the rest, let Fates alone.
She when nor Arms, nor Valor can prevail,
My Race with Hell, and Furies will assail.
Could She infect the Place I hold above,
She Would bring Her Plagues into the Court of Jove:
What Is mine on Earth her Malice does surround.
Thou see what gloomy Vapors, from the Ground,
She draws, Death hatching, in their pregnant Wombs,
And threatening Mischief to all is Mine, and Rome's.
Scarce can my Power, my sacred Isles defend.
Besides that, Venus is said to have been born in that Sea, the Island,
Luxurious in its extraordinary Fertility, the Inhabitants were more prone to
Venus then any other. Their Women before Marriage exposing themselves on the
Shore to all Strangers that arrived there. See Iustine in his Eighteenth Book.
My Cyprian, my dear Paphian Temples tend
To Ruin, and our Votaries, for fear,
Of dire Contagion, all our Shrines forbear.
No Innocence is spared: my Birds, that from
Aurora's bosom to my Lap would come,
And the Refreshments of the choicest Springs,
Would, billing, scatter from their Silver Wings,
As to our sacred Groves they would repair,
Fall flying Victims, in the poisn'd Air.
But this thy Power great Aeolus can cure,
And, what is now corrupted, render pure.
Then purge Infection from this Ambient Air,
Make it Serene, and the lost Health repair
Of this once Happy Clime, and Neighboring Isles,
And thy Reward (with that, She sweetly smiles)
Shall be the fairest Nymph of all my Train.
No sooner said (for who can ought refrain
When Venus pleads) but Aeolus unbindes
From their dark Prisons, the Etesian Winds,
Whose Active Force, not only chased away
All noxious Clouds, and Mists, and gave the Day
A wholesome Face; but, with a constant Gale,
Against all Labor of the Oars prevail,
To keep the Syrian Fleet (the more to please
The Cyprus.
Cyprian Goddess) in her Neighboring Seas.
Twice twenty Days, the Idle Ships, before
The Island lay, and Anchored near the Shore.
When a Desire to see the famed Delights
Of Cyprian Groves, the Syrian Lord's invites,
And Hannibal to Land. No place did more
Indulge to Love, or Venus Power adore.
The Goddess this to all the World prefers,
And is best pleased, when Mortals calls it Hers,
All Deities, that can Earth's Wealth improve,
Here pay their Tribute to the Queen of Love.
The Medows Flora, the Fields Ceres fills
With her rich Plenty, Bacchus crowns the Hills.
The greedy Swains no wealthy Orchards rear:
For Nature choicest Fruits does, every where,
Largely bestow, the Bounty of the Soil
Gives all they can desire, without their Toil.
All other Pleasures, which Affection moves,
They find most ample in their Sacred Groves.
Eternal Shades of Trees, whose Arms above
Embrace, and Roots beneath are making Love:
No Birds of Prey upon the Branches dwell;
Or, if they there frequent, it is strange to tell,
How soon their cruel Nature they forego,
And Kindness to all other Creatures show.
All in their Kinds are paired; no Bird alone:
No Turtles, by their Mates deserted, Moan.
Nothing, that Mischief breeds, can there be found.
Love only has the Power to inflict a Wound.
From Native Grottoes, that all Art exceed,
Their Crystal Fountains several Channels feed
With cooling Streams, which, as they murmuring pass,
Still Verdant keep the Lover's Seats of Grass.
All this survai'd, their Temple's sacred Rites
To Wonder, and Devotion them invites.
The Chief was Paphos, which their Senses Charms
Above Belief. The Goddess there her Arms,
Her Chariot, harnessed Doves, and whatsoever
On Earth she values, keeps. Her Trophies here
Of such, as against her Power rebelled, the Gates
Adorn; their Names, and Fate the Priest relates:
A Priest, who yet five Lustra had not seen,
Yet, since he three had told, her Priest had been:
But must no longer at her Altar stand,
Or take the sacred Censer in his Hand,
When from his Birth twice twenty Years expired;
For Youth is by the Goddess most desired:
Such all her Votaries, and Clients are;
The Aged seldom at her Shrines appear.
These viewed, and past; to a fair Porch they came,
Where Miracles the Deity proclaim.
Bodies to other things transformed by Love,
Whose strange Originals their Change did prove:
Some, whose Obdurate Hearts had made them Stone;
Some, Beasts; some, Birds; some, Trees; their Figures none
Had lost, but, as when changed, their Shapes retain,
And Monuments of her great Power remain.
Above the rest, an Ivory Statue stands,
Fair even to Wonder. Hannibal demands,
What Nymph it was of that Celestial Form?
To whom the Priest replies. A Soul did warm
This Ivory once. The Storie's very strange,
Yet this fair City, and these Walls the Change
Attest. When first Pygmalion in this Isle
Arrived, a Votary to Venus, while
Our Cyprian Virgins such a Freedom used,
That jealous Lovers thought themselves abused,
He, flying Hymen, to his House retires.
But still retaining in his Breast the Fires
Of Love, his troubled Fancy to divert,
This Statue, with more then Promethean Art,
He frames, and, as all Parts he, wondering, views,
Desires of Hymen in his Breast renews,
And Venus thus invokes. Give Me (He said)
For Wife, as Beautiful, and Chaste a Maid,
Great Goddess, and, if thou my Prayer wilt hear,
A Temple to thy Name my Race shall rear.
No sooner said, but the Object of his Love
Receives a Soul, and strait began to move.
Her Eyes no more are fixed; but lively Rays
Eject, and first on her kind Maker gaze.
Then on her polished Limbs, which purple Veins
Now warm, and soften with their beauteous stains.
In brief; She lives Pygmalion's dearest Flame,
And from their Nuptial Bed great Paphos came.
Who, when the Fates the borrowed Soul again
Required, his Ivory Mother, in this Fane
Vowed to the Goddess, placed, and we still here,
With holy Incense, Honor, once a Year.
When this, with other Wonders, they had seen,
The The most secret Place of the Temple.
Adyta they enter, which within
No Images adorn. But Venus stood
Alone, and kept her Altars free from See Tacitus in his Eighteenth Book.
Blood.
They Tears of Myrrha, only, offer there,
And Sighs of Lovers. The included Air
Is ever warm, and wheresoever they turn,
They meet soft Kisses, but no Lips discern.
Amazed the Strangers stand, though strangely pleased:
When them from Wonder thus the Priest released.
The Goddess, for this secret Place alone, The Birth of Kisses.

This Miracle reserves, thus made her Own.
When She her dear Ascanius had conveyed
Up to Cythera, and on Violets laid
The sleeping Boy; Her Aromatic Showers
Of sweetest Roses, round about She powers.
Then gazing on his Face, her former Flame,
Her loved Adonis to her Fancy came.
Scarce could She, then, withstand his Beautie's Charms,
Scarce from his dear Embrace refrain her Arms.
But fearing to disturb the Boy's sweet Rest,
Her Lips upon the Neighboring Roses pressed.
They strait grow Warm, and, ri^ing from the place,
Turned into Kisses, fly about her Face.
The Goddess, willing that the World should share,
So sweet a Pleasure, scatters through the Air,
With a large Hand, the new-created Seed,
Which, as from fertile Glebe arising, breed.
But the first Born She placed within this Fane,
Which warm, as now you feel them, still remain.
This said, a sudden Noise permits no more,
But summons them abruptly to the Shore,
The Wind came fair: the busy Seamen weigh
Their barbed Anchors, and stand off to Sea.
The Time no longer stay will now afford,
The churlish Masters hasten all aboard.
Torn from Delight, the Syrian Nobles are
Displeased, and rather wish another War.
But Hannibal, whose great Heroic Breast,
A Nobler Flame, then that of Love possessed;
With as much Joy the Fetters of those Charms
Shakes off, as Towns besieged, from Hostile Arms
Themselves by Sallies free, and all the Woes
That threatened them, revert upon their Foes.
Honor, which Noble Deeds in War attends,
Exciting his great Soul, he first ascends
His Ship, and offers to the God of Seas
Warm Entrails, then at large his Sails displaies.
Loud Clamours from his high Example, through
The Fleet are spread, whilst all his Course pursue.
And now the Land retires, the Cyprian Shore
Is lost, and all the Flames which they before
Cherished, are quite extinct in every Breast,
Wholly with Thoughts of future War possessed.
A War, wherein Rome's Fortune stood alone
Against the World: and were there more then One,
Might with them all contend. So Great was She,
Till lessened by her Crims of Victory.
Twice had the Sun descended to the Sea;
Twice the winged Hours had raised again the Day.
When they that Coast, where Sida does obtrude
High Rocks (Her strong Defense) against the rude
Assaults of Raging Billows made: and there
Beheld what both their Wonder, and their Fear
At once creates. The Seamen think they have lost
Their Course, and touch upon some un-known Coast.
Or Nature, from the Bowels of the Main,
Some Cyclas thrusts, or floating Grove again.
But as they nearer came, within that Wood
They saw for Fight prepared, an Army stood,
So numerous they were, that what before
Their Wonder was, is now their Terror more.
Their Order such, as when her borrowed Rays
With growing Horns the Silver Moon displaies.
But her full Glory, their Guilt, brazen Prows
Surpast, and gave the Morning, as it rose,
A brighter Face; and, where they made their Way,
With a new Light anticipate the Day.
The Syrian A Sea Fight between Hannibal, and the Romans.
Navy, whether clogged with Fear,
Or their vast Bulk, though still they forward steer.
Went slowly on, till Hannibal so far
Advanced before, that he provoked the War.
At his Approach, the Roman Soldiers fill
The Air with Shouts, that seem the Winds to still,
And fright Pamphylian Nymphs, while he goes on
Fearless, as if his Valor could alone,
With all their Force contend. When a Disdain
To see him dare so much, a Rage more vain
Creates in a brave Rhodian, who forsakes
His Station, and the Combat undertakes.
Both ply their Oars; both seek to gain the Wind.
While Fortune, that, in this alone, inclined
To favor Hannibal, extends his Sails
With following Gusts so, that his speed prevails,
And bears his Gally on against his Fo,
With so great Violence, the barbed Proe
Strikes through his Side, and with the furious Shock
Shakes his whole Bulk, as bruised against a Rock.
As from some Engine shot, the Splinters fly,
Through all the Ship, and One the Captain's Eye
So deeply wounds, it sinks into his Brain,
And leaves upon the Deck his Body slain.
With him the Courage of the rest does die,
And a base Fear persuades them straight to fly.
While Hannibal pursues, with Storms of Fire
From Pitchy Lamps, and Darts, as they retire.
Black waves of Smoke the flying Vessel hide;
And her sad Fate invites from either side.
Fresh Squadrons to the Fight. These to maintain
Their Conquest; those to take Revenge. The Main
Foams with their active Oars, and the Sea-Gods,
Affrighted, seek their most remote Abodes.
Fearing the future Horror of the Day,
And bloody Seas, their safety might betray.
Both Navies now are met, Proes against Proes;
Sides against Sides they strike, and, grapling close,
So firmly, that, as Foot to Foot they stand,
And, with their Swords, deal Wounds, as if on Land.
But where the swelling Surges interpose,
Or Winds so, that the Galleys cannot close,
Darts, Arrows, Jav'lins, flaming Lamps they throw,
And Death, and Wounds, in several Shapes, bestow:
The Romans now; the Syrians now give Way:
Yet neither fly, but equally the Day
Are confident to gain, and their Retreat,
Like Rams, does greater Force, and Rage beget.
Till Scipio, to whose Fortune Syria's Fate
Must yield, and thence her future Ruin date,
A Squadron of Italian Galleys brought
Against Apollonius, who too rashly sought
So brave a Fo. Like Thunder, tearing Clouds,
Their meeting Vessels crack: th* entangled Shrouds
Some, that would sink, above the Waves retain;
While others to the Bottom of the Main
Descend, and in their Arms the Soldiers drowned
Find a sad Fate without Revenge, or Wound.
But some, whose present Courage stood above
Surprise of Danger, against such Fortune, strove
To die among their Foes, and leaping on
Their Decks, there, fighting, fall. Some backward thrown
Are lost in the Assault: others, whose Skill
In Swimming, and their Rage kept floating still,
Attempt to Board again. Eumenes late
A Captain, who his Tyrian Gallie's Fate
A while survived, first seized a Romane's Oar,
By which he nimbly climbing up (before
Perceived) the Deck had gained; when strait, one Hand
Lop'd off, the other still his Hold maintained,
Until a second Wound took that away:
Yet this sad Loss could not his Mind betray
To want of Courage, but his Teeth supplied
Their Room, until a Fauchion did divide
His Body from his Head, which still did keep
Its Hold: the Trunck fell back into the Deep.
The Example of his Death made some to burn
With Rage: some, chill with Fear, their Proes to turn.
And fly. While Hannibal their Flight, in vain,
Upbraids, and hales them to the Fight again.
But, when they saw Pamphilius possessed
With so great Terror, that he first the rest
Forsook: no Sense of Honor could restrain
Their Flight. But, scattered over all the Main,
The base Cilicians spread their Sails to Fear,
Scarce knowing to what Land, or Coast they steer.
Hannibal's Valor.
But the brave Libyan, who as much to fly
Abhorred, as those base Cowards feared to die,
With three stout Tyrian Galleys, makes through all
The Latian Ships t'attaque their Admiral:
Thinking, that Act alone would best become
His Valor, when he seemed t'assault even Rome
Her Self; and from his Conquest, or his Fall,
The World might say, 'Twas done like Hannibal.
But Fortune the Success denied, and brought
A furious War upon him, where he fought.
Where e're he turns, their Numbers him surround,
So, as besieged he stands. No place is found,
Where a brave Deed a single Arm may boast.
All Valor in their Multitudes is lost.
This Face of Danger his last Fury wakes.
As, when too close pursued, a Tiger takes
His Stand, resolved to die revenged; he views
His Foes, all Wounds receives; at length does chose
Against that Hand to spend his Stock of Rage,
That against his Life most forward does engage.
Hannibal's Stratagem.
So a Pretorian Ship, that 'bove the rest,
With Showers of Piles, and Darts did him infest,
With a Prodigious Storm he lays aboard,
And all the Plagues, that Libya could afford,
(To which her thirsty Sands do give a Birth)
Upon it throws, enclosed in Pots of Earth.
From which (when fallen, and broken on the Decks)
Myriads of Serpents raised their marble Necks.
The Soldiers, in the Fight, with Wonder are
Surpised, as if Medusa made the War.
Their dreadful Hiss suppressed all warlike Sounds,
And when their Stings, or Teeth inflict their Wounds,
Strange kinds of sudden Death ensue; while some,
Whose Nerves the deadly Poison does benum,
Like Statues fixed stand: Others beheld
Their well-shap'd Limbs above Proportion swelled,
Till their increasing Bow'ls their Bellies burst:
Some seem to have swallowed Flames, and a dire Thrist
Firing their bloodless Entrails, to allay
Its Rage, they headlong leap into the Sea.
This through one Wound sees all his blood to flow,
His Veins soon empty made; That does not know
He Is hurt, nor feels a Wound, when Death strait creeps
Into his Heart, and he for ever sleeps.
But, though each Serpent thus a several kind
Of Death inflicts, yet, to one Ship confined
Free from their Venomous Assault, the rest,
The Libyan with all sorts of Arms oppressed,
Till Juno, struggling still with Fate (resolved
No Roman Hand should boast his Fall) involved
The Day in Horror; chased the Light away
Before its Time; and over all the Sea
The Wings of Night extends: the Pregnant Clouds
Discharge their Cataracts, and from the Shrouds
The roaring Winds the swelling Canvase tare
The Roman Ships, as if in Civil War,
Against one another strike, and now contend
How from themselves they may themselves defend.
At length dispersed over all the Main they flee,
And, by this Danger, from a greater free,
Safe to the Lycian Shore the Libyan came,
Reserved by Fate to be Bithynia's Shame.
Antiochus overthrown at Land.
But Fortune had not thus her Aid denied
By Sea alone unto the Syrian Side,
But, where by Land the King his Armies led,
His Ensigns from the Roman Eagles fled.
His Thracian Kingdoms now no more his Law
Obeyed, but the Ausonian Fasces saw
In Triumph, through their Conquered Cities, go,
And Him, of late their Lord, esteemed their Fo.
His Grecian Friends the Leagues, that they had sworn,
Reject, and now his weaker Friendship scorn,
Scarce would the Syrian Cities entertain
Their flying King, at his return. So vain
The People's Favor, and their Faith, when crossed
By Fortune, and his Power a King has lost!
Hannibal, fearing to trust himself among the Syrians, in this Decline of his
Fortune, retired to Prusias King of Bithynia, and served him with great Success
against the Etolians.
This Levity the Libyan Prince revolved
Much in his troubled Thoughts, at length, resolved
No more the Dangerous Envy of that Court
To try, but to Bithynia's King resort;
A King, who wanted then so brave a Hand
Against Etolians to defend his Land.
Prompted to this by his unhappy Fate,
Thither he speeds, and finds (alas!) too late
The Malice of his Foes could not extend
To reach his Death, but by a Treacherous Friend;
A Friend, who to his Valor owed his Crown,
And, by that Fatal Victorie's Renown,
Made Jealous Rome to hasten on his Fall,
By such an Act, as all the World may call
Her Infamy. For he, that conquered Foes
Destroys, when he may spare, does Honor lose.
But to the Roman Arms all Asia now
Submits, and all their Laws imposed allow.
No King, but basely yields to their Demands:
No City, where they March, their Power withstands^
And wha^ did most with Hannibal's sad Fate
Conspire, his Ruin to accelerate,
Was, that Flaminius, (the Son of that Flaminius whom Hannibal vanquished, and
slew near the Lake Thrasimenus) sent Ambassador to Prusias, exceeded (says
Appian) his Commission; demanding Hannibal to be delivered to Him, to which the
Perfidious King, fearing the Power of the Romans, assented.
Flaminius, whose rash Sire before
The Libyan Arms on Thrasimenus Shore
Renowned, a Legate to Bithynia came,
And to his base Revenge the Senate's Name
Usurped. Their Peace, and Amity to all
Denied, that should protect brave Hannibal.
The King, consulting with his Fears, forgets
All Ties of Honor: on his Safety sets
A greater Value. Those late Trophies gained,
By which the Libyan Prince his Throne sustained,
Seem to upbraid him with a Debt, which He
Cannot discharge, bu^ by this Treachery.
Those Glories, that too near his Crown dilate
Their Luster into Crimes, degenerate.
They Guilty are, whose Merits stand above
Reward: in lower Spears Men safest move.
These Thoughts drew on the Noble Libyan's Fate,
Whose strong Suspicious made him (but too late)
T'attempt Escape. The dubious Faith of Kings,
Which varies with the Face of Humane Things,
Gave him to fear a Change, and to prepare
Hannibal, at length, suspecting the Faith of Prusias, had made several
Passages under Ground, to escape (if possible) the Guards appointed to beset
his House: but, seeing no means to avoid them, he took Poison, which he always
wore about him (some say, in the Pommel of his Sword) and died in the
seventieth Year of his Age. His Body was buried near Libyssa (which he from the
Oracle mistook for Libya) only with this Inscription; HERE LIES HANNIBAL.
Strange Lab'rinths under Ground, to shun the Snare
But all in Vain, declining Fortune made
Traitors of nearest Friends, and he is betrayed
In all, that he designs. Armed Troops enclose
His House, and stop his Way wheree're he goes.
But his Resolved Mind 'bove Fortune stands,
And still reserves his Fate in his Own Hands.
Though now betrayed He is, and left by all,
He Is still so great, that none can Hannibal,
But Hannibal, destroy. And, to prevent
Surprise, into a secret place he went,
Where, first the Gods accused, and Hanno's Pride,
(That to his growing Conquests Aid denied)
The Syrians Folly, and base Prusias last
Perfidious Act (which all the rest surpast
In Infamy) with Execrations blamed,
The Aid of his Great Father's Spirit he claimed:
And a dire Poison (without farther Pause)
More Fierce then that, which, from the raging Jaws
Of Cerberus, upon Earth's Bosom fell,
When Great Alcides dragged him chained from Hell,
He swallows down. This baneful Drug, before
Prepared by a Massylian Witch, he wore
Locked on his Sword, which, if that chanced to fail,
Might, as his surer Destiny, prevail
Against all Humane Force: and, as he found
It seized his Vitals by an Inward Wound,
He these last Words expired. Now lay aside
Thy Fears (O Rome) no more will I thy Pride
Oppose, but with this Satisfaction Die,
That, thus Degenerate, Thy self, wilt my
Revenge effect. Not Arms, but Virtue made
Thy Fathers Great; which since in Thee decai'd,
Thy Ruin must ensue. They, Nobly, scorned
By Treason to destroy a Fo, and warned
Fabricius advertized Pyrrhus (after he had given a signal Overthrow to the
Romans) of the Treachery of his Physician, who for a sum of Money offered to
Poison Him. Plutarch in the Life of Pyrrhus.
The Epirote of Poison, when he stood
Armed at their Gates, and Triumphed in their Blood.
But Me, oppressed with Fortune, and my Years,
Betrayed a feeble Victim to thy Fears,
A Cons'lar Legate forces thus to fly
From Life,'against Laws of Hospitality,
And a King's Faith. But this vile Stain (O Rome)
More lasting, then thy Trophies, shall become:
And, when thy Deeds in War, in future Time,
The World shall read, thy Glories this one Crime
Shall blast, and all account Thee from my Fall
Unworthy such a Fo, as Hannibal.
More He Would have said, but through his swelling Veins
Death creeps, and binds in Adamantine Chains
The Spirits of Life, which with this Language ends:
His Soul to other Heroes Ghosts descends.
FINIS.
Errata in Silius Italicus.
Page 2. In the Margent (c) for there sharp Wars, read three sharp. etc. ibid.
v. 19. for with a Buls-hide r. which, etc. p. 13. v. 1^, r. Phocaan, ib.
Margent (p) r. Phoc^is. p. 24. Margent (a) r. would have it on. etc. ib. Marg.
(c) r. Pyrrhus King of Epire. ib. v. 15. r. begins. p. 42, v. 9. r. Quit, p.
44. v. 27. r. Offering with the Infernal Priestess, there. p. 45. v. 11, r.
then in for through, etc. p. 85. v. 10. r. Lap. lib. 7. Argument r. Romans, p.
1^6. v. 1^. r. He, p. 191. v. 15. r. Our buisiness, p. 194, v. 9, r. run, p.
201. v. 19. r. with Lies, ib. v. 26, r. then, p. 210. v. 4, r. who, ib. v. 1^
r. Him, p. 238, v. 12. r. his Looks, p. 280. v. 2^. r. wild. p. 302, Marg. ( f)
r. sent two Armies, p. 306, Marg. ( g) r. which was the Judgment given against
Hora^^u^ for killing his Sister, by K. Tullus. p. 323, v. 3, r. sprung, p. 324,
v. 29, r. who, I. etc. p. 330. v. 30, r. Rest, p. 336. v. 1. r. thou, p. 348,
v. 3. r. r. the Valour^ p. 372, Marg. r. Siedge, p. 373, Marg. r. as my Bones,
p. 385, Marg. (q) r. New games, p. 387. v. 30, r. Is Caesar, p. 416. v. 1. r.
then so by Maladies, p. 419, v. 5. r. thy Ideas, p. 426, v. 20, r. winding
Creeks, p. 445, v. 22, r. the fierce Cantab. p. 437, v. 21, r. He Gala, p. 446.
v. 20. r. whose lofty folds, ib. v. 28, r. Fold, p. 490, v. 33, r. my Flames I,
p. 496, v. 23, r. thy Entreaty.

Errata for t^ Continuation.
Page 2. The English Verses are immediately to follow the Latin ^iz. Hinc albi,
Clitumne, greges. then follows. But this virtue vanishing, etc. p. 6. v. 14. r.
Resentment. p. 10. Marg. K^ r. ^0. and 200. p. 33. v. 3. r. Whosoever. p. 36.
v. 16. ^r. Flight. p. 39. v. 24. r. Then^ p. 40. v. 19. r. Mighty. p. 41. v. 9.
^r. That. p. 44. v. 24. r. a loss p ^. v. 9. r. Gods. p. 72. v. 3. r.
Pamphilica^.


