THE Critical History OF THE RELIGIONS AND CUSTOMS OF THE EASTERN NATIONS.

Written in French by the Learned Father SIMON.

And now done into English, by A. LOVELL. A. M.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for Henry Faithorne and John Kersey at the
Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXV.

THE TRANSLATOUR TO THE READER.
IF at anytime a Book of this nature has been useful, it seems now to be
necessary; when most men think themselves obliged to make a bustle for
proselyting others to their Opinions, and yet are not certain wherein they
differ one from another, or how far they agree together. Difference will still
be difference, though, (to use a word well known at this time) it may be
trimmed under a disguise of Conformity: And therefore to prevent the mistakes
and disappointments that those who labor about so good a Work, as the Uniting
of Christians, under one and the same Belief, may meet with from Prejudice,
Interest, or Artifice; perhaps not one thing may be more effectual, than the
true stating of the Faith and Opinions of others; who, if they be ingenuous,
will never be complemented out of their Persuasions, nor look upon them as
Friends, who would impose upon them, for friendship sake, what is inconsistent
with their Principles.

It were to be wished indeed, that all men were of one mind, if Providence
which governs the World thought it convenient it should be so, but since it
has been foretold, that Offenses must come, it were to be desired at least,
that all knew the minds one of another, that so they might rightly understand
how to rectify mistakes, or confirm the truth amongst men. In order to that
useful discovery, probably none of those many, who have laboriously sifted the
truth by their Critics, deserve the Title of Candid and Impartial Judges,
better than Father Simon, the Learned Author of this Treatise, who through the
whole Book has employed his great Talent with so much Integrity and
Disengagedness, that one may say of him, Amicus Papa, Amici Graeci, Amici
Latini, sed magis Amica Veritas. And therefore when this Book came recommended
from beyond Sea, and that I perused it; I thought that I could hardly, in my
low Station, do better service to the public, than to render it into English;
especially seeing the whole design of it is, to clear matter of fact from
mistakes, and aspersions, and the Belief and Practice of the Eastern Christians
from the Erroneous Notions that at this distance, may be given us of them by
the Travelers and Writers of all sorts. And though, the Author discourses
largely of Transubstantiation as being the belief of the Greek Church, the
Reader will easily perceive that he never meant to enter into the merits of the
cause, and to dispute the truth of the Doctrine, which peradventure may seem
(in the Author's Opinion) very difficult to be attempted by Humane Reason; but
barely to assert and relate matter of fact, which it is fit all should know:
Nor, indeed, could he have used, in my weak Judgment, a meaner Argument either
for or against that Doctrine, than the belief of an ignorant and oppressed
People, seeing Protestants that weigh things, are not startled or moved by the
same belief, which they know to be maintained and professed in the Church of
Rome, a Church far more conspicuous both for Freedom, Wealth and Learning than
that of the forlorn Greeks. The truth is, the Learned Author of a Discourse
lately published against Transubstantiation manages the Controversy much
better, and reasons more closely to the point; when amongst his other
Arguments, he assigns the time that that Doctrine came to be established in the
Church, to be when Image Worship was enjoined by the second Council of Nice;
which to me is as strong an Argument as any that Father Simon has produced, to
prove that the Greeks who own that Council, and are very Superstitious in
Image Worship, have ever since entertained that belief, seeing no attempt was
ever used before the Reformation, to convince them of the contrary.

Since then the only design of this Book is to relate matter of Fact, and to
clear the truth from mistakes, I Question not but that it will be so well
taken, that even those Ingenious Persons who have asserted in Print some things
which they will find here contradicted, may not dislike what I have done (who
am very careful not to offend in any thing against the public) in setting it
forth in English; and since they or their Friends want not Learning to defend
the truth, they cannot be suspected to want Modesty and Sincerity (if
convinced) to acknowledge a mistake.

A. LOVELL.

A Table of the Chapters of this Book, and of the Pieces subjoyned to it.
CHap. I. Of the Belief and Customs of the Modern Greeks. Page 1. Chap. II. Of
Transubstantiation. Whether it be acknowledged by the Greeks who are commonly
called Schismatics. p. 33. Chap. III. Of the Adoration of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist. Whether it be in use amongst the Greeks. p. 57. Chap. IV. Of the
Belief of the Melchites. p. 61. Chap. V. Of the Belief and Customs of the
Georgians or Iberians, and of those of Colchis or Mengrelia. p. 64. Chap. VI. A
Supplement concerning the Belief and Customs of the Georgians and Mengrelians.
p. 70. Chap. VII. Of the Belief and Customs of the Nestorians. p. 74. Chap.
VIII. Of the Indians or Christians of St. Thomas. p. 87. Chap. IX. Of the
Customs and Ceremonies of the Jacobites. p. 106. Chap. X. Of the Belief and
Customs of the Cophties. p. 110. Chap. XI. Of the Belief and Customs of the
Abyssins or Ethiopians. p. 118. Chap. XII. Of the Belief and Customs of the
Armenians. p. 123. Chap. XIII. Of the Belief and Customs of the Maronites. p.
131. Chap. XIV. A Supplement to what has been said concerning the Maronites. p.
144. Chap. XV. Of the Religion and Customs of the Mahometans p. 148. A List of
the Churches depending on the Patriarchate of Constantinople, Composed by Nilus
Doxopatrius, and related by Leo Allatius, Lib. 1. de Cons. Eccl. Occid. and
Orien. c. 24. p. 165 Another List of the Churches depending on the Patriarchate
of Constantinople, Published by Mr. Smith in his Discourse of the Present State
of the Greek Church. p. 171. The Testimony of Gennadius concerning
Transubstantiation taken out of a manuscript Book of Meletius Syrigus against
the Confession of Faith Published under the name of Cyrillus Lucaris Patriarch
of Constantinople. p. 174. An Extract from a Manuscript Book whereof the Title
is, (...), etc. p. 176. An Extract of M. Claude's Copy of a Manuscript Letter
attributed to Meletius Archbishop of Ephesus, and pretended to have been
written to some Divines of Leyden. p. 183. A List of the Churches depending on
the Patriarch of Armenia residing at Egmiathin, which was dictated by Uscan
Bishop of Uscavanch, Proctor General to the Patriarch. p. 184.
THE Critical History OF THE Belief and Customs OF THE EASTERN NATIONS.
CHAP. I. Of the Belief and Customs of the Modern Greeks.
SEEING all the Sects that are at present in the Eastern Countries, have sprung
from the Greeks, and that excepting some particular Points, for which they have
separated from them, they agree in the rest of their Belief and Ceremonies, it
is necessary that we treat first of the Religion of the Greeks, before we come
to those others that depend upon it.

The Greek Church subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople was not always of
that vast extent, to which it attained after that it pleased the Eastern
Emperors to lessen other Patriarchates for greatening that of Constantinople:
which they could the more easily do, because their Power, as to things of that
Nature, has been far greater than that of the Emperors of the West, and that
for erecting of new Bishoprics, or granting new Rights and Jurisdictions, they
stood but very little on the consent of Patriarchs; whereas in the Western
Church, the Popes by Degrees have become Supreme in these Affairs, and Princes
must now have their recourse to them.

There are several Lists of Churches which are subject to that of
Constantinople: but because they are ancient, and do not sufficiently inform us
of the Extent to which that Church pretends, we shall produce two that are
later, one made by a Greek not much known, called Nilus Doxapatrius, See the
Lists that are at the End of the Book. A.
and related by Leo Allatius. And the other mentioned in the Letter of Mr.
Smith In the same Place. B.
concerning the Present State of the Greek Church, which he assures us he had
from some Greeks of Constantinople. Both these Lists are in Greek and Latin,
subjoined to the end of this Treatise. Let it now suffice us to observe here,
that most of the Greek Metropolitans still retain certain Dignities or Titles
of Honor, which distinguish them one from another; so that when the Patriarch
of Constantinople writes to the Archbishops, nay and to some Bishops, he never
fails to give them their Titles, even in the miserable State to which they are
at present reduced. The Greeks, in all times, have been nice in distinguishing
themselves by Titles of Honor, and by lofty and magnificent Names: which by
many is attributed to an Oriental vanity: whilst they who are more sparing in
Censure, will attribute it to their Politeness and Civility. Though the Church
of Constantinople has lost the great Splendor, which it enjoyed under
Christian Emperors, yet the Churchmen still take to themselves Titles of
Honor and Pompous Names, of which they are proud. Nor are the Monks and
Religious free from that Ambition; And that is the reason why Modern Greek
VVriters attribute commonly to themselves such kinds of Titles, and prefix them
to their Books; as, for instance, Doctor of the Great Church, and the like,
which do not always excuse them from the ignorance wherein they are plunged.
But let us now speak of their Belief.

Since the Greek Church has been reduced to the sad State wherein we see it at
present, the Latins have imposed many things upon them without cause, and the
Emissaries have often called them Heretics without any ground. But, at length,
some Learned Men at Rome under Pope Urban VIII. perceived the ignorance of the
Latin Divines, that condemned for Heresy what ever they had not learnt in
their Schools. This has been already observed by an Author who published his
Travels to Mount Libanus, with some pretty large Remarks, wherein he explains
the Theology of the Eastern Churches. That Author alleges, that the Latins
often accuse the Greeks of Innovation, without any reason, and that if Theology
were traced to its source, it would be found that the Greeks have stuck closer
to Antiquity than the Latins have done.

We have, of late, some learned Works on that Subject, which seem to have been
composed by an Author, that has solidly refuted what the ablest Protestants
of France alleged in that matter. However, I think the Author of the Notes
upon Gabriel of Philadelphia has come nearest the Truth, by keeping a mean
betwixt both Parties, and distinguishing the new Greeks who have read the Books
of the Latins, or have studied in their Schools, from those who have had no
Commerce with them; he confesses that the former agree more with the Latins
than the other, at least as to the manner of Expression. The Author of the
Remarks on the Voyage to Mount Libanus has gone farther: for the affirms that
the Modern Greeks do for most part but Copy the Books of the Latins; not
following in all things the Sentiments of their Forefathers; and besides, that
their minds being raised but little above Popular traditions, they take no
pains to search for Divinity in its Original. Nay he adds, that the Works of
Gabriel Archbishop of Philadelphia, though he be in the Number of those who are
not reunited to the Latin Church, are no more but a medly of the Theology of
the Greeks and Latins; which is chiefly to be understood of the method and
expressions. P. Morin was also of that opinion, when in his Works of Penance
and Ordinations, he speaks of the Archbishop of Philadelphia.

If we follow that Principle, which is very well grounded in these two
Authors, we shall more easily discover what the Belief of the Greeks is, and
it will be no hard matter to reconcile the different Opinions of those who have
written on that Subject. I could not, in my Judgment, make the Belief of the
Modern Greeks more apparent; than by inserting the Catalogue which Caucus
Archbishop of Corfou has made of the Errors which he imputes to them; and by
adding at the same time, some necessary Reflections for distinguishing what is
true from what is false in that matter, which has been variously treated by
different Authors.

Caucus in Hist. de Graec. recentiorum Haeresibus.
Caucus a Noble Venetian and Archbishop of Corfou, in the Book that he wrote
concerning the Errors of the New Greeks, dedicated to Pope Gregory XIII.
observes the following Errors.

I. They re-baptise all the Latins that embrace their Communion.

II. They delay the Baptism of Children until the third, fourth, fifth, sixth,
tenth and eighteenth Year of their Age.

III. Of the seven Sacraments of the Roman Church, they admit not Confirmation,
nor Extreme Unction.

IV. They deny Purgatory, though they pray for the Dead.

V. They acknowledge not absolutely the Primacy of the Pope.

VI. They deny that the Church of Rome is the true Catholic Church, and that
she is Mistress of all other Churches. They even prefer their own Church before
the Latin Church, and on Holy Thursday excommunicate the Pope, and all the
Latin Bishops as Heretics and Schismatics.

VII. They deny that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son.

VIII. They refuse to adore the Holy Sacrament in the Mass of Latin Priests who
consecrate in unleavened bread, according to the ancient Custom of the Roman
Church confirmed by the Council of Florence. Nay they wash the Altars on which
the Latins have celebrated, and will not suffer Latin Priests to celebrate upon
their Altars, because they pretend that the Sacrifice ought to be performed
with leavened bread.

IX. They say that the Ordinary words wherein the Latins make the Consecration
to consist, are not sufficient to change the Bread and the Wine into the Body
and Blood of our Lord, if some Prayers and Benedictions of the Fathers be not
added.

X. They affirm that the Communion under both kinds is to be given to Children,
even before they can distinguish that Nourishment from another, because that is
a matter of Divine Right. And therefore they give the Communion to Children
immediately after Baptism, and they account the Latins, who are of a contrary
Judgment, Heretics.

XI. They hold that Laymen are by Divine Law obliged to communicate under both
kinds, and call the Latins Heretics for maintaining the contrary.

XII. They affirm that Believers when they have attained to years of
discretion, are not to be forced to communicate every Year at Easter; but that
they are to have liberty of Conscience.

XIII. They show no Respect, Worship, nor Veneration to the Holy Sacrament of
the Eucharist, even when their Priests celebrate, and they carry it to the Sick
without Torch-light. Besides, they keep it in a little Bag and Box, without
other Ceremony, than fastening it to the Wall; whereas they light Lamps before
their Images.

XIV. They believe that the Host consecrated on Holy Thursday, is much more
efficacious, than those which are consecrated on ordinary Days.

XV. They deny that the Sacrament of Marriage is a Bond which cannot be broken.
And therefore they accuse the Church of Rome of Error, for teaching that
Marriage cannot be dissolved in the Case of Adultery, and that it is not
allowed to marry again in that Case. But the Greeks teach the contrary, and
practice it daily.

XVI. They condemn fourth Marriages.

XVII. They solemnize not the Festivals of the Virgin, Apostles and other
Saints instituted by the Catholic Church and the Fathers, on the same Days
that the Western Church celebrates them: and besides that they do it after
another manner, they also despise the Feasts of many very ancient Saints.

XVIII. They say that the Canon of the Latin Mass ought to be abrogated, as
being full of Errors.

XIX. They deny that Usury is a mortal Sin.

XX. They deny that Subdeaconship is at present a sacred Order.

XXI. Of all the General Councils that have been celebrated in the Catholic
Church by Popes at different times, they admit of none after the seventh
General Council which is the second of Nice, that was called against those who
rejected Images. The Greeks acknowledge none of the rest, and submit not to
their Decrees.

XXII. They deny Auricular Confession to be of Divine Right, pretending it
only to be a Positive and Ecclesiatical Constitution.

XXIII. They say that Laymens Confessions ought to be arbitrary. And therefore
amongst them, Laics are not constrained to confess once a year, and they are
not excommunicated for neglecting it.

XXIV. They pretend that in Confession it is not necessary, nor of Divine
Right, that men should confess all their Sins in particular, nor yet tell all
the Circumstances that alter the nature of a Sin.

XXV. They give the Communion to Laics, both in Health and Sickness, though
they have not before confessed their Sins to a Priest; and that, because they
are persuaded that Confession is arbitrary, and that Faith is the only and
true Preparation for receiving the Eucharist.

XXVI. They slight the Vigils of the Latins, before the Festivals of Our Lord,
the Virgin and Apostles; as well as the Fasts of the Ember-weeks. Nay on these
Days they eat Flesh in contempt of the Latins.

XXVII. They accuse the Latins of Heresy, because they eat flesh that has
been strangled, and other Meats that are condemned in the Old Testament.

XXVIII. They deny that simple Fornication is a mortal Sin.

XXIX. They affirm that it is lawful to deceive an Enemy, and that it is no
Sin to do him Injury.

XXX. As to Restitution they are of the Opinion, that it is not necessary to
Salvation to restore what one has robbed.

XXXI. In fine, they believe, that he who has once been a Priest, may return
again to a Lay-condition.

These are the Opinions that distinguish the Greeks from the Latins, if we
credit Caucus, who attributes that Belief not only to the Greeks of Corfou,
but also to the other Greeks who are separated from the Church of Rome.

But if we listen to Caucus Venetus Archiepiscopus Corcyrensis, vir nullius
plane doctrinae vel Judicii... Libello edito de Graecorum recentiorum
haeresibus, Graecos omnes non sine evidenti calumnia diffamavit... an mendacio,
an scelere, an fraud, an falaciis... summorum Pontificum gratia demerenda est?
Leo Allat. lib. 3. de Consens. cap. 10.
Leo Allatius, Caucus is an Ignorant, a Slanderer and a Man without Judgment,
who thought to oblige the Pope by multiplying the Errors of the Greeks, and
has attributed to all, what he learnt and saw in Corfou. Nevertheless, it is
no hard matter to justify Caucus in most part of the Opinions which he imputes
to the Greeks, unless, perhaps, in what concerns Morality, the Corruption
whereof proceeds rather from private Persons, than an universal and approved
Belief; and it is to be feared that it may be objected to Allatius, that he
has softened a great many things in the Opinions of the Greeks, through a
Design of Reconciliation, and to curry Favor with Pope Urban VIII. who at that
time proposed to himself the Reunion of the Greeks to the Church of Rome, by
soft and mild ways. In effect, if we carefully examine the Errors which Caucus
imputes to the Modern Greeks, we shall find that few Men have more exactly
observed them. And, indeed, the Pope having enjoined him to do it, there is no
probability that he would have imposed upon the Pope, in an affair of that
importance. Seeing he was not learned in the Divinity of the Ancients, he has
referred all to School Divinity, and the Decisions of the Council of Trent,
which he took to be the Rule according to which he ought to condemn as
erroneous, what ever did not conform thereunto; and in that his sincerity
appears the more. For, for a long time he had informed himself wherein they
agreed with the Church of Rome, and wherein they differed, condemning,
nevertheless, too boldly what suited not with the Practice of his Church. But
let us consider more particularly, whether Caucus be so great a Slanderer, and
whether he has imposed so much on the Greeks, as Leo Allatius would have the
World believe.

In the first Place, as to the re-baptising of the Latins, it is certain that
they have done it in other Places, besides Corfou; and that because of the
Enmity they bear toward them, looking upon all their Ceremonies as abominable.
And for the same reason they condemn the Mass of the Latins, wash their Altars
after a Latin Priest has celebrated on them, as if they had been polluted, and
consider the Unleavened bread consecrated by the Latins as an impure thing.
Proofs of this may be had not only in Catholic Writers, but even in the
Oriental Canon Law, and especially in Resp. Demetrii Archiep. Bulgar.
the Answers of the Patriarchs, where most cases that concern the Ceremonies of
the Latins, (...).
are proposed, and resolved against those who made appear so great an Aversion
to the Ceremonies of the Latins. Whence it may be inferred, that most part of
the Greeks rejected the Ceremonies that are observed in the Church of Rome, as
impure and profane, and that none but some Learned Men amongst them, have
endeavored to moderate that great Aversion which was generally had against the
Ceremonies of the Latins. And we ought not to be surprised at this, seeing the
Latins have not been more favorable to the Baptism and Leavened bread of the
Greeks, as Appears by several Letters of the Popes Epist. Clement. VII. apud
Allat. lib. de interst.
who have written in their favor. Besides that some School Divines have
doubted of the Validity of their Baptism, and their other Sacraments, as might
easily be proved.

Secondly, that which has made Caucus say, that the Greeks acknowledge not the
Sacraments of Confirmation and Extreme Unction, is because he considered them
with relation to the Practice of the Church of Rome, wherein the former of
these Sacraments is administered separately from Baptism; and is at present one
of the great Functions of Bishops (to whom it is reserved,) in their
Visitations. The other is never administered in the Church of Rome, but to those
who are at the Point of Death; from whence that Sacrament has been called
Extreme Unction. But the Greeks administer that first Sacrament at the same
time they do Baptism, and the Oriental Church has always retained that
Custom, which differs from the Practice of he Western. Besides, amongst the
Greeks, as in all other Parts of the East, the Priest administers that
Sacrament, as may be seen in the Dissertation which Luc. Holsten. dissert. de
sacr. Confirm. apud Graecos.
Holstenius made on that Subject, and which was Printed at Rome by Order of
Cardinal Francisco Barbarini. That Learned Man affirms, that that Practice is
so ancient in the Greek Church, that the Power of confirming is become common
to Priests, as if established by Law. As for Extreme Unction, the Greeks delay
it not, as the Latins do, till the sick Person be at the Point of Death, nor do
they call that Sacrament Extreme Unction: On the contrary, the Sick go to the
Church to receive it, when they can conveniently, and it is administered to them
as often as they are sick, because they think that St. James in his Epistle
speaks of those that are sick, and not of such as are at the Point of Death.

In the third Place, as to Adoration which they render not to the Holy
Sacrament after the Consecration, that ought not neither to be generally
understood, because it is certain they adore that Sacrament, but only with
relation to the Adoration which the Latins pay to the Eucharist, so soon as the
Priest has pronounced these words, This is my Body. Seeing the Greeks place
not the Consecration in these words, but in some Prayers that come after, it is
not to be thought strange, if Caucus, who made the Practice of his Church his
Rule in judging of the Errors of the Greeks, has said that they adored not
the Eucharist: nay more, when they have consecrated, which, in their opinion,
is done after the invocation of the Holy Ghost, they use none of that
Ceremonial adoration which is observed in the Latin Church; but they think it
enough to adore Jesus Christ who is presented to them by elevating the Host
after their way, a little before the Communion. However Caucus is not to be
excused in that he took all his measures according to the Practice of his own
Church, unless, probably he had Orders to reform all things according to that
Standard.

Fourthly, it is of Public Notoriety, that the Orientals communicate in both
kinds, and that they pretend to be warranted in that by the words of Jesus
Christ himself. In that manner the Patriarch Jeremy speaks in his first answer
to the Divines of Wittemberg. (...). Hierom. Patriar. Constant.
Ye say that one must communicate in both kinds, and in that ye say right:
which they extend even to Children, to whom they give the Communion after
Baptism in a spoon. In a word, all the Oriental Church observes that Custom;
and our chief School Divines do even agree, that that Practice of communicating
under both kinds was religiously observed in the Latin Churches until these
latter Ages, when for good reasons it was thought fit to change it.

Fifthly, as to Confession, it is not to be thought strange that they believe
it to be only of Positive and Ecclesiastical right, because they are persuaded
that (...). Id. Hieron. Patriarch.
properly speaking only Baptism, and the Eucharist have been instituted by our
Lord, and that the rest have been appointed by the Church; as may be seen in
the second answer of the Patriarch Jeremy, to the Divines of Wittemberg. Caucus
then has asserted nothing as to that Point, which does not agree to the real
Belief of the Greeks. However it cannot be denied, but that Auricular
Confession is in use in the Greek Church, as well as in the Latin, and that the
Greeks confess their Sins in particular, that they may receive Penance
according to the Nature of their Offenses, of which, by consequent, they must
discover the nature and kind to their Confessor. (...).
It is necessary, says the Patriarch Jeremy after St. Basil, to declare all
Sins to the Confessor. And this may be seen more at large in the Book of
Christopher Angelus, of the Discipline of his Church. There is, nevertheless,
this difference, if we will credit Metrophanes Critopulus, that the Confessor
informs himself not of the Place where the sin has been committed, nor of
those who have been concerned in it, nor yet of the manner, because, according
to the same Author, that is both needless and too curious, which is sufficient
to justify Caucus. For as to the Eastern Communion, which ought yearly to be
received in the Latin Church, it is a Custom peculiar to that Church.

Sixthly, Caucus attributes nothing to the Greeks in what concerns Marriage,
which they do not positively maintain, and pretend to be agreeable to the New
Testament, the Fathers, the Oriental Canon Law, and the Ordinances of the
Emperors. They say that there is nothing clearer than these words of the
Gospel, (...). Matthew. 19.9
Whosoever shall put away his Wife, except it be for Fornication, and shall
marry another, commits Adultery. It is manifest then, say they, that the
Gospel permits the dissolving of Marriage in the Case alleged; and declining
the Authority of St. Augustine, and some other Latin Fathers as to that Point,
they affirm that the Greek Fathers never explained that Passage otherways, and
that besides, the whole Eastern Church therein agree with the Greeks. Nay, it
is easy to prove by the Histories of the Councils of Florence and F. paolo
nella sua Istoria del Council. Card. Palavic. nella sua Istor. del Council. di
Trent.
of Trent, that it is the Practice of all the Greek Church. And therefore it
was, that the Ambassadors of Venice addressed themselves to the Council of
Trent, for obtaining some qualification to be made in the Canon which was ready
to be published against those who said, that Adultery dissolved Marriage. And
the thing that set the Republic of Venice upon this was, that the Greeks of
Candia, Cyprus, Corfou, Zante, and some other Places, Subjects of the State,
practiced that which the Council was about to condemn. In effect, the
Ambassadors had satisfaction, because their reasons were thought good, as
Cardinal Palavicini acknowledges in his History of the Council. It is
nevertheless true, that the Greeks dissolve their Marriages too easily, and not
in the Case of Adultery alone; But they still pretend that therein they Conform
to the Canon and Civil Laws, which ought to be moderated, because of the too
great Liberty they have taken to themselves. However, Caucus having only
mentioned the Case of Adultery, seems to have been too reserved, inasmuch as he
might have told a great many other Cases of less importance, wherein the Greeks
make no scruple to divorce.

Seventhly, it is not to be thought strange, that the Greeks eat no flesh that
has been stifled or strangled, blood, nor other meats that are not only
forbidden in the Old Testament, but also in the New, as appears in the Acts of
the Apostles; a thing not singular to the Greeks of Corfou only; but which is
generally practiced by all the Christians of the East, and not very long since
it was wholly abolished in the West.

In the Eighth place, as to the Article which concerns the Supremacy of the
Pope, it may be thought strange, that Leo Allatius should fall so foul on
Caucus in that Point, as if he were one of the greatest Impostours in the
World. It is but too true, that the Greeks who are not Latinised, nay and all
the rest of the Eastern Churches, do not at present own that Primacy of Rome
over the other patriarchs, in the manner that it is acknowledged in the Western
Church. Metroph. Critop. in Epit. Doctr. Eccl. Orient.
Metrophanes Critopulus assures us, that the Eastern Church acknowledges no
other Head but Jesus Christ, who has the Qualities of Head of the Church; that
amongst the Patriarchs there is no difference, unless it be of the Sea, (...),
as he speaks. The Patriarch of Constantinople takes the first place, He of
Alexandria the Second, the Patriarch of Antioch the Third, and he of Jerusalem
the Fourth. Every one is Supreme within his own Jurisdiction, and if they all
meet together in one place, they mutually kiss one another hands. So that none
of them takes the Title of Head of the Catholic Church, as the same Critopulus
observes, who would thereby condemn the Pope who assumes these Titles. As to
what Leo Allatius adds Leo Allat. de Consens. Eccl. Occid. and Orient.
that Caucus imposes upon the Greeks, when he says that they excommunicate the
Pope and Latin Bishops on Holy Thursday, that is a thing which has not only
been observed by Caucus in Corfou, but by many other Travelers also in several
places. The Jesuit Dandini who traveled to Mount Libanus, in Quality of Nuncio
under Clement VIII. in the description that he makes of the Isle of Candy,
speaks of the Greeks in these terms. Girolamo Dandini in Miss. Apost. cap. 5.
I should have a great many things to say, if I would relate all the impurities
of the Prelates, Priests and other Churchmen of that Nation, their separation
from the Latin Church, the Maledictions and Excommunications which they thunder
against her on the most Holy Days, and at the same time when we pray to God for
their Conversion.

Ninthly, we may easily believe, that the Greeks reckon Sub-Deaconship amongst
the inferior Orders, which are not Sacred, to speak in the Terms of the
Latins, since it is not very long since the Latins themselves have made it a
sacred Order.

In the tenth Place, it may be seen in the Books of Greek Writers, that to own
but seven General Councils, is not a thing peculiar to the Greeks of Corfou.
Nay one would think it a little too much, to oblige them to receive the Latin
Councils wherein they have had no share, or those others wherein they say, they
were forced to be present, more for the Interests of State, than the Concerns
of Religion. They are permitted to live in this Belief, in the States of the
Republic of Venice.

Lastly, as to what concerns Festival Days, Fasts, and many other Matters of
Discipline, it is certain, the Greek Church does not agree therein with the
Latin, and Caucus had reason to say, that the Greeks admitted them not, nor yet
part of the Saints of the Roman Church, which they laugh at when they see them
in Churches, as may be seen in the History of the Council of Florence, written
by Syropulus, where he says, (...).
When I enter into any Church of the Latins, I salute none of the Saints whom I
see, because I know none of them. Nay, I have much ado to know Jesus Christ
there, whom I do not adore neither, because I know not in what manner they
represent him.

I think this may be enough to justify Caucus in what he attributes to the
Greeks: and if that Author has been pleased sometimes to exaggerate their
Errors, and to impose upon them, it may also be said, that Leo Allatius has
not always kept within bounds in making their Defense. I confess the way that
he has taken to reunite the two Churches, would be more effectual for
reconciling the Greeks to the Roman Communion, than the Course that has been
followed by the Emissaries who have increased their Errors, and continue to
do so daily, instead of lessening them: but for all that, we may know the true
Sentiments of the Greeks, if we can but lay aside our ordinary Prejudices, and
distinguish those who are Latinised, from those that are not.

We forgot to observe their Belief as to Purgatory, Hell and Paradise. Caucus,
ib. ac supra.
Caucus with many other Writers does affirm, that the Greeks deny Purgatory,
and that notwithstanding they pray for the Dead: which is to be understood with
relation to the Opinion of the Latins, who commonly establish a Place of
Purgatory, and a Fire which torments Souls. But the Greeks deny both, though
they acknowledge a certain State of Purgatory; and therefore they pray to God
for the Dead. It is certain that Prayers for the Dead have been appointed in
the Church in the very first ages, as appears by Tertullian and the Ancientest
of the Fathers, as well as by the most Ancient Liturgies. Perhaps the Church
took that Ceremony from the Jews, who likewise pray to God for the Dead; which
was a Custom practiced in the Synagogues long before the Birth of
Christianity, and is to be found practiced at that time when the Jews were
under the Dominion of the Grecians. There is this difference, nevertheless,
betwixt the Greeks and the Latins, as to their praying for the Dead, that the
latter have explained themselves more fully; whereas the former, and all the
other Orientals, have continued in more General Terms. The Latins, however, in
their Prayers for the Dead at Mass, retain the Ancient form, which agrees
pretty well with what the Greeks believe of Hell, Purgatory and Paradise. This
is the manner of praying for the Dead in the Mass of the Latins. Domine Jesu
Christ, libera animas omnium fidelium defunctorum de poenis inferni and de
profundo lacu: libera eas de ore I eonis, ne absorbeat eas Tartarus, ne cadant
in obscurum, etc. These words seem to confirm the Opinion of the Greeks and
other Christians of the East, for they suppose but one Place, which is Hell,
where the Souls are detained as in a dark Prison, and they pray that the Souls
may pass from that obscure Place, to a Place of Light and Rest, which is
Paradise: and this exactly agrees with the Prayer that the Priest says at the
Mass which is called in die obitus.

As to what concerns Hell, we shall not speak here of the Opinion of Origin,
who has nevertheless been followed by some Greek Doctors; we shall only
mention what is most generally approved by them. When they pray that God would
deliver Souls out of Hell, that is to be understood of the State of Purgatory;
I mean, that in that obscure Prison which they call Hell, there are two sorts
of Souls; one sort whose Sins are not so enormous as to be condemned for them
to Eternal Punishment there; and another who are really condemned to Hell,
there to abide for ever. Of these last it may be said, that in inferno nulla
est redemptio; whereas in respect of the first sort of Souls, it may be said,
that in inferno est redemptio. This may serve to explain the Liturgies and
Books of the New Greeks, which seem to suppose that the Souls shall not remain
in Hell for ever, and that so the Punishment of the damned is not Eternal. If
we take this Rule along with us, we may have an easy explication of all the
Prayers that are said for the Dead in the Greek Church.

As to Paradise, the Greeks and other Orientals are in this persuasion, that
Souls enjoy not Eternal Bliss, and that they are not punished with the Pains of
Hell, before they receive Sentence from God at the last day of Universal
Judgment. And therefore according to the Sentiment of the Greeks we must
distinguish two Paradises. The first is that Place of Light and Rest, mentioned
in their Prayers and Liturgy, where the Souls of the Blessed repose expecting
the last Judgment. That Place is called in the public Office, that is said for
the Dead, Paradise, Light, Life, Blessedness, Abraham's Bosom, the Land of the
Living, etc. The second Paradise is that Eternal Bliss which they shall enjoy
in heaven after the Universal Judgment; and they think that Opinion to be more
agreeable to the Texts of Holy Scripture, than that of the Latins: for it shall
not be, say they, but at that day, that Jesus Christ who will come in quality
of Judge, shall say to the Elect, Matthew. 25.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the World, etc. They pretend that the Opinion of the Latins
concerning Paradise and Hell before the last day of Judgment is not founded on
Antiquity. Besides, we may observe, that the Greeks have not subtilized so much
upon the Light of the Glory of the Blessed, as most of the Latin Divines have
done, who have spoken of it with extraordinary nicety. Nay, there are some who
affirm, that the Greeks Fathers deny, that the Angels and Blessed see the
Essence of God in Heaven; relying upon these words of Theodoret, Theod. Dial.
immut.
The Angels see not the Divine Essence, which comprehends all things, and
cannot be comprehended, nor known, but they see a certain species which is
proportionate to their Nature. And this they confirm also by the Testimony of
many Fathers.

There remains somewhat to be said of the Morals, Discipline, and Ceremonies of
the Greeks. As to their Morality, seeing they have the same Principles as the
Latius have, it cannot be much different from theirs; unless it be, that
wanting the use of School Divinity, they are not so great Metaphysicians as the
Latins; wherein they are not to be blamed, when they mingle no Logic nor
Metaphysics in their Books of Morality, if you except some Greeks who have
studied in the Schools of Italy, or have read the Books of the Latins.

It may be, notwithstanding, that the Greeks and other Christians of the East
do not walk up to the strictness of the Rules of Morality, because of the sad
condition to which they are at present reduced. Their Churchmen are accused of
Simony, because the Bishops sell Orders; and the Priests the Administration of
Sacraments: but if matters be thoroughly examined, perhaps they are not so
blameable as people think. There is a necessity that they live by their
Calling; and seeing they have no Benefices, as they are at present established
in the Church of Rome, why are they not to be allowed to take money for the
Administration of Sacraments? There is no fault found with the Custom that is
introduced into the West, of taking money for Masses, Confessions, and many
other things; and shall a poor Papas be accused of Simony, for being paid for
an Absolution that he gives, and for having rated it according to the nature
of the Sin? Nor do we think it strange, neither, that certain Sins are rated at
Rome, because we are accustomed to the practice. Will the new distinction of
Divine Right and Ecclesiastical Right, that some Divines and Canonists have
invented in these last Ages, put the Pope without the reach of Simony; and
shall not that extreme necessity to which the Patriarch and Greeks Bishops are
reduced render them at all excusable before God and Man, in that they take
money for Ordinations? It is not that I would excuse the Greeks in all things:
for it is certain they many times take too much Liberty to themselves, and that
they are not careful enough to square their Consciences according to the Rules
of Christian Morality. But the Ignorance and Poverty wherein they are at
present, are the cause of their Disorders, which nevertheless the virtuous Men
amongst them prevent as much as they can, as the Patriarch Jeremy, who openly
(...). Jerome. Patr. Constable.
reproves Confessors who make a Traffic of Holy Things, and exact Presents.
He says that such deserve to be punished by God, and that when he finds any
amongst his People, he chastises them, and deprives them of their Office.

As to Ecclesiastical Discipline, they conform not in all things to the
Prescript of their Canons. For instance, they observe not exactly the Age that
is required for Priesthood and Episcopacy; besides, they mind but very little
the Intervals, and take several Orders together at one time. The Election of
their Patriarch is not always Canonical; for he that gives most to the Grand
Signior, is commonly preferred before the rest: And therefore there are many
times several that take the Title of Patriarch. Monsieur de Nointel Ambassador
for the French King at the Port Monsieur Anoint. Tom. 3. de la Perpet.
takes notice of four Patriarchs alive in the Year 1671. The Greeks are
ambitious, and therefore they take all courses to rise to that Dignity; which
is the Cause of great Troubles in that Church.

Besides the money that the Patriarch Elect gives to the Grand Signior for
Letters of Confirmation, he is also obliged to buy the Voices of the Bishops
who elect him: and every one upon that Occasion is willing to make the most of
his Voice. But, on the other hand, the Patriarch knows very well how to make
himself amends, when he makes any Bishop: which the Bishops also do in regard
of their Papas, to whom they sell Orders and Cures as dear as possibly they
can; and all, at length, falls upon the poor People, who pay very dear for the
Administration of Sacraments; and that is the reason they go but seldom to them.

The Patriarch and Bishops are not married; but the Priests marry before their
Ordination: and that Practice which is General over all the Levant is ancient.
I do not here examine whether it be agreeable to the Primitive Canons of the
Church, or a Deviation for the Ancient Canons. It is certain the Greeks pretend
to be warranted, as to that, by the Canons called the Canons of the Apostles,
and Council, in Trullo.
they accuse the Latins of having contravened the Ancient Canons of the Church.
If a Priest happen to marry after that he has been called to be a Priest, he
cannot afterward perform any Functions of the Priesthood, which is according to
the Council of Neocaesarea; but the Marriage is not therefore dissolved:
whereas in the Latin Church the Marriage is null, because Priesthood is an
impediment that breaks it. I believe Caucus meant of those Priests that marry
after ordination, when he says, Cauc. in Hist. de Graec. errorib.
that the Greeks believe that he who has been once a Priest, may again return
to the State of Laymen. In effect, he retains nothing of Priesthood, unless it
be some Honor in the Church, where he has a Seat separate from the Place of
Laics.

Monachism is in great esteem amongst the Greeks, as appears by the Answer
which the Jerem. Patriarch. Respons. 1. and 2.
Patriarch Jeremy made to the German Divines, who spoke of Monks as of useless
Members; to which Divines he opposes St. Basil, and the other Greek Fathers,
who have made an Elogy of the Monastic Life, and have looked upon it as a Pure
and Angelical way of living: And this he confirms, besides, by the Authority of
Councils wherein many good regulations were made concerning Monks. Metrophanes
Critopulus also praises Monachism, as a most ancient thing in the Church, (...).
saying, that it is an Ornament to it. Their way of living, according to the
same Author, is very austere, because they never eat Flesh, though they be not
engaged to that by any Vow, but only by Custom which they never violate. None
of them ever sleep more than four Hours, and some but two. They go to Prayers
in the Church thrice a day, and they who apply themselves not to study, work
with their hands; so that there is no Monastery, where all sorts of Workmen may
not be found.

Leo Allat. de Consens. Eccl. Occid. and Orient. l. 3 c. 8.
Leo Allatius treats more at large of the Greeks Monks that are nowadays in
the Levant, and that very exactly: which obliges me to give here an Abridgment
of what he has observed.

Though there be different kinds of Monks amongst the Greeks, yet they all
derive their Original from St. Basil, who is the first and sole Author of
Monastic Discipline* All the Monks look upon him as their Father, and it would
be a Crime amongst them to deviate in the least from his Rule. There are to be
seen all over Greeks many fair Monasteries with well built Churches, where
these Monks sing day and night. However, they have not all one and the same way
of living; for there are some called (...), others (...). The first live
together in Society, eat in the same Refectory, have nothing singular amongst
them as to their Habit; and, in fine, have all the same Exercises, none being
exempted. There are nevertheless two Orders amongst them; for one is of (...).
the Great and Angelical Habit, who are of a Degree more elevate and perfect
than the rest, and profess a more perfect way of living: these are in greatest
number. The others who are of (...).
the Little Habit, otherways (...), are of an inferior rank, and lead not so
perfect a life. The second, which are named (...), live according as they
please themselves, as their Name does import. And therefore before they take
the Habit, they give some money for a Cell, and some other Necessaries of the
Monastery. The Yeoman of the Cellar or Butler furnishes them with Bread and
Wine as he does the rest: and so being exempted from the Duties of the
Monastery, they mind their own business. These last leave by Will what they
possess, as well within as without the Monastery, to their Servant or Companion,
whom they call Disciple, and whom they have chosen from among the Monks to
assist them in their occasions. This Man after the Death of the other, by his
management improves the goods that he has inherited, and leaves by Will what
he has purchased, to him whom he has chosen for his Companion: the rest of
the goods which he possessed, that is to say, what his Master left him when he
died, falls to the Monastery, which afterward sells them to those that please
to purchase. Nevertheless amongst these last Monks there are some so miserably
poor, that having nothing to purchase a piece of Land with, are obliged to work
and labor for the Monastery, and to apply themselves to the basest
employments. These do all for the profit of the Convent, and therefore the
Convent supplies them with Necessaries; and if they have any spare time after
their work is done, they employ it in Prayers.

There is a third Order of these Monks, who go by the Name of Anchorites.
These not being able to work, nor support the other Duties of the Monastery,
have, notwithstanding, a mind to live in the repose of solitude. They buy a
Cell out of the Monastery, with a little piece of Land on which they may live,
and never go to the Monastery but on Holy days, to assist at the Office; after
which they return to their Cells, where they mind their own Affairs, having no
hours appointed them for Prayers. There are, nevertheless, some of these
Anchorites who have left their Monastery with the Consent of their Abbot, that
they may lead a more retired life, and apply themselves more to Meditation and
Prayer. The Monastery sends them once a month Provisions to live on, because
they possess neither Lands nor Vineyards: but those who will not depend upon
the Abbot, hire some Vineyard near to their Cell, of which they eat the Grapes;
others live on Cherries or such like Fruit. They also sow Beans in the Season
of the year; and some gain their living by transcribing Books.

Besides the Monks, there are Nuns also who live in Community, and are shut up
in Monasteries under the Institution of St. Basil. They are no less strict than
the Monks, as to Fasting, Praying and the other Offices of the Monastic Life.
They choose one of the Ancientest and most virtuous of their Community to supply
the place of Abbess; and these Abbesses are the same with them, as the Abbots
are with the Monks. Nevertheless, that Monastery of Women depends always on an
Abbot, who assigns them one of the oldest and most virtuous Monks to confess
and administer the Sacraments to them. This Monk lives near their Monastery,
that he may be at hand to assist them readily in their occasions. He says
likewise Mass for them; and orders the other Offices.

These Nuns wear all the same Habit, and a Cloak of the same color. Their Arms
and Hands are covered to their Fingers ends; and their Habit is of plain
Woollen Cloth. Their Heads, besides, are shaven, and every one has a Cell
apart where they lodge conveniently. The richer sort have a Maid; and sometimes
they bring up in their Houses young Girls, whom they bring up in the Duties of
Piety and Devotion. When they have performed their ordinary Duties, they work
with their Needle; and the Turks who bear a respect toward these Nuns, come to
their Monasteries to buy Girdles of their making. The Abbesses willingly open
the Doors of their Convent to the Turks who come to buy the Manufacture of
these good Nuns, who return to their Appartment so soon as they have sold their
Wares.

I have read a Manuscript Relation, that speaks not so much to the advantage of
these Nuns. The Author of that Relation observes that the Nuns called
Caloyeres, who live at Constantinople, are Widows, some of which have had
several Husbands, and that they embrace not that Profession, but when they are
well stricken in years: Then he adds, that they make no Vows, that all their
Sanctity consists in wearing a Black Veil upon their Head, and declaring that
they will Marry no more; that, after all, they live most commonly at home,
where they mind their House-wifery, their Children and Relations. He confesses,
nevertheless, that there are some of them who live in Community, but that these
are more miserable than the former: that both go about wheresoever they please:
and that, in fine, they have more Liberty under that Religious Habit, than they
had before.

The Fasts of the Greeks are different enough from those of the Latins: for the
Fasts of the latter would be Festival Days, and Days of good Cheer amongst the
Orientals, in regard they not only abstain from Flesh, and all that comes from
it, as Butter and Cheese; but they eat not so much as Fish, contenting
themselves with Fruits and Pulse, with some small portion of Oil, and drink
very little Wine. The Monks are more strict in their Fasting, because they
never taste Wine nor Oil, unless on Saturdays and Sundays. Yet the Moscovites
are allowed to eat Fish, because they have neither Wine nor Oil. Wednesdays and
Fridays they abstain from Flesh, and all that comes of it; but on these days
they are allowed to eat Fish. I shall say nothing of their Lent, nor private
Fasts; only must observe that the Greeks and other Eastern Nations exceedingly
blame the Saturdays Fast of the Latins, because they say, that Day is a
Festival as well as Sunday; which they prove by the Ancient Canons and the
practice of the first Ages. In fine, as to their Ceremonies, it may be said in
general, that no Nation in Christendom has so many. Their Euchology or Ritual,
with the Notes of P. Goar, may be consulted as to that point. So excessive is
the Worship they render to Images, that in a Manuscript which I have read
concerning the Errors of the Latins, they upbraid them (...). MS. Biblioth.
Bodlei. Oxon. Tit. (...).
with want of respect to Images; which cannot well be understood, unless it be
that the Latins omit an infinite number of Ceremonies before their Images,
which are observed by the Greeks. On the Festival day of a Saint Metroph.
Critop.
they place his Image in the middle of the Church, and that Image or Picture,
represents the History of the Festival that is Celebrated: for instance of the
Nativity or Resurrection of our Lord: Then they that are present kiss the
Image; which in their Language is called (...), and in Latin, Adorare. That
Adoration is not performed by Kneeling, Bowing, or any other Gesture of Body,
but only by kissing the Image. If it be the Image of our Lord, they commonly
kiss the Feet: if an Image of the Virgin, they kiss the Hands: and in a word,
if it be the Image of some Saint they kiss the Face.

These and many other Ceremonies, which the Greeks observe in the Adoration of
their Images, have been much augmented since the second Council of Nice, where
the Patrons of Images obtained a great Victory over the Iconoclasts. And it is
chiefly since that time that the Greeks have published the Miraculous Histories
of their Images, of which their Books are full: and as if they had not had
enough amongst themselves at home, they have searched at Rome and other places
for Miracles that have been wrought by virtue of Images.

After all, the Greeks ground most of their Ceremonies upon their Traditions.
They take no great care to examine, whether these Traditions be Ancient, or
not. It is enough that they are in practice, to make them pass for Apostolical.
And seeing there are but few able Men amongst them, they are incapable of
Judging whether or no their Traditions be really founded on Antiquity. One of
the Ceremonies which has most astonished the Latins, is that which they
observe with great Pomp in respect of the Mysteries, when they are upon the
little Altar, which they call the Altar of Proposition; and that before the
Consecration. For, which is surprising, they render Extraordinary Honors to
the Bread and Wine before they are consecrated, and only barely blessed.
Amongst their Ceremonies which are only grounded on Tradition, but
Apostolical, may be reckoned most part of their Sacraments: because, as we have
observed before, they do not believe that Jesus Christ was the immediate
Author of them. All these Sacraments are accompanied with a great many
Ceremonies, because they are persuaded, that too much external respect cannot
be given to Holy things. And therefore they Celebrate their Liturgy and other
Offices with far greater Pomp, than the Church of Rome does. They have besides
a great many Books of their Offices, but no Breviaries for the use of private
Persons, as the Latins have; because, say they, the Office ought to be said
publicly in the Church, and not privately in a Chamber. Jan. Nic. Erythr. in
Pinacoth.
Francis Arcudius having thought fit to make a kind of Breviary for the use of
the Greeks, which he compiled out of their Books of Offices, met not with the
Satisfaction that he proposed to himself: for the Greeks despise that Breviary,
and there are none but the Monks of St. Basil, of the Monastery of Crypta
Ferrata Fifteen Miles from Rome, who use it in their Travels.

We shall not insist longer on the Ceremonies of the Greeks; for it requires a
whole Volume to describe them fully. Most part of these Ceremonies have a
Mystical Sense, if we will Credit some of their Doctors who have written on
that Subject. But all Men know, that there is nothing worse grounded than that
Mystical and Allegorical Divinity. I could rather have wished that I could have
represented here in Abridgement the Singing and Music of the great Church of
Constantinople: but besides that that would be too tedious, there would be need
also of a great many Figures. I shall only add by way of Supplement, a
Discourse concerning belief of Transubstantiation, which is at present no less
known to most of the Greeks, than it is to those of the Church of Rome.

CHAP. II. Of Transubstantiation. Whether it be acknowledged by the Greeks who
are commonly called Schismatics.
(*) THough this Question has been largely handled by Mr. Arnaud in his Books
against Mr. Claude, yet it still lies under great difficulties; Nay there are a
great many, especially amongst the Protestants, who do not altogether credit
the great number of Attestations produced by that Doctor in his Book of the
Perpetuity; because, say they, he gives only a Vulgar Translation of all these
Attestations, without publishing the Originals; and it may be they have been
ill Translated: besides that, say the same Protestants, some things are to be
found in these Testimonies, which are no ways the Belief of the Greeks, and
which, by consequent give occasion to doubt of the Sincerity of these Records.
Wherefore some Jesuits have had a design of publishing more Authentic
Attestations, and in the same Languages they have been made in: which will
certainly be of great use. However, till that be done, I shall here produce
some Proofs of the Belief of the Greeks, concerning Transubstantiation, which,
in my Opinion, ought to be preferred before all the Attestations that can be
brought from the Levant; because the Jesuits will not only be suspected by
Protestants, but they will not fail also to say, that these Attestations have
been gained by artifice, and that the modern Greeks may be made to do any
thing for Money: whereas Testimonies taken out of Books that have been composed
by Greeks before these Disputes, are Proofs that cannot be excepted against.
Mr. Arnaud, who saw the Force of such Proofs, objected to Mr. Claude the
Authority of Gabriel Archbishop of Philadelphia, who in formal Terms asserts
Transubstantiation, in the same manner as the Latins do. But seeing he had not
the Book of that Author, he took it altogether upon the Testimony of Cardinal
Perron, who cited it in his Book of the Eucharist; from whence Mr. Claude has
taken occasion to reject that Authority, as being suspect, in as much as the
Cardinal, who mentions commonly the Greek words of the Authors whom he cites,
related only in French the Testimony of that Archbishop. Monsieur Claude
eluded also the Testimonies of the same Gabriel cited in Greek by Arcudius,
pretending that he had not Translated the words of that Greek Author, but that
he had enlarged them by paraphrasing them after his way. In this manner did
that Minister elude many other Proofs of Fact by mere Subtilties, until Father
Simon caused the Works of Gabriel of Philadelphia to be printed in Greek and
Latin, with many other Pieces taken out of Good Originals, which cannot be
called in Question.

(*) Since that, Mr. Smith, a Protestant of the Church of England, who
traveled into Greece, has published a Letter concerning the Present State of
the Greek Church, wherein he freely acknowledges, that Transubstantiation is
owned by the Greeks, and that in a Confession of Faith not long since published
in the Name of all the Greek Church, the word (...), which signifies the same
as the Latin Transubstantiatio, is used. These are the words of that
Confession. (...).
The Priest has no sooner said the Prayer, called the Invocation of the Holy
Ghost, but that the Transubstantiation is made, and the Bread changed into the
real body of Jesus Christ. And the Wine into his real Blood, nothing more
remaining but the bare Species or appearances. These are as plain and formal
words as any can be, and contained in a Book that is generally approved all
over Greece. Nevertheless Mr. Smith is so far from submitting to so Authentic
and Public a Confession, that though he could not accuse the Authors of
Falsehood, as Mr. Claude not very judiciously has done, yet he has his
recourse to other Niceties, which have some show of reason, and to which it is
necessary to give an answer, that the Faith of the Greeks may be clearly and
undoubtedly known. He pretends that the term (...), has been lately invented
for authorizing a new opinion: that Gabriel of Philadelphia is the first, at
least, one of the first that has made use of it: that that Archbishop having
lived a long time at Venice, and having filled his head with School Divinity,
nay and being won by the Arts and Tamperings of those of the Church of Rome,
had asserted that by a new word, which Jeremy Patriarch of Constantinople, by
whom he was consecrated Bishop, was wholly ignorant of. He farther adds, that
since Gabriel of Philadelphia, the word (...), has been but little used by the
Greek Writers: that the Synods held against Cyrillus Lucaris have forborne it:
that it is a word unknown to the Ancient Fathers: that it is neither to be
found in their Liturgies nor Confessions: that, in fine, Transubstantiation is
so far from being believed amongst the Greeks, that the contrary is evidently
to be proved from their Liturgy, where the Symbols, even after they have been
consecrated and called the Body and Blood of Christ, are nevertheless at the
same time (...).
called the Antitypes of the Body and Blood of Christ. And these are the
strongest Arguments that the Protestants have to object against the Modern
Greeks who acknowledge Transubstantiation; whereby they think to confute all
the large Volumes composed by Mr. Arnaud upon that Subject. This has obliged
me to examine these answers particularly, and to show the weakness of the same.

In the first Place, it is not true that Gabriel of Philadelphia is the first
Author of the word (...) among the Greeks. Gennadius, who lived above an
Hundred years before that Archbishop, and who is thought to have been the first
Patriarch of Constantinople after the taking of that City by the Turks, in one
of his Homilies See the Collections at the end of the Book C.
makes use indifferently of the words (...) and (...). Besides he explains how
it can be, that in that wonderful change, there remains (...).
no more but the Accidents of Bread, without any thing of the Substance of the
same Bread, and that the real Substance of the Body of Jesus Christ is hid
under the same Accidents. I shall not here examine the particular Qualities of
Gennadius, and whether or not he was one of the Latinized Greeks: It is
sufficient that I make appear, that Gabriel of Philadelphia is not the first
Author of the word (...), since it is to be found in Greek Books written above
an hundred Years before him. At least it cannot be said, that Gabriel, who
makes use of it, has been corrupted by the Latins, as Mr. Smith affirms
without any Proof. That is so far from being true, that Gabriel of Philadelphia
wrote a Book against the Council of Florence, having openly declared himself
for the Party of Mark of Ephesus, against those of his Church who had adhered
to that Council; and besides, he was linked in intimate Friendship and Interest
with one Miletius, a great Enemy of the Church of Rome. I confess he followed
his Studies at Padua, where he learnt School Divinity, of which he uses the
Terms in his Books. But Cyrillus Lucaris, who wrote a Confession of Faith in
favor of the Calvinists, and which he has taken almost verbatim out of the
Works of Calvin, studied also at Padua, and was more learned in Divinity than
Gabriel, who only made use of the Terms of the Latin Divines, because he
thought they explained his Belief more clearly, and not for authorizing a
Novelty. That affectation of the Language of the Schoolmen, which appears in
all the Writings of Gabriel, concerns only the Method and Expressions, and not
the Substance of the Matter; and so he ought not to be blamed for having
introduced new Terms into his Church: and instead of concluding with Mr. Smith,
that he has at the same time introduced Novelties, it ought, on the contrary,
to be inferred, that the word (...) of the Greeks, which signifies only a
change, and which is to be found in Ancient Authors, is the same with the Term
transubstantiatio invented by the Latins; seeing a Greek, learned in the
Expressions both of the Greeks and Latins, makes use indifferently of the words
(...) and (...), which is the same as transubstantiatio, for expressing the
Change of the Symbols into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.

But Jeremy Patriarch of Constantinople, who consecrated Gabriel of
Philadelphia, and made Learned Answers to the Divines of Wittemberg upon that
Subject, say they, never made use of the word (...). It is true, that Patriarch
make use of the word (...), because it is Greek, and (...) is not. He was not
willing to bring into fashion a barbarous word unknown to the Ancients.
Nevertheless he makes it apparent enough, that by the word (...), he means the
same thing as (...), or the transubstantiatio of the Latins. The Divines of
Wittemberg, who caused his Answers to be Printed, and who have no less Aversion
to Transubstantiation, than the Protestants of England and France have, were so
strongly persuaded that the Patriarch meant the Transubstantiation of the
Church of Rome by the word (...), that on the margin opposite to that word,
they have placed (...), as signifying the same thing in the thought of Jeremy;
and on the margin of the Latin Translation they have placed opposite to Mutari,
the Term transubstantiatio. The same Divines in their answer to the Patriarch
show clearly, that in the question that was betwixt them; they reckoned the
words. (...), to be changed, and (...), to be transubstantiated, to be
synonymous. Jeremy wrote to them, that (...).
according to the Belief of the Catholic Church, the Bread and the Wine after
the Consecration, were by the Holy Ghost changed into the Body and Blood of
Christ. To which those of Wittemberg answered. (...).
that they believed that the Body and Blood of Christ were really in the
Eucharist; but that they do not believe for all that, that the Bread was
changed into the Body of Christ. They make use of no other Terms in their
Answer to express the Transubstantiation of the Latins, than the Greek verb
(...), which the Patriarch had also employed. In fine, Jeremy having read the
reply of the Divines of Wittemberg, returns them this Answer, (...).
that the Bread becomes the Body of Christ, and the Wine and the Water his
Blood, by means of the Holy Ghost that changes them; and that that change is
above the reason of Man. From whence it is easy to gather that these words
(...), and other such like, which the Greeks commonly make use of to denote the
change of the Symbols, signify the same thing as the barbarous word (...),
which has been made according to that of transubstantiatio by the latter
Greeks, who had read the Books of the Latins, and studied in their Schools. The
new Greeks only adopted that word, because they thought it expressed very well
the change of the Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, and that it
suited every way with their Belief. And, which is most remarkable in that
matter, Gabriel of Philadelphia employs hardly any other word but that, in an
Apology, that he wrote on purpose for those of his Nation against some Divines
of the Church of Rome, who unjustly accused them of Idolatry.

It is moreover objected, that since Gabriel of Philadelphia, the word (...)
occurs not in the books of other Greek Writers, nor yet in the two Synods of
Constantinople held against Cyrillus Lucaris; but that Objection seems to have
less ground than the former. In the year 1635. there was Printed at Venice
under the Name of a Greek Monk and Priest called Gregory, a small Abridgment of
the Divinity of the Greeks, by way of a Catechism, where the word (...), is not
only to be found; but the manner also how Transubstantiation is made, is
therein declared at length. The Author showing the difference betwixt the
Eucharist and the other Sacraments, says that the other Sacraments contain
only Grace, whereas (...). Greg. in Synopsi Dogmat. Ecclesiae.
the Eucharist contains Jesus Christ present; and that it is for that reason,
that the change which is made in that Sacrament is called (...), or
transubstantiatio. This Greek takes the Title of Protosyncelle of the great
Church, and resided in a Monastery of the Isle Chios. In his Preface he
acknowledges himself indebted for the best part of his Work to George
Coressius, whom he calls one of the Learned Divines of his Church, and who,
in effect, takes the Title of Divine of the great Church, being besides a
Physician by Profession. This Coressius who bitterly wrote of the Errors of
the Latins, prefixed his approbation to that Book, affirming, (...).
that it contains nothing but true and Orthodox Doctrine.

Besides this Work, there was a far more considerable Book written in the year
1638. by Meletius Syrigus against the Confession of Faith attributed to
Cyrillus Lucaris Patriarch of Constantinople, which was Printed in Greek and
Latin at Geneva. The Title of that Book which was not Printed, runs in these
Terms. (...). The Author vigorously refutes that pretended Confession of the
Eastern Church, by a great many Arguments taken from the Fathers and other
Ecclesiastical writers down to our times, and makes it evidently appear that
the Confession of Cyril has been taken out of the Works of Calvin: then
toward the End of his Book he adds, a particular Dissertation about the word
(...).
(...), or Transubstantiation; and by many instances shows that though that
word was not anciently used, yet there was reason for making use of it or some
such at present, because of Heretics. And for the better Explication of the
change that is made in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, you may consult that See
the Collections at the end of this Book D.
Dissertation subjoined to this Book in Greek, which Mr. Arnaud has inserted
in French in his last Tome of the Perpetuity.

We have besides two Editions of the Book of Agapius a Greek Monk of Mount
Athos, the first Printed in the Year 1641, and the second in 1664. both at
Venice, with the Title of (...), the Salvation of Sinners. Though that Author
still retains the ancient words (...), and the like, yet in formal Terms he
asserts Transubstantiation, and acknowledges that Jesus Christ (...), Agap.
Monach. Graecus.
has hid as under a Veil, the Divine Substance under the Accidents of Bread
and Wine. I omit the many Miracles, that the same Agapius mentions to prove the
Truth of Transubstantiation, because these Miracles, whether they be true or
false, make nothing to our purpose.

To the Monk Agapius, we may join Michael Cortacius of Crete in the Sermon
which he preached, and dedicated to the Patriarch of Alexandria. That Sermon
was Printed at Venice in the Year 1642. with the Title of (...), A Discourse
concerning the Dignity of Priesthood. In that Discourse Cortacus compares the
Priest with God, and amongst other things says, that as (...). Mich. Cortac.
Sermon. de ign. Sacerd.
God has changed the Water into Wine so the Priest changes, or, to use his
word, transubstantiats the Wine into the Blood of Christ. Besides he declames
against those that believe not the truth of that Mystery; and the better to
distinguish them, he calls (...).
Luther a wicked and abominable Heresiarch and Apostate, who by his Doctrine
had seduced an infinite Number of People. After all, we ought not to be
surprised, to see a Greek inveigh so bitterly against Protestants, nor infer
from thence, that that Sermon has been suggested to him by some Latin Monk an
Enemy of theirs. They who know what happened at Constantinople under the
Patriarchate of Cyrill a great Favourer of Protestants, and who engaged a great
many Bishops in that Party, will not at all be astonished at the Invectives of
Cortacius, which at that time were seasonable.

After this, I think Mr. Smith dare hardly affirm that there are no Authors
who have made use of the word (...), in imitation of Gabriel of Philadelphia.
It may be said with better reason, that there are but very few that have not
made use of it since that time: And had I been so happy as to have traveled
into the Levant, as well as Mr. Smith, I could have furnished the Public with
a great many more.

But the two Synods held at Constantinople against Cyrillus Lucaris, make no
mention, says Mr. Smith, of the word (...), whence he infers, that they
purposely forbore it, that they might not countenance a Novelty: there cannot
be a worse grounded Objection. The business of these two Synods was to condemn
some Propositions published by Cyrill, in name of the Eastern Church. And so
these Synods thought it enough to mention the Propositions of Cyrill in his own
Terms, and to Anathematise them. If Cyrill in his pretended Confession of Faith
had made use of the Term (...), the Bishops of these two Councils would not
have failed to have made use of it. These are the Terms of the first Synod held
under Cyrill of Borrhea in the Year 1638. (...).
Anathema to Cyrill, who teaches and believes, that the Bread and the Wine
which are upon the Altar of Proposition, are not changed into the real Blood
and Body of Christ by the Benediction of the Priest, and the Descent of the
Holy Ghost. That alone is a convincing argument, that among the Greeks the verb
(...), is the same as the new word (...), which answers to the Latin
transubstantiari, seeing Cyrillus Lucaris makes use of it to deny the
Transubstantiation of the Church of Rome. Moreover the Bishops of that Synod
plainly show, what their Belief is concerning that Mystery, when in the same
place they Anathematize these words of Cyrill, taken out of the 17th, Article
of his Confession. (...).
What is seen with the Eyes and received in the Sacrament is not the Body of
our Lord. Can there be a clearer Argument to probe Transubstantiation, than
that Anathema? The second Council held at Constantinople in the Year 1642.
under Parthenius, confirmed the Belief of the Latin Church, with the same
evidence as the former. They do no more but relate the words of the Confession
of Cyrill, and condemn them as Heretical. These words are taken out of the 17
th, Article, where Cyrill asserts, (...).
that the Divine Eucharist was no more but a pure and simple Figure. The
Bishops assembled in that Synod object against that, (...).
that Jesus Christ said not, this is the Figure of my Body, but this is my
Body, to wit, that which is seen, received, broken, and which has been already
sanctified and Blessed.

To these two Synods I might add a third held at Jerusalem in the year 1672
printed at Paris in 1676. with a Latin Translation done by a Benedictine Monk,
who hardly could read the Greek, so full of faults is that Translation. but
seeing that Synod was called on purpose against Mr. Claude, who in the Preface
is called (...).
Minister of the Calvinists of Charenton; the Protestants, I fear will hold it
for suspected; though nothing past in it, but according to the Ordinary course.
These Bishops were at that time at Jerusalem for the Dedication of a Church,
and they were entreated to pronounce their Judgment upon Articles that were
presented to them, wherein the Protestants of France attributed their own
Errors to the Greek Church. They seem to have been very well informed of the
matters in Question, Judiciously making use of the Authority of several Books
written by those of their Communion, wherein these Errors were condemned.
Amongst other Books, they allege the answers of the Patriarch Jeremy to the
Divines of Wittemberg, a Book of John Nathanael Priest and Oeconomus of the
Church of Constantinople, which contains (...).
an Explication of the Liturgy, Gabriel Severus, Archbishop of Philadelphia,
whom they call (...), Archbishop of their Brethren who reside at Venice: which
the Translatour has rendered, Archbishop of our Brethren of Crete. They cite,
besides, the Orthodox Confession of the Eastern Church, which was published six
or seven Years before, since Corrected and Explained by Meletius Syrigus by
order of a Synod of Moldavia, and afterward printed by the care of Signor
Panagioti. From all these Acts they conclude that it is rather impudence than
ignorance in the Protestants of France, to impose upon the Simple People, by
attributing their Errors to the Eastern Church. In fine, the same Bishops
endeavor to justify the Memory of Cyrillus Lucaris, by opposing other Works
of his, to his pretended Confession, which show him to be of a contrary
Judgment. There are many other things in the same Synod for Authorizing
Transubstantiation; especially, the word (...) is not left out; but seeeing
there is a second and more Correct Edition come forth, I shall insist no longer
on that Synod. Only I must subjoin somewhat, by way of a Character of Cyrill,
who has been so variously talked of, according to the different interests that
Men have defended; which will not a little serve to prove the belief of
Transubstantiation in the Greek Church.

Cyrillus Lucaris, who is become so famous amongst the Greeks and Latins, was
born in Crete, and entered very young into the service of Meletius Patriarch of
Alexandria, who was also of Crete, and who having found him to be a Man of
Parts, and Studious, ordained him Priest. After that, he went to Padua to
prosecute his Studies; from whence returning to Alexandria, Meletius made him
Head of a Monastery, and sent him into Walachia: which gave him occasion in
passing through Germany, to have Conferences with the Protestants of that
Country, understanding the Latin Tongue and School Divinity excellently well.
Being come back from his Commission, he made use of the Money that he had
gathered for the Necessary occasions of the Patriarch; to get himself chosen
Patriarch: and being raised to that Dignity, he entertained his Correspondence
with the Protestants, employing for that purpose Metrophanes Critopulus, who
has writton a Book concerning the belief of his Church, Printed at Helmstadt.
This Metrophanes went in Name of his Patriarch into England, and over a good
part of Germany, where he informed himself, as exactly as he could, of the
State of the Protestants, whereof he made a report to Cyrill whom he found at
Constantinople, where he was casting about how he might get into the
Patriarchate of that Church. This made him contract a Friendship with the
Ambassadors of England and Holland then at the Port, especially with the
latter, who proved afterward useful to him for advancing his Affairs. Cyrill
being as yet but a Monk, had got a particular acquaintance with the Here
Cornelius Haga, who then traveled in the Levant, and who being afterward come
back to Constantinople in Quality of Envoy from the States General, renewed his
Ancient Acquaintance with Cyrill, who at that time was Patriarch of Alexandria,
and who entreated him to send for some Books of the Protestant Divines,
professing to have some liking of their Opinions. This being a desire which the
Here Haga could not refuse, gave advice of it to his Masters, who failed not
presently to send as many Books to Constantinople as were sufficient to have
corrupted all Greece, had they been written in the Language of the Country. It
was impossible but that the affairs of Cyrill must make a Noise, especially
having the Jesuits of Constantinople for Enemies, who in every thing opposed
his designs, publishing aloud that he was a Heretic; and gave advice of it to
the Jesuits of Paris, that the King might be informed of the same. The matter
was represented to the Ambassador of the States at Paris, who wrote about it to
Constantinople. From that time forward Cyrill observed no such measures with
the Jesuits as he had done before. He made no Scruple to give the Here Haga a
Confession of Faith written in Latin with his own Hand, which some time after
he turned into Greek. It is the same Confession which was Printed at Geneva in
Greek and Latin, and which made the French Protestants say, that the Greek
Church agreed with them in the chief points of their belief; especially as to
the matter of the Eucharist. Cyrill, in the mean time, who had a strong Party
in Constantinople against the Jesuits and Court of Rome, was chosen Patriarch,
and for the space of five or six Months after, made nothing appear in his
Actions that might give any sign of Defection from the Religion of his
Forefathers. But seeing he had the Jesuits for Enemies, he thought himself
obliged to declare for the Hollanders that he might be seconded by them; he
engaged also in his party a considerable Number of Bishops and Churchmen, who
relished his opinions, and were in the same Disposition as he was, to introduce
Novelties into the Greek Church. But they were not the Stronger, because the
Jesuits, who have a College at Constantinople where they teach the Youth
Gratis, easily gained the People, who made an Insurrection against Cyrill. The
Greeks held an Assembly in the year 1622. wherein he was deposed from his
Patriarchate, and banished to the Isle of Rhodes. Another Patriarch was chosen
in his Place, who by Letters submitted himself to the court of Rome, that had
forwarded his Election. But seeing Cyrill still entertained a Party in
Constantinople, and that the Dutch supplied him with great Sums of Money, it
was not long before he was restored to his Patriarchate. Then it was that he
revenged himself on the Jesuits, and those who had espoused the Interests of
the Court of Rome; and that Calvinism reigned at Constantinople. This brought
great Disorders into that Church, for Cyrill set every thing to sale, that he
might pay the Money which he had borrowed of the Dutch. The Jesuits and Court
of Rome finding that Cyrill had absolutely got the better on it, endeavored to
gain him, by proposing terms of accommodation, and representing to him the
danger of his Church, if he continued those Intrigues with the Calvinists. He
seemed to be very willing to embrace an accommodation: but seeing he still
continued his Practices with the Dutch, the Court of Rome made a fresh attempt
to turn him out of his Chair: which succeeded; but for a very short time,
because the Dutch Money soon recalled him again to his Patriarchate. The Court
of Rome doubling their efforts against Cyrill, sent one to Constantinople in
Quality of Vicar of the Patriarch, for maintaining the Orthodox Faith in that
Church, which seemed to be upon the brink of Ruin. Cyrill's Party failed not
to lay hold on that occasion, to render the Jesuits and their Party odious to
the Turks, who were jealous of that Envoy of Rome: Insomuch that he was very
ill used by the Turks, and Cyrill cruelly revenged himself on all the Greeks,
whom he thought to be his Enemies. Nevertheless he rendered himself so odious
by his great vexations, and had so powerful a Party, as the Jesuits of
Constantinople seconded by the Court of Rome, to deal with, that he at length
fell, and was strangled by express Orders from the Grand Signior.

This is the History of the Patriarch Cyrillus Lucaris, in whose Name the
Huguenots Printed a Confession of Faith, boasting that they agreed in Opinions
with the Greek Church. But with the glance of an Eye one may judge, what kind
of a Confession of Faith it is. It is true it was written by a Patriarch of
Constantinople, with the Title of, The Belief of the Eastern Church; but it was
not written in name of that Church, nor has it any public approbation. Cyrill
gave it privately to the Dutch Ambassador, whose assistance he needed to
defend him against the Jesuits of Constantinople. That work of Cyrill's is much
like the Book that is said to have been made by William Postel for a Nun, whom
he persuaded, that he might squeeze a little Money from her, that the Messiah
came into the world only for Men, and that she Lady Jean was to be the
Messiess of the Women. There is as much likelihood of truth in that Confession
of Cyrill's, that went under the name of the Greek Church, as there is in the
Impostures of that famous Normand William Postel: and I wonder that Protestants
should still dare to object to Catholics that pretended Confession. Grotius
gave a better Judgment of it in a Book that he published some time after that
Confession came abroad in the word, wherein he frankly says, Nuper
Constantinopoli Cyrillus sine Patriarchis, sine Metropolitis, sine Episcopis
novum nobis propinavit Symbolum. Grot. de Antichrist.
that Cyrill forged a new Symbol, without the assistance of any Patriarchs,
Archbishops or Bishops. Now, after all, I have related the History of this
Cyrill with all the exactness I could, without any regard to what the Dutch
have written of him, nor to what Leo Allatius has said, who also exceeds the
bounds of moderation. I have scarcely mentioned any thing but what is agreed
upon by both the opposite Parties.

Besides Cyrill, there are other Greeks of less note, who have written in
favor of the Protestants, and amongst others one Gergan a Bishop, who has
published a Catechism, wherein he openly denies Transubstantiation, but with
this difference from Cyrill, that he follows not the Confession of Geneva, but
that of Ausbourg. If we compare the Doctrine of this Catechism with that of the
Greek Church, we shall find it almost different in every Point, that it may be
accommodated to the Sentiments of Protestants: as when it says that Scripture
alone is sufficient, without the help of Tradition to prove the Articles of our
Creed; That the Scripture is plain and clear as to the Points of Faith, and
that Scripture ought to be interpreted by Scripture. In a word, Gergan is a
Protestant, and only a Greek in Language, and that too a base Vulgar Greek.
Nevertheless he dares boast, that he is none of those false Brethren (...).
who have been poisoned at Rome. But it is generally known, that the Greeks
themselves who have no Commerce with Rome, confirm neither the Confession of
Ausbourg, nor of Geneva in their Books. Protestants may also reckon amongst the
Greeks of their Communion Nathanael of Crete, who promised some time ago to
the Dutch, that he would translate Calvin's Institutions into Greek, and teach
his Contrymen Calvinism, provided they gave him the Sum of Money which he
demanded.

Mr. Claude adds to all these Greek Calvinists, the Testimony of one Meletius
Metropolitan of Ephesus, in an answer he made about thirty Years ago to the
Divines of Leyden, as to several Questions that had been put to him. Father
Simon made answer to Mr. Claude, that he doubted not but that that was the Act
of some Greek gained by the Dutch Divines, who answered their Questions as they
themselves would have him; and that to judge of that answer, it would be proper
to publish it in the Authors Language. I procured by means of one of Mr.
Claude's Friends, whom he could not deny, a Copy of that answer; and having
read it, I found that Father Simon's conjecture, was a real truth. For
Meletius, who in that Letter takes the Title of Archbishop of Ephesus, not
only denies Transubstantiation, but also the Honor that is rendered to the
Virgin and Saints, and many other Points which all Men do agree the Greeks
believe. And that one may the better judge of it, I shall subjoin at the End of
this Book See the Acts at the End of the Book. E.
the abstract which I had of Mr. Claude written by the Hand of one of his
Friends. It is sufficient to refer Protestants to the Confession of Faith
composed by Metrophanes Critopulus, who was one of their Friends, and written
at their Solicitation even when he lived amongst them. By that Confession of
Metrophanes they may judge, whether that which Mr. Claude has published under
the Name of Meletius Archbishop of Ephesus, have the least color of truth. But
it is time now to return to the objections of Mr. Smith.

It is still objected against the Belief of Transubstantiation in the Greek
Church, that the word (...), is not to be found neither in the Fathers,
Liturgies, nor Symbols, nay and that in the Liturgy the Bread and Wine are
called Antitypes even after the Consecration; which seems wholly to exclude
Transubstantiation. (1) Quid vetat, quo minus quae captui nostro perplexa in
Scripturis impeditaque sunt, ea verbis planioribus explicemus. Calv. lib. 1.
Inst. cap. 3. (2) Hujusmodi autem verborum novitas tum potissimum usu venit,
dum adversus calumniatores asserenda est veritas, qui tergiversando ipsam
eludunt. Ibid.
But that is a very frivolous negative Argument, which from a single word
concludes a positive thing. If it were put to Protestants to stick to their
Principle, which is the Scripture alone, and even to the Ancient Symbols, they
would find themselves much perplexed. But that I may more plainly show the
fallacy of that way of reasoning, I shall oppugn it by no other Author, than
John Calvin in his Institutions, where he judiciously refutes the Heresy of
Servetus concerning the Trinity of the Persons in God. He lays down this for a
Maxim, (1) that it is lawful to invent new words to explain things more
clearly (2) especially when we have to do with Cavillers, who by the help of
words perplex things. In that manner, adds he, the Church has been obliged to
invent the Names of Trinity and Persons. We should have a care, says that
Author, lest by rejecting Names which have not been rashly invented, we be
accused of Pride and Temerity: Quando temere non inventa sunt nomina, cavendum
esse ne ea repudiando, superbae temeritatis arguamur. Hic efferbuit impietas,
dum nomen (...) pessime odisse and execrari Ariani coeperunt. Ibid.
Impiety immediately broke out, says Calvin still, when the Arians began to
hate and abhor the word Consubstantial. These Principles of Calvin may be
easily applied to the matter in hand. Both the Eastern and the Western Churches
had no need of inventing new Terms in regard of the Eucharist, so long as no
body doubted the truth of that Mystery. The Western Church was the first that
made use of such, nay and the only Church for many Ages, because she had the
Berengarians to deal with. There was no necessity then, that the Greek Church
should make use of that term, because she had no occasion for it, or any other
of the like nature. But since the new Berengarians became known to some of
them, and that they perceived that the word transubstantiatio, invented by the
Latins, as happily expressed the change that is made in the Eucharist, as their
(...) explained the Consubstantiality of the Son with God the Father, they have
thought fit to make use of it, and it has been more frequently employed by
them since the great Bustle they had with Cyrillus Lucaris their Patriarch. And
this I take to be the plain and natural reason of the omission of the word
(...) in the Ancient Greek Books. To which we may add, that if the Argument of
Mr. Smith were consequential, it would in the same manner prove that the Latins
believe not Transubstantiation, because that word is not to be found neither in
their Mass nor Symbols. But let us, at length, come to the last objection.

The Symbols of Bread and Wine are called Antitypes or Figures, even after the
Consecration, in the Liturgy of the Greeks: whence it is inferred, that in that
they differ very much from the Belief of the Latins. But it seems Mr. Smith is
not very Learned in the Theology of the Greeks, since he says generally, that
they call the Symbols Antitypes, even after the Consecration. There is not a
Greek at present, nor has there been for these nine Hundred Years any of that
opinion. It is certain all the Modern Greeks pretend, that the Consecration is
not performed till after the Prayer which they call the Invocation of the Holy
Ghost, which Prayer in the Liturgy follows the words, that call the Sacred
Symbols Antitypes. Mark of Ephesus, who was Head of the Party against the
Latins in the Council of Florence, makes use of that Place of the Liturgy, to
prove that the Consecration consists not in these words, This is my Body, but
in the Prayer or Benediction of the Priest made afterward by invocating the
Holy Ghost. That zealous Champion for the Faith of the Greeks, grounds his
assertion chiefly on this, that St. Basil in his Liturgy calls the Symbols
(...).
Antitypes, after the Priest has said these words, This is my Body: whence he
concludes, that they are not as yet consecrated, seeing they still retain the
Name of Antitypes or Figures. The Patriarch Jeremy speaks of Antitypes also in
the same manner, and he affirms (...).
that they who have called the Bread and Wine Antitypes, have only given them
that Appellation before the Consecration. In that they agree with the Opinion
of all the Greek Authors since the Eighth Century, when that Question was
handled in the second Council of Nice. The Deacon Epiphanes declared in name of
all the Bishops in that Council, that the Terms (...).
Antitypes could not otherways be understood in the Liturgy of St. Basil, that
for the Gifts before the Consecration, and that after the Consecration they
were called the real Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. St. John Damascene,
Nicephorus Patriarch of Constantinople, and, in a word, all the Defenders of
Image Worship, are of that Judgment, and object it to the Iconoclasts as a
strong Argument to authorize the Honor paid to Images, since Honors, say
they, are rendered to the Holy Gifts, whilst they are as yet but Antitypes, or
Images, before the Consecration. Since that time all the Greeks speak the same
Language. They, however, who have any knowledge of the Greek Fathers, are
obliged to confess, that the Bishops of the Council of Nice were mistaken in
matter of fact, and that the Ancient Fathers gave the Name of Antitypes to the
Symbols, even after their Consecration, not thinking that that word signified
any thing contrary to the real presence of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist. It
appears manifestly by the Dispute, that was betwixt the Iconoclasts and the
Patrons of Images, that there was no Difficulty betwixt them concerning the
Body of Jesus Christ, which both Parties acknowledged to be in the Eucharist
after the Consecration. They differed only in this, to wit, whether after the
Consecration, the Bread ought still to be called an Antitype. The Iconoclasts
affirmed it, and had Antiquity on their side, the Defenders of Images denied
it, and fell into a mistake of a matter of fact, which did not the least
prejudice the Affair in Question. So that what way soever the word Antitype be
interpreted, Protestants can draw no consequence from it against the Belief of
Transubstantiation.

CHAP. III. Of the Adoration of the Sacrament of the Eucharist: whether it be
in use amongst the Greeks.
THough this Adoration be a necessary Consequent of Transubstantiation, yet
there are some Protestants, who freely confess that the Greeks are much of the
same Judgment with the Latins as to the Matter of Transubstantiation; but they
deny that they adore Jesus Christ in the Consecrated Symbols, pretending that
their Worship terminates on Jesus Christ in Heaven. They are confirmed in this
Opinion chiefly, because the Greeks in the Celebration of their Liturgy, render
not much Honor to the Sacred Symbols after their Consecration, as the Latin
Church does. But we are not always to pass a Judgment on things by the External
Worship; and in that many Emissaries have been mistaken, as well as Protestants,
when they would measure the Orientals by the Practice and Custom of their own
Church. It is certain, we show greater Respect and Veneration to Jesus Christ
in the Eucharist, than we did before the time of the Berengarians, nay and
before the time of the Protestants too, at least in what concerns the
exterior. It is chiefly but since the Birth of Nestorianism, that greatest
Respect has been shown to the Virgin. Besides, the Greek Church never rendered
such excessive Honors to Images, but since the Iconoclasts were so incensed
against them. [*]
[*] It must not, therefore, be said, that before that time no Honor was
rendered neither to the Virgin nor Images. The case is the same with the Greeks
and other Eastern Christians, who have continued in their Ancient simplicity,
because they have not had the same reasons as the Latins had to come out of it;
and if they be accused that they adore not the symbols, the Ancients are
likewise to be accused for not having adored them, because there is nothing to
be found neither in their Books nor Liturgies that comes near the External
Worship of our times. In this manner we are to understand the words of Caucus,
when he affirms that no Nation under the Sun renders less Honor to the
Sacrament of the Eucharist than the Greeks do; and it is not to be denied but
that he goes too far in what he relates, comparing them to some Reformers of
the West. But after all, we cannot make a better Judgment of the Practice of
the Greeks, than by the Books the have written on that Subject. Gabriel
Archbishop of Philadelphia, whom we have mentioned before, asserts so
vigorously that Adoration in a Book that he wrote on purpose against the
Latins, that it is impossible to doubt of it. That Archbishop established two
sorts of Honor or Adoration, which are rendered to the Symbols of Bread and
Wine. The first is but a bare respect paid to them, whilst they are as yet but
Blessed and Antitypes. But the second wherewith they are honored after
Consecration (...). Gabr. Philad. in Apol. Orat. Lat.
is not a simple Veneration, says Gabriel, but a Worship of Latria, or real
Adoration. This he explains more at large after Cabasilas, Simeon of
Thessalonica and many others, who also assert those two sorts of Honor
rendered to the Holy Gifts both before and after the Consecration. Nay he
remarks the time when the last and real Adoration is performed, to wit, when
the Symbols have been consecrated, and when the Priest standing at the door of
the Sanctuary, cries with a loud Voice, let all draw near with Faith, Reverence
and Love. Then they do not say, continues the same Gabriel, as they do, when
they honor the Antitypes, Lord, Remember me in thy Kingdom, but (...).
I believe, Lord, that thou art Jesus Christ the Son of the Living God: which
words are directed to Jesus Christ under the Symbols of the Bread and Wine that
are presented to the People. And at that time, says Gabriel, the Priest (...).
ibid.
gives them notice to adore with a Worship of Latria.

We are to expound the thought of Cabasilas with relation to the same time and
to the words of the Liturgy, when he speaks of those that draw near to the Holy
Mysteries (...).
who, says he, as an Expression of their Piety and Faith, adore, bless and
praise Jesus Christ as God, whom they acknowledge to be in the Consecrated
Symbols. Simeon of Thessalonica, whom Gabriel of Philadelphia follows in all
his Works, distinguishes, as well as he, two Honors rendered to the Symbols,
in one of his answers related by Allatius, where he says, that (...).
if they honor the Holy Gifts whilst they are but Antitypes or Images, by
stronger reason they ought to honor them after their Consecration, when they
are become the real Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. To these Authors may be
added Metrophanes Critopulus, whose Testimony is the more considerable, that he
has done all he could in his Book, to disguise the Belief of his Church in
favor of the Protestants of Germany. He acknowledges the change of the Bread
and Wine into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, and says, (...).
that the manner how that change is wrought, is unknown to us, and inscrutable:
then he only blames the Latin Church in that they carry the Body of Jesus
Christ with Pomp about the Streets, acknowledging nevertheless, that it is
carried to the Sick to be given them as a viaticum: and in the same Place (...).
he proves that the Symbols never lose their Consecration, if they have been
once consecrated; for that end alleging the Example of Wool, which being once
died, never loses its Tincture. Whence it may be clearly gathered, that that
Author acknowledges the Body of Jesus Christ in the Symbols when they are not
applied to use, and by consequent that they ought to be adored, not condemning
the Adoration and Honor, that those of the Church of Rome render in-general to
Jesus Christ in that Sacrament, but only that great Pomp and Ostentation, when
it is carried about the Streets on Corpus Christi day.

CHAP. IV. Of the Belief of the Melchites.
HAving treated at length of the Greeks, there remains but little to be said of
the Melchites, who differ hardly in any thing from them, either as to Belief or
Ceremonies. The name of Melchites or Royalists, was only given them because
they followed the common Opinions of the Greeks, who submitted to the Decisions
of the Council of Chalcedon, and as if they had only done so to comply with
the Will of the Emperor, their Enemies called them Melchites, thereby
intimating that they were of the Emperor's Religion. However, at present we
give the Name of Melchites to the Syrians, Cophties or Egyptians, and other
People of the Levant, who not being true Greeks, are nevertheless of their
Persuasion: And therefore Gabriel Sionita calls them indifferently Greeks or
Melchites; who besides observes that they are spread over all the Levant;
Purgatorium nullum existere pessime crediderunt, indeque illis odium intestinum
in summum Pontificem, ita ut eidem veracissimo Christi in terris Vicario
primatum pertinaciter abnegent. Gabr. Sion. de Rel. and Mor. Orient.
that they deny Purgatory; that they are sworn Enemies to the Pope, whose
Supremacy none of the East do so vigorously oppugn. But it is no wonder they
are so great Enemies to the Church of Rome, seeing they retain all the
Sentiments of the Greeks that are not Latinized. As to their Opinion concerning
Purgatory, they differ not neither from the true Greeks; and though both deny
that there is a particular place called Purgatory, where the Souls are punished
by a material and real Fire, yet they deny not the truth of a Purgatory in the
manner as we have explained it, when we spoke of the Greeks. Besides, the
Judgment of the Melchites, concerning the Primacy of the Patriarch of Rome, is
also the same with that of the Greeks who have not submitted to the Decisions
of the Council of Florence. In a word, if you except a few Points of small
Importance concerning Ceremonies and Ecclesiastical Discipline, the Melchites
are in all things true Greeks; they have even rendered into Arabic the Greek
Euchology or Ritual, and most of their other Books of Offices in which they are
not singular, because the other Sects of the East have also translated for
their own use the Greek Euchology and other Books of Ceremonies. But their
Translations are commonly faulty, and the Arabic. Canons of Councils are of no
great Use; yet I think, the Arabic versions of the Melchites ought to be
preferred before all others, because they are true Greeks, though they want not
their prejudices, which sometimes hinders them from being sincere. In general,
the Christians of the East are so far from being exact in their Translations of
Greek Books, that they think it lawful to paraphrase, after their way, upon
the Authors which they translate. Every Sect defends their Opinions by all
manner of ways; and I make no doubt, but that is the cause of the
supposititious Canons, which have been published under the Name of the Canons
of the Council of Nice translated from the Arabic. The great Authority of the
Council of Nice has given occasion of inventing those Arabic Canons, which
the several Sects have accommodated to their own Sentiments. The Melchites find
enough in these Canons attributed to the Council of Nice, to defend them
against the Jacobites: And the Jacobites, on the contrary, by the same Canons
defend their Opinion concerning the Unity of Nature in our Lord. Both of them
make the Council of Nice to speak in their favor. The Jacobites accuse the
Melchites of having corrupted these Canons. The Maronites, who in the beginning
were of the Sect of the Jacobites, reproach them with the same fault. John
Baptista Leopard a Maronite, Archbishop of Esdron Abrah. Ecchel. Not. in Can.
Ar. Conc. Nic.
in the Book which he entitled, The Vintage of the Sacraments, accuses the
Melchites of having added to the 55th. Canon of the Council of Nice, some words
that favored their Opinion concerning the Repudiation of Wives; and he
upbraids them that they had taken that Custom from the Mahumetans, which they
afterward inserted into that Canon. But there is no ground for that reproach,
since it is certain that the Greeks and other Eastern Nations may divorce from
their Wives, and marry others, especially in the case of Adultery. The
Melchites inserted nothing into that pretended Canon of the Council of Nice,
but what was agreeable to the Practice of the Greek Church.

CHAP. V. Of the Belief and Customs of the Georgians or Iberians, and of those
of Colchis or Mangrelia.
IN the History Clem. Galan. in Council. Armen. cum Romans Edit. Romans typ.
Congreg. de propag. fide. Ann. 1650.
which Galanus has caused to be Printed at Rome, concerning the Reconciliation
of the Armenian Church with the Roman, there are some Curious Pieces relating
to the Present State of the Iberians, and other neighboring People. Pope Urban
VIII. sent Emissaries to these People, of which Father Avitabolis a Regular
Priest was the chief: And this Monk wrote from that Country a Letter to the
Pope, wherein he marks the Errors of the Iberians exactly enough, which are
the same that are attributed to the Greeks; to wit, they acknowledge, indeed, a
Purgatory, but not in the manner the Latins do, because Purgatorium affirmant,
non tamen per ignem, sed animas cruciari in loco obscuro and maestitudinis.
they only believe that the Souls are in a Place of Obscurity and Sadness,
without being tormented by Fire: they deny the particular Judgment of Souls,
being persuaded that when one dies, his Soul is by his Guardian Angel carried
into the Presence of Christ; and if it be the Soul of a just Man that is
without Sin, it is immediately sent into a Place of Light and Joy: if it be the
Soul of a wicked Man, it is put into an obscure Place; if that Person dye in
the Act of Repentance, it is sent for a time into the Place of Horror and
Obscurity, whence it is afterward conveyed into the Place of Joy; and all
expect the day of General Judgment, because they absolutely deny that the Souls
see God before that time. The Iberians, besides, according to the same Author,
believe that Infidels are only judged in a particular Judgment, and not at the
General Judgment. They ground themselves upon these words of the Gospel, John.
3.
He that believes not is condemned already. Nor do they believe Inferorum
poenas non faciunt aeternas.
that the Pains of the Damned are Eternal: but they say, that if a Christian
dye in Mortal Sin, without Repentance, he may be relieved out of Hell before
the Universal Judgment, by praying to God for him. However, I think that that
Belief which comes near to that of Origin, and which seems to have been
followed by some new Greeks, is not the real Belief of the Iberians, who
exactly conform to the Faith of the Greek Church; but that which has given
occasion of imputing it to them, is because they own but one Place after Death
where they put the Souls of the Damned, and those who are thought to be in
Purgatory. Now seeing they pray indifferently for all the Souls which are shut
up in that Place which they call Hell, that God would deliver them from the
Pains of Hell, and that he would remove them from that obscure Prison to the
Place of Light and Joy which is Paradise; it has easily been inferred from
thence, that they believed not Hell to be Everlasting, which is to be
understood with Limitation, and in regard of some Souls only who endure their
Purgatory in that Place.

The Iberians agree also with the Greeks, as to their Opinion of Confession,
and speak of it after the same manner. They work on the most solemn Holy Days,
even on Christmas Day: but that is not contrary to the Practice of the first
Ages. This is their way of baptising. In the first Place the Priest reads a
great many Prayers over the Child; and when he comes to the words wherein we
make the Form of Baptism to consist, he does not stop, but reads on, without
Baptising the Child at that time: then so soon as he has done reading, the
Child is stripped, and is at length baptized by the Godfather, and not by the
Priest; which is done without pronouncing other words, than those that were
pronounced some time before. They are not very pressing to receive Baptism; and
they rebaptise those who return again to the Faith after Apostasy. The Priest
alone, amongst them, is the true Minister of Baptism. In periculo obitus si
desit sacerdos, infans non baptizatur.
So that for want of a Priest the Child must dye without Baptism; and some of
their Doctors are of opinion, that in that case the Baptism of the Mother is
sufficient to save the Child. With Baptism they administer to Children
Confirmation, and the Eucharist. They confess for the first time, when they
marry: which they do also when they are at the Point of Death; but their
Confession is made in three or four words. If a Priest fall into any
uncleanness which he confesses, the Confessor deprives him of the Power of
celebrating Mass. And therefore the Priests, have a care not to confess those
Kinds of Sins. Pueris morientibus praebent Eucharistiam.
They give the Communion to Children when they are a dying, and those that are
come to Age receive it but seldom. The Prince forces the Churchmen, and even
the Bishops to go to the Wars: and when they return home again, they celebrate
Mass without any Dispensation for their irregularity. They are of the Opinion,
that no more than one Mass should be said in one Day upon one Altar and in one
Church. They consecrate in Chalices of Wood, Eucharistiam deferunt ad infirmos
maxima cum irreverentia, sine comitatu and luminibus.
And they carry the Sacrament to the Sick with great irreverence, without light
or attendance. On some Holydays the priests together assist at the Mass of the
Bishop, who gives them the Sacrament in their hands, and they themselves carry
it to their Mouths. The Churchmen do not daily say their Breviary; but one or
two only say it, and the rest listen. He that recites the Office is commonly a
Priest, and they who are present for most part do not hear. Most of the
Iberians hardly know the Principles of Religion. If they have no Children by
their Wives they divorce from them with the Permission of the Priests, and
marry others; which they do also in case of Adultery and Quarrelling. They
allege that there are no more Miracles wrought in the Church of Rome, and
Sentiunt Pontificem in jure duntaxat positivo dispensare posse, sed in re levi,
non gravi.
that the Pope can give no Dispensations but in matters of positive Right, nor
in these neither if they be of great consequence.

Avitab. Rel. Theatin.
Father Avitabolis in the same Letter to Pope Urban VIII. describes the Politic
State of the Iberians; and amongst other things observes, the great Authority
of the Princes and Nobles: for the Princes without any regard to that which is
called Ecclesiastical Liberty or Immunity, use Priests as Servants. They slight
the Bishops and punish them. They obey not the Patriarch, who takes the Title
of Catholic or Universal; and yet it is not he who is the chief in Spiritual
Affairs, but the Prince, who is Supreme both in Spirituals and Temporals. The
Nobles do the same within their own Lands in regard of the Bishops and
Priests. The Prince has his Voice with the Bishops in the Election of the
Patriarch, and all choose him whom he desires. The Will of the Prince and of the
several Lords within their Territories stands for Law, and they have no Judges
for examining the Justice of Causes; neither have they any particular Statutes
to walk by, not so much as admitting Witnesses. The Princes dispose at their
Pleasure of the Estates of their Subjects, as well as of their Persons. In
fine, the Patriarch of Constantinople sends Caloyers often into that Country,
to entertain them in their Enmity against the Pope.

That Letter was written in the Year 1631. by Father Avitabolis to Pope Urban
VIII. from Goris in Georgia or Iberia; and in the same Book of Galanus are
inserted the Letters of the Prince of the Georgians to Pope Urban VIII. which
are kept amongst the Records of the Congregation de propaganda fide. That
Prince amongst other things affirms that the Faith has been preserved pure in
his Dominions since Constantine the Great to his time, and he allows a Chapel
to the Missionaries of Rome, that they may pray to God for him. This Letter is
dated in the Year 1629. Pope Urban wrote back to that Prince, and sent a Letter
also to the Metropolitan named Zachary.

What the Prince of the Georgians wrote to Pope Urban concerning the Faith
which he pretends to have been in his Dominions since the time of the Emperor
Constantine, is consonant Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 6.
to the History of Socrates. Balsam. Annot. in Can. 2. Conc. 2. General.
And Balsamon reckons the Churches of Iberia amongst those Churches which were
absolute, and owned no Head on which they depended. he observes that that was
done in the time of Peter, Patriarch of Antioch, by a Synodal Statute: and that
at that time that Church depended on the Church of Antioch. And for that reason
the Metropolitan of Georgia took the Title of Patriarch.

Galanus joins to the Iberians those of Colchis or Mengrelia, saying, that as
they are Neighbors, so they have the same Belief, only with this difference,
that the Mengrelians living on the Mountains, and in the Woods, are a wickeder
sort of People than the Georgians; that they are so ignorant in Religion, that
they know not so much as the words necessary for Baptism, which they administer
after the manner of the Georgians, and to render it the more solemn, they
sometimes Baptize with Wine without Water; but we have said enough of the
Georgians. The exposition that has been made of their Faith, confirms the
Belief of the Greeks: And it would not be difficult to prove it to be very
Ancient, and that the manner also of their administering Baptism, Marriage and
other Sacraments is lawful; though it differ from the Practice of the Church
of Rome. What we at present call Matter and Form of Sacraments amongst us,
ought not to be a Rule to other Christian Nations who are ignorant of these
Names. It is certain the Orientals acknowledge no other Form of these
Sacraments, but the Prayers which they make in administering them. I shall say
nothing in this Place of the Religion of the Muscovites, because in all things
they follow the Belief of the Greeks, of whom we have treated at large.

CHAP. VI. A Supplement concerning the Belief and Customs of the Georgians and
Mengrelians.
I Have lately read a Breve compendio nel quale si rachiude tutto cio che a
sacri riti e al divino cultos' aspetta della natione de Colchi detti Mengreli e
Georgiani.
Manuscipt Relation, attributed to Father Zampi, a Theatin, wherein are
described at large the Ignorance and Errors of these people, and especially of
the Mengrelians, most of whose Priests, if we will credit that Author, cannot
be certain that they have really received Priesthood, because it many times
happens, that they who ordain them have not been baptized. The Bishops who are
commonly more ignorant than the Priests, never examine their Capacity, but
only if they have Money to pay for their Ordination; which amounts to the
Price of a Horse. These Priests may not only marry, according to the Custom
of the Greek Church, before they are ordained, but they may also marry a second
time, by procuring a Dispensation from their Bishop which costs a Pistol.
Neither does the Patriarch ordain a Bishop, without he pay him the Sum of 500
Crowns. When any Man falls sick he presently sends for a Priest, to assist him
rather as a Physician, than as a Ghostly Father, who never speaks to his
Patient of Confession; but by turning over the Leaves of a Book very
attentively, he seems to search for the true Cause of the Distemper, which he
imputes to the Anger of some of their Images; for these People have a Belief,
that their Images are sometimes angry with them. And therefore the Priest
orders the Patient to make an Offering to appease the Wrath of the Image, that
Offering consists in Cattle or Money, and all the Profit comes to the Priest
alone.

It is farther observed in that Relation, that so soon as a Child is born into
the World, the Priest does not more but anoint it with Oil, making the sign of
the Cross on its Forehead, and that Baptism is deferred until the Child be
about two years old. Then they baptize it dipping it in hot-water, and
anointing it all over; at length they give it Bread that has been blessed to
eat, and Wine to drink: which appears to be the Ancient way of Baptism, when
they administered at the same time Baptism, Confirmation and the Eucharist.
These People believe that Baptism, consists chiefly in the anointing with the
Oil that has been consecrated by the Patriarch: which does not disagree with
the Doctrine of the Orientals, who call that Unction the Perfection of Baptism.

Father Zampi who was no less full with the prejudices of the Theology of the
Latins, than the other Emissaries we mentioned before, put many questions to
them relating to that Theology. Amongst other things he asked them, whether
when they administered any Sacrament, they had a real intention to administer
it? And Circal intention, non sanno che sia, solo per usanza celebrano e per
l' Elemosina, per cio se sia valida la consecratione mi rimetto a' dottori.
thereupon he doubts, whether they truly consecrate the Bread and the Wine,
because they know not what that intention means. He asked them besides, wherein
they made the Form of Consecration to consist? And having put that Question to
many of them, there was but one who gave him any satisfaction, and who in
effect rehearsed the words of Consecration. But it is easy to judge, that the
Mengrelian who thereupon satisfied Father Zampi, speaks rather in the Sense of
the Father, than according to the Sentiment of those of his Nation. What is
strangest of all, and which some will hardly believe, a Mengrelian Priest being
by the same Father asked the Question, Interrogai uno di questi Reverendi, se
fatta la consecratione del pane e vino con le sodette parole veramente dopo que
pane e vino fosse il corpo e sangue di Christo? Questo soridendo, come se gli
havessi detta una facetia, disse, chi porta Christo nel pane, e come puo
venirvi e come puo stare in cosi poco pane, e perch si vol partire dal cilo
per venir in terra, ne may si e vista simil cosa.
whether after the Consecration of the Bread and the Wine, the same Bread and
Wine were really changed into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ! the
Mengrelian smiling made answer, that one could not conceive how Jesus Christ
could leave Heaven to come down upon Earth, and that he could be lodged in so
small a Morsel of Bread. But this does not at all agree with the Testimony,
that Father Zampi gives in another Place of the Belief of that People
concerning the Eucharist. And seeing such kind of Questions are impertinently
made by the Emissaries to the People of the East, who are not at all acquainted
with our Disputes about that Sacrament, we are not to wonder at their Answers,
if they suit not always with our Principles. The Mengrelian Papas on that
occasion consulted only his Senses, and made an answer much like to that which
the Capernaites made to our Lord, How can this Man give us his Flesh? Father
Zampi added another Question as impertinent as the rest. He asked the same
Papas, whether in Case the Priest should forget the words of Consecration,
would the Mase be good? to which he answered, why not? The Priest, indeed would
sin; but the Mass would still be good. It is strange an Emissary should put
such Questions to People whom he knows to be in profound ignorance, and who are
so far from understanding the Questions that have for some Ages only been
handled in the Schools, that they have but a slight Tincture of the Principles
of Christian Religion.

But that which scandalized Father Zampi the most, was the little Respect that
the Papas of Mengrelia have for the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which they keep
not, as the Latins do, in precious Vessels, but in a little bag of Leather or
Cloth, which they always tie to their Girdle, carrying it about with them
wheresoever they go, to be made use of upon occasions, when they are to give
the Viaticum to the sick. Nor do they make any Difficulty to give it to be
carried by others, whether it be Man or Woman: and seeing the Consecrated Bread
is hard, they break it into little Pieces to be moistened, without much regard
to the small Crumbs of that Consecrated Bread that fall upon the ground, or that
sick to their Hands. [*]
[*] I confess these People pay not Veneration enough to that August Sacrament:
but, on the other hand, it is not reasonable, to exact from them all the
External Worship that is rendered to it in the Western Church, seeing they have
not the same reasons to do it, having no Berengarians amongst them, that might
oblige them to give those Exterior Marks of their Belief. We can expect no
more from them, than what was practiced in the first Ages of the Church: And it
is not peculiar to the Mengrelians alone to keep in a leathern Bag the
Sacrament which is to serve for a Viaticum; the same is also observed in some
Greek Churches, who in that manner keep it fastened to the Wall in their
Churches.

CHAP. VII Of the Belief and Customs of the Nestorians.
THere are many Sects of Christians in the East, who bear the Name of Chaldeans
or Syrians; but the most considerable of these Chaldeans, are those whom we
call Nestorians, who, in effect, reverence Nestorius as their Patriarch, and
invocate him in their Prayers. That Nation, as well as the other Orientals, have
several times desired to be reunited to the Church of Rome: which happened
under the Pontificate of Julius III. to whom the Ep. Nestor. ad Jul. III. ex
Syro in Latin. conversa per Andr. Mas.
Nestorians wrote, demanding of him the Confirmation of the Election which they
had then made of a Patriarch; and praying him at the same time to protect him
against a Family which for a long time had kept Possession of the Patriarchate.
This is to be observed, because the Orientals commonly have no recourse to the
Pope, unless for some particular Interest; which is also the reason that these
kinds of Unions are not very lasting.

The Reunion of the same Chaldean Nestorians with the Church of Rome, under the
Pontificate of Paul V. is more considerable than the former, and seeing the
Acts of these Reunions have been Printed at Rome, we shall here extract out of
them what may conduce to the Discovery of the Belief of those People, and add
some Reflections thereupon.

Pet. Stroza de Dogm. Chald. Edit. Roma. 1617.
Stroza who has caused these Acts to be Printed, affirms that the Sect of the
Nestorians is so great, that their Patriarch has Jurisdiction over more than
three hundred thousand Families, most of which have submitted themselves to the
Pope by means of the Jesuits. Pope Clement VIII. gave them a Jesuit to govern
them in Quality of Metropolitan. Until the time of Julius III. the Nestorians
acknowledged but one Patriarch, who took the Title of Patriarch of Babylon: but
Division happening amongst them, because they could not endure that the
Patriarch should always continue in one Family, as it had for the space of
above an hundred years, which appears by the Letters Epist. Nestor. ad Jul. III.
they wrote to Julius III. for having Confirmation of their new Election; the
Patriarchate was also divided, for the Pope gave them for Patriarch Simon
Jubacha a Monk of the Order of St. Pachome, who held his Residence at Caremit
in Mesopotamia, where, in that Quality he ordained several Bishops and
Archbishops. After the Death of Simon Jubacha, Abdjesu or Hebedjesu, to
pronounce it after the manner of the Chaldeans, was made Patriarch in his
Place. Abraham Ecchellensis, Abrah. Ecchel.
who has published a little Syriack Treatise of Abdjesu, gives him the Title
of Metropolitan of Soba, in the Preface which he presixes to that Book. He
takes notice of several Books composed by the same Hebedjesu, in favor of the
Religion of the Nestorians: but that being come to Rome under Julius III. he
made an Abjuration of Nestorianism. It is of him that mention is made in the
Life of Pius IV. In whose Pontificate he made a second Voyage to Rome, for
obtaining the Confirmation of his Patriarchship; and was present at the Council
of Trent. Being a Man of Parts, he had so much Address as to draw over many
Nestorians to the Church of Rome. But they who succeeded him could not retain
them, having neither his Parts nor Address.

Abathalla, who was also a Monk of St. Pachome, succeeded to Hebedjesu, and
having lived but a very short time, Denha Simon was his Successor, who before
was Archbishop of Gelu: but he was forced to leave Caremit and to retire to the
Province of Zeinalbech in the utmost Bounds of Persia, having been obliged to
yield to the Power of the Patriarch of Babylon. His Successor whose Name also
was Simon, resided in the same place: which lessenned much the Authority of
that second Patriarch. And this was the State of the Affairs of the Nestorians
from the time of Julius III. until Paul V. in whose Pontificate, Elias
Patriarch of Babylon made a solemn Reconciliation with the Church of Rome.

Stroza in proleg.
This Elias having received Presents from Paul V. and a Formulary of Faith, sent
some in his Name, to thank his Holiness, and to submit himself wholly to him,
acknowledging the Church of Rome as the Chief of all other Churches. He made a
Profession of Faith in the Ep. Patriarch. Babyl. ad Paul. V.
Letter which he wrote to the Pope, wherein he Anathematises even those who
believe not that the Church of Rome is the Mother of all Churches. Then he
adds, that his Church of Babylon differs from other Churches of Heretics,
which have multiplied Patriarchs, without any Title, and without the
Participation of the Church of Rome: whereas the Patriarchate of Babylon has
been established by the Authority of the Sea of Rome, as is to be found in
their Annals, where it is mentioned that the Patriarchs of the Eastern Church
were ordained at Rome, whither they sent afterward for obtaining the
Confirmation of their Election. But seeing it happened often, that those who
were sent were killed by the way, it was at length after a long time, concluded
by the Pope in Council, that he would ordain them a Patriarch, and give them
Liberty of Election for the future. And this, says the Patriarch Elias, is the
Original of the Patriarchal See of Babylon, which we have not usurped, having
received that Dignity from the Church of Rome.

It is easy to perceive that all this History concerning the Original of the
Patriarchate of the Nestorians, has been made on purpose by the Patriarch
Elias who stood in need of the Assistance of Rome. The same Judgment we are to
make of the Letters which the Nestorians assembled at Mosul for the Election of
a new Patriarch, wrote to Pope Julius III. wherein they give him the Title of
Head of all Bishops, in the same manner as St. Peter was of all the other
Disciples. That is not the ordinary Language of the Orientals in regard of the
Bishop of Rome, whom they do, indeed, acknowledge to be the chief of
Patriarchs, but that, according to them, is only a Primacy of Honor, and not
of Jurisdiction and Power over the rest.

The same patriarch Elias annexed to his Letter the Confession of Faith of his
Church, where amongst other Articles, it is said, that the Holy Ghost proceeds
from the Father; that the Son has taken a Body of the Holy Virgin; that he is
perfect both in Soul and in Mind, and in all that belongs to a Man; that the
Word having descended into a Virgin, was united to the Man, and became one
thing with that Man, in the same manner as the Fire and the Iron are united
together; that that Unity is without either Mixture or Confusion; and therefore
it is, that the Properties of each Nature cannot be destroyed after the Union;
that they believe that Jesus Christ who is begotten of his Father from all
Eternity, as to his Divinity, was born of a Virgin in the fullness of time, and
united with the Nature of his Humanity. As to what is objected to them, that
they call not the Virgin, the Mother of God, but Mother of Jesus Christ: he
answers, that they speak in that manner, to condemn the Apollinarians, who
pretend that the Divinity is without the Humanity; and to confound Themistius,
who affirmed that Christ was only Humanity without Divinity. He farthermore
adds, that that is the Belief of the Church of Rome, and that he receives all
which that Church teaches; that he acknowledges the Pope to be Head of all
Churches, and that out of the same Church of Rome there is no Salvation.

Now seeing Elias Patriarch of Babylon, otherwise of the Nestorians, could not
come to Rome himself, He dispatched to the Pope some of the ablest and most
prudent Men about him, to make the Reconciliation of the two Churches. They
together framed an Explanation of the Articles of their Religion, where they
laid down, at length, the manner of reconciling their Belief with that of the
Church of Rome. Abbot Adam, who was one of the Deputies, was charged with that
Commentary or Explanation; and the Patriarch accompanied him with a Letter to
the Pope Epist. El. Patr. ad Paul. V.
wherein he treats of that Reconciliation of Belief, and makes it appear that
the two Churches differ only in Ceremonies; but that as to the Doctrine of
Faith all the Disputes with the Church of Rome, are but nominal. He reduces
those Points of Belief, wherein he pretends to differ only in Name from Rome,
to five Heads, to wit, in that the Nestorians call not the Virgin the Mother of
God, but Mother of Christ; in that they assign to J. C. but one Power and one
Will; in that they acknowledge in J. C. but one Person; in that they say
barely, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father; and, in fine, in that
they believe that the Light which is made on Holy Saturday at the Sepulcher of
our Lord is a Light truly miraculous. The Patriarch Elias, having taken the
Advice of the most knowing Men about him, pretends that in all these Points,
they understand not one another aright. And, in effect, Abbot Adam endeavors
to justify himself in a long Discourse, of which we shall only here relate a
Summary, without speaking of the two last Articles which are common to all the
Orientals; the three first only, relating particularly to the Nestorians; and
I find that that Abbot evidently proves that the Modern Nestorianism, is but a
Heresy in Name, and that it has only been condemned, because not understood.

In the first place, the Abbot makes appear, that it is easy to reconcile the
Roman Church which calls the Virgin Mother of God, with the Nestorian, which
calls her Mother of Jesus Christ; because it is a Principle received by both
Churches, that the Divinity neither generates, nor is generated, so that the
Virgin has engendered Jesus Christ, who is God and Man both together; but that
it is not therefore to be believed, that there are two Sons, but one only true
Son: insomuch that there is in Jesus Christ but one Filiation, and one only
visible Person, which the Nestorians call Parsopa. In fine, he concludes, that
they deny not but that the Virgin may be called Mother of God, because Jesus
Christ is really God, and that that Doctrine is agreeable to the words of St.
John in his Gospel, of St. Paul, and St. Gregory Nazianzene: wherefore, says
he, according to these Principles, the Church of Rome acknowledges really that
the Virgin is the Mother of God, and the Orientals, with good reason, say also,
that she is Mother of Christ; and yet for all that differ not in Judgment.

In the second place, he examines the difference that seems to be betwixt the
Roman and Nestorian Churches, touching the Natures and Persons in Jesus Christ.
It is certain the Latins acknowledge two Natures and one only Person in
Christ: whereas the Nestorians say that there are two Persons in him, and one
Parsopa or visible Person; and besides that there is but one Power and Virtue
in him. He reconciles those two Opinions that seem at first so different, by
the explication which he gives of that Mystery. The Orientals or Nestorians,
says he, according to the two Natures that are in Christ, distinguish in their
Mind two Persons; but with their Eyes they see but one Christ, who is only the
Parsopa or Appearance of one Filiation. And it is in that Sense also, that the
Nestorians acknowledge but one Power or Virtue in Christ, because they look
upon him but as one Parsopa or visible Person; and so, by reason of that real
and perfect Union which makes but one Compositum of two Natures, the Divine and
Humane, they distinguish not a double Power or Virtue, making the Terms to rest
on the Unity of Filiation. Whereas in the Church of Rome, these Powers or
Virtues are distinguished into Divine and Humane, because they are considered
with relation to the Natures, and it may easily be concluded from thence, that
this Diversity of Judgment is only apparent, since, in effect, the Nestorians
confess with the Latins, that there are two Natures in Christ, and that each
Nature has its Power and its Virtue: and besides, both Churches acknowledge,
that there is no Mixture nor Confusion of those two Natures, each retaining the
Attributes which are proper to them. In fine, for a greater Illustration of his
Opinion he adds these words: As the Fathers of the Church of Rome, acknowledge
one Person because of one Filiation; so they of the East acknowledge one Virtue
or Power because of one Filiation.

In the third place, he reconciles the Opinion of the Nestorians, who assign
but one Will and one Operation in Christ, with that of the Latins who
acknowledge two Wills and two Operations in him. For compassing that, he
insists upon the same Principle of one Filiation, which making but one Jesus
Christ; the Nestorians say with relation thereunto, that there is but one Will
and one Operation in him, because he is really one and not two. This,
nevertheless, hinders them not from acknowledging two Wills and two
Operations, with relation to the two Natures, as the Latins do: but they do
not express themselves after their manner, because these two Natures making but
one Compositum, which is Jesus Christ, they also say that he has but one Will
and one Operation; which excludes not the two Wills and Operations that the
Latins attribute to Christ, because the Nestorians own him to be perfect Man.
But seeing these two Natures are united together, and that the one Will is
never separated from the other, they make both together but one and the same
thing: and in that Sense they assert this Unity of Will; in which manner
Christ also speaks, when he says, I am not come to do my own Will, but the
Will of him that sent me. Then he concludes with these words: Are there two
contrary Wills in Jesus Christ? Not at all: but without any repugnance made by
the Will of his Humanity, he wills that which the Will of his Divinity wills,
to which it is submitted, not by constraint; and therefore he says to his
Father, not my Will be done, but thine.

In this manner the Nestorians justified to Paul V. the Belief of their
Churches, and that Justification or Reconciliation was not the Work of one
Man, but of the ablest Men of the Nation whom the Patriarch Elias consulted.
The truth is, there is flattery in the Articles which relate to the Sovereign
Power of the Pope, and the Christians of the Levant are not so submitted to the
Court of Rome, as the Nestorians in these Acts do testify: but that is
pardonable in poor VVretches that solicit the Protection of that Court,
because there was no other means of approaching it, without giving the Pope
that Supreme Power and Jurisdiction over all the Churches in the World. As to
the other Propositions which are peculiar to the Nestorians, it will be found
that Modern Nestorianism is but an imaginary Heresy, and that the Diversity of
Sentiments consists only in Ambiguities, inasmuch as the Nestorians take the
word Person in another acceptance than the Latins do. However, seeing Councils
had condemned the Heresy of Nestorius, it was, it seems, necessary that
Nestorianism should appear at Rome to be a real Heresy, since it had been
condemned in the Church by a General Council. That Course Stroza has taken in
the Collection he has made of these Acts; for he heaps together all that has
been said by the Fathers and Councils against the Opinion of Nestorius:
Nevertheless, that he may not altogether thwart the Patriarch of the
Nestorians, who affirmed that all the difference that was betwixt the Church of
Rome and his own, in relation to their Belief, consisted only in Ambiguities;
he frankly confesses, that it is probable enough that the Error of the Modern
Nestorians, is more in the Understanding than Will, that is to say, that they
are not Heretics, as not being obstinate; but only ignorant of true Theology,
which makes them erroneous; as if it were an Error not to know the Terms which
have not been in use but in some latter Ages amongst the Divines of the West.

I do not think it needful to produce in this Place all that Stroza alleges
for condemning the Propositions of the Nestorians, because he says nothing but
what may be found in the Acts of Councils. I shall only observe, that from the
same Acts some might infer, that Nestorianism is only a Heresy in Name, and
that if Nestorius and St. Cyrill had understood one another, they might have
reconciled their Opinions, and thereby hindered a great Scandal in the Church.
But the Greeks have been always great Disputants; and therefore we find that
most of the first Heresies had their Original amongst them; and that most
commonly their Disputes were only metaphysical, and about Ambiguities, from
which afterward, according to their Custom, they drew Consequences, and, at
length, came to reproaches; whereby matters became irreconcilable: whereas if
the parties had modestly explained their thoughts, there had not been, for most
part, the least appearance of Heresy in them. It seems to them that Nestorius
has always acknowledged two Natures in Christ, which united together, made but
one Compositum; and that he called a Person in Greek (...), whence the
Chaldeans have taken their Parsopa. Now it is certain, the Term (...), in the
Ancient Greek Fathers, signifies that which we call Person and Hypostasis. For
as to the two Persons which Nestorius assigned to be in Christ, it was only to
explain that there were really two Natures in him, and that both remained
entire without Mixture or Confusion. In effect, besides those two Metaphysical
Persons which were not distinguished in Nature, he admitted another real
visible Person, in the manner as it is defined by the Ancient Fathers. Nay it
will appear, that the Sentiment of Nestorius, if we bar the Consequences that
St. Cyrill draws from it, is less perplexed with Difficulties, because it is
more simple, and always regards Jesus Christ in himself and as Son; whereas the
other Opinion, most frequently considers him only by parts, that is to say,
sometime as God, and sometime as Man. Nor was the Opinion of Theodore of
Mopsuestia, the Master of Nestorius, condemned in the Beginning, and it was
never thought on, until the Nestorians made use of his Authority. It is,
nevertheless, certain, That this Theodore, from whom Nestorius had learnt the
Opinion, acknowledged two Natures and one Person in Jesus Christ, as appears by
his words mentioned in the fifth General Council: And if he denied that the
Virgin was the Mother of God, it was only to refute the Heresy of
Apollinarius, and in that Sense only, that the Virgin could not conceive the
Divinity, though otherways he whom she brought forth was very God. Let us now
proceed to the other Articles of the Belief of the Nestorians.

Seeing the Sect of the Nestorians has been rent from the Greek Church, it
has the same Opinions as she has, except that which is peculiar to it, and
which was the Cause of the Separation. It may be, however, the Nestorians are
greater Libertines as to some Points of Morality and Discipline, than the
Greeks are; and without doubt it is in that Sense that we ought to understand
Brerew. of Lang, and Religions, Chap. 19.
what Brerewood relates concerning Confession, which he denies to be amongst
them. It is true they neglect it very much, and the Archbishop Joseph, a
Nestorian, who some years since was reconciled to the Church of Rome, had much
ado to reestablish it in Diarbequer, because the Nestorians, though most of
them Latinized, would not submit to it, as I have learned from another Chaldean
Archbishop, a great Friend of Joseph's, who has suffered much for maintaining
the Interests of Rome. We must then explain all the other Points of the
Religion of the Nestorians, with relation to the Sentiments of the Greek
Church, which is the source of all the Christianity in the East.

It is not to be denied, but that the Nestorians consecrate in Leavened bread.
They moreover, put into their Bread Salt and Oil, as may be seen in the Notes
upon the Works of Gabriel of Philadelphia, where the way of making and
preparing that Bread, to make it proper for Consecration, is related. They
have, for that end, a great many Prayers which they say; however they observe
fewer Ceremonies than the Greeks, who to the Ancient have added an infinite
Number of new ones.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Indians, or Christians of St. Thomas.
THE Indians or Christians of St. Thomas, and the Nestorians may be
comprehended under one Head, because it is certain they make but one Sect, and
have but one Patriarch, whose Jurisdiction extends as far as India: and the
Chaldeans who live at Goa, Cochim, Angamala, and other Places of those
Quarters, are really of the Nestorian Sect. The Popes have often sent
Emissaries into those Countries, especially since the Portuguese settled there.
But he that labored most in reconciling these Christians of St. Thomas to the
Roman Church, was Alexis de Meneses of the Order of St. Austin, who was made
Archbishop of Goa, and took the Title of Primate of the East. Seeing there has
been a History made out of his Memoires, the relation of those who accompanied
him into that Country, and of some Jesuits who have been in the same Places,
we shall relate the State and Religion of those People at the time of that
Famous Mission, which happened in the Year 1599. Many before Meneses had
attempted the Reunion of the Christians of St. Thomas with the Church of Rome.
Don John Albuquerque, Hist. Orient. des progres d' Alex. Men. en la reduct des
Crestiens de St. Thomas. Imprimee a Brusseles en. 1609.
of the Order of St Francis, was the first Archbishop of Goa; and under him, in
the Year 1546. there was a College erected at Cangranor for instructing
Children in the Ceremonies of the Latins. But the Jesuits who were more
sagacious, soon perceived, that the Young Chaldeans bred after the manner of
the Latins, were useless, and that it was in vain to think of converting the
Christians of that Country without the Knowledge of the Chaldaick or Syrian
Language. They therefore erected another College about a League from Cangranor
in the Year 1587. where they taught Children the Chaldaick Tongue, to the end
that being grown up, they might be received into the Ministry as real
Chaldeans. But neither did this do any great Service, because it was not enough
to be instructed in the Language of the Religion, there must be, besides, an
agreement in Sentiments with the Prelates, to have the Liberty of Preaching in
their Churches; whereas being taught by the Jesuits, their Doctrine and way of
speaking were very different from what was commonly received in the Country.
And therefore it was impossible for the Jesuits to make them forsake their
ancient Customs, and to withdraw them from the Submission which they rendered
to the Patriarch of Babylon, who was not in the Pope's Communion, no more than
the Bishops that were under his Jurisdiction.

The Remedy therefore that was found for that, was to seize the Person of a
certain Bishop called Mar Joseph, who had been sent by the Patriarch of
Babylon, to the end that by that means the People having no Pastor, the Design
might the more easily be brought about. But that Bishop Mar Joseph ordered that
Mass should be celebrated according to the Custom of Rome with Ornaments after
the Latin Fashion, and that they should even make use of the Wine and Wafers of
the Latins. Nevertheless he still persisted in Nestorianism, and taught the
Portuguese who served him, to say, Holy Mary Mother of Christ, and not Mother
of God: which obliged the Archbishop and Viceroy to arrest him, in order to his
being carried to Rome. But arriving in Portugal, he so well managed his
Affairs, that he obtained Letters again to be received into his Bishopric of
Serra. In the mean time, there was another Bishop already put in his Place,
called Mar Abraham, who to maintain himself in his Bishopric, went afterward
to Rome to submit to the Pope, where having made an abjuration of his Heresies,
he was re-ordained. He had all the Orders given him anew, from the Tonsure to
Priesthood; then he was consecrated Bishop, and the Pope empowred him by Bulls
for governing the Church of Serra, adding thereunto Letters of Recommendation
to the Viceroy, which stood him but in little stead: for he was no sooner
arrived, but that the Archbishop of Goa caused his Bulls to be examined; and
finding that the Pope had been misinformed by Mar Abraham, and that his
Holiness had been imposed upon, he was shut up in a Monastery, in expectation
of an Answer from Rome. But he escaped and retired into the Churches of his
Bishopric, where he was very well received by the Nestorians, who hoped no
more for any Bishop from their Patriarch. In the mean time, Mar Abraham who
still distrusted the Portuguese, retreated far up into the Country; and to
show that he was sincerely in the Pope's Communion, he ordained anew all those
whom he had already ordained, that he might conform to the Roman Rite, and did
all he could both with the Viceroy and the Archbishop, that he might appear to
be really in the Judgment of the Latin Church. But he still preached
Nestorianism in his Church of Serra, and would not suffer the Pope to be called
Head of the Church, as owning no other Patriarch, but the Patriarch of Babylon.
On the other hand, the Ancient Bishop of Serra Mar Joseph was accused of
teaching the Heresies of Nestorius, and being thereupon questioned, he answered
freely, that he had had a Revelation from God, assuring him that the Religion
which he had received from his Ancestors was the true Religion. So he was
immediately made Prisoner, and sent to Rome where he died.

From this History it may be gathered that the Portuguese have used great
Violence toward the Nestorians about Matters of Religion; that the Emissaries,
being Men unacquainted with the Theology of the East, have disturbed and
molested them for Ceremonies of little or no Importance, and that they have
thereby occasioned the temporising of the Nestorian Bishops, by introducing
Novelties into their Churches, to which they were constrained by Violence. And
therefore it was that the same Mar Abraham having been obliged by the Pope's
Brief, and more by the fear that he had of the Viceroy, who gave him a
Passport, to repair to a Council, he there again abjured all these Errors,
and made Profession of the Roman Catholic Faith. But no sooner was he come
back to his Church, but that he taught Nestorianism as before; and even wrote
to his Patriarch of Babylon, that the Portuguese had forced him to be present
at the Synod of Goa. The sequel of that History discovers more plainly the
Violences used by the Portuguese toward the Nestorians, to bring them to an
Union with the Church of Rome, and to oblige them to subscribe to the
Confession of Faith of Pius IV. which happened in the time of Alexis de Meneses
Archbishop of Goa, who went into the Indies with a Brief of Clement VIII. to
inform against Mar Abraham. In that whole Relation there appears great Zeal in
the Nestorian Christians of that Country, for the Defense of their Faith,
which they pretended to retain as being once delivered unto them by St. Thomas:
In so much that they put their hands before their Eyes at the Mass of the
Latins, when the Priest elevated the Host to be adored by those that were
present. Above all, they showed themselves zealous for their Patriarch of
Babylon; and when they were asked whether the Pope was not Head of the Church,
they made answer that he was Head of the Church of Rome, which is a particular
Church, otherwise called the Church of St. Peter, and not of the Church of St.
Thomas, as being independent one of another, which they obstinately maintained.
They, moreover, resolutely withstood the Sacrament of Confirmation which
Archbishop Meneses would have administered unto them; and they accused him of
Envy and Ambition, alleging that he endeavored to overturn the Religion of
St. Thomas, to make them embrace that of Rome, to the end that by that
Artifice, he might remain absolute Master of all the Churches of the Indies.
And therefore, say they, that Archbishop calumniated the Patriarchs of Babylon;
protesting, however, that they would persevere in Submission and Obedience to
their patriarch, and that they would never forsake their Religion to embrace
that of Rome.

Notwithstanding all these oppositions on the Part of the Nestorians,
Archbishop Meneses still persisted to inculcate to them that their Patriarch
was an Heretic and Excommunicated; and that therefore they could not pray for
him. This he did so vigorously, sparing neither Pains nor Money, that at length
he softened them. Sometimes he used Violence, and was therefore often in danger
of his Life. For under Pretext that he had full Power from the Pope, he
exercised his Jurisdiction in all Places, without minding the Ordinaries of the
Places, even before they had acknowledged his Character. And in this manner
that Envoy of the Pope planted the Roman Religion in that Country, and spared
no means to accomplish his Design. He gave Orders in spite of the Diocesan
Bishops, and made those whom he Ordained first abjure the Errors of the
Nestorians. Besides the Confession of Faith, they who entered into Orders were
obliged to swear Obedience to the Pope, and to acknowledge no other Bishops,
but such as were sent from him. But let us now come to the Errors of which
Meneses accuses the Christians of St. Thomas.

I. Hist. Orient. des progr. d' Alexis Meneses, Chap. 20.
They obstinately maintained the Errors of Nestorius, and besides that, they
received no Images, admitting only the Cross which they much honored.
Nevertheless, there were Images of some Saints in Churches adjacent to the
Portuguese.

II. They affirmed that the Souls of the Saints did not see God before the Day
of Judgment.

III. They acknowledged but three Sacraments, to wit, Baptism, Orders, and the
Eucharist: and in the Form of Baptism there was so great an abuse amongst them,
that in one and the same Church, different Forms of Baptism were in use; and by
reason of that, it happened often that the Baptism was null: So that Archbishop
Meneses secretly rebaptized most Part of that People. There were also a great
many, especially the Poor, who lived in the woods, who had never been Baptized,
because Baptism cost Money: And nevertheless though they had never been
baptized, yet they went to Church, and received the Sacrament. Besides, they
often enough delayed Baptism for several Months, nay and for several Years.

IV. They made no use of Holy Oil in the Administration of Baptism; unless that
finding in their Rituals that there was mention made of anointing after
Baptism, they anointed Children with an Unguent made of Indian Nuts, without
any Benediction; and they esteemed that Unction Holy.

V. They had no Knowledge of Confirmation nor Extreme Unction; nay not so much
as the Names of them.

VI. They abominated Auricular Confession, except a few that were Neighbors to
the Portuguese: And as to the Eucharist, they communicated on Holy Thursday and
many other Festival-days, without other Preparation, than coming to the
Sacrament fasting.

VII. Their Books were full of considerable Errors, and in their Mass there
were a great many Additions inserted by the Nestorians.

VIII. They consecrated with little Cakes made with Oil and Salt, which the
Deacons and other Churchmen, who were but in inferior Orders, baked in a
Copper Vessel, having for that purpose a separated Place in the Form of a
little Tower; and whilst the Cake was a baking, they sung several Psalms and
Hymns: and when they were ready to consecrate, through a Hole that was in the
Floor of that little Tower, they let the Cake in a little Basket made of Leaves
slide down upon the Altar. Moreover, they made use of Wine made of Water, in
which some dry Grapes had only been infused.

IX. They said Mass but very seldom, and he that served at it, wore a kind of a
Stole over his ordinary Clothes, though he was not a Deacon. He had always the
Censer in his Hand, and said almost as many Prayers as he that celebrated,
adding thereto many unknown and impious Ceremonies.

X. They had so great a Veneration for Orders, that there was not a Family
where some Body was not in Orders: and the reason of that was, because as
Orders made them not incapable of other Employments, so they had every where
the Precedence.

Besides, they observed not the Age requisite for Priesthood, and the other
Orders; for they made Priests at the Age of 17, 18. and 20. Years: and when
they were Priests, they married, even with Widows, and past to second or third
Marriages. The Priests Wives had some Place before others, as well in the
Churches as elsewhere, and they were to be known by a Cross which they carried
about their Neck, or some other. thing that distinguished them.

XI. They went daily to Church to read the Liturgy aloud in the Chaldaick
Tongue: but they did not think themselves obliged to repeat it elsewhere;
neither had they any Breviaries for saying it in Private.

XII. They committed Symony in the Administration of Baptism and the Eucharist,
setting rates of the Price they were to receive for them. For their Marriages,
they made use of the first Priest that they found, especially those who lived
in the Country.

XIII. They had an extraordinary respect for their Patriarch of Babylon, a
Schismatic, and Head of the Nestorian Sect: on the contrary they could not
endure that the Pope should be named in their Churches, where most commonly
they had neither Curate nor Vicar, but the ancientest presided in them.

XIV. Though on Sundays they went to Mass, yet they did not think themselves
obliged to it in Conscience; so that they were at Liberty not to go, nay there
were some Places where Mass was said but once a Year, and others where none was
said in 6, 7. and 10. Years.

XV. The Priests discharged Secular Employments. The Bishops were Babylonians
sent by their Patriarch, and lived only by sordid Gain, and Symony, selling
Publicly Holy things, as the Collation of Orders, and the Administration of
other Sacraments.

XVI. They are flesh on Saturdays; and were in this Error in regard of the
Fasts of Lent and the Advent, that if they had failed to Fast one day, they
fasted no more, thinking themselves not obliged to it, because they had already
broken their Fast.

These are the greatest Part of the Errors which Archbishop Meneses pretends
to have found amongst the Christians of St. Thomas, and which the Compiler of
that History exaggerates, to show that extraordinary Labor was needful for
gaining these People. But if that Archbishop and other Emissaries into the
East, had been well acquainted with the Ancient Theology, they would not have
so multiplied Errors. In effect, seeing they measured all things by the Rule
of the Theology which is taught in the Schools of Europe, it is not to be
thought strange, that they would needs reform the Oriental nations according to
that Standard. I confess, there were abuses there that needed amendment; but
they ought not to have been rectified according to our Customs. The Course that
was to have been taken on these Occasions was to have turned back unto their
Ancient Books, and to have reformed them according to the Contents thereof; and
that might have been easily done, as will appear in the Sequel of this
Discourse. But we must first relate the rest of that History, that we may be
able to make the better Judgment on the Conduct of Meneses, and of the
pretended Errors of the Nestorians.

Archbishop Meneses called a Synod the 20th. of June 1599. where the Deputies
of the Nestorians were present, to deliberate jointly with the Archbishop about
Matters of Religion. And that it might appear that the Nestorians had all the
Liberty that is necessary upon such Occasions, and that on the other Hand, they
might give their Consent to all that should be decreed there, the Archbishop
gained Eight of the most Famous Churchmen, and fully informed them of his
Design, and of the ways that were to be taken for succeeding in it, giving them
the particulars of all the Decrees that were to be made there, and asking their
Opinion upon every distinct Point, as if nothing had as yet been resolved upon;
to the end that being present in the Synod, they might do the same, and
thereby oblige the rest to follow their Example. He took many other measures
for succeeding in his Designs, which, it would be to no purpose, to relate; and
all that has been hitherto alleged, is only to show the manner how the Roman
Religion has been established in the East, and that it is not to be thought
strange, that all the Reconciliations that have been made with those People
whom we call Schismatics, have been of no long Duration.

It was then decreed in that Synod, that the Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, and
besides all the Deputies of Towns that were present should sign the Confession
of Faith, that the Archbishop had privately made by himself; which was done,
and all solemnly swore obedience to be Pope, whom they acknowledged to be Head
of the Church, swearing also that they would entertain no more Commerce with
the Patriarch of Babylon. Moreover they Anathematized the Person of Nestorius
and all his Errors, owning Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria for a Saint.
Besides, a great many particular Statutes were made in that Synod, for
reforming the Errors that Archbishop Meneses pretended to be in the
Administration of their Sacraments, and in their Books. And therefore he caused
their Liturgies and other Offices to be rectified. He regulated the matter of
Marriage, according to the Decrees of the Council of Trent. The Sacraments of
Penance, Confirmation and Extreme Unction were likewise reformed, according to
the Practice of the Church of Rome. Priests were for the future prohibited to
marry, and regulations were made for those who were already married. In a word,
the Archbishop introduced the Religion of the Latins amongst the Chaldeans, as
well in that synod, as in the Visitations which he made of several Churches.
But let us now consider, if he had reason to introduce so many Novelties
amongst the Christians of St. Thomas; which will serve to discover the Religion
of those People.

I. As to what concerns the Errors which Archbishop Meneses imputes to them;
we have in the foregoing Chapter reconciled the Sentiments of the Nestorians,
with those of the Church of Rome; and that was the way that the Archbishop
should have proceeded with them, if he intended to have established a lasting
Reformation: for he ought to have heard them, before he condemned them for
being called Nestorians. When it had been made clear to them, that all the
Disputes which they had with the Church of Rome, consisted only in the
Ambiguity of Terms, they would have become a great deal more tractable and
docile.

II. As to Images, the Chaldeans reverence them not so much as the Greeks do,
because that great Veneration of Images was not so firmly established in the
Greek Church, but since the second Council of Nice, which was posteriour to all
the Sects of the Chaldeans, who commonly are satisfied with a Cross in their
Hand; and that Cross wherewith the Priest blesses the People, is of plain
Metal without any figure. The Archbishop might very well have let the
Christians of St. Thomas alone in that Ancient simplicity, because all that
has been since that time decreed concerning Images, is but barely matter of
Discipline.

III. It is very true they administer not Baptism after the manner of the
Latins; but it is not therefore to be thought, that the form of their Baptism
is invalid; and it was far less necessary to rebaptize those who had been
baptized according to the Chaldean rite. That which deceives the Emissaries,
when they treat about Affairs of Religion with the Orientals, is the prejudices
which they have learned in the Schools concerning the Matter and Form of
Sacraments. When, for instance, they see that the Child is not baptized at the
same time that the words which denote the Action are pronounced, they take the
Baptism to be null; without considering that the manner of administering the
Sacraments amongst the Orientals, consists chiefly in certain Prayers which
they say, and that they are not so great Metaphysicians as the Latins; which
makes them ignorant of a vast number of Difficulties, that our Divines handle
with much subtilty; but the Belief of the Nestorians is not therefore less
pure, nor less Ancient.

IV. The Unction which they use after Baptism, is with them the Sacrament of
Confirmation, that differs much from that of the Latins: And it was not
needful that Archbishop Meneses should have introduced another Unction that
was practiced in his Church, and which at most was no more than a Ceremony. He
ought to have known that the Nestorians, according to the Ancient Practice of
the Eastern Church, administer to Children Confirmation and the Eucharist with
Baptism. It had been then fit, to have examined their Rituals, to see whether
any abuse might not have crept into the Administration of that Sacrament:
whereas Meneses his chief care seems to have been, to abolish most Ancient
Customs, because they were not agreeable to the Practices of the Latins.

V. The Archbishop is mistaken, when he says that the Christians of St. Thomas
had no Knowledge of Confirmation, nor of Extreme Unction, and were ignorant of
the very Names. It may be, they might have been ignorant of the Names of these
Sacraments, especially of Extreme Unction, which is no where known, but in the
Latin Church: for though the Eastern Church has the Custom of anointing the
Sick, according to the words of St. James, yet she calls not that Ceremony
Extreme Unction, for the reasons we mentioned before, when we spoke of the
Greeks: and the same reasons may be also applied to Confirmation. The Priests
administer that Sacrament amongst the Nestorians, as well as amongst the
Greeks, at the same time they do Baptism, of which, according to them, it is a
perfection that ought never to be separated from it. As to Auricular
Confession, which they had in abhorrence, it is certainly an abuse introduced
into that Church, because the use of Confession is in all the East, though most
part think not themselves obliged to it by Divine Right.

VI. As to the Errors which the Archbishop pretends to have found in their
Books, so far as that they would have entirely abolished the Office of Advent,
it was easy to have given a good meaning to all these pretended Errors;
besides that, the Reformation which he made in their Liturgy was improper: for
there is nothing worse digested than the Mass of the Nostorians, in the manner
as it has been reformed by Meneses, and as it is found inserted in the
Bibliotheca Patrum. The whole Order of it is changed, in endeavoring to
accommodate that Liturgy to the Opinion which the Latin Divines have of
Consecration, which they make to consist in these words, This is my Body, etc.
whereas the Nestorians believe, as all the Orientals do, that the Consecration
is not completed, till the Priest has ended the Prayer, which they call the
Invocation of the Holy Ghost. Nevertheless Meneses makes the Nestorian Priests
adore the Host, so soon as they have pronounced these words, This is my Body,
though they believe it not to be as yet consecrated. About this Question the
Notes on Gabriel of Philadelphia may be consulted, where the Author
particularly justifies the Nestorians, and proves clearly, that their
Liturgies, even that which carries the Name of S. Nestorius, contain nothing
but what is Orthodox: which is far from the Sentiment of Meneses, who calls
them impious and heretical, and who only defends the Correction that he has
made, by these general Terms, that their Liturgies were full of Blasphemies.
The same Author affirms that in one of the Liturgies for the use of the
Nestorians, which he had from a Babylonian Priest, the Name of Nestorius with
many other things were blotted out, and others added that were not of the same
hand writing, because the Nestorian Priest who made use of that Liturgy, was
reconciled, at least in appearance, to the Roman Church; which obliged him to
reform in his Missal all that might disgust the Divines of Rome. The Nestorians
have also done the like on another occasion, as Stroza Petr. Stroza de dogm.
Chald.
relates: for so soon as they come to Rome, and hear Nestorius spoken of as an
impious Person and Heretic, they tear out the Leaves of their Books where
mention is made of him, taking away all that they believe to be contrary to the
Theology of the Church of Rome.

VII. Their Custom of consecrating with Leavened bread, mingling therein Oil
and Salt, ought not to be reckoned amongst their Errors, since that does not
alter the Nature of Bread. The Ceremony, besides, which they observe to render,
in some sort, the Bread more Holy before the Consecration, is Laudable, nay and
Ancient. They thereby distinguish, as the Greeks do, the Bread that is destined
to be made the Body of Christ, from all common Bread, which they look upon as
profane, before they have said over it a certain Number of Prayers and Psalms.

VIII. It is no matter of wonder, that the Chaldeans do not say Mass so often
as the Latins do, and that many Priests are present at the Bishops Mass, and
take the Communion from his hands. That is an ancient Practice in the Church:
whereas the Custom of saying so many Masses in the Latin Church, is very late,
and has been chiefly introduced by Mendicant Monks, as it is observed by
Cardinal Bona; which Practice has been much fortified since the Introduction
of the new Law. It is also a very ancient Custom that they who serve and are
present at Mass, rehearse a good part of it; and that, because the Liturgy is a
Public Action which concerns the People, and may be easily proved even by the
Prayers of the Latin Mass.

IX. It is true the Nestorians and other Orientals, are grown remiss, in the
Ancient Discipline as to what relates to Orders, and that they observe not the
Age required by the Canons: But if that wanted to be reformed, as well as what
concerns the Marriage of Priests, the Reformation should have been taken from
their Laws, rather than from those of Rome. All Men know that in the Eastern
Church Priests are allowed to marry before their Ordination. This, Archbishop
Meneses ought to have considered in reforming them, and not to have dissolved
the Marriage of Priests, that he might conform to some Statutes made in the
Synods held at Goa by some Latin Emissaries.

X. Meneses seems to have been mistaken in reckoning the Custom of not saying
the Breviary out of the Church, amongst their Errors, because that Practice is
new, and that the Breviary was not made to be said in private.

XI. I doubt whether the Rates that the Nestorian Priests set for the
Administration of the Sacraments, ought to be called Symony, because that is to
them instead of a Benefice; and what has been said before when we spoke of the
Greeks, may be applied to them.

XII. I think the Submission that the Nestorians have for their Patriarch,
ought not to be reckoned an Error neither; because the Orientals look upon all
Patriarchates, even that of Rome, as Powers established by positive Law: And if
it be objected to them as a reproach, that they have an Aversion to the Pope,
they answer that the Pope takes to himself Rights over the Churches of the
East, which these Churches do not acknowledge. As to their not having Curates
nor Vicars, but that the Eldest Priest presides in their Assemblies; that
cannot rationally be called an Error: on the contrary, it is an Excellent
Discipline; and it were to be wished, that it were established in all Churches,
for a Remedy to many abuses, which are at present in Benefices.

XIII. In fine, most part of that which Meneses calls Corruptions amongst the
Nestorians, is not so in effect, unless it be in the Imagination of some
Emissaries, who measure Religion according to what they have been taught in
their Schools. Can it be said, for instance, that it is an Error in these
People, and other Christians of the East, to eat flesh on Saturday, which
amongst them is a Festival-day agreeable to the ancient Practice of the Church?
Can it be said also, that the Nestorians err in relation to Marriage, because
they take the first Priest that they meet with to marry them? We must know that
in the Eastern Church the Priest is not barely a Witness of the Marriage; but
that he is the only and true Minister of it, as of the other Sacraments and
Ceremonies.

CHAP. IX. Of the Customs and Ceremonies of the Jacobites.
IF under the Name of Jacobites, we comprehend all the Monophysites of the
East, that is to say, all those to whom that Heresy is imputed of
acknowledging but one Nature in Jesus Christ; it is certain that that Sect is
of a very large extent: for it comprehends the Armenians, the Cophties and the
Abyssines, but they who are properly called Jacobites are but very few in
number, and they live chiefly in Syria and Mesopotamia. They are not in all at
most above forty, or five and forty thousand Families: And these too are
divided about Doctrine; for some are Latinized, and others sitll continue in
separation from the Church of Rome. Nay at present there is some Division among
this last sort, for they have two Patriarchs opposite the one to the other, one
residing at Caremit, and the other at Derzapharan. Besides them, there is
another Latinized Patriarch, called Andrew, who resides at Aleppo, and depends
on the Court of Rome, to which he is wholly subject. I have, moreover, been
informed by a Jacobite Priest who lived at Aleppo, that the Patriarch suffers
much because of the Emissaries that were there, and especially because of the
Capuchins.

As to their Belief, all the Monophysites whether Jacobites, Armenians,
Cophties or Abyssines, are of the Opinion of Dioscorus, touching the Unity of
Nature and Person in Christ; and therefore they are accounted Heretics, though
in effect they differ not from the Latin Divines, but only in the manner of
expressing themselves. The Learnedest of them acknowledge this at present, as
appears P. Sacchini. hist. Societ. Part. 2. lib. 6.
by the Conference that Father Christopher Roderigo, sent by the Pope into
Egypt, had with the Cophties about the Reunion of the two Churches: for they
confessed that they only expressed themselves in that manner, to distinguish
them from the Nestorians; but that in effect they differed not from the Church
of Rome, which asserts two Natures in Christ. They even pretend that they
explain the Mystery of the Incarnation, saying that there is but one Nature,
because there is but one Christ, God and Man, better than the Latins do, who
speak, say they, of these two Natures as if they were separate, and did not
constitute a real Compositum. In that Sense is it also, that Dioscorus who
softened some Terms of Eutyches, which appeared too harsh, said that he
acknowledged that Christ was composed Ex duabus naturis.
of two Natures, but that he was not Duas naturas.
two Natures; which seems to be Orthodox: for they will not acknowledge that
there are two Natures in Christ, for fear of asserting two Christ's. Nor do I
doubt, but that if some bold Expressions, and the Consequences that are
commonly drawn from them, were laid aside in the Opinion of Eutyches, it might
be easily reconciled with the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. All the
difference proceeds only from the different use of the words Nature and
Person; and the desire of maintaining what once has been asserted, as in
effect, Eutyches defended his Opinion with headstrong Wilfulness and Obstinacy:
so that all the Terms that he makes use of, are not to be taken according to
the Rigor of the Letter; but they ought to be explained and limited according
to the Idea which he had conceived of admitting but one Christ, and therefore
but one Nature, after that the Union of the two Natures, to wit, the Divine and
Humane, is made in a manner which we cannot comprehend. For that which is
attributed to Eutyches, that he believed that the Body of Christ was a Divine
Body, and of a Nature different from ours, is rather the Oratory of the
Preacher, who might say that the Body of Jesus Christ after the Union was in a
manner made Divine, than a real and physical Truth. However, there was reason
for condemning that Sentiment, because such ways of speaking are to be avoided,
which may be wrong interpreted, and occasion Errors in Religion.

As to the other Points both of the Belief and Ceremonies of the Jacobites,
what Brerewood of Languag. and Relig. Chap. 21.
Brerewood relates of them is not always true. For instance, they deny not
Purgatory, nor the Prayers for the Dead, as he affirms after Thomas a Jesu; but
they have the same Opinion, as to that, as the Greeks and other Orientals have.
Nor is it true that they consecrate in Unleavened bread, unless it be
understood of the Armenians, and according to Alvares, of the Ethiopians: for
the true Jacobites, of whom we speak in this Place, consecrate with Leavened
bread; and I make no doubt but that Gregory XIII. who had a Design of erecting
a College at Rome for the Jacobites, as he had done for the Maronites, would
have permitted them to consecrate in Leavened bread, in the same manner as it
was allowed to the Greeks. In regard of Confession, neither is it true that it
is not practiced amongst them: but seeing they believe it not to be of Divine
Right, no more than most of the Orientals do, that is the reason why it is
neglected. As to Circumcision, that cannot be true but of some Cophties and
Abyssines; nay and these look upon it rather as an ancient Custom, than a
Ceremony of Religion.

There is a great difference to be made then, betwixt the Jacobites, when under
that Name are comprehended the Cophties, Abyssines and Armenians, and those who
are properly called Jacobites: for though they all follow the Opinion of that
same James from whom they have taken the Name, yet for all that, they differ in
some Ceremonies. Abraham Ecchellensis alleges that the Jacobites believe
as well as the Latins, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son:
but in that he is mistaken, as well as in many other things relating to the
Belief and Customs of the Christians of the Levant.

CHAP. X. Of the Belief and Customs of the Cophties.
IT is probable that the Cophties or Copties have had their Name from a Town
called Coptus, which was heretofore the Metropolis of Thebais mentioned by
Strabo and Plutarch. The Christians of Egypt carry that Name at present, and
they have also a particular Language, which is called the Coptick Tongue,
though they use it not but in their Offices, Arabic being the Language of the
Country: And that Language, which the Jesuit Kircher pretends to be a
Mother Tongue independent of any other, has been much altered by the Greeks:
for besides that it still retains the Characters, a very great Number of its
words are pure Greek.

The Belief of these People is the same as that of the Jacobites, for they are
Monophysites, as we observed when we spoke of the Jacobites; and therefore it
is to no purpose to repeat what we said in that Place. They have at several
times made several Reconciliations with the Church of Rome, but only in
outward appearance. Sacchini in hist. Societ.
The Jesuit Roderigo, who was sent to that Nation by the Pope in the Year 1562,
upon submissive and respectfull Letters which they had written to his Holiness,
as if they owned the Church of Rome for Chief and Mistress of all others, will
furnish us with a pretty instance of these counterfeit Reconciliations, which,
most frequently, have no better Foundation than mere humane Interest. This
Jesuit having had some Conference with two Cophties, whom the Patriarch Gabriel
had deputed for that purpose, easily persuaded them of the Pope's Authority:
but when the Jesuit afterward pressed the same Patriarch to send Letters of
Submission and Obedience to the Pope, telling him that he ought not to scruple
at that, seeing in his former Letters, he had called the Pope Father of
Fathers, Pastor of Pastors, and Head of all Churches; he made answer, that
since the Council of Chalcedon and the establishment of diverse Patriarchs
independent one of another, every one of them was chief and absolute Master in
his own Church; and that if even the Patriarch of Rome fell into any Error, he
ought to be judged by the other Patriarchs. He farther answered, that as to the
Letters which he had written to the Pope, it ought not to be taken strictly,
what was only meant for Civility and Modesty; and that though he spoke of
Obedience and Submission, yet that was no more than Friends commonly do one to
another. In fine, he added, that if there was any thing in those Letters which
he wrote to the Pope, that was not agreeable to the Doctrine of his Church, it
ought not to be imputed to him but to the Carrier of the Letters, who without
doubt had corrupted them. In this manner did the Patriarch of the Cophties
entertain the Pope's Envoys, after that he had received from the Conful, the
Money that was sent him from Rome. This History is more largely related by
Sacch. in hist. Societ. Par. l. 6.
the Jesuit Sacchini: And I wave a great many other Reconciliations of that
Church to the Church of Rome, which have had no better Foundation than this.
The same Jesuit Roderigo observes amongst the Errors of the Cophties, that
they put away their Wives, and Marry others; that they circumcise their
Children before Baptism; that they acknowledge, indeed, seven Sacraments; but
that besides Baptism, Confession, the Eucharist and Orders, they reckon in the
same rank, Faith, Fasting and Prayer, not to speak of others. He says farther,
that the Cophties do not believe that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son;
that they admit but of three Councils, to wit, of Ephesus, Constantinople and
Nice. But some of these pretended Errors, are either common to all the Eastern
Church, or they particularly concern the Jacobites, who have rejected the
Council of Chalcedon. As to their reckoning amongst the Sacraments, Fasting,
Prayer and Faith, they take not the word Sacrament in that strict Sense we do;
and that inclines me to believe that they call none properly Sacraments, but
the four first; and that some Mystical Doctors have afterward added the other
three, to make up the Mystical Number of Seven. In fine, we may observe that it
is not true that the Cophties believe as the Latins do, that the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father and the Son, as Brerew. of Languag. and Relig. chap.
22.
Brerewood after Thomas a Jesu does assure us; for that belief is peculiar to
the Church of the West. Kircher the Jesuit adds to this, that they pretend that
none but their own, the Armenian and Abyssine Churches, are true Churches; that
they believe that the Souls of the departed go neither to Heaven nor Hell
before the Day of Judgment. I shall not spend time in refuting many Errors of
Brerewood concerning the Religions of the East: It is enough I relate matters
of fact as really they are, without giving my self the trouble to refute
Authors who have written on that Subject.

P. Vasle Rel. della stato Pres. dell Egitto.
Father Vanslebio who has written the Present State of the Christians of Egypt,
Printed at Paris in Italian, relates many other things which chiefly concern
their Ceremonies. He observes, that when the Priest elevates the Host in time
of Mass, they who are present knock their Breasts, casting themselves upon the
ground, and making the sign of the Cross; and that they move their Cap a
little; which seems to me to be a Latin Ceremony: nor do I think the Cophties
elevate the Host, unless it be after the manner of the Orientals, to wit, a
little before the Communion, which is of no long standing neither in their
Church. Possibly Father Vanslebio might have seen that Ceremony in some of the
Churches of the Abyssines, who might have taken it from the Portuguese, that
have had Churches in Ethiopia, where Mass was celebrated after the manner of
the Latins. The same Author remarks, that when the Priest communicates, he
breaks the bread in form of a Cross, and that he puts it into the Wine; of
which he eats three little Morcels with as many Spoonfulls of the Species of
Wine; ad that he communicates thereof to him who serves at Mass. He adds, that
they keep not the Holy Sacrament after Mass; and that they never consecrate in
private Places, but always in the Church; that they consecrate with Leavened
bread, which before the Consecration they all Baraca, that is to say
Benediction; and Corban, or Communion and Eucharist, after it is consecrated;
that they make use of little Loaves about the Bigness of somewhat less than a
Crown piece, whereof they bake a great Number the Night before the Liturgy; and
that they distribute them at the End of Mass to those who have been present.

He farther says, that they use not Tavernwine, because they think it profane,
and that in Places where no Wine is to be had, they infuse Rasins in water;
that they never confess and communicate but in Lent; that the Laics
communicate in both kinds, and that they receive the Wine in a Spoon from the
Hands of the Priest; that they give the Communion also to Children so soon as
they are baptized; that all read the Holy Scripture in the Arabic Tongue,
which is the Language of the Country; that they celebrate on Saturday as well
as Sunday; and that in one Year they have two and thirty Festivals of the
Virgin, which are reckoned up by the Author: and amongst others, he takes
notice of the Festival of a certain Image of the Virgin, which miraculously was
changed into Flesh, the History whereof is written in an Ethiopian Book, which
treats of the Miracles of the Virgin.

The same Father Vanslebio relates at large the Ceremonies which they observe
in Baptism, and are performed in this manner: for that purpose they celebrate a
Mass after Midnight, accompanied with many Prayers; and after they have sung
for some time, the Deacons carry the Children to the Altar, who are anointed
with Holy Oil: and then they say that the Children are become new Spiritual
Men. This being done, they begin to sing, and the Children are anointed a
second time, making upon them the sign of the Cross seven and thirty times;
which serves them for Exorcism. Again they continue to sing, and the Women who
are present at the Ceremony make a loud Noise in token of Joy. In the mean
time, water is put into the Baptismal Fonts, and the Priests draw near. He that
baptises, blesses the water, pouring in Form of a Cross Holy Oil into the same:
then with one Hand he takes the Child by the Right Arm and Left Leg, and with
the other Hand, by the left Arm, making a kind of a Cross with the Limbs of the
Child, which they cloth in a little white Garment; and during all this, the
Priests still continue to read and sing, and the Women to cry, or rather to
houl. At length the Priest breaths three times in the Child's face, to the end,
say they, that he may receive the Holy Ghost. No sooner is the Child baptized,
but the Priest gives it the Communion; which he does, by dipping his Finger
into the Chalice, and putting it into the Child's Mouth. All these Ceremonies
being ended, they light the Tapers, and make a Procession, singing in the
Church. The Deacons carry the Children in their Arms, and the Priests go
before them; after them follow the Men and Women who have been present at the
Ceremony, the Women houling after their ordinary manner.

They have, according to the same Author, four great Fasts in the Year, the
first whereof begins before Christmas, and lasts 24 days: The second is Lent,
which lasts 60 days: The third is called the Fast of our Lord's Disciples,
which begins the third Holy Day of Pentecost, and lasts 31 days: And the
fourth, which lasts fifteen days, is the Fast of our Lady in August.

Images are held in great Veneration amongst them, though they have no Statues;
and the most usual Images are those of Our Lord, of the Virgin, of St. George,
of Angels, to wit, St. Michael, St. Gabriel, St. Raphael, and many others. They
kiss those Images, and burn Lamps before them, with the Oil of which they
anoint themselves when they are sick. It is probable they have no other
Sacrament of Extreme Unction, but that kind of anointing; unless perhaps they
do it with a little more Ceremony.

It is to be observed that Father Vanslebio in his relation speaks of the
Abyssines, as well as of the true Cophties or Egyptians, because, in effect,
they are both Cophties in Religion, and Subject to the same Patriarch, who
commonly resides in Cairo; and because there are but a few Cophties in
Alexandria, which ought to be the Place of his Residence. This Patriarch takes
the Title of Patriarch of Alexandria and Jerusalem, and calls himself the
Successor of St. Mark. He extends his Jurisdiction over both Egypts, over
Nubia and Abyssinia. He has besides eleven Cophty-Bishops depending on him, to
wit, the Bishops of Jerusalem, Behnese, Atfih, Fiur, Moharrak, Montfallot,
Syut, Abutig, Girgium, Negade on Girge, and lastly the Metropolitan of
Abyssinia. After the Bishops, the Archpriests are next in degree, and are very
numerous amongst them; next to them come in order, the Priests, Deacons,
Readers and Chanters.

As to their Office; on Saturday in the Evening after Sun set, the Priest
attended by his Ministers goes to Church to sing Vespers which last about an
Hour; and those who are present sleep afterward in the Church. They who do not
sleep, smoke Tobacco and drink Coffee, or otherwise discourse about what they
please. Two Hours after Midnight they say matins, and afterward Mass, to which
many do resort. When they enter the Church, they take off their shoes, and kiss
the ground near the Door of the Sanctuary; then drawing near to the Archpriest,
they kiss his Hand, bowing that they may receive his Blessing. If the Patriarch
be present, and do not officiate, he sits on a Throne raised above the Priests,
having a Copper Cross in his Hand; and after all have made the usual Reverence
before the Sanctuary, they make it again before the Patriarch, and kiss the
ground near him, afterward they rise and kiss the Cross and Patriarch's Hand.

Seeing most of these Ceremonies are common to all the Orientals, I shall
insist no longer upon them, nor upon their way of celebrating Mass, which may
be seen in the Relation of Father Vanslebio; besides, they differ but little
from the Greeks, from whom they have borrowed a great Part of their Ceremonies.
That which is observeable, and which might be brought into practice in the
Latin Churches is, that they have a Book of Homilies taken out of the Chief
Fathers, of which they read somewhat, after the reading of the Gospel; and
that serves as an Explication or Paraphrase upon the same Gospel, so that there
is no need of Preachers to instruct them.

CHAP. XI. Of the Belief and Customs of the Abyssines or Ethiopians.
SEEING we have treated at large of the Religion of the Cophties, and that the
Abyssines differ not from them therein, we shall not be long on that Subject.

Ancient Ethiopia is at present called Abassia, and the People who inhabit it
Abyssines. They have but one Bishop to govern them, who is sent to them by the
Patriarch of Alexandria, that resides at Cairo; so that in all things they
follow the Religion of the Cophties, excepting some Ceremonies that are
peculiar to them. They have also a particular Language which they call
Chaldaick, because they think it has been derived from Chaldea, though it be
very different from the ordinary Chaldaick, and therefore it is called the
Ethiopian Language. They use that Tongue in their Liturgies, and in other
Divine Offices, though it be old, and different from the vulgar Ethiopian. They
who understand Hebrew, may easily learn that Language, because there are many
words common to both: yet it has particular Characters; and whereas in the
Hebrew Language the Points which serve for Vowels are not joined to the
Consonants, in the Ethiopian Tongue there is no Consonant but which at the same
time makes its Vowel.

The Abyssines have made many advances toward a Reunion with the Church of
Rome. And there are several of their Letters written to Popes, of which the
most considerable is Epist. David. ad Clem. VII.
that of David, who takes the Title of Emperor of the greater and upper
Ethiopia and many other Kingdoms, written to Clement VII. to whom he made great
Submissions, and protested that he would obey him. But it is certain that the
Ethiopians have never had recourse to Rome and to the Portuguese, but for
settling their Affairs, when they have been in Disorder; and that they have
slighted them so soon as they were any ways succesfull, as may be seen in the
Histories of the Portuguse, which need not to be mentioned in this Place. All
Men know what became of John Bermudes, who was made Patriarch of Ethiopia, and
consecrated at Rome; at the solicitation of the Abyssines themselves, who
pretended that for the future they would have no metropolitans but such as
should be sent them from Rome. But no sooner had they mastered their
Difficulties, but that they rejected those Patriarchs, and sent to Cairo for a
Metropolitan from the Patriarch of the Cophties, despising the Church of Rome,
and abusing the Portuguese that remained in their Country, without any respect
to the great Services which they had rendered them. Alex. Menes. Hist. Orient.
Alexis Meneses, whom we mentioned before, thought himself obliged to use his
utmost endeavors for reconciling those People to the Church of Rome, and
having taken the Title of Primate of the Indies, he pretended to extend his
Jurisdiction also over Ethiopia. And therefore he sent Emissaries with Letters
to the Portuguese living in that Country, writing at the same time to the
Metropolitan of the Abyssines, whom he earnestly exhorted to submit to the
Church of Rome. He farther urged, that he ought not to make any difficulty of
obeying that Church, since the Patriarch of the Cophties and his whole Church,
had lately submitted to it; which he proved by the very Acts and Instruments of
that Patriarch's Legation, which are inserted in the End of the fifth Tome of
the Annals of Baronius, whereof he sent him a Copy, but he knew not that the
Court of Rome had been overreached in that Point, and that Baronius had too
easily published these Acts under the Name of the true Patriarch of Alexandria,
and of the Church of the Cophties.

Moreover, it is to be observed, that Meneses and many others are mistaken,
when they accuse the Ethiopians of Judaizing in their Ceremonies, because some
of them observed Circumcision; that besides, they celebrated Mass on Saturday
as well as Sunday, and that they abstained from Blood and Flesh that had been
Strangled. The Circumcision of the Ethiopians differs from that of the Jews,
who look upon it as an indispensable Precept, whereas the former reckon it
only a Custom that relates not at all to Religion; the Women amongst them
being even Circumcised. This makes me think, that that Ancient Custom has
been only introduced amongst them for rendering the Parts that are circumcised
more proper for Generation. As to Saturday and things Strangled, that is not
peculiar to the Abyssines: all the Oriental Church observes the same practice,
without being dyable for that to the Censure of Judaism; since Saturday,
according to the Ancient Canons, is a Festival day as well as Sunday. And as to
their abstaining from Blood, and Meat that has been Strangled, it is a
Constitution of the New Testament, which has ever been observed in the Western
Church. From this last remark, it may be concluded, that the Jesuit Roderigo
ought not to have pressed the Cophties so much in the Conference that he had with
them, to lay aside all those Ceremonies; and besides that, the Cophties did not
speak sincerely, when they told him that they erred in their opinions
concerning the Repudiation of Wives, Circumcision of Children, and their
abstaining from Flesh that was Strangled. Besides these remarks, we are also to
take notice, that many things are imputed to the Abyssines which are remote
from their belief. For instance, it is alleged that they agree with the Latins
as to the Procession of the Holy Ghost; which is confirmed by the Ethiopian
Liturgies Printed at Rome, wherein it is said that the Holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father and the Son. But we are not always to rely upon what is Printed at
Rome: for it is certain that the Abyssines differ not from the rest of the
Orientals touching the Procession of the Holy Ghost.

Nor are we to believe neither, all that Thomas a Jesu has written concerning
the belief of the Abyssines; Nay and the Thomas a Jesu.
Acts that he has inserted in his Book, touching their belief, are not always
true, though the Confession of Faith which he produces comes from Tecla an
Abyssine Priest: for it says expressly, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the
Father and the Son, which nevertheless is not their belief. It is likewise
observed, that the Abyssines believe that the Transubstantiation of the Bread
and Wine is made, when the Priest pronounces the words, wherein the Latins make
the Consecration to consist. It is notwithstanding certain that the Liturgy of
the Ethiopians is in that point agreeable to all the other Oriental Liturgies,
and that the Consecration is not performed, according to their opinion, but
when the Priest invokes the Holy Ghost, in a particular Prayer, which is to be
found in all the Missals of the Eastern Nations. I wave a great many other
points, which are not altogether well expressed according to the belief of the
Abyssines, especially those that relate to the Sacraments: but these mistakes
may easily be corrected by what we have said before, when we spoke of other
Oriental Nations; so that we shall not insist any more upon that Subject; and
it will be easy by that Method, to rectify what Brerewood has related upon
the Credit of these Authors.

CHAP. XII. Of the Belief and Customs of the Armenians.
THE Victories obtained by Scha-Abas King of Persia over the Armenians, within
these late Years when he entered Armenia, have almost ruined that Church, which
nevertheless still retains the Names of some Archbishopricks, Bishoprics and
Monasteries, but which are, for most Part, in great Disorder. I have informed
my self exactly enough of the Present State of the Church of Armenia, having
had many Conferences upon that Subject with an Armenian Bishop, who took the
Title of Bishop of Uscovanch, and who was at Amsterdam in the Year 1662. for
Printing an Armenian Bible, according to the Commission he had from his
Patriarch: For seeing the Manuscript Armenian Bibles were excessively dear, and
that that hindered private Persons from reading the Scripture, the Patriarch
took a resolution of causing it to be Printed. From that Bishop, who was called
Uscam, I had the Memoirs of the Armenian Churches, which I have subjoyned See
the Collections at the End of the Book. F.
at the End of this Book; and since that time I have conversed with him freely
at Paris; but having consulted him about several Points relating to the
Theology of the Armenians, I found him not to be very skillful in those
matters. He died at Marseilles, whither he went by permission from the King to
cause several Armenian Books to be Printed, for the use of his Countrymen. The
Cardinals of the Congregation de propaganda fide at Rome, were surprised that a
Liberty of Printing all sorts of Armenian Books had been so easily granted in
France; because, perhaps, he might have caused bad Books to be Printed, which
might have favored the Armenian Sect. But his Conduct during the time that he
was in France, was very respectfull toward the Church of Rome.

Now concerning the Belief and Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Armenian
Church, no Man has treated of it more amply than Galanus, in the Book which he
published at Rome concerning the Reconciliation of the Armenian Church with the
Roman. Galan. Cler. Reg. in Council. Eccl. Arm. cum Romans
That Book is divided into two Parts, of which the first is but an Abstract of
the Histories of the Armenians: but seeing the Armenians have been divided
amongst themselves for several Ages, and that they have had recourse to Rome in
their Necessities, as well as the other Orientals, I have found these Histories
not to be always sincere and exact. And therefore what I here take from Galanus
touching the Armenians, I shall accompany with some Reflections. The same
Author has added Notes upon his History: but because he was an Emissary and
wrote at Rome, we must not, before we have examined him, give credit to all he
says. Nevertheless that Book contains a great many Curious things concerning
the State and Religion of the Armenians.

It is to be observed then. I. That the Armenian Histories translated by
Galanus, mention a certain Instrument of Reunion betwixt the Roman and the
Armenian Churches under the Emperor Constantine and Tyridates King of the
Armenians, Sylvester then possessing the Sea of Rome, and Gregory who is the
great Patriarch of the Armenians possessing that of Armenia But besides that
there are many things in that Instrument which appear to be fabulous, it is
probable that that Piece, as to the greatest part of it, has been forged in
the following Ages, especially in the time of Innocent III. when the Armenian
Church sought to be reconciled to the Church of Rome. For there are in it ways
of speaking concerning the Supremacy of Popes, which were not in use at that
time. The Armenians, however, as Galanus observes, make use of that Instrument
to prove the Antiquity of their Patriarchate, which was, according to them,
erecten by Pope Sylvester: And they have even alleged it in their Disputes
with the Greeks. But that will appear to be a weak Foundation to those who know
Ecclesiastical History, and shall consider the great extent of Jurisdiction
that Pope Sylvester takes to himself in that Instrument.

II. All Men know that the Armenians are of the Sect of the Monophysites, who
acknowledge but one Nature in Jesus Christ. But as we have already observed
when we treated of the Jacobites; that is but an imaginary Heresy, consisting
only in the Ambiguities of words. And yet it occasions great Disputes at this
day amongst the Armenians; for though they be for the most part ignorant in
Divinity, yet they talk rationally of the Mystery of the Incarnation, and of
the Council of Chalcedon which they reject. We are to observe, however, that a
good many Armenians are at present reconciled to the Church of Rome, whose
Sentiments they follow, and that Galanus has had a great hand in that
Reconciliation in the time of Pope Urban VIII.

III. It is not true that the Armenians deny the real Presence of Jesus Christ
in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, as Brerew. of Lang. and Rel. Chap. 24.
Brerewood from no good Author does affirm: for the Armenians and Orientals
have not disputed so much about that Sacrament, as the Latins have, especially
since the time of Berengarius; and in respect the Armenians have never examined
that difficulty, they have continued in the general Terms of the Change of the
Symbols into the Body and Blood of Our Lord. Galanus, who mentions some of
their Synods, and the Disputes they have had with the Greeks, takes no notice
at all of that, but only that they mingle no Water with the Wine in
celebrating the Liturgy, and that they consecrate in Unleavened bread, after
the Manner of the Latins. What the same Brerewood affirms concerning Purgatory
is to be understood according to what we have mentioned before of the Greeks
and other Orientals; and it is very probable, that what is said in the same
place, that they deny that the Sacraments have the Virtue of conferring Grace,
is the Chimera of some Scholastic Doctor, who imagined that the Orientals
were acquainted with all the Niceties of the Latins. Nor do I think it true
that the Armenians refuse to eat of all Animals that are esteemed unclean in
the Jewish Law, which Brerewood imputes also to the Abyssines: But that which
has given occasion to this Belief is, that the Armenians and Abyssines with
the rest of the Eastern Christians abstain from blood and things strangled;
wherein there is no Superstition.

It is to no purpose to enlarge upon the Belief of the Armenians who are not
Latinized; since there has been enough said of that when we spoke of the
Jacobites, from whom they differ in nothing but in some Ceremonies, and in what
concerns Ecclesiastical Discipline. However, I think it will not be taken
amiss, if I give here a Catalogue of the chief Errors, which Joan. Hernac.
apud Galan.
a certain Latinized Armenian attributes to them; and that will serve for a
Confirmation of what we have already alleged, and at the same time give
occasion of clearing some other Points. That Author reproaches his Countrymen
who are not reconciled to the Pope, that they follow the Errors of Eutyches
and Dioscorus concerning the Unity of Nature in Christ; that they believe that
the Holy Ghost proceeds only from the Father; that the Souls of the Saints
deceased go not to Heaven, nor those of the damned to Hell, before the last
Day of Judgment; that there is no place called Purgatory and Hell, and that the
Church of Rome has no Supremacy over other Churches. He farther adds, that the
Armenians detest the Memory of Pope Leo, and of the Council of Chalcedon; that
they observe not the Festivals of Our Lord after the Manner of the Church of
Rome; nor Fasts according to the Canons of the Church; that they acknowledge
not seven Sacraments, inasmuch as they use not Confirmation, nor Extreme
Unction; and more, that they are ignorant of the real essece of the other
Sacraments; that at Mass they put no water into the Chalice; that they pretend
that the Eucharist is not to be given to the People but in both kinds. He
objects to them also their Custom of consecrating in Wooden and Earthen
Chalices; that all Priests indifferently give absolution for all Sins, there
being no reserved Cases amongst them; that they are subject to two Patriarchs,
who severally take the Title of Patriarch of all Armenia; that the Curates and
Bishops succeed to one another, as if their Dignities were Inheritances; that
the Sacraments are bought and sold amongst them; that Divorces are given for
Money, without any reason; that they make no Holy Oil for Baptism and Extreme
Unction; and that in fine, they give the Communion to Children before they
attain to the use of reason.

From this whole Catalogue it appears that the Armenian who is the Author of
all these pretended errors, was Latinized; for as we have observed before,
most part of these Opinions are common to all the Christians of the East, in
the Manner as we have explained them when we treated of the Greeks. The
Armenians are, indeed, to be blamed that they are too scrupulously addicted to
certain Fasts which they have in great Number, and that they are not exactly
enough instructed in the Mysteries of Religion. There are none in the Eastern
Church that set a greater Value upon Fasts than the Armenians; and to hear them
speak, one would say that their whole Religion consisted in fasting. As to
their obstinate Perseverance in celebrating the Festival of Our Lord's
Nativity, and the Epiphany always on one and the same day; they seem not to be
blameable therein; because it was a Custom long practiced in the Church; and
in effect the Epiphany or Apparition of Our Lord is properly nothing but his
Birth.

The Title of Master or Doctor is so great amongst the Armenians, that they
give it with the same Ceremonies that they confer Orders; Galan. in Council.
Eccles. Armen. cum Romans
and they say that that Dignity imitates the Title of Our Lord; who was called
Rabbi, or Master. These are the Doctors who are consulted in Points of
Religion, and who decide in them. The Bishops being looked upon rather as
Persons proper for administering Orders, than as Doctors. These are also the
Doctors who Preach in the Churches, and who are the Judges of Differences that
happen betwixt private Persons. In a word, they hold the same rank amongst
them, as the Rabbis did amongst the Jews.

The Monastic Order has been also in great reputation amongst the Armenians,
since the time that Nierses one of their Patriarchs introduced that of St.
Basil: but since their Reunion with the Church of Rome, they have wholly
altered their Rule, accommodating themselves to that of the Latins; and the
Armenian whom we mentioned before to have made a Catalogue of Errors which he
imputes to his Nation, being come to Rome, made a Vow that so soon as he
returned home into the East, he and his Companions would live according to the
Rule of St. Austin, and the Constitutions of St. Dominick. One Bartholomew, a
Monk of St. Dominick, was the first that gave occasion to this Reformation not
only in Religion but Monachism. He made great Progresses in Armenia in the
time of Pope John XXII. having by his Preaching drawn many Monks over to his
Party, who were useful to him in reuniting the two Churches. About that time
was the Order of St. Dominick settled in Armenia, and these Monks were called
United Friars, because of the new Reunion. This Order which was only
established to destroy the Ancient, got in a short time great Reputation;
insomuch that the United Friars built Monasteries not only in Armenia and
Georgia, but also on the other side of the Euxine Sea, especially at Caffa,
which at that time was subject to the Genoese. But since the Turks and Persians
are become Masters of that Country, the Number of the United Friars is much
decreased; and there remains but a few of them at present who have retired into
the Province of Nascivan in the greater Armenia, where being at length, reduced
to utmost Extremity, they have united themselves with the Dominican Monks of
Europe; and are at present subject to the General of that Order, who sends
thither a Superior Provincial.

They perform their Office in the Armenian Language, which is a rough Tongue,
and but little known. Yet the Modern Armenian is different from the Ancient,
and the People have much ado to understand the Liturgy, and other Offices that
are written in Armenian. They have the whole Bible also Translated into their
Language, and that from the Septuagint Greek. This Translation of the Bible was
made about the time of St. John Chrysostom by some of their Doctors who had
Learned the Greek Language, and amongst others by one named Moses the
Grammarian, and another called David the Philosopher. We may observe that the
Armenians make one Mesrop and Holy Hermit to be the Author of their
Characters, who invented them in the Town of Balu near Euphrates, and lived in
the time of St. John Chrysostom.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Belief and Customs of the Maronites.
THE Jesuit Girolamo Dandini nella sua missione Apostolica.
Dandini, who was sent by Clement VII. in Quality of Nuncio to the Maronites of
Mount Libanus, has written a Relation of his Travels in Italian, which has
been lately Translated into French, with Notes, declaring at large the Religion
of those People. Seeing the Author of these Notes has played the Critic upon
the Mistakes of that Jesuit, and of many others who have spoken of the
Maronites, I thought I could not do better, than here to give an Abridgement
as well of the Relation of the Jesuit Dandini, as of the Critical Remarks, from
whence we may learn the Belief and Present State of those People.

It is hard to know exactly the Original of the Maronites. They who bear that
Name pretend they derive it from one Maron an Abbot, whose life Theodoret has
written, and who lived about the beginning of the fifth Century. This Opinion,
which is followed by Brerewood, is strongly confirmed by the Jesuit Sacchini in
hist. Societ.
Sacchini, who pretends as well as the Modern Marcnites do, that these People
were never separated from the Unity of the Church, and that that which gave
occasion of making them to be thought Schismatics was, that the renewing of
their Reconciliation to the Catholic Church has been taken for a real
Conversion to the Catholic Faith, and that the Errors which have been found
amongst them, have been imputed to them, as if they had been the Authors of
the same; whereas they were only the Errors of Heretics amongst whom they
lived. But though this Opinion appear at first Glance to have some probability
in it, yet there is no ground for it; and the Testimonies of Eutychius Eutych.
in Annal.
patriarch of Alexandria, of Gulielmus Tyrius, Jacobus Vitricensis, and many
others, are evident Arguments to prove that that Nation has really been of the
persuasion of the Monothelites: and they who look upon Monothelism as an
Heresy, ought also to consider Maron as an Heretic, though the Maronites
honor him with the Title of Saint in all their Offices. It is to be believed
then, as a certain truth, that these People having been separated from the
Church about the space of five hundred Years, abjured their Heresy, whether
true or imaginary, before Aymeric Patriarch of Antioch, who lived in the time
of Gulielmus Tyrius. Before that time they professed that they acknowledged but
one Will and one Operation in Christ, though they confessed there were two
Natures in him.

The Maronites have a Patriarch who resides in the Monastery of Cannubin on
Mount Libanus, and takes the Title of Patriarch of Antioch. He meddles not at
all in temporal Affairs; but there are two Lords who take the name of Deacons
or Administratours, who govern the whole Country being under the Dominion of
the Turk, to whom they pay great Tributes. The Election of that Patriarch is
made by the Clergy and the People, according to the Ancient Discipline of the
Church: but since they have been entirely reconciled to the Church of Rome, he
is obliged to take Bulls of Confirmation from the Pope. He, and his Suffragan
Bishops never Marry; and it is to be observed that there are two sorts of these
Bishops: for some are really Bishops, having a true Title and People whom they
govern; the others are properly no more than Abbots of Monasteries, and have no
Cure of Souls. These last wear not the Habit of a Bishop, nor any Mark of that
Dignity; but they are clothed like other Monks, though, they are distinguished
from them, by the Mitre and Crozier when they celebrate Mass. The Patriarch not
being able alone to visit all Mount Libanus, has always two or three Bishops
about him; and besides the Bishops of Mount Libanus, there are others also at
Damascus, Aleppo, and in the Isle of Cyprus.

As for the other Churchmen, they may all Marry before their Ordination; and
the Patriarch himself not long since obliged the Priests to do so, before he
gave them Orders, unless they would become Monks: for the People who are
jealous, are not pleased to see young Priests without Wives. However, since
they have had a College at Rome, where part of their Churchmen are bred, they
are allowed to live a single Life, without being molested for it. Before they
studied at Rome, they were as ignorant as the common People, affecting no more
but to learn to read and write: And they passed for learned Men amongst them,
who besides the Arabic, which is the Language spoken in the Country, had any
Knowledge of the Chaldaick Tongue; because their Liturgies and other Books of
Offices are written in that Language.

The Monastic Life is no less esteemed amongst the Maronites, than it is in
all other places of the Levant. Their Monks are of the Order of St. Anthony:
And it is probable they are a remnant of those Ancient Hermites, who inhabited
the Deserts of Syria and Palestine; for they are retired into the most hidden
and secret places of the Mountains, remote from all Commerce. Their Habit is
mean and course, they never eat flesh, even in their greatest sickness, and
drink Wine but very seldom. They know not what it is to make Vows: but when
they are received into the Monastery, one of the Monks holds a Book in his
hand, and all he does is, to read in it somewhat that Concerns them, and
admonish them of their Duty, for instance, that they observe continence; which
is enough to preserve their Chastity without being engaged to it by Vows, as
those of the Church of Rome are. They have Goods and Money in property, which
they may dispose of at their Death; and when they are weary of one Monastery,
they go to another, without asking their Superiors leave. They can perform no
Ecclesiastical Function, such as preaching and confessing; so that they are
wholly their own Men, having no spiritual Exercise in common for the service of
their Neighbor. They work with their hands and cultivate the ground according
to their Institution. In fine, they signally practice Hospitality, especially
in the Monastery of Cannubin, where there is an open Table kept during the
whole Year. We shall not here treat of their Belief, because it differs not
from the other Orientals, except in that which caused their Schism, wherein
they are no more at present, being entirely submitted to the Church of Rome.
They even consecrate with Unleavened bread; but it is probable that they have
taken up that Custom since their Reunion with the Church of Rome, though the
Modern Maronites pretend that they never consecrated with Leavened bread.

Their Mass differed much from that of the Latins: But their Missal has been
reformed at Rome, and they are prohibited to make use of any other Missal but
of that which is reformed. They perform no Office without much censing,
especially at Mass, wherein they neither use Maniple nor Stole, as the Latins
do, nor so much as Chasables, unless since they have been sent them from Rome;
but instead of Maniple, they wore on each Arm a little piece of silken or
woollen stuff died, which is sewed to the Albe, or even sometimes loose. The
Priests say not Mass privately, as Latin Priests do, but they say altogether
standing round the Altar, where they assist the Celebrating Priest, who gives
the Communion to all, and to the Laics under both Kinds: but the Emissaries of
Rome daily introduce the Communion in one kind. They made not the Consecration
to consist in these words, This is my Body, etc. This is my Blood, etc. But in
more words which contained the Prayer commonly called the Invocation of the
Holy Ghost. Nevertheless, at present, in that and many other things they follow
the Sentiments of the Latin Divines, which have been taught them at Rome. As to
the other Offices, they say them in the Church, whither they go at Midnight to
sing their Matins, or rather their Nocturns. They say their Lauds which may be
called Prime, at break of day; their Tierce comes before Mass, after which they
say their Sixth; their Nones are sung after Dinner; Vespers at Sun set; and at
last, their Compline after Supper, before they go to bed. Every Office is
composed of a Preface, of two, three, and sometimes more Prayers, with a like
Number of Hymns betwixt them. They have moreover proper Offices for Holy days,
Lent, the moveable Feasts, and for other days. The Priests and other Churchmen
who are in Holy Orders, think not themselves obliged to say the Office, when
they cannot be present in the Quire, unless it be since the Latins have thought
fit to oblige them to it.

Their Fasts differ much from ours; they only observe Lent, and then they do
not eat till two or three Hours before Sun set. They fast not in the
Emberweeks, nor in the Vigils of Saints, or of any other Festival; but instead
of that they have other abstinences which they strictly observe; for they eat
no Flesh, Eggs nor Milk two days of the Week, to wit, Wednesday and Friday, and
on these two days they taste not of any thing, before Noon; but afterward,
every one is free to eat as much and as often as he pleases. In the same manner
they fast twenty days before Christmas, and the Monks prolong that Fast. At
the Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul, they all fast during a fortnight, and as
long at the Festival of the Assumption of the Virgin.

Bishops expect not the Emberweeks for conferring of Orders, as they do in the
Latin Church; but they administer them indifferently on all Holy days: and
before the late Reformation was brought in amongst them, they gave in one day
to one and the same Man, the Orders of Lector, Exorcist, Acolyte, Subdeacon,
Deacon, Priest, Archpriest and Bishop; and all in two or three Hours time. It
is to be observed also, that they use as many Ceremonies in making an
Archpriest, as in conferring other Orders; and it seems they look upon it as an
Order distinct from the rest.

They keep no Water in their Baptisinal Fonts, that has been blessed on Holy
Saturday, for administering the Sacrament of Baptism; as is done in the Latin
Church: but as often as any is presented to be baptized, they bless the Water,
by saying a great many Prayers; then they dip the Person to be baptized three
times in the Water, or besprinkle it thrice therewith, it being first a little
warmed. Yet they pronounce but once the necessary words when they name the
Person; they make no use of Salt: but they anoint not only the Head, but also
the Breast with their open Hands. They anoint also the Body before and behind
from head to foot; and besides that Unction which is performed before Baptism,
they have another also after, which is properly the Confirmation of the
Orientals: but since their Reconciliation to the Church of Rome, they have
abolished it, that they may administer the Sacrament of Confirmation after the
Manner of the Latins.

Heretofore they took no great care to consess before the Communion: but the
Emissaries of Rome have obliged them to it at present. All the Priests also
were equal in Jurisdiction in Matters relating to Penance, before their
Reformation. There were no cases reserved to the Patriarchs and Bishops.
Neither before that time, did they use great Reverence toward the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, which they kept in their Churches without any lamplight, shut up
in a little box, and hid in a hole in the wall, or in some other place.

Nor did they then publish their Marriages in Churches, before the Ceremony was
celebrated: nay, and for that they took all sorts of Priests indifferently, not
thinking it necessary to have recourse to the Curate. There were besides, some
who Married before the Age of 12. and 14. Years. And as to the Impediments of
Marriage, they differed much from the present practice of the Church of Rome:
for in counting the Degrees of Kindred, they reckoned not only from the Head
and first of the Line, but thought also that two branches springing from the
stock, as two Brothers are, made two Degrees; so that imagining they Married
not but in the sixth Degree, they married, in effect, in the third. On the
contrary, they held that for an impediment which was none; for they suffered
not two Brothers to Marry two Sisters, nor the Father and the Son to Marry the
Mother and the Daughter.

They practice a certain Unction for the Sick, which they call Lamp, because,
in reality, they make use of the Lamp-oil for it, in this manner. They make a
little Cake somewhat bigger than an Host, wherein they put seven Matches
twisted of little straws, and place all in a Basin with Oil, then reading a
Gospel and an Epistle out of St. Paul, with some Prayers, they light all the
Matches. That being done, they anoint with the Oil the Forehead, Breast and
Arms of all that are present, and of him who is sick, saying at every Unction,
by this Unction God pardon thy sins, strengthen and corroborate thy Members, as
he strengthened and corroborated those of the Paralytick. Afterward they let
the Lamp burn so long as the Oil lasts; and seeing that Oil has only been
blessed by a simple Priest, many have believed, that that Ceremony was not the
Sacrament of Extreme Unction, since it is administered to those who are not
dangerously sick. But they who are acquainted with the Oriental Theology, will
easily be persuaded that those People had no other Sacrament of Extreme
Unction, before the Latins reformed them: nor indeed is the word Extreme
Unction any where in use but amongst the Latins, because they anoint not the
sick but when they are at the Point of Death; a thing not observed amongst the
Christians of the East.

Before I conclude this Discourse concerning the Maronites, I will here subjoin
an abstract of what P. Besson, Syrie Saint.
Father Besson the Jesuit has observed in his Book entitled La Syrie Saint,
where he chiefly speaks of the Maronites who inhabit that Part of Mount
Libanus, which is called Quesroan. This Jesuit thinks that the Maronites derive
their name from St. Maron a Syrian Abbot, and not from Maron the Heresiarch;
and amongst other Arguments that he alleges to prove this, he says that the
Maronites have been accustomed after that the Clergy and People had chosen a
Patriarch, to apply themselves to the Pope for obtaining his Confirmation. But
he ought to have minded, that they had no recourse to the Pope before their
strict Conjunction with the Church of Rome. He farther adds that Johannes
Damascenus could not be ignorant of the Heresy of the Maronites, if they had
really been Heretics, because he was their Neighbor; and yet in the List that
he makes of Heresies, he speaks not of them. But that was needless, seeing they
are comprehended under the Heresy of the Monothelites.

The same Author in a few words takes notice of what the Jesuit Dandini, and
some others of the Society have done amongst the Maronites; which we have
mentioned more fully with necessary Reflections on it. All that can be said, is
that that Emissary Jesuit, seems to me to be sillier than the rest, when he
speaks of the Belief of the Maronites. And therefore I think there is no credit
to be given to a Miracle which he relates as an evident Proof of the Orthodox
Faith of the Maronites. He affirms that three Miles from Cannubin, near to a
Village called Eden, there is a Metropolitan Church that goes by the Name of
St. Sergius, and that above that Church there is a Chapel dedicated to St.
Abdon and St. Sennan, where there is a Fountain of Spring Water, which runs
under the Altar during Mass, the Day on which the Festival of those two Saints
is celebrated. He says, besides, that though that Feast be moveable, falling
always on the first. Sunday of May, yet there is never any change in the course
of that Fountain, which is always constant to the first Sunday of May even
since the Calendar has been reformed by Gregory XIII. But I make no doubt but
that this is a made story, possibly to authorize the Gregorian reformation of
the Calendar, which that People have on many occasions refused to admit. And
the rather it appears to be suppositions, in that the Author assures us that
that Fountain which runs during Mass, sends forth water in greater abundance,
when the Priest elevates the Host; not minding that the Elevation is not in use
amongst the Maronites, in the manner that it is practiced amongst the Latins.
However Father Besson relates this Miracle, as an evident Argument against the
other Eastern Nations, for authorizing the Devotion which the Maronites have
toward the Church of Rome, and at the same time for confirming the Reformation
of the Calendar. That Relation likewise affirms that the Maronites are of a
very soft and sweet temper, and that they give good words at least, promising
to do what ever they are desired; that it is often in their Mouth, that God is
bountiful, and that he will prosper the thing that is proposed to them; and
that they frequently pronounce the Name of God, or some of his Attributes. But
as these People are of a good and easy Nature, adds the same Author, so they
are also very inconstant. After they have heard a good Sermon, you shall see
them fully resolved to be converted, and to make an exact Confession of their
Sins; but when they are to come to performance; they appear insensible. Their
Women, are indeed, very modest, but the greater they are in Quality, the less
they come to Church: insomuch that to enhance the Quality of a Lady, they say
of her, that she never hears Mass but on Easter Day; nor does that happen
yearly neither. When a Maid is Married she keeps at home two years without
going to Mass, and in the mean time she frequents the Baths and Weddings. It
seems they are banished the Churches, as the Mohammedan Women are excluded the
Mosques. There is nevertheless a Monastery of Nuns of the Order of St. Anthony,
who are held in great Reputation of Sanctity. Their whole Fabric is hardly any
more than a Church, where these Nuns are lodged, like Pigeons in their Nests,
in little odd holes made betwixt the Arch and the Floor. These little Cells are
so low that they cannot stand upright in them, and hardly is there room enough
to hold their Bodies. All their employment is to sing the Office, Meditate,
Pray and Work. Their Prayers begin about two in the Morning; and they work from
day break, busying themselves in cultivating their Gardens, and the Grounds of
their Monastery.

In fine, Father Besson assures us in the second Part of his Book, wherein he
shows the great Antipathy that is betwixt the Syrians, and the Franks, that in
Syria they say commonly but one Mass a day, even on Sundays; that they have but
few Altars, and sewer Priests; that all, except the Maronites, consecrate with
Leavened bread; that the Priests who celebrate not, are notwithstanding present
at Mass, and take their places, but in an ordinary Habit, unless they be those
that serve as Deacons and Subdeacons; and lastly, that all communicate in both
kinds, except the Maronites, whose Priests that communicate without celebrating
the Liturgy, receive a little Piece dipped in the Blood of Our Lord.

CHAP. XIV. A Supplement to what has been said concerning the Maronites.
THough what has been mentioned before relating to the Maronites, seems to be
built upon good grounds, yet a Learned Maronite Professor of the Arabic
Language in the College Della Sapienza at Rome, has used all his endeavors to
prove that his Country was never guilty of the Heresy that it is accused of,
and that Maron was really Orthodox and a Saint, and not an Heretic. Gabriel
Sionita, and since him Abraham Ecchellensis, formed also a design of making an
Apology for those of their Nation, and for their pretended St. Maron; but these
Apologies have not appeared abroad in the World. Faustus Nairon, the Kinsman
and Successor of Abraham, has lately undertaken to make that Apology in a
Dissert. de origin, nom. ac relig. Maron. Autore Fausto Nairone. Edit. Romans
Anno. 1679.
Dissertation Printed at Rome, wherein, according to the common Opinion of the
Maronites, he proves by the Testimonies of Theodoret, St. John Chrysostom and
some other Authors, that Maron from whom the Maronites take their Name, in the
same who lived about the year 400. and who is mentioned in the Menology of the
Greeks. He adds that the Disciples of that Abbot Maron spread themselves over
all Syria, where they built several Monasteries, and amongst others a very
famous one called by the Name of Maron near the River Orontes. This Author
farther pretends, that all those Syrians who were not infected with Heresy,
sheltered themselves with the Disciples of Abbot Maron, whom the Heretics of
those times called Maronites for that reason. It were to be wished that M.
Nairon, had brought Arguments of less distance from those times to prove that
Opinion; and I think we ought not absolutely to give credit to the Authority of
Thomas Archbishop of Kfartab, who lived, as it is pretended, toward the
Eleventh age, though he was of the Sect of the Monothelites: For if these
Authors be carefully examined, they will not be found very exact in matters of
History, and most frequently they relate for Matters of Antiquity, what
happened in their own time, and which they have even drawn out of the Books of
the Maronites, since their Reconciliation with Rome.

That which has greatest appearance of truth in the Apology of M. Nairon for
those of his Country, is the Argument he uses against the Testimony of
Gulielmus Tyrius, who is an Author exact enough, and who has spoken of the
Heresy of the Maronites, as an ocular witness. He affirms that Gulielmus
Tyrius took most part of his History, out of the Annals of Said Ebn Batrik,
otherwise called Eutychius of Alexandria; and seeing Eutychius is not very
exact in a great many matters of fact which he relates, it is not to be thought
strange that Gulielmus Tyrius has fallen into the same mistakes. Eutychius,
says M. Nairon, affirms that Maron the Monothelite lived in the time of the
Emperor Mauritius; and nevertheless Monothelism was not as yet known at that
time. But if the Authority of the Arabian Historians be rejected, because of
their not being exact in Chronology, there is not one of them but must be
wholly laid aside. The Authority of Gulielmus Tyrius is not so much made use of
in the matter in hand, for what he relates out of the Annals of Eutychius; as
for his own Testimony, speaking of a thing that happened in his own time, under
Aymeric Patriarch of Antioch, who made the Maronites of that Country abjure
their pretended Errors.

There is no likelihood of truth in the story that M. Nairon alleges, and
which has been already mentioned by Quaresm. in dilucid. Terrae sanctae.
Quaresmius, to wit, that Maron went from Antioch to Rome with a Legate or Envoy
of Pope Honorius, who created the same Maron Patriarch of Antioch, because of
his Orthodox faith. I pass over some other Acts of this nature, which are not
to be found but in Arabic Books written since the Reconciliation of the
Maronites to the Church of Rome. The least knowledge in Ecclesiastical History
is enough to convince us that these Histories have no ground in Antiquity, and
that the Maronites and other Eastern People who are unskilful Critics in
Historical Learning, have referred to Ancient times, what has been only in
use amongst them for some latter Ages. According to this Principle, we must not
easily give credit to the Authority of Johannes Maron, whose Joan. Maro. Comm.
in Liturg. St. Jacobi.
Commentary upon the Liturgy of St. James, is not so very Ancient as some would
have it, seeing it contains matters of fact that are Posteriour to it by many
Ages. After all, the Maronites, who pretend to have always preserved the Purity
of their Faith, cast the errors that are to he found in the works of their own
undoubted Authors, upon their Neighbors who were Heretics, that had sown
these errors amongst them, and who had even won over to their Sect some of the
Maronites themselves: And so, though the Maronites pretend that they have
always preserved the true Faith, yet they cannot deny but that some of their
Nation, have entertained the Sentiments of the Jacobites, Petr. in Epist. Arab.
ad Card. Caraff. Anno, 1578.
Peter Patriarch of the Maronites, in a Letter which he wrote to Cardinal
Carraffa, says that the errors which occur in their Books, ought to be imputed
to their Neighbors: but the Steph. Petr. in Epist. ad Faust. Naw. Ann. 1674.
present Patriarch writing to M. Nairon, affirms that they have preserved many
Books that are free from all these errors; and gives us hopes of a Volume of
Oriental Liturgies which he pretends to reconcile with the Latin Mass. That
must needs be a very useful Work, and will clear to us a great many matters of
Fact concerning that affair, which lie as yet wrapped up in obscurity.

CHAP. XV. Of the Religion and Customs of the Mahometans.
THE Religion of the Mahometans being for most part but a medly of the
Christian and Jewish Religions, we have thought it pertinent to give an
Abridgment thereof in this place, to the end that they who travel into the
Levant, may lay aside a great many prejudices that they have conceived against
that Religion, and that they may consider that it is indebted to the Jews and
Christians for all the good that is in it, especially in relation to Morality.
Mahomet, who was persuaded that all Religion ought to be founded on the word of
God, and not upon the Dictates of Men, was obliged to take to himself the Title
of God's Messenger; and the more to impose upon Christians, he feigned himself
to be that Paraclet or Comforter promised in the Gospel. Nay he has borrowed
part of their Maxims, and acknowledged Our Lord to be a great Prophet inspired
by the Spirit of God. On the other hand, being willing also to gain the Jews,
and of these two to make but one more perfect Religion, he has brought into
his pretended Reformation a great part of Judaism: and that makes the
Mahometans pretend, that the two Laws, as well that of Moses as that of Our
Savior, are at present abolished, and that so, Men are obliged to embrace
Mahometanism, if they would be true Believers. They consess that both these
Laws have been grounded upon the word of God; but still add, that they are no
longer in force, since he has empowered Mahomet to reform Religion. There are
even some Mahometans who affirm, that neither the Jews nor Christians can have
certain and infallible Principles of their Religion, because their Sacred
writings have been corrupted. The Jews, say they, lost their Law and all their
Holy Books during the time of the Captivity in Babylon, and what they call
Canonical Books, are not so indeed, but only some scraps of those Ancient
Books which the Jews have pieced together, as well as they could after their
Captivity. As for the Christians, they say that the Books of the New Testament
have been corrupted by the different Sects, that have arisen amongst the same
Christians.

Mahomet then feigned, that during the space of 23 Years, God sent him by the
Ministry of the Angel Gabriel, a certain Number of Pieces of Writing, whereof
he composed the Book which is called the Alcoran; and that Book is to them the
Holy Scripture, being the chief groundwork of their Religion. But as among the
Jews, besides the 24 Books of Scriture, there is also the Talmud which contains
their Traditions; so the Mahometans have their Assonna, that declares to them
the Traditions which they are to follow. They have likewise Expositions on
those Books, to which they submit; and besides, they distinguish, as well as we,
that which is of Precept, from that which is only Advice.

The Chief Article of their Belief is founded upon the Unity of God; and
therefore it is their ordinary saying; There is no other God but God; God is
one; and they call those Idolaters, who acknowledge any Number in the Deity,
thereby, condemning the Trinity of Persons which the Christians acknowledge to
be in God.

The second Fundamental Article of their Religion consists in these words,
Mahomet is the Messenger of God. By that they pretend to exclude all other
Religions, because they say that Mahomet is the most excellent, and last of all
the Prophets whom God was to send to Mankind: And as the Jewish Religion was
abrogated by the coming of Jesus Christ, so, in their Opinion, the Christian
Religion was not to subsist any longer, after the appearance of their Prophet
Mahomet.

They who introduce a new Religion, ought to show some Miracles, that so their
words may be the better believed. And therefore the Mahometans attribute some
to their Legislatour. They affirm that he made water flow out of his Fingers,
and that pointing to the Moon with his Finger he clave it asunder. They say
also, that Stones, Trees and Beasts acknowledged him to be the true Prophet of
God, and they saluted him in these Terms, You are the true messenger of God.
They farther affirm, that Mahomet went in one Night, from Mecha to Jerusalem,
from whence he ascended up into Heaven, where he saw Paradise and Hell; that he
talked with God, though that be an Honor reserved to the Blessed after their
death; and that, in fine, he came down from Heaven the same Night, and was
again in Mecha before Day.

Besides the Miracles of Mahomet, the Mahometans ascribe some also to their
Saints, but with this difference, that they are not to be compared to those of
their Prophet. They speak very well of God and his Perfections, removing from
him every thing that can mark the least imperfection. They farther add, that
these Angels who execute the Commands of god, and affirm that there is no
distinction of Sex amongst them. They farther add, that these Angels differ in
Dignity, and that they are appointed for certain Offices as well in Heaven as on
Earth; and that, in fine, they write down the Actions of Men. They attribute
extraordinary Power to the Angel Gabriel; to wit, that he can in the space of
an Hour come down from Heaven to Earth, and overthrow a Mountain with one
Feather of his wing. The Angel Asrael is appointed to take care of the Souls of
those that dye: and another named Esraphil holds a great Trumpet always at his
Mouth, ready to sound to the Day of Judgment. It would be needless and tedious
to mention the Employments of the other Angels. They believe the General
Resurrection of the Dead, and reckon up all the Signs that are to precede it:
For then they pretend an Anti-Mahomet shall come, that Jesus Christ shall
descend from Heaven to kill him, and establish the Mohammedan Religion, to which
they add a great many more Extravagances concerning Gog and Magog, and the
Beast that is to come out of Mecha. They affirm besides, that at that time all
living Creatures shall die, that the Mountains shall fly in the Air like Birds,
and that, at length the Heavens shall melt and drop upon the Earth.
Nevertheless they say that some time after, God shall renew the Earth, and then
he shall raise the Dead, who shall appear stark naked from Head to Foot; but
that the Prophets, Saints, Doctors and Just Men shall be clothed with
Garments, and carried by Angels and Cherubims to the Empyrean Heaven; that for
the rest, they shall suffer Hunger, Thirst and Nakedness, and that the Sun
coming within a Mile over their Heads, they shall sweat in a strange manner,
and endure many other Torments which we mention not. I shall only observe,
that they extend not the Pains which all are to suffer with Proportion to their
Sins, beyond fifty thousand Years. Farthermore it is not only amongst us that
St. Michael is to be seen holding a Balance in his hand to weigh the good and
bad Actions of Men, the Mahometans affirm also, that at the Day of Judgment
there will be a Balance, wherein good and evil are to be weighed; that they
whose good Deeds shall weigh more than their bad, shall go into Paradise; and
that, on the contrary, they whose Sins are more heavy than their good Actions,
shall go into Hell, unless the Prophets and Saints intercede for them.

This Belief of the Mahometans concerning Paradise and Hell, comes pretty near
that of the Jews and Christians, especially of the Orientals. It Is farther to
be observed, that they acknowledge a kind of Purgatory; for they hold that they
who dye in the Faith, whose Sins nevertheless have been heavier than their good
Actions, and who have not been assisted by the Intercessions of the Just; they
hold, I say, that these shall suffer in Hell in Proportion to their Sins, and
that afterward, they shall go into Paradise. And much after the same manner
the Eastern Church acknowledges also a Purgatory, without admitting any other
place besides Hell.

Besides that General Judgment wherein the Mahometans believe that God himself
in Person, shall make all Men give account of their Actions, they acknowledge
also a particular Judgment, which they call the Torment of the Grave; and that
Judgment, in their Opinion, is performed in this manner. So soon as any one is
dead and buried, two of the greatest Angels, of which the one is called Munzir,
and the other Nekir, come and interrogate the dead Person, asking what Belief
he has concerning God and the Prophet, and concerning the Law and the Kible,
that is to say, to what side one is to turn in Praying to God. The Just are
then to answer, Our God is he that has created all things: our Faith is the
Mussulman and Orthodox Faith: and the true direction of our Prayers is the
Kiabe. Unbelievers on the contrary not knowing what to answer, are condemned to
suffer great Pains.

In the General Resurrection, they pretend that those who are destined for
Paradise, shall, before they enter into it, drink of the water of certain
Fountains appointed for that purpose, and that every Prophet shall have his
Fountain or particular Source, where he and his followers shall drink. The
Fountain where Mahomet and all of his Sect are to drink, shall be much larger
than that of all other Prophets, and shall contain in length as much extent of
ground as one can travel in a Month. there shall be, say they, on the brinks
of that Fountain, more Lavers than there are Stars in the Firmament, and its
water shall be sweeter than Honey, and whiter than Milk. They who once drink of
it shall never thirst again.

It is very probable that all these things are rather parables than true
Relations: And therefore we are not always to take literally what we find in
the Books of Mohammedan Doctors and other Orientals; in which sense we ought to
understand a great part of that which they say of Paradise and Hell. For
instance, in the Description they make of Paradise, they affirm that it is all
full of Musk; that its Buildings are of Bricks of Gold and Silver; that they
who have once entered into it, never come out again; that their Clothes never
wear out; that all sorts of delicious meats are there; and that whatever one
desires to have, comes ready dressed to their hand; that none are subject to
sleep in that place, nor to the other Necessities of the Body; that there are
Divine and Celestial Women and Virgins there, who are free from all
incommodities. And in this manner they describe their Paradise. As for Hell,
they say that Unbelievers shall there remain Eternally with the Devils; that
they shall be tormented by Serpents bigger than Camels, and Scorpions greater
than Mules, As Well as by Fire and Scalding water; that being burnt and turned
into a Coal, God shall raise them again for fresh Sufferings, and that so their
Torments shall never have an end.

They commonly believe Predestination, and say that good and evil only happen
because God has so ordained. He has, say they, from all Eternity written on a
Table, the things that are, and are to be, and it is impossible that they can
be otherwise. The unbelief and wickedness of the Infidel are as much according
to his Knowledge and Desire, as the Obedience and Faith of the Believer. They
farther say, that if it be asked why God has created the wicked and
unbelievers, we are to answer, that it does not become us to inquire too
curiously into the Secrets of God; that he does what he pleases, and no man
ought to ask the reason of what he does. And therefore a true follower of
Mahomet ought to say, I believe in God, in his Angels, in his Books and in the
Day of Judgment. I farther believe that good and evil happen according as he
has ordained, and that, in fine, it is he that has created both.

As to Believers who dye without repentance, they maintain that they continue
in suspense after their death, and that God disposes of them according to his
good Will and Pleasure; that some he pardons, and condemns others to suffer the
Punishment which they deserve because of their Sins, being still assured to go
into Paradise after the Expiation of their Crimes. They are, in fine, persuaded
that God pardons all sorts of Sins, except Atheism and Idolatry: and that is
the reason why in the Prayers they make for the dead, they pray for the wicked
as well as for the good. They have a great esteem for Prayers, Charity, and
other pious Actions that are performed for the dead, because that contributes
to the Comfort and repose of Souls. They have a kind of Office appointed for
that purpose, where are set down the Prayers to be said at Buryings, and the
Surrates of Chapters of the Alcoran that are to be read at the Grave of the
deceased; which reading being done, they who have been employed in that Office,
say with a loud voice, With all our heart we give to this Person deceased, the
Merit of all our reading. It is not out of Vanity that they erect Tombstones
over their Graves, but that Passengers may remember to pray to God for the rest
of their Souls.

The Mahometans not only perform the internal Acts of Faith, but also accuse
themselves of all their Sins, which they confess in the Presence of God, and to
him alone. Penance, say they, is but Repentance for the Sins which we have
committed, with a firm resolution not to fall into the like again.

Their Morality consists in doing good, and eschewing Evil: which is the reason
why they examine very carefully the Nature of Virtues and Vices; and their
Casuists are no less subtle than ours are. I shall here mention some of their
Principles, whence we may the more easily judge of their Morality. They are so
persuaded that all Actions which are not accompanied with Faith, are Sins, that
they maintain that he who denies it, loses the Merit of all his good Works;
that as often as he lies with his Wife, he commits so many Adulteries; in a
word, that all he does during that time cannot be acceptable to God, until he
has repented of his Sin; and that then he becomes a Mussulman or Believer
anew, and must marry again a second time: and if he has made the Journey to
Mecha, he must make it over again, because all his good Actions have been
blotted out by that denial; and Repentance cannot again revive them.

When they demand any thing of God in Prayer, they are to resign themselves
wholly to his Will, and say to him, O my God, I beg of thee, not to grant what
I ask, if it be not for my good. And when they have obtained of God the favor
they desired, they ought to thank him, confessing themselves unworthy of the
Mercies they have received, and that of themselves they are able to do nothing.

They recommend nothing so much, as trust and confidence in God, whom they
acknowledge to be their only support; and they particularly praise Humility,
which, according to them consists, in esteeming others more than themselves.

They give excellent Precepts for bridling the Passions, and shunning vice. If
thou would, say they, have Hell shut its seven Gates, take heed thou sin not
with thy seven Members, which are they Eyes, the Ears, the Tongue, the Hand,
the Foot, the Belly and the Privities which they dare not name: and they reckon
up all the particulars from which every one of these Parts ought to abstain.
Slander and Backbiting is one of the Vices against which they most declame; and
there is nothing they so much condemn as the Censurings of other People, even
when they are true. Upon that Principle they ground this Maxim, that we ought
not to speak of things that are hidden from us. For instance, they forbid to
say, such a Man is dead, or shall dye in the Faith, because it belongs not to
us to judge of things which God has concealed: that, say they, can be done
only, when the Prophet has spoken of them; and so it may be affirmed, that
Abubekir, Homer, Osman and Haly deserve Paradise. For the same reason also,
they say, that it is not lawful to say that such a Person is dead in Unbelief,
or that he deserves Hell; unless they speak of those who are expressly mentioned
by the Prophet, as the Devil, Abusaheb and Abugehel.

I wave the rest of their Morals, in respect that what I have alleged is
sufficient to show the Nature of it; and I dare affirm it is not so remiss as
that of some Casuists of our Age. Only let me add, that they have a great many
good Precepts concerning the Duties of Private Persons toward their Neighbor,
wherein they also prescribe Rules of Civility. They have also written of the
Duty of Subjects toward their Prince; and one of their Maxims is, that it is
never lawful to kill him, nay nor to speak ill of him under Pretext that he is
a Tyrant.

The Devotion of the Mahometans extends even to Holy Names: as when they
pronounce the Name of God, they must bow, and add thereunto, most High, most
Blessed, most Mighty, most Excellent, or the like, If one has pronounced the
Name of Mahomet, he must add, may God augment his Graces: to the Names of other
Messengers, they add, that God is satisfied with them. And, lastly, to the
Names of other Doctors, they add, may the Mercy of God rest upon them.

There are no Monachal Constitutions that so much oblige Monks to obey their
Superior, as the Precepts of the Mohammedan Doctors oblige Disciples to
respect their Masters, whom they ought to obey in all things, without
gainsaying, and in whose Presence they are not to speak too loud.

As they distinguish that which is of Divine obligation from what is only of
Humane Constitution, and that which is of Precept from that which is only of
Council; so there are to be found amongst them Devout People that obey Councils
as punctually as Commands, as for instance, to go to Prayers at Nine in the
Morning, which is not of obligation, to prostrate themselves there twice at
least, or eight times at most. In fine, the Mahometans besides their Belief and
Morality, have also their Ceremonies, which they strictly enough observe. To
distinguish them from the Jews, who are obliged to go to Prayers but three
times a day, Mahomet obliges his Followers to pray five times a day, as a Mark
of greater Sanctity. They have a great many Traditions about the manner of
praying, which would be tedious to relate.

They have some Prayers that are necessary upon Divine obligation, and others
only or Counsel and Decency. There are some Conditions which being neglected,
render the Prayer invalid. For instance, in the Noon and Afternoon Prayers,
which are of Divine obligation, they must read them with a low Voice; but in
that which is said in the Morning, and at Night before they go to bed, it is to
be read aloud, if there be an Imam, that is to say, a Priest present. But if
one pray alone, it is a Matter indifferent. Moreover, the Men ought at first to
lift up their Hands to the Tip of their Ears, and the Women only to their
Jaws. When one stands having the Right Hand upon the Left, if he be a Man, he
ought to place his Hands below his Navel; and if she be a Woman, she is to put
them upon her Bosom. To pray with Order, they must accompany the Imam with a
low voice, and imitate all he does. I should be too tedious if I would reckon
up the particular Postures they have in praying, especially when they prostrate
themselves, and touch the ground with their Forehead and Nose: that is better
understood by seeing them when they themselves a are at Prayers.

Their Modesty at Prayers is so much the greater, that they are obliged to
observe a great many things, if they expect to be heard: for their Prayers are
esteemed ineffectual, if they talk or laugh in time of Prayer so as they may be
heard; it is the same, if they weep too loud, by reason of any Misfortune that
has befallen them, or for other Causes, unless it be because mention has been
made of Paradise or Hell, for then the Prayer is nevertheless good. There are
also a great many other Cases which render then Prayers null, as to scratch
three times in one Place, to pass before the Imam during a Prostration, to
advance or go the space of two ranks, to turn their Face from the Kible, to
begin a Prayer, when they hear the Imam begin another, to commit any mistake in
reading, to salute any one voluntarily; for if it happen by inadvertency, the
fault is expiated, by making a Prostration, which is the usual Penance in that
case.

They are moreover prohibited to pray to God in a habit, wherein they commonly
work at home, and in which they would not pay a visit to Persons of Quality.
Nor can they pray to God before the fire, though they are not hindered from
doing it by a Candle or Lamp. But we should never make an end, if we mentioned
exactly all that they are prohibited to do during the time of Prayer. Let us
now say somewhat of their Washings. Amongst the Mahometans it is of Divine
Obligation, to wash the Mouth, the Face, and then the whole Body: and the
Tradition of Mahomet enjoins, that this Ablution be made with intention of
doing so; that for better cleansing the Body, Water is to be poured three times
upon it, beginning from the right Shoulder to the left, then upon the Head, and
afterward upon all the parts of the Body. If one break wind during the Abdest,
or Ablution, all that has been done is good for nothing; for then the Ablution
is null.

They reckon amongst the Commands of God, the washing of the Face once and the
Arms up to the Elbow, to wash the fourth part of the Head and the Feet once:
and the tradition of Mahomet ordains the Hands to be washed three times, the
Teeth to be cleansed with a certain kind of Wood, and the Mouth after that to
be washed three times, and the Nose as often, without interruption after one
has once begun; then the Ears are to be washed with the rest of the Water that
was used for the Head. They are always to begin their washings by the right
side: and when they wash their Hands or Feet, they are obliged to begin with
the Fingers and Toes. There are many things also that render these Ablutions
null: but we have insisted but too long upon these Ceremonies.

What I have hitherto said of the Religion of the Mahometans, is extracted out
of a Book of Mohammedan Divinity written by one of their Doctors who lived in
the last age. That Doctor professes to follow the Doctrine most generally
received at Constantinople, and the most approved by good Men. This is worth
the observing, because the Mahometans are divided into a great many Sects, not
to speak of the Persians, who differ much from the Turks. And that we may have
some knowledge of these Sects, I shall relate what that Mohammedan Divine has
judiciously said of them, and which deserves to be taken notice of.

He affirms that the matters which concern their Religion are indeed, written
in their sacred Books; but that there are part of them which are obscure and
hard to be understood, and that none but the Learned can dive into them: which
has been the will of God, to the end that the Learned should busy themselves
in the study of these Books, and teach his mind to others. Seeing these Books
are obscure, the Interpreters happen many times to mistake; but their Errors
are not Sins, and it is even the will of God that they who have not applied
themselves to study, should follow the judgment of Doctors, without examining
too scrupulously, whether or not they tell the truth, because it is their part
to submit; and if they be deceived, they are not therefore guilty of Sin.

Those who came after Mahomet, though they have written many things for the
Confirmation and Explication of the Law, yet they could not write all; besides
that, there was no great Necessity for it in those times, when there were not
so many Novelties, and so many Cases of Conscience, as have happened since. But
after that the number of Believers increased, they began to be divided in
opinions, and it was Necessary that some should apply themselves to the study
of the Law, that they might digest into writing the Precepts which they drew
out of Divine Books. And that gave occasion to the different Sects of Doctors:
for every one explained the Law according to their Capacities and Talents, and
gave their Interpretations to the People. So that, in a short time the People
were divided into Factions: some followed Abuhanife; others Chasihie; some
Malike; others Ahmed; others again Dudzahime; In a word, the number of these
Doctors was very great, and has continued so to this present.

After all, these Sects have all the same belief as to the Fundamentals of the
Faith, but they differ much one from another as to Morals and Ceremonies: which
diversity, say they, has undoubtedly come to pass by the permission of God; so
that there is no danger to their followers, for there is no Sect wherein one
may not be saved. However, the Sect of Abuhanise is to be preferred before all
others, because he, being the most Ancient and best instructed, has explained
the difficulties the best of any: and he ought to be followed especially in
what concerns Morals; and therefore it is more meritorious to follow his
Sentiments, than those of the other Doctors that came after him. In that sense
these words are to be understood, I am of the Sect of Abuhanise in what relates
to Actions, the Worship of God and the Ceremonies. Ireceive all that he has
drawn from the Word of God and Traditions. I have chosen his Opinions for
regulating my Actions. Thus ye have in a few words the Sentiment of our
Mohammedan Doctor concerning the Sects which are very numerous in his Religion,
and which occasion no Schism nor Division that can be prejudicial to the State:
For the Fundamental Articles of Mahometanisme consist only in Professing that
there is but one God, and that Mahomet is his Messenger, in being exact in
Prayers and Almsdeeds, in performing the Pilgrimage to Mecha, and in observing
the Fast of Ramazan. These five Principal Articles contain others of less
importance: for that of Prayer ought always to be attended with whatever can
render the Prayer pure, such as are Ablutions; and Circumcision also belongs
to that External Purity which ought to be the Sign of the Internal. I might
enlarge more on this Subject: But I think what I have already mentioned will be
sufficient to make known the Religion of the Mahometans.

FINIS.
A List of the Churches depending on the Patriarchate of Constantinople,
composed by Nilus Doxapatrius, and related by Leo Allatius. lib. 1. de Cons.
Eccl. Occid. and Orient. cap. 24.
1. (...). 1. CAesarea Cappadociae habens Episcopatus 8 2. (...). 2. Ephesus
Asiae habens Episcopatus 34 3. (...). 3. Heraclea Thraciae in Europa, habens
Episcopatus 15 4. (...). 4. Ancyra Galatiae habens Episcopatus 8 5. (...). 5.
Cyzicus Hellesponti habens Episcopatus 12 6. (...). 6. Sardes Asiae habens
Episcopatus 25 7. (...). 7. Nicomedia Bithyniae habens Episcopatus 12 8. (...).
8. Nicaea ejusdem Bithyniae habens Episcopatus 6 9. (...). 9. Chalcedon ejusdem
Provinciae fine subditis. 10. (...). 10. Side Pamphyliae habens Episcopatus 16
11. (...). 11. Sebastia secundae Armeniae, habens Episcopatus 7 12. (...). 12.
Amasea Helenoponti habens Episcopatus 7. cujus Episcopatus erat and ipsa
Iberia. 13. (...). 13. Melitene Armeniae habens Episcopatus 9. ex quibus est
and Episcopatus Cucusus, quo in exilium missus est aurea lingua Joannes. 14.
(...). 14. Tyana secundae Cappadociae habens Episcopatus 3 15. (...). 15.
Gangra Paphlagoniae habens Episcopatus 3 16. (...). 16. Thessalonica Thessaliae
habens Episcopatus 8 17. (...). 17. Claudiopolis Honoriadis habens Episcopatus
5 18. (...). 18. Neocaesarea Ponti Polemoniaci habens Episcopatus 7 19. (...).
19. Pisinus secundae Galatiae habens Episcopatus 7 20. (...). 20. Myra Liciae
habens Episcopatus 33 21. (...). 21. Stauropolis Cariae habens Episcopatus 26
22. (...). 22. Laodicaea Phrygiae Capatianae habens Episcopatus. 21 23. (...).
23. Synada Phrygiae salutaris habens Episcopatus 20 24. (...). 24. Iconium
Lycaoniae habens Episcopatus 15 25. (...). 25. Antiochia Pisidiae habens
Episcopatus 21 26. (...). 26. Perge, five Sylaeum Pamphiliae, habens
Episcopatus 17 27. (...). 27. Corinthus Peloponnesi habens Episcopatus 7. 1.
Damalorum. 2. Argi. 3. Monembasiae, five Tenarusiae. 4. Cephaloniae. 5.
Zacinthi. 6. Zemenes. 7. Mainae. 28. (...). 28. Athenae Graeciae habens
Episcopatus 11. 1. Eurypi. 2. Dauliae. 3. Coroniae. 4. Andri. 5. Oraei. 6.
Scyri. 7. Caristi. 8. Porthmi. 9. Aulonae. 10. Syrae and Seriphi. 11. Cei and
Thermiorum. 29. (...). 29. Mocysus Cappadociae habens Episcopatus 4 30. (...).
30. Crete habens Episcopatus 10 31. (...). 31. Rhegium Calabriae habens
Episcopatus 13 32. (...). 32. Patrae Peloponnesi habens Episcopatus 5. 1.
Lacedaemonis. 2. Methonae. 3. Coronae. 4. Bolenae. 5. Olenae. 33. (...). 33.
Trapezus Lazicae habens Episcopatus 15 34. (...). 34. Larissa Graeciae habens
Episcopatus 17 35. (...). 35. Naupactus Nicopolis habens Episcopatus 9 36.
(...). 36. Philippopolis Thraciae habens Episcopatus 10 37. (...). 37.
Trajanopolis Rhodopes habens Episcopatus 7 38. (...). 38. Rhodos Cycladum
Insularum habens Episcopatus 12 39. (...). 39. Philippi Macedoniae habens
Episcopatus 7 40. (...). 40. Adrianopolis Haemimonti habens Episcopatus. 11 41.
(...). 41. Hierapolis Phrygiae Capatianae habens Episcopatus 9 42. (...). 42.
Rhodostolum seu Distra Haemimonti, habens Episcopatus 5 43. (...). 43.
Dyrrhachium habens Episcopatus 4 44. (...). 44. Smyrna Asiae habens Episcopatus
5 45. (...). 45. Syracusae Siciliae habens Episcopatus 21. 1. Cataniae. 2.
Taurominae. 3. Messenae. 4. Cephaludii. 5. Thermorum. 6. Panormi. 7. Lilybaei.
8. Trochalorum. 9. Acragantis. 10. Tyndarii. 11. Carines. 12. Leontines. 13.
Alesae. 14. Gaudi insulae. 15. Melitae insulae, quae dicitur Malta. 16. Liparis
insulae. 17. Vulcani. 18. Didymi. 19. Ustinae. 20. Tenari. 21. Basiludii. 46.
(...). 46. Catania, quae cum Syracusani effet Episcopatus, propter Sanctum
Leonem in Archiepiscopatus dignitatem provecta est. 47. (...). 47. Ammorium
Phrygiae habens Episcopatus 5 48. (...). 48. Camachus Armeniae habens
Episcopatus 8 49. (...). 49. Coryaium Phrygiae habens Episcopatus 13 50. (...).
50. Sancta Severina Calubriae habens Episcopatus. 5 51. (...). 51. Mitylenae
Lesbi insulae habens Episcopatus 6 52. (...). 52. Novae Patrae Graeciae habens
Episcopatus 4 53. (...). 53. Thebae Graeciae habens Episcopatus 3 54. (...).
54. Serrae Thessaliae habens Episcopatus 57 55. (...). 55. Aeonis. 56. (...).
56. Corcyra. 57. (...). 57. Mesembria. 58. (...). 58. Amastris Ponti. 59.
(...). 59. Conae Phrygiae. 60. (...). 60. Pompeiopolis. 61. (...). 61. Attalia
a Sylaeo avulsa. 62. (...). 62. Paronaxia a Rhodo avulsa. 63. (...). 63.
Lacedaemonia a Patris Peloponnensi avulsa. 64. (...). 64. Madyta ab Heraclea
avulsa. 65. (...). 65. Abydus a Cyzico avulsa. (...). An hiepiscopatus item qui
Throno Constantinopolitano subjacent, nulli tamen Metropolitancrum obnoxii,
neque sub se habe^tes Episcopacus, omnes sunt 1. Biz^a. 2. Leontopolis. 3.
Parium. 4. Proconesus. 5. Cius. 6. Aspros. 7. Cypsela. 8. Psice. 9. Neapolis.
10. Selga. 11. Cherso. 12. Mesenae. 13. Garela. 14. Brysis. 15. Dercus. 16.
Carabyza. 17. Lemnus. 18. Leucas. 19. Misthia. 20. Pedachtoe. 21. Perme. 22.
Kosporus. 23. Cotradia. 24. Codrae. 25. Carpathus. 26. Cotro. 27. Rhizeum. 28.
Gothia. 29. Sugdia. 30. Phulli. 31. Aegina. 32. Pharsala. 33. Anchialus. 34.
Heraclei. Hae omnes civitates and Provinciae Throno Constantinopolitano
annumerantur.

Another List of the Churches depending on the Patriarchate of Constantinople,
published by Mr. Smith, in his Discourse concerning the Present State of the
Greek Church.
(...).
Catalogus Provinciarum, seu Metropolium and Episcopatuum Throno
Constantinopolitano hodie subjacentium.
(...), cujus Metropolita dicitur (...), Ephesus.

(...), Heraclea, penes cujus Archiepiscopum consecrandi Patriarcham jus usque
manet. Dicitur (...). Habet sub se quinque Episcopos, (...), Calliopoleos,
(...), Rhodosti, (...), Tyriloes, (...), Metrorum, (...), Myriophyti.

(...), Ancyra.

(...), Cizycus.

(...), Philadelphia.

(...), Nicomedia.

(...), Nicaea.

(...), Chalcedon.

(...), Thessalonica, cujus Metropolita (...) dictus, haber sub se novem
Episcopatus, (...), Citros, olim Gydriae, (...), Scrviorum, (...), Campaniae,
(...), Petrae, (...), Ardemerii, (...), Hieriffi and Sancti Montis, five
Athonis, (...), Plantamonis, (...), Polianinae.

(...), Athenae, sub quibus continentur Episcopaius quatuor, (...), Talantii,
(...), Scirri, (...), Solonis, (...), Mindinitzae.

(...), Prusa.

(...), Trapesus.

(...), Philippopolis.

(...), Philipporum and Dramae.

(...), Thebae.

(...), Methymna.

(...), Lacedaemonia habet sub se Episcopatus (...), Catiopoleos, (...),
Amyclarum, (...), Btestenae.

(...), Larissa, cuius Episcopatus sunt (...), Demetriadis, (...), Zetunii,
(...), Stagonis, (...), Thaumaci, (...), Cardicii, (...), Radobisdii, (...),
Schiathi, (...), Loidoricii, (...), Letzae and Agraphorum.

(...), Adrianopolis, cui solus subjacet Episcopatus (...), Agathopoleos.

(...), Smyrna.

(...), Mitylene.

(...), Serrae.

(...), Christianopolis, quae and Arcadia.

(...), Amasia.

(...), Neocaesarea.

(...), Iconium.

(...), Corinthus, sub qua solus Episcopus (...), Damalonis.

(...), Rhodus.

(...), Novae Patrae.

(...), Aenus.

(...), Drystra.

(...), Tornobus, cuius Metropolita dicitur (...), haber sub se Episcopatus
(...), Lophitzi, (...), Tsernobi, (...), Presilabae.

(...), joanninorum Metropoliza habet Episcopos (...), Bothronti, (...),
Bellae, (...), Chimarrae, (...), Drynopoleos.

(...), Euripi.

(...), Artae.

(...), Metropolita Monembasiae haber Episcopos (...), Eleos, (...), Maiinae,
(...), Rheontis, (...), Andrusae.

(...), Nauplii.

(...), Phanarii and Neochorii Archiepncopus.

(...), Sophiae Metropolita.

(...), Chii.

(...), Paronaxiae.

(...), Tziae.

(...), Siphni.

(...), Sami.

(...), Carpathi.

(...), Andri.

(...), Barnae.

(...), Cous.

(...), Leucadis.

(...), Veterum Patrarum Metropolita habet Episcopos (...), Olenae, (...),
Methonae, (...), Coronae.

(...), Proconnesi.

(...), Gani.

(...). Sunt adhuc Episcopi and Metropolitae.

(...), Mediae.

(...), Sozopoleos.

(...), Proelabi.

(...), Caphae.

(...), Gotthiae.

(...), Bindanae.

(...), Didymotichi.

(...), Lititzae.

(...), Buziae.

(...), Selymbriae.

(...), Zychnarum.

(...), Neurocopi.

(...), Melenici.

(...), Berrhoeae.

(...), Pogogianae.

(...), Chaldaeae.

(...), Pisidiae.

(...), Imbri.

(...), Myrae.

(...), Santorinae.

(...), Aeginae.

(...), Ungarovalachiae.

In Moldavia quatuor tantum Episcopi regimini Christianorum Ecclesiastico
praesunt. Metropolita Cretensis cum tribus ipsi subjectis Episcopis Sedem
Constantinopolitanam agnovit.

The Testimony of Gennadius concerning Transubstantiation, taken out of a
Manuscript Book of Meletius Syrigus against the Confession of Faith published
under the name of Cyrillus Lucaris Patriarch of Constantinople.
(...).

(...), (...) (...).

Gennadii primi Patriarchae Constantinopolitani postquam a Turcis capta est,
qui vixit circa annum salutis 1453.

MAximum itaque omnium Dei miraculorum est hocce mysterium. Idcirco multa, uti
jam dictum est, contra illud objectant ex una quidem part infideles, ex alia
haeretici, and ex alia idiotae, qui rationem mysterii illius nequeunt
intelligere: quas objectiones in hoc sermon modo solvimus. Alii siquidem
dubitant, quomodo in momento temporis panis and vini substantia convertatur in
corporis substantiam. Alii vero dubitant, qua ratione fieri possit, ut
substantia panis in corporis substantiam transmutata, remaneant panis
accidentia, illius videlicet longitudo, gravitas, latitudo, color, odor, and
quae in gustu est qualitas; ita ut sint panis accidentia, absque ejusdem panis
substantia, and vera corporis substantia lateat sub alterius substantiae
accidentibus. Alii dubitant, quomodo fieri possit, Christum extare in parva rei
quae apparet extensione. Alii rursus dubitant, quomodo mysticum Christi corpus,
etiam in parts divisum, remaneat integrum, and partium quaelibet sit totum
Christi corpus, idemque perfectum. Dubitant alii, and haec dubitandi ratio
videtur maxima, quomodo idem Christi corpus unum fit in coelo and in multis
simul altaribus super terram. Verum istas dubitandi rations jam solvimus,
possumusque solvere, gratia Christi noe illustrante. In primis autem
sapientissimi Ecclesiae Doctores, gratiae quae in vobis est ac studii duces,
easdem solvunt. Vobis autem incumbit credere absque ulla haesitatione,
similiter and Christiani omnes credere debemus, mysticum illud corpus esse
ipsummet Dominum nostrum Jesum, Mariae Virginis Filium, qui crucifixus est,
quique nunc est in coelo, ille omnino idem est, qui sub panis accidentibus
delitescit. Extat autem secundum substantiam in Sacramento, non vero secundum
gratiam and efficaciam tantum; neque mysticum Christi corpus very corporis
figura est, sed purum putum illius corpus: nunc enim figuris and umbris, sicut
olim, minime servimus, sed ipsismet rebus. Si quis autem Sanctorum sacrificium
istud Dominicae illius coenae vocet antitypum, inde fir quod istud sacrificium
illius fit figura, sicut and hodierni sacrisiculi figura sunt Jesu Christi, qui
tunc fecit sacrificium: utriusque autem sacrificii eadem est perfectio, nimirum
transubstantiatio.

An Extract from a Manuscript Book, whereof the TITLE is,
(...).
Meletii Syrigi Monachi refutatio Confessionis Fidei Christianae, quae exposita
est a Cyrillo Patriarcha Constantinopolitano, inscriptae nomine Christianorum
totius Ecclesiae Orientalis.
(...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).

De nomine ((...)) Transubstantiationis.
IN confesso quidem est apud nos, ipsam ((...)) transabstantiationis vocem non
extare apud priscos Theologos: nordum enim ussa haeresi circa mysterium illad
exorra, si eos excipias, qui veram Verbi Incarnationem negabant, nova formare
nomina Sanctis Patribus non curae fuit. Verum de voce nobis non est disputatio:
non enim in verbis, potius quam in rebus, pietatis vim sitam esse volumus.
Itaque, si apud Theologos invenerimus quod nomine transubstantiationis
significatur, quid vetat quominus ista dictione, vel alia huic simili utamur?
Quippe Patrem absque principio, and immortalem and ingenitum, nusquam in
scriptura invenimus; similiter nec Filium ejusdem cum illo substantiae, nec
Spiritum Deum esse expresso verbo deprehendimus. Sed nihil vetat, imo pietatis
est ac necessitatis, ob haereses quae nascuntur ex aliis quibusdam quae eodem
tendunt, voces istas formare, ut res quae intelligitur melius percipiatur, and
ii, qui aliud sentiunt, refellantur, Quid enim unquam detrimenti possit iis
accidere, qui pietare erga Deum affecti sunt, si vocibus diversis eundem
conceptum religiosum exprimant, minime video. Unanimi autem consensu Theologos
profiteri panem sanctificatum in substantiam carms Dominicae vere transmutari,
quod idem est ac transubstantiatio, jam allata testimonia manifest profeste
probant. Justinus enim dixit, cum qua ratione potuit carnem assumere, eddem
etiam potuisse panem in suum corpus convertere. Secundum autem Cyprianum, Panis
quem Dominus ministrabat Apostolis, mutatus non specie, sed natura, omniporente
verbo factus est caro. Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus dixit, Cum aquam suapte
voluntate in vinum mutaverit in Cana Galilaeae, a fide non videtur alienum,
illum vinum convertiffein sanguinem. Iterum, panis qui videtur panis, non est,
quamvis id gustus praemonstret, sed Christi corpus: ita quod videtur vinura,
non est vinum, etsi illud gustus monstret, sed est Christi sanguis. S.
Ambrosius ait, Panis ille ante verba quibus Sacramenta peraguntur, panis est;
sed postquam sanctificatus fuit, e pane fit caro Christi. Gregorius Nyssenus
ait, Recte igitar credimus, panem qui Dei verbo sanctificatus fuit, in corpus
Dei Verbi converti. Joannes etiam Chrysostomus Homilia 28. in Matthew. Nos vices
ministrorum gerimus: ille autem est qui ea sanctificat and efficit. Joannes
Damascenus, Panis propositus, vinumque cum aqua per invocationem and illapsum
Sancti Spiritus divinitus convertuntur in Christi corpus and sanguinem.
Theophylactus Bulgariae, Jesus erga homines benevolus, speciem quidem panis and
vini servat, sed in virtutem carnis and sanguinis transmutat. Caeterum, qua
ratione prisci Ecclesiae Doctores sumpserunt productionem, aut transmutationem,
aut conversionem, aut existentiam, aut transelementationem, aut quid fimile,
eadem nuperi Theologi transubstantiationem intelligunt. Sicut enim illi per
illas voces panem proprie ac vere in corpus Christi converti affirmant, ita hi
eadem omnino ratione idem intelligunt per vocem transubstantiationis, novo
invento vocabulo, ob haereseos novitatem. Cum enim quidam Berengarius and
illius Discipuli asseruissent, panem accipere quidem gratiam aliquam corporis
Dominici secundum accidens a Deo, non vero substantialiter converti in Christi
corpus, sed manner non mutatum, and qualis erat ante consecrationem, qui tunc
saniores erant Theologi, ut insanam illius doctrinam everterent, dixerunt panem
transubstantiari in corpus Christi, non vero in aliquod corporis Christi
accidens per quamdam alterationem mutari, sed panem substantialiter fieri
Christi corpus. Nam sicut ante insanam Arii haeresim, nomen ((...))
consubstantiale, neque in scripto, nec extra scriptum audiebatur; ubi autem
impudenter Filium a Patris substantia ille separavit, publicatum est nomen
illud a primi Concilii Patribus, qui confessi sunt Filium consubstantialem esse
Patri, ejusdemque ac unius substantiae, ut illos everterent qui amarulenter
divinitatem separabant. Ita and in omni aetate, qui recte Ecclesiam gubernant,
novorum autores sunt vocabulorum propter novitates obortas, quod and in
praesenti Sacramento factum videtur: nam ante septimam Synodum fere omnes de eo
simpliciter locuti sunt; post septingentos autem a Christo annos, ubi qui
venerandas imagines impugnabant in quadam Synodo a Constant congregata, quam
falso septimam appellabant, impudenter publicassent, unicam esse imaginem
Christi, panem scilicet, qui datur in Eucharistia, ex eo tempore qui postea
fuerunt Patres coeperunt in scriptis suis declarare, panem consecratum non esse
figuram corporis Christi, sed veritatem, uti videre est in septima Synodo, and
apud Joannem Damascenum and qui eum secuti sunt Patres. postquam autem
Berengarii haeresis, qui negat Christi corpus and sanguinem esse
substantialiter in divinis symbolis, pervenit in nostras Provincias, vox
((...)) transubstantiatio inventa est, quae nullatenus differt quoad sensum a
transmutatione, aut conversione, aut transelementatione, quam prisci Patres
adhibuerunt, uti jam dictum fuit. Si cui igitur Religio fit antiqua mutare
vocabula, quasi alienum fit a pietate illorum voces mutare in alias, quae
ejusdem omnino sint significatus, quamvis illud sit ridiculum, modo tamen has
voces ea ratione suscipiat, qua usi sunt Patres, non erit our nos ei opponamus;
sed illum uti nobiscum conscientem recipimus, illius quidem pietatem laudantes,
at simplicitati ejus nos accommodantes. Verum illum non existimo debere ab iis
alienum esse, qui rem eamdem exprimunt verbis quae majoris videntur esse
significatus, minusque accedunt ad Haereticorum sermonis ambiguitatem, aut quae
Patrum mentem clarius explicent: quippe nihil eo contensiosus est, quam
differ nominibus, cum res ipsa est in confesso. Si vero transubstantiationem
inficietur ob vocis illius virtutem, quia scilicet non putat panem and vinum
mutari in Christi corpus and sanguinem, tunc illum ut alienum a nostra Ecclesia
and Fide respuimus, atque uti novatorem damnamus, ac illius novitates. Aliud
siquidem a Divinis Patribus accepimus, nos scilicet esse participes corporis
Domini nostri, modo sensili illud oculis aspicientes, sumentesque manibus, and
illud ad os allatum manducantes, sicque ejusdem cum Christo corporis fieri,
illius carne and ossibus mystice nutritos. Cum enim modo corporali participes
simus sensilis panis qui in Christi corpus substantialiter conversus est per
omnipotentem Verbi Divinitatem, ad illud accedere didicimus modo quidem
sensili, quatenus illud spectat panem and vinum, spiritualiter autem and
mystice, quod non conspiciatur corpus humanum carnem habens and ossa, neque
modo corporali and eadem ratione qua reliqui ubi corporales eorum qui illum
sumunt corda reficiat, sed spiritualiter ob Divinitatem quae inest, uti jam
dictum fuit. Sed de his satis: jam enim praeter modum differere nos coegit quae
nunc in nostras Ecclesias infer conatur Calvinianorum haeresis.

An Extract from M. Claude's Copy of a Manuscript Letter ascribed to Meletius
Archbishop of Ephesus, and pretended to have been written to some Divines of
Leyden.
(...).
(...).

ILlis vero qui rogant me, utrum necesse sit Religionis cultu preces offerre
Beatae Virgini, vel Angelis, vel Joanni Baptistae caeterisque Sanctis; sique
oporteat credere in Eucharistia, hoc est in coena Domini fieri
transubstantiationem in pane, aut putare oleum, exorcisma and exsufflationes
expellere Daemones, aut adorare imagines Sanctorum, tam pictas quam sculptas.
Respondeo ac dico, nihil horum observandum esse, quandoquidem non licet
opiniones humanas profiteri, sed ea solum placita, quae a Domino and ab illius
Discipulis atque Apostolis Spiritu Sancto afflatis nobis tradita sunt, cum
pietate and inviolabiliter observare debemus.

A List of the Churches depending on the Patriarch of Armenia Residing at
Egmiathin, which was Dictated by USCAN Bishop of Uscavanch, and Proctor General
to the Patriarch.
EGmiathin, seeds Patriarchae Armenorum, Episcopatus immediate subjecti
Patriarchae.

Algusgvanch vel Akusvanch, Episcopatus Parvus.

Aring, Episcopatus parvus prope Ervan Archiepiscopatum: ibi etiam est
Conventus, unde vocatur etiam Aringshusvanch.

Bitlis apud Turcas, vel Balesch apud Armenos, in Provincia Varaspuracan
Episcopatus: ibi sunt tres Conventus Monachorum S. Basilii.

Elevard Episcopatus antea, sed a 30. annis extinctus: Ecclesiae tamen
inserviunt Sacerdotes seculares. Est in Provincia Ararath.

Gesargel, Episcopatus magnus in Provincia Ararath prope Aring, qui est prope
Egmiathin.

Goscavanch, Episcopatus prope Egmiathin Provinciae Ararath.

Hoi, seu Coy, Episcopatus prope Salmast and Lacum magnum.

Johanavanch, id est, S. Johannes, Episcopatus magnus in Provincia Ararath:
distat quatuor leucis ab Egmiathin.

Karenus, Episcopatus and Monasterium: distat 6. leucis ab Egmiathin.

Kiekart, Episcopatus deletus prope Egmiathin. Kiekart, id est., lancea
Christi, quae erat in hac Ecclesia.

Mueni, Episcopatus novus a 90. annis: distat 4. leucis ab Egmiathin versus
Septentronem.

Macharavanch, Episcopatus deletus Provinciae Altsteu: distat ab Erevan 15.
leucis versus Septentrionem.

Salmasavanch, Episcopatus prope Mueni: distat 5. leucis ab Egmiathin. In hac
Ecclesia olim erat perpetua psalmodia. Salmes Armeniace est Psalmus, unde
dictum est Salmasavanch.

Tieceravanch, vel Tiecheravanch, Episcopatus: 3. leucis distat ab Egmiathin.

Tiplis, seu Teflis, Episcopatus. Dominatur ibi Princeps Georgianorum, in quem
tamen Persae and Turcae habent aliquod Dominium.

Varthehair, Episcopatus deletus Provinciae Casvan sub Turcis prope Van
civitatem.

Virap, Episcopatus; sed vocatur Archiepiscopatus, quia habet sub se tres
Conventus nempe, 1. Vanstan. 2. Urzavanch. 3. Musahbiuruvanch. Distat ab
Egmiathin 12. leucis versus Meridiem Orientalem, noh long a monte Ararath.

Ouscohvanch, Episcopatus, cuius Episcopus Dominus Uscan Anno 1670. qui haec
mihi dictavit.

Praeter hos 17. vel 18. Episcopatus Suffraganeos Patriarchatus Egmiathin,
sequentes Abbatiae aut Monasteria Ordinis S. Basilii.

Surb-Astuasasin, id est, Sancta Dei Genitrix in Provincia Ararath, alio nomine
vocatur Niggara, quod est nomen villae, in qua erat Monasterium, and
Surb-Astuasasin nomen est Ecclesiae.

Surb-Astuasincal, Monasterium etiam deletum, 2. leucis, distans a Niggara.

Praeterea tres sunt Conventus, Monialium S. Basilii in Armenia.

Armenaperkhich dicitur Archiepiscopatus, quia habet sub se multa Monasteria:
sed vere est tantum Episcopatus sub Egmiathin. Monasteria illa sunt Hogevanch,
Masctos Vardapiet, and alia destructa.

Agulii Archiepiscopatus in Provincia Golthan prope Naxuvan, a quo distat 15.
leucis versus Orientem Meridionalem. Nullos habet sub se Episcopatus, quia sunt
destructi, sed tantum hos 5. Conventus S. Basilii, 1. Hamasravanch, Ecclesia
est Surb-Mesrop. 2. Bestuvanch, Eclesia est Surb-Uscan. 3. Est Pharracuvanch,
Ecclesia est Surb-Stephanus and Surb-Jacob. 4. Tsenuvanch, Ecclesia est
Surb-Stephanus. 5. Est Surb-Joannes.

Acthamar, seu Altamar, Archiepiscopatus in insula Lacus magni Varaspunacani.
Habetur Archiepiscopus Schismaticus a Patriarcha Egmiathin and Ecclesia Armena,
quia ab annis 500. and amplius dicit se Patriarcham contra decretum Ecclesiae
Armenae. Habet sub se 8. vel 9. Episcopatus, fere omnes circa Lacum
Varaspuracani and Van, nempe Sasan, Gasgi, Basti and alios, nec non aliquos
Conventus. Ecclesiae vero paulatim collapsae ruinis non reaedificantur sub
Tutcis

Basti Episcopatus, Gasgi Episcopatus, Sasan Episcopatus. N. N. N.

Amenaphreic, vel Ameniaperkhik Archiepiscopatus, id est, omnium redemptor, est
Monasterium in quo Archiepiscopatus seeds in Provincia Ararath, juxta civitatem
Garni: 10. leucis distat ab Egmiathin versus Orientem. Gubernat civitatem
Erevan, quae est circiter quatuor mill domorum, a qua distat 5. leucis.
Dicitur Archiepiscopatus, quia habet sub se multos Conventus, Chogevanch,
Masctos, Vardapiet and alios deletos: sed vere est tantum Episcopatus sub
Egmiathin.

Bardulimeos, Archiepiscopatus, id est, S. Bartholomaeus in Provincia Hacbac:
habebat olim Episcopatus sub se, qui nunc sunt destructi: nunc autem est
Suffraganeus Archiepiscopatus maximi Van.

Betchnu, vel Bgnu, Archiepiscopatus in Provincia Salcunus-Stuer, antea magna
civitas, nunc destructa a Persis, octo leucis distans ab Erezan versus
Septentrionem: habet sub se Episcopatus sequentes.

1. Hair-Johan, vel Hairuvanch, Episcopatus in Provincia Gelarchuni.

2. Kietcharvasvanch, Episcopatus in villa Provinciae Salcunus-Stuer.

3. Schalvachuvanch Episcopatus: deleta civitas and Episcopatus: nullus
Monachus superest in conventu.

Sevan, Episcopatus in Provincia Salcunus-Stuer.

Karienusvanch Monasterium S. Basilii sub Archiepiscopatu Besenu.

Caesarea, Archiepiscopatus Provinciae Cappadociae: habet tantum duos
Suffraganeos.

1. Surb-Astuasasin, Sta. Dei Genitrix, Episcopatus 3. leucis distans a
Caesarea versus Meridiem.

2. Hisia Episcopatus, 6. leucis versus Septentrionem distat a Caesarea: ibi
etiam est Monasterium Ordinis S. Basilii, quod dicitur Surb-Sargis, S. Sergius.

Surb-Carapet, Archiepiscopatus, vel Karapiet, id est, praecursor S. Joannes,
in provincia Taron, Vulgo Muse prope Bitlis. Habet subse.

1. Matnavanchmscu, Episcopatus in eadem Provincia.

2. Bitlis, Episcopatus in eadem Provincia.

Opar, ante Archiepiscopatus, nunc deletus, and Provincia prope civitatem Ranni
and Provinciam Sciracvam Armeniae magnae.

Derganavanch, Archiepiscopatus in Provincia Dergan inter Arzerum and Arsingam:
subjecta Turcis est illa regio.

Fahrapat, vel Ferah-bat, vel Ferawavu, Archiepiscopatus, vel potius
Episcopatus in Provincia Mansanderam. Surb-Grigor, id est, S. Gregorius,
Archiepiscopatus, idem qui vocatur Lusavaric, and idem Monasterium in Provincia
Carin vel Arzerum. Vocatur quoque Archiepiscopatus Arzerum, nam Monasterium
Lusavarich distat tantum leuca versus Orientem ab Arzerum.

1. Surb-Astuasasin S. Dei Genitrix, Episcopatus in Provincia Karin: distat
autem 4. leucis versus Orientem Septentrionalem ab Arzerum.

2. Ginisuvanch, Episcopatus sub Turcis: distat 8. leucis versus Occidentem ab
Arzerum.

3. Mamruanavanch, Episcopatus in Provincia Mamruam prope civitatem Ohtic.

Hacbat, Archiepiscopatus magnus in Provincia Armeniae Fascir, vulgo Lorri:
distat Hacbat 20. leucis circiter versus Meridiem Orientalem a Tiplis. Habet
Suffraganeos.

1. Goruvanch, Episcopatus in Provincia Gori prope civitatem Gori in regione
Georgianorum.

2. Hacartinwanch, Episcopatus deletus.

3. Macaravanch, Episcopatus deletus.

Hamith, Archiepiscopatus, seu Caracmit, sed Syri Chaldaei and Armeni vocant
tantum Hamith. Car, lingua vulgari significat nigrum; and quia sita est ad
radicem montis in quo sunt multae parts nigrae, ideo dicitur Car-Hamith.
Armeni volunt esse antiquam Tigranatensem. Ibi sedet quoque Patriarcha Syrorum
Jacobitarum ab anno 1662. qui sedebat ante in Orfa. Sedet quoque ibi
Suffraganeus Episcopus Patriarchae Nestorianorum, qui nunc sedet in Elchong, 8.
leucis distante versus Septentrionem a Mozul seu Ninive antiqua, ut fert
illorum Traditio. Habet Suffraganeos Episcopos

1. Ael, vel Agel, distat una leuca ab Hamith.

2. Arcni, distat 2. diebus ab Hamith.

3. Balu Episcopatus, distat ab Hamith 3. diebus.

4. Edesia Episcopatus, distat 4. diebus ab Hamith versus Meridiem Occidentalem.

5. Germuc Episcopatus, 3. diebus distat ab Hamith.

6. Merdin Episcopatus, Orientis Meridionalis respectu Hamith.

7. Senchuse, Episcopatus distans ab Hamith 4. diebus.

8. Thulguran Episcopatus, distat ab Hamith 2. diebus.

Harberdu, vel Harberd Archiepiscopatus in Provincia Harberd, Ecclesia aut
Monasterium est Surb-Astuasasin prope Hamith ipsi Occidentalem: habet sub se 4.
Episcopatus and 3. Conventus, quorum nomina ignorabat D. Archiepiscopus Uskan.

.....

Hispahan, vulgo Armenis Sphuhun, Archiepiscopatus, regia civitas Persarum a
tempore tantum Scha-Abas, qui Armenos plurimos collegit in part civitatis, aut
suburbio quod dicitur Gulfa, aliis Ciolfa, in quo sunt Armenorum Ecclesiae 20.
1. Surb-Astuasasin. 2. Surb-Nicolaus. 3. Surb-Jacub. 4. Surb-Amenaphreic, id
est, omnium redemptor, and est Monasterium S. Basilii. 5 Surb-Grigor. 6.
Surb-Johan. 7. Amirrasthenesi. 8. Karametichens 9. Portuens. 10. Norascencim.
11. karachein. 12. S. Jacub. 13. Anapatinn. 14. Erevaneseos magnus. 15.
Erevaneseos minor. 16. Gazge. 17. Schsapanin. 18. Ckocin. 19. Est Conventus
Monialium. 20. Chogia Abedik.

In Gulfa vel Ciolfa and Erevan, villa vicina Hispahan, sunt circiter octo
mill Armeni fere omnes mercatores. Habet Suffraganeos.

1. Pharia, Episcopatus versus Occidentem: distat ab Hispahan tribus circiter
diebus.

2.....

.....

Karmiuvanch Archiepiscopatus, id est, ruber Conventus, quia lapides sunt
rubri, est in Provincia Ecegazor: distat ab Erevan and Naxuvan 2. diebus. Habet
Suffraganeos.

1 Capisvanch, Episcopatus and Monasterium S. Basilii prope civitatem Capis,
quae nunc est deserta.

Caputusvanch, id est, caerulei coloris Monasterium aut atri in Provincia
Ecegazor: nunc non est Episcopatus, sed tantum Monasterium: olim erat
Episcopatus.

2. Derbavanch, Episcopatus Provinciae Ecegazor.

3. Hermonivanch, Episcopatus Provinciae Ecegazor.

4. Azpter, Episcopatus Provinciae Sabhunissor: distat ab Erevan versus
Orientem circiter 20. leucis.

Machienusvanch, Archiepiscopatus prope villam Machienus in Provincia
Gelarchuni: distat versus Orientem 15. leucis circiter ab Erevan: nullos habet
sub se Episcopatus, quia sunt destructi and Monasteria.

Macu, Archiepiscopatus magnus in Provincia Artaz: in Cathedrali Ecclesia est
Corpus S. Thaddaei. Habet sub se

1. Auhar, Episcopatus: distat versus Meridiem Orientalem a Macu 5. diebus.

2. Hoi, Episcopatus: distat versus Meridiem a Macu 2. diebus.

3. Jormi, Episcopatus: distat una die a Tabris, tribus vero versus Orientem
Meridionalem a Macu.

4. Maratha, Episcopatus ad Occidentem Tabris. Ibi sedebat Episcopus Italicus a
300. annis, and vertit multos libros Armenice, and fecit multos Vardapiet.

5. Salmast, Episcopatus prope Maraga.

Surb-Narcavea, id est, S. primus Martyr Stephanus, Archiepiscopatus versus
Meridiem Occidentalem: distat 12. leucis a Naxuvan: Suffraganeos habebat olim
multos and Monasteria; sed praeter Astapat omnia sunt destructa. Olim Gulfa
d'Hispahan erat sub ditione Archiepiscopi,

1. Astapat, vel Surb-Stephan, cui Ecclesia est dicata.

2. Nachiovan.

.....

.....

Surb-Uscan, id est, signum Stae. Crucis, quia ibi est pars Sanctae Crucis: est
idem Archiepiscopatus quam Sebaste sub Turcis. Habet sub se

1. Azptiruvanch, Episcopatus Provinciae Ascharu.

2. Andreasic, Episcopatus Provinciae Acscan: Ecclesia est Surb-Astuasasin.

3. Surb-Hresctacapet, id est, S. Archangelus, Episcopatus in Sebastia.

Sanachim, Archiepiscopatus in Provincia Tascir, vel Lorri, versus Tiplis: qui
erant sub illo Episcopatus and Conventus, sunt destructi.

Scammachi, vel Acuanis, Archiepiscopatus prope mare Caspium: quierant sub eo
Episcopatus and Conventus, sunt destructi.

Tathevanch, Archiepiscopatus, magnus in provincia Kapan. Habet sub se

1. Mecri Episcopatum.

2. 3. 4. Sunt alii Episcopatus, quorum non recordatur D. Uskan. Habet etiam
Archiepiscopus Tathevanch sab se Monasteria.

1. Surb-Carapiet.

2. Tanzapharac.

3. Vagathevanch.

4. Anapat, in quo sunt plusquam centum Eremitae in deserto.

5. 6. Duo Conventus Monialium, unus Schriher, alius Zanzaparach.

Thivatavanch, id est, S. Anna, Archiepiscopatus prope civitatem Thucat vicinam
Amasiae, olim Eudochia versus Occidentem Septentrionalem, distat ab Egmiathin
150. leucis circiter. Habet sub se

1. Nazianzenum, Episcopatus sub Turcis.

2. Marzuanavanch, Episcopatus provinciae Marzuan sub Turcis.

3. Neucaesaria, Episcopatus sub Turcis.

Van, Archiepiscopatus magnus, idem qui and Varach, est Conventus in quo sedet
Archiepiscopus, and Van est civitas vicina juxta Lacum magnum Varaspuracani.
Habet sub se Suffraganeos

1. Arces, vel Arciscuvanch, Episcopatus, seu Argens prope Lacum magnum.

2. Clath, Episcopatus, seu Chelath juxta Lacum.

3. Ctusuvanch, vel Ctus, juxta Lacum versus Occidentem: ibi sunt tres
Conventus Monachorum and Eremitarum, quibus praeest Episcopus.

4. Lim in ipso Lacu versus Occidentem, Episcopatus.

5. Ustan, Episcopatus versus Septentrionem laci Varaspuracani.

6. Husanus Episcopatus.

S. Ephannivanch, Monasterium tantum prope Van.

Virap, id est, caverna vel abyssus, in qua S. Grigor latuit and vixit 13.
annis: ibi celebratur Missa: est tantum Episcopatus sub Egmiathin, a quo versus
Meridiem Orientalem circa Ararath distat 12. Leucis; sed dicitur
Archiepiscopatus, quia sub se habet tres hos Conventus.

1. Vanstan.

2. Uzavanch.

3. Muscacbiurvuanch.

Subscripsi Vscanus Episcopus Vschavanch and Vardapiet ac Vicarius generalis in
Armenia, sigillumque apposui.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for Henry Faithorne, and John Kersey, at the Rose
in St. Paul's Churchyard.
THE Case of the Church of England, Briefly and Truly stated, in the three
first and Fundamental Principles of a Christian Church. I. The Obligation of
Christianity, by Divine Right. II. The Jurisdiction of the Church, by Divine
Right. III. The Institution of Episcopal Superiority, by Divine Right. By
Samuel Parker. D. D. Archdeacon of Canterbury, in Octavo.

The Song of Songs; being a Paraphrase upon the most. Excellent Canticles of
Solomon, in a Pindarick Poem. By John Lloyd. A. M. Late of Wadham College in
Oxon. To which is annexed another Pindarick Ode, being an Hymn on the Works of
the Six Days, by the same Author, in Octavo.

The several ways of resolving Faith by the Controvertists of the Roman and
Reformed Religion. With the Author's Impartial thoughts of each of them. And
his own Opinion at length shown, wherein he conceives the Rule of Faith to
consist. The second Edition enlarged in several of its Sections; with an
Addition also of an Appendix of diverse Objections and their Answers; and an
Explanation of the different Acceptations of the Word Tradition as it is used
in the Book. By a Layman, in Octavo.

The Christian Tutor, or a free and rational Discourse of the Sovereign Good
and Happiness of Man, and the infallible way of attaining it, especially in the
practice of Christian Religion: Written in a Letter of Advice to Mr. James King
in the East Indies. By Henry Jenkes Fellow of Gonvil and Caius College in the
University of Cambridge, and of the Royal Society. And now published for the
Benefit of all others, in Octavo.

The Situation of Paradise found out; being an History of a Late Pilgrimage
unto the Holy Land. With a necessary Apparatus prefixed, giving Light into the
whole Design, in Octavo.

The History of the Council of Trent. In eight Books. Whereunto is prefixed a
discourse containing Historical Reflections on Councils, and particularly on the
conduct of the Council of Trent, proving that the Protestants are not obliged
to submit thereto. Written in French by Peter Jurieu, Doctor and Professor of
Divinity. And now done into English, in Octavo.

The History of the Original and progress of Ecclesiastical Revenues. Wherein
is handled according to the Laws, both Ancient and Modern, whatsoever concerns
matters Beneficial, the Regale, Investitures, Nominations, and other Rights
attributed to Princes. Written in French by the Learned Father Simon. And now
done into English.

Methodus Plantarum nova, brevitatis and perspicuitatis causa synoptice in
Tabulis exhibita; Cum notis Generum tum summorum tum subalternorum
Characteristicis, Observationibus nonnullis de seminibus Plantarum and Indice
Copioso. Autore Jo. Rayo, A. M. e Societ. Reg. In Octavo.

Medulla Chymiae, variis Experimentis aucta multisque Figuris illustrata.
Authore Johanne Francisco Vigani Veronensi, In Octavo.

Summum Bonum, seu vera, atque unica Beatitudo Hominibus per Christum
communicanda, sex Dissertationibus aliquatenus explicata. Per Edmundum Elisium,
Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbyterum, In Octavo.

Observations on the Mineral Waters of France, made in the Royal Academy of the
Sciences, by the Sieur Du Clos, Physician in Ordinary to his most Christian
Majesty. Now made English, In Duodecimo.

Wounds of the Brain proved Curable, not only by the Opinion and Experience of
many (the best) Authors, but the remarkable History of a Child four years old
cured of two very large Depressions, with the loss of a great part of the
Skull, a Portion of the Brain also issuing through a penetrating Wound of the
Dura and Pia Matter. Published for the Encouragement of young Surgeons, and
Vindication of the Author, James Young, in Octavo.

Ephemeri Vita: Or the Natural History and Anatomy of the Ephemeron; a Fly that
lives but five hours. Written originally in Low Dutch by Jo. Swammerdam, M. D.
of Amsterdam, In Quarto. stich'd.

Poeta de tristibus; Or the Poets Complaint. A Poem, in four Canto's, In
Quarto. Stich'd.

Lisander, or the Soldier of Fortune. A Novel. In 12.

Weekly Memorials for the Ingenious: or an Account of Books lately set forth in
several Languages. With some other Curious Novelties relating to Arts and
Sciences. In 4 to.

FINIS.

