COMFORTS Against the fear of DEATH: Being some short Meditations, composed by
that precious Gentle woman Mrs. Anne Skeleton, late of Norwich.

Wherein are several Evidences of the work of Grace in her own Soul, which were
the Stay of her Heart, against the fear of Death; From which may be discerned
the ^^able of a true Christian spirit.

To which is added some short Notes of a Sermon preached at the Burial of that
choice Servant of God in St. Andrews in Norwich.

By JOHN COLLINGS M. A. and one of the most unworthy Embastadors of Jesus
Christ for the preaching of the Gospel in the said City.

Phil. 1. 21. For to me to live, is Christ; and to dye, is gain. Ver. 23. For I
am in a strait betwixt two, having a (...) to depart, and to be with Christ,
which is far (...). London, Printed by I. M. for Nathaniel Brooks, and are to
be sold at his shop at the Angel in Corhnil. 1649.

TO My truly honored Friend WILLIAM SKELETON, Gent. Increase of Happiness and
Comfort.
SIR,
IT is my happiness, that I can be acquainted a little in her writings with
her, with whom God was pleased to give me so short a time of acquaintance in
this life. Sir, though I could not deny my worthless labors, as my last piece
of service to her; yet, had it not been to tempt out this little piece into the
world, I should have denied this Sermon any further publication then the Pulpit
in which it was preached. I need not excuse it to you (Sir*) who know enough
what impar opus humeris constantly lies upon my shoulders, that I had neither
time to compose it, not yet since to enlarge or refine it; but have sent you my
own Notes, totidem verbis, as the first day written. I shall beg, Sir, That her
Notes may be prefixed to the Sermon; I shall be a little covered under so sweet
a shadow, and the Readere expectation will be satisfied, before his eye
reaches my Sermon: But, Sir, (without a Complement, which is but the folly of
excuse) the Sermon holds out something of Christ, his name is precious:
Reading, Rhetoric, etc. are but the poverty of the Creatures endeavors. In her
writing you will be a Spectator to a pitched battle, sought betwixt her Soul and
Death: My Sermon will present you with the Conqueror, singing Triumph, we
sight, but Christ conquers; nay, to speak truth, he both fights, and conquers
too. After I had seen her upon her deathbed, so fully triumphing over the King
of Terrors, I could not but at her Funeral rejoice, concerning Death, with
crying, O Death, where is thy sting? O Hell, where is thy victory? It has often
pleased my secret thoughts, to remember her, over-looking Death, when the pangs
of Death had taken hold of her. Ah Sir! how sweet is it to have an assurance of
Christ's love? What a nobleness of spirit is there in the true Christian, that
can call Death and Hell cowards? It is no marvel to see a profane beastly
wretch (whose conscience the Lord has feared to damnation) dying quietly; but
to see a knowing Christian, of an awakened conscience, to dye triumphingly, and
make an holy day of leaving all Creature-conte^^nents: O this is the mighty
Conquest of the Soul, through the great work of him that has led Captivity
captive: Sir, methinks it should comfort you to think how willing she was to
part with you, (though before more dear then her own life to her.) It argued no
want of love, to desire Christ's company more then yours. Alas! Sir, you never
dyed upon the Cross for her. Let it refresh you, Sir, to think how much you
were beholden to the Bridegroom of Glory, that he would trust you with his
Bride so long a time: The enjoyment of such a Saint thirty years Sir) is a
great piece of Heaven. Is she gone? No Sir; only restored: Where she is, she is
in good keeping; and as well-beloved as she loves. You have resigned her, Sir*
And it was but Justice that the Lord Jesus should have his Wife, when he sent
such a messenger for her as would not be denied: Ah! Sir, let us follow, she is
gone before; It should seem her Mansion was ready before ours. or (which is
most probable) her Soul was fitter for it then ours: She was first dressed, and
therefore is first gone to take her walk in the Paradise of God. Sir, let us
blush, and get ready; how long shall her glory antidate ours? But it will be
some comfort to think, that though she has got the start in Heaven before us,
yet she will be walking there till we come: It is a rare walk, that wearres not
the feet of he Redeemed ones: Here we wall upon stones, there we shall have a
gardes-walk, and legs that cannot be weary. ^ut yet let us make haste; there is
odds betwixt Earth and Heaven; what ever our enjoyments here be. This Sermon,
^^ rather her own prefixed Meditations, may mind you of her, Sir, who now is
before the Throne, and is satisfied with the likeness of him who is the
brightness of his Father's glory. I beseech you Sir, as it minds you of her, so
let it quicken you after her. So shall God have the glory your Soul the
comfort; and he the answer of his prayers, who is, Sir,

Your most unworthy Servant in the work of the Lord Jesus, JOHN COLLINGS.
From my study in Ch^plyfield house in Norwich, August 26, 1648.
TO THE CHRISTIAN AND Ingenious Reader, Especially such as fear Death, for want
of assurance of Christ's Love.
Christian Reader,
I Here present thee with a copy, after which I would have thee to write; some
few Meditations of that precious Saint of God Mistress Anne Skeleton: I need not
speak for her; as those parents said of their child, so I shall say of her, She
is of age, let her speak for her self: Of age she is, for she has taken up her
inheritanes in Glory; what her life was let her books speak: It was not her
course to triffle away her time by sleeping or dressing; as the most of her
quality use to do; God had given her another Spirit, viz. to strive to go as
fast to Heaven, as most gallants do to go before each other in ^all. I was
acquainted with but a few of her last days, but it was easy to discern by the
honey the laboriousness of the Be: Her reported practice was to have made
Heaven her [^say] and the necessary things of this world her (...) if her time
allotted for worldly affairs, would allow her any minutes for God, she would
improve them, of they would do her no good, she was resolved they should do her
no hurt, by committing sacriledg upon her religious hours; if her Kitchen would
lend no time to her Closet, yet she would be sure it should steal not a minute
from it. For her worldly employments, as she was conscientious in her
relations, so she was refreshed when she could wash the pitch from her fingers,
and have liberty to go sit with her God. Her Closet work was no chambering and
wantoness, but a serious study to make he^^ ^^lling and election sure: To this
end she reads with understanding, observing, and carefully transcribing the
promises she had gathered up her Bonds, and knew how much God was in his Word
an accomptant to her Soul, and was never in want, but she had a Bond to put in
suit, knowing that he was faithful that had promised. She was a conscientious
attender upon God in his Ordinances, and it was her practice not to hear as one
that looks his natural face in a glass, that presently goes away and
forgets what manner of man he was: She would observe matter al passages, and
upon her retirements record them with her pen; if in any thing ^^ doubted, she
ceased not till she was satisfied. And whereas it is the too blameworthy
practice of Christians to seek cavils against themselves, striving by their
cavillings to unsettle their spirits; she rather stadyed to make it her work to
find what interest God had in her Soul, then what she might have to say against
her self, nor in this was her labor without fruit. Thou shall read here what a
writing she had drawn for Heaven, to make it sure to her Soul, and (...) had
striven, so the Lord had crowned her Souls endeavors with such an assurance,
as failed not her Soul in her dying hour. It was my happiness to be a witness
to the latter end of her life: It pleased God to continue her holy day to the
last hour, in such a measure, that Death had not an ill look from her. There
might thou have seen; Christian, what a conquest Christ had made over Death
and Hell, Death had in her truly lost his sting and Hell was cheated of its
victory, Captivity was led Captive. I shall commend to thee this little piece,
penned with her own hand, (by which thou may dis^^^^ with what an excellency
of Graces, as well as Gifts the Lord had crowned her.) I commend it to thee,
not to be read only, but that (as by a true touch^^one) thou may try thy own
Soul by it, and find whether thou be ready to dye or no. Thou shall find
this choice Servant of God dealing truly with her own heart, neither
presumptuously flattering, nor unwarrantabl^ dejecting her own Spirit. For what
of ^^ine is added, I beseech thee take the goodwill, that he that offers it
bears to thy Soul* I acknowledge there is nothing of a Scholar in it; if there
be the more of Christ, let God have the Glory, thy Soul the benefit, and the
Author thy prayers, who is,

Thy true Servant in the work of the Lord Jesus, John Collings.
From my study* Aug. 27, 1648.
Infallable Signs OF Saving Grace,
Each one an Evidence for Heaven, each Evidence an Antidote against the Fear of
Death; Death being to the Soul, endowed with Grace only Heavens Gate, to enter
in, by, or through it, to Eternal Glory and Happiness.

IT is a ^rrevokable decree of Heaven, that all men must once dye; yea it is
the Law of the God of Nature, and must be obeyed, (no avoiding it.) The
Scripture faith, it is appointed to all men once to dye; Therefore, oh my Soul,
seeing there is no escap^^^ Death, thy only way is to prepare for in get the
sting of it taken away, so shall it not hurt thee, nor be terrible to thee; no
cause then to fear Death for it shall be but a messenger sent from God, thy
Father, to fetch thee home to him, and free thee from all sins, which is thy
greatest burden, and all sorrows and miseries that sin occasioneth, and carry
thee to Heaven, to Happiness and Glory, to thy Savior and Redeemer, the Lord
Jesus Christ, to reign with him, for ever, in Heaven.

Now the only way, to make Death thus to thee, is, to clear up thy evidences
for Heaven. Wherefore, on my Soul, get thee more Interest in Christ, make that
more sure to thy self, that Christ is thine, and thou art his, and then no
cause at all for thee to fear death.

As it is certain that Death will come even to thee, as well as to others, so
is it most uncertain, the time when it shall come: Therefore (my Soul) defer it
not, for it stands thee as much upon as thy life, may as thy eternal well being
for evermore, to make that sure to thy self, even now, while it is called to
day, and that upon good grounds, that thou have a sure title to Heaven, art an
heir of it, and have an Interest in Christ, then it shall be well with thee
after Death, that shall be a happy change for thee, no cause then to fear it.
Therefore, oh my Soul, why art thou so cast down? And why art thou so
disquieted within me? And why fear thou Death so much? Have thou not some
Evidences of Truth of Saving Grace to prove thou art in Christ? Dare thou
deny it? Thou can not: Oh therefore now clear them up, view them well again,
meditate on them seriously, bless God for them, and let them support and
comfort thee against the fear of Death, at all times, in all extremities or
distresles whatsoever may befall thee.

Consider seriously with thy self, has not God promised to support thee in,
and deliver thee out of all afflictions and distresses in the best time, and
mean while that all shall work for thy good? Therefore trust thou in him for he
never fails any that trust in him, rest thou on his promise, and he will make
it good to thee.

The first ground work of Grace in thee thy sins, both many and great, as well
thy in^^nd corruption, of which David complains* Psalm; 51. 5. As also thy
continued, actual transgressions, all thy life along, which are the fruits of
that bitter root, either outward or inward, to wit thy natural aversness to all
good, pronness to evil, perverseness of heart, rebelliousness of will, disorder
of affections, and distemper of thy whole Soul, in every part; not as a mere
natural disturbance only, but as a spiritual disease, a wicked and wretched
disposition, evil in it self, and of it self, displeasing to God, and deserving
his curse, and damnation of thy Soul and body, although it should never break
forth into any actual excess. And now, my Soul, has not God also in some
measure humbled thee, and broken thy heart too, for thy sins? Are they not a
burden, too heavy for thee to bear? Were thou not once in thirte own
apprehension, in a most desperate condition, ready to sink under the load of
them? Therefore, oh my Soul, ^o Christ calls thee to come to him, and
promises, he will ease thee, Mat. 11. 28. There is a promise for thy faith to
rest on, apply it to thy self, to support thee; Do thou not confess th^^ to
God, bewailing (...) with great grief and sorrow of heart? Yea do thou not
abhor thy self, judge and pass on thy self the sentance of condemnatior. to be
thy due desert, and that it were just with God if he had cast thee into hell
long ago?

No, no hypocrite, ever was willing to have this filthy sink of his wholly laid
open to God, as thou, my Soul, art.

But did God leave thee in this miserable, wretched, desperate and damnable
condition thou art in by nature, since the fall of Adam, whose (...) thou were
then in, and so guilty of his sin, and not only so, but deprived of that Image
of God, that there is in thee nothing that is good, no^ a strange averseness
and unp^ness to all good, and a pronness and readiness to all evil?

No, no, for ever blessed praised and magnified be my good God, that out of his
own free and unspeakable love, infinite mercy, and abundant goodness; he has
found out a way, and showed thee a way, and means, to free thee from this
misery, save, and make thee eternally happy, that neither Angels not men could
do, no way whereby no ^^eature, no means in Heaven or Earth (...) do it; as
Acts 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is no other name
under Heaven given amongst men, whereby we must be saved. Even then God
manifested his superabundant, surpassing, unsearchable, unexpressable,
incomprehensible love to the utmost, to give his only begotten, and deerly
beloved Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, the second Person in the Trinity: God to
take upon him our nature, and dye and shed his most precious blood for sinners,
of whom thou art chief; and in the Gospel God offers his Son Christ freely,
to all that will come, and drink of this water of Life freely, as Rev. 22. 17.
therefore as freely to thee as any other.

Yet further, to heighten this wonderful Love of God, consider the time when he
did this, even then when thou desiredst it nor, nor soughtst it, nay when thou
were an enemy and traitor to him; and then, for God so infinite in Majesty, so
to condescend to poor, wretched, sinful man, that had so fal^ and plunged
himself into such a woeful, sinful and damnable condition; Oh how great is the
riches of his mercy and love! Yet God (...) not there; but behold more in the
Gospel, he opens the worth; Excellency, All sufficiency and Fitness of Christ;
to save thee, in particular; and he helps thee with grounds and encouragements
to believe in Christ, though but weakly, and he does, in some measure,
strengthen thee, to rest; and cast thy self, on his mercy in Christ, because of
his promises; yea at such times as there is a sense of the wa^^ of him, so
David, Psalm 42. 5, 8, 9, 11. And now, my Soul, ^ast thou not not accepted of,
and embraced this free offers, or render of Christ, made to thee, by God thy
Father, in as much as the Gospel is preached to thee, and that upon his own
terms, in all his offices, applying him to thy self, to be thy King and
Sovereign Lord to rule and govern thee, by his Laws, his Word, and his Spirit,
to be thy Prophet, to discover the Coun^ile of God to thee, and reveal himself
to thee in his Gospel, and to guide and instruct thee in his Baths? Do thee
not as much, and heartily desire, to have Christ rule thee, as to love thee, or
^o^he a Priest, to offer up himself a Sacrifice for thee? Thou dare not, thou
can not deny it.

A second Sign or Evidence of Saving Jacob once did, I will never let thee go,
thou that have promised to give Christ to them that ask, till thou give me
Christ, and make me to know, that he is mine, and I am his. I can in truth say
so for as I can search and know mine own heart, if it do not deceive me, as the
Apostle says, Phil. 3. 7, 8. The things that were advantage to me, I now
account loss, for Christ's sake; yea I esteem all things but as dung
incomparison of Christ.

Do not thou, my Soul, prize Christ sat before all outward contentments? Even
in the height of them, they are but as withered flowers to thee; no pleasure
not sweetness in them without Christ: Nay, no inward corruption but thou art
right willing to part with for him.

It Is not the manner of Hypocrites to be thus willing to relinquish all outward
contentments, much less to ^a^don all inward corruptions for Christ, but in
them is still some private Reservation.

But the earnest desire of my Soul is, to have all sin subdued in me. Lord,
Lord, by the power of thy holy Spirit, mortify and kill every sin: Oh! let not
any one sin rule in me, that I should obey it, in the lust of it; though sin
do well in me, yet let me overcome it; truly it is my heavy burden, that I am
in yoked with sin, therefore long I to go out of my self; for in me is nothing
that is good.

But in Christ is all ability to duty, and against sin, all life and profit
from the Ordinances, and Christ conveys all, especially to his Members, by
their resting on him for it, which we call believing.

Now Gods gracious invitations, to come to Christ, thou, my Soul, do embrace,
and upon the serious consideration of the all sufficiency; fitness and
willingness of Christ to save thee, and the infinite love of the Father to give
his Son for thee, and the unspeakable love of Christ, in his condesc^ntion to
the Father, so to dye, and undergo all the wrath of God, and all for thee, and
the freeness of the mercy of God, offering Christ in the Gospel, and his
Commandment to believe, as 1 John 3. 23. And this is his Commandment, that we
should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ. Also the sweetness and
freeness of his promises to them that believe. Now in obedience to the one, and
confidence of the other, thou, my Soul, are at length thereby imboldened and
encouraged to repair to Christ^, and by the freeness of the promises, art
encouraged to apply them to thy self, not daring to exclude thy self, but do
believe, though but weakly.

A third. Sign or Evidence of Saving Grace is, thy Faith, thy full purpose of
instrumental, as it is hand to receive Christ, and unite thee to him; those
righteousness alone is the meritorious cause of thy Justification.

Now here is a promise for thee to rest on, John 3. 16, 36. Whosoever believes
in Christ shall not perish, but have everlasting life; And he that believes in
the Son has everlasting life.

Now, my Soul, exercise thy Faith, apply this promise to thy self: I believe,
and therefore I shall have everlasting life: Labor for that reflect act of thy
Soul, to know more, that thou do believe: The sincerity whereof in thee, is
in some measure approved, by thy resigning, and giving up thy self wholly to
him, as the Apostle, Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I
live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself
for me. Desiring, as well to be ruled and guided by him, as saved by him,
purged, as pardoned, freed from the power, as the punishment of sin, cleansed
from the filth, as discharged of the guilt of sin.

What though thou art not able wholly to put it in practice, but lost full of,
and come short in performance thereof; was not this the Apostle Paul his own
case which he so ^^^gely deploreth, Romans 7. 15. 23. I allow not that which I
do, for what I would that do I not, but what I hate that do I. I see another
Law in my members rebelling against the Law of my mind, and leaving me Captive
to the Law of sin which is in my members. It suffices to warrant the sincerity
of thee, my Soul and Spirit in this case; that with the same Apostle in the
same place: Thou take notice of thy failings, art grived for them, there is
in thee a nature or part that abhors them, thou watchest against them, and
endeavorest what thou can, to reclaim thy self, upon discovery of falling,
laborest by carnest prayer to God against them, and continuest constant in the
use of the means sanctified by him, for spiritual strength and abillity, and
restest on Christ, and expectest from him power to overcome thy corruptions;
Therefore comfort thy self herein, (O my Soul,) and apply this to thy self, for
thou art but in the same case that Apostle Paul was then in, who at that very
time had truth of grace, and was even then in a most happy and blessed
condition; Therefore fear not, though thou find many temptations, either to
despair, or to think all thy hope but presumption; none of the Saints or
Servants of God was ever heard praying to be rid utterly of their corruptions
forthwith, and at once: Suffice them and thee; it may, and must, that he will
one day rid them utterly of all; and mean while, to support thee: Know that thy
corruptions shall never so prevail against thee as to reduce thee again to the
sway and sovereignty it once had in thee, when it had its throne in thee; these
show that there is a part in thee that is regenerated as Paul had.

Now to such as these are the promises of God made good, Malla. 3. 16, 17. A
book of remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and
thought upon his name: And they shall be to me, says the Lord of H^sts, in
thee day a flock, and I will spare them, and man spares his own son that
serves him. 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19, 20. Hezekiah prays to the Lord to be
merciful to him, that prepares his whole heart to seek the Lord God, though he
be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary; And the Lord
heard Hezekiah, and healed the people. Psalm. 33. 18, 19. Behold, the eye of the
Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that trust in his mercy, to
deliver their Souls from death, and to preserve them in famine. Psalm. 37. 40.
The Lord shall help them, and deliver them from the wicked, and shall save
them, because they trust in him. Psalm. 34. 22. The Lord redeemeth the Souls of
his Servants, and none that trust in him shall perish. Oh my Soul, set thy
Faith a work, lo here are promises for it to rest on, apply them to thy self,
for they are precious.

Another Sign or Evidence of Grace is, and affection to God, as David urget^^
often, and presses the like for himself, Psa. 119. 11. I have hid thy promise in
my heart that I might not sin against thee. Also, Verse. 24. Thy testimonies are
my delight and my counselors. And Ver. 33. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy
statutes, and I will keep it even to the and. Also, Verse. 40. Behold I desire
thy commandments; quicken me in thy righteousness.

Hypocrites desire the and only, delight in them; for by and sinister ends; not
enduring them, where they find they cross their corruptions: But the closer
they come home to thee, and most strike at thy corruptions, the better thou
likest, and more love them; thou do not spare any sin: I have sworn that I
will Psa. 119. 106
keep thy righteous judgments.

Another evidence of Saving Grace, is, David's integrity. Therefore, O my Soul,
make thou the same application to thy self also, to uphold and comfort thee.

And do thou not groan under the ^urthen of thy inward corruptions, and
thoughes, as well as actual transgressions? Would not thou fain be rid of
them? Is it not thy greatest grief, that thou do daily so sin against God,
who is so good, so loving and merciful to thee? Thou dare not deny it. Oh
that I might and could so live, as never to commit any one sin more, so long as
I live, to offend so good a God as he is to me, not no more grieve nor quench
his holy Spirit in the motions of it ^ I resolve so to do, Oh that I could do
so!

Another sign of true Grace, Have thou David, Psa. 119. 5, 6. O that my ways
were directed to keep thy Statutes: Then should I not be ashamed, when I have
respect unto all thy Commandments. And when fallen, do thou not loath thy
self the more for that, and renew thy faith in Christ, and repentance as sin is
renewed, and feast it more and more vile, judging thy self miserable, because
that which is contrary to Gods will prevails over thee* And so thou do
overcome sin, though often soiled by it, that which yet may stand with grace,
though it abide to death in thee. Now, my Soul, do thou not mourn under this,
Pray earnestly, and rest withal on Christ for help and assistance of his Spirit
to enable thee to overcome all thy corruptions, still striving against them;
(thou dare not deny it:) And with unfeigned purpose never entertaining any
known evil with full consent of will, but co^^ially embracing the contrary
grace and command, longing after more grace out of the fence of want of it?
This is an infallible sign of true grace, as Math. 5. 6. Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be filled. Therefore my
Soul, apply this by faith; Bless God with humility, and take the comfort of it,
that so thou may walk the more thankfully, and love him more who has so
loved thee; and be more careful of all thy ways.

Another evidence, or mark of true Grace is, thy resolving in the sense of Gods
absence, yet then to stick to and rest on his mercy through Christ, even unto
death, by his assistance; Psa. 13. 1. How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for
ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me! Verse 5. But I have trusted in
thy mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.

So still continue thou testing on Christ alone as to work in thee all grace;
both to will and do, so to strengthen and perfect it to the day of Christ, as
Philip. 1. 6. And begging of God his Spirit, who is the Spirit of Grace, to
help and enable thee, it being the sap to make thee fruitful, for of thy self
thou can do nothing pleasing to God; but all thy services, as of thy self,
are an abomination in Gods presence: But now if they come from Christ and the
Spirit, then God is well pleased with them, and accepts them: And remember God
has promised to give the Spirit to them that ask it, Mat. 21. 23. Whatsoever
we ask in Christ's name, if we believe, we shall receive. And Luke 11. 13. If ye
then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children; how much more
then shall your^ heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him?

Let that comfort thee; this was as argument to David of grace in him, let it
be so to thee.

Another evidence of Grace, is, thy David did, Psa. 119. 81. My Soul sainteth
for thy Salvation, yet I wait for thy Word. When David heart fainted, this very
thing stayed him, namely, that he trusted in Gods Word: Psa. 34. 8. Blessed is
the man that trusts in the Lord. Psa. 2. 12. Blessed and all that trust in
him. Psa. 3. 18 Blessed are they that w^l^ for him: Blessed is the man that
trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord.

And do not thou, my Soul, still seek, wait, pray, hope, and with on humbl^
dependency desire still to trust in God always, though with much opposition?
Yea when thou feel no sensible evidence of Gods love and savor to thee, yet
even then Gods Word comforts thee; thou have given me more joy of heart then
they have whose outward comforts abound, as Psalm. 4. 7. So thy Word comforts my
Soul, in the midst of great doubtings, distress and trouble, yet thou, my Soul,
have still some hope, by casting thy self on thy God, when other hopes still, as
David, Psalm. 142. 2, 3. I poured out my complaint before him, though my spirit
was even over whelmed. Yet Verse. 5. Even then said he, I cried unto thee, O
Lord, and said, thou art my hope and my portion in the land of the living. Now
Oh my Soul, is not God thy portion also? Indeed he is: Have not thou taken him
so to be? Yes truly, even to be thy All; and thou have, I hope, with a cordial
resignation, given up all thy interest to the Lord and his service, at least
desire and endeaverest so to do in thy resolutions. Good Lord put forth thy
mighty, yea almighty power, and give me thy Spirit that may reach me, and
enable me to walk as becomes such a one as has given up himself to serve
thee; That I may, in the remainder of my l^st, express all sincere and humble
obedience to the Word delivered: O that I could!

Another evidence of Saving Grace, is, daily help and strength from him, in the
use of his ordinances, and especially in that of the Sacrament, act faith, and
reject all discouragements, for they hinder the growth of grace as frosts do
tender fruits. Oh when shall the time be that the ordinances shall be so
powerful and efficacious as to kill all my corruptions, that I may (...) the
virtue of Christ his death killing the body of sin in me, and the power of his
resurrection raising me up to newness of life, that holy frame of heart that
has been in other the servants of God? Sure there has been such a changing,
quickening, raising, comforting power attained from God in the use of his
ordinances, both to beget, and so to strengthen and increase Grace; therefore I
will never (...) the Lord alone until he make, them ^^ to me, seeing he has
promised, Hea^^ makes shall receive: Ok, and it shall be given; seek, and you
shall finds; knock, and it shall be opened unto you Math. 7. 7. Lord, I ask, I
seek, I knock, let me obtain [Lord] its thine own free and gracious promise,
(though free,) thou were not any way tied to make it,) (yet Lord) it is now thy
promise, that thou will give Grace to them that seek it; and ask it, and hunger
after it. Lord, I desire it more then my appointed food; [thou Lord] sure, I
trust, will be prevailed with: Seeing the unjust Judge was so through
importunity, shall not the just and righteous, yea merciful God, be prevailed
withal, when importuned for that which he promises to give? Yes surely, he
will most certainly make good even that promise to thee [my soul] in
particular. Do but trust in him, and press him with his own Word: nay more,
it is a part of that new Covenant that God has made with his servants, that he
will take away the heart of stone, that is, all that hinders Grace; and he will
give them a new heart, and put his Laws in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be his people, Jer. 31. 33.
and Ez^ek. 36. 25, 26, 27.

And that he will put his Spirit within us, and cause us to walk in his
statutes, believe so, and it shall be so to thee. Be encouraged; and wrestle
still, for thou shall obtain in the end. Has God said it? Build thou on it:
Only go on in use of his means, limit not the holy one, he is a free Agent, he
may work when and how he pleases; he delights to hear his children beg and cry
often to him; and remember how prevalent prayer in Faith has been with God, how
great things it has obtained of God, for particular Servants of God, as that
of Peter's delivery by the prayers of the Church, Acts 12. when condemned to dye
the next morning, and no way or means that he knew ^t to escape; And so for
Nations too. Does the Lord then say, seek my face? Oh let my heart Answer, Lord
thy face I do, I will still seek, and wait till thou Answer.

Another Evidence of Grace is, Thy

Another sign of true Grace is, Thou either stands at a stay, or decays, which
makes thee full of discouragements and disquietness of spirit, fearing thy
estate is not good; but what ever change is in thee (O my Soul) of seeming
decay in Grace, or increase of corruption, yet thou can not but be sure in
the main; for where there is a sense of sins evil, and a groaning under it, a
high Valuation of Christ, and Grace, and longing after it with a
self-emptiness, a desire and purpose to hang on Christ, (as thou dare not
deny, but (...) in some measure in thee,) there is ground of comfort, and
therefore apply it to thy self, else thou wrongest thy self, and the spirit
also. Thou fear falling into sin, let it make thee more watchful, and trust
more and more carefully in Christ; the view of thy wants should not discourage
thee, but abase thee in thine own esteem, quicken thee to use the means, and
press thee to go to Christ, and rest on him, who can and will help all that
thus repair to him: Therefore fear not falling off, for God has promised to
put his Fear into the hearts of his, that they shall not depart from him, Jer.
32. 40. Apply that promise to thy self by Faith.

Having once true Grace, it can never be lost; why therefore (O my Soul) art
thou so cast down, and why art thou so disquieted within me? Trust still in God,
for I will, or shall, yet give him thanks; he is my present help, and my God,
Psalm 42. 5, 11, verses. Or art thou thus disquieted, because thou art often
foiled by sins, that thou resolvest against?

O^ consider, thou have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ, who is thy
Reconciliation; he sits at the right hand of God, and there he plead thy
cause for thee. Or is it because thou art still full of fears, that thy Grace
is not true? Thou did once believe it was true, and that upon good ground;
Therefore question not that groundwork now, that were to go about to rip up,
or undo, all that work of Grace that God has wrought in thee.

Why then is it, O my Soul, because of those inward corruptions within thee
that rebel against the Law and Will of God, and such effects of them as thou
can not be rid off, with whatsoever care and caution thou can use? Or such
sins, slips, and oversights, as thou art unwillingly overtaken withal, or do
inconsiderately slip into? For thou do not allow thy self in any known sin.

For this remember what was once my Cozen Gatakers Answer hereunto; to wit,
consider S. Paul his case, read but what he says of himself, Romans 7. from
verse. 15. to verse. 24. That which I do, I allow not; for what I would, ha^ do I
not; but what I hate, that do I. If then I do that which I would not, I consent
unto the Law, that it is good. Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwells in me: For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no
good thing. For to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is
good I find not. For the good that I would that do I not, but the evil which I
hate that do I. I find then a Law, that when I would do good evil is present
with me. For I delight in the Law of God after the inward man; but I see
another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me
into Captivity to the Law of sin which is in my members.

And if you can say more of your self, then he there does of himself, I much
marvel; if not, you may conclude, your estate to be no worse then his was.

God indeed hears the prayers of his, but yet he does not presently give in
kind the thing prayed for: The Apostle Paul was heard, when he prayed to be rid
wholly of some corruption and temptation that he was anoyed and often foiled
with. 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8. Lest I should be exalted above measure, through the
Abundance of the Rovelations, there was given to me a throne in the flesh, the
massenger of Satan to buffet me. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice;
that it might depart from me. Remember Gods Answer to him, verse. 9. My Grace is
sufficient for thee. So shall it be, my Soul, to thee; if thou rest on his Word
it shall be so. But mark, he was not presently freed from it, but upheld in it.
Or is it out of the sense of thy want and great need of more Grace? Oh let not
that discourage thee! indeed thou have the more need to go to Christ by Faith,
who is the Fountain and Spring of all, he has enough, and so fetch virtue and
strength from him; believe more, and thou shall have more Grace; that is the
only way to obtain it.

And remember Mr. Archers Answer once to thee, concerning this particular.
(Dear Sister) Let not that make thee doubt thou christ no truth of ^ence, which
is an Evidence or effect of Grace, and is not until Grace be: ^t is no sign
thou have not Grace, but their thou have Grace. These things which make thee
doubt, added to the former, make me assumed of the goodness of thy state. Satan
ever makes that to be feared and doubted that is true and good. These be
conflicts of corruption and Satan; which company Grace: These be that smoke
that argues fire; and Christ will not by (...) the smonking Flax: They be
effects of Sanctification; therefore be comforted here with, I beseech you,

Another sign of truth or Grace is, Thy

For first, These dispositions in thee, desires and endeavors, being signs or
Grace, must of necessity be granted to be signs of sincerity; since, that that
is no grace in truth, that is not sincere.

Secondly, thy diligent search and inquiry into thy self, and jealousy of thy
self, is an evident argument of the sincerity of thy heart, and that thou
would not deceive thy self with flattery, false or vain hopes.

Another sign of true Grace, is, thy Gods Ministers, whom thou did judge most
sincere, strict and faithful; much pressing them, to deal truly, plainly and
freely with thee, without any flattery, as they will one day answer it to the
great God of Heaven. And they bear witness to thee, my soul, from Gods own
Word, of the much of Grace in thee. Thou did not account thy own poor weak
endeavors, ^o search and try thy self sufficient, although thou did it to the
utmost of thy power and ability; apprehending, that they might be more able to
discover, some deceit of thy heart, that thou could not find out.

There follows another sign of saving grace, that is yet farther, Thou have
put thy self upon the Lords own trial. How often have thou in secret, gone to
thy God on thy knees, and earnestly entreated, and beseeched him to search thy
heart and reins, thy most secret sins, and intimate corruptions; and that he
would show thee thine iniquity, and cleanse thee from thy sin, not willing to
hide any one from him? so David, Psalm. 39. 23, 24. Search me, O God, and know
my heart; try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in
me.

And the Lord has at sometimes made answer to thy heart, That he is thine, and
thou art his, showed some little glimpse of his love and favor to thee, as it
were at (...), which has been more joy of heart to thee, then if thou had a
thousand worlds. Therefore* O my soul, praise thou this God of love; and all
that is within me, praise his holy name; as Psalm. 103. 1.

Oh magnify his free grace, mercy, and love, that he has given thee some
love tokens, as pledges of more hereafter. Oh my soul, raise up thy self to
sound out the praises of the Lord; and all that is within me, bless his great
and glorious name: For truly, he has dealt bountifully with thee. Oh how can I,
how shall I, express my thankfulness unto him? Surely, I will tell others, what
the Lord has done for my poor soul, that they also may trust in him. For
truly, its never in vain to seek and wait, and trust in the Lord. Therefore, O
my soul, do not be no more cast down, and so disquieted within me. Trust in
God, for I shall (that is, he will give me cause to) give him thanks; he is my
present help, and my God. As David said, so say I. Oh, that I could chide my
soul out of its unquiet condition! seeing I cannot, I will complain to God of
it, and desire him to do it for me, as David did, Psalm. 43. 6. O my God, my
soul is cast down; do thou raise and comfort it; for thou art able to do it.
Though I cannot, I know thou Lord art able, to cheer and revive my drooping
spirits; and thou will cause me to taste how good thou art, that I may set
forth thy ravishing sweetness unto others, acquainting them, what great and
unexpressible goodness, the Lord has manifested to me. O dwell my soul a while
here! suck more sweetness out of this love of God. O how great is this love of
God, that pardons all thy sins of nature, and custom! o^ long continuance, as
well as later; great as well as smaller; of omission, as well as commission;
sins of ignorance, and knowledge; secret sins, and more open sins, sins in
thought, word and act; sins of thy youth and ^^per age: He blots them out all,
as a creditor that takes his pen and blots out all debts, leaves none to
condemn. O the greatness of this infinite love of God* O stand still and
behold, what love the Father has showed! wonder, and be amazed, and ravished
with this love of all loves! O the riches of this love of God to thee! O
admirable superabundant, surpassing love! O excellent, precious, sweet, unheard
of love! O wonderful indeed, rare, unspeakable, unutterable, unexpressible,
incomprehensible love! O love everlasting! one dram whereof, is better then
life it self, much sweeter then the honey, and the honey comb.

Another Evidence of Grace, is, the God, and thee my soul. Sometimes thy
praying to him, his answering thee. Gods upholding and quieting thee sometimes,
in greatest dangers; so Job and David. Therefore, stir up thy faith and live by
it, for time to come. Thou have humbled thy soul, and God has comforted thy
soul. Now he has this communion with none, but his own children.

Another Evidence of Grace, is, Thy Grace. Psalm. 51. 3, 4, 5, 6, 10. I
acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. Against thee, thee
only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight, that thou migh^est be
justified, when thou speak, and be cleared when thou judge. Behold, I was
shapen in iniquity: and in sin did my mother conceive me. Behold, thou desire
truth in the inward parts; and in the hidden part, thou shall make me to know
wisdom. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.
Psalm. 19. 12, 13. Cleanse me from my secret sins; keep thy servant also, that
presumptious sins reign not over me. Romans 7. 14, 15, 22, 23, 24. For we know
that the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin: For that which I
do, I allow not; for what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I:
For I delight in the Law of God, after the inward man. But I see another law in
my members, warring against the law of my mind; and bringing me into captivity
to the law of sin, which is in my members, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death. 2 Cor. 7. ^^. Godly sorrow causes
repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of. Lord give me more of that
sorrow.

Now God reckons not thy failings, nor imputes thy corruptions to thee as
thine; as by his Apostle, and his Spirit, speaking in him, he assures thee,
Romans 7. 16, 17. If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the Law,
that it is good. Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in
me. But God accepts thy person and performances in his Son (as he did Paul
there) though never so poor* and imperfect he regards not so much, what thou
art or do, as what thou would^^ be, and do.

Another evidence of Saving Grace, is, John makes to be a sign, That we are
translated from death to life, because we love the brethren, as 1 John 3. 14.
Therefore as it gives attestation for thee my Soul, so take thou the comfort of
it from Gods own Word, and bless God with humble thankfulness for it: so David,
Psa. 119. 63. I am a companion to all them that fear thee, and keep thy
precepts.

Another sign of Grace, is this, Thy Col. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. If ye then be risen
with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the
right hand of God: Set your affections on things above, not on things on the
earth: for ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God* When Christ,
who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in Glory.
Yea, thy present dis-esteem and undervaluing of all worldly honors, profits
preferments or greatness, in the height of them, accounting them vain and of
small value to thee: And indeed let worldlings hunt and scramble for them that
have no better portion in heaven; But thou my Soul, I bless God, see better,
sweeter, and more precious and durable riches, spiritual things, that last for
ever, that will satisfy the Soul: The love and favor of God, Heaven, and Glory
everlasting, that shall never perish; and peace of conscience and pardon of
sin, these indeed are well worth the desiring and laboring for: Alas! the other
cannot afford one jot of comfort, nor satisfy the conscience when troubled for
sin, or when death comes. Oh then nothing but Christ will serve the turn, or
stand in stead I Therefore now labor to get Christ to be thine, and then he
will not leave nor forsake thee, no not when thou come to dye, and have most
need of him, when friends and all creature comforts will leave us: And truly
the greatness of the world does often steal away our hearts: These are b^^^s and
snares, both worldly credit and profit, I mean, that take many a soul in their
nets, by means whereof many come to lose their souls ere they are aware of it;
because they have no (...) or else no hearts to look after their precious
Souls, that must last for ever, after these bodies, with all the fading
comforts here below, are gone and perished. We do or may see how fleeting and
uncertain all creatures and all comforts here are; every day sounds it in our
ears, and continually our eyes may see it in the corpse daily carried to their
graves, and how riches take their wings and f^^e away, as Prove. 23. 5. I am
sure, within these few last years, God has abundantly showed, and fulfilled
that Scripture. How many thousands, not only of the meaner sort, but of the
great ones of the world, even now in these our days, worth very many hundreds a
year, now have not bread for their families. Men get goods, that many times
know not who shall enjoy them. But I will seek the Lord, for at his right hand
are joys, and pleasures for ever more, that shall last to all eternity. My
Soul, this thy settled resolution is a pregnant testimony of thy love and
affection to God; As also that God has created a new heart, and put a new
spirit within thee; and thou therefore art become a new creature.

Again, That change, which God has Paul, and so with David, and the rest: and
when thou confessest thy sins to God in secret, thou bewailest thy sins of
thought, which never trouble Hypocrites or other sort of sinners.

Another sign of Gods love to thee, is this, Though thou have had sore
conflicts God, and from the all sufficiency and goodness of God, and thine own
experience of the same, having found the presence of the Spirit of God in power
so supporting thee, that thou have not fallen away, nor sunk under them, but
resolved still to trust in God by his assistance, though he should kill thee,
as Job did, Job 13. 15. at that time when thou have had no present comfort.

Another sign of true Grace is, Thy it was good for thee that thou were
afflicted: And before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I keep thy word:
As David, Psalm 119. 67. Lord make good to me that promise, That all things
shall work together for good; and therefore afflictions, to them that love God,
to them who are called according to his purpose. Romans 8. 28. Lord I would fain
love thee, The desire of my Soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of
thee: With my Soul have I sought or desired thee in the night, and with my
spirit within me will I seek thee in the morning. As Isaiah 26. 8, 9. For whom
have I in Heaven but thee, and I have desired none in the Earth with thee. As
Psalm 73. 25. And thou hate sin, as it is a breach of Gods Law.

Another Evidence of Gods Love to I know whom I have believed, that he is able
to keep that which I have committed to him, as 2 Timothy 1. 12. And I am persuaded
he will do so. And, my Soul, since thou have found favor in the eyes of God,
that he has been pleased to manifest his Grace to thee, consider what cause
thou have of comfort and joy. Now that it may be aright conceived what Grace I
mean; There is a twofold meaning of the word Grace in Scripture.

First, It is taken for the gracious good Will or Favor of God, where by he is
pleased of his own free love, to accept of some in Christ for his own: This
Divines call first Grace, because it is the fountain of all other Grace, and
the spring from whence they flow; and it is therefore called Grace, because it
makes a man gracious with God; but this is only in God.

Secondly, Grace is taken for the gifts of Grace, and they are of two sorts;
Common or special. Some are common to both Elect and Reprobates, Believers and
Hypocrites; As Knowledge, a gift of prayer, and the like. Some are special
Graces, and they are proper to the Saints, therefore called saving Graces;
whereof, some are most principal, and absolutely necessary unto Salvation; such
as is Faith, without which, none can be saved. And some other which are very
comfortable, as the feeling of Gods love, Peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy
Ghost. Now if God have, first, of his gracious good will, and free love,
accepted thee in Christ: And secondly, if he have given thee, any evidence of
the same, by the saving graces of his holy Spirit wrought in thee, (which thou
dare not deny;) then, O my soul, bless, praise, and magnify, this God of
love, for this his infinite, unutterable, and superabounding love to thee. Has
he given thee any grace? Its because he loves thee; and truly, no cause at all;
why God should love thee, as thou art in thy self; but the clean contrary,
rather to hate and abhor thee. But he looks upon thee, in his only begotten,
and dearly beloved son, the Lord Jesus Christ, God-man; and seeing no other
means in all the world to save thee, Gods love was so great, That he gave his
only begotten son to die for thee. And see here also, the exceeding great love
of Christ to thee, that gave himself to dye for thee, took thy nature on him,
stood in thy steed, fulfilled the Law, satisfied the justice of God for thy
sin. He suffered on the Cross for thee, he procured pardon of sin, salvation,
and heaven for thee, he merited it all for thee; for his was worthy; his
righteousness is the meritorious cause of thy justification. He is now thy
Redeemer, thy Advocate, that pleads thy cause for thee to God; he makes peace
with God for thee; he ^its at the right hand of God the Father, and makes
intercession for thee. God, is now become of a just, severe, and angry Judge, a
loving Father in him.

Therefore now my soul, receive all from him by promise, that shows his love as
a Father. Oh, the free, and sweet love, that is in an uncompelled promised I
will love thee freely, says the Lord, Hosea 14. 4. Its free love indeed, in
God to thee wards. Oh therefore, let this special free love of God, cause thee
to study, how to return love to him, and live to him. Remember what he has
done for thee; how thy sins wounded thy Savior, peirced and crucified him, and
nailed him to the cross: how thy sins made his most precious body, be overrun
with his heart blood: how thy own betraying and selling thy soul to sin, and
Satan, made him to be betrayed, and fold to suffer and die: yea, how he endured
the torments of Hell, as it were, the most heavy and sorest wrath of his Father
for thy sin. What, O what great and vehement love, was in Christ thy Savior,
that made him sweat drops of blood for thee my soul? These are as so many cords
of love, from Christ to thee, to cause thee to love Christ. Oh, that I could
love thee, my dear Savior, as I should. Its my hearts grief, that I cannot so
love thee, as I would. Oh my dull, and drousie soul, awake, rouse, and quicken
up thy self, and stand amazed at this love of Christ. Shall, or can so many
sweet expressions of such unexpressible love of Christ to thee, pass without
Echo? Shall every passage of Christ, from his birth to his death, all preach
forth love to thee? And shall thankfulness be wanting in thee toward him?
Shall his birth, work thy new birth; his cross take away thy curse? Shall his
pains procure thee rest? Shall thou ^e cleared by his sorrowful sadness? Thou
be made free by his bonds, happy by his misery, fed by his hunger, refresht by
his weariness, rejoiced by his anguish? [Thou, my Soul] be excused before God,
by his being accused before men? And shall not love flush and burn in my breast
to him? Oh, my God, do thou inflame my heart with this Love; kindle some
further heat of Love in me; give me one dr^^ more of it; draw up my Love, and
most entire and intimate affections. Shall I, as it were, freeze, for want of
Love to my Savior, when his Love is so hot to me? Far be it from me. No, my
loving Lord, I do love thee, I will love thee dearly: Oh help and enable me to
love thee more. Oh my Soul, sleep not under such Comforts, never forget such
love as this is; it is sufficient to fill all thy senses, all thine affections.

And yet see more, This Love is not only for some years, but for eternity; Whom
he once loves he loves to the end; as John 13. 1. He is a never failing
Fountain of Love: Oh my Soul, therefore distrust not, despair not of his Love;
though thou art so full of sins, which indeed of all things God hates most, yet
behold the Love of God: all these, though so great, so many they cannot
separate between thee and thy God; but in and through Christ he still loves
thee, accepts thy person and services.

It Is not some slips or falls, that thou art overtaken withal, that are hated,
resolved against; not wittingly, willingly, deliberately committed, nor
delighted in, nor allowed, but slipped, and fallen into unawares; These cannot
finite his infinite Love: He that dyed and bled for thee, will not lose thee,
now he has done so much for thee: No, thy sins shall not eternally separate
^h^e from him: Sin may over-cloud the beams of his Love, but it shall not cut
off the Being of his Love to thee; Be thou sensible of thy load of sin, and
thou art capable of his Love. He that suffered not a cup of cold water to go
unrewarded, will not permit a ^ar, for thy sins, or for his Love, to go without
reward: Let not the sense of thy own wretched, miserable, and undone condition
discourage thee, not the fear of his displeasure dish^^^^en thee, there is Love
enough in him for all that: there is a Sun within these Clouds; there is Love
within these frowns: Can Christ forget thee, whose burning Love made him sweat
drops of blood for thee? No, he cannot, he will not; he may withdraw himself to
sharpen thy desire; he may ^^em lost to inflame thee to seek more ^arnestly and
instantly: It may be, my Soul, thou think thou want him, because thou
desire him, and do not sensibly, at some times feel thou have him, but know
thou desire him, because thou love him: you know it is so in natural love,
and thou could not love him, had he not first loved thee: But if thy sinful
neglects have sent him away from thee, let thy future diligence draw him home
to thee. If thou have lost him by sin, seek him by true repentance, and he will
be sound of thee: He cannot be long absent from a weeping Soul. He is Love, and
that will yearn and melt when it sees tears. If thy sins fear the hand of
Justice, ^o Love is a Sanctuary. If thy sins make thee tremble before the Judge,
Love is an Advocate; there is nothing but the Love of Christ to thee will do it
for thee, and supply it to thee. Oh my dear-bought Soul, that cost so precious
a price as the very heart-blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, wrap up thy self in
this consideration, Want not comfort while thou have or may have enough, yea
abundance; but make him, that is all in all, to be thy All, in all thy Wants
and Necessities; Thou can want nothing but his ABVNDANT LOVE can supply thee.

Art thou cold in holy duties? His love can warm thee. Art thou flat in thy
spirit? His love can rouse thee. Art thou still hard under the means? His love
can soften and melt thee. Art thou liveless under ordinances? His love can
quicken thee. Art thou incorrigible under afflictions? His love can bend thee.
Art thou fallen by any sin? His ardent love can raise thee, and revive thee,
and make thee alive. Oh excellent comfort, joy unexpressible, and love
surpassing! Oh thou who art Love it self, who art only amiable, thou whom my
Soul loves, longs for, and thirsts after, pants for, as the hunted Heart
after the rivers of water! Oh God, my God, come thou, oh come thou, and do all
this to my poor soul. Oh warm, heat, and inflame me with love to thee who has
so loved me. Oh melt my heart with thy love; revive and quicken me that am so
dull and dead in my self; shed thy love abroad in my heart more and more, which
may enable me to express sincere, cordial and hearty love to thee, all the days
of my life, by walking more closely with thee, and trusting more in thee, and
resting more on thee. [Oh my soul] make that good the Scripture says, They
that know thy Psa. 9. 10.
name will trust in thee. Its the work that God appoints thee to do, to believe
in Christ; as Joh. 6. 29. Also it is his commandment that we believe in the name
of his Son Jesus Christ; 1 John 3. 23. And Christ himself calls thee, that art
weary of, and heavy laden with the burden of thy sins, to come to him, and he
promises to ease thee, or give thee rest, Math. 11. 28. And he calls out to
any that will come, Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to to the waters, and
ye that have no money; come, and buy, and eat yo, come buy wine and milk
without money and without price, Isa. 55. 1. And so Revel. 22. 17. Every one
that thirsts, let them come: and who ever will come and drink freely of the
waters of life. And whosoever comes to him he will not cast off, Joh. 6. 37.
And besides all these offers of Christ and his command to believe, there is
abundance of sweet promises which God has made to them that believe; as Joh.
3. 16. God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Also
Verse 36. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life. He is as sure,
and as certain of it, as if he had it already in possession. And God delights
in them that hope in his mercy, Psa. 147 11. And the Lord redeemeth the souls
of his servants, and none that trust in him shall perish, Psa. 34. 22. The Lord
is a shield and a helper to all them that trust in him.

Now God that made these rich, free, and precious promises, is Truth it self,
and therefore is [so] in performing all his promises. God is not as man, that
^e should lie; neither as the son of man, that he should repent. Has he said,
and shall he not do it? And has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? O
yes: as Numb. 23. 19.

Nay more, it is a part of his Covenant with his people; therefore (Oh my Soul)
press the Lord with his Covenant* and he will perform it, even to thee; and so
all his promises also. What good thing do thou or can thou want, either
spiritual, temporal, or eternal, that God has not promised to give thee? And
what evil thing caust thou fear, or suffer, that God has not promised to save
thee from the evil of it at least?

Are there not promises of giving thee Christ, and with him perfect
Righteousness, and Justification? and in this life, such a measure of
Sanctification, as he will accept of, both all the necessary graces of the
Spirit, and victory over every lust, and perfect Sanctification after death; as
also a sufficient ability to every service and duty; a passing by, and covering
of all imperfections, and perseverance to the end, and in the end, life
everlasting? Again, a sanctified use of all Afflictions, either preservation
from, or deliverance out of them, in the best time; with such Administration of
all outward necessaries, as he shall see best, for his glory, and thy good.
Assistance also in any sufferings for his name, and a reward for them. And what
now can be thy estate, in which thou may not hope yea, and joy in that hope
too? as Romans 12. 13.

Art thou under the guilt of some sin, power of some lust, want of some grace,
absence of Gods Spirit, or assurance of Gods favor; or under some persecution,
or outward affliction? Has not God promised to supply that good, save from
that evil? Why then my soul, should not thou joy in hope of it; or may
thou not have hope, since God has promised it? And why does not thy hope beget
joy? in outward things it does so.

Thou may see the full joys of Heaven, Christ's presence, Gods face, perfect
glory; and these all enjoyed by thee, all enjoyed, I say, by hope; and that by
such an hope as cannot fail, Romans 5. 5. as makes not ashamed. Its sure, and
presents the things hoped for; most sure, for it has the certainty of Faith
for its ground, and that is the certainty of God himself. For Faith builds on
Gods promises, and they are most certain; confirmed by two immutable things.

First, The Word of God.

Secondly, The Oath of God.

Heb. 6. 16, 17, 18, 19. For men swear an oath for confirmation, it is then an
end of all strife. God willing more abundantly, to show unto the heirs of
promise, the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath: That by two
immutable things, in which, it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a
strong consolation. Which Hope, we have as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and
steadfast: Yea, thy Faith, and Hope has, as the immutability, so the fidelity,
and truth of God to rest upon: he can as well cease to be God, as not to be so
good as his Word It has also the purpose and de^ree of God; for Gods promises
are only the expressions of his purpose and decree. And as the Mercy of God,
so it has also the Merit of Christ; the efficacy of his Obedience, Passion,
and Intercession. And thus also its sure; for Christ has merited all good
things, for thee, present and to come; whether it be p^rdon of sin, victory
over sin, subduing thy corruption; the favor of God, or what ever else thou
want. And its necessitated now by Gods Justice also, That being satisfied by
Christ, and his satisfaction by God accepted. Oh, why then should not thou
joy in hope of all these? O consider the strength of all these Arguments, to
cause and increase, Hope and Joy in thee. The joy of the Lord is our strength,
Neh^. 8. 10. Therefore, O my soul, be thou no mo^e so cast down, for time to
come; why art thou, o^ why should^st thou be so? O rouz^ up, and encourage thy
self in thy God; and strengthen thy Faith by meditating, on the truth and
goodness of these promises; their excellencies, sweetness, and usefulness to
thee, and by Resis^ing doubtings; and so stir up thy Faith in them.

This is the place of living by Faith: therefore, O my soul, live thou by
Faith, (that is) find out a promise of what ever thou want, and ^enture on
it with e^pectation, hoping above hope; and so fetch every thing thou need
from the promises. O that tho^ wo^ldst sing that triumphant Song, that the
Apostle Pa^l does, Romans 8. 38, 39. I am persuaded, that neither death, nor
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor thin^s present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate the^, from the ^^ve of God, which i^ in Christ Jesus our Lord. O my
soul, pray, and strive so to do. O that thou could say, as the same Apostl^
does, Phil. 1. 23. I des^re to be d^^olved, and be with Christ, which is best
of all. Truly, in the mean while. God alone is thy portion; for thou have taken
him so to be. And if God alone be present with thee, its enough: He were not
God, i^ he were not All-sufficient.

Now thou have him in Faith, in pledges, and earnest, yea, in possession; why
then do thou not enjoy him? why do thou not shake off that senceless,
drowsiness, which makes thy life unpleasant, and uncomfortable; as though thou
had none of God? O leave off over-heaviness, to those that want God, to those
that either know him not, or know him displeased, not in Christ.

Thou Lord shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward bring me to glory,
as Psalm. 73. 24, 25, 26, 28. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none
upon earth, that I desire besides thee. My flesh and my heart ^aileth, but God
is the strength of my heart, and my port^^n for ever. It is good for me to draw
near to God. I have put my trust in the Lord God; and ^o, he answers, I will
not leave thee, nor forsake thee; no never, as Heb. 13. 5. No, at no time. When
thou art therefore in any strait, or distress, that thou know not what to
do; then go freely, and boldly to the throne of grace, in the Name, through the
Mediation of Christ: There Is a friend that will help thee, and relieve thee;
sustain, and deliver thee. When all other helps ^ail, yet I say, he will never
fail thee; do I say so? nay verily, of a truth, it is God himself says it, by
his Spirit, speaking in his Apostle. Therefore, build on it, ^^st on it, as
most certain: For as God is truth it self, so are all his promises; let them be
believed by thee. Press the Lord with his own word or promise; and he will
perform them even to thee. Lord, thou have said, that sin shall not have
dominion over us, as Romans 6. 14. O let it not have have dominion over me, make
good that word of thine to me. O when shall that time once be? O, that thou
would this day, nay, this very hour, at once, kill all sin in me. Lord thou
have said, Thou will Mich. ^. 19
subdue our iniquities. O Lord, do thou it in me, for they are too strong for
me. Is any thing to hard for God? no sure, surely thou have power enough to do
it. And thou said thou ar^ willing; O, what then hinders? O my God, let thy
Spirit come, s^nd it with power; and make its virtue to appear, in subduing all
sin in me; and raising me up to a new, a holy life; such a life, as thou
would have me live. Lord thou have said, That we shall seek thee with all our
hearts; and that thou will befo^^d of us, Jere. 29. 13, 14. O remember thine
own everlasting Covenant, made with thy ^ervants, Jere. 32. 40. That thou will
put thy fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart from thee. And thou
have said, Thou will comfort us, and we shall be comforted, even as one whom
his mother comforts, I^. 66. 13. Lord make good these promises, in which thou
have caused thy servant to trust. O keep thy servant, that ^o presumpt^ous sins
prevail over me. And clea^se me from ^y secret sins; yea from all my sins of
thought; then shall I be ^pright, and I shall be inn^cent, and free, from the
great transgressions. Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my
heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my Strength, and my Red^^mer.

A SERMON Composed for the FUNERAL Of that pr^^ious Woman Mrs ANNE SKELETON, of
S. Andr^w^ in Norw^^^.
HO^^^ 13. 14. O death! I will ^^ thy plagues: O grave* I will be thy
destraction!
THis Chapter easily divides it self into three parts:

1. A grievous Reprehension, to v. 10.

2. A sad Comination from the 10. to the 14. verse.

3. A seasonable Consolation from the beginning of the verse, where my Text is
co^ch^, to the end of the Chapter. My Text begins the last part of the Chapter:
The sense of which is ambiguously controverted by Expositors. Some will have it
to be a promise merely relating to the deliverance of the Jews out of
Captivity; in which sense some conc^ive the same phrase (almost) taken, Isai.
25. 8. But it is plain from the Apostles Commentary, 2 Cor. 15. 55. that it is
not to be restrained to that sense. The Hebrews opinion is altogether for it;
But Christian Interpreters, g^ided by the Apostle, generally render it a
prediction of the deliverance of the Elect from Sin, Death, and Hell, by the
Lord Jesus Christ. Some Controversy there is yet amongst them about the direct
sense, some amongst which is Calvin, and Oecolampadius will have it to be a
spiritual promise, but conditional; as if the sens^ were this: If they had
repented and turned unto me, I had delivered them even from the gates of Death.
But Jerome, with others, make it an absolute promise of a Redemption from from
Sin and Death by Christ, and will make the words to be the speech of Christ
promising Redemption to his Elect. Join both together, and the sense is
perfectly this; Christ does here promise Redemption to his Elect, under the
type of the deliverance of the Children of Israel ou^ of Babylon. The
deliverance of the Children of Israel out of Babylon was ^ypical: That Is
promised here, viz. That after a certain time he would redeem them out of the
power of the Babylonish Captivity, where they should lie as buried for a while.
But the Antitype was the Elect of God, ^o whom Christ promises a Redemption
from Death and the Grave. [I,] I, the Lord Jesus Christ, Jehovah, the second
Person in the Trinity. [Will Ransom,] Redeem: It signifies to deliver out of
some bondage, by virtue of a price paid by another for his friend. I will pay
the debt due to my Fathers Justice and Wrath, and buy them out of their natural
slavery. [Them] The Elect, in a spiritual sense; the Jews, in a plain sense; as
the words are a promise of a deliverance out of the Babylonish Captivity. [From
the hand of the Grave,] that is the power of the Grav^: To be in ones hand, is
to be in their power; therefore our Translation reads it power. [Of the
Grave,] The Ba^ylonish Grave, if you look upon the promise, as merely
respecting them. 1. Sin, 2. Death, and 3. Hell, are all here understood: So the
Apostle applies it, 1. Cor. 15. Thus Christ has fulfilled it for his Saints.
[I will redeem them from death.] It is but a repetition of wh^t was promised
before: The word is doubled for it is certain. [O death!] Christ speaks O
death, Spiritual, Temporal, Eternal: [I will be thy plagues,] O grave, I will
be thy destruction!] I, Jesus Christ, [will be,] by my coming, and dying, and
rising again, [will be,] in time; it is yet but a little while, but I will come
and tread upon thy neck, [thy plagues,] Jerome and Ambrose read ^t (...), thy
contention. I will, engage in the quarrel betwixt thee, and my elected ones.
Death had a quarrel against all the children of Adam, by virtue of that
original word, In the day that thou ^atest thereof thou shall surely dye.
Others read it, [Plagues or Destruction*] The difference arises from the
ne^rness of kin that is betwixt the Heb. words, signifying Contention, and the
Hebr^w word, signifying Plagues. The Greeks read it (...), Victory: I will be
thy Co^^ueror. Others read it (...), Punishment, just Punishment, etc. I will
be thy ^in^ with Justice. [O grave. I will be thy destruction.] Thy sting, thy
cutting off. Here Christ says, I will be. The Apostle triumphs, as of the
thing done, 2 Cor. 15. 55. O death, where is thy sting? etc. Christ having then
dyed, conquered death, risen, and asc^nded. You have now the sense.

If you look on the whole Verse, you have in it these three parts.

1. A redemption promised, in which you may note; 1. The Redeem^^; I Christ. 2.
The Act; I will redeem. 3. The Redeemed; Them. 4. The time; I will. 5. The
slavery; Death, the Grave.
2. The manner of this redemption: 1. By himself; I being ^^aths ^uine. 2. With
a price paid; I will redeem. 3. The confirmation of it: Repe^^^ance shall be
hi^ from mi^^ eyes. I cannot change or eat my words; I have said it, and it
shall be done.

My Text contains the second part, where you have Christ threatening death to be
its plagues, and the grave to be its destruction. The Doctrine is shortly this.

Doct. Christ for his Believers is become deaths plague, and the graves
destruction.

There is no change in the Doctrine from the very words of the Text; only what
Christ here spoke in the future tense, I will, I have put in the preterperfect
tense, (as the Apostle.) Christ prophesied his coming by Hosea, we preach the
prophecy fulfilled.

Two things would here for Explication be enquired into.

1. What death Christ is a plague to. 2. How Christ became the plague of death,
and the destruction of the grave to his people.
The distinction of death is ordinarily known.

1. Spiritual; which is the souls death in sin: We were all of us dead in sins.
2. Temporal; which is the separation of the soul from the body. 3. The third is
Eternal; The death of body and soul for ever.
The first consists in the separation of the soul from God: The second in the
separation of the body from the soul: The third in the separation of both body
and soul from the presence of God for ever. If it be asked concerning which of
these Christ speaks, and to which of these Christ is a plague and destruction.

I shortly answer to all: First, he is a Spiritual Death, a destruction to that
grave. Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. You has be quickened, who were dead in trespasses and
sins. By reason of Adams fall all the elect became dead in sins, and children
of wrath by nature, as well as others. Christ coming quickens the dead soul
with his enlivening Grace. Ezekiel. 16. 6. I said unto thee, while thou were in
thy blood live; yea, I said unto thee, while thou were in thy blood live. O
death! Spiritual Death, he has been, he is, he will daily be thy plague.

Secondly, He is a plague to Temporal Death: Indeed it is the last enemy that
shall be put under the Conquerors feet, before he resigneth up the Kingdom to
his Father.

First, He is a plague to it; for he has delivered us out of the power of it,
he has made the door stand merely by the latch: When Adam had his mittimus
made to the Gaol of the Grave, Death turns the lock, bolts up the door, when he
had gotten him but once in his custody, never intending to part with the
prisoner more: Christ seeing the Jailer so confident in his Tyranny, Well,
says he, let him be good of his office, for I will ransom them from tho power
of the grave; I will make Death know, he is but to keep his prisoner till
further order. Indeed this was decretally done, before the beginning of the
world, by Christ's Word given to his Father: and Christ ever and anon, in the
time of the Jews, let his elected ones know there was an evasion out of the
grave, by the resurrection of several persons; but the time of Christ's actual
and full becoming the plague of death, and the destruction of the grave, was
when he dyed, and rose, and led captivity captive. Thus Christ is the plague of
Death, and the destruction of the grave, for all men and women in the world;
but to his Elect, only for good, there is an escape-way out of the deepest
grave already; and at the last day there shall be an actual freedom.

Secondly, He is to Believers the plague of this Death, and the destruction of
this Grave, by taking away the cause of fear of this death out of all their
hearts, they can stand upon the top of the grave, and sing, O Death, where is
thy sti^g* O Hell, where is thy victory? The Elect (^ad it no^ been for Christ)
for ^ea^ of death had all their life time been subje^t to bondage* Heb. 2. 15.
^^rasmuch therefore as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also
took part with them, v. 1^. that ^e might d^liver them. The Saints of God can
stand over the grave and say, Surely the bitterness of death is past, though
they cannot say the time o^ death is past.

3dly, Christ to his Elect is the plague of Death temporal, ^n that he has
taken away the final evil of it, and has made that which would have been their
ma^^e^ for ^^ine and evil, to be their desire and servant for good. Death
thought to have been go^ler of the bodies of Gods Saints, till the day of
judgment, and then Hell should have had them delivered up. God says, No; their
bodies shall be in thy custody, but thou shall deliver them up refined to
Glory, to Eternal Rest, to be with me for ever: So that now it is the voice of
Gods child, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: And in this we
groan earnestly, being burdened, not for that we would be unclothed, but
clothed upon, that mortality may be swallowed up of life. Death is ease now to
the Saints of God, the hard stones are but pillows of down: The grave, from a
place of terror, is turned into a retiring house, from the busy sweating
world. O death! Christ is thy plague: O grave! ^e is thy destruction.

Thirdly, Christ is the plague and destruction of Eternal Death: they shall are
past from death to life; He that is the Amen, that was dead and is alive, yea
alive for ever more, he has the keys of Hell and Death, Rev. 1. 18. Christ is
the Angel that came down from heaven, R^v. 20. 1. that has the key of the
bottomless pit; and he that has a part in the first resurrection, on him the
second death has no power: Rev. 2. 11. Overcoming Saints shall not be hurt by
the second death: Now this is our victory that overcomes the world, even our
faith: Believers are Conquerors in and through Christ, and Christ has
conquered hell for them; for the lake which burns with fire and brimstone is
the second death, Rev. 21. 8. Christ now has saved them from this; this has
no power over them. O death! he is thy plague: O grave! he is thy destruction.
Thus I have opened the first, and showed you what Death, what Grave Christ is a
plague to.

Now let me show you in the next place, How Christ is the plague of death and
the grave of destruction? To this I shall answer in three or four particulars
briefly.

1. By his enlivening Spirit. 2. By his dying Love, 3. By his rising Power. 4.
By his ascending and reigning Glory.
First, By his enlivening power: Thus he is the plague of spiritual death; he
comes and sees the soul that he has chosen, dead in ^respasses and sins; it
neither speaks, nor hears, nor sees, nor moves spiritually; it is more cold
then the frozen earth: Christ breathes into it the breath of life. The Son
quickens whom Joh 5: 21. John 6. 63
he will. Christ does it meritoriously: The Spirit does it instrumentally; Joh.
6. 63. It is the Spirit that quickens: He makes the dead soul to begin to
hear the voice of the Son of God, and live; to begin to relish heavenly things,
and savor things which are above; to stand upon its legs, and walk a little in
the ways of godliness.

Secondly, By his dying Love: Christ's death was that which destroyed death; He
was the first of those that rose from the dead, by power from himself to live
for ever: Christ dying showed the grave his power: Christ's dying was the plague
of death:

1. In his own example: He brake through the bol^ed door of the Grave, though
the stone was rolled and sealed: He was he that was dead, and is alive; yea,
that lives for evermore. O Death! he was thy plague in himself; he was ^ P^t. 3
18
dead and is alive, thy lock could not keep him.

2. In the merit of it: Christ's death in the merit of it, was the plague of
death, and the destruction of the grave: The sting of death is sin, (says the
Apostle.) Christ dying satisfi^d his Fath^rs Wrath and Justice. So that though
death lives for a while, yet he lives without a sting; it can do no member of
Christ hurt; and it shall not live long neither: for though it be the last
en^my that shall be destroyed, yet it shall dye too, 1 Cor. 15. 26. Christ's
death was the graves destruction, it destroyed sins life, which is the
spiritual death; for Christ having dyed, sin is dead too, Romans 6. 6. Our old
man is cruci^ied wi^^ him, that the body of sin might from henceforth be
d^stroyed, that hence^orth we should not serve sin. Verse. 9, 10. In th^^ he
dyed, he dyed once unto sin. Verse. 11. Likewise r^ckon you your selves to be
dead indeed unto sin. By Christ's death, temporal death is destroyed, in the
power of it, for he himself led captivity captive: In the fear or it, F^rasmuch
as ^^e children were partakers of flesh and blood, ^e also himself took part
with them, that through death ^e ^ight destroy him that had the power of d^^th,
^ven the devil: And deliver them that through fear of death were all their life
time subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 13, 14. In the bitterness of it; for now we
know that while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. O
death! Christ dying has been thy death; And so for eternal death: for he has,
by his death satisfied, so satisfied his Fathers Wrath, that now the second
death shall have no power over us.

^ly. Christ is the plague of death, by his rising power: The power of Christ's
Resurrection is great upon death: Therefore the Apostle tells us, Romans 6. 4.
That like as Christ was raised from the dead, by the glory of his Father, even
so also Col. 3. 1.
we should walk in newness of life, being first planted into the likeness of
his death, then of his resurrection, Verse. 5. Christ rising in himself was the
plague of temporal death; Dying, he was a servant to it; Rising, he became the
Conqu^ror over it: Being the first fruits of them that sleep in the grave, 1 Corinthians. 15. 20. And rising, he became the plague of death for his people: His
Resurrection was but a type and a prophecy, that those that that sleep in the
dust shall have a morning to awake in: this the Apostle fully proves in the
former part of his 15. Chap. of the first Epistle to the Corinthians; it is a
pillar upon which all the Saints of God ought to build their faith, in the
Article of the resurrection of the body: And from that premise, an undeniable
argument may be brought to confirm ou^ Faith in the resurrection of the body,
as the Apostle disputes there: yea and his resurrection was the plague of
eternal death: for by his resurrection the love declared in his death b^came
victorious, and his death m^^^orious: it would have a^gued, that the d^bt had
not been paid to infinite Jus^ice, if the prisoner had not been se^ ^t liberty
by the resurrection of his body: Now who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods elect? It is God that justifies. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ
that dy^d; yea rather that risen is again: Romans 8. 34. But the freeing of the
priso^er argues the ransom is paid, and Justice satisfied.

Fourthly, Christ, by his a^c^nding and living in Glory, is become the plague
of death: Spiritual death is thus destroyed, as soon as it begins to ^reep upon
the Saints of God. Christ sits at the right hand of God to make intercession
for them, Romans 8. 34. And now we know that if we sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father, even Christ the Righteous, 1 John 2. 1. Thus Temporal death was
destroyed; for it appeared by this, That he did not come out of the grave with
deaths leave, upon condition to return a prisoner again. Rev. 1. 18. He lives
that was dead, and is alive for evermore. He rose no Ephesians. 4. 8.
more to go down to the prison again; thus Eternal Death is destroyed too. For,
In that we know our Redeemer lives, we know we shall see him with these eyes,
and live with him in Glory. Therefore the Psalmist puts them together; He
has ascended up on high, and led Captivity [all kind of Captivity] Captive: In
that he is ascended to his Father, and our Father; our God, and his God; We
know Ioh. 20. 17 Ioh. 14. 3.
he is not amissus, but praemissus, not lost, but gone before to prepare a
place for us, and that he will one day come again, and receive us to himself,
that where he is, there we may be also.

Lastly, He will yet be the plague and by his freeing and acquitting power, at
the great day, when he shall come to judge the quick and dead, when he shall
come in his Glory, and shall sound the Trumpet to a Resurrection: Gather my
Saints together, those that have made a Covenant with 1 Cor. 15. 16
me by Sacrifice: Then shall there not the least smell of the death of sin
remain about the bodies or souls of his Servants; then the prison of the grave
shall fly open, and be shut no more for ever; all the bars and locks of the
grave shall fly off, and death it self shall be destroyed, and all bodies have
a liberavit; then shall the Robes of Righteousness be put on the souls and
bodies of his Saints, and the Crown of Glory shall be put upon their heads,
even the Crown of Everlasting Life; then shall all the redeemed ones of the
Lord be actually declared before all the world to be free for ever, not only
from the first, but the second death; and the Saints that have been buried in
Christ's Death, and quickened by his Resurrection, shall for ever live with him
in Glory, and sing for ever, O death, where is thy sting? O hell, where is thy
victory? Thus Christ is the plague of Death, and the destruction of the Grave.

I have done with the Doctrinal part, and am come to Application.

First, It shall serve for Instruction; secondly, for Consolation; and lastly,
for Exhortation.

First, For Instruction: It may instruct us how wonderfully beholden every
Saint of God is to the Lord Jesus Christ.

1. Do but consider what he has done for thee: He has delivered thee; Is that
all? No, he has redeemed thee; it argues a price paid for thee, to deliver
thee from sin, the grave, and hell: Went not thou all mired with sin, under the
power and command of sin, a slave to thy base lusts and corruptions, dead in
trespasses and sins? Who has quickened thee? Who has said to thee in thy
blood live? Was it not h^ that has here said, O death, I will be thy death?
Who shall deliver me from this body of death? (says the Apostle.) O w^etched
man that I am, etc. Romans 7. 24 25
I thank God through Jesus Christ o^^ Lord. O death, he is thy death!

2. Thou art redeemed from the power of the grave, and from the bitterness of
it: Who has done this? Was it not he again that took flesh, and became
partaker with us of it, that through death he might destroy him that had the
power of it, and deliver them that all their life time; through fear, were
subject to bondage.

3. Who has saved thee from the second death, from hell, and eternal torments,
but thy Savior who has put this song into thy mouth, O hell, where is thy
victory? B^t consider again how Jesus Christ has done this, by his own dying.
Christ dyed in the flesh, that thou may not dye in thy sins; himself tasted
the bitterness of the cup, that he might leave it sweet to all his children. Is
not thy heart won with his love, Christian? Do thou see him encounter thy
three great enemies, the first, the second, the third death? for so I may call
them: Do thou see him dying in the fight, and conquering by his dying pains?
O my Soul, thou art drawn with strong cords of love, run after him.

Secondly, From hence we may learn of what use and comfort every Act of Christ
is, and may be, to believers. His death, his rising, his ascension, nothing of
what he did was too little, nor any thing too much; there could have wanted
nothing, and there was nothing redundant; if he had not dyed, he had not
merited deliverance from Spiritual Death; if he had not risen, he had not
conquered Natural Death; if he had not ascended, he had not led all Captivity
Captive. Let every action of Christ comfort thee, who did all that he did for
thee.

Thirdly, From hence we may be instructed, why so many are afraid of death;
Temporal Death I mean. The cause may be double, either a want of Christ, or a
want of Faith. 1. Wicked, vil^ wretches they are afraid to dye: Oh that that
cup might ever pass from them; they know not how to think of that day, and
parting hour; and truly no great marvel, death with its sting in it, will fear
the stoutest man in the world: For a poor wretch to be ready to dye, and cry
out, Now goes out my poor soul to answer for all my oaths and blasphemies, for
all my Sabbath breaking and profaness; now must I take my leave of all
comforts, friends, wife, children, all adieu for ever. If death be not killed it
self, it kills the heart of the stoutest, the poor wretch cannot see that
Christ has redeemed him from the power of the grave. 2. Gods own dear children
may fear death, through a want of faith, not applying, with such a confidence
as they ought, the merits and virtue of Christ's death to their souls. Those now
that the Lord has given a persuasion to, that they have an Interest in Jesus
Christ, those dye without fear, they know their Redeemer lives; and this was
the happiness of this precious Saint of God, that he has now taken from us:
She had comforted her self against the fear of Death, that she could say, O
death, where is thy sting? Therefore in a book she had composed and written for
her own use, to Her book ^s annexed to this Sermon.
comfort her against the fear of Death. She makes it her work to prove her
interest in Christ, and did it by several marks, which made her dye without
giving death an ill word, or countenance; death came, but he had lost his
sting, Christ had been its plague.

A second Use may be of Consolation comfort the children of God against the
fear of death: Lift up your heads, O ye righteous! be glad ye upright in heart!
All your enemies are trodden under foot: fear not sin, death, nor hell. Death
has lost its sting, Hell has lost its victory. 1. Fear not spiritual death:
Sin shall no longer have dominion over your mortal bodies; for Christ has died
to free you from the guilt of it, and to deliver you from the power of it. It
may live, it shall not reign; it may fight against, it shall not conquer you.
2. Fear not temporal death. Consider the Wasp has lost its sting. What hurt
can it do thy soul? It is not thy ruin Christian! It is thy perfection. Luke
13 32. I do cures, says Christ, to day, and to morrow, and the third day I
shall be perfected. Thou art not perfected here Christian! there is a crown of
glory, that the Father will set on thy h^ad with the black hand of death. Who
fears the Serpent, that has lost its teeth? the Be that has lost its sting.
O death, Christ has been thy death! Though thou might be afraid to take up
death, when it was a Serpent, yet see its turned into a rod. What is thy life
Christian? is it not full of frowns? are not all thy days almost tears and
sorrow? Does not the wicked world look a squint upon the Saints of God? is not
suffering an hereditary disease, that runs in the blood of Mighty Jesus? that
every Saint is born to inherit the Cross, and through Golgotha, to take his way
to glory? what should wed thee to the world Christian? not thy desire of life;
and sure it cannot be thy fear of death. Death has nothing formidable in it:
Say to it Christ is dead. O death where is thy sting then? Much less can they
fear eternal death; for they are passed from death to life, and the second
death has no power over them.

I have but a word more, and that is of Hic labor, hoc opus est; Christians,
here is your work, you spend else your time for nothing, and your labor for
that which will not profit. Work out your salvation; give all diligence to make
your calling and election sure. This is your land-work Saints; and while it is
done, you will never be prepared to go to Sea, to set sail for eternity; he
will never be satisfied with time and days, that has not some grounds to hope
for eternity. O that you would labor to make this work, your work: You spend
your days in labor and sorrow; and when you die, you will lie down in sorrow.
Believe it, you that spend your strength, for that which will not profit; you
will see the day when your souls will be troubled for the hours lost in
dressing and vanity, in the following the lusts of the eye, and of the flesh. O
make this your work, to get a portion in Christ, and believe him (who though he
knows but little, knows that) you will find it a difficult work; a work, that
will be enough for the time, and for the strength you have to spend. If you
have Christ, you are well, if not, you die a slave to death, and will be a
gallyslave to Satan in Hell for ever. O that you would be wise, and consider
your latter end, before you come down wonderfully. This was the work, and
constant work of this precious Si^^er of ours, whom God has now taken from the
evil to come. It was her practice to hasten over the business of her family, as
a thing to be done, yet not her great work; and then to apply her self to the
great work of making her calling and election sure. In which, her pains were as
unweariable, as others are in vanity. That she has lest behind her several
Books written, which are as the C^ronicle and Annuals of her life; collecting
those promises on which her soul rested; framing the objections of her own
spirit, and seeking out satisfaction from Gods Word. If in any thing she
doubted, she ^nquired at the lips of them that should preserve knowledge, and
pens down their answers, observes Gods ways with her self, and her own frame
toward him; and from all, gathers up a posie of such evidences of saving
Grace, as she could find in her soul, to comfort her in her latter hour. And
if any asks, what profited this labor? I could only have wished, that such
persons had been (as I was) a witness to her dying happiness; to have seen with
what a peace of Spirit, what a fullness of assurance, what hope, what joy, she
entertained her last affliction, the messenger of death: There they should have
seen this promise made good; the grave destroyed; the Saint delivered; hell
trodden under foot; death desired, conquered, despised; this song sung, O death
where is thy fling? O hell where is thy victory?

Be exhorted, O ye that have a portion in Christ, be exhorted to tred under
foot your conquered enemy. What is there in death, that is terrible or bitter,
to those that have a portion in the Lord Jesus Christ? Why are you afraid to be
made perfect? there is no taste of hell in the cup. The prison doors shall not
be locked; the bolts are broken off; the bitterness of death is past. O desire
to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: Love the winding sheet that wrapped up
your Savior; the stones and gravel of the grave, have nothing in them that is
hard or harsh. Christ has been the plague of death, and the destruction of the
grave. I heard a voice from henceforth, saying, Blessed are they that die in
the Lord; yea, (says the Spirit) for they rest from their labors.

Lastly, From this Text may those that Weep not for her, weep for thy self: Not
that she is gone, but that thou art here. Death has our friend in his hands,
but not in his power. It is Christ that has said, I will rede^m you from the
power of the grave. Is not Christ dead? is not he risen again? and ascended?
has he not led captivity captive? why mournest thou then for a Saints freedom?
is there any thing of bitterness in the cup, that thy and her Father, has
given her to drink? Triumph, because she triumphs; rejoice, because all tears
are now wiped from her eyes; show a faith in Christ's death, Resurrection,
Ascension, conquest over Sin, Death, and Hell. The work of Righteousness is
peace; and the ^ffect of her Righteousness, quietness, peace, and assurance for
ever.

FINIS.

