Sir Thomas Fairfax his Summons sent into OXFORD, And the Governors Answer,
with the names of those Sir Thomas Glenham desires passes for to treat about
what he shall send. Also Sir Thomas Fairfax his Summons sent into Wallingford,
Bostoll, and Rudcot. And the Copy of the Articles for the surrender of Dudley
Castle to Sir William Brereton, with all Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition, bag
and baggage.

These being examined by the original Copies, are commanded to be printed, and
are published according to Order of Parliament.

LONDON: Printed by Elizabeth Purslow, May 14. 1646.

The Copy of the Summons, sent into Oxford, on Monday the 11 of May, 1646, by
Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the surrender thereof, to his Excellency for the
PARLIAMENT.
SIR,
I Do by these, summon you to deliver up the City of Oxford into my hands,
for the use of the Parliament, I very much desire the preservation of that
place (so famous for learning) from ruin, which inevitably is like to fall
upon it, except you concur: You may have honorable terms for your self,
and all within the Garrison, if you season^bly accept thereof. I desire your
Answer this day, and remain

Your Servant T. Fairfax.
May 11, 1646. For the Governor of Oxford.
The Copy of Sir Thomas Glenhams Answer, to the Summons sent into Oxford, by
his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, with a motion for a safe conduct for
Commissioners to treat, sent out the same day.
SIR,
I Have received your Letter, summoning me to surrender the City, which was
given me in trust for His Majesty's use; but in respect there are many persons
of Eminency, I must desire you to receive for Answer a Request, that you will
be pleased to send a safe conduct for Sir John Mounson, and Master Philip
Warwick, to repair unto you at such a time and place as you shall appoint, by
whom you shall understand what for the present is desired, I remain

Your humble servant Tho. Glenham.
May 11, 1646. For Sir Thomas Fairfax
The Copy of the Sumons sent into Bostol house, on Monday the 11 of May, 1646,
by Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the surrender thereof to his Excellency, for the
Parliament.
SIR,
I Do by these, summon you to deliver up the Garrison of Bostol house into my
hands, for the use of the Parliament; you may have honorable terms for your
self, and all within your Garrison, if you seasonally accept thereof. I desire
your Answer this day.

May the 11, 1646. T. Fairfax.
For the Governor of Bostol house.
The Copy of the Summons sent into Radcot house, on Monday the 11 of May,
1646, by Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the surrender thereof to his Excellency, for
the Parliament.
SIR,
I Do by these, summon you to deliver up Ratcut house into my hands, for the
use of the Parliament; you may have honorable terms for your self, and all
within your Garrison, if you seasonably accept thereof. I desire your Answer
this day.

May the 11, 1646. T. Fairfax.
For the Governor of Ratcot house.
The Copy of the Summons, sent in to the Castle of Wallingford, on Monday the
11 of May, 1646. by Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the surrender thereof to his
Excel^encie, for the Parliament.
SIR,
I Do by these, summon you to deliver up the Castle of Wallingford into my
hands, for the use of the Parliament; you may have honorable terms for your
self, and all within your Garrison, if you seasonably accept thereof, I desire
your answer this day.

May the 11, 1646. T. Fairfax.
For the Governor of Wallingford Castle.
Articles agreed upon the 10. day of May, 1646. Between Lieutenant Colonel
Beamount, Major Christopher Henningham, and Major John Gifford, deputed on the
behalf of Colonel Leveson, Governor of the Castle of Dudley, and Colonel
Skipkins, Lieutenant Colonel Hunt, and Captain Stone, Commissioners appointed
by Sir William Brereton, Commander in chief of the Forces employed for the
redusing of the said Castle, touching the Surrender thereof.
1. THat all Gentlemen with their Servants, and all Officers in Commission,
shall march away with their Horses and Arms, so that they exceed not the
number of 30. And all common Soldiers that will march to any of the Kings
Garrisons unbesieged without their Arms, and all such as will live at their
own houses to have protections, submitting themseleves to all Ordinances of
Parliament, and all Gentlemen Soldiers and others, to carry with them their
own proper goods and no more.

2. That they shall have two Months time, to consider whether they will live
at home, or depart the Kingdom without molestation or arrest for any Hostel,
Act, or Debt, so far as is in our power, and to have passes to that purpose;
Provided, in the mean time they do nothing prejudicial to the Parliament.

3. That at the end of two Months, all that will live at their houses shall
enjoy their goods and estates without plunder or molestation, submitting to all
Ordinances of Parliament, and such as will go beyond seas, to have passes
accordingly, and convenient time allowed them to travel to any port Town to
take shipping with passes accordingly.

4. That no oath shall be imposed on any Officer or Soldiers that shall choose
to go to the said Garrisons, during the time of their march.

5. That a sufficient convoy be appointed to such as will march away, and
Carriages provided for their goods, and not to be forced to march above 10.
miles a day, and to have free quarter in their march, and care taken that no
abuse be offered to their persons, or any of their proper goods diminished.

6. That all the Prisoners in this County belonging to this Garrison shall be
released, and likewise all Countrymen and Soldiers in the Castle set at
liberty,

7. That the Governor shall on Wednesday next, by 12 of the clock, deliver up
the said Castle, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, Victuals,
Provisions, Goods, Bedding, and all other accommodation, necessary and
belonging to the said Castle, (except what is allowed by the fore said
Articles) and all those safe and unspoyled unto the said Sir William Brereton,
or whom he shall appoint for service of the Parliament.

8. That (the Prrliament giving order) the Works, Walls, and Towns of the said
Castle, shall be slighted and made nncapable of a Garrison.

9. That all Goods in the Castle that lawfully can be claimed and owned by any
of the Country, shall be restored.

10. That all wounded Soldiers shall have liberty to remain in the Town,
till they are cured, and then have passes according to the Articles.

Commissioners for the King.
John Beamont. Christopher Heveningham. John Gifford.
Commissioners for the Parliament.
Robert Stepkin Robert Hunt. Henry Stone.


FINIS.

