(...), OR, The Wicked Man's sad Disappointment, and The Righteous Man's sure
Recompense;

BEING A SERMON Preached the 17th. day of October 1661. at the SOLEMN FUNERALS
of the Right Worshipful Sir Abraham Raynardson Knight, Late ALDERMAN of LONDON.

By GEORGE SMALWOOD, M. A. and Rector of St. Margarets New-Fish-Street, London.

(...).

Macar. hom. 17. Justus fructum eligit, folia peccators Ambros. de Paradiso
cap. 13. Quam beata Civitas quae plurimos justos habet! quomodo benedicitur
tota de part? idem de Abel and Cain. l. 2. cap. 3. London, Printed by, Ame
Hunt for William Hope, and are to be sold at the sign of the Blew Anchor on the
back side of the Royal Exchange, 1661.

To the Right Worshipful and truly Pious Lady, the Lady Raynardson, his much
honored Friend, An abundant supply of all Spiritual and Heavenly consolations
is unfeignedly wished.
Madam,
IT is the first time that ever I adventured my meditations to the Press, and
it would have abundantly satisfied me, if these homely and unpolished Notions,
when they had served the Funeral of my Wo^thy deceased Friend, had bin buried
together with him, and not seen the Light, nor after they had safely passed the
T^yal of the Ear, have come again under the more strict examination, and exact
scrutiny of the eye. But I chose rather to expose these plain practical Truths
to the danger of a curious censure, then not satisfy the desires of your
Ladyship and those other worthy Friends and Relations of yours, to whom I am so
much obliged, or be wanting in the due respects which I owe to the Memory of
him that merited the tongue and pen of a far better Orator; he that in all his
public Transactions expressed so much Piety and Obedience to Gods Commands, so
much Loyalty to his Lawful Sovereign, so much Religious care to keep a
spotless and undefiled Conscience, so much tender love and respect to the
welfare of his Brethren and fellow Citizens, that was so zealous to preserve
the City from being stained with the indelible and everlasting infamy of Sacred
Royal Blood, certainly he and his actions deserved to be presented to the World
by some such eloquent Tongue, and accurate Pen as that of St. Basil the great,
whom Erasmus calls the Christian Demosthenes for his rare and almost
unparalleld eloquence; none but an Apelles might draw the Picture of Alexander
the great, nor any carve his Statue but Lysippus, as Plutarch tells us. It
was Livies opinion that none was Ad laudandum Ciceronem, Cicerone opus est.
fit to praise Clcero but another Cicero; truly he had need be a very skilful
Artist that draws the picture of this worthy Knight in his due Lineaments and
Proportions; here I have given the World but a rude draught, yet such as it is
I bring to your Ladyship both for Patronage and Acceptance, not doubting but
that you to whom the original was so dear, will most willingly embrace the
Copy; whatsoever is wanting to it in skill and workmanship, is made up in the
workmans honor and affectionate Respects toward him whom it represents, and
those to whom he was related; and I hope thht as the Diamond commands the Ring,
and makes it more precious, so this homely piece shall find the better
acceptance both with your self and others, for^kis sake that is the Subject of
it, who was a precious jewel indeed. Some perhaps will accuse me of
Hyperbolizing, and say I have given him too much, and some it may be wlll think
I have erred in the defect, and say I have given him too little, but I have
labored to steer my course in a middle and equal way between both these Rocks,
and have as near as I could judge, given him what was his just due and no more,
and what I need not want witnesses to attest; and I could do no less, for my
Text teaches me to deal Righteously, which I had not done if through a fearful
or hashful silence, I had concealed that from the world, which was so real in
him, and so profitable to be communicated to others; Here I have given a true
Character out of the sacred Oracles of God, both of the wicked whom he hates,
and of the righteous whom he loves: I have showed the fatal disappointment of
the one, and the certain and blessed Reward of the other, and have set forth
the work of Gods Free Grace (for I desire to set the Crown upon no other head
but that) in making this worthy Knight an eminent example of the latter: Now if
either the Preaching or Printing of these few Meditations, or the laudable
practice of him that occasioned them, has or shall effectually stir up any to
eschew the deceitful Way of wickedness, and walk in the safe and plain paths of
Righteousness, to be obedient to God, Loyal to their Sovereign, and faithful
to their trust which God and man committed to them, and not to be overswayed by
the tentations either of hope or fear to adventure upon any unrighteous and
unwarantable action or design, I shall bless God for such a Mercy, and esteem
it an auspicious hour that brought them forth into public view. And now
neither to detain your Ladyship, nor the Reader any longer in the Porch, but to
bring you into the house it self, I shall add only this humble request, that
you would not be over indulgent to pensive discontented thoughts that it has
pleased God to take so dear as Husband from you; but rather let it be your
comfort and joy that God was pleased to honor you with a Husband who was so fit
to be taken from you to the enjoyment of himself; consider what good God has
done by him, and now what good God has done for him, and let these be
Lenitives to assuage your grief; if God was so good as to make him righteous,
and now so merciful as to make him glorious, you have greater cause of
thankfulness, then sadness; if it were possible for you now to see the
happiness which you have good reason to believe he enjoys in the blessed
vision of God, it would turn all discontents into Hallelujahs and Songs of
Thanksgiving. R^flect not then so much upon your own loss as upon his gain, and
admire the wonderful love of God, who has takin away a mortal husband from
you, one that you knew must die, and has given himself to be your husband who
is immortal and lives for ever; he has no reason to complain that loses the
comfort of a Creature, and keeps sure possession of God the Creator; he can
want no comfort that wants not God; what has not he that has God Quid non
habet, qui habet habentem omnia.
who has all things? The Lord of his infinite goodness make up this earthly
loss to your Ladyship, with abundance both of Spiritual and Temporal Blessings
upon all the living branches of that dead root, but especially with a more full
enjoyment of himself and his Son Jesus Christ, and the Spirit of comfort both
in the communications of Grace here and the fruition of Glory hereafter. So
prays

November. 15. 1661. Madam, Your Ladyships humble Sevant in the Lord Jesus,
GEORGE SMALWOOD.

The wicked man's sad disappointment, and The righteous man's sure recompense.
PROVERBS 11. 18. The wicked works a d^ceitful work; but to him that s^weth
righteousn^ss, shall be a sure reward.
THis Book of the Proverls is made up of Divine Aphorisms and short
Sentences, which (as one of the Ancients (...).
says, upon another occasion) are very short, if you measure the words; but
full of spiritual energy, and Soul-saving Virtue; like a little body full of
spirits, or like juycy clusters of Grapes filled with the noblest liquour, and
ready to burst forth with new wine. Here are heavenly Apophthegmes fit for all
occasions, for all persons, for all actions. Here are comforts for the poor,
counsels for the rich, instructions for the ignorant, corrections for the
obstinate, wholesome precepts and precious promises, Characters both of good and
bad, matter for all to work upon.

It was penned by Solomon, who himself was a Proverb for his wisdom, a man
though not without great failings, to show that the Saints have their (...),
their fainting-fits, their imperfections and aberrations as well as others; and
we must expect no absolute perfection in those that dwell in houses of clay.
Yet he was one in whom much matter of great worth and excellent knowledge was
shut up and contained. The Holy Ghost says, He spoke of trees, from the
Cedar-tree that is in Lebanon, even unto the Hysop that springs out of the
wall; He spoke also of Beasts, and of Fowls, and of creeping things, and of
Fishes, and there came of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon. 1 Kings
4. 33, 34. It pleased God to use him as one of his Amanuenses or Divine Penmen
of holy Writ; and so notwithstanding his failings, he is to be reckoned inter
Sanctos Dei, among the holy Ones of God. For Saint Peter tells us, that
Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1. 21. so then he was one of those
holy men that were (...) inspired of God himself, and guided by his spirit.

And this eminently wise man like a careful Physician, has in this Book as it
were piled one upon another boxes of Medicines for all diseases, and cordials
to comfort and cheer up pious souls in the midst of all troubles and
distresses, with short inscriptions upon each of them, that any man, without
overburthening his memory, may easily learn a compendious and sudden cure for
every particular malady, and find a Cordial to revive and comfort his heart in
any fainting fit whatsoever.

These words which I have chosen for the subject of my discourse upon this
occasion, like most of the rest, have no dependence at all upon the former, but
are in themselves two absolute divine sentences or doctrines, as contraries one
to another, as the persons they speak of, and so they add luster each
Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt.
to other. For contraries placed together make one another more apparent.

Now here is an Antithesis or opposition between the state of the wicked, and
the state of the righteous, showing the vast difference between the one and the
other in their respective conclusions or final events, or the issue and result
of both their works.

1 The wicked man's work how prosperous and happy soever it seems for the
present, yet at last it proves vain, and deceitful; For the wicked, etc.

2. The righteous man's work, whatever outward evils accompany it for the
present, yet in the end it proves most blessed and successful. For to him that
sows, etc.

Thus this world is like a common field, where both good and bad have ground to
work upon. But the wicked sow such bad seed, that it brings forth nothing but
briars and brambles, it is all overgrown with thorns, and nettles cover the
face thereof, as it is said of the field of the slothful, and the Carduus and
spinis surgit paliurus acutts. Virgil.
Vineyard of the man void of understanding, Prove. 24. 30, 31. And so the wicked
work to no good purpose, but lose all the fruit they expected, and are nigh
unto cursing, whose end is to be bur^ed, Heb. 6. 8.

For as the work is false which they do, (God biding them do one thing, and
they doing another; he commanding them to sow to the spirit, and they sowing to
the flesh:) so it proves a work of falsehood to themselves also, wholly
frustrating their expectation, for it is a deceitful work.

It is in the Original the work of a lie, or a lying (...)
work. The work of a wicked man tells him a most notorious lie; for it
promises him good success, and he thinks his happiness is placed in it; he
hugs and applauds himself in his politic enterprises, Populus me sibilat, sed
mihi plaudo domi. Horat.
as the covetous man in the Poet did in his heaps of money, though all the
people were ready to hiss at him. As the Prophet speaks of the oppressors in
his time, He sacrifices unto his net, and burns incense unto his drag,
because by them his portion is fat, and his meat plenteous. Habak. 1. 16. How
many such fishers have fished in our troubled waters, and thought themselves
the wisest and best men in the Land? Thus the wicked man's work makes a fair
show in the beginning, nay perhaps it has a very hopeful progress for a long
time; for the Tabernacles of robbers may prosper, and they that provoke God,
may be secure, into whose hands God may bring abundantly, Job 12. 6. but at
last it brings nothing but woe and misery, and so all his devices fail and
vanish into nothing, they become a mere lie, and there is no truth in them.

But the righteous sow the pure corn of righteousness, which therefore proves
sincere also, and true to their hope: it deceives not their expectation, but
brings forth the harvest of a plentiful reward, which is reaped in Heaven,
though it were sown upon earth.

So then; these words contain two remarkable dispensations of divine providence.

1. The wicked man's sad disappoi^tment, after all his tedious toil and labor in
the works of iniquity: he works a deceitful work.

2. The righteous man's blessed success, after he has labored in the work of
the Lord, and passed through many difficulties; he loses not his labor, he
scatters not his seed in vain: For to him that sows, etc.

I shall not speak much to the first of these, viz. The wicked man's sad
disappointment, but only to warn you to take heed of his ways: For it is not
so suitable to our present occasion, save only to serve as a foil for the
latter. He, whose Funeral has ministered the occasion of this discourse, was
one, blessed be God, whose heart was made of a better Ex meliore luto sinxit
praecordia
mould; therefore I shall handle the first part more briefly.

1. And first let us consider the quality or nature of the person, He is a
wicked man.

A wicked man is one that lives as he was born, according to the principles of
corrupt nature, without any real change of his state and condition; one that
yet has never received any true life of Grace from Jesus Christ the Fountain
of life, but lies still in his natural unbelief and hardness of heart, and is
altogether dead in trespasses and sins; that is,

1. He is deprived of Spiritual life, per peccatum, by sin, as the means or
instrument: sin in the first Adam wounded him to death.

2. Propter peccatum, for sin, as the meritorious or impulsive cause, for which
God most justly depriveth him of life.

3. He is dead in sin, that is, he is so devoted, addicted, and wholly given
over to all ungodly, unrighteous, and sinful ways and practices, that a dead
man may as soon return to life, as he can be diverted and turned away from his
impiety and iniquity. He lies in sin like a dead man in a grave, turning more
and more daily to rottenness and putrefaction; and so walks according to the
course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of the air, the
spirit that now works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. making
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, giving neither God nor
man his due, but behaving himself irreligiously and profanely toward God,
unjustly and uncharitably toward his neighbor, unholily and impurely toward
himself, running into all excess of riot. He that lives in the constant
practice of any, or all these evils, is truly denominated a wicked man, an
ungodly, unrighteous, unclean liver.

2. Consider his action; he works; wickedness is an operative principle, and
the word (...) signifies (...) Turbulentus, seditiosus* inquietus. Turbulent
in the Commonwealth, unsettled in all things. Leigh, Crit, Sacra.
turbulent, seditious, unquiet, and restless, as well as wicked. For wicked men
are of unquiet, troublesome spirits, like the troubled Sea that cannot rest,
whose waters cast forth mire and dirt: they are without peace in themselves,
therefore they seek to molest and disturb others; like fire they are still
breaking out into one combustion or other. Saint Jude calls wicked men raging
waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame. Now nothing is more restless
then the waves of the Sea, they cannot forbear tumbling and tossi^g, if there
(...) Jud. v: 14.
be any wind stirring. He calls them wandering Stars, Planets; not properly so
called, for no Starwander less then they do. The Planets in themselves have
certain stated motions, and do keep the just points of their Compass; The Sun
knows his going down, Psalm. 104. and the Moon is a faithful witness in
Heaven, keeping its constant course from one sign of the Zodiak to another; and
they have the name of Planets, not from their own nature, but from the
judgment of sense, because they are not carried about the whole circuit of the
Heavens, but in a shorter Orb and course. But now improperly, there are other
wandering Stars, which are not Stars indeed, but only dry exhalations inflamed,
which glare much, and deceive the eye (...), Aristotle,
with appearance of light, but soon vanish and are quenched. These Aristotle
calls running and gliding Stars, which are nothing else but fiery meteors
glancing and shooting. Such Stars are wicked men; they have sometimes an
appearance of light, as if they were true Stars, but they are but (...), things
which appear what they are not, fiery meteors; and as they are various and
uncertain in their motions, sometimes moving this way, and sometimes that, so
they are restless in their motions, till they are quite extinguished, and put
out. For such is the nature of wicked men, that they will be working, though it
be (...), a fruitless work to no purpose. The corruption of their heart is a
restless evil, still breaking out upon every occasion, making men commit sin
with both hands greedily, drinking in iniquity like water, and drawing on sin
with cords of vanity; as the Prophets phrase is, Not suffering men to sleep,
but causing them to devise in quity, and work evil upon their beds, and put it
in practice when the morning is light, because it is in the power of their
hands to do it, Mich. 2. 1. so Prove. 4. 16. it is said of wicked men, They
sleep not except they have done mischief, and their sl^ep is taken away, unless
they cause Et si non aliqua nocuisses, mortuus esses, Virgil. (...), Plutarch.
some to fall: nay, it is a kind of death to them, not to do evil, Having eyes
full of adultery, and that cannot cease to sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14. the very sight of
their eyes is turned as it were into adulterious glances, as Plutarch wittily
expresses it: this is the genius and natural disposition of wicked men; like
Satan the god of the world, they are circumambulators, they are going to and
fro in the earth, and walking up and down in it, compassing Sea and Land to
make one proselyte, as Christ says of the Pharisees: and it is most true of
the Jesuits, those busy Factors of A^tichrist, who are like Flies, buzzing in
every corner, and seeking to bring in their erroneous opinions, and
superstitious practices. Thus the wicked man is still working: so the Hebrew
word being a participle of the present Tense, notes a continued act, without
any, or not (...)
with much interruption.

3 Let us examine the vanity and folly of his work; God knows he is doing to
very little, or no purpose, as to his own good: for it is a lying or deceitful
work, and that in diverse respects.

1 In respect of Satan, the principal efficient cause of it, who is the father
of lies, the grand impostor that deceives the whole world, that has his (...),
his sophistical reasonings, and crafty devices; his (...), wiles, methods, and
stratagems; his (...), depths that are unsearchable, whereby he gulls and
deceives the poor souls of men, that like silly birds are caught in his
snares, or like brute beasts, are carried captive by him at his will.

2 The wicked works a deceitful work, in respect of the fountain from whence
it flows; namely, the heart of man, which is deceitful above measure, and
desperately wicked; a mere supplanter, propounding evil under the appearance of
good; full of deceitful reasonings, and carnal policies. The Apostle calls
the lusts of the heart (...), lusts of deceit, or deceitful lusts, by a
familiar Hebraism. Ephesians. 4. 22.

3 The work of the wicked is deceitful, because at last it always meets with
frustration and disappointment, Psalm. 7. 14. Behold, he travaileth with
iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood. There was
never any wicked worker yet, that did not befool and deceive himself in the
conclusion; and self deceit is the worst deceit.

1 The wicked worker promises himself joy and comfort, but God on a sudden
turns all his joy into mourning: he feeds him with wormwood, and gives him
waters of gall to drink. In the midst of his mirth there appears a
handwriting against him, which strikes him with trembling, and fills him
with horror and amazement, as it did Belshazzar.

2 He promises himself peace, safety, and security; he says in his heart, I
shall be a Lady for ever; I am, and none else besides me; I shall not sit as a
widow, neither shall I know the loss of children; this was the vain confidence
of Babylon, Isa. 47. 8. And so it is of the carnal man; he trusts in his own
heart, his own wisdom and policy, and makes flesh his arm, but departs from the
living God, and thinks his mountain stands so strong, that it shall never be
moved. But God says, There is no peace to the wicked; nay, when he says peace
and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon him, as pain upon a woman in
travail, and he shall not escape, 1 These. 5. 3. In an hour when he thinks not,
the Lord comes, and brings upon him that which he least feared, saying unto
him as he did to Babylon, These two things shall come to thee in a moment, in
one day; the loss of children and widowhood; they shall come upon thee in their
perfection, Isa. 47 9. Wicked men, like Saul, whilst they think by carnal
means to make their peace, plunge themselves deeper into misery: and when they
are in the very height of their prosperity, they are suddenly cast down into an
abyss of adversity, never to rise again, Psalm. 73. 19, 20. How are they brought
into desolation as in a moment? they are utterly consumed with terrors. As a
dream when one awaketh; so O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shall despise their
image.

3 The wicked worker (if perhaps at any time he think upon death) dares promise
himself comfort in that also, and eternal happiness after death: but he
deceives himself, he shall find death to him the king of terrors, and shall
meet with nothing after it but torment and misery, the worm that never dies,
and the fire that is never quenched. It is said of the hypocrite, that his hope
shall perish, Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spiders
web, Job 8. 13. 14. All that an hypocrite hopes for at his death, shall come to
nothing: he shall find that all this while he has been in a golden dream, that
he has been as one that is hungry, who dreams he is eating, but when he awakes
his soul is empty. He shall find that all his lifetime he has been weaving
Spiders webs, which is a work of curiosity, but not fit for clothing, or any
other use. Therefore as the Spider eviscerates her self, and weaveth her web
out of her own bowels; and when she has spent her pains, her work is fit for
no use but to catch Flies; and when the house is cleansed, it is suddenly swept
away, and perishes: So wicked men toil and labor, and consume their very
bowels for the enjoyment of these outward things; and their hope and trust is
in their own duties, gifts, strength, and wealth: but when death comes, all
these are swept away from them; yea, they themselves are swept away with the
besome of destruction, like so many useless cobwebs; and their hope proves no
better then a Spiders web.

Nay, which is worse then death, the sequel of death is unspeakable misery; he
is loath to dye, but he cannot Mors prima pellit animam nolentem de corpore,
mors secunda detinet animam nol^^tem in corpore. August.
escape it: the first death drives his soul, whether it will or no, out of the
body, and the second death will keep his soul, whether it will or no, in the
body, as Saint Augustine expresses it; for his body, which has been a
companion with his soul in sin, shall be a sharer with it in torment, and so
his hope perishes for ever.

Thus the wicked works a deceitful work indeed. Malicia maximam partem veneni
sui bibit, wickedness drinks up the greatest part of its own poison; and the
wicked man is like the Wasp; for with his sting he offends others, but much
more himself; for he leaves behind him, and that for ever, both his sting and
his strength, and brings himself at last by his wicked works, to the ruin of
body and soul to eternity.

O take heed of adventuring upon any wicked work whatsoever with hope of
security or impunity: meddle not with that which will so grossly deceive you.
You have seen in these unhappy times, what the end of wickedness has been; how
much they deluded themselves, how suddenly and sadly to themselves they were
disappointed of their hopes. God miraculously turned the wheel upon them, and
their mischief returned upon their own head, and their violent dealing came
down upon their own pate. This has been always Gods method; He has left us
examples of his vindicative justice upon unrighteous men, to be for our
admonition. What did Achitophels wicked policy, who was esteemed as an oracle
of God, come to at last? when he saw that his counsel was undervalued, he went
home in a discontent, and hanged himself. God suffered him to be his own
executioner. So Absoloms rebellion against holy David Hamans malicious devices
against the people of God to destroy them, and Judas his treason against his
blessed Master the Lord Jesus Christ; the insurrection of Corah and his
Accomplices against Moses and Aaron: all these met with nothing in the conclusion
but violent and accursed deaths; they were disappointed of their hope, and cast
themselves into the bottomless pit of remediless misery. Saint Bernard says of
Judas, he thirsted for gain, and found Dum sitit lucrum, tendit ad laqucum.
Bern.
an halter to choke him. Corah and his company went down alive into the pit,
the earth opening her mouth and swallowing them up. Read this History, and
tremble to attempt the like, lest God make you examples to others Lege
historium ne sias historia.
of his severe vengeance. O take heed of presuming to do any ungodly, unjust,
or unlawful action; shun it as you would do a savage wild beast, or the sword
of an enraged R^pet in authorem scelus. Sen. Trag. Raro antecedent^m scelestum
deseruit pana pede claudo. Horat.
enemy; for in the end it will bring nothing but disappointment and
destruction; and as Moses says, their sin will most certainly find them out.

But I leave the dark side of the cloud, and shall change the scene, and
present unto you the light side, viz. the Godly man's blessed success. Although
the wicked man's work will deceive him; yet the righteous shall not be
disappointed of his hope; For to him that sows, etc.

Herein let us consider, 1. The quality of the person, To him that sows
righteousness.

2 His blessed success, wherein these things are to be observed, 1. The
futurity of it, It shall be, it is not yet. 2. The certainty of it, it shall be
sure. 3. The excellent nature of it, what and how great it shall be, in the
word Reward

First, Let us reflect a little upon the quality of the person, and therein
three things are to be noted. 1. The Metaphor by which he is resembled, He is a
Sower of Seed. 2. The Seed which he sows is righteousness. 3. His
perseverance and continuance in sowing this Seed; he is sowing in the present
tense; that is, still sowing all his life (...)
long, he never breaks off this work till it be quite finished, and that will
not be till his life be ended. Of each of these in order.

1. The righteous man is a Sower of Seed, this Metaphor of sowing fitly sets
forth the practice of a true Christian; a righteous man is like one that sows
Seed in a field.

1. In respect of his preparation for it: for as before the Seed is sown, the
ground must be broken and plowed up, and so made sit to receive it: So he that
sows righteousness, must first have his heart plowed and broken by
contrition, godly sorrow and humiliation for sin. The Prophet Hoseah says to
Israel, So we to your selves in righteousness, reap in mercy; break up your
fallow ground, cap. 10. 12. He that ploweth not, cannot sow. It is only the
broken and contrite heart that is fit to receive, or retain grace; our hearts
must be prepared for grace, as the ground for the seed by plowing; So it was
with St. Peter's converts, Acts 2. 37. (...), they were pricked in their hearts,
and said to Peter and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall
we do? if the fallow ground of our hearts was never yet plowed by godly sorrow
and humiliation for our sins, it argues that the seed of righteousness was
never yet sown there.

2. After our hearts are plowed up, then the seed of grace must be cast in by
the Ministry of the Gospel, the glad tidings of salvation being declared and
applied by the faithful Dispenser of Divine mysteries. The Preacher says, In
the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand: for thou
know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether both shall
be alike good, Eccles. 11. 6. This is not much unlike S. Paul's Counsel to
Timothy, Preach the word, be instant in season, and out of season, 2 Timothy 4. 2.
The Ministers of Christ must be careful to sow the seed of the word upon all
occasions, and leave the success to God that gives the increase; for as our
Savior says, the Ut sementem feceris, ita and ^etes.
Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a man that sowed good seed in his field,
Mat. 13. 14. After plowing there must be sowing, or no crop can be expected.

3 After sowing the seed there must be rain to moisten it, and sunshine to warm
it, and make it spring forth; for humor and calor, moisture and heat are the
causes of growth: So the seed of grace that is sown in the heart, must still be
watered with the tears of true godly sorrow, and with the dew of Heaven from
above. They that sow in tears, can only look to reap to joy; he that goes
forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him, Psalm. 126. 5, 6. A dripping Spring is
most likely to produce a plentiful Harvest. And then the sunshine of the Spirit
must continually warm and quicken the seed of grace, till it spring up and come
at last to maturity; for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life, 2 Cor.
3. 6.

4 When the ground is well plowed, and the seed is sown, watered and warmed,
there must be expectation and patient waiting till the time of Harvest: So when
the seed of grace is sown, it must have a time to grow, and ripen by degrees;
for no man comes to the perfection Nemo repent sit optimus.
of goodness on a sudden, the Sun climbs by little and little to his Meridian
altitude: And so the path of the just is as the shining light, that shines
more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4. 18. The earth brings forth fruit,
first the blade, then the ear, after that the full Corn in the ear, Mark. 4.
28. So it is in all things; ad summum non nisi ex principiis, we must begin at
the bottom, and so come to the top by rounds and steps, as they that climb up
a Ladder. Therefore when we have sown the seed of grace, we must wait upon God
till we reap the Harvest of Glory, and be content to endure all manner of
Weather, rain and storms, as well as serene Halcyon days of peace and
tranquillity; if we meet with Thunder, and Hail, and an horrible Tempest, we
must not be terrified, but bear it out with courage and constancy. So did Job
in the midst of the fiercest storms, and foulest Weather that ever poor mortal
endured; he says, all the days of my appointed time will I wait till my
change come, Job 14. 14. the original (...) Militiae (...). so Montanus,
word that signifies an appointed time, signifies also a warfare; now Job was
content to wait upon God, till he should be pleased to give him his quietus
est, and discharge him, though his life were a continual warfare, where every
battle of the Warrior is with confused noise, and Garments rolled in blood,
Isai. 9. 5. So must he that sows this seed of righteousness, wait till the
time of rewarding come. Behold, says St. James, the Husbandman waits for the
precious fruit of the Earth, and has long patience for it, until he receive
the early and latter rain: Be ye also patient, establish your hearts; for the
coming of the Lord draws nigh, cap. 5. ver. 7. 8. The righteous have more
reason to wait patiently then the Husbandman; for they shall come to a better
Harvest then he, to a more rich and plentiful crop, even to the enjoyment of
God himself, who is the chiefest good, to sit with Christ upon his Throne, and
be Partakers with him of his Glory: Therefore they have good cause to wait with
patience, for they shall be well paid for their waiting; every minute shall be
abundantly remunerated; besides they shall do that which is good and well
pleasing to God. Lam. 3. 26. It is good that a man should both hope and quietly
wait for the Salvation of the Lord. Salvation will make them amends for all
their pains and patience in waiting, and expectation shall be turned into
fruition: Thus you see the righteous man's employment; he is a Sower of seed,
and how fitly the Metaphor suits with his practice and condition.

2 The Seed which he sows is righteousness, not legal righteousness, which is
an exact conformity to the Will and Law of God, fulfilling it (...) in the
utmost rigor of it, in thought, word, and deed, in perfection both of nature
and action; no mere man since the fall ever sowed such seed of righteousness;
it is proper only to Jesus Christ the righteous, who is both God and Man, and
therefore is called Jehovah, our Righteousness, and was made a propitiation for
our sins: He, and none but He, was able to fulfill all Righteousness.

2 Therefore the Righteousness here spoken of, as the seed which must be sown,
is Evangelical Righteousness, which Christ has purchased for all those which
believe and embrace the Gospel: and this also is twofold.

1 Imputative, or the Righteousness of justification, which is the
Righteousness of Christ himself, inherent in his Person as in the subject, but
imputed to us, and made ours. We sow this Righteousness, when we receive Christ
by Faith, and are united to him, and so are made Partakers of his Merits; and
by renewed acts of Faith we have it continually communicated to us, to our
lives end. This is called The Righteousness of Faith; Romans 4. 13.

2 There is Evangelical Righteousness inherent in us, which is the
Righteousness of sanctification, whereby we are regenerated and receive the
Image of our Heavenly Father, being renewed in our minds, and putting on the
new man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians.
4. 24. and thereby we bring forth the fruits of all good works to God, our
neighbors, and our selves.

Some restrain this righteousness in the Text only to Almsdeeds, and
liberality to the poor, taking it in Daniels sense in his counsel to
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 27. O King, break off thy sins by righteousness, and
thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor. But righteousness here is taken
(...).
more generally for all manner of good works, it is a comprehensive word
containing all moral virtues in it, and so to sow righteousness is to lead a
holy and a righteouslife in all godliness and honesty, to give God and man his
due, to be fruitful in good works, to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with God, Mic. 6. 8. It is as the Prophet Isaiah paraphraseth upon it,
to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the
oppressed go free, to break every yoke, it is to deal our bread to the hungry,
and to bring the poor that are cast out into our houses; when we see the naked,
to cover him, and not to hide our selves to our own flesh, Isai. 58. 6, 7. To
live in the constant and conscionable practice of these and all other duties
which God requires in his word, and that sincerely, and with an honest heart,
this is to sow righteousness; and this righteousness inherent, is always joined
with righteousness imputed; justus reputatus, he that is accounted righteous,
is always justus factus, made righteous by inherent sanctification, and the
fruits thereof; and he that is justified by faith, is always made zealous of
good works; the one is the Fountain, the other the stream, the one is the
foundation, the other the building; the one is the precious ointment, the other
the sweet savor of that ointment; thus you see what the righteouss man's seed
is, viz. his righteousness.

3. There follows his perseverance and continuance insowing this seed, he is
still sowing it all his life long; for, as I observed before, the Participle of
the Present Tense here used, notes not only actum inchoatum, an act begun, sed
continuatum and perfectum, continued and brought to perfection; he does not sow
one or two or (...). Chrysostom.
three days, months or years, but all his days; as he goes on his course, he
still scatters the seed of righteousness; it is his constant practice, and he
persevereth in it to the very end; he seeks glory, and honor, and immortality,
by patient continuance in well doing; he is truly (...), a perfect man, because
he does not his work by halves, but is careful to bring it to perfection; he
begins not in the Spirit, and ends in the Flesh, but respondent ^ltima primis,
his end is answerable to his beginning; he lets Faith, and Patience, and
Humility, and every heavenly virtue, have their perfect work, and gives not
over laboring about the spiritual building, till he has laid the top stone
thereof with rejoicing, crying Grace, grace unto it, he bears forth precious
seed, and is always sowing it, till at last he comes to reap the Harvest of
Eternal Blessedness; thus you see the qualification of the person, he is one
that sows, his Seed is righteousness, and continues in sowing it to the end.

2. Let us take a view of his blessed success, to him shall be a sure reward;
herein three things are observable.

1. The futurity of this man's reward in the perfection and completeness of it,
it shall be, it is not yet: now he is but in via, in the way traveling toward
his reward, he shall ere long be in patria, in his heavenly Country, enjoying
his reward; now he has it only in primitiis, in the first fruits and foretasts
of it, in the graces of the Spirit, which are but a few Clusters of the Grapes
of Canaan; hereafter he shall reap the full crop: now he has his blessedness
in faith and hope, hereafter he shall have it in vision and fruition. It does
not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear, we
shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. 2. This is a
glorious privilege to be (...), like God, and to see God: how beautiful will
their faces be, that shall be like him? how blessed will their eyes be that
shall see him! surely their beauty and blessedness is beyond all expression or
conception, but all this is to come. It is said, the righteous shall shine like
the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13. 43. they shall shine
hereafter, for the present they must be content to be darkened and clouded with
corruptions, afflictions, and temptations: this is their cloudy time, the time
of their Eclipse, their shinning time is to come: Now they are as it were under
the Horizon in obscurity, but hereafter they shall arise like the Sun after a
dark night, and shine in perfect brightness and glory.

God gives the wicked their heaven upon earth, they have their portion in this
life: he fills their bellies with his hid treasure; but that is all the good
they must expect, they have all their happiness (if it may be so called, which
is but a Prologue to endless misery) in present possession, they have none in
reversion for the future. It is said of them, they have their reward, that
which they desired, which they preferred and chose, which they loved and liked,
which they sought after, and labored for above all other things, above God,
above Jesus Christ the Lord of Life and Glory, above the Holy Spirit, and his
Graces and Comforts, above the Heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the Living God,
and all its glorious enjoyments, they have their good things already, and they
must look for no more good to come, not one moment of comfort after their
departure from hence, not one glimpse of light, not so much as a drop of cold
water to refresh them, not the least minute of rest, but woe and misery, and
darkness, and torment for ever, this shall be the portion of their cup, and
they may thank themselves, they chose the pleasures of sin for a season, they
would have their heaven upon earth, they would have murmured if it had been
denied them, they would not be persuaded to make a better choice, therefore
they must expect nothing for the future, but to feel the worm that will gnaw
their hearts to eternity.

But he deals otherwise with the righteous; he many times cuts them shorter
of earthly comforts, and keeps them for the most part to a more scanty
allowance, that hereafter they may enjoy a greater fullness; he suffers them to
mourn here, that they may rejoice hereafter; to mingle their drink with
weeping, that hereafter he may wipe all tears from their eyes, and remove all
sorrow and sadness from their hearts; their portion is to come, their Crown of
Righteousness is laid up in flore, their inheritance is teserved in the
heavens, they have a blessed estate in reversion; for to him that sows
righteousness shall be a sure reward. It is not now, but it shall be hereafter,
that's the futurity of it.

2. The certainty of it, it is a sure reward, according (...). Septuagint.
to the Hebrew Text, it is a true or faithful reward, or a reward of truth, so
the Septuagint render it. The Chaldce and Syriach traslations read it, veritas
erit merces ejus, truth shall be his reward, intimating to us, that as truth it
self is most true, and cannot lie nor deceive, so to him the reward shall be
most certain. It is no fancy nor delusion, but a certain truth. Lahan could not
find his images among Jacobs stuff, for Jacob was a righteous man, and as Non
erat apud cum image, sed veritas. Ambrose.
St. Ambrose observes well, there was not with him the image, but the Truth it
self, not a deceitful likeness, but solid substance of blessedness; so it is
with the righteous man, his reward is not the image of blessedness, but
blessedness in truth, a solid certain true reward. The reward of the righteous
is accompanied with a fivefold certainty.

1. It has certitudinem beneplacit^ the certainty of Gods good will and
pleasure; of his mere mercy and free grace he has purposed and decreed from
eternity to reward therighteous; he has wi^led it and resolved upon it. Our
Savior says to His Disciples, Fear not little Clock, for it is your Fathers
good pleasure to give you a Kingdom Luke 12. 32. Now what is Gods will and
pleasure, must be performed, for he never wills in vain; the pleasure of his
will shall most certainly be fulfilled, and all his counsel shall stand.

2 It has certitudinem precij, the certainty of Christ's purchase; he has
purchased a reward for the righteous, and that at a dear rate, with the expense
of his own life and blood: it is called the redemption of the purchased
possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. Now Christ will not lose that which he has purchased
with the price of his precious blood. Having by his own blood entered in once
into the holy place, and obtained eternal redemption for us, he will not suffer
us to be defeated of our inheritance: but as he entered into Heaven for us, as
our forerunner, so he sits in Heaven as our Head, keeping possession for us his
Members, till we shall ascend thither after him.

3 It has certitudinem promissi, the certainty of Gods promise: God has
promised to reward the righteous, Jam. 2. 5. Has not God chosen the poor of
this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised to
them that love him? Christ says, The righteous shall go into life eternal,
Matthew. 25. 46. Now all Gods promises are Yea and Amen in Christ, that is,
doubly certain: what he has promised, he will undoubtedly perform.

4 It has certitudinem juramenti, the certainty of an Oath, which for
confirmation is (...), an end of all strife. Heb. 6. 16. Ged has sworn by
himself, because he could swear by no greater, that he will reward the
righteous, verse. 17. 18. God welling more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
prowise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, that by two
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have
strong consolation, who are fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us; That is, the reward hoped for, which is most certain, and cannot
deceive, because God has sworn to bestow it, and he will not, he cannot break
his Oath. God has sworn, and shall it not come to pass? We may better say that
the Covenant of the day and night shall be broken. Therefore the righteous man's
hope of reward is an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast, and which
enters into that within the vail, verse. 19. The word is doubled, Sure and
steadfast, to show the certainty of it: It is such a sure Anchor, that it will
hold fast the soul in the midst of the greatest storms, which makes the
Psalmist conclude peremptorily; A man shall say, that is, every man, if he be
endued with right reason, That, Verily there is a reward for the righteous,
verily he is a God that judges in the earth, Psalm. 58. 11.

5 The reward of the righteous has certitudinem Sigilli, the certainty of Gods
Seal; he has set his own mark upon them for his Sheep, to whom he will give
eternal life; he has set his own Seal upon them to distinguish them from all
others. The Apostle says, In whom after that ye believed, ye were sealed with
that holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.
13, 14. Now they whom God has sealed with his own Privy Seal, cannot miss of
the promised reward. For the foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal,
The Lord knows them that are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. God will know them, and own
them for his, therefore they must needs be saved.

Thus the reward of the righteous is most sure; for God has willed it, Christ
has purchased it; God has promised and sworn to bestow it, and he has given
them the Seal of his Spirit to assure them of it; therefore it cannot fail nor
deceive them: as there is truth in their righteousness, so there is infallible
truth and certainty in the reward of it. To him that sows righteousness shall
be a sure reward.

3 Lastly, let us a little consider the excellent nature of this reward, what,
and how great it shall be. It is no common or trivial thing, no fruit and
effect of Gods general love and bounty to mankind, but an especial choice
token of his peculiarlove and favor which he shows to his Jedidiahs, his
beloved darlings, his special Favorires, whom he has set aparr for himself, to
see his face, and enjoy his glory. It is that which is most transcendently
blessed, neither eye has seen it, nor ear heard it, nelther has it entered
into the heart of man to conceive it. I will give you some few glimmerings of
it, as they shine forth in the word.

1 This reward is life without death: for righteousness tends to life, as it
is in ver. 19. of this chap. This life is not subject to the stroke of death,
but is immortal and cannot decay. Our Savious says, This is the bread which
comes down from Heavem, that a man may eat thereof and not die. I am the
living bread which came down from Heaven, if any man eat of this bread he shall
live for ever. As the course of Rivers is to return to the Sea, from whence
they have their original; so righteousness, coming from Christ the Ocean of
life, tends thither again: and Christ says to such, Because I live, ye shall
live also, John 14. 19.

2 It is light without darkness, a Sun that shall never set, and there are no
Clouds to overshadow it; a perpetual solstice of glory, a day that knows no
evening, a uniform constant light. Hell is the Region of darkness, but, Heaven
is the Region of light, yea, (...), a mavelous light, where we shall see such
wonders, as we never saw or thought of before. It is said of the Heavenly
Jerusalem, The City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it:
For the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. And the
Nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it, Revel. 21. 23,
24.

3 It is joy without the least mixture of sorrow: there is no mourning, no
sorrow, no complaining in those streets where the righteous shall dwell, but
joy unspeakable and full of glory. David says, In thy presence is fullness of
joy, at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. Saint John
says of the holy City, the new Jerusalem, and the Inhabitants thereof, God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the
firmer things are passed away, Revel. 21. 4. then that comfortable promise
shall be certainly fulfilled, Isa. 51. 11. The redeemed of the Lord shall
return, and come with singing unto Sion, and everlasting joy shall be upon
their head: they shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and mourning shall
flee away.

4 It is peace and tranquillity without the least trouble or disquiet; a
perpetual calm, (...), a quiet Harbor, without fear of winds, storms, or
Pirates. The Prophet says of the righteous, He shall enter in^o p^ace; they
shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness, Isa. 57. 2. What
sweet repose shall the righteous man find in Abraham's bosom! he shall have
perfect peace with the God of peace, and Christ the Prince of peace, and he
shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, where there are only friends and no
enemies.

5 Lastly, The reward of the righteous is in one word (...) Beatitudines*
Cumulus omnium bonorum aggregatione perfectus.
Blessedness, Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, that walk in
the Law of the Lord. The word is Blessednesses, a plurality of blessings, an
heap of all good things gathered together in perfection, where no evil shall be
present, no good shall be wanting; for there shall be God the chiefest good,
nay, (...), all the good that can be named, and all this shall dure to
eternity; For the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Romans 6. 23. This is a blessed reward indeed. I might be very large in the
application of these truths, but then I should transgress the usual bounds of a
Funeral Sermon; therefore I shall speak but a few admonitions, and so come from
the Text to the occasion.

Glaucus his change, viz. Gold for Brass? Truly I cannot enough (...).
admire at the folly of Worldlings, that choose to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season, and have no eye at this recompense of reward, prona in terram
animalia, that look always down to the earth, and raise not their thoughts, nor
lift up their eyes to those Mansions of glory in Heaven, where the righteous
shall be rewarded; that labor so much for the meat that perishes, and will
take no pains for that which endures to everlasting life: that prefer dross
before gold, and gold before grace and glory. Doubtless, had they an eye of
faith to see the excellency of this reward, they would choose to sow the seed
of righteousness, although they sowed it in tears, because they shall be sure
to reap in joy.

Therefore let me beseech and exhort you by the Lord Jesus Christ, to walk not
as fools, but as wise: to make the best choice, to choose eternal blessedness
before temporal abundance. Choose the righteous man's reward, rather then the
Worldlings portion? Let it not be said of you, that ye have your portion in
this life, that ye have your reward; but choose God for your portion and
inheritance, and the enjoyment of God in the life to come. And to that end, if
you desire comfort in death, when all earthly comforts will fail you, and the
breasts of the Creatures which you delight to suck, will be quite dried up: be
careful to sow this blessed seed of righteousness both to God and man; take the
Apostles counsel, 2 Timothy 2. 22. Follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace,
with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart. The word is, (...), pursue
it, hunt after it, as the hunter does after his prey, not resting satisfied
till you have obtained it. This will be a comfortable Cordial, a sovereign
Antidote against the fear of death, when all the wealth and greatness in the
world will stand you in no stead. For as the wise man says, Riches profit not
in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivers from death, Prove. 11. 4. It
will deliver you from the evil of death temporal, and from the power of death
eternal. That which is a terror to others, shall be a rejoicing to you; and
when death approaches, you shall be able to lift your heads with comfort, as
knowing that your redemption draws nigh; You shall be able to say with good
Hezekiah, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee
in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight, Isa. 38. 3. You shall be able to worship God, and say with holy Jacob,
Lord, I have waited for thy salvation; You shall breath out your souls with
Saint Stephens Prayer, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; You shall have life, and
light, and joy, and peace, and blessedness, and what not that is good to have.
As God has given you grace to make you righteous, so he will give you glory to
make you blessed? As you have sown the righteousness here, so you shall be sure
to reap the reward of righteousness hereafter. For to him that sows, etc.
Amen. And so I leave the Text.

And now let me crave your patience a little longer, to speak a few words of
the occasion of our present meeting; though it is not my custom to make large
Panegyricks, or commendatory Orations at the Funerals of the dead, because I
know the comfort of a sincere Christian is, That his praise is not of men, but
of God.

Yet for example and encouragement to others, I cannot but speak something of
this worthy and Heroic Citizen, Sir Abraham Raynardson Knight, late Alderman,
and sometime Lord Mayor of this honorable City of London, upon whom my Text is
a fit Commentary, and I am persuaded may be truly applied to his practice: For
as far as I was able to judge by the course of his conversation, for those many
years acquaintance which I had with him, and the experience I had of him, I
think I may truly say of him, he was one that sowed righteousness.

For as to his life and conversation, he always appeared to me, and I think to
all others that knew him, to be very innocent and inoffensive; a man of a very
strict life, walking as it was said of Zachary and Elizabeth, in all the
Ordinances and Commandments of God, though not (...) without sin, for who walk
so; yet (...) without blame: No man, as ever I heard, could justly charge any
thing upon him.

1. As for his piety to God, he was a man Orthodox and sound in the Faith, not
tainted with any Heretical opinion, or drawn away from the truth established
amongst us, as too many have been in this time of Apostasy: He was a diligent
and constant attender upon the public Ordinances upon the Lords days, a
careful observer of holy Duties in his Family, and as I have been informed,
his closet was conscious to his secret devotions: He was a man of few word, and
affected not, as many do, (...), to make a fair show in the flesh, and to say
wirh Jehu, come see my zeal for the Lord of hosts: but I am persuaded by all
probabilities, he was constant in putting up his suits and supplications at the
Throne of grace in secret, remembering our Saviors counsel, Matthew. 6. 6. Thou,
when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy door,
pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret
shall reward thee openly: this I have reason to think was his practice.

2. For his relations; he was a loving Husband, and a careful Father, one that
not only made good provision for their outward estate by his industry in his
Calling, and Gods blessing upon it, but was also careful of the welfare of
their souls; witness the good admonitions and counsels to his Children upon his
Deathbed, which I hope will make such an impression upon their Spirits, as
shall not easily be forgotten, viz. to be constant in calling upon the Name of
God, and to serve him faithfully; to be dutiful and obedient to their Mother,
and to live in love and unity one with another. The Lord grant them grace to
remember and practice these things, and follow their deceased Fathers advise,
as the Rechabites did the counsel of their father Jonadab, that the blessing of
God may rest upon them

3. For his dealing with men, he was very careful to sow this seed of
righteousness, he was very exact and just in all his dealings, oppressing no
man, defrauding no man, as I hope all that he dealt with can bear witness. I
never heard the least blemish cast upon him in this re,+spect: and this is no
mean commendation. We find nothing more pressed in Scripture then righteous
dealing with men, and nothing more condemned then the contrary. God says, He
has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee,
but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God, Mi^h. 6.
8. The wise man tells us, That a false balance is abomination to the Lord:
but a just weight is his delight, Prove. 11. 1. This is the voice of God
throughout the Scriptures, he had rather no sacrifices should be offered upon
his altar, then that they should be the fruits of wrong and violence: he
professes plainly, I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for
burnt-offering, Isa. 61. 8.

Indeed it is no true piety that is separated from justice and honesty, nor
real honesty if it be divided from true piety: he that seems to be zealous in
the duties of Religion, and yet makes no conscience of his dealings with men,
is but a glorious hypocrite: and he that deals justly with men, and has no
due care of the duties of piety to God, is but an honest Infidel; both joined
together make a sincere Christian; and such a one I am persuaded was this
worthy Knight.

4. For his mercy and liberality to the poor, he did not blow a Trumpet before
his alms-deeds, neither shall I; only thus much I can say, his hands were
opened to the necessities of the poor, and those of the place where he lived
are sensible that they have lost a good Benefactor. The stream of his bounty
did run chiefly in one Channel, viz. in taking poor children, and placing them
in such Callings, wherein they might get their own bread, and provide things
honest in the sight of men. This was a very good work, an odor of a sweet
smell, yet this was not all, the beams of his charity did shine upon other
objects while he lived, and as the Sun after his setting casts some light above
the Horizon; so now his Sun is set, some beams of his charity will appear to
the comfort of the poor in the several Hospitals of this City, and some other
places.

5. But then the greatest and most eminent Trial and Testimony of his
Righteousness and Integrity was in that fatal year 1648. when the Blood of His
Sacred Majesty was shed by cruel and wicked hands, then it pleased God to call
him to be Lord Mayor of London; in which office coming to him in such a stormy
time, he was steadfast and unmovable from his Integrity, he showed himself a
good Christian, a wise Magistrate, a loyal Subject, and a loving Citizen.

Indeed Magistratus indicat virum, Magistracy is a touchstone which will
discover a man whether he be gold or dross: he that carries himself as he
ought in Offices of eminency, gives a great testimony of his wisdom and
virtue: There are two things that commend a Magistrate, Honesty and Courage,
both these were eminent in him. There were three very memoriable passages to be
observed in this worthy Knight, in managing his public affairs.

1. In reference to the good of the City, whereof he was chief Magistrate when
a Treaty was concluded upon, between His late Majesty of Blessed Memory, and
the Parliament then sitting, and in order thereunto, an engagement was
subscribed by most of the Common Council, and principal Members of the City,
for the carrying on of that Treaty. Afterward the Treaty proving ineffectual,
and the Parliament being dissolved by the unjust violence of the Army and their
Abetters, a strict inquiry was made after the names of those that subscribed
the personal Treaty: But the Book wherein the names of the Subscribers on both
parts, for and against the Treaty were written, containing about two Reams of
Paper, being privately brought to this worthy Knight then Lord Mayor, he
tendering the good and welfare of all his Brethren and fellow citizens, not
knowing what might be the ill consequence of it, if such a Record should be
found extant, took it and burnt it to ashes privately in his Chamber, that
nothing might remain to the prejudice of any; how many perhaps here present
were deeply engaged to him for the safety of their estates, if not of their
lives, by that one action? certainly it was a work full of wisdom, charity, and
brotherly kindness; a most excellent concatenation of Christian Graces.

2. When some tumultuous and busy Commoners had contrived a traitorous and
wicked Petition to bring His Sacred Majesty and others to a Trial, and were
vehemently urgent to have it read and voted in the Common Council, that so it
might be presented to the then new molded Parliament, as the desire of the
whole City: This Heroic and Noble Knight stoutly opposed the promoting
thereof, and would suffer it neither to be read nor voted, notwithstanding the
rage and violence of the adverse party, who neither reverencing the Authority
of his venerable office, nor regarding the gravity of his person, loaded him
with reproach and contempt within, telling him they would have it voted whether
he would or no before their rising; and some of them stirred up a tumultuous
Rabble against him without: Notwithstanding all this unworthy dealing with him,
he continued like an unmovable Rock, persisting in his resolution, and endured
those insolences from eight of the clock in the morning until after eight at
night, accompanied only with two of his brethren, and would not yield a jot to
their unreasonable desires, notwithstanding all their clamorous importunities.
And at last when no reason would prevail with them, not able longer to endure
their uncivil behavior toward him, and chiefly that he might to the utmost of
his power keep the City and Citizens from being stained with the guilt of that
Sacred Innocent Blood, he resolutely took up the Sword, and departed the Court
to his great hazard. All these proceedings he caused to be registered in the
book of Records belonging to the City for an evident testimony to after times,
of his own and the Cities Integrity and Innocence as to that ungodly and
execrable Fact of taking away the Kings Life, which he heartily abhorred: for
all which noble and gallant resolutions and performances, he had since public
thanks given him by a declaration from the City.

Thus this worthy Knight might well be called the Sword and Buckler of London,
as Camillus and Fabius were among the Romans, for he defended them from that
which is worse then any outward evil, viz. from blood guiltiness, and that in
the highest degree, even from the guilt of parracide, and shedding the blood of
him that was Pater Patriae, the Father of their Country. This was a great mercy
to the City on Gods part, and an eminent favor on his part that did it, and
the whole City have cause to be thankful to God and him for it. When the rest
of the children of Israel understood that their brethren the children of
Reuben, the children of Gad, and the Children of Manasseh had not turned from
following the Lord, by building an Altar for Burnt-Offerings besides the Altar
of the Lord their God, which was before his Tabernacle, but only had built a
pattern of the Lords Altar, to be a witness between them and their brethren,
that they and their posterity belonged to the Congregation of Israel, and had a
part in the Lord and his Service, as well as the other Tribes; when they
understood the Truth of this, it is said, the thing pleased them, and they
blessed God, and said, This day we perceive that the Lord is among us, because
ye have not committed this trespass against the Lord: now ye have delivered the
children of Israel out of the hand of the Lord, Joshua 22. 31. They rejoiced
that God had kept their brethren from polluting themselves with that crying
sin of Idolatry, and turning from the Lord and his Altar, and took it as a
token of Gods presence among them, and as a merciful deliverance of the whole
Nation, from the avenging hand of God and his fierce wrath, which the guilt of
that sin would have brought upon them: Truly we in this City have great cause
to be well pleased, and to bless God as well as they, for keeping us from being
guilty of His Majesty's Blood; we have reason to interpret this happy
providence as they did, to be a pledge and token that God would not forsake us,
but continue his gracious presence among us, as blessed be his name he is
pleased to do, as we see at this day, and I hope through mercy shall still see,
as also to be a merciful deliverance of this City from the fearful wrath and
severe vengeance of the most righteous God, which the guilt of that Sacred
Blood, besides its other crying abominations would have brought upon it; we
have reason to magnify God for that gracious deliverance, and for raising up
this worthy Knight to be so happily instrumental therein: had it been some
faint hearted Ephraimite, or covetous Demas, he would have turned back in the
day of battle, and for want of Christian courage, would have betrayed this
City into the hands of her enemies, and consequently have exposed her to the
wrath of God; but this noble Hero stood stoutly in defiance of all opposition,
was courageous and faithful to his trust, and would not betray it for fear of
men, or love of this present world.

3. When the then usurping Parliament had made an Act to abolish the Kingly
Office and House of Lords, and sent it to this worthy Person then Lord Mayor to
be proclaimed at the usual places of the City, he judging it altogether
inconsistent with, nay positively, contrary to the several oaths which he had
taken, and considering of what dangerous consequence it might be to the City
and Citizens, he delayed to do it for eight days, and afterward being summoned
to come in person before the Parliament, to give a reason of his refusal, he
appearing, told them plainly, that his conscience being forecharged with diverse
oaths, would not permit him to do what they required. Though he was before so
great an Assembly, surrounded with his enemies, and his person, estate,
liberty, and life were all in their power, and lay at their mercy, which was no
better then cruelty, yet he did not shrink back for fear, but gave them a flat
denial to their very faces; whereupon he was voted out of his Office, fined Two
thousand pound, and committed Prisoner to the Tower of London, where he
remained for a time, and was afterward released: but not paying his fine, the
Committee for advance of moneys, ordered his goods, households stuff, and
wearing apparel to be sequestered and sold by a candle, which was done
accordingly, and so his whole fine was extorted from him in Money, Bonds, and
Goods, by the power of that Committee.

Thus the unspotted Integrity and Christian fortitude of this then Honorable
Lord Mayor did shine forth most gloriously in the midst his persecutions and
afflictions, like the Stars in a clear cold frosty night, to the honor of God
and the Example of others; he suffered for His Majesty, he suffered for the
Nobility, he suffered for the City and his fellow Citizens, and in all these,
which is his greatest happiness, and the greatest shame to his enemies, he
suffered persecution for Righteousness, and to keep a good conscience, and such
our Savior pronounces blessed, and says, That great is their Reward in
Heaven, Mat. 5. 12. In expectation of this reward he would rather hazard his
Estate, Liberty Life, and all that was dear and precious to him, then defile
his conscience and break his Oath, which was lawful for the matter, and
lawfully imposed for the Authority.

O if men had been so conscionable in those days in keeping the lawful Oaths
which they had taken, our land had not been so stained with the blood of her
own children, neither had we seen and felt those Miseries and Calamities under
which this City and Nation groaned for so many years together. The Lord of his
infinite mercy give repentance and pardon for all the perjury of these
perilous times.

Our Christian Worthy would have no share in it, nothing to burden his
conscience nor disturb his peace; he was firm and inflexible in his Resolution,
and as St. Jerome says of Joseph, he was not changed from his Uprightness and
Integrity, nec squalore carceris, nec tumore Aegyptiae potestatis, neither by
the unsavouriness of a Prison, nor by the Pride and Swelling of that Egyptian
power then in being: he was a man so careful to sow Righteousness, that he was
well content with the fruits of Gods Blessing upon his endeavors in his lawful
calling, and never sought to add one penny to his estate, or enrich himself by
the spoils and ruins of others, like Harpies and Crows that love to seed upon
dead carkeises, and to eat the fruits of other men's labors. And which was none
of the meanest of Gods mercies to him, the Lord was pleased to keep him from
having any hand in beginning or promoting our late unnatural troubles and
commotions: he was a man of very peaceable and quiet Spirit, which in the sight
of God is of great price, he was none of the Sons of Mars, none of those people
that delight in War, but he heartily wished and prayed for the welfare of our
Sion, and the peace of our Jerusalem: this was one special favor of God to
him, to keep him from having fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
according to that Song of Hannah, He will keep the feet of his Saints, and the
wicked shall be silent in darkness, for by strength shall no man prevail, 1 Samuel 2 9. But his fidelity and love of peace, were very costly to him (though
indeed such a purchase as the reward of Righteousness, cannot be bought at too
dear a rate) for his being Lord Mayor that year, was prejudicious to his Estate
at least to the value of Twenty thousand pound, besides his Fine, as he has
affirmed under his own hand, and I dare believe it, coming from the mouth or
pen of a person of such Worth and Integrity as he was.

And for all these sufferings he has had no recompense upon earth, but we may
very fitly apply that of the Preacher to his condition, Eccles. 9. 14, 15.
There was a little City, and few men within it; and there came a great King
against it, and besieged it, and built great bulworks against it: now there was
found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the City, yet no
man remembered that same poor man, This is very suitable to our present purpose,
except in some circumstances: I confess there is some difference in this place
from that, and in this person from that, for this City is great, and there are
many men in it, and this person was rich and not poor, but the work and
recompense of both, run Parrallel, for this wise and righteousness man
delivered the City by his wisdom and righteousness, yet no man remembered this
same wise and righteous man. It is pity such honorable worthy Christian actions
as these should not be proportionably regarded and rewarded upon earth. But
this is the comfort of the righteouss man, and it is unspeakable, that his
reward is with God in Heaven, yea God himself is his exceeding great reward.

This worthy Knight sowed Righteousness, and I hope that through the infinite
mercies of God, and invaluable merits of the Lord Jesus Christ, upon whom alone
he relied for Justification and Salvation that he has recieved this sure
reward, which shall never be taken from him: the Lord give us grace so to
follow the steps of his Integrity and Stedfastness in believing and well doing,
that we may have a sure reward with the Generation of the Righteous in Gods
Heavenly Kingdom, Amen,

FINIS.

