POEMS IN TWO PARTS.

First, An Interlocutory Discourse concerning the Creation, Fall, and Recovery
of Man.

Secondly, A Dialogue between Faith and a Doubting Soul.

By SAMVEL SLATER.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockeril at the Three Legs in the Poultry, 1679.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
AN itch of Scribbling and appearing in Print, has not seized me, though I must
confess my self easily persuaded to draw up this following Discourse. An
account of my publishing the Dialogue between Faith and a doubting Soul you
will find before it. That being delivered to the Bookseller, and by him
communicated to some of my Brethren, they were pleased to signify their
approbation thereof, wishing withal, it might be accompanied with something
about the Fall of Man. The motion I readily closed with, and so set to work in
the midst of many affairs, and under a very tenacious and afflictive distemper.
Yet I have in short time finished it, and now send it abroad. Be pleased to
give it a fair and friendly reception. If thou do not like some things in it,
no more do I, yet have not leisure to mend them. I was much taken with Learned
Mr. Miltons Cast and Fancy in his Book, viz. PARADISE LOST. Him I have followed
much in his method, and have been otherwise beholding to, how much I leave thee
to judge; but I have used a more plain and familiar style, because I conceive it
most proper. Cast a mantle of love over failings wherever thou find them,
and either do better, or accept this from

Thy Cordial Friend, SA. SLATER.
Febr. 6. 1678/9.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Creation, Fall and Recovery of Man.
Jehovah Elohim. I Am that which I am; this is His Name,
Who happy always is, always the same.
He Essence and Existence owes to none.
Whom can he owe it to, being God alone?
Himself he his own happiness does call;
What can he want, who in himself has all?
Both life and light, and love, and every thing,
Which may delight and satisfaction bring.
Of company there is no want, for he
Has in himself a Blessed Trinity.
Before the World was, he was not alone;
He then was, and is still full Three in One.
And in this happy, that the Trinity
Does not divide his perfect Unity,
For the Three Persons are one Essence still,
One therefore in affection, one in will.
The Son set up from everlasting, is
His Father's great delight, the Father his.
Before him always he rejoiceth, he
Causes and finds matchless joy to be.
The Spirit too, which does from them proceed,
Does the same joy both feast upon, and feed.
But though no want of any thing could be
Consistent with his sacred Deity;
His Goodness did not love to stay at home,
Communications did it become.
He did no Heaven need, is his own place;
Yet for the eternal glory of his Grace,
Heaven he framed, and Earth, both by a word
Of power; in both he is the Sovereign Lord.
Above, he Angels placed, who all once shone
As Morning-Stars about that Glorious Throne,
On which he sits an everlasting Sun,
Whose influence and beams can never be done.
A Law to them he gave, that Law some brake,
And down he kicked them to the burning Lake;
Where they in everlasting chains shall lie;
Wishing for death, though they can never die.
Yet Heaven is not empty, for although
Many did fall, many do stand, who do
Attend upon him: Thousands* yea, and more,
Ten thousand times ten thousand do adore
His Majesty with veiled face, and sing
In the highest glory to their God and King.
But besides Angels, he from Earth did take
A despicable clod, and of it make
A Creature, whom he nobly did endue
With Will and Understanding, and did show
In him his own Image; than Angels less
He was but little, for with Holiness
God did invest him, and resolved to make
Him of ne're-ending happiness partake:
And with his chosen Progeny to fill
His stately Palace, his most holy Hill.
So he resolved, so did, and formed man,
One and no more; in one the World began.
Of dust he formed him, dust of the ground;
Yet he with Honor him, and Glory crowned*
His own similitude he gave him, and
Sovereign authority for to command
Fishes of Sea, with Fowls, and Beasts of sield,
Who all obedience unto him must yield.
And having made him for his pleasure-sake,
He commun'd with him, and thus to him spoke.

GOD. Adam who art my Workmanship, know, thou
Unto none shall, but thy Creator bow.
Others shall bow to thee, thee I have given
All things that are under the cope of Heaven.
The world is thy dominion; but my love
Has for thy Court chosen this pleasant Grove;
Eden I called, a Garden where thou have
Varieties to please both eye and taste.
One fruit alone's withheld, and therefore see,
Thou do not venture once to taste that Tree
Which knowledge does of Good and Evil give,
Forbear to taste it, as thou hop'st to live.
I, who am Truth it self, and cannot lie,
Say, In the day thou eatest, thou shall die.
Death it is I threaten, therefore have a care;
Who e're shall tempt thee to it, Adam beware.
All other fruits I give thee for thy meat,
Of them thou have free leave freely to eat.
Be then content, if this thou tastest, sin
Will draw the latch, and so grim Death comes in.

ADAM. O God my Maker, I do thee adore
For mine own being, and this bounteous store:
Which thou providest have, O let my love
Always flame high to thee my God above.
Yet grant me leave to speak, and make my moan
Unto thy gracious ear: I am alone,
In midst of comforts comfortless, since I
My days do pass without society.
Whatever creatures in the world there are,
Of each sort of them I do find a pair.
Which I together see associate,
And sweetly please themselves, each in his Mate.
But betwixt me and them's disparitie;
No pleasure therefore, 'cause no harmony.
Man should not turn a bruit, and no bruit can
Be a companion suitable to man.

GOD. Can not thou find pleasure enough alone?
What Prince would have another in his Throne?
Look round about thee, see, how I have made
Others to serve, and thee to be obeyed.
On thee shall all attend, from thee take Law,
And of thee every one shall stand in awe.
Before thee they shall come to sport and play,
And various delights yield every day.
Names thou have given them, and so do know
Their nature: and their duty they know too.
Be satisfied then, and mind my charge,
Great are thy comforts, thy dominion large.
Besides, look up to me, I am alone,
From everlasting beside me is none.
Heaven view, and Sky, with Sea, and Earth, and Air,
And who is there that can with me compare?
All Creatures I have made, and all to me
Be more inferior than they are to thee.
Yet be assured, that I do possess
In mine own self most perfect happiness.

ADAM. Lord, pardon me, thy dust, if I reply,
And once more speak unto thy Majesty.
I cannot comprehend thee, but admire
Thy glorious being, and thou art still higher
Than is mine admiration; thou above*
My highest thoughts art placed, or my love.
In thee do all perfections abound,
No one deficiency in thee is found.
In essence, Lord, I know, thou art but one
Yet being all in all, thou need none.
In thy self thou have all, so have not I.
A creature cannot grasp Infinity
Of bliss and happiness in its own arms,
And therefore cannot but look out for charms,
And beauties, and delights; one that may be
Fit to serve God, fit to converse with me.
One that may be my comfort every way,
My help at all times, both in night and day.

GOD. Adam, thou know me God, who do full well
My Creatures understand, and who can tell
Whatever may thought necessary be
To render perfect thy felicity.
I Information do need from none,
But knows it is bad for man to be alone.
And among all my Creatures do not see
One that is a companion meet for thee.
My bounty has run over, ne'retheless
My bounty to thee I Will yet more express.
All that I do intend, thou have not yet
Received from my gracious hand; it is fit
My pleasure thou should wait, but Adam know,
What is my purpose, what for thee I Will do.
To work again I will, one I will make,
In whom thou pleasure and delight may take.
Into a comely body I Will inspire
A noble Soul, which to thy hearts desire
Shall most completely suit, and I will bring
Her to thee, and in her thou every thing
Most lovely and desirable shall find,
All that is now wanting to thy craving mind.
For with a deep sleep I thine eyes will close,
And bind thy senses up: and not unlose
That bond again, until out of thy side
A Rib I take, and of it make a Bride.
I will a rib take, flesh and spirits warm,
And vital blood, without doing thee harm.
For the operation shall cause no pain,
And when it is done, I Will heal the wound again.
This Rib thus taken out, I my self will
Form curiously by mine own power and skill
Into an humane creature, thou shall see
Thy soul and body in her sampled be.
Sex only shall be different, all things fair
In her thou shall conclude contained are.
From her converse thou may receive new store
Of pleasing sweets thou did not know before.
No sooner said than done; Adam, see here
A Virgin for thee, a companion dear.

ADAM. Blessed Creator, of thine own good will,
Heaven and Earth with goodness thou do fill.
On all thy works great beauty is impressed,
But of all Fairs, this fair one is the best.
My self I in her see, bone of my bone,
Flesh of my flesh she is, my lovely one.
Woman she shall be called, because she
Extracted was from man, even from me.
And for this cause he shall most gladly leave
Father and Mother, and to's Wife shall cleave.
Let nothing their joint-happiness control,
For they one flesh shall be, one heart and soul.

GOD. Adam consider well, and thoroughly know,
What love, praise, and obedience thou do owe
Unto me thy Creator, who did rear
Thee out of dust, and then inclined mine ear.
To thy request, and gave thee one that might
Make great addition unto thy delight.
Now have a care, sin not, but stand in awe.
Do not thou disobey me; and the Law
I gave thee think upon. Do not thou eat
Of that one tree, its fruit is deadly meat.
In framing of thy Wife, I Have done my part,
She has thine image, and thou have her heart.
Act thou thy part also, thou art the Head;
It becomes thee to lead, her to be led.
She is to help thee, and with thee to live;
But counsel and advice are thine to give.
More wisdom therefore I on thee confer,
Use but that wisdom, and thou will not err,
Or wander from the path of life. Be thou
Her guide, for such I do ordain thee now.
She is a lovely Creature, therefore she
Deserves love and cherishing from thee.
In a just balance yet be sure to weigh
With her thy self, and do not overlay
Her worth with thy esteem. The greatest grace
Attends not always on the sweetest face.
The side from whence she came, keep thou her by,
And over her a tender watchful eye.
Let her not from thee go, lest she alone
Be by another, thou by her undone.
Thus have I set thee up, thus I advise,
My charge do not forget, Adam be wise.

ADAM. Come, dearest Consort, of my self a part,
Who of me formed wast, who have my heart:
By our Creators gift, Eve, thou art mine;
And by bond-conjugal I too am thine.
May nothing, nothing, nothing ever be
Cause of disquiet unto thee or me.
Look round about thee, all things here below
Are subject unto us, to us they owe
Obedience, and we to God above,
All whose commands speak him a God of love.
For present there is none but thou and I,
But he has said, Increase and multiply.
While we do live, let us rejoice together;
Yea, let us still rejoice one in another;
Yet most in God himself, for he will be,
If we sin not, ours to eternity.
He has this Garden given us to tend,
We must both dress and keep it; we must bend
Our labors that way: but our labor will
Breed us no pain nor weariness, but still
Our recreation prove; this blessed estate,
In which we are, has nothing to abate
Our full-grown pleasures; here will be no let
Of sickness, tyring none, no grief nor sweat.
See what variety of trees God made
For our use and delight: Now in the shade
Of this we will sport together, then at root
Of that we will sit, then go and pluck the fruit
Of one and other freely; there is no fear,
No none at all, of catching surfeits here.
Avoid the Tree forbid, and then there is none,
But we may feed upon, all are our own.

EVE. Our lines are fallen well; we with delight
May feast in day, and then may rest at night
In sweet embraces. Our great Lord thought meet
TO appoint a place of pleasures for our seat.
As for our work, we may not quarrel it,
Since by him ordered, by whom it is fit
All things should ordered be, because all made;
His will, whatever it is, must be obeyed.
And therefore, Adam, let us up and do
The work which our Creator set us to*
And if you do consent, we will part a while,
And work asunder, because every smile
Which passes us between, will prove a let,
Taking us off from business; when we get
Alone, our work we follow harder may,
And comfortably end it with the day.
Continual enjoyment may abate
Sweetness, so that we may it nauseate.
A little absence now and then will prove
Sauce to our dainties, fuel to our love.
When after that we two again do meet,
We shall with fresh delight each other greet.

ADAM. Silence, my Dearest, I cannot abide
To think thou should be absent from my side.
Because our business does not call away,
We may dispatch it, and together stay.
We were not made to toil, but work with pleasure,
And so may do what is to be done at leisure.
Nor will some distance more advance our joy,
For in this state communion cannot annoy.
Fruition in Heaven's always full,
And yet delight in Heaven never's dull.
And prithee tell me why it may not be so
On Earth too, in a Paradise below.
But more, my Love, I fear lest thou should be
In danger, when out of my company*
For though we Happiness our own may call,
Yet there is possibility of fall.
Angels in Heaven did sin, and Heaven did lose,
And then became of God and man the foes.
God they grudg honor, and us happiness,
Endure they cannot that we should possess
An Heaven now on Earth, nor that at last,
We should that Heaven have whence they were cast.
And therefore doubtless some of them will try,
Us two to bring to endless misery.
Our frame they know, that we were made of dust;
And if that we should sin, we again must
Unto the dust return, whence we were taken,
Being of God and Happiness too forsaken.
Malicious spirits they are, and understand
How any base design to take in hand,
And how to manage it; they full well know,
Which way will take best, whether so, or so.
It Is true, they cannot force us, we may choose
Whether we will yield unto them or refuse.
Both these are in our power; never can
The power of Hell compel the will of man.
And I do know, my Love, that thou art wise;
But I know too, there may be a surprise.
My God made thee, because I was but one,
He saw it was not good to be alone;
Wherefore since for my comfort thou wast made,
Do not depart from my securing-shade.
Thy honor and thy safety both do lie
In keeping in thy Husbands company.
When we together are, my help thou't be,
And I shall give protection unto thee.

EVE. What means all this, my Lord? does Jealousy
(That bane of conjugal Society)
Peep up already in thy breast? do fear
My faithfulness to God or thee? To hear
Ought to this purpose I expected not;
Unto mine Honor it is a stain, a blot.
Since force and violence cannot prevail,
Fraud and enticements sure shall not avail.
Since I was framed by the hand of Heaven,
What have I done? or what occasion given?
What have thou found either in look or word,
Or in one single carriage, which afford
Ground of suspicion may? I pray thee tell;
For me, I know, thou have observed well.
I from thy side was without fault transmitted
Into thy bosom, and have I committed
Any fault since? If thou do answer, None,
Let me know why I may not be alone.

ADAM. Sweet Creature, made by God, and made of me:
Who under God art my felicity,
My Love, my Second-self, my Hearts delight,
In whom I do rejoice both day and night.
Think not that I would an Indictment draw
Against thee, for I cannot, there is no flaw
In thy perfections, but thou do stand
A Creature worthy of thy Makers hand.
No spot in thy most perfect beauty is,
Nothing at all in thee I find amiss,
Nor yet in thy deportments; thou do do
Nothing but what becomes, and pleases too.
And may this still continue, may that grace
Rest always on thy brow, that lovely face
Never be veiled with a blush for shame,
Let blemish never light upon thy name.
But though thou art, through innocence, fair,
Yet thou art mutable, so we both are.
And ere we are aware of it, may fall,
And thereby ruin both our selves and all
From us that shall proceed. One fatal blow
May us and our posterity undo.
Wherefore I judge it needful to unite
Our strength and reason, that we may keep right
What we have found so; if we stay together,
We may hold bravely up, and all storms weather.
Should an Assailant come, then would I be
To thee a Monitor, and thou to me.
If thou be wise, this counsel thou will hear,
And follow, moved with love, nay moved with fear.
But if for all this, Eve, thou have a mind
Alone to go, and would not be confined
Unto thy Husbands Elbow; if to try
A combat single with an Enemy
Do seem more glorious, than in the field
To have a Second that some help may yield;
Unwillingly I condescend, you may
Go, only God be with thee all the day.
Go in thy strength, thy native innocence,
And may integrity be thy defense.
Consider what thou art, and whose, and why,
These things considering, do not comply
With a temptation, that would withdraw
Thee from thy duty, but then stand in awe.
God and his threatening fear with all thy heart;
To fear him is from evil to depart.
Of Virtues thou art full, summon them all,
If need be; to thy help me also call.

EVE. Having obtained leave, away I Will go,
And armed with uprightness not dread a foe.
Likely it is, we are more nice than wise,
What mischief can lurk in a Paradise?
Surely the envious one will never bend
Hither his steps, where Angels do attend
Upon us as a Guard. Or if to vex
Man be his choice, me thinks the weaker Sex
He should not first attempt. So great a foe
Will think it scorn for him to stoop so low.
But say he should, He Is fallen, Why may not I
With ease resist a fallen enemy?

SATAN. I now that opportunity have met,
Which I so much have longed for, and will set
My trap immediately; for in my pain
Nothing can ease me unless her I gain;
Not for a Spouse: Carnal embraces do
Not with Angelic Beings suit. We, who
Have nothing terrene in us, soar much higher,
And unto things more noble do aspire.
It Is for a slave I Would have her, that she may
Fry in Hell-flames with me another day.
Lovely she is: But what is that to me?
Before my fall I fairer was than she.
And since revenge I do resolve, I must
No beauty like, but as it draws to lust.
What God and man does please, does me offend;
I shall by spoiling that attain my end.
That soul shall lose its rectitude, that face
Shall be divested of its comely grace;
And when I have once drawn her into sin,
How shall I laugh to see what case She Is in?
Among the creatures I have been to choose
An instrument, by whom I may abuse
This new-made couple, and find none so meet
As is the Serpent for this devilish cheat.
Of beasts he is most subtle, the whole field
Does not another half so crafty yield.
With him my self I now incarnate will,
And in a Serpent be a Devil still.
It matters not though I my self abase,
So I Gods image may in man deface.
This Serpent then I Will use my mind to break;
He, taught by me, thus unto Eve shall speak.

SERPENT. Lady Supreme, unto whose great command,
We all are subject, and obedient stand.
Vouchsafe a pardon to me, who am bold
Your presence thus to enter, and behold
With ravished spirit, and with humbled eye
Your person which resembles Deity.
Put on a smile, and do not that brow bend.
Where Majesty and Love seem to contend.
I was created dumb, but do rejoice,
That now I can with an articulate voice,
Applaud the charms of thy beauty Divine,
And tell thee I by gift and love am thine.
Yea so are all things else, and were there more,
They all thy beauty always would adore.
Yet they of me fall short, for lately I
Some distance hence did happily espy
A goodly tree laden with fruit, which might
Tempt the most dull and sluggish appetite.
I had no sooner seen it, but my mind
Was for a taste sharp set. So I did wind
About the body of it, and at last
I did get up; being so, I could not cast
Mine eye on any twig, but I did meet
With numberless temptations to eat.
Restrain my self I could not any more;
Sin it was not to eat, where was such store.
Venture therefore I did, and don't repent,
For I return much better than I went.
Here is my former shape, my former skin,
But there is great alteration made within.
The strings that once my tongue ti'd, now are loosed,
Into my mind a glorious light's infused.
I that before was beast throughout, now can
Hear, and discourse, and understand like man.
When upon me this great effect was wrought,
Duly I it considered, and thought
It crime unpardonable should I smother
Such an advantage, and acquaint no other
With what my self had found. 'Twas in my heart,
Good grows better when we it impart.
My Lord I dared not tell of this. His brow
Is with such Majesty arrayed, we bow
Before him all amazed; without dispute,
His very look will strike a speaker mute.
But from thy milder aspect I did take
Encouragement humble address to make,
And tell thee what I find. This is the Tree,
Which in a moment wrought this change in me.
If such a Servitor would please, in haste
I Would up again, and fetch you down a taste.
Do it your self, sweet Lady, look up, and
Gather an Apple with your lilly-hand.
Had I but ought to pawn, it pawn would I,
That eating would advance you; Lady, try.

EVE. Serpent, thou might of thus discoursing me
Have saved thy self the labor. It Is a Tree,
We are forbidden; thou may go and boast
What good thou foundest, to the numerous host
Of creatures lately made, and let them try,
If eating of it will them edify,
As thee it seems it did; what is thy gain,
Should I taste too, would surely be my bane.
Our great Creator did by words express,
Command us to forbear, and ne'rtheless
Would thou have me to meddle? Shall a Law
So strict be given, and I not stand in awe?
Is disobedience the way to rise?
Or can sin be the way to become wise?
What e're advantage this Tree has thee brought
I do conclude thy counsel now is naught.

SERPENT. My Sovereign Mistress, I thy pardon crave,
If I in any thing offended have.
For that offense did from pure love proceed,
And love deserves a pardon when there is need.
With mine own gain I could content have stood,
Had I not zealously desired thy good.
At what else could I aim? As for this Tree,
I could have kept its virtues hid from thee.
Yea, had I thought its fruit forbid, sure I
Should not have dared to cross that Majesty
Whose great creating-Word did being give
To thee and me, and by whose Word we live.
Your patience yet most humbly I implore,
And beg you would consider well, before
You positively determine any thing
In this one case. Unto your mind first bring
What God indeed did say, so you may see
You're under some mistake; I will be free.
Did he say, Madam, did he say; indeed,
On all these Garden-trees ye shall not feed?
Did he not constitute you Lords of all?
Has he not made you owners general
Of Fish, and Fowl, and Beasts? Did he not give
Unto you all things that on earth do live?
And all the herbs that bear seed in the field,
With fruit of all Trees too that seed do yield?
And has he after all excepted one,
Bounding thereby your vast Dominion?
Have you at last a confined liberty?
Freedom that is not, where all is not free.

EVE. I well remember what our Lord did say,
As well as if he spoken had to day.
We may the fruit eat of all Trees that do
Within this most delightful Garden grow.
But for the fruit of this Tree, which does stand
In the midst of Garden, this is his command,
This, I am sure he said, for I was by,
Ye shall not eat, nor touch it, lest ye die.
And though, what Death is, I as yet cannot tell,
I judge, that Death contains in it Hell.

SERPENT. Lo here the reason of a rigid Law,
Merely to keep inferiors in awe.
Did God say thus, when ye do eat ye dye?
Look down and see that threat a foppery.
See It so in me, a kind of pious cheat;
I live, and yet I of that Tree did eat.
Nay that my eating quickly was attended
By nobler life than e're was me intended.
The best was thee designed, sure then at least,
Eat thou may what is eaten by a beast.
Shake off vain fear, I tell thee, even I,
What e're he said, surely ye shall not die.
For God himself does know it, what day ye
Do eat thereof, your eyes shall opened be.
Yea, unto gods ye shall be like, for so
Both what is good and evil ye shall know.
Good, the more known it is, the more enjoyed;
By knowing evil, you may it avoid.
And does not this invite? Knowledge is one,
Nay a great part of Gods perfection.
With it you should be filled, since the fates
Have made you Universal Potentates.
For he that is advanced to highest Rule,
Should be at furthest distance from a Fool.
Nor can your knowledge hurt God, if he be,
As we suppose, from imperfection free.
He knows all things, sure; and what if you,
Who bear his Image, be made knowing too?
When your eyes opened are, you will thereby
Resemble him the more who is all eye.
But why should we more words thus spend in waste?
Stretch out thy hand, gather, and freely taste.
That tasting will us change, but with these odds,
Me it makes like to you, you like to Gods.

EVE. What time of day is it? Has the swift Sun
His morning up-hill-course already run?
Methinks I feel a sharpened appetite,
Which calls for food, and this Tree does invite
To come and eat thereof. If I compare
All Fruits together, there is none more rare
Presents it self in the Garden, none so well
Does with its fragrancy delight my smell.
And sure some hidden virtues in it lie,
Concealed hitherto from human eye
And understanding, yea the very name,
God gave it, does greatly confirm the same:
Himself the Tree of knowledge did it style,
Can such a Tree destroy? can it defile?
Besides experience good now has me taught,
This lovely Tree was not designed for naught
But a show only, for one taste did raise
And teach a creature dumb to speak its praise.
Which is an argument, I shall not dye,
The Serpent eat and died not, why should I?
Are only we restrained? Death only found
Us two to fright, and keep us within bound?
Was this rare fruit designed for a beast?
And must we die the death, if taste the least?
I Will not believe it, I will take and try,
Yea, and taste too, although I taste and die.
But if when I have eaten I do live,
And like, I will some unto Adam give.

ADAM. My Dear, where have thou spent so many hours?
What work could thee detain? what pleasant
Could keep thee from me? or what could supply bowers
Thy Husbands room so long? for certain I
Did greatly miss thee, and do find it true,
Upon this earth is nothing like to you.
Nor only so, for I did strangely find
A discomposure in my thoughts and mind,
Which boded ill, methought, a sudden blow
Was given, though by what hand I did not know.
The earth beneath did tremble, and withal,
Off from their trees the fading leaves did fall;
Upon a sudden beauty left their fruit,
And all the pretty warbling birds stood mute.
Some creatures fearful grew, and others fierce,
Their looks were stern. Eve, I cannot rehearse
All that I did observe: My blood waxt chill,
My heart misgave me, there was something ill
Had fallen out; and though I had even wove
Of choicest flowers a Garland for my love,
Out of my hands I threw it, would not stay
A minute longer, but did come away.
In haste to find thee, glad to meet thee here.
How do thou feel thy self, how is it my dear?

EVE. It never better was, never so well,
Unless I judge amiss, since I could tell
What Being means. Thy company indeed
Most sorely I did miss, and shall take heed
Of future absence; for I felt such pain
Upon that score, I would not feel again.
But that which me detained so long was this:
The subtle Serpent (who advanced is
Unto a nobler state than what he had,
And is of that advancement very glad)
Most humbly came, desirous to acquaint
Me with his change, and did most sweetly paint
In lively colors virtues of that tree
Which you and I by God forbidden be
A taste of. This he did in humane voice,
With words that were most eloquent and choice.
This secret, not being selfish, but most free,
Others should with him share, he did to me
Kindly impart, and withal much persuade
Me for to take and eat --

ADAM. Ah! but I hope he did persuade in vain.
My Dearest tell me, for I am in pain
To know thee issue --

EVE. My Lord, he did persuade, and did prevail
I saw, I took, I eat. What will it avail
Now to deny the fact; neither despise
Me for what is done, much clearer are mine eyes,
Scales off did fall, my mind is more sublime,
Than e're I found it was before this time.
My spirits are dilated, my thoughts fly
Hither and thither with full liberty,
All my affections are raised, I do
Conclude my self a kind of Goddess too.

ADAM. My soul is troubled; thou have troubled me,
Who formed wast my Comforter to be.
Upon me has amazement taken hold;
My joints are loosed all; and horror cold
Runs through my veins, this it is to be undone
By her that is my dear and only one.
Oh! that I ever suffered thee to go
Alone, exposed alone unto thy so.
Had I denied thee then, I had not now
Known those sad sinking sorrows which I do.
Lately thou wast most lovely and most sweet,
In thee did all create Perfections meet.
But now thou art defaced, thou now art lost,
Which will a thousand, thousand sorrows cost.
Oh! had thou never been made, or being made,
Would have my counsel given thee, obeyed.
Poor ruined Eve! for I must change my note,
What e're thou think, thou art to death devote.
Thy wound's incurable, who can it heal?
God never will the sentence past repeal.

EVE. Did I feel what thou fear, I would be
Alone a victim to that Deity
Which thou supposest angry, and so end
All that displeasure thou do apprehend.
But whence these fears? I pray and pray again,
That thou would tell me. Is not the case plain?
The Serpent did eat first, afterward I,
And we do live, why should thou then die
If thou should eat? but grant it, had not rather,
If die we must, that we die both together?
Where is thy love? or where thy noble heart?
Art thou afraid to die? shall death us part?
But where, where is he, if his fatal blow
Must cut me off, why don't he strike it now?
Come let me hug thee in my tender arm,
And so infolded fear not any harm.
I tell thee, and with twenty kisses seal
The truth of these my words, I never did feel
Such ecstasies of joy as did ensue
My tasting of that tree. Taste thou it too.

ADAM. Since thou do give, my Dear, I Will take, although
I Am not deceived like thee, but better know.
I know that eating this will do me harm,
But I am carried captive by thy charm.
My flesh and bone thou have, with them my heart,
We two are one, and therefore will not part.
In happiness thou did partake with me*
In miseries I will partake with thee.
My great delight thou have been, even thou;
Whatever comes I will not leave thee now.
What though this hour I fetch my dying groan?
It would be death to me to live alone.
Or if thou die, and then another come,
That other never would fill up thy room.
Let God his pleasure do, I will do mine,
In life and death resolved to be thine.
Eve, I have eaten, and now own my love
To thee, which threatened death could not remove.

DEVIL. Of my ends thus I master am, thus I
With ease have triumphed over mine enemy.
God did intend to honor dust to raise,
And make these despicable worms a praise.
A race of men, he was resolved, should spring
From Adam's loins, forsooth, them he would bring
To those celestial places whence we fell,
And while we do tormenting pains in hell
Suffer without all hope; there they should be
As favorites crowned with felicity.
And that at which my spirit most recoils,
Is, they should be enriched with our spoils.
And could we Angels brook it? though we are
Fallen and ruined, yet we cannot bear
Such an affront. I gladly would have preyed
On his Imperial Throne, I would invade
His stately Royal Palace, if that it
Would but a siege, or storm, or mine admit.
But its walls are too high for me to scale.
It Is gate so fastened, no strength can prevail
To force it open, there he sits secure
In happiness for ever to endure.
Well, though his lofty Throne I could not shake,
I now have that achieved, which will make
Some breach upon his peace, and spoil in part
His matchless joys, and grieve him to the heart.
I call to mind how greatly he was pleased
With our confusion, when he had eased
Heaven of us as its burden, and in chains
Of darkness clapped us, while himself still reigns
In light and glory; therefore now will we
Be pleased at his disturbance, now that he
Is to repentance brought for making man,
Yea, grieveth inwardly for making man.
Where is the beauty now of his Creation?
He that his darling was, is his vexation.
I have him so seduced, that even he
Now is become his Makers enemy.
Man, whom before he in his arms did cherish
Of Love, is now worse than the beasts that perish.
Hasten, sin, now, him with all evil fill;
Death feast upon him, but be hungry still.
Both air and earth your territories call,
And exercise dominion over all.
But specially over man, diseases cast,
Sorrows throw on him, and him killl at last*
Thus Devil, Sin, Death, and the Triplicity
Infernal, after all victorious be.
Let our grand enemy rejoice, that out
Of Heaven he has tumbled at one bout
So many thousand Angels. I can tell
Almost as great a feat performed by Hell
At once, and by one little Strat'gem I
Have Adam ruined, and his progeny,
Millions and Millions of them, who shall now
Against God rebel, and to our Scepter bow.
Henceforth to make man happy shall cost more
A great deal than it would have cost before.

ADAM. Night most uncomfortable I have had;
None such till now, a thousand thousand sad
And frightful thoughts have taken up my mind:
And now, Eve, at my waking I do find
My head much discomposed, yea out of frame
I feel my self all over, find not the same
Serenity within, nor strength without;
There is, alas! there is a total rout
Of purity, and peace, and joy; All Is gone:
Instead of being made, we are undone.
Our eyes indeed are opened, for I see
Our selves exposed to shame and misery.
Now we are naked, and that very thing
Which was our glory, does now blushes bring*
Our rectitude is lost, our beauty is
Turned to deformity. All is amiss,
And out of order quite: where ever mine eye
Fixes, on self or thee, I faults espy.
An hapless hour it was, when without fear
Thou did incline thy overcurious ear
Unto that ill-taught Serpent, who did feign
An humane voice, that he thereby might gain
Closer attention from thee, and infuse
Notions would thy credulity abuse
To Our ruin, he a very counterfeit
Was, and his promises an arrant cheat.
It Is true, our eyes are opened, and we do
Know good, as he said, and what is evil too.
But that is bad knowledge, which increases sorrow,
Something to day we feel, more shall to morrow;
And daily more. The good we had, is lost:
And evil we do know unto our cost.
How evil is it for us to be stripped
Of innocencies robes, and to be whipped
With lash of Consciences! within are fears
Which do perplex our Spirits, in our ears
A dreadful sound is always; in our face
Marks of sin are instead of wonted grace.
With boldness now I cannot look on thee;
And how shall I with confidence then see
The face of God, whom we so much offended
After he had us both so much befriended?
Nay, how shall we upon the Angels look?
Or how will they such loathsome Creatures brook?
Let us go seek a place as dark as night,
Where we may be removed from that light
Which will our spots and blemishes discover:
For now we nothing are, but spots all over.

EVE. Go then, I follow; for my cheeks are died
Red with a blush: and first let us both hide
Some way or other those parts which do seem
Of all the most uncomely, which we deem
Most fit to be concealed. Let us sow
Broad and thick leaves together, which may go
About our middles, and so cover round
Such parts as now with shame do most abound.
For if we them with modesty do hide,
Better we may Spectators eyes abide.
With Fig Leaves we are clothed, but sad the story,
We fallen are down from our former glory.

ADAM. A covering this is, but such as will
Neither secure nor beautify; we are still
More clothed with shame; within we have no rest:
Oh how do frightful thoughts our Souls molest!
Deep springs of fruitless sorrow do arise,
And streams of brinish tears flow from mine eyes;
In which I may be drenched all the day,
And I no hand know will them wipe away.
All things I find now in an uproar are,
All turned up-side down; my passions dare
Rebel against my Reason. That great Queen
Who was enthroned by God, and should have been,
Sole Governess, does now a Captive stand,
Divested of its power, at the command
Of base unruly lusts, that strive to be
Controllers unto it, masters to me.
So Understanding rules not, but my will
Scorns to obey its dictates; they both still
Bow to a brutish appetite, and I
Can only groan under its tyranny.
For this, Eve, thee I thank; to thee I owe
All, even all the miseries I know.
Would thou have kept thy place, had thou obeyed
Thy Husbands counsels, would thou have stayed
By me, as I advised, this had not been;
Such a sad case as this we had not seen.
Learn henceforth to keep home; without dispute,
Of woman's wandering, mischief is the fruit.

EVE. Be not so partial, Adam, prithee, come,
Lay not the fault on me alone; bear some
Of it thy self; it cannot be denied
But we between us should the blame divide.
When was that charge given forth? When did God say
Be sure that you together always stay.
I did conclude kind Heaven did us permit
Sometimes to be alone, and judged it fit
So to be then; and being innocent,
Thought where I would I might go, so I went.
My head thou wast; if therefore thou did know
Mischief would follow, why did let me go?
One positive command of thee had made
My purpose change, and me with thee have staid.
I did not, would not go without thy leave;
I had it, thou did me permission give.
And likely it is, had I been by thy side,
We both had fallen, had we both been tri'de.

ADAM. I am undone by thee, and yet must I
Be charged as cause of our misery?
By granting leave to go, I did approve
My self to thee; yet blamed am for my love.
And is it indeed just matter of complaint,
That I on thee laid not a full restraint?
Alas! that could not be imposed by me,
For God himself had us created free.
Advise I did, and warned, yea did foretell
What enemies were abroad, and what might well
Fall out unto our hurt and prejudice
Even in this delightful Paradise.
But when I all had said, thy confidence
Was raised, being built on thine own innocence
And strength. But to speak fully to thee, I
Knowing thy rare perfections, did rely
Upon thy virtue; but see since that time
Error in love may prove a fatal crime.
And henceforth may all men be warned by me,
And may all women too be warned by thee.
Husbands, away with jealousies, you must
Love wives with dearness, but not overtrust
Them with self-rule. Wives don't your selves abuse
And then your Husbands for their love accuse.

GOD. Let all be quiet, nothing's come to pass
But what by me foreseen most fully was.
For known to me from everlasting are
My works; also the works of all that were
By me created, both Angels and Man,
All I most easily grasp with my span
Of knowledge. Had I pleased, I in that state
Could them confirm in which I did create.
But them to have confirmed, did not comport
With my great Counsels. In my Supreme Court,
Many attendants stand, many to fall
I freely left, freedom I gave them all;
And strength enough, that so it might appear
Who did me truly love, who did sincere
Obedience to me yield, and all might see
Justly they cannot charge their destiny
Nor my decrees, but they themselves must blame;
For from their own free choice their ruin came.
Angels innumerable tell; though they
In Heaven were placed, they would not Heaven obey.
Wherefore I spurned them from me with disdain,
And made them know it impossible to regain
Their first estate, first habitation;
Fettered they lie in Hells dark region,
And in its flames they shall for ever fry;
Repentance shall be hidden from mine eye.
Their chieftain Beelzebub my sworn foe,
Out of his spite to me sought to undo
Poor man my Creature, and he has it done,
And thinks he now of me the day has won.
But he shall quickly know, I can outdo
His policy and power, in his own bow
I can out-shoot him. It Is resolved, I will;
And when all is done, man shall be happy still.
These broken potsherds I Will again repair,
And make them full as beautiful and fair
As erst they were. In spite of Hell, a place
For justice shall be found and saving grace.
Of man I was the Maker. When made, He
Unmade himself. Who shall repairer be?
That work I Will have accomplished. I will not
Upon my honor suffer such a blot
As Hell designed to cast. But I will be
Praised and admired to all Eternity.

Son of GOD. No sooner was this said, but Heaven did ring,
The Angels there did Allelujah sing.
But above all, Gods only Son did grace
That great assembly; in his radiant face
Pity and love did sit triumphant. He
Man dearly loved, pitied his misery.
Both now were at their full, and for man's sake
His Father he approached, and thus he spoke.
Father, I did thy resolution hear
With joy superlative; and cannot forbear
Such goodness to extol with highest praise,
Which will poor man out of his ruins raise.
Should he be lost for ever, how should flame
Rise from thy Altars? What one would thy Name
Exalt? would not thy glory, Father, fade,
Should they be lost, who for thy glory made
All know? Consult thy goodness, let it shine;
Never let Hell, by frustrating of thine,
Be master of its ends. Go on, and do
What ever thine own grace does prompt thee to.

GOD the Father. Difference, my Son, between us there is none,
But full agreement; for we two are One.
I see my self in thee, my glory bright,
My Son thou art, in whom I do delight.
Thou lie in my bosom, and to thee
All mine eternal counsels open be.
Full well thou know, from everlasting we,
Mercy to man together did decree.
How sad soever matters now appear
Between us two, counsels of peace then were.
All which shall stand unshaken, for I will
My thoughts perform, my pleasure all fulfill.
All mankind shall not be lost. I Will offer grace,
Which when once offered many shall embrace;
And those that do, shall find it, and shall be
Not to themselves beholding, but to me.
Conquer at last they shall their deadly foe,
And to their God that victory shall owe.
Unto all those I will my grace impart;
On them I will bestow a gracious heart,
In which I Will write my law, and put my fear;
And so in duty they shall persevere.
Love them I will even for mine own names sake;
Leave them I never will, never forsake.
Yet on mine Honor I do stand, and will
Have the world know me good, but righteous still.
For who will reverence a Deity,
If they may sin with full impunity?
Yea, man being fallen, must his folly rue;
For if he do not, I cannot be true.
My threatening is gone forth; I said, that he
Eating should die, with his posterity.
That sentence cannot be reverst, one shall
Dye for lost mankind, or they must dye all,
Who Will pay the debts that men contracted have?
What one will dye himself, their lives to save?
Can the Angelic nature show such love?
Will the Angelic stock sufficient prove?
I see, they all are nonplust, there is none
Of them to interpose, there is not one.
Among them all I know none is that can
Satisfy Justice, or help ruined man.
Both love and power enough they all do lack;
Sins weight would quickly break an Angels back.

Son of GOD. It Is too too great a work. Created power
Would utmost weakness prove, in that same hour
It should engage unto't; who recompense
Can return for an infinite offense?
Such as sin is, unless he be some one
That Is infinite himself, and can alone
Infinite price lay down, and the injury
Compensate, which was done Gods Majesty?
Man himself cannot do this, he has lost all,
And is become a Bankrupt by his fall.
He might have kept the happiness he was in,
But he can never answer for his sin.
Nor can the Angels for him, though they be
Stars of the morning, high in dignity.
Their stock together put, immense may seem;
Yet were it all laid down, it cannot redeem
Man from destruction: should they all be weighed,
And in the balance against one sin laid,
They would be found too light. But what of this?
Because among the Creatures no help is,
Shall there be none? Though they this cannot do,
Shall wisdom infinite be nonplust too?
Shall mercy be resolved, yet want a way,
By which its self to man it might convey?
May threatened judgments often prevented be;
But grace shall always have its passage free.
It is my Fathers glory, also mine;
By magnifying of it we shall shine
In the eyes of all; all will Us love for this,
When they shall find with Us forgiveness is.
Therefore, O Father, be it known this day,
There shall not want one to pave mercies way,
And to remove obstructions. I will be
Savior to man, and sacrifice to Thee.
In thy most wise eternal counsels thou
Did me appoint Redeemer; therefore now,
Lo now I come to do thy will, and be
A Mediator between man and thee.
His debts and sins to a great sum amount;
Yet, Father, put them all on mine account.
I fully will discharge them, and will see,
By him thy glory shall no loser be.
I well this undertaking understand;
What it will stand me in, I well know, and
What brook I must drink of, before that I
Come to lift up my Head. I am the High
And lofty One, whom Seraphims adore,
And veil their faces when they are me before;
Yet I must act low condescension,
And be made of no reputation.
Instead of glory I must take the dress
Of one that has no form nor comeliness.
In form of God I am, and robbery
Do think it none to claim equality
With him; but yet I must a man become,
And be found in a sorry servants form.
Nay more, if I to man would bring relief,
Sorrows must my familiars be, and grief
Mine intimate acquaintance. I must be
Most sorely bruised for his iniquity,
For his transgressions wounded. In that day
On me thou their iniquities wilt lay.
Yet this does not discourage, nor much more,
I have of love and bowels as great store
As thou can have of wrath. This pleases me,
Full out as much as Vengeance pleases thee.
More thou art not displeased with his sin,
Than I am pleased Salvation him to bring.
Him I will draw out of the horrid pit,
And on a rock most sure I Will set his feet.
Thy Justice honor I will so secure,
As that thy Mercy shall for ay endure.
Look on me, Father, then, and take my word,
Which it is impossible for me to break, great Lord,
Thou know me faithful, thou do know that I
Can upon no account my self deny.
Look then again. I here as surety stand
To pay what e're thy Justice shall demand.
Ask what thou will, thou can not ask amiss,
Performed it shall be what e're it is.
Can only blood pardon procure? If so,
Rather than not a pardon, mine shall go;
My life I Will give for his, and part with all
Which I can part with. Let thine Anger fall
On me thine only Son, that burden I
Will take, to take away iniquity,
In all its guilt and power. And that I may
Be a fit object for it, in the day
Thou shall appoint, I will to my Godhead
The Manhood join, and so have blood to shed.
Blood thou can not except against, for I
As man will suffer, as God satisfy.
Let men me as a worm tread underfoot,
And laugh, and shake the head, and the lip shoot.
Let Bulls, yea Bulls of Bashan me beset,
And come like hungry Lions me to eat.
Let me be poured out like water; and
Let all my bones as dislocated stand.
What though my heart melted must be, and I
Shall have my strength like to a potsherd dry.
What though in sorrows thou do me immerse,
And cruel ones my hands and feet will pierce:
I Will bear, yea welcome all, since thus I can
Redeem from wrath poor, but beloved Man.
Nay when I am thus brought upon the stage,
Let death it self spend on me all its rage.
Let it strike fiercely with its Iron Rod,
And then boast it has killed the Son of God.
My heart is glad, my glory joys, also
My flesh shall rest in hope, because I know
My precious Soul thou will not leave in grave,
I incorrupt shall resurrection have.
Of life the path thou will me show, to store
Of joys and pleasures, which forevermore
Are in thy glorious presence. Thus, although
I seem to yield unto that mighty foe,
By him to be devoured, yet will I
Fall like my self, and a brave Conqueror die.
My very weakness shall much stronger be
Than men and Devils* Devils and men shall see,
I at my lowest can their pride abate,
And be above them in their greatest height.
Against man the handwriting shall not prevail:
Out of the way I Will take it, and will nail
It to my Cross. All adverse powers I Will spoil,
And give to principalities the foil;
So be triumphant over the infernal crew,
And also of them all make open show.
My people I will ransom from the grave,
From death I will, them all redeemed have.
O cruel death, even I thy plagues will be:
O grave, I will destruction bring to thee,
And utterly root out mine enemies;
Repentance shall be hidden from mine eyes.
In death I Will fall, that death may die by me,
In grave I Will lie, that graves may sweetened be
To mine that shall come after. I my head
Will lay in dust, that dust may prove a bed
Of fragrant Roses yielding to them rest
Who by sin were ty'rd out, by world oppressed.
Yea that same death which was brought in by Sin,
And was intended only to have been
A way to Hell, shall through my dying-love
For mine be made the way to joys above.
A way to Heaven for them I will it make,
When out of grave I shall rise for their sake
As their head and first fruits: I will disarm
Death of its sting, that it shall do no harm
To mine. As victor then in triumph high
I, I will captive lead captivity.
And to my Chariot-wheels will firmly bind
All those mine Enemies, who were combined
Me to disgrace, mine to destroy; attend
My triumph, as slaves, they shall: when I ascend
In clouds to Heaven, and direct my course
Father, with gladness unto thee, the source
And spring of happiness, when I will sit
On thy right hand, until under my feet
My foes by thee be brought. At length I will
Descend again in state, and so fulfill
My joys and thy Decrees. Father, I Will go,
Waited upon by Angels, who shall blow,
And by their mighty breath that Trumpet sound
Whose noise shall rough the Seas, and shake the ground,
And make them both surrender up my dead,
Who with those living then shall me their Head
Follow into thy presence, where I shall
Resign my Scepter, that God all in all
May be. Father, this I Will perform, and thus
We shall rejoice in them, and they in Us.

GOD. None could have spoken thus, but He that is
The brightness of my glory, the express
Image of mine own person; in whom be
All the perfections of the Deity.
My Son thou art, my most beloved Son,
In whom I am well-pleased, mine only one.
My works I took delight in, because good;
Much more in man mine image, while he stood:
Nor am I so incensed by his fall,
As utterly to ruin him and all
Who shall of him proceed. Now he is lost,
I am resolved to be at much more cost
For his to be admired Restoration,
Than ever I was at for his Creation.
I made him with my word alone, but will
Ransom him with thy life, and thereby fill
Both Heaven and Earth with wonder, that I part
With thee, who art so near unto my heart.
For man's Redemption I do not care
What charges I am at, I will not spare
For cost, but freely will deliver up
Thee unto death; and mingle such a cup
For thee to drink, as never one did taste
For bitterness, and yet I will no waste
Admit of, though it wormwood be and gall,
My pleasure is, thou drink it, dregs and all.
But thine own love will sweeten it; for I
Know, for man's sake thou love to deny
Thy glorious self, and never wilt repine
To shed thy blood, so man may have the wine.
And as thy love does prompt thee, so I do
Set everlasting joy before thee too,
For thy encouragement. A just regard
Shall be had to thee, and a full reward
Shall crown thy labors; thou at last shall see
Such fruit as will most fully satisfy.
Heaven and Earth shall be filled with thy Fame:
A Name I Will give thee above every name;
Wonderful, Counselor, thou called shall be,
A mighty God, that is, equal with me.
And what thine honor greatly will increase,
The everlasting Father, Prince of Peace.
Yea more, that Manhood, which thou shall assume,
Shall be exalted, and with thee have room
Upon that lofty Throne, where I do sit.
For after such abasement, it is fit
Thou should be exalted as a Prince
As well as Savior; I Will never mince
Nor clip thy dues, but all the world shall know
Thee their supreme, and every knee shall bow
To thy Authority. When thou shall rise
Out of the grave thou chusest, I in no wise
Will be unmindful of thy love to men,
Nor thine obedience unto me, but then
I thee in Heaven will with power clothe,
And in Earth too; so that thou shall in both
Do what thou will, for thou will always be
Like to thy self, and faithful unto me.
Above thy fellows I do thee anoint
With oil of gladness, and do thee appoint
Lord over Men and Angels, it is my will,
Even as my self they do thee honor still.
Unto thine enemies thou shall give thee soil,
And with the mighty shall divide the spoil.
Supply thou shall poor man's necessity;
And proclaim to the captives liberty;
Opening of prison-doors unto the bound,
With perfect healing to the deepest wound.
Souls weary and oppressed, under thy wing
Shall comfort find, and finding, bless their King.
All that accept thee, I with pleased face
Will look upon, and cheerfully embrace
In arms of love, though they be never so poor,
Yea, though they were grand enemies before.
My Glory thou design'st; and if for me
All this thou't do, what w'ont I do for thee?
Not stick at pardons sure, I have them ready
For all those lost ones, which are poor and needy
In their own eyes, and will repair to thee,
All those shall find they welcome are to me.
And when those many shall be called, that now
I give unto thee, when they are brought to bow
Unto thy ruling Scepter, when once they
Who called are, shall all the call obey,
And follow thee wherever thou do go,
In paths of Holiness; when they shall grow
Into a meetness for their purchased right,
The sweet Inheritance of Saints in light:
All then shall plainly see what love I bear
Both unto thee and thine. Thou shall appear
A Judge on the Tribunal; quick and dead
Shall come before thee. Some shall hang the head
For fear and shame: But all thine at that day,
Shall lift up theirs with boldness, knowing they
Shall then receive full absolution,
With their long longed for Redemption
From sin and sorrow. Then the world shall burn,
And by that burning into ashes turn,
Losing thereby its filth; yet in no wise
Will I it quite consume, for there shall rise
Out of its ashes a new Heaven, and
A new Earth also. Both at my command
Shall spring, and both the present shall excel,
For in them righteousness alone shall dwell.
No wicked men shall there lift up the horn;
No vexing brier there, no pricking thorn:
Nothing, nothing at all, that may offend,
Or thee, or me, or thine. Nothing to mend,
No wants to be supplied; sorrows away
Shall vanish quite, and nothing shall allay
The sweetness of their pleasures; I will be
Their portion, and their full felicity.
For thy sake this is done; the new Creation
Shall ascribe all unto thy mediation.
Ye Angels worship this my Son, and raise
Your joyful acclamations to his praise.

ANGELS. Ever be thou admired, O God above!
Ever admired this thy wondrous love!
Thou art Eternal, Infinite, thy treasures,
Like to thy Self; thy Grace beyond all measures.
Father, thou art Father of Mercies too,
All things thou made, and do all things outdo
In goodness. Thou art all invisible,
Dwelling in light that is inaccessible.
Thy Greatness, Glory, Goodness we adore,
And bless thy name, that we may stand before
Thy Throne; for it is our happiness to be
Always in presence of thy Majesty.
And thee we bless, thy Father's only one,
His great delight, his most beloved Son.
In whose most gracious countenance does shine
Beauties perfection, Glory divine.
By thee all things created were, by thee
We placed were in this felicity.
By thee Rebellious spirits were cast down;
Thine was the Victory, thine be the Crown.
Heavens peace thou did restore, and by thy might
Those enemies were overcome, and put to flight.
Before thee they could not stand, no, down they fell;
And falling down, they stopped not, until Hell
Gaping had them received, where they shall be
In flames tormented to eternity.
For that thy mighty conquest we do sing
Praise unto thee, to thee victorious King.
We do admire that noble Act, but more
Thy glorious grace, whereby thou have a door
Of hope opened to man; Thy Grace expressed
On undone Adam, now less than the least
Of mercies through his sin. That thou do lay
His ruin to thy heart; Offer to pay
His debt, his burden bear, his sin take up,
And for his sake drink off a wrathful cup.
That thou should leave the Heaven thou do possess,
And carry sins into a wilderness.
We never could have thought of this, and we
Admire it now it is resolved by thee.
Such love eternal obligation lays
On man. Such love transcends Angelick praise.
But what exceeds our praises, that will we
Admire thee for, Lord, to eternity.

GOD. Know, in their order all things shall proceed:
And since that foolish man has done this deed;
Since Adam, made by me upright, has sought
Many inventions out, he must be taught
By sad experience, what it is to sell
All Paradise for one tree; what to rebel
Against the God that made him. Justice now
Requires that sentence pass; and who but thou
My Son should pass it? I my self judge none;
All judgment I commit to thee, my Son.
By doing which it shall appear to all,
That to man ruined by his own fall,
Healing and faving-mercy I intend,
Not utter misery, because I send
His Friend to be his Judge, and have no other
Sentence to pass, but Him, who shall his Brother
Be one day, and Redeemer, who his blood
Will shed most willingly to do him good.

SON of GOD. Father, thy will revealed is, shall be done
With cheerful readiness by me thy Son.
That so thou mai'st for ever pleased be
With me, as I am ever pleased with thee.
I therefore go, according to thy will,
These Criminals to judge; but I know still,
As I to judge go now, so that one day,
I must to suffer go, for thou will lay
On me all their offenses. Of that cup
Which they but taste, I must the dregs drink up.
Yet though the worst of all on me must light,
I will, as Judge of all the earth, do right.
Justice and Mercy shall together meet,
And being satisfied, each other greet.
With speed all shall be done; away I go
With Angels not attended, for I do
No Witness want nor Jury; and the Sun
Almost to the end of this days race has run.
Evening approaches, at which time blow fair
And gentle gales of wind to cool the air,
A time fit for man's milder Judge, and he
Shall find that fury does not dwell in me.
Where art thou Adam? what! do thou not know
My being in the Garden? can I go
So near thee unperceived? Has not my voice
'Waken'd thine ear? and made thy heart rejoice,
As it was wont to do? it seems strange,
From me thou should absent! Is any change
In thee a cause thereof? come and impart
The matter as it is; Adam where art?

ADAM. Lord, I thy voice did in the Garden hear,
And thereupon my soul did fill with fear.
My self I naked saw; seeing, did hide:
For being so, Lord, I could not abide
Thou should look on me, but away I fled
Among the thickest trees to hide my head.

SON of GOD. Adam, my voice has often reached thine ear;
As often it was thy joy my voice to hear.
It was thy sovereign delight; and how
Comes it to be a terror to thee now?
I see indeed that thou art naked; well,
Of this thy nakedness who did thee tell?
Have thou adventured to eat of that tree,
Concerning which I gave command to thee,
Eat thou should not? --

ADAM. -- The Woman thou did give
With me as my Companion to live,
Whom I did count a token of that love
Which thou to me do bear, could disapprove
Nothing of all I saw in her, but stood
Enamored on her as a perfect good.
She thou did give, gave of that tree for meat;
And being by her given, I did eat.

SON of GOD. Have for thy self nothing to say beside?
Was she by me given to be thy Guide?
An help she was intended for thee, and
Fitted for such by her Creator's hand.
But know, God never did unto thee say,
Rather than me, thou shall thy Wife obey.
He did not thee subject to her, nor none;
Him thou should have obeyed, yea him alone.
But, Woman, say, what is it that thou have done?

EVE. I was beguiled by the Serpent, and did eat.

SON of GOD. Serpent, 'cause thou art guilty of this cheat,
And this have done, there is nothing shall thee shield
From vengeance. Above every beast of field
Thou art accursed, and above cattle all.
Henceforth upon thy belly thou shall crawl;
Yea dust shall be thy food, dust thou shall eat,
All the days of thy life be that thy meat.
And further know, between the woman and thee feel,
I now will put a mortal enmity,
Which 'twixt your seeds shall last. Thou shall it
Her seed shall bruise thy head, and thou his heel.
As for thee, Woman, Be it known, that I
Sorrows on thee will greatly multiply
In thy Conception; yea for this thing,
In sorrow thou thy Children forth shall bring.
Unto thy Husband thy desire shall be;
Learn to submit, he shall rule over thee.
Now, last of all, Adam, to thee I come,
And so will end the Assizes with thy Doom,
Which thus I do pronounce: Because that thou
Have to thy Wifes voice hearkened, and now
Of that tree eaten have, about which I
Said, Thou shall not eat of it, lest thou die.
For thy sake cursed is the very ground;
Sorrows shall thence spring up, and much abound.
Out of it thou with toil shall fetch thy meat,
And that in sorrow all thy days shall eat,
Till thy return unto the ground thou make,
For out of that at first I did thee take.
Know thy self, Adam, that thou art but dust,
And unto it again return thou must.
All this shall be accomplished. But I do
Your misery behold, pity it too.
You both before me naked stand and bare,
Covered with shame all over; now you are
Exposed unto storms without a fence,
And to the changing-weathers violence.
My Bowels yearn to see your Poverty,
How low you are fallen into misery.
Wherefore your nakedness I Will hide with skins.
And with my Robe of Righteousness your sins.
But now out of the Garden I thee send,
In tilling of that Ground thy time to spend,
Whence thou wast taken. Therefore now be gone,
Adam, from hence away. Eden alone
For Innocence was. A Wilderness
Will serve him well enough, whose holiness
Is altogether lost. Nor shall there be
Of return hither any Hope for thee.
For straight upon the Gardens eastern side,
I will appoint some Cherubims to abide;
A Flaming-Sword also, which night and day
Brandished shall be, and turned every way,
The way unto the Tree of Life to guard,
That Man may never taste it afterward,
Unless from me. For know, that I Will give leave
And power to all who me by Faith receive;
Even all that shall under my Banner fight,
And fighting overcome, I Will give them right
Of the Tree of Life to eat, which always stood
In the midst of the Paradise of God.

ADAM. How am I fallen! my tongue cannot express
That depth of misery, which fathomless
Is to my understanding! I ere while
Had God my Friend, under whose gracious smile
With joy I lived, and gladly did embrace
All opportunities to see his face.
But now alas! from him I Am fain to hide,
And his approaches can no more abide.
Being from Eden thrust, where shall I flee
To seek relief in this my misery?
Creatures avoid me, or stand gazing on
Me as a monster, or man quite undone.
Having transgrest my great Creators Law,
Of me the Brutes refuse to stand in awe.
My former blessing is turned to a curse,
My comforts into crosses. And what is worse,
Both Sin and Curse I propagate to all
Who shall of me descend. For by my Fall
My whole race ruined is; They all will be
Conceived in sin, born in iniquity;
Born unto Trouble, as sparks upward fly;
No sooner born, but they will begin to dye.
Oh that I might be childless! and that God
Would put a period to this earthy clod!
And grant that in the longed-for silent Grave,
Sense of these sorrows I no more may have.
Yet what if Death a full end should not make,
But cast me down into a burning Lake,
Where I a drop of water shall not get,
My Tongue to cool in that tormenting-heat?
I tremble to think on it; The case stands so,
What thing I should desire I do not know.
Eve, from my sight be gone, make no delays,
Sorrow and indignation thou do raise
In me when e're I see thee; get thee gone;
By thee, by thee it is I am undone.
It was thy self-conceit, thy wretched pride
Of parts and beauty, drew thee from my side.
A Serpent, and a Devil in him, were sit
Companions for thee, rather than to sit
And talk or work with me. Oh that alone
I had remained, and never woman known!
A Rib thou art, crooked by nature, sent
By God for comfort, but to mischief bent.
All the ingredients of future woe
To mankinds Grand-dame does all mankind owe.
Thou Mother of all living called shall be,
Mother of Death too, for that sprung from thee.

EVE. My Lord, I have transgrest, and do with tears
Confess my fault. Oh let thy gracious ears
To my request incline; and let the heat
Of kindled wrath abate; now at thy feet
I prostrate lie. God knows, my heart is thine,
My Love, and high esteem, whatever is mine.
Through my means, true is is, thou art accursed;
But know, the Serpent has beguiled me first.
Do think I would have done't, had I foreseen
What would the consequence thereof have been?
Oh! pity me, dear Adam, for I do
My crime acknowledge, and bewail it too.
And if that such entreaties might have sped,
I Would beg the punishment upon my Head
Might wholly light, and God would thee restore
To all the happiness thou had before.
On those terms welcome sorrow, welcome pain,
I all would freely bear, of none complain.
Be kind unto me, Adam, me forgive
My great offense, and let me with thee live.
Broken my heart is, multiplied my fears,
My sighs consider, and observe my tears.
In this my sore distress do not me leave;
Me, a part of thy self, do not bereave
Of thine advice and aid. A look give down,
A look of love on her who is thine own.

ADAM. Here it is, my Dearest, for thee; come, arise,
And those o'reflowing tears wipe from thine eyes,
Which my displeasure caused; alas! that is
The least effect of what thou did amiss.
His wrath I dread whom we provoked have,
And from that wrath I gladly would thee save
By bearing all my self. I Would loudly cry,
Let Eve live in thy sight, and let me dye.
But this discourse is vain; though I am loath
To see thy miseries, yet since we both
Have sinned, both must suffer, and feel smart;
Our Judges sentence carved us both our part.
What then remains, but that we study do
Love to each other, how to show it too
In all ways possible? for so may we
Somewhat alleviate our misery.

EVE. My Lord, with thankfulness I do admire
Thy love to me, just object of thine ire.
Which great and undeserved love does raise
Hope toward God, that we shall speak his praise.
For if man thus forgiveth, how much rather
Will he forgive, of Mercy who is the Father?

ADAM. Most sweet these words, dear Consort! and my mind
Gives me, that we and ours shall favor find
In the eyes of our God. Methought there did
Great comfort lie in the very sentence hid.
A sudden death was looked for; but lo! He
In stead of death, only imposed on thee
Travailing sorrows. And it is richly worth
Considering, thou Children shall bring forth,
For all those pains; and when a Child thou have,
Forget thou will all sorrows that were past.
In stead of me; our Judge did curse the ground,
Which now will grow more wild, and will abound
With thorns and thistles. Its face will be marred
With vexing weeds, so I must labor hard.
But sleep by labor will be made more sweet,
And I by labor shall get bread to eat.
But above all, this has my comforts fed,
One day thy seed shall bruise the Serpents head.
On these encouragements let us both fly
Unto his mercy-seat, and there let us lie
Covered with shame, and drowned with tears; let us now
Before him like poor malefactors bow.
Of this our sin let full confessions,
Mixed with fervent supplications,
Ascend before his Throne. He may relent
And mercy show unto us penitent.
It is the only way to escape the Rod,
Humbly to seek our refuge in our God.

SON of GOD. Father, the Sentence I have past. Thy will
And pleasu^e therein I did all fulfill.
Nor have I finished that work alone,
But from the offenders took their heart of stone,
And gave them one of flesh, so that they melt,
For now the burden of their sin is felt.
Yea more, behold, they pray, and sue for grace,
Nothing will please them, but thy pleased face.
As Priest, their names upon my breast I bear,
And now an Advocate for them appear,
Presenting their requests all incensed, and
With Intercession back them. Let thy Hand
Of Love reach out a Pardon. Let them obtain
Thy choicest favor, for my sake, again.
From those deep sighs rising from hearts oppressed
And kindly broke, smell a savor of Rest.
Now that they seek thee, be thou of them found,
And where Sin has, let Grace much more abound,
Despise them not, who unto thee do fly;
If thou do them, thou shall me too deny.
I will their sins for ever take away,
For their offenses I by death will pay.
What is done I would not have thee undo,
Most highly it becomes thee to be true
Unto thy righteous threats. They did forsake
Thy Law, and thy Commandments did break;
And visited let their transgressions be
With Rods, and with stripes their iniquity.
Let their own wickedness correction give,
And backslidings reprove them while they live.
May they and theirs by sad experience know,
It is an evil thing, and bitter too,
That they forsook God, and made it appear,
By that departure they cast off his fear.
Yet thine own purposes of Grace fulfill,
Do thou them good, and be their Father still.
Some sign of favor give them. Let them see
That thou art reconciled with them in me.

GOD. Be it, my Son, according to thy will,
Whatever thou have spoken, I Will fulfill.
In thee I reconciled am, and can
For thy sake pardon all the sins of man.
He shall be sure to feel my smarting Rod,
Yet I will be to him a loving God.
When thou art suitor, what shall not be done?
What Is too much for thy Intercession,
Which, I know, thou will ever live to make
With me in Heaven for poor Sinners sake?
Therefore to the utmost thou shall Savior be
Unto all those that come to God by thee,
Who shall be happy. Go ye Angels then,
And Peace proclaim on Earth, Good will to men.

ANGEL. Adam, I hither come Tidings to bring
From our and your Creator, Heavens King.
Unto thy Prayers he has inclined his ear;
Although a sinner, thou to him art dear.
Upon thy sin Death might have seizure made;
And if it had done't, thou must have obeyed
Its summons; but behold! there is a reprieve
Which Grace has issued forth, and thou shall live
Many and many days, that thou thereby,
When e're Death comes, mai'st be prepared to die.
Unto thy Makers pleasure it is fit,
Having offended, humbly thou submit.
Bad will be mixed with good; thy days will be
Sunshine and cloudy; God lays out for thee
Sore trials. But of sin do thou repent,
And learn in every state to be content.
One called Abr'am shall from thee descend,
Whom God will own and honor as his Friend.
From him, in David's line, also shall spring
The promised Messiah. Zions King,
Born of a Virgin overshadow'd by
The Holy Ghost, power of the most High.
He upon David's Throne shall sit full sure,
His Kingdom shall for evermore endure.
From Gentiles he thick darkness shall dispell,
And be the Glory of his Israel.
He out of love to thee and thine will die,
And shall by Death obtain the Victory,
Nailing unto his Cross each enemy.
But unto man by death bring peace and rest,
So that whoever believe in him, are blessed.
He judged you, and he will come at last
To judge the World, when Judgment shall be past
By him in Righteousness. And then his own
He will advance to his most Glorious Throne,
Where they shall reign in all felicity,
Without disturbance, to eternity.
Man's Hymn of Praise. Tune our Hearts, Lord, that we may speak thy praise;
Flat they are yet, do thou them higher raise.
Affect us thoroughly. Let us admire
Thy Love, and call in help from all the Quire
Of Angels, who with wonder have all seen
How great thy goodness unto us has been;
Who gav'st thy Son, that he might for us die;
Who gav'st thy self for our Recoverie.
How freely did thou stoop, when we did fall?
That we might Honey have, thou drankest Gall.
We eat the Fruit, thou hung'st upon the Tree,
Which Life brought unto us, Death unto thee.
Thy stripes our healing are, thy thorn our flower;
Thy Blood our Balsom; and thy Cross our Tower;
Thy wounds our Refuge; and thy sighs our Song;
Of thee we will make our boast all the day-long.
Thou art the first-begotten of the Dead;
Thou of all earthly Princes art the Head.
Thou love'st us, and washed us from our sins
In thine own Blood, making us Priests and Kings
To God thy Father. Therefore we will never
Cease saying, Glory be to thee for ever.
For we, O Lord, thy ransomed Ones shall come
Unto the Heavenly Zion as our Home,
With Songs (caused by that blood which thou did shed)
And everlasting joy upon our head.
We shall obtain all gladness in that day,
When sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

FINIS.
A Dialogue BETWEEN FAITH AND A DOUBTING SOUL.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
ABout seventeen years ago, a gracioas Woman (one of that Flock which was by
Divine Providence committed to my charge) sorely labored under many Doubts,
which created her much disquiet. In her agonies she frequently repaired to me
for help, which according to the Grace given, I did most readily afford her.
But by those Convulsion-sits, which almost every day returned, her memory was
rendered so labil and unfaithful, that all I said made no abiding impression.
Every time she came to me, she brought with her the same perplexing thoughts,
and I had my work to do again. Thereupon I resolved to draw up in Verse her
Doubts, and my Answers, and gave them to her in writing, in hope that her
memory would more easily retain something which might befriend her; at least,
that having these things by her, she would make use of them as occasion
required, and so save both me and her self much labor.

Through the goodness of God, my expectation was not disappointed, she found
much benefit, as she did most freely and thankfully acknowledge; and through
mercy past the remainder of her days in a pleasant calm. But, good Soul, she
could not hide Gods loving kindness within her breast, but communicated to
others these lines, which she counted a treasure; several Copies were taken and
dispersed, some sent into remote parts, which found good acceptance, and were
not without their fruit.

Mine own Copy of them lay dormant long after; indeed I concluded it lost,
until about two years since one of my Children found it among my loose Papers,
and with joy brought it to me. Since then, one borrowed it, and another, and
more, of which several took the pains to transcribe it. And I have of late been
so pressed to make it public, that contrary to my own thoughts and resolution, I
have been constrained to yield unto their importunity.

Certain it is, that Doubtings do abound in gracious Souls, though wicked men
enjoy a fatal peace, and are not in trouble like them. The Devil like a roaring
Lion gapes upon, and worries those that have escaped out of his snares; whilst
he rocks his vassals, and does his utmost to keep them asleep in the cradle of
carnal security. Those that have true Faith, have also many fears. But those
that are strangers to Faith, are commonly free from them.

Doubts are good signs, yet bad company. They damp the spirit, and weaken the
hand, and cover with a cloud that face which should shine. They keep Faith from
flourishing; they deprive the Christian of that comfort which the breasts of
Gospel-promises would yield him; they rob God and Godliness of that honor
which the cheerful lives of Saints would bring them; and they render the
converses of holy persons many times very unacceptable to their brethren;
though we should bear one another burdens, and be very compassionate unto such
as are deserted, buffeted, and disconsolate.

It is the unquestionable duty of Christ's Ministers to be Messengers of peace
as well as Sons of thunder; as to startle and affright sleeping sinners, so to
revive drooping and sinking Saints. We are to comfort the people of God, by
speaking to their case, and to their hearts. To strengthen the weak hands, and
confirm the feeble knees, is a part, yea a very sweet part of our work. We have
no dominion over their faith, no, none at all; but should be helpers of their
joy, and rejoice to be so.

Upon this Errand and Design is this little piece sent abroad into the world;
without question many will find themselves concerned in the things contained in
it, and I hope some will find advantage. The answer to these Doubts are fetched
from the Word of God, and grounded upon it, and such are most cordial. Nay none
but such will bring healing to a wounded, and settlement to a tumultuating
spirit. Let none be offended at the manner of composure, but remember the
reason before given, and call to mind David's Psalms, together with the Apostles
Exhortation, To admonish one another in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs.
A blessing from heaven go along with this little work; and if thou receivest
any spiritual benefit by it, he has his end, who is

A Friend and Servant to the Household of Faith, SAMVEL SLATER.

A Dialogue between Faith and a Doubting Soul.
FAITH. WHat joys like those which from above descend!
They know no bounds, are strangers to an end.
My comforts overflow, I sit and sing;
The night is day to me, and Winter Spring.
While others think I want, I enough have,
My heritage is good, I nothing crave.
Come, Soul, put on a smile, chase sorrow hence;
Whence flow these tears? why is this great expense
Of deep fetched sighs and groans? thy Saviors voice
Should clear thy brow, and make thy heart rejoice.
Hushed! do not hear't? Salvations Captain comes
With sound of Trumpets, and with beat of Drums.
It Is not the alarm of War; he takes thy part,
His actions all along have spoke his heart.
For thee he did engage, he fought, and di'd,
And now triumphs. All, all makes on thy side.
Himself did tell me so; be of good cheer,
Away with doubtings, and defy all fear.
Shake off these causeless dumps, arise and shine;
The victory is Christ's, the advantage thine.

SOUL. What mine? can prove it? thou take all on trust,
And so may be deceived* try I must,
And look, and search, examine, and enquire,
Ask question after question. Yet no higher
Can I attain than to faint hopes; which cost
A thousand thousand labors; but are lost
In twinkling of an eye. I cannot rest,
Nor lasting peace enjoy. When things are best,
I am disturbed, my sleep scarce lasts an hour,
And when I 'wake again, Lord! what a power
Of sad perplexing thoughts assault my mind?
That I conclude both Heaven and Earth combined
To make me miserable. Faith, speak out,
Have thou more cause of joy, or I of doubt?

FAITH. Thou bid'st me speak, and yet deny'st to hear;
When I unlock my lips, thou bolts thine ear.
There are such sobs and sighs, bitter bewailings,
Such weeping, wringing hands, such loud complainings,
That all my labor's lost. Alas! my skill
In vain is tried, for out of mere self-will
Thou spillest all my Cordials, and wilt none
Of my choice Heaven-born comforts, no, not one.
Yet since I know thy sickness, know, I do
Both pity it, and long to cure it too.
We Will argue things once more, for I don't dread
Thy reas'nings, nor the crafty Serpents head.
My cause is good, my blessed Seconds are,
(Though thou think otherwise) without compare.
Enter the lists then, yet the Judge shall be
Not sense, nor carnal reason, much less he
That Is styled God of this world; these neither can
Nor will speak comfort to poor humbled man.
The Scripture I make choice of, for it is
Divine, impartial, cannot judge amiss.
Thou can not quarrel it; and therefore say,
Say on, dejected Soul, I Will yield the day
To Fears, if Scriptures do. Objections raise,
Thou shall have answer, and thy God the praise.

Doubt. 1. From the apprehension of Gods Holiness.
SOUL. Trembling takes hold upon me, when I see
A God above of spotless purity.
The Seraphims his glory do proclaim,
And it admire, most holy is his name.
The garnisht Heavens are unclean in's sight,
The noonday Sun is darkened by his light.
His eyes are flames of fire, piercing and pure,
Which cannot the least iniquity endure.
But I am full of sin, all over stains;
From top to toe is naught but boils and blains.
My head, heart, life with sin are over run;
Sin I did choose, by sin I am undone.

FAITH. Yet there is hope: a ruined Bankrupt may
Set up again; the night gives place to day.
Adam his beauty lost, and by one sin
Defaced the image God had made him in.
The Nazarite became an Ethiope,
And in himself had neither help nor hope;
Yet found both in another. God prepared
More lasting beauty for him, and repaired
His Image on him, and the sinner then,
Washed from his filth, waxt fresh and fair again.
This may be done for thee, the fountain still
Stands open for all comers; whosoever will
May go and bathe his sooty soul, and so
Come sorth a Creature new, and white as snow.
Thy God is holy, so is Christ, and he
Has Grace sufficient for himself and thee;
Thy wound is not incurable; thy sore
He can so heal, that it shall run no more.
Thy Maker can, O soul, form thee anew,
Thy holy God can make thee holy too.
Nay more, by Covenant he is bound to impart
To his a spirit right, and a new heart.
Go to him then, his faithful promise plead,
And so he will richly supply thy need.

Doubt. 2. From Gods Justice.
SOUL. But God is just, and will not see his Law
Broken without revenge. I stand in awe,
And dread his iron-rod. Does he not say,
The soul that sins shall die? ah! who then may
Once hope for life, since we are sinners all,
And lost our righteousness in Adam's fall.
Behold me clothed with rags, once but one story
Lower than Angels, who are clothed with glory.
These rags are filthy too, and so the shame
Which they should cover, they to all proclaim:
I do condemn my self, though self I love:
What favor then can I expect above?
The Law has past its sentence, it does cry,
All men are sinners, and as such shall die.
My guilt is great, my God is just, who can
Satisfy justice, and clear guilty man?

FAITH. I have a Friend will do it. Did I say, will?
Pardon, dear Jesus: Oh, how I do fill
With joy, since I can say, he has it done,
And God is pleased with thee in Christ his Son.
Thy debt was great, empty thy purse, that friend
Became thy surety, and did put an end
To the Lawsuit, by saying he would pay
What thou wast charged with, upon the day
Justice should set; and when that day came, he
Paid to a farthing, and discharged thee.
The sum was great, but his far greater love
Bogled not at it, nor did he once remove
From his resolved kindness, but has given
What did redeem lost earth, and purchase Heaven.
He laid his life down, his heart-blood he gave,
That sparing thy blood, he thy life might save.
What more can Justice ask? surely if I
Be once arrested, I Will plead, Christ did die.
If God be not appeased with death of God,
I will for ever bear his flaming rod.
Besides, I spied white linen in his grave,
And soon concluded that I this must have.
Christ saw me naked, and then did provide
A perfect Robe my nakedness to hide.
What more is lacking? let strict Justice see;
My Savior says, there is no spot in me.

Doubt 3. From the comparatively small number of Redeemed Ones.
SOUL. I grant there is in Christ sufficient merit
To purchase Heaven, and make his inherit
Those peaceful blissful mansions, where he
Crowns all their hopes with full felicity.
His blood can make the blackest Blackmoor white,
And loathsome sinners lovely in Gods sight.
Of his Almighty power doubt who can,
I do believe him God as well as man.
But what of that, I hear, the number's small
For which he died. Had he died for all,
I might have filled with comfort. But alas!
A little part of this corrupted mass
Was chosen out for honorable use,
Vessels of glory, whom the Lord did choose
For his Celestial Temple; the rest will
As worthless silver be rejected still.
My reason tells me, if he would not cry
And pray for all, for all he would not die.
I fear of his dear little Flock I Am none,
Others may saved be, and I undone.

FAITH. Be it acknowledged, that few there are,
Whom Christ redeemed, shall in his merits share.
He saves not all the world, died not for all,
Did not alike affect Judas and Paul.
Grant that, yet do not sink, the door is open
To all that will come, it is a door of hope.
Christ died for sinners, why then not for thee?
Either give reason, or believe with me.
Gods Decrees secret are, and who can read
His everlasting purpose? Nay what need
Of climbing Heaven, curiously to look,
Whether thy name be written in his Book?
That is a vain attempt, that course once take,
Thy soul thou wilt wound, and work for sorrow make.
There is enough in Christ, and none shall die
But such as do not to that refuge fly.
In him are safely Arkt persons unclean,
Who grievous sinners like to thee have been.
Haste thou for shelter too. Why this delay?
O soul, it must be done. Do it to day.
Would thou destroy thy self? shall black despair
O'rewhelm and drown thee, now there is such a fair
And ready passage, leading to the Ark
In which thousands of thousands do imbark,
And are conveyed to a land of rest,
Where neither sin nor sorrow can molest.
Up, up, for shame, away to him with speed,
Who Is called a Savior, and is one indeed.
Do but go to him, yea go at a venture,
Into his gracious presence all may enter.
He never said to any, seek in vain,
All humble seekers shall his favor gain.
His promise is, if any one will rise
And make address to him, he in no wise
Will cast him off. Flee thou unto his grace,
So he in arms of love shall thee embrace.
None e're departed empty from him. He
Is infinitely full, full out as free.
Haste to him therefore, haste, thy days do spend;
End thou thy danger, e're thy days do end.
Put in thy sickle, reap what he has sown;
He Is not thy foe, if thou be not thine own.
The invitation is, Whoever will,
Let him come hither, and here take his fill.
If thou will take, then Christ will give, believe;
Stretch out thy hand, he will thy wants relieve.
He is the God of Love, then to him go,
Thou can not ask the thing he will not do.
Others have sought and found, asked and had,
Who sinners were like thee, as old, as bad.
Their good success should ease and cheer thy heart,
Christ will do his, if thou will do thy part.

Doubt 4. From uncertainty of interest.
SOUL. I question still mine interest in God,
And cannot call him Father. Mine abode
Is yet in darkness, I want light to read
Mine Evidences by. Oh! could I feed
My joys with full assurance; did I know
That God is reconciled, Christ did do
And suffer all for me, I soon would chase
All sorrow hence, and with a smiling face
Look on my dearest Lord: nothing should hinder,
His love should be the spark, my heart like tinder
Should quickly kindle, and be all in slame
With love and praises to his holy name,
Thrice happy Paul could say Christ died for him,
Which filled his soul with joy up to the brim.
Did I know that, my comforts would run over;
I Would sit and sing, but sigh and sob no more.

FAITH. Do thou desire to know it? Look within.
Is no discov'ry made? then look again.
Beg light from Heaven when it is dark below;
Thou shall know, if thou follow on to know.
Christ died for all in whom he lives, make out
His living in thee, and thou needst not doubt.
If thou can say, O Lord, my heart is thine;
Thou well may say, O Lord, thy death is mine.
He enters no House, but he sprinkles first
The Door-posts of it with that blood which burst
Out of his precious side. That sincere love,
Which glows within thy breast, came from above,
And is a sweet reflection of that fire
And purer flame in him, and does aspire
To its own Element; 'twill carry thee
To that blessed place, where is no room for me.
Cease groundless fears, God will not him deny
That says, Lord give me Christ, or else I dye.
Deal faithfully in thine own case, and own
With thankfulness what God for thee has done.
Thou can not choose but say, many a time
Christ has himself shown willing to be thine.
Thou do accept him, do not? Then all is done,
The match is made, and Jesus is thine own.
God says, wilt have my Son? thou say, yea Lord,
Be it to me according to thy word;
His Love and Law also, both I would have,
His Peace without his Grace I do not crave.
I am as willing he in me should reign,
As that by him I happiness may gain.
Let this be thy return, for so shall he
Fill thee with grace, and Heaven with such as thee.

Doubt 5. From inward Corruptions.
SOUL. With such as me! believed who will; I cannot,
Whoever enters Heaven, sure I shall not.
Naught that defiles shall thither come; that place
Is filled with Glory for Souls filled with Grace.
But mine is stuffed with sin, numberless evils,
Ill thoughts, affections, Legions of Devils,
Haunt and inhabit here. Lord! what a power
Of lusts are crawling in it every hour!
I never set my self to look within,
But I discover filthy heaps of sin.
Did others see what I do, they with shame
And scorn would shun me; I disgrace that name
Which graceth me, Christ's holy name I bear.
Him I profess, his Livery I wear,
With him I live, his word I hear, yet feel
No yielding to him in this heart of Steel.
Filthy I was, and so am still; How can
An holy Christ dwell in so soul a man?
Sure he his habitation sweepeth clean;
There are not in his Temple heaps of sin.
Sin dies in him that lives; therefore I
Have no true life, not finding sin to dye.

FAITH. Sin is in thee. But is there nothing more?
There may be Grace, though of corruption store.
In midst of enemies thy Savior reigns,
And of those enemies still ground he gains.
That mighty one has girt his Sword to's side,
And conquering, to conquer he does ride.
Thou feel thy corruptions are rife,
Such feeling is a mercy, sign of life.
Dead men feel nothing, load them, load again,
They do not groan, they do not once complain.
It Is well when sin does trouble and molest,
Which did thee please; for Christ has promised rest
To heavy laden souls; nor is he slack
To take that burden off which galls thy back.
He will not pass thee by, because so ill;
Thou art the fitter for his Sovereign skill.
A good Phisician overlooks the sound,
And goes where sicknesses do most abound.
Hate and abhor thy sins, thy self bemoan;
If sin lose love, it cannot keep the throne.
Where it is endeared it lives, loathed it dies.
Christ at one time humbles and sanctifies.
As for the stirrings of thy lust, at most,
They Are but death-pangs, it shall give up the Ghost.
Sampson did at his death make greatest sport.
The Devils rage grows high, when is time is short.
Be thou so wise in the case which thou art in,
As to discern 'twixt reign and rage of sin.
What speak thy bleeding heart, and weeping eyes?
Sure this, that sin don't reign but tyrannize.
Danger of death is past, because I see
By these complainings, sin does die in thee.

Doubt. 6. From want of Godly sorrow.
SOUL. Could I indeed mourn kindly, then at last
I Would think the bitterness of death were past.
Could I with weeping mingle all my drink,
Or make my bed to swim; could I so think
On my corruptions, as to dissolve
Into a flood of tears, I should resolve
My doubts, and banish fears. Were e're a vein
Of godly sorrow breathed, 'twould ease my pain.
Then I should smile at table, rest in bed,
A bleeding heart would cure an aching head.
But mine, alas! is stupid, brawnie, dry
Will scarce afford a tear, will scarce supply
Me with desired groans; sometimes I see
My brethren furnished with a treasury,
Or ocean of tears. How soon can they
With laden clouds o'recast their clearest day!
One thought of Christ, or word of sin does make
Their eyes run over, and their hearts to ache.
I cannot command a drop, when they have store;
And therefore grieve 'cause I can grieve no more.

FAITH. Poor soul! oh that thy head were waters, and
Thy chamber Bochim. Oh! that a command
Would sweetly break thine heart, and make it melt,
Feeling such sorrow as it never felt.
I wish that these dry cheeks bedewed may be
With tears for him that shed his blood for thee.
They would be Aqua vitae, generous wine,
Quickly reviving this faint heart of thine.
Those tears would drown thy sorrow, and that rain
Would make the inward chaps to close again.
Well, take a turn upon that fatal mount
Where Christ was crucified, and there recount
His pressing sorrows; there behold the Sun
Of Righteousness eclipsed, and having run
His race of life, setting at last in dark,
Wrapped up in clouds, stand still a while and hark
How deep his sighs were fetched in that black night,
Who brought for us immortal life to light.
His soul was sorrowful, even unto death.
Yet in that sorrow not the smallest breath
Of comfort reached him; he was fain to 'bide
The rage of enemies; nay God did hide.
Men reak'd their rage, his Father too did pour
His wrath upon him in the self-same hour.
And all this for thy sin; lay that to heart,
Thou did transgress, and he endured the smart.
Dwell on these thoughts, for sure a Savior's groan
May pierce and mollify an heart of stone.
Repeated thoughts, that God did him forsake,
May kindly work, and cause thy heart to ache.
Since Peter wept with one cast of Christ's eye,
Thou mai'st to hear him say, for thee I die.
Yet measure not repentance by thy tears.
Sorrow is deepest when it least appears.
Don't always judge of inward sorrows by
The tongue complaining, or the weeping eye.
For full-charg'd vessels frequently run least,
Through want of vent, so does the heart oppressed.
Many have words, yea tears too at their will,
Who Christ rejecting hug their Idols still.
Esau did weep, and yet could find no place
For wished repentance, nor for saving grace.
Again, there may true Penitents be found
Overwhelmed with grief, with brinish tears not drowned.
Some men's complexions are hot, and they
Buckets of water must needs want to lay
The fire that burns within, whilst others are
So full of moisture, they have enough to spare.
Grace sanctifies, and makes better, yet
Natures defects are not supplied by it.
Diverse affections too are in the heart.
Now one, anon another acts its part*
Thy grief once wrought, and then thou could have stood.
Under Christ's Cross, till thou had wept a flood.
Holy revenge now is upon the stage,
And prosecutes with never-ending rage
The murderer, that Christ did crucify,
And nothing but its blood will satisfy.
Despond not then, O soul, that sacred fire
Of holy anger (which shall not expire
Upon the altar of thine heart) does dry
That dew which once upon thy cheeks did lie.
Come, do thou feel the heavy weight of sin?
Would give a world, there were not one within?
Is that thy misery, thy plague, thy sore?
Would willingly offend thy God no more?
If God should bid thee ask a boon, would cry,
Lord, that my soul might live; my sin might die?
Can part with Delilah? can Agag hew,
Thy Kingly-darling-lust, can bid adieu
To all the Idols of thine heart? then he
Who died for sinners, also died for thee.
That sense of sin, those inward pains that cause
A man to loath himself, yield to Christ's laws,
The Gospel calls enough. Do thou not cover
One of thy sins, God will them all pass over.
What e're is wanting in thy tears, Christ's blood
To the utmost will supply, and make it good.
Huge mountainous transgressions of man
Small rivers cannot hide, but the Ocean can.

Doubt 7. From spiritual unfruitfulness.
SOUL. But my heart is a barren soil: that lays
My comforts dead; did I fill up my days,
Place and Relations; ah! did I find
A fruitful soul, I should not faint in mind.
I cannot weep, yet if my work went on,
Were this my straightened heart enlarged to run
The ways of Gods Commandments, then my peace
Would like a river be, and still increase.
Abundant fruits of holiness would be
Proofs of my love to God, Gods love to me.
God justly does expect from every one
Returns of love and duty. There is none
Deserves a servants name, unless he do
Perform the work his master sets him to.
God likes not idle drones, that drink and eat
At others cost, and live on others sweat.
His people are industrious, and can say,
Lord we our work have finished in our day.
Whereas mine lies dead upon my hand,
While time flies swiftly, I do idle stand.
Many commands before me present are,
But where is obedience? if I compare
My life with God's law, I most plainly see,
Of much that should, little is done by me.
I stand and wonder at my Masters cost,
Then sit down sighing, when I think all lost.

FAITH. Suppose it true, that little fruit is found
Upon thy branches; thou do not abound
In service; though thy reck'ning-day does haste,
Yet days for working do run out to waste.
The best of servants often have cause to say,
I have not done a days-work in a day.
But what is thy duty now? sure not to throw
All hope away, and utterly undo
Thy precious highborn soul by black despair;
Rather mend former faults by future care.
Is one day gone, and yet its work not done?
Then if thou can, do two days work in one.
And having been too too remiss before,
Double thy diligence, and strive the more.
Did sleep away thy golden morning hours?
Then in the afternoon call up the powers
Of soul and body, working each amain,
Not leaving till thy losses thou regain.
This does become a Christian, not to sit
Doubting and drooping only in a sit
Of Melancholy, which his comfort kills,
And him with spiritual distempers fills.
But is it a just charge which thou do put in
Against thy self, poor soul! O do not sin
In false-accusing; act not Satan's part
To make him all the sport, thy self the smart.
Let the best laden branches hang the head.
Be thankful for some fruit, the tree's not dead
That has one cluster. Though more would do well,
Out of that one thou mal'st a blessing spell.
Acknowledge what thy God to thee has been,
And overlook not thy returns to him.
Thankfully own receipts of Grace; withal
Do not disown thy gracious acts, though small.
There Is no day thou do all thy work; but pray
Do not do something for God every day?
Can thou pass one without an holy thought,
And thankful mindfulness of him that brought
Thee up from the womb? can for the world be free
Without some intercourse 'twixt God and thee?
Tell me the truth; where have bestowed thy love,
Unless upon thy dearest friends above?
Whom do desire? whose absence do bemoan,
Like that of God, who is thine only one?
In Ordinances thou do most delight;
And would do all thy duties with thy might.
Now springs a sigh, then drops a pearly tear;
Here Is grief for sin, longings for God be there.
Call this good fruit; thou have not barren been,
Something thou find, more remains unseen.
All Saints do not improve alike; some yield
A larger crop than others. Every field
Bears not an equal burden. Some Saints prove
More fertile than their Brethren, and their love
Being stronger is more active; ne'rtheless
Not one does know a total barrenness.
The Father purges every branch that is
Truly in Jesus, so that none does miss
Wholly of bearing. And if now small store
Of holy fruit, there may next year be more.
Besides thou read, Christians life is hid;
So are their vital acts sometimes. Who did
Discover ought in David, while the fall
Of leaf was on him: ah! how sadly all
His graces lay for dead! the sap in's root
Yet rose again, and brought forth precious fruit*
Be not discouraged, God will not despise
A day of small things. In his gracious eyes
Blossoms are acceptable; if there be
One little cluster, Oh! how sweetly he
Does smile upon it! it is his holy will,
It should not be destroyed, because still
There is a blessing in it. If God do
Own poor beginnings, see thou own them too.

Doubt 8. From want of Growth.
SOUL. Where grace is true, it thrives. The rising Sun
Does with a swift incessant motion run,
Until he reaches the Meridian.
At last the tender Infant is a man.
Thus it is in nature, thus in grace; the way
of just men shines to the perfect day.
At first they live, after they lively grow,
Add grace to grace till they a fullness know.
From strength to strength they do advance, until
They before God appear in Zion-hill.
They flourish in his holy Courts, and do
Improve in youth, and in their old age too.
The outward man is subject to decay,
But the inward man's renewed day by day.
So should it be with me, who sit and feed
At a full table, where I nothing need.
Yet though I keep my meals, and eat my fill,
There Is cause to cry, Ah Lord, my leanness still!
I have the Sunshine, and the fat'ning rain
Of Gospel-Doctrine, but yet nothing gain.
I suck the flowers of truth, thereby to thrive,
Yet carry little honey to my Hive.
Others began since me with Heaven to trade,
Better advantage yet by far have made.
When I my spiritual strength or stock do try,
I do at first weakness and wants epsy.
Look what an one I was sometime ago,
Just such I am; my Stature's very low.
My hand of faith yet trembles, and mine eye
Sees very dim, the Gospel mystery
I can scarce peep into; my love is chill.
My patience hardly brooketh any ill.
My zeal for God is cold. Flat my desire.
My heart is ice, which should be all on fire.
Thus it was formerly, thus it is now,
I am but what I was, and do not grow.
Which want of progress makes me sadly fear
I am not what to others I appear.

FAITH. It is not always safe from present sense
To judge of thy condition, for from hence
Thousands upon mistakes have filled with fears,
And cast away those comforts which were theirs.
Thou do deny thy growth in grace; do know
For certain thine estate some years ago?
If thou reflect only on yesterday,
Or a month since, it is plain, thy progress may
Be wholly undiscerned; look further back,
Look curiously, and so what thou do lack
For evidence of growth, thou mai'st discover,
Whereby the present trouble will go over.
Thou do not see the motion of the Sun,
Though in a day thousands of miles he run.
Thy childrens growth, thy plants increase may be
Hid for a time, and not perceived by thee.
Bread daily thou do eat, and yet as soon
As dinner's past, know not what good is done.
Thereby thou nourisht art, and strength have got,
Although immediately thou feel'st it not.
A Tradesman does his Calling follow hard,
Yet cannot tell his gain till afterward.
Wares he buys in, and sells them out again,
Others he does supply, himself maintain;
But scarce can tell whether he get or waste,
Until at the years end he comes to cast
His shop-books up; which being done, he can
Make it appear, he is a better man
Than last year left him. He with joy has found,
There Is added to his weight an hundred pound.
So if thou will consider what thou wast
In spiritual strength and stature some years past,
Thou't find the babe in Christ is grown a man,
And to thy graces great addition.
Only consider wisely, and compare
With faithfulness things past, with things that are.
And thy seize do thou not deny,
Because thou have not all that is in thine eye.
Besides in nature are more ways than one
Of growing and increase. For when the Sun
Makes his approach in Spring, the plants do shoot,
And flourish upward, then again their root
On his withdrawing from them, spreads, and so
Now upward and anon downward they grow.
Both growths in season are, both needful be,
One graceth, to other stablishes the tree.
Thus in the Christian; sometimes Faith improves
And makes advance; then the next turn is Loves,
Which rises to a flame, from whence there springs
Raptures of joy. The soul then sits and sings,
The table now is spread, the cup runs over,
In which it does delight, and God adore;
Of him it makes its boast; the affections
To Christ wax vehement; injections
From Satan cool, the Lion does not roar.
Now evidences are clearer and more
For present grace, and everlasting bliss.
Most easy it is to see such growth as this.
But it is not thus with thee; well, don't despair,
Improvement now may be some other where.
Ricketty growth does never please a mother,
She Would see it in all parts, both one and other.
And so would Christ, who to his holy race
Out of his fullness gives grace for grace.
And influenceth each with dews and rays,
That so his people may be to his praise.
All this he does not all at once, but yet
He does it as in wisdom he sees fit.
Search then, yea dig, dig deep, so mai'st thou find
Those hidden treasures that will please thy mind*
In barren places often rich Mines are found;
Gods workings are not seldom under ground.
Perhaps thou do not seast it with delight,
But do not feel a craving appetite?
Thou wants assurance of thy Father's heart;
But thou for this humbler in spirit art.
Thou at the spring of comforts do not lie;
Yet now thou can for Christ thy self deny.
Once thy affections were fonder far;
But at this day they more judicious are.
For sin thou weep'st not, as thou could before;
But now thou see it worse, and hat'st it more.
Thou to more spiritual knowledge have attained,
Much in experiences thou have gained.
Art lower now than e're in thine own eyes,
Can worldly Vanities much more despise
Than in thy younger time. Bless God for this,
He that grows thus, shall never do amiss.

Doubt 9. From wandering Thoughts.
SOUL. Another vexing thorn and pricking briar
Is, that my fluttering mind can mount no higher
In holy duties. When I up would fly,
Upon the earth my heart does grovelling lie.
Or if sometimes it be upon the wing,
It does not stay above; but every thing
Allures it down again. Trifles divert
This foolish, worldly, and unstable heart;
And draw it from Gods service, when I Would fain
Keep close to him. There is cause to complain;
Evil is present with me when I would
Walk with my Father, and do what is good.
My reason tells me, One present with God
Seeing his Scepter, and his Iron-rod;
One that such mercies has humbly to crave,
As that God pardon would, accept and save.
One that 'doth see the sinfulness of sin,
And does desire to conquer all within.
One that does know the plague of his own heart,
And has been made to feel its dreadful smart.
One that has looked down into the deep,
And fears his own damnation does not sleep.
One that for life prays, and celestial pleasure,
With endless glory, should not be at leisure
Any divertisements that time to own,
He from such weighty work should not come down.
But my inconstant spirit's drawn aside
By every fawning trifle; cannot abide
To stick to serious work, or dwell upon
Its own concerns by meditation.
Though to a boiling heat my heart be wrought;
Yet even then many an idle thought
Will bubble up: In midst of fervent cries,
A filthy and most loathsome scum does rise.
Methinks, when I most gladly do repair
To hear Gods Word, it is pleasant to be there;
That duty's my delight, fain would I sit
A daily Learner at my Savior's feet.
All earthly business I lay by, and go
Where I may know him whom it is life to know.
But while my greedy ear to him I bow,
My heart is stolen away I know not how,
Carried I know not where, but moan my cross
In fullest chase to find my self at loss.
So when in sense of sin or want I pray
And put up my petitions, I lay
Strict charge upon my soul to go along,
And with affections to back my tongue.
But a temptation comes, and knocks at door,
And then my fickle heart will pray no more.
Up then it gets, and strait away does run,
Its heat is spent before my suit is done.
What ground is there for hope I prosper may,
When frequently in prayer I don't pray.
I greatly fear, my heart from wickedness
Is not yet washed, since vanities do press
Continually into 't, and quickly find
Most ready welcome with my vainer mind.

FAITH. Christian, this even thy soul-distempers speaks;
It Is sure, thy heart has too too many leaks,
Which sacred things let out, and then let in
Satan's suggestions, the world, and sin.
All is not as it should be, in this life
Grace will imperfect be, corruptions rise.
Mourn therefore that this Cabinet of thine
Framed by Gods own hand for things divine,
And to be filled with Christ and Grace should be
Thus stufft with dross, and dung, and vanity.
Our souls our glory are, on purpose made
To carry on a never ceasing trade
With Heaven, and upon their God attend,
Like Angels in his presence without end.
Grieve then that thine thus should the Lacquey play
On every toy that summons it away.
Let mourning upon wanderings attend,
Sadly bewail what yet thou can not mend.
But be not out of heart, these spots are seen
On Gods own children, that have washed been
In Christ's most precious blood. All of them do
Hate wandering thoughts, and yet they have them too.
That soul which upon Christ is fixed in love,
May in its duties often fluttering prove.
Wanderings either from carelessness proceed,
Or unto them mere weakness does thee lead.
If carelessness be cause of them, thy God
Will visit for them with a smarting rod.
If they arise only from weakness, he
Will never charge those failings upon thee.
He is a Father, with loves mantle can
Hide multitudes of such in humbled man.
The child is troubled with a Palsy, and
Cannot hold fast what he has in his hand.
His Father is not angry with him sure,
But first him pities, then looks out for cure.
God is a Father too, none such, and so
Accepts what thou do with weakness do.
Know further, this is not thy case alone,
On this side Heaven of all the Saints there is none
But will with sadness say, Just so am I:
This is the burden under which I lie.
When they mount upward unto God, they feel
Their weaker minds all on a sudden wheel,
And downward roll again. Though Heaven be
Their Element, place of felicity,
Yet like to fishes in the water, they
E're and anon frisk out in wanton play.
Then do not with despair thy self bemoan,
Thy case is sad, but not thy case alone.
Let that be thy support, in misery
It is some comfort to have company.
Further, I know, as vanity does mix
With thy best duties, when thou would six
Only on God, and bid'st all things be gone,
That thou mai'st please thy self with him alone;
So as these cheating vanities do steal
Some of thy precious time; thy soul does feel
(In midst of this incroaching worlds affairs
Which fills thy mind with many thoughts and cares,
Secret withdrawings of thine heart from all,
Holy ascendings at thy Father's call.
As there are heavy weights that do depress
And bear thee down in solemn services:
So there is a mighty principle of love,
Which sweetly carries thy soul above.
When other things needs would it here detain,
Upon that mighty wing it flies amain.
And when it is fettered with the world, what smart
Do feel until (those fetters broke) thou art
Again restored to spiritual liberty,
And made for holy meditation free.
If Satan and the world have crowded in
To Church and Closet, cheer up, God has been
With thee in house and street. This wandering heart
Out of its six days has carved God apart.
As in thy purest manchet there is leaven,
So in thy daily bread there is some of Heaven.
But since, O Soul* thy stay with God is short,
See that to him thou frequently resort.
Do not thy thoughts with him abide? be sure
Long absence from him thou do not endure.
Thy head indeed is weak, thy grace not strong,
Pray therefore often, because thou can not long.
While others visit once, do thou go twice;
Thy falls are frequent, frequent be thy rise.
Thy duties interrupted are, this do,
Piece duty unto duty, mend all too.
Since all thy lambs are blemished, without fail
Of all thy flock offer to God the male.
And since thy thoughts wiil from thee often part,
Be sure in all thy work there be thy heart.
And know, this weakness shall be cured, God will
Give thee of fellowship with him thy fill
When once thou come to Heaven, thou shall be
Fixed upon him to eternity.
He that is thy desire and thy delight,
Shall minded be, and served with all thy might.
Thy thoughts and thy affections shall come
And dwell on him their everlasting home.
Thine enemies shall all away be flown,
Temptation there shall not be, corruption none.
Thine heart shall then be raised, and no more fall
To earth or sin, God shall be all in all.
Grieve not too much, though here thou wander still,
Thou shall not wander, when up Zion-hill.

Doubt 10. From fear of Apostasy.
SOUL. I know if I were there, I soon should be
Eased of these loads, and from corruption free.
No Devil's there to tempt, sin to perplex,
No clog to hinder, Canaanite to vex.
All is serene and pleasant, all delight;
Withdrawings there are none, no clouds, no night.
There sights of God are clear, communion sure,
Uninterrupted, always to endure.
But I uncertain am, and sadly fear,
I shall my labor lose, and not come there.
Heaven I mind for Gods sake, it is the scope
Of all mine actions, yet I dare not hope
At last to reach it; no, I may fall short,
And be the Angels scorn, and Devils sport.
Experience tells me, if at any time
I plead a title, and call glory mine,
Strait I receive a check, because it is
So difficult to get, easy to miss.
I have indeed been walking in the way;
That thither leads, some steps I take each day.
I for salvation pray, and wrestling groan,
Resolved not to let my God alone
Until he bless me. Prayer is the thing
That to me does my sweetest comforts bring.
Unto the Church I go, the Word I hear,
As it is Gods Word, with reverence and fear.
I daily stand upon my guard, and do
Watch against sin, as my most mortal foe:
I put on all my armor, and maintain
A constant war with all, thereby to gain
The victory at length over each one,
And sit triumphant on my Savior's throne.
I labor with my might, if so I may
Commended be by God another day.
I make what haste I can, that so I might
Reach safely to my Father's house by night.
By this means I have got near Heaven, and
From Pisgah can look to the holy land.
But what of this? many an one has lost
All his profession, his pains and cost.
Not only buds are nipt, which tender are,
But lovely blossoms, which did promise fair,
Are blasted with the cold and winds. Nay more,
Often have I seen the earth thick sown with store
Of fruit near ripe, which in a Summers morn
A furious tempest has blown down with scorn.
Many a stately Ship, the owners pride,
Backed at its setting forth with wind and tide,
Has swiftly plowed the Main, and safely past,
Trading from Port to Port, until at last,
It does return rich fraught, and every one
Sweetly discourses of his longed for home,
And Wife, and Children, with his Friends, that do
Long every whit as much to see him too:
The Mariners conclude their danger over,
The Merchants smile, and dread their loss no more;
Yet near the Haven it is cast away,
And by the mighty waters made a prey.
When all thought with success their labor owned,
The Ship is sunk, goods lost, and Seamen drowned.
With many in Religion thus it is,
Who aim at Heaven, but of Heaven miss.
Their lives are blameless, and their hopes are high,
Yet when their days are done, their hopes do die.
To day they think all well; but on the morrow
Death summons them, and down they lie in sorrow.
Thus did the foolish Virgins at last get
Unto the Bridegrooms chamber door, and yet
No entrance could obtain. This was their doom,
I know you not, depart, here is no room
For such as you. Pack, pack out of my sight,
Your vessels want their oil, your lamps their light.
The young man went a great way, and got near
To Heaven, but fell short, and never came there.
Admired the progress, terrible the falls
Have been of some professed Saints, which calls
Loudly on all to fear, lest in the close
Of all their labors they their labor lose.
Of such why may not I, poor I be one,
Who after all their doings are undone.
Such are the workings of mine heart, I do
Watch daily, ply mine oar, and tremble too.
I have made fair beginnings, but do fear,
Unto the end I shall not persevere.
Some weight may press me down, some sin beset
And with ease master my affections, get
A conquest over me, clap on its chain,
From which I never may get loose again.
As yet I do proceed as I began,
But may be driven back by fear of man.
My zeal now seems hot, but cool it may
Upon the sight of Lions in the way.
And how shall I appear? or with what face
Can I look upon God? if in this race
I tire or turn my back; since it is sure,
Apostate Christians he cannot endure.
Better it had been never to have known
Pure ways of righteousness, than to disown
And leave them afterward; none sink in Hell
Deeper than those fall from a Pinnacle.
Many from thence have tumbled, why not I?
Whose head is weak, whose standing slipperie.
Who every foot am ready to turn over,
Religion to throw up, and do no more.
The footmen weary me, what shall I do,
When I am called to run with horsemen too?
If in a land of peace I fainted have,
How shall I live on Jordans swelling wave?

FAITH. Apostasy indeed's a dreadful evil,
Transforming man into an ugly Devil.
Blind Turks and Heathens jewels are, if we
Compare them with those that Apostates be.
Hells firstborn these are, Satan's eldest sons,
And shall receive their double portions
Of plagues and miseries; God will repay
In punishment their falsehood at that day
Which he appointed has, when for what is done
By men, he men will judge by Christ his Son.
Often these are found within the Churches line;
Often seeming sheep have proved sordid swine.
Some that were thought furnished with oil enough
To feed their lamps, have ended in a snuff.
Some that seemed orient stars of light do fail,
And down are dragged by the fiery Dragons tail.
Demas forsook that Paul he followed;
Showing thereby, he only borrowed
The Christian name himself a while to grace,
Which done, he did the flattering world embrace.
But know the fruit which falls, though 'twas before
Lovely in skin, was rotten at the core.
Members that seemed alive, and now are dead,
Never united were to Christ the head.
Hangby's they were, and base pretenders, who
Mystical union unto Christ never knew.
False grace is always failing grace; the sound,
Instead of sailing shall still more abound.
Not that this holy firmness does proceed
Or spring from natures power in Abra'ms seed,
Or from the grace in them, that is but a creature,
And might be mastered soon, were not a greater rout.
And alsufficient strength by God put out,
Which does maintain their ground, prevent their
Even Peter's faith had failed, had not Christ prayed
And also secretly afforded aid.
Saints eminent (if God withdraw his hand
For one poor moment from them) cannot stand.
Should he withold his influence, they die;
Should he leave them, they soon would him deny.
Angels themselves would fall, but that they be
By grace confirmed in their felicity.
Much more would Adam's seed, who have within
Backsliding principles, and seeds of sin.
They soon would God forsake, and soon undo
The Covenant made to love and serve him too.
The root they do not bear, the root bears them,
They are both holy Saints, and sinning men.
Undone thou soon would be, if God should take
Away his Spirit, and thy soul forsake.
By thine own strength, O man, thou do not stand
But thy dear Father is at thy right hand,
Holding thee up, and he will carry thee
In arms of love to blessed eternity.
Thy Cistern leaks, but it shall not be dry,
Because the upper springs will send supply.
Dangers and clouds shall vanish; God shall be
An everlasting Sun and shield to thee.
Consider in how much thou Christ have stood,
Not one whit less than his most precious blood.
For thee his Head with thorns was crowned, his side
Was pierced, for thee he sweat, he bled, he di'd,
And will he cast away a soul, that cost
So great a price as this? shall that be lost
Which he preferred before his life? no, he
Will be his purchased Saints security.
His own thou art, with thee he will not part,
Who once did cost his blood, still have his heart.
Thou art a member of his body, one
Part of his fullness, and he will part with none
Of them or that, but will them save and love;
Christ will not be a maimed Christ above.
Nay more, he stands obliged. His Father gave
A people to him, that he might them save.
He is accountable for every one:
Must raise them all at last day, losing none.
Yea, and in such a state he must them raise,
As they may be unto his name a praise.
Now in pursuance of his Father's will,
He that has always kept, will keep thee still.
And therefore he has promised to impart
His fear unto thee, and write in thine heart
His sacred law, that though thou mai'st be tried
With fierce assaults, none of thy steps may slide.
He in himself has laid up all thy store,
And if thou little have, he will give thee more.
Adam thy father had a power to stand,
Which power was wholly placed in his own hand,
But he did quickly lose the stock that was
Committed to him; hence Christ will not pass
All thine estate to thee at once, lest thou
Run out of all, and prove a beggar too.
Himself thy fullness is, and therefore sure,
He being rich, thou never shall be poor.
So poor as to depend, thou still shall be,
But never know undoing poverty.
Eden was once indeed filled with more grace,
Or rather holiness, yet that sweet place
Was never so secure, as is thy Ark,
Thy floating little cock-boat now; for mark,
God is its skilful Pilot, constant stay,
Who by his spirit steereth night and day
Its course; upholding, strengthening thee likewise,
When tempests rage, and threatening waves arise.
Thus cheer thy self, when thou do fear to fall,
Remembering God will be thine all in all,
Thy rock and refuge, thy treasure and guard,
Who keeps for thee constant watch and ward.
His eye does neither slumber, nor once-sleep,
He keeps Israel, and thee does keep.
He is no land of darkness, barren heath,
His everlasting arms are underneath.
He knows full well when ought would thee annoy;
Will always be thy comfort and thy joy.
Do thou thy duty, and then know that God
Will with his staff support thee, with his rod
Will guide thy steps, until at last thou be
Above a sinning possibility.

Doubt 11. From Satan's Temptations.
SOUL. If God my keeper were, I should not doubt
My spiritual safety, nor my holding out.
Mine enemies should fall, and I should be
At peace, because in full security.
Iachin and Boaz I Would my pillars call,
Did God make his Salvation my wall.
The Lion should not rend, nor Serpent bite,
Because he watches his both day and night.
But sure the Lord has left me, for I feel
The Serpent always nibling at my heel.
I now am walking in a wilderness,
Where Lion's always roaring more or less.
Hardly a day does pass, nay scarce an hour,
But Satan does assault me with his power.
With utmost rage the mighty gates of Hell
Assault and storm my crazie Citadel.
And how is it possible, poor I should be
An equal match for such an enemy?
What may a worm do? what resistance can
Be made by foolish weak and naked man?
Alas, I quake and tremble every hour,
Expecting when he will my soul devour.
Now he does play with me, and my fears feed
His mirth; me at his pleasure he can lead
An helpless captive, hurrying me to sin;
He can me post to the torments he is in.
Great is his strength, and numberless his wiles,
Many his famous conquests, trophies, spoils.
Run through the world, sinners and Saints compare,
You Will see, the greatest part falls to his share.
Here he has spread a net, there set a gin,
Thousands of thousands are intrapt therein.
Of men, the most he orders at his pleasure,
His sport he makes them, when he is most at leisure.
He knows and is assured they are his own;
If but a bait be laid, the work is done,
They Are caught, his hook sticks, and they caanot free
Themselves from sin, nor him, nor misery.
Lord of this world he is, whom they adore,
Fear him they do, and yet they love him more.
Nay, he will encounter any, he fears none;
But counts himself a match for every one.
Those that are built on the eternal rock,
And stand immovable, have felt his shock.
Experience tells us, that those Saints who be
Strongest in grace are not temptation free.
Adam in Paradise (though perfect, and
Armed with strength sufficient to withstand
All foreign force, and bravely keep the field)
Was set upon, and set upon did yield.
So did this subtle enemy undo
A world of men in one man at a blow.
That first attempt succeeded to his heart;
Since, he is grown a master in the Art
Of tempting; at the first he had his will;
Six thousand years have much increased his skill.
That victory did flesh him, ever since
He is courag'ous, bids fear get it hence.
He set on David, Joshua the Priest
(When in Gods presence) found he had not ceast
From troubling Saints. Although Job did outshine
All men on earth that lived in his time,
He could not be at quiet. This foul Fiend
Desired on him his sharp'ned darts to spend.
Paul was a valiant champion, yet still
On him the Devil needs would try his skill.
He had his buffets, and in's flesh a thorn;
And had not help come, had been overborn.
Saints then he troubles, and of all there is none
Reached Heaven but through sore temptation.
Yea, as he has desi'd the blessed Host
Of great Jehov', so he can likewise boast
Of his assaulting Christ their chief; he did
Not only bruise the heel, but strike the head.
This beast of prey has set upon the sheep,
And on the shepherd too that does them keep.
And what, shall I, sighting with such a so,
Hope to make good my ground, and worst him too?
Shall I victorious be, and cause to fly
Those troops of Devils that in ambush lie,
And have a party too in mine own breast,
By which I am continually oppressed?
Mine own corruptions do me betray
To their temptations often every day.
How can it be, that I who thus beset
Am with such enemies, should the conquest get?
I cannot believe it, for it cannot be:
The strength of Hell and sin's too strong for me.

FAITH. Be of good courage, dread not Satan's might,
By Christ thou listed art, resolve to sight.
He of Salvation the Captain is:
Do what he bids, thou can not do amiss.
Put on thine armor, man, one piece and other,
From head to foot it will thee safely cover.
Only there is no back-piece: such as fly
Lose their defense, then either fight or die.
Gird on thy sword, and Faith take for thy shield,
So shall the Devil sly, thou keep the field.
Has he his trophies by him? does he tell
Of captives he has led in chains to Hell?
Has he near filled his prison? and made sure
Of thousands that did think themselves secure,
And out of gunshot? what! does he recall
To mind with triumph, David's, Peter's fall?
Remember how Goliath did defy
Isreal's army; but proud fool did die
By a young striplings hand; a little stone
Did turn his vapors to a dying groan.
And in thy fainting-sits remember how
Blaspheming Rabshakeh did brave it too;
With a profane foot on the holy land
By fair Ierusalem's walls he did stand
Crying, Where are the gods of Hamath? where
Ivah's and Sepharvaim's gods? were there
Any of them could my great power withstand,
Or keep Samaria from Assyria's hand?
But what'of that, one Angel in one night
Did near Two hundred thousand slay outright.
All were dead corpses, when next morn men rose,
And so in sear away Sennacherib goes.
That God who thus the powers on earth did quell,
Knows how to do the same to the gates of Hell.
Poor weaklings have through him stood out the shock,
And being built on the eternal Rock,
Laughed Beelzebub to scorn; assisted by
Christ's strength, babes win the day, and make him fly.
Cedars have tumbled, when a bruised reed
Has stood unbroken. The immortal seed
Once sown shall root and grow, though Satan fain
Would be at work to pick it up again.
The first of Creatures he did make to fall;
But the new Creature shall stand after all;
Yea, after all is attempts, and shall at length
With triumph say, My soul thou have trod down strength.
In mad Bravadoe he did Christ engage,
But thereby lost his power, though not his rage.
He of his Holiness longed to bereave him,
But when his worst was done, was forced to leave him.
And then was vanquished, spoiled; see, see his loss,
Which openly was shown upon the Cross.
E're since the Lion's muzzl'd, roar he may,
But cannot make the meanest Saint his prey.
With his own filthy swine he may be bold,
He there has leave, but must not touch the fold,
Nor seize a lamb thereof; or if he dare,
Our watchful David in his tender care
Steps in and makes a rescue. Jesus will
Be, as his name imports, a Savior still.
David his Type appointed was to keep
And tend his aged Father Iess's sheep,
A Lion and a Bear to thin his stock,
Did take a tender Lamb out of the flock;
Then David killed the Lion, slew the Bear.
A greater far than David, Soul, is here.
David thy Shepherd is, the mighty God,
Who in his hand carries an Iron rod,
With which he can in pieces break with ease
Any devourer that his Lambs would seize.
Thou mai'st be tempted, Satan is not tied
From worrying thee; Gold in the fire is tried;
And so is Grace, the more thou have, the more
Will Satan envy thee; thy well-known store
Does tempt him thee to plunder, and to cheat:
'Twas Peter he would winnow as the wheat.
But Christ thy Captain has him in a chain;
When he gives him a Link, he can again
At pleasure draw him in, and shut him up
In his own proper place, and make him sup
On flames of wrath, when he had thought to dine
And feast himself on this poor soul of thine.
Under authority he is, cannot go
One step without permission, cannot do
Ought without leave from Christ, who is so dear
Over thine interest, thou need'st not fear.
Engage thou never do, but he stands by,
Ready to help in thy necessity.
When Peter wounded was, and going over
Unto the enemies tent, Christ did recover
Him with one gracious look; so did he save
His precious soul, and kept him from the grave.
This he will do for all that do him own,
Of those the Father gave him, he will lose none.
For he has promised, that they shall be
Crowned at last with happy victory.
Wherefore the combat do thou not refuse.
For God thy God this enemy shall bruise
Under thy foot, and when his worst is done,
By the Lambs blood thou shall him overcome.
And as a conqueror in Heaven dwell,
When this dire foe shall be confined to Hell.

Doubt 12. From Afflictions.
SOUL. I Will name but one thing more which does create
Perplexing thoughts, and very much abate
The vigor of my joy, who fain would grace
My high profession with a smiling face.
Afflictions manifold attend upon,
Just as its shadow, pure Religon.
With inward gain is joined outward loss;
Before a Crown we must expect a Cross.
Disciples must stoop down and take it up,
Pledging their Savior in his bitter cup.
All things uncertain are under the Moon;
These comforts quickly spring, wither as soon.
Estates are bubbles, broke as soon as blown,
We hardly know what thing to call our own.
Job was a great man, did not want for ought,
And yet was quickly to a dunghill brought.
Poor Jonah in his gourd did much delight;
But Ionah's gourd was blasted in a night.
All are uncertain, Saints more so, who stand
Compast with enemies on every hand,
And when for nothing they deserved the rod,
Have suffered for the matters of their God.
Because to their Religion firm they stood,
Home they have been sent through a Sea of blood.
Walk through the world, in every place you will find
The men of earth against the Saints combined;
Consult the Ages past, and read their story,
You Will see Gods children went through shame to glory.
And it is not easy for us to deny
Our life, our peace, or our prosperity.
The young man at this stumbling block did fall,
He Would rather part with Christ, than part with all.
And many have at first fairly set out;
Who, when the storm waxt great, have tackt about.
Christ they este^m'd far less than an Estate,
And would not have him at too dear a rate.
Christ and pleasures are good, Christ and earth too,
But they thought Christ alone would never do.
Now who can tell, what we may meet before
Our journey ended is, and time no more?
Though now we fallow lie, yet plowers may
Make long their surrows on our back one day:
And in those surrows may, my little store
Of seeming-grace be buried, rise no more.
If God should leave me, ah! how soon should I
Desert his cause, and from my colors sly.
In Sun-shine-days it is nothing not to fear,
And challenge enemies when none appear.
It Is nothing to be good, when seeming so
Brings credit with it, and preferment too.
Who would not hug a Christ, when hugging him
We may in Pleasures river daily swim?
But it is difficult for one to cry
Hosanna, when Rulers say, Crucify.
To bear a Cross for Christ, and all forego
Rather than shipwreck Faith and Conscience too.
To be disgraced, a beggar, nay to die
Of deaths the worst, rather than him deny:
This, this is hard, and calls for greater store
Of Grace than I have, though I had much more
Than yet I have. The very thought does pinch;
Sure when I come in traces I shall slinch
And break the yoke, and he that does not bear
Christ's heavy Cross, his Crown shall never wear.

FAITH Why troublest thou thy self about the morrow?
The present day is big enough with sorrow.
Dangers at distance are the worst by far;
They lose their terrors as they nearer are.
A Lion's not so fierce as he is painted;
We sufferings may like, when once acquainted.
Such as in corner sit by sire-side,
Say, weather's cold, and who can it abide?
But when they once are up, and out, they find
The day befriends them more than did their mind.
Such is the present case, persons at ease
Count flea-bites, symptoms of some sad disease.
Nothing more certain is, than thou should be
Ready to part with all for God, when he
Calls thee unto it, no enjoyment should
Sever thee from his love, no, not thy blood.
But possibly thou shall not thus be tried;
God in the hollow of his hand may hide
Both thee and thy concernments; thou mai'st have
A sweet and easy passage to thy grave.
He in his Chambers may thee hide, and then
Safe thou shall be from all the rage of men.
When storms abroad, thy Halcyon-days shall last
Until the Indignation's overpast.
Yet grant, that he in wisdom number out
Afflictions to thee, compass thee about
With gall and travel, know that he can roll
In sugar bitter pills, lay in thy soul
With such surpassing joys, as thou shall be
Even in Heaven, whilst in misery.
Men can no further reach than the outward part;
He can by speaking peace ravish thy heart.
Of crosses the world has not half such store
As God of comforts; for he can do more
To cheer thee in an hour, than all the rage
Of enemies to trouble in an age.
He can with grace so fortify thy heart,
So shed his love, as thou shall not depart
From him, nor from his ways, his power can
Perfect the work of grace it once began.
And will he stick at either? surely no,
He Will bare his arm, and broach his comforts too.
If thou should lose thy land, silver and gold,
He will to thee restore an hundredfold.
If for his sake thou have a thousand foes,
He, he alone will far out-number those.
When all these Stars are darkened, that Sun will
By his resplendent beams make daylight still.
If thou imprisoned be, he at that time
Will carry thee into his house of wine,
And feast thee richly there, so in a trice
Turn thy dark dungeon into Paradise.
So he has done for others, who have found
Sweet unseen consolations most abound
When they were heavy-laden with the cross;
Whereby their gains did much outweigh their loss.
They suffered all with joy, in prisons sung.
Accounting all for Christ mere dross and dung.
When the Apostles whipped were for Christ's name,
Away they went rejoicing in that shame.
And sure that God who strengthened them, will be,
Act but thy faith, full out as good to thee.
Burdens shall be proportioned to thy back:
When strength is small, yet strength thou shall not lack.
If that thy way at last be dirt and mire,
Thou shall get thorough it, and shall not tire.
Weather and way fear not, no, fear thou neither,
Both strength and steps thou shall renew together.
In arms of love Christ will thee carry through
All the sharp trials, which he calls thee to.
Therefore though weak, fear not the wickeds rod,
Weak ones shall be as David, he as God.

SOUL. All will be well: within a change I find
Some settlement in mine once shaking mind.
Time was, I never could hold up my head,
But a doubt came, and struck my comforts dead,
Making me droop again. Did I but take
Hold of a promise, heart and hand would shake.
I thought my self too bold, and still did fear
Such high presumption would cost me dear.
But now the clouds begin to scatter, and
Darkness does vanish, I now can see land,
Who farely saw nothing but swelling Seas
Of deep and boundless, endless miseries.
When I go out, methinks I see above
God smiling on me with his beams of love.
And when at home I sit, there is good store
Of Gospel-comforts knocking at my door,
Commanding entrance, which do smooth my brow,
And I wax cheerful, though I know not how.
Its calm within, without I see it fair:
Those things that threatened, now dispersed are.
Risen the Sun is, and a glorious light
Comes from him, chasing hence my dismal night.
Where fears were rank, sweet consolations grow,
Rejoice I must, whether I will or no.
But how comes this about? what hand has brought
Such Cordials in, when of them least I thought?
My peace beginning has, my fears an end;
But how, I Would gladly know, and who is my friend.
Oh! it is Faith, precious and high born Faith.
Faith's voice alone it is, which to me says,
Shake off thy dust, fear not, arise and shine,
Thy light is come, God and his all are thine.
Fool that I was! that so long time should be
Spent in such strangeness between Faith and me!
That I the door should open to every doubt,
And shut at the same time, believing out.
So I will do no more; Faith's my relief,
I will believe, Lord help mine unbelief.
Get thee hence, Satan. Doubts be gone, I will
Rely upon my God, and trust him still.
My sins end sorrows, though they are manifold,
Shall never force me to let go my hold:
But I upon his grace will hang, and say
Mine thou have been, art now, shall be for ay.
He is Immutable, and why should I
Doubt of that love which has Eternity?
Abiding frowns such love cannot abide,
I Will trust him therefore though he from me hide.
This is my fixed resolve, which is not made
In mine own strength, but thine; Lord, faith would fade,
And soon give way to doubts, were it not each hour
Preserved by thine own Almighty power.
And so still let it be; grant thou that I
May live believing, and believing die.
Faith is my strength, be thou Faith's strength, till we
In Heaven meet once for eternity.
When of these Creature Comforts I have none,
Let me rejoice in thee mine only One.
Whatever I do want, let me all make
Up in thy self, Lord, for dear Jesus sake.
Yea when thou frownest, and lay'st on thy rod,
Let me rely upon an angry God
Grant me to cast my self, and each affair,
At all times on thy tender love and care.
And Father, while that I by Faith adhere
Unto thy boundless grace, make it appear
Thou have accepted me. Lord feed my sense
With thine own love; draw up mine evidence
And seal it by thy Spirit; that I may
Glory in thee my God throughout the day.
And when I leave the world, let Angels be
My convoy in my passage unto thee.
Let Hope at last end in fruition,
And Faith be swallowed up of Vision.
Conduct me to that place, where I shall sing
Eternal praise to thee my God and King.

FINIS.

