The Predestined Thief. A DIALOGVE BETWIXT A Rigid Calvinian Preacher AND A
Condemned Malefactor. In which is not only represented how the Calvinistical
Opinion occasions the perpetration of Wickedness and Impieties; but moreover
how it does impede and hinder, nay almost impossibilitate the reducing of a
Sinner to Emendation and Repentance.

What does Christ his Spirit (or the Word preached) profit us, if the contrary
be Predestined by God?

If Christ would profit us by his Spirit, and reform us by his Word, of
necessity God has not decreed any thing to the contrary.

LONDON: Printed by R. Trott for Daniel Jones, and are to be sold at the three
Hearts in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1658.

TO The Christian Reader.
WE question not but this Discourse or DIALOGUE may stick on the stomachs of
some, and seem strange and insolent to others, who are not at all (or else but
very little) acquainted with Discourses or Opinions of this nature.
Nevertheless, those things which we hear by the Thief both defended and
maintained, are not so to be judged of, as if every word of it were immediately
deduced from Scripture.

Yet whatsoever is alleged is consonant, nay the very express words of those
Doctors which are accounted the most Eminent and Orthodox among the Calvinists:
which opinion we assert to be most abominable, maintaining such things as
utterly overthrow Evangelical Piety, and opening a wide gap to all manner of
sin and iniquity.

Men of less piercing Intellects do not perceive how pernicious and absurd this
opinion of precise and rigid Predestination is, which was the very reason this
Dialogue came to light, that hence it might appear as evidently as the Sun at
Noonday, that such Doctors and their Doctrines are to be aavoided as much as
Hell.

Though the Inscription may seem strange or hard to thee, gentle Reader, let
not that offend thee; for it is certain, that many being carried away with a
fancy to these Opinions, have given themselves over to Rapines, Robberies,
Murders, and to other more detestable wickednesses; so that if we might have
our wish, we could wish, that the sad Experience (the more is the pity) of many
Examples did not prove it too true: which considered, it does evidently appear,
that the Title does aptly agree with the matter of this following Discourse.

Farewell.
The Names of those Doctors whose Opinions of Precise Predestination are most
esteemed, and quoted in this Treatise.
A B
RUardus Acronius late Preacher at Schiedam. Theodore Beza Doctor of Geneva.
George Buchanan of Bern, Profess^r at Lausan. Martin Bucer Professor at
Cambridge. John Bogard late Preacher at Harlem. John Becius Preacher at Dort.
Bern. Buschop Preacher at Utrecht.
C
John Calvin Doctor of Geneva. These six that follow were the Collocutors
against the Remonstrants. Peter Plantius Preacher at Amsterdam. John Bogard
Preacher at Harlem. Libertus Fraxinus Preacher at the Brill. Rvardus Acronius
Preacher at Schiedam. Festus Homnius Preacher at Leyden. John Becius Preacher
at Dort.

D
Dunganus Preacher at Arnehem. Reyneirus Donteclock late Preacher at Delph and
the Brill. Synod of Dort. Darnman Preacher at Zutphan.
F H
Libertus Fraxinus late Preacher at the Brill. Festus Homnius Preacher at the
Brill.
G
Cornelius Geselius late Preacher at Edam. D. Fran. Gomarus Professor at
Groaning.
M
Marloratus Preacher at Roan. Musculus. P. Martyr Professor of Oxford and
Tigurin.
N
Nicasius de Schure Preacher at Gaunt. Pet. Neinwenrode Preacher at Roterdam.
P
G. Perkins an English Doctor. Amandus Polanus Professor at Basil. Pareus
Professor at Heidelberg. John Piscator Professor of Nassan in the County of
Herbon.
R
Renucherus Professor of the Hebrew Tongue at Leyden, a Preacher. Hen. Sturmius
a Professor of Leyden. Adrian. Smactius, heretofore Preacher at the Rhyne.
Rippertus Sextus Preacher at Hornan.
T
Jab. Triglandius Preacher at Amsterdam. Anthon. Thisius Professor at
Harderwick. Dan. Tossanus Professor and Preacher at Heidelberg.
U
John Urbanus Preacher at Hattem.
Z
Zuinglius Tiguri Professor and Preacher at Helvetia. H. Zanchius Professor at
the new City of Spire.
A DIALOGVE Had betwixt A Calvinist Preacher AND A Condemned Malefactor.
Preacher. A Good evening to you Sir: How have you led your life all along?


Thief. Even as the Omnipotent God, who works all things according to the
counsel of his own will, pleased to decree from all Eternity, and effect in
time concerning me.


Pr. You say well, but I do not like this; but I like you worse in that you are
thus fettered, nor can expect nothing but a certain, sudden and detestable
death.


Th. It Is true; but I don't know whether it becomes you or me thus to grieve,
when neither you nor I are certain whether God from Eternity by some immutable
Decree have predestined me either to life or death eternal.


Pr. We will speak of that by and by: and in the mean while, because ye are
condemned to die to morrow, I am appointed here to be ready with you; and am
come to know whether thou desire to be translated with the Thief into
Paradise: Tell me what sins you have committed, that I may the better order my
Instructions and Exhortations to you, and teach you better for your Souls
health.


Th. I shall willingly, if you will but be pleased to hear. My Parents had a
care that I should be bred up in learning from a child: At last intending to
send me to the Unisersity, thought what they should do; Leyden was full of
Heresies, Franeker of Deboistness and Duellings. Nevertheless, the Parson of
our Parish would have me go to Franeker, forasmuch as it is better to be
Bacchus or Mars his Scholar, than an Heretic; because the first destroy but
the Body, the last murder the Soul. After this, away went I for Franeker,
where the Ale was so good, the Wine so cheap, the Company so ingenious, that I
spent all my money in jolletting. As soon as my friends heard of this, that I
was more in the Alehouse than my Study, and drunk more than I read, they called
me home, and sent me into France, where they live sparingly, and count
Drunkenness both a shame and a sin. But I went to Paris, where is a general
concourse of all Travelers: There the best Wine is worth little or nothing,
and I believed drinking strifly would do my business for me, I spent my whole
time in drinking and wenching. Living so egregiously and openly wicked, my
friends had notice of it; who as soon as they heard it, sent Letters to some in
Geneva, and to me, that I should presently go live there, if I expected their
blessing: For our Parson had possessed my friends, that it was a most sanctified
City, in which they would neither suffer Rioting or Drunkenness, Levity or
Wantonness, or any other unlawful or sinful action. Hence the credulity of my
Parents presently persuaded them, that I should live there no otherwise than
another Samuel with a good old Eli in the Temple of God. Well, there is no
avoiding of it, I must for Geneva, or else they will neither own me or maintain
me. Being come thither, I happened to lodge where the woman of the house was
exceeding handsome, and the Maid exceeding affable; yet both of them so
adorning their professions by their walking, and their beauty with such a
majesty, that you would take them to be beauty and goodness it self, going to
Lectures every day, receiving the Sacrament often, so that at the first I durst
scarce open my eyes to look upon them. But Time, that brings all things to
pass, at length answered my expectations in all things. But first of all, that
I might get the good word of all the Preachers and Consistory, I never
neglected any opportunity of going to private Meetings, and hearing of Sermons:
Then going to Church with a great Bible under my arm, I would never take up my
standing but under or near the Pulpit, where I would enquire again all the
Proofs quoted by the Minister, and then with a sigh as from the bottom of my
heart, and eyes lift up to heaven, I would look on the place and turn it down.
So by this means I became famous for a Lecture-monger and a Christian. In the
mean while, being diligent to be counted a Gentleman, I got me a Sword by my
side, a Footboy at my heels, and a Madam by the hand, who when her stockings
were off would prove her self a woman. And when I was got into this equipage, I
must needs travel, and with Glycerio I walked thorough the craggy Mountains,
and grass-bearing Plains, not denying my self Wine, Gaming, strange Beasts or
Birds, or any thing that might move or make delight. I had the Fiddlers daily;
and lest their noise should be too much taken notice of, I had the trick to
make them play their easier strains: and on high days in eminent places, the
Curtains drawn, the Torches light, we in our Pumps did dance and tear the
ground.


Pr. I, but if it had been known what you did, they would have ordered you: for
in Geneva, that holy City, it is counted a great offense to dance.


Th. I would that were all: for once the bufiness being made common, I and all
my Companions were warned to appear before the Bishop. I thought that we should
have been so sore punished, that we should scarce have had enough of Bread and
Water; but our Companions came to us daily, and we eat and drunk of the best,
and danced till the house shook again, all the while we were there. As soon as
our Penance was terminated, we were brought before the Consistory, where with
many grievous words they aggravated to us the foulness of the fact. After this,
we were forced in a full Congregation to creep before the Pulpit on our hands
and our feet, to ask God and the Church forgiveness of the scandal we had
committed. But this disgrace lasted not long, for the multitude of examples
swallowed it up, whilst not only the greatest part of the best sort of
Citizens, but Consuls and Preachers too equally suffered it: Yet nevertheless,
I timely foreseeing, that if once this rumor should become childrens talk
amongst the Battavi, I should quite lose my credit, I thought it high time,
since my credit lay thus at stake, to provide for my fame, confidering more
seriously with my self what I should do before this was spread through
Battavia, I prepared my self, and went before the Consistory, where I did
counterfeit to fetch from the bottom of my heart, heart-killing sighs, and
throbbing words, but no hummings and hawkings: I told them I was a stranger,
who neither knew the Laws of their Nation, nor the genius of their people: I
cried out I was seduced, and in the narration of it expostulated with my self,
how ever such an one as I should be thus deluded into wickedness, whose
conversation hitherto had been so holy and unblameable. Wherefore I greatly
entreated them to inform me which was the best and nighest way to avoid and
abandon such ways and Company. I howled like any Dog in the Church, and
roaring, and twisted my hands into as many postures and folds as a Suake can;
and did so maintain it by my actions and expressions, that no one but was
affected with my misery, and thought me to be a fit object of their
commiseration. After this, I went to a Minister by my self, told him with
weeping eyes my sad condition, and complained that I had sinned so far, that I
was almost, if not quite past remedy; but much sad that I was to depart thence
for home, like to a wandering sheep, who durst not so much as dare to look his
Parents in the face, or come into their fight. The Minister hearing this,
comforted me with the example of David, Solomon, Manasses, Mary Magdalen, and
many others, who had all egregiously and notoriously sinned. But, in short, I
so smoothed the Parson up with these fine words, that he writ to my Father, and
commended my ingenuity, diligence, behavior, after an extraordinary manner,
and bids my friends they should not fear, but that whatsoever cost they
bestowed on me, would redound both to their great delight, and my profit. I
presently took a special care these Letters should be sent away, with some more
Manuscripts of mine, Of Absolute and Free Will, which I had subtly disputed,
decked above with Hebrew, Greek, Latin and French Vowels, I commended the
sanctity of the City, extolled the Learning and the Piety of its Pastors,
giving thanks to my Parents, that they had reduced me into the ways of health
and of truth. This Messenger did so rejoice my aged Parents hearts, that I was
presently the richer by two Crowns: but this will do no good, he that has
already ore-run his bounds, has outrun all shame too: So that I grew worse
every day than other, and was grown so intollerably exorbitant, that I was
commanded home; but I was afraid of Amsterdam Prison, and long looked for came
at last, but I made shift to break Prison and escape, and resolved for Rome: I
made a Gown of my Cloak, as all those do who travel for Religions sake; to my
Cap I fastened a Canna, as all those do who go a Pilgrimage to see the Relics
of St. Jacob, that I might have the safer egress and regress into Ostiaries and
Monasteries. But this kind of life spoke low, therefore I resolved for
Attalia, where I played the Thief both in Woods and Roads, in the Towns a
Cutpurse and House-breaker. After this rate and life past I through all
Germany into Holland, where, with all the art and strength I had, I both robbed
City and Country, stole Goods and Cattle. After this rate in the company of
Whores andRogues have I merrily spent this six years, and now it seems that one
sad half hour must end all this sweet pleasure.


Pr. I understand you are a precious Rogue, a grand Sinner, who deserve to be
hanged twice for all your Roguery; nay Hell fire it self for your sins: so that
I wonder you tell such stories and laugh, as if there were no grief or
punishment more to be feared to your Soul: Therefore tell me now you are a
going out of this world, whether do you think you shall go.


Th. To heaven as well as you, who art not much better than I.


Pr. Do you think then you are as good and as honest as I am?


Th. Yes that I do, and that I will prove out of your own proper Confession
Calv. Com. on Isa. chapter 64. v. 7. of his Institut. l. 3. c. 12. did. 9, 13, 14.
Ibid. c. 14. did. 9.
one for all; Your best works in themselves are filthy, deformed, detestable,
nay mere abominations and sins, and like an unclean woman, always infected
with filth and spots, so that you are not accepted or esteemed of God for any
of your works, because that they Belg. Confess. art. 24.
deserve nothing but eternal punishment; and that Catech. Heidel. quest. 60.
you altogether grievously sinned against all the Commandments of God, neither
have observed any one of them; nay, that you are altogether prone to all manner
of malice and hatred both against God and your Neighbor. In those printed
Prayers at the end of your Psalter, you confess (worthy Sir!) your worchiness
not only to be blind in your understanding, but unapt to all good; that it
strayes from God, follows its own vain imaginations; that it daily sins, and
that most hainously; and that it is by our Original Sin sometimes so corrupted
and instigated, that by reason of it there rise many and sinful thoughts, which
fight against God and your Neighbor: so that many times you transgress the
commands of God without intermission. In brief, you are a miserable sinner,
conceived and born in all sin and corruption, prone to all evil, unapt and
averse to all good, so that you have uncessantly, by your sins throughout your
whole life, excited the anger of the Lord against you, and according to his
righteous judgment, has deserved on thy self his eternal (the more the pity)
Condemnation. Your Conscience accuses you of this, Confess. Belg. Art. 7.
nay your very sins witness against you; so that being convinced you often
groan under the sense of your corruption, and desire to be freed from the body.
I will speak in short: Since your being of little or no profit; for Teelings
Dial. of Christian man's state, p. 8, 9.
from your nativity you have been a child of wrath, and heir of Divine
vengeance, had communion with damned Devils when thou wast in thy Mothers
womb; full of all natural poison, whence all evil actions proceed; that you can
do nothing more than sin; yea, when thou wast an Infant, had thou but been
tempted by the least occasion: for you are naturally as propense to sin, as the
Serpent is to bite or sting: and as is the Serpent odious to men, not for the
mischief it has done, but the poison it carries about with it; so even you are
counted odious by God, by reason of that poison of Original Sin, in which you
were born and conceived. All this, and much more of the same kind, you say of
your selves, and have subscribed it with your own hand: Nay, you brand all
those which deny to affirm these things with you, by the name of Heretics, as
Arminians, Pelagians, and such like Names; and how would you take it if some
one, Shimei like, should make it his business to reproach and assault you with
dishonesty and maledictions, and vomit out, if there be any things worse than
these, upon you?


Pr. For the honor of God, and the exalting of the superabundant riches of his
grace, I willingly confess my self guilty of all this; nay, God will that his
chosen and faithful should be such sinners, that they should not boast of
themselves, but Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 14. did. 9.
be humble; which humility confists in this, that we empty our selves of all
goodness whatsoever.


Th. And of late I have believed this to be true too, Sir; and I did further
judge, if I may speak my mind in this case, that I was forthwith to do no good
my self, for the further I was off from doing any good, the truer I could
confess my self to be void of all righteousness and goodness.


Pr. I would not have you so understand me, as if God would have us to be
sinners, and not endeavor to do good works; but that it is only by his grace,
lest we should seek to be justified by our works.


Th. I believe the same yet; and because I well know how deadly a sin it is to
lean to good works for justification, and see with what subtilties the devil
does hunt men, how with heresies he entraps men, I have even lain aside doing
good, if I could, only leaning to the free grace of God.


Pr. Must you have your will and your judgment before all others, and interpret
our doctrine no otherwise then if it were the cause of your perverse life? Fie,
Fie. God intends this, that men should not seek to be justified by works, but
faith.


Th. By faith, what faith?


Pr. As our Catechism has it in the 60 question; I believe only in Jesus
Christ, through whom by faith I shall be justified before God. My conscience
accuses me of all these things, that I have sinned most hainously against all
the commandments of God, that I have observed none of them, and am now liable
to all evil; yet the good God, without any merit of mine, out of his own mere
grace, both gives and imputes to me the perfect satisfaction, justice, and
sanctification of Christ, as fully as if I had committed no sin; yea, as if I
had performed all that righteousness and obedience which Christ either did or
suffered in my own person, as I apply this by belief to my heart.


Th. You say well Sir, this pure and sound faith has been always my faith, and
so that I am more persuaded I have always stuck close to that Doctrine of the
reformed Churches; so that I have almost wearied God, if it were possible, with
my prayers, in which faith, without any good works I persist. Furthermore, this
was always in my mind, often in my mouth, Luthers preface to Galat.
That it was the chiefest art of a Christian to know no law, no good works, no
not a tittle as to justification: Luth. lib. of Christian liberty.
for a Christian neither wants works or the law, after by faith he is freed
from all laws. Luth. on 2. chap. to Gal. Id. de lib. Christian.
Faith is only necessary to salvation, other things we are freed from whether
commanded or forbid. Goodworks make not men good, nor bad ones bad, and as to
unbelievers no good work profits to their salvation, so on the contrary, no
bad action makes a man bad or condemns him, but only unbelief: For where faith
is, no sin can hurt.


Pr. What then? have you such an esteem of good works indeed; we teach indeed,
that faith in Christ does alone justify, yet notwithstanding we are bound to
observe the precepts of God, as it is written, if you will enter into life
eternal, keep the commandments.


Th. Gently good brother; Luth. in Sermon. on Joh. 16.4.
for thus you deny Christ, and destroy faith, attributing that to Divine
commands, or the law, which is only due and proper to God. Furthermore, I am
almost induced to believe, that you are an heretic, whilst you attribute
something to good works in our justification before God. Luther N. T.
I say further, Sir, because the way is narrow, you ought to be lowly and
humble if you intend to pass: for those that are loaded with good works, are
like those we see go pilgrimage to the relics of S. James, so encompassed
with reeds, that they cannot pass thither; Id.
therefore if you come to heaven with a great bag full of good works, you will
be forced to lay them down, for you cannot get in with them.


Pr. I confess that good works are not looked upon as the impulsive cause of
our justification, and salvation; yet for all that we are to take heed that we
commit no bad ones.


Th. Very right Sir; we do beware of sins, Catech. Heidel. qu. 114.
but much more of the law and good works, only heeding divine promises and our
end. Good God! What good can such miserable sinners as we do? when as the most
holy men who ever lived, whilst they were in this life, have had so small
beginnings of obedience, that you could not out of all their actions pick out
one which did not deserve the just punishment; yea, the eternal punishment
rather of Gods wrath, then worthy of the reward of eternal life. Go to
therefore you Pedlers and Sectaries in religion with your good works, and
follow me, who only build my faith and help in the free grace and mercy of
God. Luther of Capt. Babyl. chapter of Baptism.
For a baptized Christian is so rich, that no sins whatsoever they be, can
rob him of his inheritance, or impoverish him, unless he fall away of himself
from the faith. All these are the very express words of Luther and Calvin: and
are these of your reformed Divines?


Pr. Yes; but I perceive friend, that you confiding in these and such like
expressions, have taken too much liberty to commit heinous sins; therefore it is
necessary that you be instructed of that will of God, by which he will be
obeyed.


Th. You speak well Sir; but don't you think that I have often thought of it?
truly I have, and have often and much considered with my self about it; for
Sturm. of Predest. These. 18. page 117.
I knew the will of God was twofold, either Secret or Revealed: So that God
wills many things, which he will not reveal, Id. These. p. 31.
as is clear by this instance, Perk. of Free Grace, p. 45.
God promulgated this edict by Moses to Pharaoh, saying, Let my people go, when
as the secret will of God, and purpose, was, that he should not let the people
go. Neither Calv. ad calumn. Nebulon.
ought this to seem a wonder to you, because God has by his secret will decreed
some to sin, who by his revealed will he has commanded to do no evil.


Pr. Why so? do you believe you perform the will of God when you commit
iniquity?


Th. If Sturm. of Predest. These. 18. p. 17.
you look after the hidden will of God, whereby he has ordered all things to
work for his glory, wicked men do do the will of God: but ^f you look to the
revealed will of God, wicked men do it not.


Pr. You say right; therefore you are always to be intent on the external
revealed will of God, because his hidden will you do not, cannot know.


Th. Truly Sir, these same two wills in or of God, have always made a great
noise in my head, and sounded very strangely in my ears: Pisc. against Schafm.
for seeing God does not always will what he Dungan. Pacif. fol. 56.
does reveal to us to have willed, and his revealed will to be called so, but
improperly, his hidden properly: furthermore, Calv. ad calumn. Neb. page 161 to
Art. 7.
that God should by his ineffable counsel will a thing to this end, and make it
for another, and forbid that to be done which he wills to have done, I was not
very inquisitive about this revealed will.


Pr. How dare you belch forth such Blasphemies?


Th. I speak the very truth it self; for when as Sturm. of Predest. These. 1.
fol. 3.
the secret will of God is wholly, only, and always done, and nothing happens
in the world, but God did before decree it, nay when this hidden Decree of God
is the necessary cause of all things; so that God himself wills sin by the will
of his been placet; I have always counted it safe to follow the efficacious
will of God, lest otherwise I should take labor in vain.


Pr. Ripert. in Colloq. p. 250.
It is manifest that the Omnipotent God, according to his secret Decree and
been placet, would not have done what he has commanded to men in his revealed
word; and that Id. page 252.
all things, as it appears, according to God and his Decree, infallibly and
necessarily come to pass. I go not about to deny, nay I expressly hold this
opinion in my judgment: yet nevertheless you ought to be the more sollicitous
and careful over your self.


Th. I have read in Scripture, Sir, that Christ forbids all manner of vain
sollicitousness of mind, as to add one cubit to ones height, to make one hair
black or white, and others of these sorts: Thence I judge, I should do a great
deal foolisher, as well as more irreligious, if I should presume to endeavor
and strive against the decree and efficacious will of God. Therefore you ought
to confess with me, that all operations, humane commotions, internal and
external, as well the bad as good, whether of understanding, heart or will,
have both their rise and efficacy from the force and impulse of Divine
Providence, so that they cannot but choose whatsoever God shall will: So that in
Adams fall God had destinated his heart both to that end and action: And hence
it is Calv. of Predest. p. 842.
that men can never will or do any thing, but what God prompts them too,
whether it be good or evil; so that he sometimes guides their hands, sometimes
holds them, now turns them this way, then that way, and what way soever he
pleases, that they may effect whatever he has decreed, which is only not to be
understood of actions which are, but of bad and evil likewise: for Calv. de
locis praecipuis.
men sometimes, like unto savage beasts, run into all manner of viciousness;
yet for all this it often happens, that they are so held in and curbed by an
invisible and secret bitt, that they are not able so much as to move their
finger amiss of themselves, but rather effect the will of God than their own;
Beza against Castle Aphor. 22.
for God so works by instruments, that he does not only permit that they
should do such an action, and it should fall out to such an end, but he himself
also excites, impels, moves, governs, (and what is more than this) creates
alone and above, that what he has decreed should come to pass by these very
means; and without question it is for this very cause, that God has given Calv.
ad calumn. Neb. 11.
a will and inclination to the worst of men, that for this very reason he might
be said to be the sole and genuine Cause of all things whatsoever, willing and
effecting Trig def. fol. 172.
that wicked men should live in their lusts, and this same necessity of sinning
is imposed by God: Therefore you Mr. Parson, all that you have said of this
same special care and watchfulness, is mere nonsense, and the absolute issue of
your imprudence; for Gesel. probl. c. 14. fol. 62.
Ren. in cat. aur. fol. 32.
wicked men are by the secret hand and power of God, as by a hidden string, not
knowing themselves directed and twitched to an end and design of which they are
altogether ignorant, as a man is that shoots at a mark, and missing that, hits
some neighboring thing, which he neither intended or knew of.


Pr. You prate to me, as if you should not brush to affirm God to be the author
of your sins.


Th. If by Author Pezel. treat. of Pred^st.
you mean one who persuades, impels, or any other way administers an occasion
of doing any thing, you may very safely call God the Author of sin; as for
example, when Joh. Urba in sua Tapeinophrosyna resol. p. 7.
Adam is the cause of sin, and God the cause of Adam, why may you not call God
the cause of sin? Nay, God is the very prime first Cause of sin; Ruard. Acron.
expos. in Catechis. quest. 9.
but this you must take with a grain of salt, as thus? The same act, Zuingl. d^
provid. c. 6.
as Adultery or Homicide, as God is the Author and impulsive cause, is no sin,
but as it is the work of man is a shameful and Soul-killing wickedness: For,
for just causes, Calv. de Predest. fol. 844
although unknown to us, wickedness comes forth from God, which are unjustly
committed by men; Pisc. against Schafm. pref. p. 3.
and God does secretly stir up men to those villainies he has openly forbid:
Nay, Sturm. of Predest. These. 15, 16.
God himself works all things in all men, yea their very sins, and whatsoever
is done, is irresistibly done; which is thus evidenced; Triglan. def. fol. 164.
God by an effectual Decree and Providence compels Thieves to Homicide, as a
King compels his Subjects to pay their Tribute; or as one on horseback makes
the horse to go what pace and what way he will.


Pr. Therefore you do not believe that it is you have done all this wickedness
and roguery?


Th. Yes, but I do, to wit, against the external will of God, but against his
internal will and providence not a jot, for this will Rippert. in Colloq.
of the Divine been placet of God, is then also done, when a man sins against
the Precepts of God.


Pr. Then you did not so much as think of the internal and secret will of God?


Th. Why Sir, can you think I could think so? was I able (the Divine Providence
and will of God premised) to think any otherwise than I did? for if it were the
hidden will and providence of God that I should think so, who was I, or what
could I do to resist it? but because it was not his internal Decree, according
to our Doctrine, I could not so much as think it; nay, as soon as ever I
perceived any motions or suggestions in my self, to any thing which God had
forbidden by his Law, it presently run in my mind, whether God or no had not
by his secret will pre-ordained that I should do it; and whether or no he did
not excite and impel me to it, that he might bring to pass by me, what he had
from all Eternity inevitably decreed of or for me: reasoning thus with my self;
If I resist, I shall be counted, with Lucifer, to be an enemy to God, and a
fighter against him; and on this, Whithersoever the dictates of my will (though
depraved) carried me, I acted it, and hurried that way with all violence, so
that I know now as sure as God's in heaven, that whatsoever wickedness I
committed, was the internal will been placet and Decree of God. For had it not
been agreeable to his internal will, it would never have come to pass so long
as the world had stood. But to say a little more: If at any time I went but
about to consider more accurately and exactly with my self, I was all on a fire
till I had multiplied faults, and sinned to some tune, seeing it highly
acceptable to God for me to do such things: Piscat. as above. These. 35. p. 32.
for God has as it were a necessity of our sinning, that he may the more
manifest his glory, because he cannot exalt his mercy, or bestow it but on
those that are miserable sinners, and have need of it; neither justly damn men,
unless they were sinners: Id. These. 27. Beza Predest. against Castle. in ref.
call. secundae.
So that unless this be granted, God could not, if he would, bring about his
principal end, which are the showing of his Mercy and Justice toward some, to
manifest his Mercy for their deliverance, and in their salvation; toward
other, to manifest the exactness and rigor of his vengeance in their
destruction and damnation. Smout. Concord. fol. 107.
Therefore it was necessary that man should fall from grace, that God might
have an occasion and reason of declaring both his Mercy and Justice.
Furthermore, Martyr in C. L. class. 3. c. 2. did 48.
sins make as well to Reprobation as Predestination, for who are reprobated,
are by them brought to destruction; who predestined or saved (for here it is
all one thing meant) by their sins do so much the more illustrate the goodness
and glory of God, whilst they are redeemed out of them, for all them. And
again, seeing God so allow of sin, that he let it exist, I thought my self his
creature, and have often ingeminated this saying, Behold thy Servant, Lord,
always ready and willing to sin.


Pr. But do you hear friend, were you always wont to live free of all anxiety
and terrors of conscience?


Th. No: I was always merry since I was born, thinking thus with my self, If I
am elected, the Spirit of Christ will work conversion and faith in me with that
force and power, which is to the elect irresistible: for Renovation is a second
Creation, which does not depend upon the will of man, but sole power of God.
Donteclock in respons. ad ignoti scriptum litera, L. 4. M. 1.
Martyr L.C. de lib. arbit. p. 978.
For as those which are dead cannot raise themselves again; so I can by no
means raise my self from the death of sin, how much soever the word of God
sound against, threatening to reward this Spiritual death with an eternal,
unless God himself be pleased to give a new Spirit unto me: wherefore I did
wisely even to tarry Bucer in Romans 9.
till God should come in upon me, and by his word and instructions turn my
heart; for when I should be compeld I could not choose but follow. On the other
side, I concluded with my self thus: If I am reprobated, all that lies in me
either to do or suffer will be vain; my doings can do me no good, may be they
may do me harm; Donteclock against Castle, p. 171.
nay though I should perform all the good deeds Marl. on Ioh. 15. v. 2.
that all the Saints ever did or shall do, I could not be saved, the decree of
God stands so firm and sure.


Pr. You should have observed the outward and inward call of God both by his
word and spirit.


Th. Could I have behaved my self any otherwise then I have done? Gesel. in
probat. fol. 38.
for who are not outwardly by the Gospel and inwardly by the Spirit, called
according to the good purpose of God, cannot obey this call, neither can they
believe, or Id. 38.
convert themselves; and God Smout. in pref. Concopd. fol. 9.
draws those that believe so that they will not, cannot, neither can will to
resist his will. Whom God enlightens, and whose hearts he moves, are compelled,
and cannot but follow when it is God that calls. To illustrate this by an
example: Anthon. This. in doct. and ord. reform. Eccles.
Contra-Remonst. in Colloq. Hag.
as none can hinder his own production, or resurrection, so none can hinder the
Free Grace of God working in Jesus Christ for our regeneration and resurrection
to a spiritual life: from these you abundantly see, if I had bin thus handled
and called of God, I could have done no other then followed and obeyed his will.


Pr. Did you then never hear God thus calling, nor find your self ever moved?


Th. Yes, I have often heard; yet you very well know, that as God has an
internal and external will, so there is an internal and external call:
Pareus in Romans 9.
but if this external call shall be joined with the internal, it is to be an
effect and an ineffable figne of his predestination; and this is what the Synod
of Dort have not of late so clearly demonstrated. Synod of Dort cap. 1. Art. 6.
Some have faith bestowed on them by God, and others have not, proceeds from
the eternal decree of God; according to which decree, he softens the hard
hearts, and bends their wills to believe: but the non-elect (the elect by his
just judgment) he leaves to the hardness and malice of their own hearts.
Therefore, Sir, you seem to be easilier bafled then one of your Coat should
be, bawling at me so often, that I did not hearken to the call and invitation
of God; and fishing out of me, whether I had not heard this call or no, and was
moved at it. Synod of Dort, cap. 3, 4. Art. 10.
For that some are called and converted by the Ministry of the Gospel, is not
to be ascribed to man, as if by his own free will from others instructions, he
could discern and follow sufficient grace and works for his conversion, (which
that proud Heresy of Pelagius affirms) but to God, who as he has from all
eternity chosen his in Christ, so in time he does effectually call them,
bestows on them Faith and Repentance, and translates them out of darkness into
the Kingdom of his dear Son; nay, Ibid. Art. 12.
God creates this new creation in us, without us, by such a virtue which is not
inferior to that of the great Creation or Resurrection: So that all those in
whose hearts God has thus strangely and wonderfully wrought, are infallibly
regenerated, and do actually believe. Why do you accuse me that I am not
converted? when to speak the truth, I do not see how it is possible, that one
who is always tottering and doubting whether he be elected or not, can conform
himself to the eternal Call, this let being left too over and above, that this
internal Call does not concur.


Pr. Have you then all this while judged your self to be a reprobate? O sad to
relate!


Th. That I have; and that not without a cause too: because God of his own good
pleasure has reprobated the greatest part Smout. Concord. fol. 109.
of Mankind, and reprobates Trigl. Def. fol. 83.
are not damned for their sins, neither are foreseen sins the cause why any
should be reprobated; so that it is necessary we confess, Gesel. probat. f. 216,
217.
evil works and incredulity not to be the cause of reprobation: So that God out
of his will and counsel has ordained, That some should be born as infallibly
heirs of Hell as of their Parents, that by their destruction his Name might be
glorified. Pondering these things in my mind, I have oftentimes silently
thought, O good God! have thou also reprobated me with the greatest part of
Mankind? I did easily believe it, because thou have so ordered our
reprobation, that though it be our misery, it turns to thy glory.


Pr. This is very true, that God Anthon. This. ad Summam Baron. p. 20.
from eternity, without any respect to sin, by his pure and absolute Decree,
which no man can understand, has rejected the greatest part of Mankind, and
created them to destruction, or bequeathed them to destruction in Adams fall,
from an immutable and inevitable Decree, which he decreed with and in himself:
nay, if any one Id. page
shall dare to say, God has not decreed to hate man, as man, his creature, but
as a sinner, he contradicts the Apostle, and so consequently will not take the
Authority of God himself: yet for all this you are not by and by without any
more ado to conclude your self a Reprobate.


Th. You say well; but how is it possible, that a man whose faith is oppugned
with so many various and strong temptations, who is given to so many lusts,
should easily persuade himself not to be reprobated? as for example, if a man
knows and weighs with himself, that not only aged people, but also Infants
are of this number, Perk. Cat. page 393.
so that among Infants that die, This. in expl. doct. de Praedest. p. 245.
some are saved, some damned, and that before they have done either good or
evil, for that decree Perk. ut supra.
concerning reprobated Infants is so; born, and died, and damned, as it were
all in an instant, for the guilt of orignall and innate sin which they brought
into the world with them; and for this cause Calv. ad calumn. Neb. ad Art. 13,
14.
many children are taken out of this world, and God, as it were, snatches the
tender Infant from its mothers breast, and throws it headlong into eternal
death: but, what is more, God does not only deal so with the children of Jews,
Turks, Infidels, but Donteclock in pacif. lit. L.
also with the baptized children of Christians and believers, that some of them
dying in their Infancy are damned. Whether all the children of Believing
parents dying such shall certainly and undonbtedly be saved, the word of God is
silent; but I dare say a little more with Infants Rippert. in Colloq. p. 802.
which die in Christ before they are able to do good or evil, it is thus, they
must either be saved by grace, or damned by nature as children of wrath as well
as others. Truly Mr. Parson, this is harsh Doctrine for him who is bound to
observe your Creed, so that I scarce understand what to make of it.


Pr. But hear, friend; Pareus Romans c. 2. quest. 9.
if it be in the power and liberty of man to kill an Ox or a Sheep for his
use, to hunt an Hare or Partridge to death for his pleasure; much more does it
lie in the will and freedom of the Creator, without any injustice, to reject or
desert his creature, for his own glory: nay, it is a thousand times equaller,
that all the creatures both in heaven and earth should by their general and
eternal destruction demonstrate the divine glory and majesty, then that the
death of one single Fly or Gnat should go, for the demonstrating of the glory
of all the men in the world. And this in God is not to be spoken against, but
prayed against; and the elect cannot but give God thanks that he has condemned
the wicked, although he did decree them to it, because he reprobated them for
their good, and to testify how great his love was toward them: nay, the very
damned have not whereof to complain, but rather to give thanks; for though they
be fitted to destruction, God fitted them not to it in vain, but for many
special ends, and principally his own glory.


Th. And for this very cause Gomar. disp. de Praedest. page 105, 106.
I have often thought, we reprobates ought to be so much the quieter: for if
private and peculiar good were only to be looked after, it were better not to
live at all, than to live a little, or be a while a dying, till we plunge into
eternal death; yet for a public and universal good in this world, the contrary
(to wit, Damnation) is better, that the particular may serve for the good of
the whole, and the Creature make way for the glory of its Creator. Therefore
although in the middle of Summer my nostrils should be frozen up close, yet
nevertheless I might be in a possibility of smelling that it would be, though
we be cast into hell by God, and tormented, yet we shall be forced to thank
him, that he has honored us his Creatures with so divine a service, because
the Gomar. disp. de Praedest. page 105, and 106.
dignity of the chief glory of God, and of the elect, is so great an advantage,
that the Elect by an absolute inward propensity, actuated by the Spirit of God,
would wish (if it were possible) though by their own proper damnation and
destruction, the salvation of reprobated Jews, though unbelieving and
obstinate: So that this same ran often in my mind, how exceedingly happy shall
even we the reprobated be.


Pr. You seem to me to have used all the industry, and weighed all the
Arguments that are or can be said or done about this Argument of Reprobation;
yet it behoved you only to have led your life by that Word and Doctrine by
which he called you.


Th. I do not deny, truly, but that this same Reprobation has a long time had
deep impression in me, and being often troubled with it, satisfied my self
thus: The reprobated cannot at all obey God, nor believe, nor convert, nor
justify, nor save Musc. L C. de elect. c. 10.
themselves, though God himself should call them, and therefore are not
converted, because God will not have it so: Trig. D^f. fol. 156. Calv. in Ezekiel.
18. 23.
nay God does offer his grace both in his Word and Sacraments to some
Reprobates within the pale of the Church, not to that end, Anthon This. in
Doct. and Ord. Eccles. Reform. p. 21. f. 216, 217.
that they should be saved by those means, but on the contrary, that they might
have less excuse than others, and might be more severely punished in the end.


Pr. All this is as true as truth it self: Calv. Instit. lib. 3. c. 24. did.
12.
for, whom God has called to the ignominy of life, and certainty of eternal
death, that they should be the instruments of his wrath, and examples of his
Justice, he deprives of the faculty of hearing his Word, and afterward more
and more blinds and hardens them, that they may be brought to those ends to
which he has appointed them. Oftentimes also Id. lib. 3. c. 2. did. 11.
there is such a faith found in Reprobates, which has a great affinity and
similitude with the faith of the very Elect; and experience teaches us, that
oftentimes they are carried with the same motion and sense that the elect are;
so that oftentimes they judge themselves to be such in truth and in deed: and
sometimes it happens, Beza in brev. explic. c. 7. Aphor. 6, and 7.
that some are so lift up by the help of grace it self, that they think they
taste of the joys to come, and are really ingrafted into the true Church; so
that they mayshew others the way of life, and believe and judge of themselves
no otherwise then that they are elected. O how miserable are these men, who
ascend but to fall the lower, and that God might cast them many stories lower
into Hell!


Th. And truly I knew this very well, and therefore so much the more avoided
all Exhortations, Sermons, and reading of the Word, and abandoned all good
works, lest my blindness should be greater, and my damnation heavier: Nay, and
did affirm, Donteclock adv. Pacif. lit. L. 1.
as it is not the purpose and mind of God, to save those hereafter which he
does not call here; so neither those Reprobates which he does call here,
because it does not please him to give them faith and repentance, without which
they cannot be saved. God Trigland. Apol. fol. 135.
requires worship and obedience from all men, but has not decreed to give all
men the power of obeying in this fallen corrupted condition; God requires faith
of all to whom the Word is preached, but will not give faith to all to whom it
is revealed.


Pr. You seem to me to have been always of this opinion.


Th. I was not so wedded to this opinion, till such thoughts as these ran
always in my mind, that I was really of the number of the Elect.


Pr. Do not presume rashly, you too confidently pronounce your self Elect, when
from your Childhood you have been such a rakehell, and have not to this day
mended your course, these are but small fruits or signs of your Election.


Th. O good Sir! you must know, that all Calv. in Instit. lib. 3. c. 24. did.
10.
the Elect are not called so soon as born, nor all at one and the same time:
nay, before they are congregated to the Supreme Pastor, they wander in the
common desert of this world in sin, and are neither known to others or
themselves to be elected to life, till the peculiar mercy of God keep and guide
them. Musc. loc. com. de Fide, c. 7.
Neither is God bound to any time when, or persons which to call, so that it is
for no one to doubt when he shall be called; for no sin is so great as to
^inder when heaven calls. Whence it appears, clear as Noonday, I am not
presently to despair, if I have not lived so unblameably as you would have me.


Pr. Yet it was your duty, as the Apostle says, by good works to make your
salvation sure.


Th. How came you to speak so unadvisedly, Sir? does our Election depend on
good works? I Will prove it does not: and further, I am persuaded that the Elect
may fall Zanch. in M^scel. p. 329.
into great and heinous sins, as Adultery, Murder; nay sometimes into such
errors, by which sometimes partly, sometimes wholly, the very foundation of
Salvation is turned topfie-turvy; or otherwise against their Conscience to sin
foully and grievously Ruard. Acron. Explic. Catech. qu. 53. fol. 137.
against any of the Commandments of God: but all these things hinder little or
nothing. For, Wilhel. Teeling in dial. de statu hom. Christi, page 44.
God will not damn any of the elect though they sin, because the foundation of
their safety lies in his eternal act of their election; neither can a thousand,
nay the sins of the whole world, nor all the Devils in Hell destroy one of the
Elect: Our sins may harden our hearts, weaken our faith, but cannot quite
destroy it, nor extinguish the Spirit of God utterly: So that God damns none
for their sins, whom he has adopted in Christ.


Pr. What, then you did not fear to be damned?


Th. No, not I, a jot: for who are Toss. de Praedest. cap. 3. Zanch. de not.
Dei, l. 7. q. 1.
predestined, cannot be cast off for ever, because once elected by the
immutable Decree of God; and again, because whom Christ loves, he loves unto
the end.


Pr. But you ought to have turned and conformed your self according to the will
of God, that you might have obtained the remission of your sins.


Th. For any thing I understand, you have even the same conception of Smout. in
Script. consent. fol. 12.
the New Covenant, as of the Old, which was placed in the condition of Works;
as if we would constantly believe, and do this and thus, God would again do for
us so and so, etc. which rule is diametrically opposite to the New Covenant
conditions. Id. fol. 31.
God makes a New Covenant with us, and promises us, not only when we are
without any, but have strayed a long way from the condition, whilst we wallow
in the midst of sin; Id. fol. 46.
Behold, God forgiveth sin, before he renews the heart, and does both these
before we have done any good; nay, whilst we are in our sins, and do profane
his Name. Hence it is abundantly evident, Gesel. probat. fol. 33.
that God does prosecute all his Elect with a singular, eternal, gracious, and
saving love, before they believe or repent: For truly, as the Synod of Dort
Acta Synodi cap. 1. Art. 9.
says, Election is made not from any foreseen faith, obedience, fanctity, or
any other good quality or disposition, as a pre-requisite cause or condition in
us, that we should be thus elected; but are chosen to faith and obedience: so
that Election is the cause from whence all good works flow, and from hence
faith, holiness, all spiritual gifts flow, and at last life it self, as the
fruit and effect merely of it.


Pr. Whither do you intend to protract this Dispute? hold your tongue, and
leave this disputing; think with your self how far the night is spent, and how
nigh your life is to its period, and be more sollicitous how you may be saved
when you shall depart this life. Consider those words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 6.10.
Nor thieves nor drunkards shall inherit the Kingdom of God; yet you must
possess it, if you be saved.


Th. Do you think you can show your self a Physician to my sinful sick Soul?


Pr. Believe in Jesus Christ, mourn for your sins, beg a blessed change from
God, an happy hour, wherein he may give you the remission of your sins, and
life everlasting.


Th. What must I believe, that I may believe in Christ aright?


Pr. You must believe that Jesus Christ, by his Death and Passion, merited the
remission of sins, and life eternal, and that for you particularly. This is
commanded you in the Gospel.


Th. Whatsoever the Gospel says, is it true or false?


Pr. It Is truth it self.


Th. Has Christ by his Death and Passion purchased these things for all?


Pr. Pisc. con. Schafm. disp. de Praedest. page 12.
Although humane Reason, and in good men, has thence taken scandal, and some of
the Evangelical Doctors much rage and rail, when they hear any teach, that God
would not have all men to be saved, but only such and such, and Christ is not
dead for all, but we firmly believe on either side, and that from Scripture it
self; so that I may assert in plain words, Perk. de Spir. desert. p. 3.
God has constituted no Mediator for the reprobated; for Christ is the Redeemer
of the Elect only, and not of others.


Th. Is not Christ then dead, and made Polan. Explic. quar. in Relig. diff. p.
154. q. 4.
an offering for Reprobates?


Pr. I pray, Sir, if you be one of Christ's elect Sheep, why do you thus
patronize the Reprobate and Damned? Read the judgment of the Synod of Synod
of Dort, c. 2. art. 8.
Dort, that will teach you, that this was the free counsel and gracious
intention of God the Father, and of the precious death of his only Son, to
effect grace and Salvation in all the Elect, giving them alone justifying
faith, and by it infallibly bringing them to heaven; that is, God would that
Christ by the blood of his Cross (by which he ratified the new Covenant) should
effectually redeem out of every Tribe, People, Language and Nation, those, and
those only which were elected to Salvation from eternity, and were given to
him of his Father, giving them likewise faith and spiritual gifts, which he
acquired by his sufferings.


Th. Are all men elected?


Pr. No: Pisc. contra Schafm. These. 115. p. 119. Buc. L. C. de Praedest. q. 46.
for God merely out of his own will, without any respect to future impieties,
ordained the greatest part of mankind to utter destruction.


Th. Now at length, tell me seriously from your heart what you think of me, am
I of the Elect or no? Why do not you answer? Speak out, and speak plain, hide
not truth under the ambiguity of words, neither let your tongue dissent from
your heart, for they ought not to be divorced, but speak heartily; for it is
necessary that I know this: If I am a Reprobate, I should believe a lie, for
Christ has purchased nothing for Reprobates; if I am Elect, I follow the truth,
and not a lie. Now to follow the truth, is a work of the Gospel; therefore
before I do any thing else, I will know whether I am elected or not.


Pr. Perk. de Praedest. p. 89. Gomar. de Praedest. These. 4. Dungan. Pacif. p.
68.
Whosoever is within the pale of the Church, is bound to believe that he is
redeemed by Christ, the Reprobate as well as the Elect, yet each after a
peculiar manner; the Elect is bound, that believing he may possess the benefit
of his Election; the Reprobate is bound to believe from the intention of God,
he may have the less to plead for himself: and therefore Gomar. de Predest.
These. 21.
Christ is offered to Reprobates, not that they should be saved, but that being
convicted from the incredulity and refractoriness of their hearts, they may
want all manner of excuse.


Th. Will you say, God would have Reprobates to believe that which is a lie,
and damn them eternally too if they will not believe it? and what hinders but
it is so? for Nic. de Schure in Instit.
after he has once resolved to damn them, he may do it which way he pleases.


Pr. Pray Sir leave off these niceties, we have more need to pray to God, that
he would save your Soul.


Th. If you will be praying, pray for your self; for my part, I will not spend
time and labor so idly. If I am reprobated, it is impossible to acquire
Salvation, though I should spend a thousand years in praying: for the Decree
stands so sure, Polan. in Doct. de Praedest. page 139.
that as the Elect cannot be reprobated, so the Reprobated cannot become Elect;
for Reprobation is as immutable in respect of God reprobating, as man
reprobated. What good can prayers do then? On the contrary, if I am elect, God
has destinated me to salvation from Eternity; Donteclock Instruct. de Predest.
p. 93.
and all whom God has ordained to salvation from the foundation of the world,
are brought to it by the Almighty Power of God (that the purpose of Election
might stand sure) that it is impossible for them any way to perish. This has
been always my belief, according to which I have lived, and the Synod of Dort
have so confirmed me in it, that I would sooner be burnt than depart an hair
from it. And as God Cap. 1. Art. 11.
himself is most wise, immutable, omniscient, omnipotent; so that Election by
him made, can neither be changed, revoked or broken, nor the Elect perish, or
their number admit of addition or subtraction. It Is granted It. cap. 5. Art. 4.
moreover, that the Elect sometimes, by the permission of God, fall into
grievous sins, as David, Peter, and other Saints; and they do offend Art. 5.
God by such sins, and incur the guilt of death, grieve the holy Spirit,
destroy the exercise of their faith, wound their consciences, and many times
lose the sense of grace for a while: God nevertheless, for the immutable Decree
of his Election, does not in sad failings quite take his Spirit from them,
neither does he suffer them to fall Art. 6.
so low, as to fall from the state of Adoption or Justification, or to sin unto
death, or against the holy Ghost, so that he should utterly desert them, and
leave them to perish infallibly for ever. So that they obtain not any thing by
their own worth and strength, but of the mere bounty of God, Art. 8.
that they neither fall totally from grace, nor unavoidably into Hell. But,
what is more than all this, when as both internal and eternal Reprobation is
the operation of God, which does not really differ from the essence of God
himself, why may not we discourse and descant of Election? Polan. in Doct. de
Predest.
It Is granted on all hands, that Reprobation, as well as Election, does not
really differ from the Essence of God, and therefore it is God himself, who in
himself is altogether immutable; and far be it from me to ask, how God can be
mutable.


Pr. Good God! what a sad hearing is this? Can a man proceed so far, as to be
burdened with sin and misery as you are, and yet will not call upon his God?


Th. I would sooner, Sir, sing that excellent Hymn made by Bernard Biscop,
heretofore Preacher at Oyen in Gelderland, now Preacher at Vtricht, till my
Chamber rung again.


Pr. If that man has made a Hymn, it is necessary it be good, for he is one
teaches all Orthodox Doctrine: Let me hear it.


Th. Hearken diligently: the melody of it shall answer to the 103 Psalm: You
shall briefly perceive in it the universal Rule of my Belief, according to
which I intend to live and die.

I.
PRaised be God, who before I was born, nay ere the World was, predestined me
to Salvation; not according to the Faith or Works which I should have or do in
this life, but according to his own infinite mercy.

II.
Blessed be God, who by the immutable counsel of his own Will, has called me
inwardly by his Spirit, and outwardly by his Word; who has inwardly enlightened
my mind and corrupt senses by his Spirit, and will more and more inlighten
them.

III.
Who has freed my base erring will, the servant and storehouse of sin, so that
I desire only to walk in the ways of the Lord, only to be able is wanting.

IV.
Blessed be God, who by his Omnipotent Spirit, and Divine Word cooperating, has
implanted a firm faith in my heart; such a strong faith, which though by
crosses, and whatever is worse, may be bended and yield, yet cannot break.

V.
Who shall seduce the Elect of God? Who shall separate me from his love in
Christ? Who shall pull me out of his Omnipotent Hand? Neither the Devil, or
Death, or deadly sins shall be able by all their strength to force away my
Crown.

VI.
That good God, who has begun a good work in me for his mercy sake, will carry
it on, and perfect it even unto the end, even to the end of this miserable
life. It Is the Lord my God who will do this, that I may persevere, being
always guarded as it were a Prince by his Spirit.


Jailer. Pray make an end, will you? I have enough of these Disputes and
Rhymings: Is this one of your godly Hymns? This is a Song indeed befits a
Rogue, and deserves singing by none but a Club of Whores and Rogues met at a
Bawdy House. Your faith and your manners are even much alike.


Th. Even jeer on, good man Rogue, as much as you will: yet I esteem it for an
excellent Hymn; and were I to die, I would sing it on the top of the highest
Round of the Ladder, before that of Ex profundis Domine, etc. Out of the deep,
O Lord, etc. The Composer of it was one of the Orthodox Contra-Remonstrants:
Not long ago he being called out of a little Village into the City of Vtricht,
he there so abundantly well argued for, and defended this Hymn, that there it
was received into the Orthodox Church, as really consentaneous to Scripture.


Jailer. Is this that same Orthodox Doctrine, about which these Provinces are
so devillishly troubled and pestered: Which that it may be had in holy
reverence with the Church, Synods and Soldiers, use all their Authorities?
Truly it is a very pretty thing.


Pr. Sirrah, you ought to hold your tongue of such things, concerning which you
know no more than a Dog. Look to it what you say, and leave to calumniate the
Church and her Doctrine, or it shall go worse with you, for ere long you shall
be so far from being head Jailer, that you shall scarce be admitted to run of a
Rogues errand.


Jailer. If these be your best Arguments, Mr. Parson, yours is not so certain
and good a Religion as you talk for. For all your hot words, I Will tell you but
thus much, that you may very well know that I understand you have done little
or nothing (for all your many words) to the turning this poor Soul from sin,
and translating him from death to life: nay, which is worse, he is now much
more hardened than before. Indeed I have heard much of your opinions before, but
never believed it till now, where I have been an eye and ear-witness of all is
come out of your mouth. Is this your Reformed Religion in good sooth? If you
had called it the Deformed Religion, you had hit it, as that which is not able
to effect any thing of it self, unless to stir up security in men, and give
them an occasion, nay spur them to go on in sin. Therefore, Mr. Parson, because
you cannot profit this sick sinful Soul any thing by your Doctrine, you may
walk, for I Will light my Candle, and go fetch another, who shall contradict your
Institutions, and be of another-guess Opinion, who I suppose will far sooner
and surer bring a man to sorrow for his sin, and a better life.


Pr. Do what you please; so that you take it for granted, you shall not thus
escape unpunished.


Jailer. Do what you can, I esteem this man's Soul more than your favor. In the
mean while, though you show your envy and bitterness too much. But however, God
give you good night.


FINIS.

