Legi Concionem hanc, dignam, que censui, quae publica Luce donetur.

Datum, Episcopo-Thorpae, juxta Eboracum, Jun. 29. 1665. Edm. Diggle, S. T. P.
Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac Domino, Domino Richardo Archiepiscopo
Ebor^censi a Sacris Domesticis.

A SERMON Preached at CARLISLE, Aug. 17. 1664.

By A. Smalwood. D. D.

YORK, Printed by Stephen Bulkley, 1665.

To the Honorable and Loyal Sir Philip Musgrave Knight and Baronet, Mayor of
the City, and Governor of the Garrison of Carlisle; and the rest of the Noble
Gentlemen of the County of Cumberland, the Candid Auditors of this Sermon, the
humble Author wishes all happiness.
IT pleased some of you to put me first upon preaching, then upon Printing this
Sermon: I have obeyed your Commands, you have your desire: may God have the
glory, the people the benefit, and the contentment will redound to

Your humble Servant A. SMALWOOD.

To the READER.
THE Reverend Judges of the Circuit desired that the Sermon should be ended by
ten a Clock, in respect of the multiplicity of their occasions. Whereupon I was
enforced to omit much of what was prepared, and somewhat was also added during
the time it lay by me. But whatsoever was not then uttered in the Pulpit, is
marked in the margin by ' or half-moons: The rest is the Sermon Verbatim, as it
was spoken, without any change, addition or diminution. Besides, after it was
preached, some of the Gentlemen that desired it might he sent to the Press,
furnished me with some Papers (some printed, some written) by such persons as
were of contrary Judgment: upon those as often as I find them offering any
Reason against what I have here incerted, I have bestowed some Marginal
Annotation or other referred to the place whereto it relates, by some of these
Characters * etc. In all that I have here spoken or writ, I have proceeded
sincerely and according to the dictates of my Conscience, and am persuaded that
there is nothing laid down, but what is perfectly consonant to Truth, Reason,
and Religion: and if any thing can be discovered herin to be otherwise, I shall
willingly retract it, freely submiting mine opinions to the Doctrine and
Judgment of the Church of England. Of my Readers I shall desire nothing, but
that they peruse this Sermon and Notes with impartial and unbiased affections,
and an earnest desire to find out the Truth, and submit to it. Let them weigh
seriously what here they find, and the Lord give them right judgment in all
things. If ought seem obscure, I shall be willing to clear it, and if any
rational objection be made, I shall be ready to give them satisfaction: but
shall not put my self upon the trouble to take notice of any loose discourse
wherein I find many Words and little Matter.

St. Mat. 5. 34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all.
THe peculiar favor God had for his people Israel, was evidenced in that He
vouchsafed to be their Legislator, not only as to the Moral Law, writ with his
own Finger; but also in Ordaining them political Ordinances (which Divines call
the Judicial Law) far transcending Dent 4. 8,
those of other Nations. And because the most wholesome Statutes, not put in
execution, are to no more purpose than a Sword rusted in the Scabbard. He
therefore that they might be observed duly, and Justice administered equally,
appointed Judges. Ever blessed be God Deuteronomy. 16. 18.
that we are not defective in either particular, having to enliven our Laws,
(and it is now near 500. years since that Institution) Justices itinerant, that
like so many Samuels, 1 Samuel 7. 16.
Judge our Israel in their several Circuits. Whose Authority, though as to the
designation of their Persons, and extent of their Power it be delegated to them
by Commission from his sacred Majesty; yet their Office is from Heaven: Ego
dixi dii estis; Psalm. 1^ 6.
God himself calls them Gods, that is, by substitution from him, to mind them,
that they should act a^cording to his good pleasure in the dispensation of
impartial Justice: which notwithstanding cannot be effected, unless Truth in
the Causes brought before them; be made to appear by the Information of
Witnesses; whose Testimonies, that they may with greater security be relied
upon are to be given in upon Oath. And so it seems it was in the Apostles days,
and before: Else he could not have said, (as he does) An Oath for confirmation
Heb. 6. 16.
is to men an end of all strife: Whereupon, it may seem strange, that I have
chosen a Text, which in appearance, so flatly opposes the ground of Legal
proceedings, But I say unto you, Swear not at all.

Sect. 2.
To clear mine intentions, you may please to take notice, that there are two
sorts of men that do violence to my Text. The one winds it up to too high a
note, as though our Savior had thereby absolutely forbidden all kind of
Swearing whatsoever: This error, as far as I can trace it in Antiquity, had its
rise from that Saint in show, but indeed grand Heretic Pelagtus: For I find a
Letter from one Hilary, written it seems from Syracuse (and therefore, as it is
certain, that it was not that famous Father and Bishop of Poitiers, who goes
under the name of St. Hilary, for he was dead above 20. years before St. Austin
was Baptized; but Hilary afterward Epist 88. and 89. Bishop of Arles) to St.
Austin concerning this matter, above 1200. years ago; for as for Polycarpus
St. John's Scholar, and by him ordained Voss. Mist. Pelag. lib. 5. Part. 2.
Antith. 1.
Bishop of Smyrna, he refused not Swearing in general, but that Oath that was
tendered him, to wit, by the fortune of Caesar. And Basilides, Suseb. Eccles.
Hist. lib. 4. 6. 15.
a Martyr not 40. years after, denied also to Swear; but that was More Ethnico
per Deos Gentiles (say the Centurists) after the fashion Gent. 3. cap. 6.
of the Heathen, and by their Gods: Which may be confirmed by that of
Tertullian, Apel. cap. ^2.
who lived at the same time, when Basilidey suffered, Sed and juramus sient non
per Genios Caesarem, it a per salutem eorum, quae est angustior omnibus Geniis:
They would Swear not by the Genii of their Emperors (which they esteemed
Devils,) but by their safety, that is, by God, from whom comes health and
salvation; A notable monument of the judgment, and practice of the Primitive
Christians concerning Swearing. But not to digress, This Error revived in St.
Bernards time, about 500. years since, in the Province of Th^louse in France,
in a Sect of Phanaticks that were called Henricians, from one Henricus their
Master, and Apostolicks, because they pretended that they lived according to
the Apostles Doctrine: Against whom St. Bernard Preached in his 65th. Sermon
upon the Canticles, and complained of that Henry to Hildefonse Earl of St.
Giles, in his 240. Epistle, wherein he mentions, That the Bishop of Hostia in
Italy was sent from the Apostolic Sea, to root out the Tares, which that
Heretic had sown in Gods Vineyard. Which not withstanding, the Albigenses, or
Albienses, as some term them, in the same Province, no doubt, sprung from the
same root, who denied all manner of Swearing; but were refuted publicly, in
the year 1176 (as says Spendanus in his epitome of Baronius) by the Archbishop
of Lions, and their opinions, and particularly this against Swearing, were
condemned in a Provincial Synod; as themselves were also, not long after, in
the third Council of Lateran, of 280. or (as Gulielmus Tyrius, who was there
present, says) of 300. Bishops under Alexander the third. But (alas)
notwithstanding all these endeavors for the suppression of this Error, it was
resuscitated by Wicliss, and his followers; and again amongst us, during our
late distractions, When Judge. 21. ^1.
there was no King, in Israel: but every man did what was right in his own
eyes. Which error, though masked under the fair color of a more than ordinary
piety, tends to the overthrowing of all Judicatories, and taking away the
decision of all emergent suits, and controversies. And were it granted, we
should be necessitated, if not to disown the Magistrates Authority, yet to
disobey their Legal commands, as having a countermand from Christ himself, I
say unto you, Swear not at all.

Sect. 3.
The other sort are men of Atheistical Principles, such as have no fear of God
before their Eyes, who in despite of my Text, dare Swear, not only commonly,
rashly, profanely; but falsely, and that upon set purpose, and with
deliberation, whereby innocent persons may be bereaved of their lives, and any
man of his just Estate. The former go disguised in the habit of Angels of
light: but these, admit not possibly of any disguise, but walk in their proper
colors, as black as outer darkness. And yet these are more ancient than those;
for I find the Prophet complaining of such, Though Jer. 5. 2.
they say, the Lord lives, they Swear falsely: The former would abolish
Judicial proceedings, and make them nothing: These would corrupt them, and
render them (if possible) worse then nothing. To induce the former to
relinquish so irrational an opinion; and the latter to forsake so criminal a
practice, that God may be glorified, our Judgments rectified, our lives
amended, our Estates secured, and just obedience to the King and his Laws
performed, was my design in the choice of these words.

Sect. 4.
And these, I hope, by Gods blessing may be effected; The Explication of my
Text, will serve for the one: And the Application for the other. And when I
have, by the assistance of Heaven, and your Noble Patience posted over these
two Stages, I shall no longer entrench upon your weighty occasions. I begin
with the former, The Explication of the Words. And here, be pleased to give me
leave to proceed, First, Negatively, And secondly, Affirmatively. Negatively,
what is not the purport of these words. And Affirmatively, what it is. For the
former, I lay down this Proposition, Our Savior did not intend by these Words,
Swear not at all, an absolute, universal, an^ unlimited Prohibition of all
manner of Swearing; And that I prove:

Sect. 5.
First, It is a Principle of the Christian Faith, that the Father and the Son
are one, and the same God; that is, of the same Nature, Power, Wisdom,
Immutubility, and Eternity: To deny this, were horrid blasphemy. Now, if they
be of the same Wisdom, they are of the same Will; and if they be of the same
Will, they cannot issue forth contrary Commands, for so there should be a
contraricty, or a mutability in their Wills, and consequently, they should not
be one, and the same immutable God; But God the Father, has Maste^ Crook, Mr.
Fisher, Morgan, VVa^kins, (of I understand them) and others, I take it, do
confess, That Swearing was on to commanded by God; but deny that that Command
was part of the Moral Law, because that then, swearing should be performed as
a duty continually though no Magistrate require it, which, it seems, they think
to be very absurd. But I conceive it to be no absurdity to follow Truth whither
so ever it leads, and doubt not at all but that a man ought to swear, not
continually; (for affirmative Precepts hind semper, but not ad semper: as a
man ^^ obliged to hear Sermons, but not continually: for so, be should do
nothing else,) but whenever there is a necessity for an Oath: which may
happen, not only when it is imposed by a Magistrate, but whenever he cannot
otherwise do that good to his Neighbor that Charity requires. And the neglect
thereof ^^sire of Omission. in not doing his Brother that good Office that
lawfully be night and therefore ought to have done. And this sin is aggravated:
if the lawful Magistrates (to whose just, and Legal Commands, by Gods Law, we
are to yield Obedience) require an Oath of him to testify the Truth, and he
refuse it. For thereby he withdraws his due subjection from ^is Superiors, and
as much as in him is, ^bstracts the course of Justice, and (in some cases)
hinders the preservation of h^^ Neighbors Person, or Estate. And les any man
judge, whether these be not grievous sins, To say there be many that swear
rashly, and prophantly in their ordinary discourse, is (alas) too true, but
impertiuent. For Vertus is placed in the medium, betwixt two extremes (on
either hand one) which both are (more or less) vicious. And therefore to say,
there be too many covetam people in the World, is no excuse for a Prodigal. In
like s^r^, to say there be too many lewd Swearers, neither excuses, nor
extenuates his faul^, that will not Swear when he ought Let these the^^ whom it
concerns, not suffer themselves henceforth to be deluded, nor plunge themselves
into a certain sin, whilst they pretend to a degree of Piety above others, lest
they be i^relled in the Catalogue of those foolish people mentioned by the
Pe^t, who -- Dum vitant vitia, in contraria current.


commanded swearing, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall
Swear by his name, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. And therefore it is not possible that God the
Son should forbid it.

Sect. 6.
At quid verba audio, cum facta videam? says not the Text, Swear not at all? I
answer, That where there is an (...), a seeming contradiction in Scripture,
(which cannot possibly be real, the whole Scripture being exactly true) there
by some commodious Interpretation, the places are so to be expounded, as to
admit of a fair reconciliation one with another. As when we read, Sacrifice
and Offering, Ps^. 40. 6.
thou did not desire; we cannot understand it, (how plain soever it appears)
as to the Words at the first view seem to import; because it is clear, That God
required Sacrifices and Offerings in the Leviticall Law, which was in force in
the Psalmists days. So we, cannot understand our Saviors words in the Text,
in that latitude, that some interpret them, as generally prohibitive of all
Swearing, seeing God has required it no less, then he did his own Service and
Worship in the Moral Law.

Sect. 7.
If any allege in contradiction to this Argument, That Christ abolished the
Ceremonial and Judicial Laws once commanded by God, (though Objections be no
Answers) I must deny that Assertion. For we were never under the Judicial Law,
it being given solely to the Jews, for the regulation of their Commonwealth,
so long as they enjoyed it, and that in their own Land; Deuteronomy. 4. 14.
and therefore, it was never obligatory to us, that neither are Jews, nor ever
dwelt in Canaan: And what was never imposed, need not be abolished.

Sect. 8.
As for the Ceremonial Law, it was merely temporary, as appears by the
Sacrifices typifying the death of Christ to come, and therefore ceased of it
self at our Saviors Death, and was not at all If to the contrary, That of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 15. be objected: I answer, That Christ may be said to have
abolished the Ceremonial Law, not by repealing it, but by dying; at whose death
it expired. So the High Priest dying, might be said to free the Man-flayer from
his Confinement, (which during his life, he could not, either by disanulling,
or dispeasing with the Law, Numb. 35.) because at the High Priests death, the
Man slayer had liberty to live at horn securely, who by the Law was confined
to some City of Refuge, until the High Priests death.
abrougated, but observed by him in his life. So when a Parliament Enacts, That
a Law shall continue in force for seven years, and no longer; at the end of
that term (though during that season, it obliges as much as any other) it
ceases of it self, and is not properly said to be repealed, but expired. In
like manner, our blessed Savior, cannot be properly said to have repealed the
Ceremonial Law Enacted by his Father; but is expired of it self. The greatest
humane wisdom may think fit to Enact a Law, which after, upon some emergent,
and unforeseen inconveniences, may with Reason be Repealed. But it is not so
with the unerring Wisdom of God, who foresees all things passible, ab
Aeterno. Hence I may Conclude, Seeing God the Father has Commanded Swearing,
that God the Son has not forbidden it.

Sect. 9.
Secondly, Because some, without any color of Reason, or possibility of proof,
pretend that Swearing was only Mr. Fisher takes Swearing for a Ceremony. And
of that mind are many of that Sect. Yet. John Wigon in his Paper, directed from
Eancaster Castle, to Judge Twisden, would rather place it amongst the
Judicials, Ex. 22. 10.
a Ceremonial Rite; (whereas on the contrary, God himself ranks it with his
fear, and service, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. which certainly are Moral.) I argue thus, What
at all times, as well under the Gospel, as under the Law, as well amongst the
Gentiles, as the Jews, tends in an especial manner to the Glory of God, that
is neither a Ceremonial Ordinance, nor forbidden by Christ. But Swearing so
much conduces to Gods glory, that it is an owning of him in his several
Attributes; so that he that Swears by any object, implicitly acknolwedges it
for a Deity. Whereupon, that old Father Lactaentius, de falsa sapientia, sect.
19. accuses Socrates of madness, Qui per canem and ansere^ dejerabat; because,
Animal curpissimum pro Deo habuit. Indeed Swearing tends so much to the glory
of God, that Sim-na kavod laihovah, (...), Give God the Glory, was one of the
Forms (ac Grotius says on Mat. 26. 63.) which the Jewish Magistrates used,
when they required an Oath of any Person brought before them, because the Act
of swearing, is an expression and acknowledgement of the Power, Wisdom, and
Providence of God. And he brings in two Scripture instances, Josh. 7. 19. and
John 9. 24. which to the intelligent, and considerative Reader may strongly
evidence the profound knowledge, and ^aga^ity much above the rate of common
Enpositors) of that admirable ^a^: The former pla^e is read by the Septuagint,
(...). Which seems to me to bear this sense, Give Glory to God, etc. and make
thy Confession in his presence, (our Translation read i^ unto him) and tell
me, etc. The acknowledgment of his sin to God, is plainly differenced, from his
^^^ing it to Joshua. Besides, it is observabi^, that (...). Englished
Confession, is a Verbal of that same word, whereby the ^^. first, and after them
St. Paul, Romans 24. 11. renders the Prophets word, tish^bang, shall swear, Isay
45. 23. And (...), must needs signify the same, if the one be a true
Translation of the other. So also Ier. 44. 26. where our English has it, Behold
I have sworn by my great Name, I find it in Greek, (cited by Conrad. Kircher,
in his Concordance of the Old Testament, in the word nishbang) (...) It appears
then that both (...), and (...), (if the word nishbang be rightly rendered by
them) do sometimes signify to swear. Thus (...) is used for ^^ Oath by Justin
Martyr in his second Apol^gy for Christians: as appears by the Context. And so
Johannes Long^^ there Translates it. And if so, why there may not (...) denote,
a Confession upon Oath? Add hereto, that Masius on the place tells us. That in
Origens Greek Bible (made up of the 70^s and Theodotion's Translation) in this
verse, after the word (...), the Particle ^^ was inserted. Quae (says he) vim
quandam u^gendi habet, ut scripfit Vir doctissimus Theodorus Gaza. And for that
other Text, of John 9. 24. it is not very probable, that when the Phariseas
were dissatisfied with the account, the quendam blind man had given them, how
he had obtained his sight, his re-examination should be upon Oath; Nor can I
conceive what other so fit sense can be given of what they said, Give God the
praise: Let the Reader consider and judge.
such is Swearing, and therefore it cannot be thought to be prohibited. Such, I
say, is Swearing; For he that Swears by Gad for the confirmation of an unknown
Truth, acknowledges his Omnisciency, in discerning whether he speak truly, or
no; and his Power in being able; and his Justice, in being willing, to punish
such as Swear falsely. And does not the acknowledgment of Gods Wisdom, (in
discerning, the secrets of all hearts) and his Sovereign Power, and Impartial
Justice in the Punishment of Offenders, tend much to the Glory of God? And that
as well now under the Gospel, as it did before under the Law? Nay, it is a part
of ^^at (...). Gods peculiar service, that is incommunicable to any Creature.
Hence that prohibition to Swear by Creatures, because thereby, we should yield
to them that Honor, that is due to God alone. The Glory of God, is the end of
our Creation. And therefore, what ever highly advances that, must needs be
good, and consiquently, liable to no prohibition. Surely Christ, who Honors
his Father, and Ioh. 8. ^9. Ioh. 6. ^^.
who came from Heaven, not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent
him, would not, did not prohibit what God had so clearly expressed to be his
will, and what so eminently conduces to his Glory.

Sect. 10.
Thirdly, If Christ's purpose here, be utterly to abolish Swearing, as an
illegitimate Brat of Jewish extraction, not to be admitted into the Christian
Church; then it must be, either as it is This is Rodolphus Gualtheru^ 's
Argument, open Heb. 6. Non prohibet Deus ^a, quae landem illius non mi^u^nt,
(...) o^sunt proxime, ergo non juramentum prohibet.
repugnant to our Duty to God; or else to our Neighbor; for into that Summary,
he has contracted the whole Law. And I freely confess, That Perjury is in both
respects exceeding culpable, as highly tending to the dishonor of the God of
Truth, who is called thereby to the attestation of a lie, and to the injury of
men, who thereby may lose their lives, lively-hoods, or what else is dearest to
them in this World: Perjurium peccatum esse, and grande peccatum ^erm. 28. de
Verbis Apost.
nemo dubitat, says Saint Austin. And I grant likewise, That frequent, and
customary Oaths, upon slight, or (possibly) no occasion, are both extremely
derogatory to the Majesty of that infinite, and incomprehensible Essence, to
whom all Knees must bow, and whom we are not to name without Internal
Reverence, and Adoration; and also in great measure scandalous to such as hear
them. Many of the Fathers Preached so St. Chrysostom Preached 21. Sermo^^ ad
Populum Antiochenum, yet extant: and in 17. of them, which follow immediately
one after another, (one only excepted) he in^^ight more, or less, (^^d in
some of them very largely) against this sin of swearing.
often, and with so much vehemence against this vicious Custom, that they fell
under suspicion of disallowing all Swearing: And St. Austin punished every such
Oath in those of his own Family by the forfeiture of some part of their wonted
S. Saint Chrysostom Hom, 5. prescribes the like Artidote against swearing. If
any (says he) does perceive himself, his Wife, Childrens or Servants addicted
to that (...), let him male them go (...) Supperless to Bed, as often as they
offend.
Ordinary, (as Possidonius records in his life) the sooner to withdraw them
from that profaneness. Hence it cannot be denied, but these Oaths may, and ought
to be restrained as offensive, and insolent breaches of our duty both to God
and Man. But such Oaths as are adadvisedly, and reverently taken upon necessary
occasions, are so far from being displeasing to God, or hurtful to Men; that
on the contrary, they are acceptable to the one, and advantageous to the other:
Nihil Enarrat. in Ps. 131.
gratius Deo possumus offerre, quam jure jurare, says St. Austin. And by them
Princes are secured of their Subjects Allegiance, and Generals of their
Soldiers fidelity, and Subjects assured that their Princes shall not degenerate
into Tyrants; Leagues confirmed between Nations; Peace conserved; Mutual
Commerce and Trading confirmed, every Man's just Right maintained; Offenders
discovered, and duly punished; and Controversies and Suits decided. And these
are such great, and good ends, that Men cannot subsist in any degree of
security, or happiness without them. Hereupon Julian the Apostate, the most
subtle Enemy that ever Christianity had, Skoffed at this Praecept, Swear not
at all, (being willing to understand it in the utmost latitude) as destructive
to all Government, and humane Societies, which unless we would verify (as I
see not but we must, if we expound the words as Julian did) we shall be
enforced to profess that false and vain (but not at all necessary) Oaths, were
here prohibited.

Sect. 11
I may add, Swearing by Creatures, it being Idolatry to ascribe that honor to
them, that is peculiarly due to the Creator. But the disanulling of such Oaths,
as are taken by such things as are no Gods, does not restrain, but rather
confirm the use of those that are lawfully taken by God. And therefore, as
Swearing by false Gods, is forbidden, Josh. 2^. 7.
lest thereby, they should be owned for Deities. So Swearing by the true God,
ought not to be forbidden, because Men thereby acknowledge his Divine Nature.

Sect. 12.
Fourthly, Had Christ intended Universally to forbid all kind of Oaths; it had
been sufficient to have said, Swear not at all; because a General includes all
Particulars; and so these following expressions, Neither by Heaven, nor by the
Earth, neither by Jerusalem, neither by the Head, had been useless, as being
evidently included in the general prohibition foregoing. As he that says, No
Substance is a Quality, needs not add, neither Heaven, nor Earth, nor Man, nor
Beast, for all these are comprehended in the word Substance; and therefore the
enumeration of several Substances were altogether superfluous, and vain. But
it were highly blasphemous to say, That our blessed Savior who condemns all
vain Words, did himself Mat. 1^. 36.
use them in his Sermon.

Sect. 13.
Besides, the following words were in probability added, for the illustration,
or explication of the former. But had he meant, That no Oath should be used
upon any occasion, these subsequent words, are so far from giving light to the
preceding, that they have much obscured them. For had he said no more, but
Swear not at all, it might have been thought, that he had disallowed all Oaths;
whereas, his descending to this, and that Creature in particular, may
rationally imply, that his purpose was only to forbid all such Swearing, and
not that which was formerly enjoined. And surely, these words, as they are laid
down in the Gospel, might well be spoken without any intention to forbid
Swearing by God. For from this Proposition, Swear not at all by this, or that
Creature; it cannot be Logically inferred, that we ought upon no occasion to
Swear by the Creator. But on the contrary, it seems, that Christ, lest any
should conceive, that he forbad all kind of Swearing; to prevent that mistake,
add^, Neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, etc. thereby manifesting what kind of
Oaths he would have difused.

Sect. 14
If any dislike this Interpretation, I would gladly know what other sense these
words can import; or what the enumeration of these severalls, Heaven, Earth,
Jerusalem, thy Head, can add to a general negative, which comprehends all
them, and more: Or how can they be thought not to be superfluous, if they mean
nothing, but what was plainly expressed before? The learned Calvin was of this
opinion; for he says, Si ad substantium refer Institut l. 2. cap. 8. sect. 21.
as particulam, omnino acsi nulla exceptione illicitum esset quodvis
juramentum, quorsum explicatio quae mox additur; neque per Coelum, neque per
terram, etc. As wise a man as he was, (and our judicious Hooker says, He was
incomparably the wisest, Preface to Eccle. Polit.
that ever the French Church had since) yet, it seems, he could not vindicate
these words from being superfluous; unless the Word omnino were referred to
them, and not to the Act of Swearing. And then the sense of this Verse in the
utmost extent thereof will be no more than this; I Command you, that you shall
not upon any Consideration whatever, Swear by any Creature, which is not at all
exclusive of such Oaths, as God before had Commanded.

Fifthly, Christ never forbad any thing, but what was of it self Mr. Fisher in
his Answer to Bishop Gauden says, That some things are Prohibita quia mala:
and some things are, Mala, quia prohibita; evil to us, merely because
forbidden: And of this sort (he says) are these Ceremonies, Circumcising,
Sacrifices, Swearing, etc By which words, he plainly acknowledges, That
Swearing, is neither in it is own Nature, nor in any other respects evil, save
only as it is Forbidden by Christ. But I say, That our Savior did never
universally forbid any thing, but what was in it self evil, or in some respect
conducing thereto. Which If be deny, I would gladly hear but one, instance in
any particular thing whatsoever, which being of it self either good, or
indifferent, was generally, and perpetually forbidden by Christ (so that it
should be lawful for none afterward to do it) as he pretends Swearing to be.
If in the four Gospels, or in all the New Testament any such prohibition, be,
it may easily be produced: If not, the dictate of Mr. Fishers is vain.
intrinsically evil, as may be proved by Induction; For he forbids Anger, and
abusive Language, sect. 22. and they are evil, he forbids Lust, sect. 28. and
that is evil; he forbids Divorce, saving for the cause of Fornication, sect.
32. And Swearing by Creatures, and they are evil. And the same Reason may be
rendered of all his Prohibitions. And therefore, what ever he forbad was evil,
and that in it self, and not merely as forbidden. But such Swearing in
general, is not: For that has not only been the Practice of holy Men; but
also an Angel did Swear, Dan. 12. 7. And so another, (which according to many
Interpreters, was Christ) Swear by him that lives for ever, and ever Rev. 10.
6. Besides our Saviors Amen, Amen, 24. times used in St. John's Gospel,
according to the Judgment of St. Ambrose, In Heb. 6. Jurat enim and idem
Christus in Evangelio dicens, Amen, Amen dico vobis.
(if he be the Author of that Comment upon the Hebrews, which is Printed with
his Works) amounts to an Oath. So that very Learned and judicious Lutheran
Chemnitius, says expressly, That Christ Harm: Evang. c. 51. peric, 3. in locum.
So G. Biel l. 3. did. 39. A. 2 C^ncl. 1. Amen, Amen est jurare, etc.
Swore; and proves, that Amen, is, formula jurandi, out of Heb 6. 13. 14.
referring the Greek Particles (...), to the Hebrew, Amen; which (...), (says
our Lexicographer) Frequentissimum usum in jure jurando habet. And although an
Oath be there mentioned, there is none expressed, unless that (...) be it. Nor is
Mr. Nicholas Fullers objection Miscel. l 1. c. 2.
against it of force, That there is no Oath, where God is not interposed, if by
Amen, Apoc. 3. 14. These things says the Amen, be denoted the Person of
Christ, as Expositors tell us. And indeed, What else can it be? A like instance
is in Isay 65. 16. for where our Translation Reads it, The God of Truth; in the
Original it is, Be lohe Amen; and in the vulgar Latin, In Deo Amen, where
Amen seems to be either a Name, or an Epithet of God. So also St. Hierome, In
veteri Testamento, In Ezekiel. 16.
Dei juramentum est, vivo Ego, dicit Dominus in Novo autem, Amen, Amen dico
vobis. And this is the opinion of our Church, as is plainly expressed in the
former part of the Homily against Swearing, in these words, And this is the
same* that is asserted by Saint Chrysostom in Heb 6. (...). Quomodo juravit
Pater ita etiam filius jurat. per se, dicens, Amen, Amen dico vobis. So
Theophilact, in Heb. 6. to the very same purpose, in Amos 5.
Our Savior Christ did Swear diverse times, saying, Verily, verily. And it
cannot be denied, That God himself Swore, The Lord has Sworn, and will not
repent, Ps. 110. 4. The like may be found in several places of Scripture, as
St. Hierome says, Jurantem Deum saepius Scriptura describit. Now since the
holy Ghost bears witness, that not only the best Creatures; but also that the
Creator himself swore: It appears undeniably, That Swearing is not Morally, and
of it is own Nature evil. And St. Austin, upon this very ground, affirms it to
be no sin, This may also he further proved, because God once commanded
Swearing, which therefore cannot be intrinfecally evil. Non enim peccatum
praeciperetur nobis, says Saint Austine, Sermon. 28. de Verb. Apost.
Jurat Deus qui peccatum non habet; non ergo est peccatum jurare. And
therefore, we must either say, That Christ forbad that which was not evil, but
good, A like arg^^ent migbt be formed thus; Christ neve forbad any thing in it
self good, as Swear^ng is, which has many good ends and purposes, both in
respect of God and Men.
(which I think no man will) or else some other sense must be put upon these
words than that which implies a total Prohibition of Swearing.

Sect. 16. Sixthly, Either these words, Swear not at all, must be so
interpreted, as not to forbid every Oath, though taken upon a just occasion, or
St. Paul never knew the meaning of this Text, or else contrary to his knowledge,
and that upon set deliberation, he acted against it, and that in those very
writings wherein we all believe, that he was infallibly assisted by the holy
Ghost. For his Oaths are upon record, 1 These. 2. 5. God is witness. So Romans 1.
9. and in several other places. There is a little Pamphles extent, called,
Supplementum sublatum, in answer to Mr. Tombs, by Richard Hubberthorne, in a
Samuel Fisher, who deny that these expressions, I affirm before God. God is
witness, etc. are Oaths, because were these Oaths, then the Apostle did Swear
frequently and unnecessarily, in respect his credit was so good amongst the
Saints to whom he did wri^e, that his words would have been taken at any time
without an Oath. I answer, That though he swore several times, yet never
unnecessarily. For had he not judged those Oaths necessary, he would not have
used them. And he knew better in what credit he was with his Countrymen, than
either Mr. Hubber thorn or Mr. Fisher I am sure St. Austin was not of ^ha^
jud^ement, For he says (^erm. 28. de verbis Apost.) Videbat ibi, (that is
amongst the Galations to whom he had used this expression behold before God I
lie not, Gal. 1. 20) eos qui^e edebant, videbat and alios qui non credebant.
Thus St. Aust^n with an unde^iable, evidence of Reason. For if all had so
readily believed his word, how came it to p^ss that some, even of the
believers, disputed against his Doctrine? Acts 15 Or what occ^si^n bad there
been for him to have written (as he does Romans 9. 1.) I say the truth in Christ,
(or, by Christ) I lie not? Which translation (by Christ) Mr. Fisher in his
Antidote carps at, because it is in Greek (...). And yet it is the same word,
(as he knows, I doubt not) that is h^re translated by Heaven, by Earth, etc.
Mat. 5. 34. 35. 36. But not to digress, it is not probable to be as they
imagine: For were their A^gument good, as there had been no need of such Oaths,
so neither of such vehement Asseverations, as they themselves take these to be.
And then i^ would follow, that the Apostle writ what he needed not, which to
assert savours of blasphemy, if we grant that be writ by inspiration from the
holy Ghost. But if these be Oaths, how is it (say they) that the Judges and
Justices in Sessions will not own them as so --? And then they triumph saying,
Surely the Magistrate in England do not believe the Priests Doctrine. I
answer, (1.) I have heard a great Magistrate say, That such Oaths should be
accepted by him. (2) I suppose that they are accepted by such as be in
Authority so to do, when they are persuaded of the fidelity of the Swearer. For
I have it under the hand of Mr. Isaac Pennington (one of the most considerable
of that Fraternity) that he once gave satisfaction, which he heard found
acceptance with the Court to which he gave it, and also to the King, etc. (3.)
The same I. P. gives a Reason why that savor is not indulged to all. His own
expressions are these, (Many words have been spoken by several eminent Persons
(as has been often related to me) of their belief and satisfaction in relation
to our words, and a good inclination in them several times to accept thereof in
stead of an Oath, if they knew but how to exclude others from the like
indulgence, whom they were more jealous of. (4ly.) Inferior Magistrates (such
as they speak of) are sworn to act according to Law: And the Law prescribes (as
I understand) in what manner, and with what formality Oaths are to be taken,
which it is not in their power to dispense with, or vary from pro arbitrio. And
therefore though they firmly believe that calling God to witness is an Oath;
yet they are not at liberty to accept thereof, because they are tied up to
Rules of Law. And of this me thinks Mr. H. and Mr. F. should not be ignorant,
and if they were not, then this Quaere were needless. Lastly, they argue thus,
If to say God knows, or God is witness, as in appeal to Gods contestation be
Swearing by God; then to say such a man knows, or such a man is witness to the
truth of what I say as an appeal to that man's contestation is Swearing by that
man. And then they cry out upon such an absurdity. It Is strange that men of
Parts, and Reason should be so deluded. They might ^t well have argued, That if
a Man may lawfully marry a Woman, then a Man may lawfully marry a Beast. I say
as well. For as the Essence of lawful Matrimony consists in the mutual
agreement betwixt a Man and a Woman; and not betwixt a Man and a Beast: so the
Essence of a lawful Oath consists in calling God to wi^ness, not in calling
Man to witness. I beseech God to open their eyes, that they may discern into
what absurdities they fall, whilst they v^^^ly dream of putting absurdities
upon others.
Now to call God to witness, is the very substance of an Oath. Jurat (says
Saint Austin) qui adhibet testem Deum. And again, Hoc est jurare, Deum testuri.
And in several passages of his Books, he condemns their ridiculous folly that
thinks otherwise: Were it to any purpose, I could produce more than Cicer^, Est
jus jurandum affirmatio religiosa. Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7. c. 1. (...).
Juramentum est confessio definitiva cum divina assumptione. Ambrose ad
Valentin. Ep. 30. Quid est jurare nisi eju^ quem testare fidei tuae praesule,
divinam potentiam confiteri? Et in Praefar. in Luc. Dominus Naturae fidei
testis adhibe^ur. So Saint Chrysostom Hom. 9. in Act for Swearing uses this
Per^phrasis, (...). Deum vocabant testem, Austin in Psalm. 109. Enarrat. Quid
ergo tu facis cum jurat? Testaris Deum. Hoc est jurare Deum testari. And in his
former Book de Sermon Domini in monte and else where to the same purpose.
Cyril. Alex de Adorat. in Spirit. and ver. l. 6. (...), etc. Quod fi haec
loquendi forma est, and non ab aliquo contemnatur, tum denique juris jurandi
usus ad id revocetur, quod est nobis, imo vero univers^ creatura majus.
Cassiodorus in Psalm. 14 Jurare est sub attestatione divina aliquid polliceri.
Eu^hym. Zygabon. in eundem. Juramentum nihil aliud est quam dictorum
confirmatio in qua testem assumimus Deum Tho Aquin. 28. ^ae. Q. 89. A. 1.
Conclus. Assumere Deum in testem dicitur jurare. And Q. 98. A. 2. Concl. Jurare
est Deum testem in vocare. P. Lumb^^d. l 3. did. 39. In omni juratione aut
Deus testis adhibetur, aut creatura Deo obligatur, and oppigneratur, ut hoc sit
jurare ^sc. Deum testem adhibere, etc. G Biel. l. 3. did. 39 Q 1. A. 1. brings
in several definitions thereof to this purpose. So King Henry the 8ths
necessary Doctrine Published, 1543. on the 3d, Command. They Swear in vain that
Swear without lawful or just cause, for that they take the Name of God in vain,
although the thing they Swear be true. Calvin Instit. l. 2. c. 8.. 23. Est
(juramentum) Dei attestatio a^ veritatem Sermonis nostri confirmandam. M.
Chemnitius (in locis, de lege Dei) Juramentum est invocatio nominis Dei, qua
petimus ut Deus sit testis de nostro animo, quod non velimus fallere homines in
ea re de qua asseveramus, and simul petimus ut Deus sit vindex, si
fefelierimus: and nos ipso rest ad poenam obligamus secundum ipsius
comminati^nem. And again, Harm. Evang. c. 51, Peric. 3. Est juramentum
contestatio, seu invocatio Dei, qua petimus ut Deus qui est inspector cordium,
and patronus veritatis sit testis de animo nostro quod non velimus fallere, and
simul, netimus ut sit vinde^ si fe^ellerimus. M. Bonacina in adum Decalogi
Praeceptum, (as they count them) Q. 1. Juramentum est invocatio divini nominis
in testimonium. Tilemannus Heshurius in Examine Theologico, Dedicated to the
Duke of Sexony, 1586. Loc. 15. Juramentum est adseveratio alicujus rei nobis
perspectae cum invocatione very Dei, ut sit testis dictorum, and judex seve^^^^
innocentem, and veracem clementer desendat: perjurum vero fallentem and nomine
divino abutentem puniat, and cocrceat. Pareus in Mat. 5. 34. Juramentum est
invocatio Dei, qua petitur, ut is tanquam unicus (...), testimonium det
Veritati, and jurantem puniat, si sciens fallat. Which definition be borrowed
of Ursin. Q. 102. of his Catech^sme. And upon Romans 9. 1. he says it is,
Species invocationis Dei, and pars culcus divini: (and then to take that away,
is to bereave God of a part of his worship and service.) The right Reverend and
Learned Bishop Sanderson, de juram. Prael. 1. 2. Juramentum est Actus
religiosus in quo ad confirmandam rem dubiam Deus testis invocatur. I.
Wollebius Compend. Theol. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 6 can. 6. Objectum juramenti per
quod jurandum sol^s Deus est. H. G^otius de jure B^lli and Pac. l. 2. c. 13.
10. Forma juris jurandi verbis differt, re convenit. Hunc enim sensum habere
debet, ut Deus invocetur, etc. It is said in the first part of the Homily
against Swearing, set out by the authority of our Church, Saint Paul Swears
thus, I call God to witness. Wilson in his Christian Dictionary thus expounds
what it is to Swear, sc. To use the name of God in an Oath to witness some
matter in controversy for the ending of strife. The Author of that most
excellent Treatise, entitled, The whole duty of Man, page 101.. 4. In all
Oaths you know God is solemnly called to witness the truth of that which is
spoken. Corn. a Lapide in Romans 14. 11. Est juramentum vera, ac aperta ejus Dei
professio, quem ut testem, and perjuril vindicem appellamus, etc. The Learned
Mich. Walther in his Harm. Bib. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Est jusjurandum non solum vinculum
-- sed etiam invocatio very Dei qua Deum testem citamus vera nos dicere, seu
asseverationem nostram esse veracem, and petimus ut severe nos puniat, si
mentiamur; Lorinus in Ps. 118. 106. Paulus scribers -- Testis est mihi Deus,
censetur jurasse. And in Ps. 62. 12. Derivantes aliqui nomen illud Dei, Eloah
vel elohim obalah, quod est jurare sive affirmando, sive execrando colligunt in
omni juramento nomen Dei aliquo modo includi. So N. Fuller, Missel. l. 1. c. 2.
In jurisjurandi Religione semper interponit Deu^ and testis, and judex. So the
learned Dr. Prideaux late Bishop of Worcester, then Divinity Professor in
Oxford, Cons. 5. de Relig. Juram. sect. 12. Inter plurimas juramenti
definitiones quae occurrunt passim apud plurimos caete^is haec videtur
accuratior, and contactior. Juramentum est asseveratio religiosa de re
possibili and licita cum very Dei invocatione facta, qua petimus ut sittestis
dictorum, and fallentes puniat. And Illiricus in his Clavis Script. Jurare
praeter suam propriam fignificationem quae est Deum in testem vocare alicujus
dicti, aut Sententiae. So Athanasius in his Apoligy to the Emperor
Constantius. We speak (says he) in the presence of God. For (...), that Oath
we Christians use. And Rodolphus Gualtherus in his Comment upon the Hebrews,
cap. 6. says, That an Oath is Contestatio summi Numinis quod omnia intuetur.
Philo Judaeus (as Grotius has it upon Heb. 6. 15.) calls an Oath, (...), the
testimony of God in a doubtful business. The learned Vossius, Hist. Pelag.
lib. 5. part 2. Juramentum est actio qua Deus sive simpliciter sive cum
piecatione aliqua intestem eorum invocatur quae asseuntur, aut promittuntur. So
Peter Martyr, in Gen 21. 24. says, That an Oath is, Confirmatio voluntatis
testimonio Dei, vel divinarum rerum. Nor do I believe that ever any not
interested Person was otherwise m^nd^^. Ipsi Ethnici (says Bishop Sanderson,
Prael. 5. sect 7) (...), ad juramenti essentiam pertinere docuerunt. And
therefore he that says, That Swearing is forbidden, but means not that which
all the world calls so, is like to him that would undertake to prove, that Snow
is not white* but meant not that which is commonly named Snow, but some other
meteor.
twenty Authors of the same Judgment. Nor indeed have I seen, or read of any of
the contrary opinion, except some Phanaticks, who would they yield the
substance, and with St. Paul, call God to witness of the Truth of their
Assertions, it might be wished out of condescension to their weakness that they
might be dispensed withal (if the Law would give leave) as to the external
formalities of an Oath.

Sect. 17
But not to digress; If any be still of that conceit, notwithstanding the
contrary Judgment of all the world, that no man Swears unless be say by God; I
would demand what they mean, when they say, By God this is true, or that is
false? Is it any more, than I call God to witness, or than So help me God? And
if these forms of speech be all aequivolent, then if one be an Oath, why be not
the other? If there be any difference, it may well be thought that these last
are more certain expressions of an Oath than the first. They cannot well be
used to any other purpose, but the first may, So Saint Austin, Sermon. 28. de
verbis Apostoli. Ut noveritis verum jurare non esse peccatum, invenimus and
Apostolum Paulum jurasse, Q^otidie morio^ per vestram Gloriam fratres, etc. Per
vestram Gloriam juratio est, non enim sic ait: Per vestram Gloriam m^riot,
quasi vestra Gloria me fecit mori: quomodo si diceret, ^er venenum mortuus est,
per gladium mortuus est, per Bestiam mortuus est, per inimicum mortuous est, id
faciente in mico, faciente gladio, faciente veneno, and fimilia: non sic d^xit,
Per v^stram Gloriam. Ambiguitatem Graecus Sermo dissolvit. Incipitur in
Epistola Graeca, and invenitur ibi juratio^^e non est ambigua, (...), ubi
dixerit Graeous, jurat -- Ergo, nemo dubitet jura^se Apostolum Paulum, cum
dixit, Per v^ltram Gloriam, fratres,
Per non semper significatio juramenti est: nam si dicam per puerum misi, non
statim per puerum jurasse putabor, said Sedutius. The In 1 Cor. 15. 31. and
Hierom ibidem.
Particle by, is not always a note of Swearing, but of a medium or
isntrumental cause whereby any thing is effected, as in this Prayer, By thy
Cross and Passion, good Lord deliver us; which some rather maliciously, than
ignorantly would mistake for an Oath. When the Israelites craved passage
through Edom, they said, We will go by the Kings Number 20. 17.
highway. Can any imagine that they swore by the Way? It is said, Thou Ps. 77.
20
leadest thy people like a Flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron. Will any say
that the Psalmist Swore by the hand of Moses and Aaron that God led his people?
So, There is no King saved Psalm. 33. 16.
by the multitude of an Host. Does the Prophet there swear, by the multitude of
an host, that no King is saved? I should abuse both your time, and patience,
and seem to distrust your Judgments, should I give you mo instances, which
might in a great number, and variety, be produced to show, that the word by
does not always import an Oath, as the former expression, I call God to witness
perpetually; and, So help me God most commonly does. These generally are Oaths;
but so is not the other. And therefore if any difference be put betwixt them,
the skale will go down on this side, for these may more certainly be reputed
Oaths than the other, which is often liable to various, and doubtful
construction. The truth is, That the substance of an Oath consists in the
attestation of God, by what terms soever it be expressed. And therefore, Non
audiendi sunt (says St. In Epist. ad Galat.
Austin) qui has jurationes esse non putare. Nor have I found any before this
present Age that does deny it, and some in express terms declare it. So P.
Lumbard, Juravit Apostolos, dicens, Lib 3. Did. 39.
Testis est mihi Deus; ac si dixisset, Per Deum ita est. And St. Austin long
before Sermon. 28, de verbis Apost. So Sander son Praelect. 5. sect. 6. Per Deum
est -- proprie juramentum, and qui sic loquitur, Deum inducit testem.
him, Si dicas, per Deum juras; Si dicas, Testis est Deus, non juras? Quid est
enim, Per Deum, nisi Testis est Deus? Aut quid est, Testis est Deus; nisi, Per
Deum?

Sect. 18.
I know there is a generation of people, Quo^ non persuadebis etiamsi
persuaseris, who will have by, and nothing else to be the formality of an Oath.
Were that true, then that which God himself expresses to be an Oath, Jer. 4. 2.
and 5. 2. The Lord lives was none, because there is not the particle by. And
again, were that true, it could not be denied but that St. Paul swore, 1 Cor.
15. 31. by your rejoicing. And indeed, there want not Interpreters that so
expound it. The Syriack Translator renders it Jure per gloriam vestram. And
vii. the original word in that place, is as ordinarily a note of swearing in
Greek, as by is in English. Hence Saint Austin writing to Hilarious, Epist. 89.
Sermon. 28. de verb. Apost.
draws an argument for the lawfulness of Swearing. And again more clearly, Per
vestram gloriam juratio est. Notwithstanding they that affirm the particle by
to be the only and peculiar mark and characteristicall expression of an Oath,
will not I believe allow it to denote one in this place. And therefore I shall
not insist further upon it.

Sect. 19.
However the Apostle swears by Christ, Romans 9. 1. so the Syriack, and Athiopick
Translators; as also Piscator, Beza, Pareus, and Hentenius the Translator of
Oecumenius, read it, Per Christum. And the Fathers, St. Ambrose, Theodoret,
Theophilact, In locum.
and Oecumenius say, that the Apostle here brings in Christ for a witness,
which is Swearing. And Gualterus jusjurancu^ inter ponit piscator. (...), ^d
est, (...), formula jurantis. Pareus, Jurejurando fimula^i doloris suspitlonem
averrit -- docet -- Christianis non esse illicitum jurejurando Veritatem
confirmare in rebu^ gravibus, Gloriam Dei, and salutem proximi concernentibus,
ubi alioqui fides verbis non haberetur. A Lapide, Jure per Christum me verum
dic^re. Grotius -- sus^itionem -- a se amoletur. and qu them jurejurando
abhibito per Christum, quod non minoris ha eri debet in novo scedere, quam
juramente in veteri scedere per Deum fact^.
modern Expositers, both Romish and reformed, as many as I had opportunity to
consult with, do unanimously agree, That this is an Oath, and hence conclude
the lawfulness of Swearing And further this praeposition So Sal^^ Mat. 23. 16.
18. 20, 21, 22. where (...) is the formula jurandi, (...), by the temple, by
the gold, by the altar, by heaven, by the throne of God. Si verborum vis, and
genuinus sensus penitium introspiciatur, nullum erit discrimen inter
praepositiones per, and in fi ad eundem rem applicentur. Sanderson Praelect. 5.
sect. 7.
^here used is the very same that is used in St. Mat. 5. 34. (...), by Heaven,
sect. 35. (...), by Earth, sect. 36. (...), by the Head. And therefore why not
here (...), by Christ? And thus is (...) used by the 7ty. Dan. 12. 7. (...),
per viventem, swore by him that lives for ever. So Jer. 5. 7. (...), swore by
them that are no Gods. And Ephesians. 4. 17. (...), Obtester per Dominum, so the
Arabique, and Ethiopick Translators, and Beza. 1 Cor. 12. 3, 9, 13. and 14. 6.
1 John 2. 3. Mat. 23. 16. 2. Cor. 6. 6. 7. and 10. 15. Gal. 2. 17, 20. and 3.
11. Ephesians. 2. 13, 18. and 3. 5. 21. and 4. 14, 21, 30. and 5. 26. Phil. 4. 19
Col 1. 16, 17, 21. 1 These. 3. 3. and 4. 1. 15. 2 These. 3. 16. 1 Timothy 1. 18.
Mat. 17. 21. 1 Pet. 5. 10.
And many times in the New Testament, (...) is rendered by, 1 Cor. 6. 2. (...).
by you. And fitly As Ephesians. 2. 10. 1 Cor. 7. 22. 2 Cor. 7. 8. Gal. 3. 14. and
2. 4.
it might be so Englished in several other places. It appears by what has been
said, that both the use of the word, and the sense of the place concur in
evidencing, that the Apostle swore, especially it being a synonymon to beth,
which amongst the Hebrews is, nota jurantis, as appears, Genesis 22. 16. by
nishbangti, By my self have I Sworn. And Josh. 2. 12. Jurate mihi per Dominum,
baihovah, Swear unto me by the Lord. This Argument St. In Epist. ad Galat.
Austin afforded me, Nam utique Apostolus noverat praeceptum Domini, and
juravit tamen. Hence then we must either lay the imputation of Ignorance, or
wickedness upon that great Apostle; or else understand these words, Swear not at
all, (as doubtless he did) in a limited sense.

Sect. 20.
Seventhly. If some swearing be enjoined in the third Command, then all
swearing is not forbidden by Christ in these words, Swear not at all, because
he came not to destroy the Law. But some swearing is there enjoined, or else the
Law written by the Finger of God in Tables of Stone cannot be vindicated from
imperfection, which to assert were no less blasphemous in it self, then
conrrary to the Psalmists profession, to wit, That the Ps. 19. 7.
Law of the Lord is perfect. The Consequence, that God's not enjoining some
swearing, implies some imperfection in the Law, as it was delivered upon Mount
Sinai; I thus show, Whatsoever is perfect is defective in nothing; Perfectum
est cui nihil deest. If then the Law summarily contained in the Decalogue, be
perfect, it must command every practical duty, and prohibit every vice; which
is impossible, being contracted into so short an Epitome, unless we admit of
those Rules which Divines have been necessitated in order to the maintaining
the perfection of the Law, to make for an extensive Interpretation of these
synecdochical praecepts.

And if we admit of them, it follows, That God commanded some swearing, for one
of them is this: Every negative praecept commands the contrary virtue. By this
general Rule, (which either must pass without exception, or else we cannot
defend the perfection of the Law) it follows from the sixth Commandment, Thou
shall not kill, that we are obliged (quantum in nobis est) to preserve our
Neighbors, and to do all charitable offices to them: So from the seventh, Thou
shall not commit Adultery, that we should live in Chastity and Temperance, etc.
And so from the third, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain, it follows by this Rule, that thou The prohibition of an abuse implies
the permission of the due use of any thing. And that Maxim, Exceptio firmat
regulam in non exceptis, holds no less in Reason then in Law.
shall take the Name of the Lord thy God (that is, thou shall swear) whenever
an Oath is not vain, and that Oath is not vain, but necessary, which is
required by a lawful Magistrate for the glory of God, the preservation of his
Majesty, the peace of the Nation, the manifestation of Truth, the just
punishment of Offenders, the security of men's Lives and Estates, or the
decision of Controversies; which last the Apostle mentions, Heb. 6. 16. And
seeing there be controversies amongst men now, as well as there were then, and
so are like to be to the ending of the world, and that it is necessary that
they be decided for the preservation of Peace and Concord; and seeing an Oath
is a Medium that conduces as much to that purpose now, as it did formerly, it
is clear that there must be the same necessity thereof now, that there was
then. All these are necessary ends, but not atteinable, at least not so well,
by any expedient yet put in practice, as by interposition of Oaths, which as
they were enjoined by God in the third Commandment, no less then Charity in the
sixth; so it cannot reasonably be believed, that our blessed Savior would
forbid them being of such important use for the safety of Empires, Kingdoms,
and Commonwealths, and the lives, means, and well-being of the generality of
Mankind, and that only of his own mere good pleasure.

And that puts me in mind of another Argument. For,

Sect. 21
Eighthly. Our blessed Savior did never any thing without some ground, or
evidence of That of which no Reason can be given, is not a Moral Praecept, Dr.
Tailor in his Ductor Dubitantive, Book 2. Chapt. 2. Rule 5. Ject. 66.
Reason. But no Reason can be showed why all manner of swearing should be
forbidden. Indeed swearing by Creatures, without respect to the Creator, is
therefore unlawful, (as has been already mentioned, sect. 11.) because
thereby we ascribe that Glory to them, that is incommunicably due to God. And
swearing by God falsely, is abominable, because thereby we make him (as much as
in us is) guilty of our lie. So swearing truly by God in trivial matters, is
also to be disallowed, because it is dishonorable to that high Majesty to be
called to witness for a trifle. Likewise customary Oaths in ordinary
communication, are therefore not without cause forbidden, in respect that
thereby men get such a habit of swearing, that Oaths with them are but words of
course, and formalities of Speech, they very often (as experience shows)
neither knowing, nor regarding what, or when they swear, which highly tends to
the dishonor of Almighty God, whose Holy and Reverend Name ought never to
bementioned without inward Reverence and fear. Besides, frequent swearing is an
occasion of frequent perjury, and absolutely voids the end of an Oath, which is
the assurance, and confirmation of truth. For men that constantly swear are not
in Reason to be better believed for their swearing. But none of all these, nor
any other the like inconveniences that I can imagine can be objected against
swearing in a due manner, and upon a just and necessary occasion. And therefore
we may well believe, that such swearing was neither here, nor any where else
forbidden.

Sect. 22
It is objected, That Oaths may justly fall under prohibition, as idle and
unnecessary, because they neither do, nor can serve to any good purpose. For a
good man will speak truth though he be not sworn; and a wicked man will not be
restrained from lying by the Religion of an Oath. I answer, (first,) That were
this dilemma granted, it would infer only the no-necessity of an Oath, but not
the unlawfulness thereof, which is the point in question. (Secondly,) The
Fathers that (as far as we Chrysostom. Hom. 15. ad pop. Antioch. and Hom. 9. in
Act.
know) were the first that thus argued, are to be understood of rash, and
customary, not useful, or imposed Oaths, intending thereby to break that
profane custom of ordinary swearing in common discourse. Thirdly, Upon
supposall that some are so exact observers of Truth, as never to lie upon any
occasion; and others so desperately wicked, that they dare on set purpose swear
a known untruth; yet it cannot reasonably be thought that the generality of men
are to be ranked in either of these Classes. For it has been observed, that
some who have not much scrupled to tell a lie, notwithstanding have refused to
swear it, making more conscience of the one, than of the other. And amongst all
such, (and they may well be supposed to be the greatest part of mankind) an
Oath is a fit expedient for discovery of Truth, or obliging them to the
performance of a duty. Fourthly, Even amongst those good men that will never
lie, some perhaps may think themselves not obliged to discover voluntarily an
hidden truth, especially if it ten^ to the prejudice of themselves, or some
whom they favor. And there are not a few that hold, Mendaciu^ Officiosum, to
be but a venial sin. And as to such, an Oath is not vain, or useless, but
necessary for the discovery of the truth. And therefore this can be no Reason
why such Oaths should be forbidden.

Sect. 23
Ninthly, Either these words, Swear not at all, must not be extended to a
total prohibition of swearing, or else Christ thereby gave a new moral
Command; for all men grant, that before, Swearing was either commanded, or
permitted, not forbidden. But Christ gave no new Isidoru^ Pelusiota in an
Epistle to Timotheus Lector, (l^b. 1. Ep. 107.) (...) Nullain ^dog^matum
novitatem Dei filius legi, ac Prophesis induxit. And there is reason for it.
For if our Savior gave a new Precept, then the Moral Law before it was
supplied by that Precept was defective, and imperfect, or else that new Precept^
was superfluous. But that David denies, Psalm. 19. 7.
Moral Command. For that had been contrary to Gods expressed will, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
You shall not add unto the Word which I command you, and would also have argued
the imperfection thereof. Besides, he ordained no new Law in the matter of the
sixth and seventh Commandments; but only reproved the erroneous Tenants, or
vicious manners of the Jews. To manifest which assertion, you may take notice
that he reduces the Decalogue into a duologue, Mat. 22. 37. and 39. Love God
with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self. But both these (whereupon
says Christ, hang all the Law, and the Prophets, sect. 40.) were of old. The
former is expressed, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. The latter verbatim, Levit. 19. 18. So Saint
Austin, l. 19. c. 28. contra Faustum Manichaeum, Itaque vel omnia, vel pene
omnia, quae mo^ui^, seu praecepit, ubi adjungebar; Ego autem dico vobis,
inveniuntur and in illis veteribus libris. And there be gives sundry particular
instances. And Christophorus Pelargus in his Evangelicall Questions ^^ Mat. ^5.
part. ult. Q. 1. says, Omnia quae (...) loco, and quasi supplemento hic
recitantur, in Lege and Propheti^ prius comprehensa apparent; whereof he also
gives several instances.
And further, Christ reproved nothing, but what had been disallowed before. He
forbids Anger; but for that God had of old rebuked Cain, Genesis 4. 6. He
prohibits reviling, sect. 22. But that had God formerly declared against as
punishable, Zeph. 2. 8, 9. He disallows hatred, sect. 43. 44. But that was
unlawful before, Lev. 19. 17. He forbids Lust, sect. 28. And that was likewise
prohibited of old, Ex. 20. 17. Thou shall not covet. Prove. 6. 25. Joh 31. 1.
Whence St. Paul (which else he had not) understood Lust to be a sin, Romans 7. 7.
And shall we think that our Savior, who vindicated the other Commandments from
the lewd depravations of men, has abrogated this only, as though it had not
been framed by the same wisdom, and enacted by the same God, or that in lieu
thereof he instituted a novel Praecept never heard of formerly? Whatever we
do, St. Austin did not: For he says, Tract. 3. in Joh. cap. 1.
Legite vetus Testamentum, and videte quia carnali ad huc populo ea quidem
praecipiebantur, quae nobis. If to the contrary any urge the clause, But I say
unto you; I reply, that as it denoted not a new Commandment, sect. 22. and 28.
no more does it now, but only our Saviors opposition, not against Gods Law,
but the Pharisaicall Observandum est quod Christus sequence suam senten^iam non
Legi Dei opponat, sed corruptelis; quas Pharisai ex prava and perversa Legis
Dei interpretatione in Ecclesiam invexerant, Chemnit in locum If any her^^^
oppose the word (...), by them of old time, 33. and thence conjecture that
thereby Moses and the Prophets are meant. I reply, That that word does not
always denote great antiquity: For we find it used, Acts 15. 7. (...), ab
antiquis diebus, which in our last Translation, and others, is Englished, a
good while ago, intimating, that it was no very long time before. And our
Commentators understand it, to be less then twenty years. Pareus on the place
speeks to the same purpose; Antiquos autem (...), Christus non intelligit
Patres, vel Mosen, sed majores Pharisaeorum tam falsae doctrin^e Authors. And
this may be added in confirmation thereof, that when out Savior had disallowed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, sect. 20. he immediately adds
sect. 21. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, etc. What them,
but the Scribes and Pharisee^ next before mentioned? For against then
righteousness he disputes, not against the righteousness of Moses, and the
Fathers. The learned Ma^donat with other Jesuits, the Anabaptists and Socini^^
contend earnesty for the contrary opinion; alleging, the Christ named expressly
the Commandments themselves, Thou shall not Kill, sect. 21. Thou shall not
commit Adultery, sect. 27. and thereto opposed his, But I say unto you, 2^. and
28. To this i^ may be replied, that Christ did not only mention, Thou shall
not kill, but further, that whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of
Judgment: which words are not to be found in the Law of Moses, though spoken
(^^ our savior says) by them of old time, And therefore it was not against
the Law, but against the depravation thereof by those Ancients that Christ
opposed. Another like instanct may be produced, sect. 43. Thou shall love thy
neighbor, (which is found Levit. 19. 18.) and hate thine enemy; But that is no
where extant in the Law, and appears to be a corrupt addition destructive to
the former member of this Sentence, For the hatred of this or that man, under
the ^^^ion of an enemy, is inconsistent with the love of our neighbor, Hence
it may appear that Christ did oppose his, But I say unto you, to the
Pharisaicall innovations, not to the Divine Ordinances; or if to the Law, not
as it was given by God (for it was exactly perfect) or expounded in the Old
Testament, (for so it fully agrees with Christ's Doctrine in the New) but as
depraved by the corrupt Glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees. Do we make void
the Law through Faith? (says Saint Paul, Romans 3. 31.) God forbid! yea we
establish the Law.
mis-interpretations thereof, against which it is as reasonable to interpret
this place as the former. And if so, then did not Christ by these words, Swear
not at all, promulgate a new Law, nor consequently forbid such Oaths as were
lawful, or enjoined before.

Sect. 24
Tenthly, If the High Priest charged our Savior to swear, and he without
exception thereto answered upon Oath, as acknowledging his Authority over him
(as he did Pilates, Joh. 19. 11.) and that some years after he had said, Swear
not at all; then from thence follows, that when the Magistrate imposes an Oath,
the persons charged to swear, may lawfully answer upon Oath, as Christ himself
did, notwithstanding this seeming prohibition, Swear not at all; and
consequently, that all swearing was not forbidden in these words. But the high
Priest did charge The same kind of adjuration, (...), Irenaeus calls an Oath,
as it is cited in Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 19 or (according to the Greek) 20.
our Savior to swear, Mat. 26. 63. (...), (of (...) juramentum) I adjure thee,
that is, I command thee to Swear; or (as it is in Tompsons Translation of
Beza's new Testament dedicated to Sir Fran: Walsingham) I charge thee Swear
unto us. So the word is used by the Septuagint, Genesis 24. 3. (...), thereby
giving the sense of ashbignacah, faciam te jurare. And sect. 37. (...), My
Master made me swear. So Genesis 50. 5. (...), My Father made me swear. The like
use of the word is found, sect. 6. and 25. and in Ex. 13. 19. Josh. 6 26. 1 Samuel 27. 28. 1 Kings 2. 42. 8^. 2^. 16. 2 Kings 1. 4. 2 C^^o^. 18. 15. and 36.
13. Ez. 10. 5. Nehem. 15. 12. 1 Esd. 8. ult.
many other places, And though (...) sometimes in Scripture, or perhaps in the
Septuagint be rendered charge, yet so is not (...), nor (...) neither, when an
answer is to be given, nor unless in matter of fact, when somewhat is required
to be done. No^ does either (...), or (...) when (...) with a Genitive case
follows after it (as it does here) signify any other thing any where in these
holy writings then to adjure, or make to swear. So then, the high Priest
enjoined Christ to answer upon Oath, whereto happily he might be warranted from
De testibu^ Lex ^^tat, Levit, 5. 1. ubi o^ini obnoxious. produnciatur testis,
qui verum sub^ice^ post quam ^udicrit (...), Quol alah. Grotius in Mat 26. 63.
And there be mentions two of the forms which the Magistrates were wont to use
when they caused any to ^^ear. One whereof ^^ this which the high Priest used
^^ Christ, (...).
Lev. 5. 1. and he accordingly who before held his peace, in reverence it seems
of his heavenly Father by whom he was adjured, and in preservation of the
Magistrates Authority, and perhaps in obedience to the Law, Lev. 5. 1. answered
directly (as every man ought that speaks upon Oath) and acknowledged the whole
Truth; which surely he would not have done, but rather have reproved the high
Priest, had he enjoined him what was unlawful.

Sect. 25
I confess that some pretend, that Christ here by these words, Thou have said,
Fisher's Antidote.
did rather wave than give any positive answer. But that is a groundless
conceit. For it consisted not with the ingenuity, and honor of our Savior
(who is the faithful Witness, Rev. 1. 5. and who came into the World to bear
witness to the Truth, John 18. 37.) not to have afferted that Truth in his
utmost danger, which was necessary for the salvation of mankind, and which
before when he was in safety, he had plainly professed to the Samaritan woman,
John 4. 26. I would demand whether one of us brought before some Heathen
Tyrant, and examined whether he were a Christian, or no, might lawfully by
obscure, or ambiguous words clude the question. If so, the Martyrs were
indiscreet in not so doing. If not, it were not fit to impute that to the
Master, which would misbecome the Disciple. Besides, the Apostle testifies of
Christ Jesus, That before Pontius Pilate he witnessed a good Confession, 1 Timothy
6. 13. And what was that, but only that he was the King of the Jews, the
expected Messiah, and Savior of the World? To put the matter beyond all
dispute, St. Mark (14. 62.) relates plainly, that Christ's answer was, I am.
And therefore that in St. Matthew, must be the same in sense, unless we would
make the one Evangelist differ from the other. And thus the high Priest
apprehended it, when he rent his clothes, and cried blasphemy, Mat. 26. 65.
That the Phrase, Thou have said, impl^: a grant, and concession of the demand,
appears by our Saviors answer to Judas's question Mat. 26.. 25. So here, a^
Plyricus upon St. John 18 37. (cited by the learned Mr. Gataker in the 19th.
Chapter of his Adversari^ Miscellanea) Phrasi quadam Hebraeae Linguae propria
modeste confi^^tur se esse Regem. For, Tu di^isti may well be understood,
Re^^^u tetigisti, Thou ^ast ^^; So it is; Thou have his the ^ail on the head.
And doubtless he understood well enough what Christ's answer was, though it
appear not so intelligible to us, who are not so versed in the idiotismes of
the Language the Jews then used) otherwise he had been very rash in renting his
clothes he knew not why.

Sect. 26
To reply, that Christ swore not (though Caiphas had adjured him) because he
said not I swear, is vain. For an examinat is to answer the Magistrate both in
matter, and form, according to what is proposed to him. It was enough that he
denied not to swear, which assuredly, had it been unlawful, he would have
done. He that came to teach all Truth, would not so have deluded the people
there present, as to seem to speak upon Oath, when he intended it not; and by
his example taught them dissimulation. Qui tacet consentire videtur. And let
any one judge, whether (upon supposition that all swearing is unlawful) this
had not been at least (which the Apostle forbids; 1 These. 5. 22.) an appearance
of evil. If it be demanded, whether (had the high Priest asked the blessed
Jesus forty Questions touching the same matter, without reiterating his
Adjuration) he was still to answer upon Oath; mine opinion is, That he was. Nor
is that to multiply unnecessary Oaths, for one and the same Oath puts an
obligation upon the party examined to speak the whole, and the sole Truth in
all Interrogatories touching that matter concerning which he was sworn.

Sect. 27
To allege, that Christ swore not, because he laid not his hand on That
Ceremony i^ ancient. For it appears by St. Chrysostom, Hom. 19. ad pop.
Antioch. That the Gospel-Book was holden out to those that were to take an Oath
in that time. And that is above 1250. years since.
a Book, or kissed it, is to trifle. For the Essence of swearing, is in calling
God to witness: the lifting up of the hand, or the laying it on a Bible, are
but extrinsecall formalities, and render an Oath more solemn, not more
obligatory. The Question is concerning swearing it self, and not the Ceremonies
thereof. Nor is it pretended, that those Accidental Rites in taking an Oath
were prohibited in these words, Swear not at all.

Sect. 28
And for that (...) the Anabaptists last evasion, That swearing was lawful
until our Saviors death, and then abolished as a Ceremonial Ordinance: it is
not true; and if it were, it yielded the Question. First, It is not true. For
swearing duly performed, is (as has been Wisdom, Power, Goodness, and
Justice of God; and therefore incommunicable to any Creature, or false God.
Whereupon it is equally commanded, with the fear and service of God, Deuteronomy. 6.
13. and 10. 20. and consequently obliges equally at all times, no less now
under the Gospel, than it did formerly in time of the Law. Nor has it in it is
substance an, It is evident that Oaths were anciently reputed more obligatory
than the Sanctions of the Ceremonial Law, and consequently were to be referred
properly to the Moral Law. The Author of the Questions and Answers in the Works
of Justin Martyr in Resp. ad Quest. 27. says, (...). Moses for the greater
obserservance of the Oath (in carrying Joseph's bones out of Egypt) violated
the less forcible Obligation of the Ceremonial Law; which denounced a Legal
impurity in all those that that touched any dead body, Numb. 19. 11. or a man's
bone, or a g^ave, 16.
Type at all. Circumcision, the Passover, the Leviticall Obligations, and the
other Ceremonies of the old Law, had no Moral goodness in them (as swearing has)
but were mere Shadows of things future, and therefore ceased of themselves,
which cannot with any color of probability be said of swearing, that conduces
now as much to the honor of God as ever it did. And why might not that
command, Zech. 8. 16. Speak ye every man the Truth to his Neighbor (which
without all peradventure is Moral) as well be counted Typical, (as relating
to Christ the everlasting Truth) and consequently now antiquated, as swearing
performed in a due manner, which was a more immediate service of God than the
other? For Christ is essentially the Truth; John 14. 6. and saving Truth came
by him, John 1. 17. But he is improperly called the Oath of God.

Sect. 29
But were it so indeed, that Oaths were Ceremonial, then it follows, that
Christ in this Text did not forbid them, for he did not forbid the Ceremonial
Law, but observed it all his life, eating the Passover with his Disciples the
Night before his death; unless perhaps some would interpret his words thus; I
command you that you do not swear, yet am willing that this command shall not
oblige you at present: For I am content that for a year or two you may swear by
Heaven or Earth as you have been accustomed; but after my Crucifixion, and
Resurrection, swear no more. He that thus dares expound these words, may also
at his pleasure Paraphrase in the like manner upon the 28. sect. You are not to
look lustfully upon a Woman, for that is Adultery of the heart, which for the
present indeed I permit you to do: but after my Passion do it not. If this
Interpretation be worthily deemed absurd; so likewise is the other. And
therefore let these that disallow swearing as a part of the Ceremonial Law,
and consequently now antiquated, argue no more the unlawfulness thereof from
these words, Swear not at all.

Sect. 30
11thly. No Exposition of this Text, or any other, is to be admitted that puts
an inconsistency betwixt the Old Testament and the New, both being inspired 2 Timothy 3. 16 2 Pet. 1. 21. Contra adversarium Legis. and Pr^phetarum, c. 16. and
17.
by the same God; So St. Austin, Testamenti utriusque unus est Deus: And again,
Deus Author est amborum Testamentorum. And hence he inferrs the Contra
Adimantum c. 4. Unde clarescat been intellie entibus utriusque Testamenti man
festa concordia. And cap. 7. Ex quo facile apparet -- utrumque Testamentum
convenire, arque congruere, tanquam ab uno Deo utrumque conscriptum, etc, And
cap. 19. Haec isti si aut legerent, aut non impie legerent, vielerent omnia in
utriusque Testamenti Scripturis -- si^i concordantia, and suis gradibus
ordinata. And contra Faustum, lib. 10. cap. 3. Omnia quae in vetere scripta
sunt, nos and vera esse dicimus, and divinitus mandata, and congruis temporibus
distributa. And contra Adimanium cap. 3. Quod isti si conside are vellent --
omnia came in veteri, quam in no^o Testamento uno Sancto Spiritu conscripta and
commendata esse sentirent.
perfect Harmony, and Concordance betwixt the two Testaments, as proceeding
from one and the same God, who is incapable of fashood, or alteration.
Whereupon if we be not so Atheistical as to deny the veracity, or immutability
of the most High, (Tit. 1. 2.) it must be granted, that his Word is of eternal
Truth, (Jam. 1. 17.) His Promises are Yea, and Amen; His predictions 2 Cor. 1.
20 Mat. 26. 24. ^4 and Luke 24. 25, 26, 27
must needs be accomplished, His Precepts are more unalterable than the Laws of
the Medes and Persians Nor did our Savior come to destroy, but to fulfill Mat.
5. 17. L^k. 16. 17.
them who affirms that it is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass than one
tittle of the Law to fail. Whereupon he enjoins obedience to the Mat. 2^. 2. 3.
commands of the Pharisees, as sitting in Moses Chair: Quo loco (says St.
Austin) Contr. Adimantum, c. 16
Authoritatem legis quae per Moysen data est, codfirmat Dominus. From all which
pasages it is apparent that the Old Testament is so far from being
contradicted, that it is fully confirmed in the New. So the some Father
refuting an He^etick, that disclaimed the Authority of the Law, and the
Prophets (contra adversary Legis and Prophetaru^, l. 2. c. 2.) Nec iste
adversus lucem, vocemque Dominicam, vel Apostolicam tam caecus and surdus est,
ut ignoret quemadmodum a Christo, and Apostol^s in libris ad novum Testamentum
pertinentibus confirmetur Legis. ac Prophetarum, and commendetur Authoritus. So
our Church in the 7th Article, The Old Testament is not contrary to the New,
etc.
It was part of the Manichean Heresy to set the one in opposition to the
other: Against which, and the Assertors thereof, Faustus, Adimantus and the
rest of that crew, St. Austin writ above 40 Books yet extant. This Error was
likewise confuted By Epiphanius, who says, Haer. 66 Sect. 74. (...).
that though there be two Testaments yet there is but one God the Author of
them both; and that thereupon they are set to the same tune. And it is no small
evidence of the Divine Authority of holy Scripture that there is so full an
agreement in all the particulars thereof, though written by several Penmen at
very distant both times and places. This Truth has ever been maintained
against both Heathens and Heretics. Lib 7. (...). Neither (sa^es he) did the
Father sending Jesus, forget what he had commanded Moses, neither did he
condemn his own Laws, repent, and send a messenger for contrary purposes
Sigismundus Gelenius the Translator renders it thus Evangelium Deo Legis
Authorize non opponit, -- Nec Pater Jes^m mittens oblitus erat quid Mosi
mandaverit, neque penitentia ductus damnata propria Lege misit Evangelium
doct^^um contraria mandatis pristi^is.
Origin makes it good against Celsus, that there is no contradiction betwixt
the Law and the Gospel, which differ not in substance nor in deed, more than
the Sun under a cloud from it self when it shines forth in its brightest
luster. So St. Austin; Et novam in Contr. Adversarium Leg. and Prophet. l. 1.
c. 17.
vetere est figuratum; and vetus in novo est revelatum. The Law is the Gospel
veiled and the Gospel is the Law revealed. What was typified or foretold in the
one; is verified and accomplished in the other. From all these Premises I may
well draw this conclusion that these words, Swear not at all, ought not to be
so interpreted as to render all It was also Prophefied before, that Christians
under the Gospel should swear, Is. 19. 18. and 45. 23. which if at might not be
fulfilled without contradiction to our Saviors command would entrench upon the
Truth of the Prophecy, and make the Gospel thwart the Law beyond all terms of
Reconciliation.
swearing unlawful, (Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20. Psalm. 63. 11. not without promise
of reward, Jer. 12. 16.) which before was both commanded, and commended. For I
cannot but look upon it as a perfect piece of Manicheisme, and extremely
derogatory both to Scripture, and God himself, that for what Moral duty one
man was commended in the Old Testament, another for the same should be
condemned in the New.

Sect. 31
12thly. and lastly, The consent of the Christian World, the practices of
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Councils, Bishops and People of all sorts confirm
this Truth, that the general opinion was, that Christ their Lord,
notwithstanding these words which were well enough known, had never forbidden
swearing as altogether unlawful. For otherwise doubtless it had not been in so
common, and unquestioned use. It would be a work more fit for a Volume, than a
Sermon, to relate historically the practice thereof through all Ages, and
places. Let it suffice that the Centurists tell us that in the 12th. Age after
Christ one Otho was consecrated Bishop of the Bambergenses, and had no Oath
administered unto him, Quod hactenus (say they) nulli Germanorum Episcopo
accidisse constat, which is certain had Sir Roger Twisden in his learned
Vindicat^on of the Church of England, cap. 3. sect. 51. shows, that Oaths were
imposed not only upon Archbishops at the receipt of their Pall, but also upon
Bishops and Abbots. Nay, not so much as the Popes themselves were exempted.
never happened before to any Bishop of Germany. So also many Laws have been
made concerning Oaths, as well in our own Country as else where, and
punishments decreed and inflicted upon perjured persons. All which are
Arguments that just Oaths were always allowed. True it is, that some of the
Fathers, especially in their Homilies and Sermons to the People, inveighed much
against swearing, as though it had been altogether unlawful. But that was out
of a Religious zeal against irreligious and customary Oaths. A In Haggai 2. 1.
Lapide relates a story of St. Chrysostom that he preached so often against
swearing, that the people were offended thereat; which he understanding, told
them, he would never leave that Sermon till they would leave that profane
Custom; which I find taken out of his fifth Homily ad populum Antiochenum. But
as to the Fathers; they spoke less cautelously; never perhaps suspecting that
lawful swearing upon just occasion would be denied: not (...) but (...), with
great vehemence refuting that horrid Custom of common swearing in ordinary
discourse; but not at all intending to take away necessary Oaths. Origin in his
25th Tract upon St. Matthew says, that Christ Manifest vetuit omnino jurare:
whereupon I conceive it came that Pareus branded him with holding the
Anabaptistical Tenent against swearing which I cannot grant, because he The
like may be said of St. Hierum, as appears out of his 153. Epistle to Paulinus.
himself swears in his first book against Celsus. (...), God is witness of my
Conscience that, etc. And so the great Athanasius having declaimed with much
vehemence against In Pass. and Crucem Domini.
profane swearing; yet in his Apology to the Emperor Constantius, he
spontaneously swears again and again, (...), The Lord is witness, and his
Christ is witness. And several times he uses such Oaths, and wishes that his
Accuser were there to be examined according to the Oath used by Christians. So
Chrysostom, though he often sharpened his style against swearing, (for which
Pareus, unadvisedly enough, listed him with other of the Fathers as bearing
arms for the Anabaptists) yet in his 5. Homily, ad Populum Antiochenum, he
advises the People to leave (...).
superfluous Oaths, such as are rashly, and without necessity uttered at home,
amongst their friends and servants, which if they did, they should need him no
further in these matters. All which clearly shows, that though they zealously
inveighed against the profane practice of swearing; yet they did not dis-allow
the voluntary taking an Oath upon just occasion, and much less judiciary
proceedings, which were then, and ever since every where publicly practiced
even till these times. To omit the Master of the sentences, and the School
Divines who are generally consentient to this Doctrine, the Churches of the
Reformation have publicly professed the lawfulness of Oaths, as may be seen in
the Harmony of Confessions, and accordingly The inferior Ministers in Hungaria
and Transylvania swear Canonical obedience to their Bishops as is the custom
of England) The form of their Oath is set down by Monsieur Darel in his
excellent Book of the conformity of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas with
that of England, Sect. 1. 19. beginning thus, I N. N. swear before the living
God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, etc.
practiced them. The confession of Switzerland condemns the Anabaptists for
denial of Oaths required by the Magistrates. The confession of Basil (Helvetica
Basiliensis, vel Milhusiana, Ann. 1532. Art. 11.) protests that they reject,
and damn as abominations and blasphemies, that Doctrine that we must swear in
no case, though the glory of God and Charity to our brethren require it. And in
a marginal note they profess, that swearing is lawful, and give reasons for it;
to wit, because God in the old Testament commanded it, and Christ in the new
did not forbid it; but on the contrary* both Christ and his Apostles practiced
it. So also the Augustine confession Art. 16.
teaches, that Christians thereto called by the Magistrates may lawfully swear,
and condemns them which forbid that duty. To conclude, our own Church in the
39th Article speaks thus, As we confess that vain and rash swearing is
forbidden Christian men by our Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle; so we
judge that Christian Religion does not prohibit, but that a man may swear when
the Magistrate requires in a cause of Faith and Charity; whence it appears,
that they are neither Children of the Church of England, nor conformable to the
Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, nor agreeable to the Doctrine, and practice
of the Primitive Church, who deny the lawfulness of swearing upon just
occasion. Hence also it is evident, that not only the Church of England, and
the Reformed Churches; but also the whole Catholic Church in all times, and
places approved this Doctrine, that all swearing is not unlawful, which
accordingly they practiced as occasion served. Whence it follows, that either
the whole Christian Church in all places, and ages was so ignorant as not to
understand our Saviors meaning; or so wicked, as understanding it, to teach
and practice the quite contrary; or else that Christ never meant to forbid all
kind of swearing. To assert either of the former, were to profess all that went
before us were either dunces or Devils. And if so, what is become of the holy
Catholic Church professed in the Creed? Nay, what is become of our Saviors
promise, Mat. 28. 20. I am with you always even unto the end of the World, when
upon this supposition he never assisted them effectually either in the
profession of his Truth, or practice of his Commands? And of these absurdities
one is unavoidable, unless (which is most reasonable) we confess that these
words, Swear not at all, are not to be extended to that latitude in which some
of late have been pleased to expound them.

Sect. 32
To sum up all then that has been said; if we would not oppose God the Son
against God the Father; if we confess that swearing tends in an especial manner
to the glory of God in the acknowledgment of his Omnisciency, Power, and
Justice; if it neither thwart our duty to God, nor that to our Neighbor; if
the particular Enumeration of several Oaths in this place forbidden, be
irreconciliable with that interpretation, that from hence infers a total
abolition of swearing; if we grant that it is not unlawful, ex natura rei,
being practiced by holy men, Angels, and God himself; if we acknowledge that
Saint Paul assisted in a great measure by the Holy Ghost understood his Masters
meaning, and yet advisedly, and upon deliberation did several times swear; if
we yield that swearing upon weighty occasions, and in due sort is enjoined in
the third Commandment, as we must, unless we have a mind to deny the perfection
of Gods Law; if no Reason can be given, why all manner of swearing should be
forbidden; if we confess that Christ ordained no new Law, but only reformed the
abuses in the interpretation of the old; if Christ himself brought before a
Magistrate answered upon Oath; if no Text of the Gospel ought so to be
expounded as to infer a repugnancy to the Moral Law, as this does according to
the Anabaptistical interpretation thereof; and if we consent to the Doctrine
and practice of the Christian world in all Ages, then we must confess that our
Savior by these words, Swear not at all, intended not an absolute and
unlimited prohibition of all manner of Oaths.

Sect. 33.
And thus I have done with the negative Explication of the Text. And though I
should not be able to lay down positively the genuine meaning thereof, yet I am
encouraged by the former Reasons to hope that I have freed these Judicial
Proceedings from any sad influence which the dismal aspect of these words might
seem to portend against them.

Sect. 34.
And now I come to the affirmative part of my Task, what the sense thereof may
be. And here I have scarce so much time as to show the many Expositions,
whereby several Authors have endeavored to clear their latent meaning. Some
only of the principal I shall: First, that Portent of learning Hugo Grotius was
of opinion (and I think that glory of our English Divines the incomparable Dr.
Hammond was much of his mind) that Promissory Oaths are here principally,
though perhaps not only understood in our Saviors Prohibition. And that is
probable because the immediate words before my Text, Thou shall perform unto
the Lord thine Oaths, relate only to such as are Promissory. And it is
reasonable, that the following sentence should be understood as the foregoing
whereto it answers. And this may be thought more likely, in respect to that
what is future is not in our power, and consequently not so fit to be promised
by Oath, though indeed I conceive we engage not so much the after event as our
present intention, and future endeavor. Again, this interpretation is not
inconsistent with legal proceedings. For all Oaths therein are Assertorii us^^
praecipuus est in Judiciis ad lites t^rminandas, Sanderson Pral. 1. sect. 8.
assertory (as I take it) and concern the truth of things already past.

Sect. 35. 2ly. Others think that Christ here forbad such Oaths, as then were,
and still are too frequently used in common discourse, but not such as the
Magistrates require by Law: Nor is this improbable, for here is not a syllable
of any proceedings in Law; but on the contrary, this Comment receives a great
Corroboration from the place it self, sect. 37. but let your Communication be
yea, yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these (that is in your
Communication) comes of evil. Now if this verse refer to my Text, as the
particle but seems to imply, Swear not at all, but say yea, nay, then as on the
one side we are enjoined to use bare affirmations or negations; so on the
other, we are forbidden to swear at all in Communication. And for the further
confirmation hereof, it is urged that the Hebrew word Nishbang is most
frequently used in the Old Testament: And that is known to be of the passive
voice, implying, that we are not to swear, but be sworn, Quod nemo jurare nisi
coactus solemniter debeat, says Pagnin. And this is the judgment of some very
reverend and learned persons now living.

Sect. 36.
3ly. There are who say that profane, false, rash, and vain Oaths are
generally here prohibited, as never to be used upon any occasion: and no other.
So Pareus, Nihil haec Christi In locum
sententia derogat legitimis juramentis quae vel in judiciis vel extra judicia
quandoque praestanda sunt. And that such Oaths as are seriously taken, and upon
good ground, whether required by Magistrates, or extrajudicial, are lawful, and
therefore not dis-allowed by Christ is highly warranted by the Authority and
This was also St. Austins practice. Cum videro non mihi credi, nisi faciam, and
ei qui mihi non credi, non expedire quod non credit, ha^ per pensa rat^one, and
consideratione librata, cum mag^o timo^e dico, coram Deo, aut Testi^ est Deus,
aut scit Christus, sic esse in animo me^. Sermon. 28. de Verb. Apost.
practice of St. Paul. And on the contrary frequent and idle swearing, the
taking in vain the dreadful Name of the most High, which ought not to be used
but advisedly, and with great Reverence, must needs argue a great impiety, and
dis-respect of the Almighty. Whereupon it must be granted, that this Exposition
is very suitable to other Scriptures, and the Analogy of Faith, and neither
restrains Oaths imposed by Authority, nor is disagreeable to the Text, if the
word (...) (from which I suppose come our English words whole and wholly) be
rendered commonly, as it may well be, and as it is, 1 Cor. 5. 1. (...). It is
commonly reported; There goes a common saying as an old Translation reads it.
Nor can it hence be inferred, that the Apostles were common Swearers, though
St. Peter that great Apostle, was not altogether free from this vice, some
years after these words were spoken, as appears St. Mat. 26. sest. 72. and 74.
For as St. Ambrose says, Non ad solos Apostolos loquebatur, In Ps. 108 Octo^.
14.
sed ad turbas. And Christ himself says as much, Luke 6. 27. I say unto you
which hear; and that was this same Sermon whence I have chosen my Text, at the
end whereof it is said, S. Mat. 7. 28. that the people were astonished at his
Doctrine, and therefore assuredly they heard it. Besides, as there is no Reason
that I know to be rendered, why swearing should in general and totally be
prohibited; so there are two great causes why common swearing should severely
be forbidden. The one is the profanation of Gods Name. The other, lest thereby
men at unawares fall into that horrid sin of To this sense St. Austin expounds
this Text Epist. 1^^. -- In novo Testamento dictum est, ne omnino juremus Quod
quidem mihi proptere^ dictum videtur, non quia verum jurate peccatum est, sed
quia perjurare immane peccatum est, a quo nos long esse voluit, qui omnino ne
juremus admonuit. So also St. Ambrose, l. 30. de Virginibus: Non immerito
Dominus in Evangelio jubet non esse jurandum, ne ^it causa perjurii, ne sit
necessitas delinquendi. And again, Tract. de hort* ad Virg. prope finem. Non
jurandum, inquit, facile, quia plerumque multi casus accidunt, ut non pomssius
imple^e quod juraverimus. Qui autem non jurat, utique non pejerat: qui autem
jurat, aliquando necesse est incidat (I suppose is should be read in)
perjurium, qui^ (...) homo mendax. Noli ergo jurare ne incipias pejera^e. A^^
again in Ps. 118. Octon. 14. Voluit te non jurare ne pe^jures. So Clemens
Alexandrinus, Strom. l. 7. (...). Nam qui ne jur^ quidam multum abest ut sit
pejera^ur^s So St. Basil ^ Psalm. 14. 15. (...). Qui non jurat periculum vitavit
perju^^ And Isidorus Hispalensis, lib. 2. Sentent. cap. 31. sect. Non est
contra Dei praeceptum jurare, sed dum us^^ju andi facimus, perjurii crimen
incurrimus And ^ contemptu mundi, Prohibe etiam tibi juramentum, tol^ jus
jur^ndi (that is his word) usum, quia periculos^^ est. Assiduitas jurandi
perjurii consuetudinem facit, and So Euthymius Zigabo^us in Mat. 5. Qui facile
jurat al^quando for^asse pejerabit ob jurandi cousuetudine^ And in Regula S.
Benedicti (cap 4. sect. 27.) the Rule ^^ Non jurare, ne forte perjures. He
lived Anno 500. A^^ these words are made use of by Theodulphus Aureliane^sis
above 300 years after.
Perjury, the prevention whereof is here more clearly discovered than it wa^
before. For whereas it wa^ said, Thou shall not forswea^ thy self, etc. Christ
expressly forbids the occasion o^ Perjury, rash, and customary swearing, not
only as ill ^^ it self, but also in respect of the danger adjoined. This Reason
is touched by St. James 5. 12. if we read the Text with the most learned Bishop
Walton in his Polyglot, (...), ne incidatis in simulationem as the Arabic
Translator renders Eccl. 23. 11. In Epitome divinarum Institut. sect. 4. In Ps.
118. Oct. 14. In verba Domini and de Sermon. Dom. in monte. l. 1. and In Ps. 88.
and In Ps. 109.
it; which Grotius expounds, ne fallaces inveni^mini. Thus also Syracides,
(...). So that ancient Father Lactantius speaks of a good man, who, Ne jurabit
quidem, ne quando vel necessitate, vel consuetudine in perjurium cadat. So St.
Ambrose Voluit te non jurare ne perj^res. So St. Austin, ne fac^litate jurandi
in perjuriu^ prolabamur; to which purpose he (as many others) speaks in several
places.

Sect. 37.
4thly. Many understand that by these words of Christ, all swearing by
Creatures is forbidden, but not that by God himself. And that seems evident if
the words (...) be not referred to the foregoing act of swearing, but to the
subsequent objects. Besides, this opinion, as it fully agrees with the Analogy
of Faith, and makes a perfect concord betwixt the Old Testament and the New,
and is no way repugnant to swearing in judicial proceedings; so it is backed
with great Authorities. Considera (says St. Hierome on the place) quod hic
salvator non per Deum jurare prohibuerat, sed per Coelum, and terram, and
Hierosolymam, and per caput tuum. This way went the Gallican Council that
condemned the Albigenses, where it is said, that in the Text, Non prohibet nos
jurare per Deum, sed per Creaturas: and this great reason is there given, Si
licitum fuisset per Creaturas jurare, Reverentia, and honor qui Deo soli
debetur, creaturis exhiberetur. And In Respe ad cota Bulgrocum. before that
Nic. the first Bishop of Rome (about 800. years since) says that here, nil
nisi ut per Creaturam juretur procul dubio inhibetur; without doubt, nothing is
here forbidden, save only swearing by Creatures. And before that also about
1200. years ago, according to the judgment of the noble Antiquary Sir Henry
Spelman, who by his unparelled labors has so highly merited Cap. 23.
of our Church, an Irish Synod holden under St. Patrick, expounded this, Non
jurare omnino, non adjurandam esse Creaturam, that we should not be sworn by a
Creature.

Sect. 38.
And now I hope you do not expect, that so mean a Person should sit down in the
Moderators Chair, and determine which of these Expositions is most consonant to
our Saviors meaning. Let me not be guilty of such a Presumption. Yet what my
thoughts are of this matter, without the least derogation to any of the recited
opinions warranted by so much Reason, and Authority, I shall not refuse to
declare.

Sect. 39
It has in part, and may be sufficiently proved that our Savior did not in
this Chapter dis-allow the Moral vide s^^t. 23.
Law, but only the Pharisaical corrupt Glosses thereon, and the ir-religious
practices of the misinformed Jews, who (as Origin Tract. 25. in Mat.
tells us) Consuetudinem habent per Coelum jurare. To that same purpose, St.
Hierom, Hanc per Clementa In locum
jurandi possimam consuetudinem semper habuere Judaei. And so St. Chrysostom,
In locum
(...). They were accustomed to swear by these things. And Christian Druthman a
In locum
Writer of 850 years standing, says, Habuerunt Judae^ consuetudinem jurandi
per Creaturas, Deus hoc nobis prohibet. Nay farther, because the Pharisees
taught them to perform whatever they had promised, swearing by God, they under
a specious pretension, that they would not take Gods Name in vain upon a slight
occasion, fell to swear by Creatures (which the Pharisees, as Grotius shows out
of Philo Judaeus, did not disallow) the easilier thereby to delude such
credulous people as believed those Oaths, which themselves neither thought
obligatory, nor meant to keep. This cheating trick grew not long after to be so
notoriously known every where, that Martial, in the Reign of the Emperor
Domitian in one of his Epigrams made sport with it, bringing in a Jew swearing
by the Roman Gods; Non credo (said he) Mart. l. 11. Epig. 95.
jura verpe per Anchialum, corruptly, for im chai eloah, as the Lord lives.
The Poet ignorant of this Language, mistook it for the proper name of some God,
by whom alone he thought they durst not swear falsely. And it is certain that
the Scribes and Pharisees taught the People, that to swear by several
Creatures, as by the Temple, and the Altar, was not binding: For Christ
reproves them as blind guides upon that account, S. Mat. 23. 16. etc. This
practice was a gross offense as well against the eighth Commandment as the
third. And our Savior having already prohibited the abuses against the sixth
and seventh, proceeds now in due order to reprove such as were committed not
only against the third, but also the eighth, which otherwise might seem to be
omitted. Upon which ground I conceive (with submission to better Judgments)
that Christ's scope in these words, was to rectify the erroneous Doctrine of
the Pharisees (which had too powerful an influence upon the lives of the
people) and the vicious St. Austin de Sermon Domin^ in monte, makes a Quaere
why Christ forbad swearing by Heaven, Earth, etc. and answers it thus, Credo
propterea quia non putabant Judei se t^neri ^ure jurando, si per ista
Jurassent, and quoniam audierant, Reddes autem Domino Jusjurandum tuum, non se
putabant Domino debere Jusjurandum, si per Coelum, aut tertam, aut per
Hycrosolimam, aut per c^put suum jurarent: qu^d non vitio praecipientis, sed
illis male intelligentibus factum est. To the same purpose speaks Chemnitius,
Har^. Evang. cap. 51. Pericop. 3. Explicatio certior and firmior est quae ex
Textu samitur* duae enim quasi species subjiciuntur. 1. Quod Pharisaeorum
traditio erat in quibusvis casibus in familiari Sermon, and in communibus
negotiis recte, and sine pe^^^to posse nomen Dei ad Juramentum assumi. 2. Quod
sentiebant in quibusdam obliquis sive indirectis jurandi formulis, ut per
Caelum, per caput juramentum impune posse violari. Illis igitur persuas^onibus
Christus opponit particulam omnino, quae ad hanc subjectum materiam
restringenda est, ut sc. omnino non lice^t vel ^irecte per Deum, vel indirecte
per creaturas, vel vane, seu temere, vel falso jurare. Haec autem prohibitio
Christi non est nova quaedam Le^, etc.
practices of that seduced Nation, as to the third and eighth Commandments, as
well as he had done already in the sixth and seventh. The one taught that it
was Perjury indeed to break an Oath, if a man had sworn by God; but not, if he
had only sworn by some Creature. And the other took advantage of that liberty,
and customarily used those non-obliging Oaths (as they accounted them) upon a
set design to overreach their credulous Neighbors. In opposition to which,
both Doctrine, and Practice, Christ forbids all swearing by Creatures, and
Teaches (contrary to the Jewish Rabbis) that though such Oaths ought not to be
taken; yet being taken are binding, in respect of the Creatures relation to the
Creator; which is the purport of the latter part of this 34, 35, and 36.
verses. And Sect. 37. he orders them in place of these sinful Oaths, to use
only bare Affirmations or Denials in their mutual converse. Whereof he gives
this reason, that whatsoever is superadded there to (as their accustomed Oaths)
Some argue from thence, that therefore ^ll swearing is unlawful as coming from
evil. But that is no good Argument. For, first; all swearing comes not from
evil causally (though occasionly it do) because some is commanded by God. Only
that swearing that comes from a vici^us habit in ordinary d^scourse, (whereof
our Savior speaks especial^y here) or Pe^jury, or swearing to wicked purposes,
which come from the instinct of the Devil, or from men's own malicious, or
co^^tous Passi^ns: or swearing, when otherwise we cannot he believed, either in
r^spect we have been formerly promise^^^akers: or through incredulity, or want
of Charity in the hearers (which ordinarily arises out of the consciousness of
their own fraudulency, and deception of others) may truly the said to come of
evil: and so thu reaches not all Oaths. But secondly* It is not true, that
what ever com^^th occasionly of evil, is evil it se^f. For good Laws are
^^casioned by evil manners. And the preservation of Jacob and his Family from
perishing by Famine was good; set it was occasioned by selling of Joseph, which
was evil. So if a man will no^ believe what is necess^ry for him, nine Oath is
good, though his distrust which oc^asioned it, be ev^ll.
comes of evil, that is, either by the suggestion of Satan that evil one, or
else from their wickedness, and desire of defrauding their brethren.

Sect. 40
I know that many judicious Persons have interpreted this word evil, to be the
Incredulity of those with whom we converse. But I must crave leave to dissent
from them in this particular, because that might be a motive to us to Swear,
especially in matters of importance, when otherwise we should not be credited;
but no Reason why we should not Swear. Another man's distrust, cannot make mine
Oath unlawful. Nor is this Argument of any force, I ought not to Swear,
because some men will not otherwise believe me.

Sect. 41
If any of a contrary persuasion be not yet satisfied, but still urges the
universality of the expression, Swear not at all; and that of St. James 5. 12.
Above all things, my brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the
Earth, neither by any other Oath. I answer, first to the Texts severally; and
then to both together. To the former, it is plain, that they who thus argue,
break off our Saviors Sentence in the middle, and suffer him not to come to
his intended Period, which is wrong, and incivility to an ordinary speaker. For
he said not, Swear not at all, there fixing a point; but, Swear not at all,
neither by Heaven, etc. nor by Earth, etc. And it is certain, that the
beginning of many sentences, were the explanatory words cut off, might admit of
a construction (and that with a great show of probability) contrary to the
meaning of the Author. For example, There be some (says the holy Jesus)
standing here which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of Man
coming in his Kingdom, St. Mat. 16. 28. should any put a full point at Death,
and lop off the remainder of the sentence, how distant would the sense seem
from the intending meaning? if any then urge against you, Swear not at all, you
may desire him to speak on, and what God has joined together not to put asunder.

Sect. 42.
And as for that of St. James, it must of necessity be understood with
Restriction. Sermon 28. de Verb. Apost.
St. Austin preaching upon that Text, scruples at the first words, Quare ante
omnia? jurare pejus est quam furari, etc. quam adulterare, etc. quam hominem
occidere? Absit? It cannot be that swearing is worse than forswearing, Theft,
Adultery, Murder; nor so ill, if that Father may be judge. These are heinous
crimes, nulla utem culpa est verum jurare. But it is no sin to swear the Truth,
with due qualifications. Why then above all things, Swear not? Vt vigiletis ne
surrepat vobis consuetudo jurandi; not that swearing is so great an offense as
many others, or indeed any offense at all rightly used; but left we contract a
habit thereof, which we shall be apt to do, if carefully we avoid it not, and
then probably by rash Oaths we shall offend God, by false swearing wrong our
Neighbors, by both, damn our souls. And therefore above all things (which is
here no more than in Quid est ante omnia? Prae caeteris cautus esto, plus ad
hoc in^entus e^^o, quam ad alia, Aust. Sermon. 28. de Verb. Apost.
an especial manner) forbear swearing. In like sort, the subsequent words any
other Oath, must be understood in a restrained sense. For thereby is not meant
any Oath whatever; but only such as the Apostle there speaks of. As therefore
it were an illogical inference from the former part of that Verse, to say, that
swearing is worse than Murder, because St. James says, Above all things swear
not: so it is no better a consequence to say that swearing by God is unlawful,
because it is here enjoined, that we should not swear neither by Heaven,
neither by the Earth, neither by a-any other Oath, that is, any Oath taken by
any other Creature. For so of necessity must the Apostle be understood, unless
we so interpret his words, as to make them contradict Gods, and set the Servant
in a manifest opposition to his Master.

Sect. 34
Secondly, I answer to both these Texts conjunctim, that these Propositions,
how universally soever expressed, ought not in equity to be extended beyond the
intention of the Speakers, but to be limited according to the subject matter.
Swear not at all (says Christ) neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, etc. that is, I
universally forbid you all those Oaths, which you were wont to use frequently
to wicked purposes. And this is not a fancy of our own to evacuate the words
of our Savior: far be that from us; we rather seek to establish them in the
full latitude that they were intended to bear: But to this Restriction of them,
the former Reasons do constrain us. If it be said, that then, for all Christ's
words, we may swear as often as we please, and that vainly, and falsely too, by
God, if only swearing by Creatures be here prohibited, which seems most absurd.
I reply, that these vain, and false Oaths by God, even by the acknowledgment of
the Pharisees themselves were sufficiently forbidden before; and so there was
no need either for Christ or St. James to speak of them, or forbid them again.
Christ came neither to make a new Law, nor to void, or alter what was already
established; but to vindicate the perfect Law of God from the sinful
interpretations of men. Nor is this exposition of these Texts strange, or
unusual. Other places of Scripture must of necessity be thus interpreted, a^ 1
Cor. 10. 23. All things are lawful for me. How? is it lawful to kill, or steal?
nothing less. The Apostle is speaking there of things indifferent, and
therefore the words there (just in the same manner as here) are to be
restrained to the subject matter. All things in general are not lawful, but all
such adiaphorous things as the Apostle there discourses of. So here, all Oaths
are forbidden, not all in general, but all which our Savior, and St. James had
occasion to speak of: many like instances might be given. There went out to
John the Baptist all the Land of Judaea, Mar. 15. What? sure not all the sick,
blind, lame, decrepit, bedrid, but some from all quarters of the Land. St. Luke
says, he had perfect understanding in all Cap. 1. 3
things. What? of all Arts, Trades, Professions, Nations, Languages, etc. No
sure, but of all things concerning which he was to Write. Augustus decreed that
all the World should be taxed. But Lu. 2. 1.
that was no more than that part of the World that was under his Dominion: For
the rest was not under his command, and at that time much of the Earth was
either not inhabited, or unknown; and all that was not known, was not then
subject to the Roman Empire. We read in the fourth Command, In it (that is in
the Sabbath day) thou shall do Ex. 10. 10.
no manner of Work, or (as it is rendered by our last Translators) Thou shall
not do any Work; yet notwithstanding this expression of the most extensive
latitude, it is certain that Works of Piety, Charity, or Necessity were not
forbidden. So our Savior says, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven Mat. 12. 31.
unto Men; an universal proposition, which nevertheless admits of a
Restriction; for he immediately adds, that the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost
shall not be forgiven unto men. And besides, notwithstanding the generallity of
these words, All manner of sin shall be Luc. 13. ^
forgiven, we know that no sin shall be forgiven but upon condition of
Repentance. The woman that was healed by touching the border of Christ's
garment, St. Luke 8. 47. told him before all the people why she had touched
him. How, before all the people of the World, or before all the people of the
Land? No doubtless, but before all the people there present. Reason plainly
shows that these and many like Enunciations, how universally soever proposed,
must be restrained according to the occasion, and purpose of the speaker. And
so accordingly must these words be, Swear not at all.

Sect. 44.
And here the grand objection falls of it self, which is, either all kind of
Swearing is here forbidden, or else Christ notwithstanding his words, But I say
unto you, forbad nothing which was not forbidden before, which is utterly
improbable. The reason is, because God had formerly prohibited all false, and
vain Oaths, and all swearing by Creatures: all which I grant to be true.
Nevertheless, the Pharisees* had taught the People otherwise, and that under a
religious pretense of a greater Reverence to Gods Name. And the practice of
that Nation, mislead by their Teachers, was widely distant from the
Commandment, both which were very necessary to be reformed. Which here our
Savior did in these words, But I say unto you, swear no^ at all; Which were
not spoken in any opposition to Gods Law, but to the false, and wicked glosse^
of those blind Guides (that made the Commandment of God of small effect by
their Tradition) and the lewd de-deportment of the People.

Sect. 45.
And now I have done, and I fear it is more than time to have done with the
Exposition of these words. For Application let me address my self to you all,
who either now, or at some other time may be legally called to take your Oaths,
which you have heard vindicated to be lawful, notwithstanding the seeming
opposition of these words, Swear not at all. But this must be understood only
of just and necessary Oaths. Hear what our Savior says, St. Mat. 5. 20. I say
unto you, that except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. But they condemned Perjury in the Verse immediately before my Text:
Thou shall not forswear thy self. So then, if you swearing by God, do not
carefully avoid all false Oaths, you are so far from exceeding them, that you
fall much below them. And then if they shall not enter into Heaven, what will
become of these that are much worse? For the regulation of your Practice in
this point, I shall commend that Text of the Prophet. Jer. 4. 2. And thou shall
swear (here is your warrant for swearing, which thence appears to be not only
Lawful, but in some cases Necessary, because commanded) The Lord lives; whence
you learn by whom you are to swear, that is, only by the Living God. Consider,
O consider with what fear, and reverence, and care of the Truth you ought to
approach into the presence of God, whom you call to Witness; that God who is
your Maker and Preserver; that God through whose Mercies you hope to be saved;
that God who is the searcher of your hearts, and the just Judge, and severe
Revenger of all Perjury. In Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness, these
three are the qualifications of a lawful Oath; and no Oath is lawful, if it be
repugnant to any of these. St. Hierom calls them, the Companions of In Jer. 4.
an Oath, without which, Nequaquam est juramentum, sed Perjurium, it is not
swearing, but forswearing.

Sect. 46
The first Concomitant of an Oath is Truth, which engages you neither* to swear
any thing you know false, nor any thing you know not to be true. Ground not
your Evidences on surmises, or conjectures, but on your own certain knowledge.
Jurare (says St. Ambrose) judicium scientiae, testimonium Conscientiae In Ps
11^ Oct. 14.
est. Use plain, and not ambiguous words, without deceit, partiallity, or by
respects. Be not transported with fear, favor, or ill will to any Person: Your
testimonies are neither to be lamed by concealing ought that is true, nor
corrupted with the addition of any falsehood.

The second is Judgment, which admonishes you, that what you speak upon Oath
should not be passionate, rash, or inconsiderate; knowing, that whatever
Information you give to a Judge upon Earth, you must at the last day be
accountable for it to the great Judge of quick, and dead. Be therefore wary,
and well-advised what you utter, that neither through wickedness, nor
inconsideration, you pervert Justice, or prejudice their right who may suffer
through your sin, or unadvisedness.

The third is Righteousness, which ought to be your scope. Accuse not the
innocent, excuse not the guilty. Remember that, he that justifies the wicked,
and he that condemns the just, are both abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.
15. Be then so conscientious in bearing witness, for, or against others, that
your own Consciences bear not witness against you in the day when God shall
judge the secret of all men by Christ Jesus. Consider that you do not only
speak in the presence of God, (and therefore ought to regard what you say,) but
also call him to witness with you the Truth of your Affirmations. Think that
every false Oath is a grievous curse, wherein you renounce the help of your
Creator, the hope of Heaven, your salvation by Christ's death declared in the
Gospel; and by your falsehood bid defiance to the God of Truth. The honor of
that God in protecting the innocent, and punishing the wicked, and the security
of men's persons, and Estates depend much upon your fidelity. Seek not by
wronging others to lose your own souls; these soul^ for the salvation whereof
our blessed Savior was content to shed his dearest blood. Let me shut up all
in the words of the Prophet Zech. 8. 16. Speak ye every man the truth to his
Neighbor: execute the Judgment of Truth, and Peace in your gates. And let none
of you imagine evil in your hearts against his Neighbor, and love no false
Oaths; for all these are things that I hate, says the Lord. May our heavenly
Father so imprint these words in our minds, that we may love what he loves,
hate what he hates, and at length may be partakers of everlasting happiness,
through the Merits and Mediation of Christ Jesus, to whom with the Father, and
the Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one God, be all honor and glory, now, and
evermore. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

