Memorialls For the GOVERNMENT OF THE ROYALL-BURGHS IN SCOTLAND.

With some Overtures laid before the Nobility and Gentry of the several Shyres
in this Kingdom. AS ALSO, A Survey of the City of ABERDEEN, with the Epigrams
of Arthur Iohnstoun Doctor of Medicin, upon some of our chief Burghs translated
into English by I. B.

By (...) ( Or,) A lover of the Public welfare.

ABERDEEN, Printed by JOHN FORBES, Printer to the CITY and UNIVERSITY, 1685.



By the Blessing of the Upright the City is exalted: but it is overturned by
the mouth of the wicked.

Prove. 11.11. When the Righteous are in Authority the people rejoice, but when
the wicked bears rule the people mourn.

Prove. 29 2. When Themistocles was mocked by his companions that he was
ignorant in some of the liberal Sciences. He answered, that he could not sing
to the Harp, nor make use of the Psaltrie: but he could make a little Village,
or a small Town a Great and Famous City.

Plutarch on the life of Themistocles. Unto the Right Honorable, Sir GEORGE
DRUMMOND of Milnab, Lord Provest. THOMAS ROBERTSON, Bailie. THOMAS HAMILTON,
Bailie. ALEXANDER BRAND, Bailie. DAVID SPENSE, Bailie. CHARLES MURRAY of Hadden
Dean of Gild, GEORGE DRUMMOND Thesaurer.
And to the Rest of the Honorable Council of the City of EDINBURGH.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
I being a person who (without vanity) may say, that Heaven has blessed with
so much of a Public Spirit, that I feel in my heart an inclination that would
do good unto all men; but since my ability quadrats not with my desires, (that
being GODS peculiar Privilege, whose Omnipotency can only equal his Will,)
I must rest satisfied with the extent of my Cordial Good Wishes for the
Welfare of all: from which Principle, (though I am not in a capacity to act,)
I could not forbear to express somethings in these Memorialls, whereby I humbly
conceive, the Good and Welfare of the Burrows of this Kingdom may in some
measure be advanced, if acceptably improven.

It would be from a defect of Charity, if any apprehend I have wrote these out
of conceit of my own ability, for I am not so fond of any Talent I have
acquyred, that if my earnestness to cast in my Mite into the Treasury for the
Public Good, had not overballanced the mean thoughts I have of any thing I can
do of this nature, I should never have dared to present you with them. But now
here they be, and such as they are I presume to lay before You, who are the
Representatives of the Chiefest City of this Nation. It is your Discretion,
your Zeall for the Publick-Good, your Christian Wisdom and Behavior, your
Righteousness and Piety, that influences not only the rest of the Burrows, but
also most of the Subjects of this Kingdom. I am not ignorant how much I expose
my self to the Critic Censures of many, in permitting the Publishing of this
Tractat, considering the Politness and Learning of this Age, and my own
Imperfections in undertaking such a Task: Yet if ye shall be pleased favorably
to accept hereof, Charitably constructing my Zeal, and covering my Defects and
Over-reachings, I need care the less what thoughts others have of me or it. And
because it is frequent with many, to measure their Esteem of Books by the
respect or disrespect that is had to the Author, I have therefore suppressed my
Name, that it may neither be undervalued, or possibly by some overvalued upon
my account: but that all may be left to consider what is said, then to inquire
who said so. And how ever it be, it shall be the cry of my heart, that ye may
acquit Your selves in all Your Places and Administrations like Men and
Christians, and that with Jehoshaphat Ye may prepare Your Hearts to seek the
LORD. To whose Wisdom, Counsel and Direction, I commend You all, as becomes

Right Honorable The cordial Well-wisher of the Prosperity of Your CITY, and
to serve You in the LORD, PHILOPOLITEIUS.

Epistle to the Reader.
IT has been a great question amongst the Ancients, what kind of Government
was most conduceable to the Happiness and Welfare of the Life of Men some
preferring the Government of one Wise, Just and Discreet Man for making Laws,
and commanding Obedience to all others, and this is called Monarchy simply:
Others preferring the Government of many, who may perhaps disscerne better what
is needful for the Public Good then one, according to that saying P^us vident
oculi quam oculus. But forbearing to trouble any with the Opinions of Plato,
Xenophon, Aristotle or Cicero, who have severally written Books concerning
Civil Society, and wherein they have differed one from another; they having
treated of these Governments, to which soveraignity and supreme Authority
belonged.

But the subject of this following Treatise being only of Ro^all-Burghs within
this Kingdom, I think it the duty of all persons concerned therein to be
thankful to GOD, that they live under the Power and Protection of a Potent
MONARCH, who Governs according to the Laws made by Him and his
Royall-Ancestors, with consent of the three Estates of this Kingdom, and
preserves all the Privileges of His Subjects accordingly; so that by the
foundamentall constitution of Government; we are under the best temper and
composure of any Nation in the World And if we will be good Christians, good
Subjects, and a virtuous happy People; we have the advantage of the best Laws
of any Kingdom in Europe.

As to the particular improvement of that Power, which every City in this Nation
has within it self to contribute to its own Happiness and Prosperity, I have
taken the freedom to set down these few Memorialls for the benefit of all, not
out of any conceit of my ability for such an undertaking, (as I can truly say)
but out of a desire to be useful according to my mean talent to Young Men, who
perhaps are not acquainted with such things, though these that have had
experience are probably far beyond me in Knowledge and Parts. And seeing there
are Books written for every Science, Art or Employment, from the highest to the
lowest, I have fallen upon this Essay, if it were but to stir up some of more
pregnant Parts and acute Engine then ever I laid claim to, whereby they might
benefit their Native-Countrey, seeing the Government of Burghs within this
Kingdom is a Subject that might very well beseem the exactest Pen, till which
appear, let these concerned admit of this testimony of my respects, who am,

A Cordial Well-wisher to all the Burrows of this Kingdom. PHILOPOLITEIUS.

To the Author of these MEMORIALLS.
WEll may thou own to have a Public Sp'rit,
And Philopoliteius named for it;
And for this Book, the Royal-Burrows all
May ratify thy Name, and thus thee call:
Thy wholesome Counsels if practiced be,
Our Nation happy we shall shortly see.
Our Burrows prosperous by Forraign-Trade,
Our Country to make Famous: all made glade
To see our Kingdoms-Glory every way
Increase by Virtue: and what ever may
Its Praise advance, which surely will not miss,
If all our Rulers shall account of this.
Then these Memorialls shall esteemed be,
And by our Cities keept in Memory.
A Friend to the Author.

Another to the AUTHOR of these MEMORIALLS.
HEre does a Public Spirit breath,
Tho by a private Pen,
Both to provock and to incit
Like minds in powerful Men:
More to prefer the Public Good,
And seek that to advance;
Then Property or Interest
Or Breeding, brought from France.
And if Ambition laid some men
To seek Renown and Praise,
How much more should Religion then
Above this Region raise?
True Christian Virtue does aspyre;
To Eternize their Fame
Before the LORD, by doing so
As He Will approve the same.
A lover of the Public Good,
Here is this Authors Name:
Let all who read this Book, make choice
Of this habitual frame.
A Lover of the Author.

The Contents or Index of the Memorialls contained in this Treatise.
CHAP. I. Anent the Diversity of Burghs. Viz. Burghs of Barrony, Regality, and
Burghs-Royal. Page 17 CHAP II. Anent Government in general and in special,
and the advantages of the Burghs-Royall, by the Ingredients of the several
sorts of Government. Page 19. CHAP. III. Of the Council and their Duties in
general, and their two chief Ends they should aim at. Page 25. CHAP. IV Anent
Religion and Holiness, wherein it consists not, and wherein it does consist.
Page 27. CHAP. V. Anent Justice and Righteousness, and the Branches and Effects
thereof in a City. Page 32. CHAP. VI. Anent Sobriety and Moderation. Page 34.
CHAP VII. Anent bearing down Ambition, and joining in Elections of Magistrates
and Council. Page 38. CHAP VIII. Anent Sloth and Neglect in Rulers, and their
public Administrations. Page 44. CHAP. IX. Anent Envy and Vainglory, being
both enemies to Virtue. Page 55. CHAP X. Anent Love and Concord, as the surest
foundation of a Kingdom, City or Commonwealth. Page 62. CHAP. XI. Anent
Observation of Laws, both National and Municipall. Page 70. CHAP. XII. Some
select Acts of Parliament, anent Royal-Burghs, the Conservator, and anent the
Staple. Page 74. CHAP. XIII Concerning some Means in general, by which a Burgh
may flowrish Page 88. CHAP. XIV. Concerning Merchandising. Page 94. CHAP. XV.
Concerning some general Overturs for improvement of Trade, mostly relating to
the Chief Rulers of the Kingdom. Page 98. CHAP. XVI. Concerning
Mechanick-Trades. Page 111 CHAP. XVII. Concerning Planting, both for Profit and
Pleasure. Page 115. CHAP. XVIII. Concerning Charity, and care of the Poor. Page
120. CHAP. XIX Concerning Magistrates in General, and the Qualifications
required in them. Page 125. CHAP. XX. Concerning the Duties and Office of the
Provest Page 134. CHAP. XXI Concerning the Office and Duties of the Bailies
Page 137. CHAP. XXII. Concerning the Office and Duty of the Dean of Gild. Page
140. CHAP. XXIII. Concerning the Office and Duty of the Towns-Thesaurer. Page
146. CHAP. XXIV. Concerning the Office and Duty of the Town Clerk or Recorder.
Page 148. CHAP. XXV. Concerning some Duties incumbent upon the Magistrates
joyntlie. Page 151. CHAP. XXVI. Concerning Justice of Peace Courts, to be
holden within Burgh by the Magistrates thereof. Page 159. CHAP. XXVII.
Concerning some Considerations laid before the Youth, in every City or
Corporation. Page 165. CHAP. XXVIII. Directed to the Inhabitants, and Free^men
of Cities. Page 176. CHAP. XXIX. Some Overtures, humbly offered to the Nobles
and Gentry of the several Shires in Scotland. Page 182.


MEMORIALS For the Government of ROYALL-BURGHS in SCOTLAND.
CHAP. I. Anent the Diversity of Burghs, Viz. Burghs of Barrony, Regality, and
BURGHS-ROYALL.
IN the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, there are three sorts of Burghs, some are Burghs
of Barrony, some are Burghs of Regality, and some are Royal-Burghs. Burghs of
Barrony are such as the Barrons has full power to choice their Bailies. Burghs
of Regality are such as the Lord of the Regality has the full power to choice
their Bailies; unless power be given them in their Infestments be him to their
Commonalitie, to choice their own Bailies; whereof there are diverse instances
in the Kingdom.

Some are Royal-Burghs, so called, because they hold immediately of the KING;
and by their first Erections, have power to choice their Provest, Bailies and
Council: and have the only Privilege of Forraign-Trade and Merchandising;
and have their own Common-Lands holden of the KING, their Houses and
Burrow-Lands holden in free Burgage of the KING, can enter an Heir to Tenements
of Land within Burgh ( brevi manu) without Service or Retour, and enter them
thereto and give them Seasing by Hesp and Staple: and have many more
Privileges conferred on them, (some of them being Sheriffs within themselves,
as Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Striviling etc.)

Having briefly set down the differences betwixt the three several sorts of
Burghs My design relating only to Royal-Burghs, I shall set down first the
manner of the Government thereof. 2 dly Shall set down the nature of the
Town-Councill, and the Duties incumbent unto them in reference to GOD, and the
welfare of the City. 3 dly. Shall set down the Qualifications of an able and
fit Magistrate, upon whom a chief part of the prosperity and happiness of a
Town depends. And then the particular Duties, relating to each of the several
Magistrates in particular, and next of their Duties jointly together.

CHAP. II. Anent Government in general and in special, and the Advantages of
the BURGHS-ROYALL, by the Ingredients of the several sorts of Government.
AS to the Government of our Cities and Towns, several Politic Writers have
concluded, that a well mixed Government, made up of all ^states and Ranks of
Persons, is to be preferred, to any of the three sorts of Governments that has
been; or at this day is in use in Kingdoms Commonwealths or Cities as they are
simply considered; as Democracie: which is, when the People, or mixed
Multitude, have the Supreme Power in them, Magistrates are chosen by them, Laws
are made by them, and that which is carried by the greater part, is esteemed to
be the Judgment of the whole: Their great end is Liberty to live as they
please, and do what they think fit; and this kind of Government degenerats
often into confusion, and many gross abuses have been committed by it.

Secondly, Aristocracie, which is, when a few persons have the Sovereign Power
in them, and this often degenerats into Faction and Division.

Thirdly, Simple Monarchy, when one person has absolutely the whole Power in
himself to make what Laws he will, and do whatsoever he thinks good, and this
often degenerats into Tyranny.

But as is said, a well mixed Government, made up wisely of all Estates and
Ranks of persons, is preferred before any of these. Such is the Government of
this our Ancient Kingdom, and in some respect, our Cities are mostly so
constitute; for since a Commonwealth or City, consists of several Degrees of
men of different conditions and employments, some Merchants some considerable
Heritors that live upon their Rents, some Tradsmen and Handicrafts, the want of
which, would make a great defect in a Commonwealth, all the Members are
useful, and make but one Body, that as 1. Cor. 12.21, 22. The Eye cannot say
to the Hand I have no need of thee: nor again, the Head to the Feet I have no
need of you: nay much more these Members of the Body, which seem to be more
feeble are necessary. It cannot then but agree with reason, that every estate
and condition of men, should have their own share in the manadgement of these
things, according to their proportions and interests in the whole.

We have matter to bless GOD, for the equal and just constitution of Government
not only of the whole kingdom (which of it self is as good as any in the
World,) but also for that well tempered mixture, granted to us by our KINGS,
and left unto us of our Worthy Ancestors, which is in our Cities, and more
particular Commonwealths, being thus.

Our Town-Councills is chosen out of the whole Citizens and Burgesses of the
Burgh, the Citie-Roll being read at every Election of Council, that if
Aristotle were alive, he would not censure us as he did the Government and
Laws of the Gretians, given by Minos and Radamanthus: for their Cosmi or
Magistrates were not chosen out of all the People, but out of some few of every
Tribe; though they did pretend that all their Laws were made by Jupiters
advyce: and for this, the most of the Grecian Re-publicks did imitate them,
particularly Lycurgus the Lacedemonian, there being a large List drawn up of
all amongst us, where is set down every one whom any person of the Present
Council desires or nominats: then they choose the prefixed number, that are
appointed to be New Counselors for the ensuing Year: Next they choose out of
their own number, who have been ruling the Year preceding, so many as are by
the Law appointed to continue, Ja. 3. P. 7. c. 57. And lastly, so many of the
Deacons of the Trades, as should complete the number of the Council, all which
being presently called and conveened, they with the Old Council, and the whole
Deacons of the Trades, (besides these Tradsmen that are on the Old and New
Council) do elect of these that are chosen for Counselors for the Year to
come, Provest, Bailies, and all other Office-bearers requisite. Thus Brethren
of Gild, and Tradsmen, of which our Cities consists, have all their equal
share in the Government of our Royal-Burrows.

When any matter of more then ordinary Importance comes to be consulted of, if
the Council find it meet, they call the former years Council, and joins both
in the Consultation and Determination and if it be a business of setting on of
a Tax, or Levying of Money; whether for National, or Particular Use, or such
like, the consent of the whole is called for in a public Head-Court conveened
by Authority of the Magistrates: for the Reasons of the said Tax, or Imposition
is holden out to them, so that by this, it may be evident to the judicious,
that we have the best Ingredients and Advantages of all the several sorts of
Governments.

Though some are Privileged to be Sheriffs within their Jurisdiction, and so
have Power of Life and Death in some cases, yet we may look on our selves as
more happy in several respects, under the Government of the well constitute
Monarchy we live in, then if Sovereign Power were in our own hands, as many
free Cities and Commonwealths have.

First, Because we are hereby fred from the fear of overthrow, oppression, or
subjection to the lust of any proud or ambitious Neighbor, that perchance
might have more Strength then we, being under the Fatherly Care and Protection
of such a Powerful Monarch. When we look back upon the manyfold dangers, that
Famous and Renowned Cities have frequently been assaulted with in Elder times,
or at present Beholds the many staggerings, and violent agitations, that free
Towns have been surprised with in this our Age; by reason of the Power,
Ambition, and Avarice of their Insidious Neighbors: we may bless GOD for our
Peace and Security.

Secondly, If any intestine jarrs may unhappily arise amongst Citizens, which
may draw Parties to Factions, and great Animosities and Seditions; wherethrough
not only the Names, Fames, and Estates of the Inhabitants might be in hazard:
but the Lives, Liberties, and Interests of the Commonwealth might utterly be
destroyed and subverted thereby. We have the Supreme Authority of this Kingdom,
to prevent all these evils, and to crush them in the bud; whereby our Concord,
Unity, and at least our Peace and Security is through Gods blessing safer then
the great Imperial City of Rome, when lyklie to have teared out her own
bowels, by that unnatural War betwixt Sylla and Marius, which destroyed the
chiefest and best of her Senators, and so many thousands of her own Citizens.
The like apparent Fate, being wisely and seasonably prevented, (when that
unhappy difference arose in Aberdeen, about the Year 1590, called the
Common-Cause) by the Prudence and Authority of King JAMES the sixth, and the
Interposition of the Convention of Burrows, who by the Kings approbation, did
determine the controversy, which before, through slaughter and blood, had
drawn to that hight, which if not timely adverted unto, might have brought with
it destruction and desolation.

Whereas, since the Government is so regulated, as is above showed, and
established upon surer fundations then formerly; that through GODS Blessing
thereupon, no such thing has had any appearance since, not (we hope through
Mercy) shall ever again.

Next, though it would be pertinent to speak of the Magistrates, and their
Qualifications, yet, I shall refer it till I intend to speak of their duties in
particular, where, to hold out immediately before their Qualifications, will be
more recent and proper, and therefore shall speak of the Council in general.

CHAP. III. Of the COUNCIL and their Duties in general, and their two chief
Ends they should aim at.
A Council is a certain Assembly, lawfully chosen to give advyce to him, or
them, that have the Power of Administration of Affairs within the
Commonwealth. The Romans called the Counselors Senators, for their ^ravity
and Age, and sometimes they were ^^lled Fathers, from the care they had of the
^^mmon-Wealth, as Parents are careful to pro^^de and see for their Children,
what they stand (...) need of, or what their condition may re^^ire, Counselors
should do the same for the ^^-publick. They are custodes Legum, the keep^^s of
the Laws, and appeals are made to them ^^^m the Magistrates, when any person
conceives ^^mself wronged by them, The Grecians, and the Romans for the most
part, composed their Councils of old wise and expert Persons.

It is a great prejudice to a City, to have persons chosen, more out of a
design to strengthen a Faction; then for their worth and abilities especially
when an Oath is taken by every Counselor at his admission, to be a faithful
Counselor, in all, and every thing that concern the Commonwealth.

In all Royal Burrows the Council Acts are the Rules (for the most part) by
which all the Affairs are ordered, and according to which the Magistrates should
walk in all their adm^nistrations, next to the public Laws of the Nation.
Wherefore, though the Magistra^^ were never so well disposed, or qualified;
cannot be but a great discouragement, and a^ impediment to them, if the Council
be not composed of Wise, Judicious, and Able Men: mu^^ more, if they be wicked,
or vicious, alway^ opposing good things, discouraging the Godl^^ and Virtuous,
and strengthening the hands ^^ the Wicked.

I shall hold out something of the Counc^^ Duty in common. It Is their Duty,
both a^^ and every one, to propose to themselves, a^^ seriously to mind two
Great and Honorab^^ Ends, wherein all their Consultations and A^^ should
terminat. viz. The Glory of GO^ 2 dly. The Good and Prosperity of the Cit^*
^^ese two Generals comprehend all the Par^^^ulars of their Duties, and they
cannot be se^^rated; for in Honoring of GOD, much of (...) Happyness of the
City consists: and in ad^^ncing the Happyness and Prosperity of the Ci^^ there
will redound Glory and Honor to ^OD.

CHAP. IV. Anent RELIGION and HOLINESS, ^^erein it consists not, and wherein it
^^th consist.
THere is no way, whereby GOD is more Honored amongst men, then when they live
according to the Rules of true Religion, as is holden forth in the Scriptures
of Truth, and these are Plain, Spiritual, and Universal; according to ^^at
place in Titus 2.11 12. For the Grace of ^OD that brings Salvation, has
appeared to ^ men Teaching us that denying all ungodly^^^s and worldly lusts we
should live soberly, righ^^^usly, and godly in this present world. This
comprehends all true Religion, To wit, a turning from all evil, and a doing of
all good.

There are two things specially requisite in al^ that would serve GOD aright,
and worshi^ acceptably, One is a serious conversion of the heart from all
worldly lusts and ungodly corruptions. 2 dly, A measur of a humble holy
spiritua^ lively frame upon the heart: without the former, all Religious Duties
are but acts of Hypocrisy, according to Micah 6.7. and though they would
multiply their services and duties t^ the uttermost bounds of human powers, it
were to no purpose, if there be not a washing from filthiness, lusts, and
unrighteousness; according to Isa. 1. from the 11. to 18. verse. So Isa. 66.1.
to 6. verse. without which, any may see, how the LORD hates and despises all
the services and acts of worship in his people* See this at length in Amos
5.21. etc. I hate and despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your
solemn assemblies, though ye offer me burnt offerings, and your meat offerings,
I will not accept them neither will regard the peace offerings of your fat
beasts and so forth. But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as
a mighty stream etc.

I mention this the rather, and these clear Scripturs, because it is a common
fault amongst many Professors, to lay the stress of Religion and Holiness upon
the bare observation of Ordinances and outward Duties; though the ^^ide, greed,
and vanity of the hearts, and in ^ word, the spirit of conformity to the
fashions ^f this world, remains and is in the dominion ^ith many of them,
contrary to Romans 12.2.

See Psalm. 51.16, 17. There are Sacrifices which GOD cares not for, and there
are that which he regards: A pure heart, and a brocken ^^ontrite spirit, are
the most acceptable sacrifices to ^OD. A pure mind is the best service of GOD
^^e most religious Worship of GOD, is to ^^llow and imitate him, and the way to
Honor ^OD is not to be evil, says Senec. Lauct. Merc. Trism.

Yet I would not in this be so understood, as ^^ I were crying down all outward
duties, seeing ^ is their abuse my testimony is only against. and therefore,
my 2 d. requisite I speak of, was that they ought to be performed with a measure
^f a Humble, Holy, Spiritual, and lively ^rame of Heart; without which, Duties
are ^ut dead, and will be as abominable in the ^^ght of the LORD, as if they
under the Law, ^ad brought a dead carcass of a beast, to offer ^p in Sacrifice
before the LORD.

But not to insist further in this, I shall set ^own a Testimony or two, of a
Judicious and ^earned Man, concerning true Religion. Peter ^harron in his
second book of Wisdom, Cap. 5. ^oncerning Religion, says thus.

That of so many diverse Religions, and manners of serving GOD, which are in
the World or may be, they seem to be the most noble, and to ha^^ greatest
appearance of Truth, which without gre^^ corporal, and external service, draw
the soul in it self, and raise it by pure contemplation to a^mire and adore the
great and infinite Majesty ^ the first cause of all things, and the essence of
essence without any great declaration or determination the^^of; or prescription
of his service, but acknowledgi^^ it indefinitely to be goodness, perfection,
and infi^^ness wholly incomprehensible, and not to be know^.

Again, (says he) Religion consists in t^^ knowledge of GOD, and of our
selves, (for it a relative action betwixt both,) the office thereon is to extol
GOD to the uttermost of our power, a^^ to beat down man as low as may be, as if
he w^ utterly lost; and afterward, to furnish himself wi^^ means to rise
again, to make him feel his misery and his nothingness, to the end he may put
his wh^^ confidence in GOD alone. Again, (says he^ The office of Religion, is
to join us to the Author a^^ principal cause of all good, and to reunite man,
a^^ fasten him to his first cause, and to his root; where^^ so long as he
continues firm and settled he prefer^eth himself in his own perfection; and
contrarywis^ when he is separated, he instantly faints a^^ languisheth.

Next, as to Religion, all in Authority a^^ to evidence their zeal for the
LORD, i^ bearing down all open scandalous Vices, a^^ Drunkenness, Whoredom,
Cursing and Swearing, ^hest, Oppression, Bloodshed, Cheating, and all ^njuries
that are not consistent with the good ^ Civil Societies: And on this account he
is the ^inister of GOD, and is not to bear the Sword ^ vain. Romans 13.1, 2 3 etc.

Next, he is to honor true Religion in his ^wn personal walk, in all his
private or public ^ctings: he is to show himself exemplary, and ^ guard and
watch against any scandalous fail^ngs; for as one says, Magistratus ubi enim
de^nqunt, long majus exemplo quam culpa peccare vi^ntur, Minores namque omnes
eorum vestigia se^uuntur, vixque se errare putant, cum ejusdem cri^inis reum
aliquem Senatorem ostendunt. That ^, When a Magistrate does transgress, they ^em
to sin more by their example then fault; or all their inferiors follow their
footsteps and ^arce imagine they err, when they can hold ^ut a Ruler guilty of
the same crime. Pat. ^inensis Instit. Reipub. Lib. 3. Tit. 3.

And as he would wish to be honored of GOD ^o be an instrument of good in his
place he ^ust make conscience to look up to GOd, and wait upon him for his
blessing in all his ^ndertakings. Prove. 3.6. If we acknowledge ^e LORD in all
our ways, he will direct our ^aths. And without this waiting on the LORD or
his blessing, how can any expect to prosper ^ their undertakings and
consultations. The forecited Author, says in that same place. Ib^ nunquam res
humanae prospere succedunt, ubi ne^gliguntur divinae. There human matters never
succeed well, where divine are neglected. And he adds, Tit. 4. Let the Council
be diligently careful, that what ever is done in the Senate, they may have GOD
for their Author, whose favor being obtained, by the Sacrifices of spiritual
Prayer nothing can succeed ill, nor fall out wrong in the Commonwealth. When a
Popish Prelat goe^ thus far in this matter, Professors of Truth should much
more depend upon GOD, and acknowledge him, having many promises annexed to the
Duty, as Ierem 29.12 13. Zach. 13.9. Psalm. 10.17. Philip. 4.6.7. Prove 15.8,
29. Ioh. 16.23.

Thus for the duty of Holiness, which is the^ first branch of Religion.

CHAP. V. Anent Justice and Righteousness, and the Branches and Effects thereof
in a City.
CIties that would honor GOD aright, would study in all things to be Just and
Righteous. This Righteousness and Justice of all the blessings o^ Civil Society
is the greatest: for ^t lays the foundation of Civil Society, and without it
there could be no Civil Society, or Corporation whatsoever: yea, without it,
all ^he duties of Holiness and Religion will prove ^o be but Formality and
Hypocrisy: accor^ing to Amos 5.21, 22. The property of this Divine Virtue, is
to do wrong to none, and ^s the Civilists desyne Justice, it is to render ^o
every one their due. To those that have ^eserved well, thanks, praise and
reward; and to offenders, rebuke and punishment.

It is very notable duty, and a branch of this virtue, to keep promises,
pactions, and covenants; and all such engagemen^s; and that not only with
Citizens or Strangers with whom we have to do, but also with our Enemies. There
can be no baser imputation upon these who have the charge of the Commonwealth,
then to break promises and engagements, which reproach can never be ob^iterated
by any progress of time, as we read of the Carthaginians, whom Ennius called
Covenant breakers, which was the chief cause of the overthrow of that Famous
City, which had so long contended with Rome for the Empire of the World.
Cicero calls this fidelity, a constancy of words and Counsels, that all ^e
done which are promised.

Let these therefore, who have charge of a City embrace Righteousness, from
which, neither fear nor favor, hope nor prom^ses, nor any other allurement
ought to di^ve^t them. Let this Righteousness appear in all concernments, both
public and private weights and measures, in guarding against oppression of
any, doing wrong to none encouraging and defending the just and virtuous, and
punishing the unjust and vicious.

From this Virtue, (when carefully made conscience of,) their will spring forth
many more, which will contribute much for the good of an Corporation. As
Innocence, Freindshipe, Concord, Kindly Love, Thankfullness, Courteousness,
Gentleness, all which are Ornaments of the best Citizens.

The Righteous LORD loves Righteousness Psalm. 11.7. And Blessings are upon the
hea^ of the just. Prove. 10 6. The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his
way: The righteousness o^ the upright shall deliver them: And to him that
sows righteousness, shall be a sure reward Prove. 11.5.6.18.

CHAP. VI. Anent Sobriety and Moderation.
THe third thing that most immediately relates to the Honor of GOD, is a
Christian Sobriety and Moderation, whereby all pride inordinate passion or
hastiness, excess of meeat drink and vanity of apparel will be evited.

Pride and self-conceit has occasioned many evils both in Church and State:
But I shall say as the Apostle said, Romans 12 3. For I say through the grace
given to me, to every man that is amongst you, not to think of himself more
highly nor he ought to think, but to think soberly, according as GOd has dealt
to every man the measure of faith.

This Virtue will not permit any rash course to be taken, but will make men
carry themselves moderatly; both in Prosperity and Adversity.

This will not let Rulers imperiously Command, as through passion or hastiness
to abuse the Citizens, and to encroach upon their just liberties and
privileges; but wisely and moderatly persuade and exhort where that can take
effect, and to do nothing by force; because power is in their hands, which is
very unsuteable, yea most detestable in a free City, and amongst a free people,
unless inevitable necessity require it.

This will not permit a Magistrate to be elated or lifted up in his mind, but
will suppress that vanity and ostentation that many are subject to. Valerius
Publicola was most imitable in this: That when the people of Rome had expelled
their Kings, and they with the Senate had conferred the supreme Authority upon
him; yet he used it most soberly and modestly, and of his own accord, assumed
Spurius Lucretius for his Colleague, and because he was a man of a greater age,
caused transferr the Rods or Magistraticall Ensigns on him.

By the exercise of this Virtue, all excess in meat and drink will be eschewed,
and all vanity or prodigality in apparel evited and curbed; and here I cannot
but mention the commendable Laws made by Zaleucus to the Locrenses, to this
purpose.

Amongst many good Laws for that Commonwealth to bear down the pride of women,
He appointed that no woman whatsoever should wear Gold, or any precious or
costly Garments; unless they did publicly profess themselves Whores: nor that
men should wear Gold-Rings, or Milesian-Garments, unless they should be looked
upon as Whore-Masters or Adulterers: whereby Diodorus says, through fear of
reproach and shame, he did most wisely curb all excess and superfluity, which
are amongst the Vices that wrong a City or Commonwealth. If there were more
of this Virtue in Cities, there would not be such unlimited deboarding in rich
and costly Apparel; that there is nothing the most Noble in the Land can wear,
but Citizens Wives and Daughters, yea sometimes of the meaner quality must have
it, if they can reach it. It were very suitable to the Wisdom of a grave
Senate; by Penal Laws, to restrain these excesses which neither GODS Law, nor
Conscience can bear down. Its sad to see, when diverse Acts of Parliament have
been made to restrain this excess, and yet, that Magistrates and Councils should
let them perish, through their slackness and want of Zeal to the Public Good.

The best fruits of this Prodigality in a City, is to uphold and increase
Pride, Emulation, Lust, and to diminish particular men's Estates; which should
relieve and uphold the Commonwealth under incident Burdens. It were more
praise worthy, if the expense made upon costly Apparel, (beyond what might
serve a comely and due decency) were bestowed upon Gardens and Orchyards, in
and about each Town, which would be more useful for the health, life and
pleasure of Mankind; and would be comely Ornaments to a City, and yield in
time good profit.

I would have all Christian Women minding that command, 1. Pet. 3.3, 4, 5.
Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair, or
wearing of gold, or putting on of apparel: but let it be the hidden man of the
heart, which is not corruptible even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit,
which is in the sight of GOD of great price. For after this manner of old time,
the holy Women also who trusted in GOD adorned themselves, being in subjection
to their own husbands.

In this was the bravery of holy Women in old times, who desired to be in more
esteem with GOD then with men. And thus I have spoken a little to these three
particulars, whereby men may most grorify GOD, and which more immediately
tends thereunto.

CHAP. VII. Anent bearing down Ambition, and joining in Elections of Magistrates
and Council.
HAving in the third Chapter, proposed what were the two great and Honorable
Ends which the Council should aim at, to wit, GODS Glory, and the Cities
Welfare and Prosper^ty; and having spoke at some length concerning these
Duties which relate most immediately to the Glory of GOD, in recomending
Holiness, Righteousness and Sobriety: I come now to ^peak of these Duties
which more ^mmediat^y concern the good and prosperity of the Ci^y, and first I
shall speak of some evils which ^re very proper for a Council to conside^; the
prevention or reformation whereof may tend ^o the good of the whole Body, as
the abuse has often times hazarded the prosperity of a Commonwealth.

One is, that it is a very concerning business for a Senate to consider and use
all means that may crush ambition, brybing or unlawful suteing for places of
Magistracy, which is called by the Latins, crimen ambitus; and in some Cities
their forty years bygone being termed Joining

By this Factions are made, heart-burnings kindled, discords multiplied, malice
and wrath fostered, pride nourished, and the best and worthiest depressed,
when the emptiest and vvorthless are advanced, the good of the public
neglected, yea many times overturned, if not destroyed: As may be seen in the
example of Sylla and Marius, Pompey and Caesar, through whose ambition and
inordinate desire, to have all the Government in their Persons, Rome lost a
greater number of Citizens, then she did by the propagation of her Empire over
the world, and though we who live under Monarchical Government, are not in
such hazard to ruin our selves, that Parties and Factions dare come to that
hight, as these Cities that had Sovereign Power, and none above them to
overavv them; yet sure I am, great are the prejudices and decays these
ambitious and factious persons bring upon a City, for whatever one person
speaks or does, whether it be according to reason or not, the other does
alvvayes oppose it. It is reported of Themistocles betwixt whom and Aristides
there was a great emulation and hatred, they two being the most Famous and
Worthy Persons in Athens; yet alvvayes opposed each other, so that the Senate
at a time rising without any thing concluded by reason of their janglings,
Themistocles cried out, Unless ye throw him and me into the Dungeon, the
Athenian Commonwealth can never prosper nor be safe.

In a word, by this many works of the Devil are carried on, and the Spirit of
GOD greatly grieved and provoked. All these sad effects would be carefully
cured by removing the cause, which is this Joining.

I think it will be below the Spirit of an Ingenious Man, to abase himself to
these reproachful vvayes, that many ambitious persons falls upon for putting
themselves into Offices of Magistracy in Towns, and for strengthening their
Factions whereby they may rule as they list, and bear down their Competitors.
^ know not with what Faith they can ex^ect direction from GOD, or strength
from ^im under difficulties, or success in their un^ertakings or consultations
for the Commonwealth, seeing they did not vvait for his call; but did run
unsent, whereas one that never had a hand in his own Election, but only by
the esteem and good opinion that the E^ectors had of him, is called to place or
office of Trust; he may look on it in some measure as a call from GOD, and
confidently seek wisdom, direction and success from him in all his
undertakings, and may expect strength and furnitur for cutbearing of him at all
occasions accordingly.

Now this Ambition and joining work is for the most part carried on with the
inferior sort of people, that have hand in Elections as some Deacons of
Trades. I desire not that I should be so understood, as meaning by all Deacons
of Trades in general, for I doubt not but many amongst them are discreet,
virtuous and sober men, that will not comply with any design prejudicial to
the public welfare of their respective Towns: for these who are greatest
sticklers for strengthening of Factions and promoting of themselves, finds
themselves concerned to invite these to Taverns, and keep meetings at drinkings
and collations at unseasonable hours, whereby to work upon the minds of these
men, to gain their votes and secure their designs, without considering that by
such means any naughty person may be gotten easily preferred to the most
deserving, that cannot comply with these ways or the humors of such men. Even
as it fell out with Pub. Scipio Nasica, (to whom the Senate of Rome for his
many notable services to the Commonwealth, had given the Title of A brave and
most Excellent Man,) when he was upon the list to be Aedilis, or Master of the
Public Works or Houses, taking an laboring man by the hand, which he found
very hard, (as hardy Craftsmen uses to be) asked in jest, whether he walked on
his hands or feet? which the Tradsman taking so ill, many being round about
him, it went presently through all, and was the cause of an repulse to that
excellent man, because they thought he mocked them. Yea, was not Paulus
Aemilius often repulsed, because he would not join: And was not that brave
Fabius Maximus repulsed, and Terentius Varro preferred to be Consul by the
votes of the Vulgar, (though he was none of the Patricii or Nobility, but come
of the Plebeian sort,) and had thereby almost ruined and lost the whole Estate
of Rome, and the City it self, after the Famous Battle of Cannae, lost by his
temerity and folly.

Wherefore it were a work worthy not only of the Councils of particular
Burghs, but of the grave and judicious Meeting of the Convention of the whole
Burrows, to take away so far as can be, this bitter root which has troubled
the Burghs of these Kingdoms so long with so many sad fruits. The Romans made
Laws against it, other Cities to cure it, did choose their Senators and
Councils by Lot, as Florence and Sienna, which often proves dangerous. The
Venetians mix Lots and Elections together unto this day, of purpose to bear
down Ambition, whereby great Concord is preserved, and their State has
flowrished wonderfully, having stood above eleven hundred Years. And if the
Zeal of these Wise and Potent Cities for the preservation of their Civil
Liberties be such, in the care they take in their Elections, though these
things amongst us be of so far less importance, even beyond all comparison; yet
Christians in their Sphere though never so low, ought to be no less careful to
bear down Sin, and to be tender of the Honor of GOD, which suffers not a
little often times by these things.

Wherefore, I must recommend it to be thought upon in an effectual way, being
confident, the KING, Parliament and Council, will be ever ready to ratify what
may be in this for the Honor of GOD, and the good of such a part of the body
of the Kingdom.

CHAP. VIII. Anent Sloth and Neglect in Rulers, and their public
Administrations.
THe next evil a careful Senate and faithful Rulers should beware of, both in
themselves and others, of whom they have the charge, as they would wish matters
go well, is Neglect and Sloth. Its too common a fault amongst many in public
trust, they look more to the Dignity then Duty of their Charge; but a person
whom GOD has called will make conscience of their Employment, and mind their
business, and study a faithful discharge of their Duty. 2. Chron. 19.3. Its
said, that King Jehosophat prepared his heart to seek GOD, which is as much as
to say, he seriously bethought himself, how he might most advance the Honor of
GOD, in that high station the LORD had placed him in, and we have excellent
fruits of that seriousness, mentioned 2. Chron. 17.6, 7, 8. And 2. Chron. 19.4.
and to the end of that Chapter.

2. Where this Sloth and Neglect has place, there is no good minded nor acted,
even although men be of great and pregnant Parts, otherwise, whereas careful
and diligent Persons, though they may be far short of that quickness and
abilities which others have, yet may do more good, and to better purpose
prosecute their business, then they from whom more might be expected.

Its reported that the Famous and most Eloquent Orator Demosthenes, had no
great promptness or natural parts, but only by Pains and Industry, became to
outstirpt all in Greece; yet when provoked, he would speak nothing immediately,
till he had premediated in his Nocturnall Lucubrations what he was to say:
which occasioned Pythius an Athenian Orator to say, That Demosthenes Orations
did smell of a lamp. Also, when expediency would require, that he should speak
for himself ex tempore, Demades behooved to plead for him, who was very prompt,
and did excel all others in an extemporanean discourse, being by Nature and
Ingyne far above all others in Athens, tho by pains and industry Demosthenes
did far outstrip them all.

It falls often out, that painful and diligent men will do far more, then many
that are of much greater natural Parts; for care and diligence will supply
what is wanting in Nature and Engine: on the contrare, these o^ sharpest Wits,
trusting to the strength of their Parts; oftentimes are slothful and lazy
while they remain too confident in their Gifts of Nature.

3. My meaning is not here to condemn seasonable and suitable divertisment, for
I know the nature of man is such, that his Spirit cannot always keep upon
bend, except it debilitate and loss its vigor and activity; for Nature it self
craves refreshment by sleep in the night, after the travel in the day; so the
Earth cease to bring forth her Herbs and Fruits at all Seasons, but being
spared be the cold nipping frosts of Winter, returns with new strength to shut
forth her tender buds in the Spring.

Its reported in Ecclesiastical History, that when some persons came to see
John the Apostle, through the Fame they heard of his Holiness and Gravity, they
found him feeding a Bird, who perceiving they wondered some what at him, as
being disappointed of their expectation, takes the Bows which were in their
hands, and asks them why they did not always keep them bended? They answered
it would weaken them much, and render them more unfit for service when they
should have use for them: even so said the Apostle, must I take some
divertisment, else my Spirits should fail.

4. Augustus Caesar having changed Capreae for the Island of Inarime with the
Neapolitans, that he might retire thither for his health, did build there a
glorious PALACE, which he made use of for honest recreations when wearied with
business. Recreations are not only lawful but expedient, yea sometimes
necessary, but when men are too much in them, and at unseasonable times, they
are sinful and very unbeseeming any, but especially public persons; for then
not only is time lost, but often times needful and weighty business neglected,
justice delayed, the poor and oppressed not relieved. Even as Tiberius abused
that Island exceedingly, which Augustus did use soberly, for he went thither to
befool himself through sordid neglect and sloth, and when he was to depart from
Rome, set out an Edict that none should call for him, and sent some of his
Train before, that all who in his journey thither were like to meet him, might
be put out of the way and no person to come to him; that being entered this
Isle, he might lay all care of the Empire aside: whereby he permitted Armenia
to be taken by the Parthians, Mysia by the Dacianes and Sarmatianes, and France
by the Germans, with great disgrace and hazard of the whole Empire. He in the
mean time taking liberty through the secrecy of the place, which was guarded on
every side with high Rocks, and no entry thereto but a narrow shore, did
abundantly and freely discover the ill dissembled vices of his mind: And with
Pomponius Flaccus, L. Piso spent both days and nights in feast^ng and
drinking. To the One he gave the Province of Syria; to the Other, the
Government of the City of Rome, calling these his most joviall Friends and
Companions for all seasons.

His greatest delight of that Isle was, that there he could execute his cruelty
more easily, (wherein he took singular pleasure) for whom ever he did hate,
after most exquisite and long torments, he caused throw them into the Sea. Its
sad when the lawful recreations of some, are turned into such excess by
others, that they become their shameful snares and sins.

5. Demetrius King of Macedon, in the beginning of his Reign, was exceedingly
given to sluggishness, and delighted only in solitary idleness, that it was
very hard and difficult to get access to him, which was the more recented by
his Subjects, that King Philip had been so accessible, that any might have got
audience from him at all times. It fell out that an old woman finding the King
not busy, requested him to hear her graciously: The King replied somewhat
passionatly, that he had not leisure to hear her, but she fastening her eyes
cried out, that he should not be a King if he irked to hear: Demetrius
considering and becoming more mild, gave her audience at great length, and did
her business and sent her away with very affable words; and after he had
pondered the words of the old woman, he changed his way and became very
accessible and gracious to all that made address to him, so that a great part
of the day he spent in hearing and giving answers; not without great profit and
delight.

6. By all this, I would desire a due diligence in all Affairs, with that
seriousness that becomes, not excluding seasonable and moderate divertisment,
which will rather whet then blunt the Rational Faculties for their proper
exercises. And that neither Magistrate nor Council may satisfy themselves with
the name of their charge, nor with the form of their appointed dyets and
meetings: but labor to consider the particular affairs of the Town, and of
their respective Charges and to consider of every good and laudable Motion that
concerns the same, and not think it sufficient to approve the same in words,
or with a verbal consent; but so to entertain it, and prosecute all these
public concernments, as not only to stop the mouth of any that may challenge
them of neglect; but fully to have the answer of a good Conscience toward GOD,
before whom they have lifted up their hands to be faithful in their charges and
employments.

7. And here I judge it not unfit to offer it to consideration, that as this is
a Duty of persons in public trust to mind their own Administrations; so it
were worthy of a Judicious Senate, that would advert to every thing commendable
in a Commonwealth, to study all ways and means to check the idleness and
negligence of all within their Corporation: especially of the Youth, whose
spirits being naturally in the greatest heat, and consequently fittest for
action, would be carefully keept at virtuous Employments, which by the Favor
of GOD may greatly conduce to the good of the City, and preservation thereof in
its prosperity; otherwise if Idleness get liberty, all the activity of their
Spirits will vent it self in Vice, which is not only their personal ruin, but
the decay of the whole Body in a short progress of time.

8. Homer the Famous Grecian Poet, when he would mock and jeer Idlesit and
Lazines, he brings in the Cyclops, or Ancient Giants who pass their whole time
in Idleness, and esteems it their chiefest happiness to be doing nothing, he
allots Lands to them that neither needs ploughing nor sowing, but all fruits
grow there naturally of their own accord, by which they are plentifully fed:
and least they should be troubled with the meanest thought, he commits all care
to the Woman. His Verses are rendered in Latin to this purpose.

Omnia per sese nullo nascuntur Aratro,
Non Fora, non causas agitant non sancta Senatus
Jura, sed in celsis habitantes montibus antra
Et puer, and magnis de rebus judicat uxor.
Englished thus.
All things grow of themselves without the pleugh,
They plead no causes nor in Courts do sue,
Regarding not the Senats sacred Laws,
But in high hills they dwell and dungeon caves:
They to their wife and children do commit
To judge of weighty things, as they think fit.
This kind of Idlesit is most hateful, because it is to be esteemed the
greatest enemy to Virtue, and opposes every commendable Art and Calling: and
because it abhores the meanest care, therefore its called by the Ancients
Incuria, and by the Graecians (...), that is without care. I would have all
(especially of the meanest rank) to hate Idlesit, because it has three evil
Companions attending it, Reproach, Poverty and Famine, which are three
exceeding feirce destroying beasts.

9. But though I was saying something in the former Chapter against unlawful
hunting after places and preferment, I cannot but take occasion from this, to
show such a fair way to satisfy their desires, and for this let them take
notice of the word: Prove. 22.29. See thou a man diligent in his business, he
shall stand before KINGS, he shall not stand before mean men. Here a promise of
Honor and Preferment to the careful and the diligent, and this is a
commendable and most lawful way of seeking preferment, if when a man from a
right Principle out of Conscience of Duty, studies a sedulous carefulness and
diligence in all he is called to go about. Upon the contrare, Idleness, Sloth
and Laziness is threatened with difficulty vexation and pain. Prove. 15.19. The
way of the slothful man is an hedge of thorns. So Prove. 13.4. The soul of the
sluggard desires, and has nothing. Prove. 21.35. The desire of the slothful
kills him, for his hands refuse to labor. See Eccles. 10.18. Prove. 24.30.31.
I wish all persons both in private and public employments may seriously mind
these threatenings, relating to this common guiltiness of Idleness and Neglect.

10. But for the encouragement of any who are grieved for their Sloth, and
aversation from Pains, Industry and Virtue; I shall give them two or three
instances, that may raise their hopes and preserve them from utter despondency,
and sinking under this burden: But I must say it were a ground of good hope, if
such as have been usless in their generation, either through a natural
sluggishness of Spirit, or depraved manners, frequenting loose and dissolute
company, that they were so far come to themselves as is said of the Prodigal,
Luke 15.17. To reflect upon their Folly and Sloth, and thereby become weighted
with it, so as not only to desire, as Prove. 21.17. but seriously and
effectually to resolve, to set a work after Duty with all their might: To such
I will set before them these instances.

11. We read of Manlius Torquatus, son to Lucius Torquatus, (a most brave and
excellent Roman,) that he was of such a blunt and blockish nature, that his
Father did appoint him to live remotly in the Country as being unfit for
either private or public business; yet notwithstanding, a little after being
wearied with his sluggish disposition, he so bestirred himself, that he
relieved his father (being found guilty) from the hazard of the Law, and by the
War and Victory he had over the Latins, he obtained a Triumph with the great
applause and consent of the whole people.

What greater corruption could appear, then in Fabius Maximus in his Youth, but
when he came to ryper Years, there was nothing wanting in him that could be for
completing the gallantest of men; to whom the Surname of Allobrogis was given,
in honor of the Victory obtained over the Gaulis or Frenches by his particular
care and conduct, which Surname never wore out of his Posterity.

Neither is that passage concerning famous Themistocles to be past over in
silence, whose profligat and abominable-Life was so despaired of, that his
Mother did hang her self for grief, yet afterward coming to more years, he
attained to such excellency, that the most Eloquent Cicero stood not to call
him the Prince of Greece, and not unworthily, seeing he gathered the distressed
Forces of Greece, when Xerxes with his innumerable Navy began to burn Athens
and other Towns, and became the Valiant Avenger of his Country, and compelled
that King whom the Seas seemed not sufficient to bear, to return with trembling
into his own Country in a small fishing boat. O that such may be the fruits of
many that have long stood as barren Plants in their Generation!

Let all that are sensibly touched with a deep impression of their
unfruitfulness and usless life, improve by Faith and Prayer, that refreshing
Promise, Psalm. 92.12, 13, 14. The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree:
he shall grow like the cedar in Lebanon. Those that be planted in the house of
the LORD, shall flourish in the courts of our GOD. They shall still bring forth
fruit in old age: they shall be fat, and flourishing. Now the LORD is
faithful, And his truth endures for ever. Psalm. 117.2.

CHAP. IX. Anent Envy and Vainglory, being both Enemies to Virtue.
IN the next place, I would have Counselors and Citizens watching against
Envy, whereby a man grieves at his Neighbors Good, Prosperity and Success, and
rejoices at his hurt; or when any cross event befalls him. If the good of the
Commonwealth were sincerely aimed at, it would be the joy of all the Members
that the Body were well. If any were blessed to be an instrument of good to the
Public, every Ingenious Person that has a Public Spirit would rejoice
therein, and esteem more of the person, and give all the Glory to GOD the chief
Author thereof: and would be far from that venomous disposition, to detract,
misconstruct, defame or look with an envyous eye upon such as did deserve
better from all.

2. This evil of Envy rages most against the best deserving, and therefore the
more hateful. If any one be blessed to be an instrument of good, and because
thereof, be commended by some according to demerit, this stirs up Envy in
others, and occasions detraction and misconstruction of the best deeds or
endeavors, contrare to the rule of Love, 1. Cor. 13.4 5. Charity envyeth not,
thinks no evil.

3. Envy has brought ruin to many Famous Cities and Persons. It was the
misery of Athens, that could never endure to see one Citizen become more Famous
and Deserving beyond his fellow Citizens, but either he was killed, banished,
forefaulted of his Estate, or otherwise tempted to put hand in himself. It was
Envy that was the death of that moral and most strick Philosopher Socrates,
whom, when his Wife Xantippe (tho a most perverse Woman, and had been a daily
Trial to the Good man, yet,) when she saw the Executioner reaching the Cup of
Poison, which he was sentenced to drink, cried out, That he was an innocent man
that was now to dye. Socrates answered, What? thinks thou it better I should
dye guilty? What may be said of other Famous Athenians, whose Glorious Actions
both in Peace and War, at home and abroad, did not honor them with the Glory
of Trophies or Triumphs, but procured the Punishment of an miserable Exile.

Themistocles after he had beatten Xerxes in a Sea Fight, and had delivered his
Country and all Greece from the Command and Tyrrannie of the Barbarians,
behooved to yield to Envy. He is rewarded with ten Years Banishment, and the
best excuse the Athenians could put upon it, was that they might bear down his
Spirit, lest otherwise by Power and Glory, he might be lifted up and transgress
the bounds of that popular equality that was fit: yea, they permited Tymocreon
a Rhodian Poet to defame him in Verse, and to accuse him of Covetousness,
Unjustice, Wickedness and Perjury.

5. Aristides who by Virtue and the Glory of his Actions was most Honorable,
and through his Zeal to Justice, was surnamed Just; was ejected and banished
out of his Country, though he had preserved, enlarged it, and with so great
Honor made it Famous. When he was going out of the Town, he lift up his hands
to Heaven, not with imprecations against his Citizens, but prayed to the most
High GOD, that all things hereafter might befall the Athenians so happily and
successfully, that there might be no more occasion to remember Aristides.
Examples might be multiplied, to show how Envy has depressed many excellent
Men, and rendered them incapable to do their Country or Commonwealth service.

6. But because this is the thing that envyous ones most desire, I shall mind
them of some Scripturall instances, that may deterr them from so base a Vice.
Let such consider, that Envy is a disease that torments themselves, more then
it can do the person whom they envy; Therefore Antisthenes said, that as rust
eats iron, so does envy the person that envyeth. Solomon says, Its rottenness
of the bones. Prove. 14.30. So David, Psalm. 112.10. speaking of the envy of the
Wicked to the Righteous, says, They shall gnash with the teeth and melt away.
Job. 5.2. Envy slayes the silly one.

7. It was Envy that made Corah, Dathan and Abiram provoke the LORD, to cause
the Earth open her mouth and swallow them up. So Psalm. 106.16. compared with
Number. 16.30, 31. verses. Envy was the first rise of the ruin of Pharaoh and the
Egyptians, Exodus 1.9. Behold the People of the Children of Israel are more and
mightier then we. GOD who is Love it self, and takes pleasure to do good, and
also in the welfare of all his people, cannot endure Envy; wherefore, if we
would approve our selves to be of one Spirit with Him, we would not envy the
Honor, Esteem, Riches or any Virtue which others do happily procure, but when
ever Providence should bless any, to be isntrumental of public Good, we take
the Obligation as our own, thinking our selves bound to recent it as done to
our selves.

8. But because naturally the Spirit that dwells in us lusts to Envy: James
5.5. all persons would need to watch against Vainglory and Vaunting, as they
would wish to be fred from Envy, for nothing provokes others more to Envy, then
the vanity of boasting of their Virtues, Worth, and of any Good they have done.
Its good to keep an equality and carry soberly, not permiting our selves to be
blown up with any wind of vain Conceit or Applause from others, nor to hunt
after it. Many Heathens have given eminent Examples of Moderation in shunning
all causes of Envy, some have removed themselves from their Native Country of
purpose to eschew the Envy of their Citizens; others have refused Rewards for
their most Notable Services. As Pittacus Mytelaeneus, who was holden for one of
the seven Wise Men of Greece, for when he had fred his Country from Tirrany,
and had killed Phrynon the Athenian General in a singular Combat, when the
Supreme Command of the Commonwealth was offered to him he refused it, and when
his Contrymen offered him great and large Lands, he requested that they
would not give him what many would envy, and many more covet: Wherefore of all
these (says he) I will have no more, but so much as may declare the moderation
of my Spirit, and be testimony of your Good Will toward me; for lesser Gifts
and Rewards are of greater duration, and great things are scarce thought a man's
own. I might add many more Instances of the like Sobriety and Moderation in
great Persons from several Histories, and particularly from the Famous and ever
to be Honored Commonwealth of Venice, where it may be observed, that there
was very little personal Ambition, or Affection of airie Applause, for all
they contended was for the Good of their Native Country, and Wealth and Honor
thereof; for they would not admit of Sumptuous Tombs, nor Magnifick Statues,
nor the Warlick Ensigns of their Glorious Victories to be set up as the
lasting Monuments of their Virtuous Atchievments: but to give one of the many
of such instances, Caspar Conterenus that Noble Venetian, in the description of
the Venetian Commonwealth, shows for proof of this, that Andreas Contarenus
Duke of Venice dying shortly after that most remarkable Overthrow he had given
the Genoaves, prohibited by his Latter-Will that no Ensigns or Ducall Coat of
Arms, neither his own propper Escotcheon or Name should be engraven on his
Tomb, that no person might know where such a Worthy and Well Deserving Person
was interred. This and the like, may check the airie and vain Spirits that hunt
after the vain applause of the World.

9. The Apostle gives an excellent Direction, (which all that have a right
esteem of Gospel Rules will walk by,) Philip. 2.3. Let nothing be done through
strife, or vain glory, but in lowlyness of mind, let each esteem other better
then himself. Again, Gal. 5.26. Let us not be desirous of vain glory,
provocking one another, envying one another.

10. As for Avarice which is a most dangerous and destructive evil to a
Commonwealth, when it gets place in the hearts of Rulers, its so gross a Vice
in public Persons, and I having never seen, nor known any prejudice done by
any in power within the City I live in, to the common Treasury or damnage
thereof: I shall not insist on it, GOD Himself having by Jethro given it as a
special Qualification of all that should be in Authority, that they should be
men Hating Covetousness, Exodus 18.21.

Thus having touched at some special Evils very prejudicial to a City, I
shall in the next place, fall to speak somewhat of the particulars, which the
Town-Councill should be careful to cherish, for promoving the good and
welfare of their Corporation.

CHAP. X. Anent Love and Concord, as the surest foundation of a Kingdom, City
or Commonwealth.
THe foundation of all Kingdoms, Commonwealths, Cities, Societies and
Families, is LOVE and CONCORD; for as our Lord said, Mat. 12.25. Every Kingdom
divided against it self is brought to desolation, and every City or House
divided against it self shall not stand. This may alone suffice to discover the
absolute necessity o^ Concord and sweet Harmony in a City and Commonwealth,
therefore have I chosen to lay i^ down in the first place, as the only and sur^
foundation of a happy and prosperous City. For what is the Origin of a City or
Civil Society but an harmonious Concord and Agreement to live together for
mutual Aid and Assistanc^ in all common Concernments: and when thi^ common and
necessary principle is forgotten and every one minds mostly his own things,
with the utter neglect of the common-Good; it may be said, that People and
Place are going to ruin. And in no Age since the World was, can any instance
be given, where such a City or People did prosper; multitudes of instances may
be given where it was the dismal presage of an inevitable destruction, and
that of the most famous and magnificent Cities in the World. To forbear the
many miserable effects, which at first view are obvious to any judicious
beholder, where this Virtue is wanting, I shall instance but this one Evil,
which is an inevitable consequent thereof, and it is this; Every motion that
can be made for the public Good, though with demonstration of never so much
advantage, if it but cross the particular interest of any Party or Person,
yea, because it proceeds from such a person or party, it is forthwith
opposed, crushed and utterly hushed down by these concerned; and all their Wit,
Power and Moyen laid out for that end: Whereas, ^f there be Love and Harmonious
Concord amongst ^he Inhabitants, all will join as one-man, to ^romote every
Motion that may further the Public Good.

2. Wherefore, I judge it a chief Duty ly^ng upon all in Charge, or that have
any Place ^r Authority in a Commonwealth to lay themselves out in the pursuit
of so great a Benefit: and seeing this is so necessar and conduceable for the
good of a Corporation, I shall propose these few means that may contribute for
the attainment and preservation thereof when attained.

3. In the first place, let there be care taken that all Ranks of Persons have
their due Liberties and Privileges preserved, according to the Rules and
Constitutions of the Commonwealth; for encroachments upon these have caused
great agitations, yea many alterations in the Governments of Cities, and
sometimes have hazarded the ruin thereof; from this General I shall instance
some Particulars.

4. Let the People bewar, first of encroaching upon the Privileges of the
Council and Magistrates, which cannot be done without Mutinies and seditious
Meetings, and the most effectual way to prevent this. Secondly, That the
Magistrates and Council be very tender of the Privileges and Liberties of the
People, to do nothing against them by force or oppression. Hence it was that
the People of Rome rose up against the Decem-viri, when they perceived them to
exercise Tirranny and Oppression under the covert of Authority: Therefore, by
sedition and slaughter they were thrust out, and a new Government erected. So
also the Thirty Praetors of Athens (whom Lysander the Lacedemonian had set up,
after they had with Poison and Sword destroyed many Famous Worthy Men) were
destroyed and overturned by Thrasibulus, which Socrates that Divine Philosopher
foretold before he drank that deadly Poisonous Cup at their Decree. Therefore,
Magistrates would rather moderate their Power by Authority, then bend and strain
it up to the hight. Thus wisely Theopompus did bow the Royal Authority amongst
the Lacedaemonians to a certain mediocrity, and was the first setter up of the
Epheri from amongst the Common People, (like the Tribuns amongst the Romans)
and when he was Taxed by his Wife, as in scorn: Thinks thou not shame (said
she) that thou leaves thy Son with less Royal Authority and Power, then thou
got from thy Ancestors. He answered wisely, O Woman! I do not leave them less,
but a far more strong and lasting Authority. Magistrates would be mild and
sober, as well as severe, as in Wisdom and Prudence the several caises may
call for.

5. Let not 3 dly the Brethren of Gild incroach upon the just Liberties of the
Trades, which I think were rather to be enlarged for the encouragement of
Virtue, then peremptor^ly to be hemmed in: where there can be but small
prejudice thereby to the Brethren of Gild, and yet great benefit to them. By
this the Trades might be engaged to consent more freely and cordially to all
good Overtures, that might advance the Public Interest of the Town; therefore,
any Favor may be allowed them with Public Consent, that may not tend to set
them up in a stated Faction and thereby make a rent in the Body, but all things
which may evidence the good Respects of the Town to them, and encourage them in
their Trades to be virtuous and diligent, ought freely and kindly to be
condescended to 4 ly. On the other hand, the Trades ought not to envy the
Privileges of the Brethren of Gild, but each should be subservient in their
places to another, neither of them seeking to Remove the ancient Landmark
which their Fathers have set, Prove 22.28.

6. In the second place, let due care be taken to suppress Factions and all
factious Persons, which has a direct tendency to Discords, Hatreds Emulations
and many such like bad Vices; if this Evil were seriously laid to heart, all
the means that Wisdom and Prudence could help men to fall upon, would be
employed and improven to bear down this, of which I have spoke somewhat in the
seventh Chapter, and therefore shall forbear it now.

7. In the third place, let Justice be duly administered to all without respect
of persons with out fead or favor; according to 2. Chron. 19.6, 7 I but name
this, and for brevities sake forbear, having mentioned it at more length in the
5. Chap.

8. Let fourthly, all the Inhabitants study a loving, discreet and respectfull
carriage to one another, according to their Rank in the fear of the LORD, and
discountenance and bear Testimony against all miscariages that may cross Love
and Concord, and let all live in a courteous and peaceable Disposition; and if
there be any mistakes, which may readily fall in amongst Neighbors, let every
one according to their Relation and Place study to clear it, and reconcile all
disagreeing Parties, and look upon these that are apt to kindle discords and
prejudices amongst Citizens, (under what ever pretense) to be unworthy to live
in civil Society. If we be bound to offices of Love to Enemies, Exodus 23 45,
how much more to our Neighbors and fellow Citizens. This would be very lovely
both in the sight of GOD and Man, according to Psalm 133.1. etc throughout. O
how good and pleasant it is to see Brethren to dwell together in Unity, etc.

9 For begetting and mantaining this desirable Blessing of Love and Concord in
a City and Commonwealth. Fifthly, it would be very conducible to have
Societies, Fellowships and Fraternities set up in a Town, and they to have
frequent Meetings for conference about such Affairs as are most pertinent to
their Societies, and for this end, it were good there were commodious public
Houses for their respective Meetings, with ways set down and settled for all
Accommodations convenient, (whereby meetings in Taverns might be evited, where
there is oftentimes too much Money lavished, and the Creatures too much abused,
and much time misspent,) where, with much sobriety and mutual assistance they
might with due moderation argue and debate about improvement of Traffic in
Merchandise, and advancing of Trades and Arts, and propose Overtures, and set
down ways for the same, as need should require, to call for the Aid,
Assistance and Authority of the Magistrates and Council, and in all these
Meetings, care should be taken that no motion might be heard, much less
entertained, that did tend to division, just irritation or offense to any
within the Commonwealth; but let all have one eye to the Glory of GOD, their
own Good, and the Prosperity and Advantage of the whole Incorporation. Bodinus
in his third book of his Reipublick, and seventh chapter toward the end,
shows several Advantages of these Meetings and Societies in Countries and
Provinces, and particularly in the Province of Languedock in France, what great
and good things they did, which I shall refer to the reader to peruse, but
generally, there is much good to be done to the whole Town when they are
discreetly and well ordered. By them, all abuses may come to be rectified, and
what is defective supplied; and in a word, much reformation attained, and
advantages improven for the good of every Party and Members of the Body, and
much Love, Harmony and Concord attained and mantained among all the Inhabitants.

10. It were good 6 ly. and very expedient, that the Inhabitants could come to
that degree of Freedom and Brotherly Kindness, as cheerfully to entertain each
other at Table, (my meaning is not by Feasting, or in any extraordinary way,
which might tend rather to a prejudice then increase of Love and Friendshipe;
but that neighbors might be so free and friendly together as to both give and
take a part of any homely fare as occasion did offer.) Cicero called the Table,
Parens and Nutrix Amicitiae, The Parent and Nurse of Friendship. Lycurgus
caused the Lacedaemonians eat all together at Public Tables, and upon the
Common Charges. The Christians in the Primitive times, (when Love was most
remarkable) had their Love Feasts, and all these were but to nourish and
entertain so noble and necessary a Grace, as Love and sweet Concord is.

11. By this Blessing of Love and Concord, how joyntlie all should join
together in every Overture and motion made for the advantage of the Public,
and good of the whole Body, (that as Prove. 24.26. Every man should kiss the
lips of him that gave a good advice,) though it were with some apparent
prejudice to our own particular, if it were for a far greater good to the
Public.

12. By this we should make the Motto of all the Burrowes be most deservedly
called BON-ACCORD, and that upon all commendable and Praise Worthy accounts,
that it should be a delight to all to live together, a good example and
refreshment to strangers that should see our Love, and if we did entertain this
Peace within our Walls, the LORD would add that inseparable Blessing with it,
Prosperity should be in our Palaces, Psalm. 122.7. And for my part it shall be
my Prayer, as verse 8. For my Brethren and Companions sakes, I will now say,
Peace be within thee, and I will seek thy good.

CHAP. XI. Anent Observation of Laws, both National and Municipall.
THere are two sorts of Laws that our Cities are to observe, One is National
Laws, which are made by the Supreme Authority, for the good of the wholl
Kingdom, these ought to be carefully observed, and if their be a negle^t of
them, we are liable to the Penalty contained in the Laws; and in so far as
the Law is just and praise worthy in it self, and is thro^gh neglect, or (which
is worse) wilfully slighted and transgressed; it leaves a stain of unjustice
and baseness upon the guilty: Wherefore, it is not only the Reverence which we
ow to Authority, but the Justice and Equity of the Laws that should engage all
good Men to yield Obedience to the Statutes of the Nation.

2. It may be asserted without prejudice to Truth, as these that are best
acquaint with the Laws at home and abroad knows, there are few Nations (if
any) that can be said to have better Laws then we of this Nation have had: so
that if there should be found any neglect, it would be the default of care and
diligence, yea of the fidelity of those to whom the execution of them is
committed. The best remedy whereof, is to have good, able and conscientious
Office-bearers.

3. Yet I shall not desire to be so understood, as if I thought it Duty
implicitly to obey all Public Laws, for I know a State may err, and have
erred as well as a Church; and therefore Parliaments have found cause to
repeall and nullify many Acts and Laws made by former Parliaments, and in
caise of error (which a man by his private Judgment of discretion may
discern) it is sin to obey. For though the Authority be lawful, yet it may
make wrong Acts, which according to the Law of GOD, (who is the only Supreme
Lawgiver) cannot be lawfully kept, upon this account Israel is threatened,
Micah 6.16. For the statutes of Omri are kept and all the works of the house of
Ahab, and ye walk in their counsels, that I should make thee a desolation, and
the Inhabitants thereof an hissing: therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my
people.

In this caice, I say when a Lawful Authority Acts unlawfully, our duty is to
suffer rather then to sin. It is therefore the duty of all to pray earnestly
for Lawgivers, that they might be Governed of GOD to make no Acts but what are
good and observable, and what are sinful may be repealled. It is so far from
being a duty to obey sinful ordinances, which are contrary to the Commandment
of GOD, that it argues a people to have no sound Principle of the fear of GOD,
but to have more fear and respect unto men that shall die, and to the sons of
men that shall be made as grass; then to the living GOD, who has streached
forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the Earth. Isa. 51.12, 13. And
GOD in his Righteous Judgment not only threatens, but oftentimes executs that
threatening, Hos. 5.11. Ephraim is oppressed, and broken i^ judgment: because
he willingly walked after the commandment. Its no strange thing to see a people
oppressed by those, whose sinful commands they have willingly obeyed.

The other kind of Laws that are to be punctually observed, are Municipall,
such as are made and enacted in Council, and if expediency require, Ratifyed
in a Public Head Court, by consent of the whole Town: for Laws of greatest
and most common concernment, are of greatest Authority, when approven by all or
most of an Incorporation. It is a well Governed Town, where Laws bear the
whole sway of the Authority, when neither fead nor favor, fear nor reward
prevails, but all men are judged according to the Law impartially. Wherefore, I
shall say no more to this purpose, but that it concerns all men in Council and
Magistracy strictly to take notice, what National Laws are most to be
observed, that may conduce most to the good of the Town, and Honor thereof,
and carefully to see these put in execution. And as for Laws occasionally made
be themselves, or by their Predecessors, for advancing of the Common Good, let
them be observed with that veneration, and executed with that dis^retion, as is
most becoming their Honor and Gravity.

CHAP. XII. Some select Acts of Parliament, anent Royall-Burghs and the
Conservator, and anent the Staple.
BEcause Magistrates and Inhabitants of Burghs may probably not have the Acts of
Parliament at hand, to make use of at all occasions, I have thought it not
amiss, to extract out of the Abridgment of the Acts of Parliament, such as I
judged most propper to be known by all, with this caution, that every discreet
and intelligent Person may take heed to distinguish betwixt Times elder and
latter.

That in all Burghs there be eight or twelve Persons after the quantity of the
Town, chosen of secret Council and sworn thereto to decide matters of wrong or
un-law, to the avail of five or eight pounds, within eight days warning. Ja,
2. P. 11. c. 46.

That no man in Burgh be found in Man-rent, nor ride in Roll, in fear of Weir
with any but the KING and his Officiars, or the Lord of the Burgh; and that
they purchase no Lordship in Oppression of their Neighbors under pain of
Confiscation, and their lives to be in the KINGS will. Ja. 2. P. 14. c. 77. Ja.
4. P. 3. c. 34. and Ja. 5. P. 4. c. 27

That all Merchants be Freemen indwellers in Burghs. Ja. 3. P. 2. c. 11.

That Officiars in Burghs be not continued further then a Year, that the
Old-Councill first choice the New; and then both Old and New choice the
Officiars: and that ilk Craft have Vot in Election of Officiars, by one to be
chosen be the Craft yearly, and that no Captain, nor Constable of any Castle
may bear Office in the Town. Ja. 3. P. 5. c. 30.

In all Burghs four of the Old-Council should be chosen Yearly to sit with the
New, notwithstanding the preceding Acts. Ja. 3. P. 7. c. 57.

That the Election of Officiars of Burghs be without partiality or mastership.
Ja. 3. P. 14. c. 108.

That all Officiars in Burgh be changed yearly, and that they be persons useing
Merchandise within the Burgh. Ja. 4. P. 6. c. 80. Honest and and substantious
Burgesses, Merchants and In-dwellers thereof, under the pain of tinsell of
their freedom who does in the contrare. Ja. 5. P. 4. c. 26.

That none be capable of Magistracy, or any any other office within Burgh,
except Merchants and actual Traffickers within the said Burgh allennarly, and
no others. And that the said Magistrates and Commissioners of Burghs to
Parliaments wear such decent Apparel in all solemn occasions as his MAJESTY
shall prescribe. Ja 6. P. 20. c. 8.

That the Commissioners of Burrowes conveen yearly in Ennerkeithing, the morn
after St. James day, to treat about the welfare of Merchandise, and their own
common profit, and the Burgh absent, to pay five pounds to the Coast of these
present, and that letters be direct thereupon* Ja. 3. P. 14. c. 111.

That all Ships, strangers and others come to free Burrowes, and there make
their Merchandise, and that strangers buy no Fish but salted and barrelled, and
shall make no Merchandise at the Jews, and that no Subject take Ships to
fraught in defraud o^ the KING under the pain of tinsell of life and goods; and
strangers contraveening, tyne Ship and goods. Ja. 4. P. 1. c. 3.

This Act ratified, and further that none buy from the said strangers, but from
Freemen, at the Ports of the said Burrowes under the pain of escheat of their
Movables: Q. Ma. P. 6. c. 59. But this Act is called, an Act anent liberty of
Merchants at the West-Sea.

And these Acts again ratified, and that strangers neither buy nor sell any
Merchandise but at free Burrowes and with Freemen: and that none conduct,
fraught, nor pilote any stranger to the Isles, under the pain of tinsell of
Life, Lands and Goods. Ja. 6. P. 7. c. 120.

That Strangers-Merchants lodge in the free Burrowes or Principal Towns of the
Ports where they arrive, and that their Hosts give an account to the KING of
their Goods inward and outward. Ja. 4. P. 4. c. 41.

That the Common-Good of all Burrowes be spent for their Common Profit, by the
advice of the Town Council, and Deacons of Crafts where they are: and that the
Chamberlane enquire into this yearly, and that the Rents of Burrowes be not set
but for three years allennarly, under pain of nullity. Ja. 4. P. 3. c. 36.

Ratification of the Privileges of Burrowes, and that none dwell out of
Burrowes, use Merchandise, nor tap, nor sell Wine, Wax, Silk, Spycerie, Wad,
nor sicklike Stuff, nor Stapple-Goods, nor pack nor peil in Leith or other
places outwith Burrowes, under the pain of escheat of the Goods. Ja. 4. P. 6.
c. 84.

That Commissars or Head-men of Burghs be warned to the giving of Taxes, as one
of the three Estates. Ibid. c 88.

That Magistrates of Burghs bring yearly to the Exchequer, their Count-Books of
their Common Good, under the pain of tinsell of their freedom, and that fifteen
days before, they warn all that pleases to come and object against their
accounts. Ja. 5. P. 4. c. 26.

That no Earl, Lord, Barron, nor others molest Burrowes, their Officiars or
Merchants, in using their Liberties, under the pain of oppression. Ibid. c. 27.

That no man pack nor peil Wool, Skin or Hide or loss nor laid outwith from
Burghs and Privileges thereof. Ja. 5. P. 7. c. 107.

Item, That no persons strangers or inhabitants within the Realm, pack or peil
any hides or skins in the Isles out free Burghs, under the pain of tinsell of
the said hides or skins; and the Sheriffs and Over-lords of the Land where the
same is done, are ordained to put the Act in execution. Ja. 6. P. 23. c. 12.

He that tines the cause within Burgh pays the winners expense. Ja. 5. P. 7.
c. 110. And also, 12 pennies per pound to the poor. Ja. 6. P. 6. c. 92.

That the Officiars of Burghs have the only power to punish Forstalers within
the same, Ja 5. P. 7. c. 113. Renewed, but the power of accusing (because of
the negligence of Burrowes) given also to the Thesaurer, or his MAJESTY'S
Advocat. Ja. 6. P. 12. c. 148.

That Burrowes have an universal Weight. Ja. 5. P. 7 c. 114.

That the Officiars in Burghs search and apprehend all havers of false Money,
or counterfitters of the KINGS Irons for coynzie. Ibid. c. 124.

That Magistrates of Burghs cause Deacons, Craftsmen, and Hostlers, set and take
reasonable prices for their Work and Victuals, or else deprive them of their
Office and Privilege. Q. Ma. P. 5. c. 23.

Ratification of the Privileges of Burrowes and Burgesses, and that Letters be
directed upon their Privileges, and Acts of Parliament made thereupon, without
calling any Party. Q. Ma. P. 6. c. 49. P. 9. c. 86. Ja. 6. P. 1. c. 26. P. 5.
c. 64. P. 6. c. 85. And P. 19. c. 5.

That all common high Gates to and from Free-Burrowes, and to and from
Dry-Burrowes, from and to Seaports next adjacent, be keept and no stop made
thereuntill, under the pain of Oppression. Q. Ma. P. 6. c. 53.

Ratified, and ordaining such as shall stop or impede the same, to be charged
summarily on six days before the Lords of Session, (as only Judges thereto
appointed) to be decerned to have done wrong and to desist, and find caution
for that effect, under such pains as shall be modified, half to the KING, half
to the party grieved, and the probation to be by Famous Witnesses, and not by
an assize. Ja. 6. P. 12. c. 156.

Act in favors of Burrowes of the West, discharging unwarrantable exactions of
Fishers in Lochfyne, or other Lochs of the Isles; by bringing their Fishes
within this Realm for serving the country allennarly, under the pain of
oppression. Q. Ma. P. 6. c. 54.

That none make privy Convention, put on Armor, display Banners, sound Trumpet
or Talbron within Burgh, without the QUEEN or the Magistrates license, under
pain of death. Q. Ma. P. 9. c. 83.

Ratified, and that none convocate or assemble within Burgh except they have
license of the Magistrates, and that they do nothing in their Meeting against
the Acts of Parliament, and quiet of the Burgh, otherwise the said Meetings
are declared seditious. Item, All the Inhabitants are ordained to assist the
Magistrates and their Officiars for suppressing of tumults, under the pain to be
punished by the Magistrates and Council of the Burgh as fosterers of the said
tumults. Ja. 6. P. 18. c. 17.

That the Burrowes may meet four times In the year, by a Commissioner for ilk
Burgh, and two for Edinburgh, at what Burgh they please; for matters concerning
their State. Ja. 6. P. 5 c. 64.

Ratified, and that the Burgh not keeping the Convention when appointed by the
most part, o^ by the Burgh of Edinburgh, or any six or eight of the rest: and
warned by a Missive from the Provest, and Bailies of the Burgh, where the
Convention is to be held or otherwise lawfully cited; be fined in twenty Pounds
toward the Charges of them that meet, and that on the Act of Convention,
Letters of Horning and Poinding be summarily direct at the instance of the
Burgh of Edinburgh for payment of this Fine. Ja. 6. P. 7. c. 119.

That the Taxation of Burrowes be not altered, but stand as formerly; that is
to say, that it be the sixth part allennarly of all general Taxations. Ja. 6.
P. 11. c. 111.

That no Free Burgh sell or annailzie their Freedom in whole or in part to any
other Burgh, or any other ways; without license of his HIGHNESS and three
Estates of Parliament, under the pain of tinsell of Freedom of the Burgh,
either buying or selling. Ibid. c. 112.

Act ratifying all former Acts of new statuting, that none exercise Merchandise
not being Free Burgesses, under the pain of escheat of their whole Movables,
half to the KING, and half ^o the Burgh, whose Commissioner shall apprehend the
same; but prejudice to Landed-men ^o have some Merchandise to their own use and
^ehoofe, provyding they sell not the same again. Ja. 6. P. 12. c. 152.

That all Inhabitants in Burghs, whether they ^e admitted Burgesses or not,
exercising Traffic, or having change within the same, bear their part of all
Taxes, Stents, Watchings, Wardings and all Duties and Services touching the
KING or Burgh, without respect to any privilege granted, or to be granted,
except that the KING may exeem one of ilk Craft for his own Service, and
without prejudice to the members of the College of Justice. Ibid. c. 153.

That there be three Burghs bigged, One in Kintyre, another in Lochaber, and a
third in Jews, with all Privileges of Burghs. Ja. 6. P. 15. c. 263. See the
Act in the Highlands.

That there be no exercise of Crafts in the Suburbs of Burrowes, but that the
Magistrates and their Officiars may intromit with, and escheat all work wrought
or working there, to whomsoever the materials may appertain. Ja. 6. P. 12. c.
154.

And their two Acts ratified, extending the former to Free and Unfree, and
having their Commodity within Burgh, and having no other dwelling, and bearing
no other burden without the same. Ja. 6. P. 14. c. 225. But declared thus, that
all residing within Burgh with their families, who may spend a hundred Pounds a
Year, or are stented to be worth two thousand merks, be subject to burdens with
the rest of the Inhabitants, exeeming and excepting ut supra. Ja 6. P. 15. c
275.

That all unfree persons, not actual Burgesses of the Royal Burrowes where
they dwell, and pays no Taxt nor Stent, desist and cease from using
Merchandise, or any of the Liberties of the said Burghs, under the pains
statute against unfree Traffecters: and that Letters of Horning be thereon
direct, charging the said unfree men to find caution to obey this Act, as also,
upon the Decreets of the Convention of Burrowes, betwixt Burgh and Burgh, and
Burgesses and Free Burrowes upon ten days. Ja. 6. P. 19. c. 6

That Letters of Horning, on a simple charge of ten days be direct on all
Decreets of Acts of Burrowes, inter Concives, and others subject to their
Jurisdiction, and the Officiars execution thereof given on fyfteen days. Ja.
6. P. 13. c. 177.

That the Common Good of Burrowes after the yearly rowping and setting thereof,
be yearly bestowed at the sight of the Magistrates and Council, to the doing of
the Common Affairs thereof. Ibid. c. 181.

That the Magistrates, at the instance of the Heritors, take summar cognition
upon citation of the party, of the condition of Bands Lyferented within Burgh,
and ordain the Liferenter to repair them within an Year; wherein if the
Liferenter failzie, the Heritor may enter to the possession, upon security
found to pay the Liferenter or Conjunctfier the mail the house may give the
time of the cognition, and this extended to all burnt and wast lands. Ja. 6. P.
14 c. 226.

That Burghs and their Stent-masters do only Stent persons according to their
rents and holding within Burgh, but not according to their livings and rents
lying without the same. Ja. 6. P. 15. c. 276.

Ratification of all Privileges and Acts in favors of free Burrowes and
Burgesses, and especially of the Acts of Ja. 3. P. 2. c. 11. Ja. 4. P. 6. c.
84. Ja. 6. P. 12. c. 151. And P. 19. c. 6. All here above declaring the
Liberties contained in these Acts, to be only proper and competent to the free
Royal-Burghs that have Vote in Parliament, and bear burden with the rest Car.
1. P. 1. c. 24. But this Act corrected, and it is ordained, that Freemen of
Royall-Burrowes, and none else, may buy or sell in great or whole sale, Wine,
Wax, Silk, Spyceries, and Wad, or other materials for dyeing; and that none may
import or export the same, or import any other Commodities except as thi^ Act
allows, but prejudice to Noblemen, Prelates, Barrons and others of their
Privilege o^ importing for their own use. But it is declared leasome to any
Subject, or any who shall buy from them, to export Corns of the growth of the
Kingdom, all manner of Cattle, Nolt^ Sheep, and Horse; Coal, Salt, and Wool,
Ski^* and Hydes, and all other Native Commodities. And Burghs of Regality and
Barrony and other Burgesses and members of Societies, may export all their own
Manufacture, and such Goods as they shall buy in Faires and Markets; and all
these Exporters may import for their return or fraught and hyre of their Ships,
Timber, Iron, Tarr, Soap, Lint, Lintseed, Hemp, Onyons and necessaries for
Tillage, or building for the use of their Manufactories and also may tax and
retail all commodities whatsomever. And if any unfree-men shall be found to
have any Goods to be bought or sold, exported or imported, contrary to this
Statute, if within Burgh Royal, Suburbs or Pendicles thereof, then the Goods
may be summarily ceised upon as escheat, but if without, then they may be only
arreasted and pursued as escheat, half to the KING, and half to the
Burgh-apprehender. But they may not only in this last call be summarly ceised
by way of fact by any Burgh, or any for them, under the pain of a riot. And all
Acts and Ratifications contrary thereto are rescinded, and Letters of Horning
are ordained to be direct on this Act at the instance of Burghs Royal. Car. 2
P. 2. Sess. 3. c. 5.

That where houses are ruinous within Burgh by the space of three years, the
Magistrates may warn these known to have interest therein of property or
anuallrent personally, or at their dwelling houses, and them and all others at
the Parish Kirk and Market Cross, and incaice of absence out of the Realm, at
the Cross of Edinburgh, and Pier and Shore of Lies on sixty days, to repair
them within year and day, or otherwise that They will repair them within the
said space, or if none will buy, then the Magistrates may buy and rebuild them,
and this right to be an unquestionable security to the builders. Car. 2. P. 1.
Sess. 3. c. 6.

That no Royal Burgh keep Mercats on Monday or Saturday. Car 2 P. 1. Sess. 3.
c. 19.

Burgesses and Indwellers in Burghs Royal may only arreast Strangers living
without the Burgh for horse-meat or mans-meat, abuilziements or other
Merchandise due to themselves originally, without Bond or security given
thereof, otherwise the Magistrates may be pursued for wrongous imprisonment.
Car. 2. P. 2. Sess. 3. c. 5.

Acts of Parliament anent the Conservator.
THat the Conservator have jurisdiction to judge with six or at least four
honest Merchants with him, betwixt Merchant and Merchant beyond Seas, and that
no Merchant pursue another before any other Judge under the pain of five
Pounds, and the parties expense^ Ja. 4. P. 6. c. 81.

That the Conservator come home yearly, or send a Procurator to answer for
him, under pain of tinsell of his Office and of twenty pounds great to the
KING. Ibid. c. 82.

That the Conservator admit no Cocket except the Merchants, Skipper and Factors
swear that they have no forbidden Goods, nor no lawful Goods besides what is
in the Cocket; and that they know of none in the Ship pertaining to others, and
that so far as they know, all the Goods pertain to Freemen: As also, that
before the loadning of the Ship for her return, they swear that the Goods
pertain to themselves, and not to Strangers; otherwise, the Conservator may
arreast the Ship and Goods, at least all the Goods of the refuser. Ja. 6. P.
15. c. 257.

The Conservator should put the Acts against Usurie in execution upon all Scots
Merchants, Skippers and Factors in the Low Countries, and count thereupon to
the Thesaurer. Ibid. c. 259.

Acts anent the Staple.
THat an Incorporation be made of Scots in the Low Countries, and their
Privileges, ordaining the Scots residing there, and pretending to the said
Privileges, to give their Oath of obedience to the KING and his Laws as if
they were dwelling in Scotland, and that they pay for their entries ten Pounds
Fleemish, and the persons refusers to be deprived of all benefit or commerce
with his HIGHNESS Liedges. Ja. 6. P. 6. c. 96.

That no Ships passing to the Low Countries land any man's Goods but at
Campvere, or the ordinary Staple, and that no person go on land, or take any
thing out of the Ship until her arrival there, under the pain of ten pound
Fleemish, and the Conservator should take the Merchants and Skippers Oaths
thereanent. Ja. 6. P. 15. c. 258.

That Merchants coming from the Low Countries, give to the Conservator an
account of the quantity and quality of the Goods, under the pain of
confiscation thereof, and that a subscribed Cocket thereof be sent home to the
Thesaurer. Ibid. c. 260.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning some Means in general, by which a Burgh may flowrish.
IT ought to be the care of a faithful Senate, and vigilant Rulers over a City
and Commonwealth, seriously to consider, by what means a Town may most
flowrish, grow in Greatness, prosper in Riches, and increase in Numerous and
Virtuous Inhabitants.

I shall name some of these. 1. Religion was a mean whereby Jerusalem was not
only made head of that Kingdom, but also greatest in all Asia, because all the
Males behooved to appear there thrice a Year.

There was the Temple of the LORD, there the High Priest and all solemn
Oblations and Sacrifices, hence it was called the Holy City: but now there are
no places that have any Holiness in them under the Gospel, Joh. 4.21, 22. For
GOD may be Worshipped every where, and any where, if it be in Spirit and in
Truth. I know not any Religious Concernment that might more greaten a City, nor
be a more attractive motive for Strangers, that had any Principle ruling in
them of the fear of GOD, then a Holy People. Isa. 4.3. and 60.21.

When the Inhabitants of a City generally did walk so Christianly and so
Sweetly together, according to Gospel Rules, that they might give evidence of
the fullfilling these blessed Promises, Isa. 1.25 26. upon which account a Town
might be justly termed a City of Righteousness, the Faithful City, this was a
sure foundation of all true Prosperity and Greatness, therefore let all profane
and ungodly persons be esteemed the chiefest enemies to a Cities welfare and
the Pious and truly Godly the chiefest Jewels and Blessing thereof.

A 2 d. mean of making a Town flowrish, is a dilligent care to have Trade and
Merchandise thriving by all due encouragement thereunto, and to endeavor (if
possible) to have some distinct and particular Commodity to be exported or
imported, that no other neighbor Town has, or some useful Manufacture that
is not in any other place of the Nati^^: or at least not so good or cheap. It
we^^ a desirable thing in Scotland to see every Town to improve their
Situation^, and soil their Rivers, Lochs, Trades, Arts and Engines, and in a
word their particular properties and advantages by industry, that each of them
might be found to have some special and distinct commodity to vent, for their
own great benefit and their Countries service.

A 3 d. mean is to cherish Industry, and Arts and Handy-crafts, See Botero on
the greatness of Cities, Page 84. and to procure excellent Wits and Persons of
eminent Qualifications for that end.

4 ly. The erecting and maintaining Schools of Learning, and Professors of all
useful and commendable Sciences, which may draw the Youth of the Country to
be bred in Cities and Towns in doing whereof, special care would be had that
strict Laws and Orders might be set down for the good and quiet behavior of
the Students, and these duly execute by faithful Masters, and careful
Magistrates, that Parents and Relations may send their Children thither in a
measure of confidence and security, and so the Inhabitants be preserved in
Peace.

5 ly. Inviting by immunities from Taxes and Tolls all that have any
commodities to sell, to frequent Mercats and great Faires within Burgh, which
would need to be procured from the KING and Parliament for that end; by which a
Town may have several advantages, though the Taxes were quited, at least very
low. As Monthly Mercats in every great Town, for Horse and Oxen, by which the
Country may be served at all seasons, and the Burgh be benifited by the change
that the Country People should make.

6 ly. That all the Judicatories that may be had be set up within Burgh,
whereby the Subjects may have occasion to make frequent resort to the Town.

7 ly. To endeavor to order well all necessaries for Food and Fireing, and for
keeping and mantaining Families within Burgh, that all Persons of Quality may
be encouraged to buy and build Houses in Towns, which would undoubtedly
contribute much for the Prospering of Trades and Arts in a Town by their
change, and greatly enlarge the City.

8 ly. If there be any special Blessing of Nature in or near to the Town, that
may be for pleasure or profit to Strangers, that the same may be published and
set forth with the best advantages, for inviting the concurse of Strangers to
the place; as the Waters of Bath in England, the Medicinal Wells and Fountain
at Spa in Germany, and Orges in France; and that health giving Spring for
Gravel, Gout, Hydropsie and Colic at Aberdeen, being drunk (according to Dr.
William Barclay his printed prescriptions) in the Summer-Moneths. Or if there
be any notable or curious device invented, or illustrated by Art, which may
adorn or ennoble a Town, the same will influence, and not a little concur to
advance it. All these former means have been drawn from profit, it is to be
considered, that pleasure has been a special mean to draw Strangers to a City.
And for this,

9 ly. Curious Gardens, fruitful Orchards, in, or about a City, especially
when so so placed as may most beautify the Town, which may be no less
profitable then pleasant, according to the saying, Omne tulit punctum qui
miscuit utile dulci.

I shall in the next place enlarge upon some of these in particular, in the
fourth-Chapter I did treat of Religion at some length, and shall not therefore
insist now, but regrate that Superstition has served to greaten more Towns in
many Kingdoms of the World, then the true fear of GOD; and that love that
should be amongst Christians. Witness Rome, which is so much frequented upon
the imagination of her pretended holy places, and false relicts of Saints
departed, and the supreme Authority of her Ecclesiastical Affairs, and her
Judaick Jubilies, by which and many more such like Impostures, she has made
many Nations drunk with the Wine of her Fornications and Whoredoms, and
thereby keeps her self in such greatness, till the LORD by pouring out the
vialls Rev. 16. burn and consume that seat of the Beast.

Many other Cities and Towns are also greatly frequented upon superstitious
Accounts by Strangers, as Loretto in Italy, S Michael in France, Compostella in
Spain, and many other places although rough and almost inaccessible. But now when
Light has discovered these Antichristian-Delusions, I think we should study
upon more Christian Accounts, to invite Strangers (as was said in the beginning
of this Chapter) by being through divine Grace a holy People, living in the
true fear of GOD, and in love to his holy Image, where ever it is to be seen by
an holy and blameless Conversation. Though there be a difference in Judgment
in most Cities now in Britain, let it be our care to love all Men, and seek
thee good of every one if so be the LORD may bring them to the knowledge of
Himself, and the acknowledgement of the Truth, and walk according to that rule,
Phillip. 3.15 16. This as it is very suitable to Christian Charity, and that
meekness and moderation that becomes the Gospel, so it is very conducible to
the greatning of a City and Commonwealth.

CHAP. XIV. Concerning Merchandising.
HAving touched some Generals necessary for the prosperity of a Town in the
last Chapter, I come now to speak of some of them more particularly at some
more length, and the first is Merchandising.

Rulers ought to have a special care to give all due encouragement to Trading
that can be thought upon, for by it a Burgh is mostly distinguished from a
Countrey-Village; rather then by strong Walls or Fortifications as some
distinguish, without Trade a Town were little better: so that Traffic is the
very essence, and by it the Being and Vitalls of a Burgh or City is mantained.

First, It therefore concerns Magistrates and Council to assist, yea, to own
as their propper Concernment, all the Intetests that may impare or prejudge the
Traffic in all Staple-Commodities, when the Supreme Authority makes any Act,
or are like to do any thing that may damnify the same; as in highting Customs
or Bulzeon: These things would be adverted to, and all opportunities carefully
attended when matters of that nature may be best helped, especially at
Parliaments, for this there is a great necessity to make choice of
understanding, able and active men to be Commissioners at such times,
otherwise it may fall out to be done at such a time, that possibly cannot be
gotten helped in an Age.

Secondly, It were good to look well upon all these ways whereby Trade is
prejudiced amongst our selves, as to take condign order with Fore^allers of
Mercats, and such raisers and highters of the prices of common Commodities, and
these that study to enhance one particular Commodity in their hands, that
they may sell and oppress others at their pleasure, and many more ways which
others can more easily fall upon that are better acquainted nor I am with the
like.

Thirdly, It were very commendable for all that have charge in a City, not
only to look to these particulars above mentioned; but to be careful that the
Dean of Gild and his Council of Assessors (to whom it would be very propper)
may set themselves to fall upon the best Overtures for removing of impediments,
and advancing all means that may make every Trade whether of Scottish
Commodities outward, or such Foreign Commodities as are brought homeward to
prosper and flowrish, and then the Council after mature deliberation had; that
the means be propper, and may be practiced without the breach of any duty to
the settled Laws of the Kingdom, may put to their Authority and so effectually
prosecute the samen that no covetous or selfish stickler (that may possibly
find himself hemmed in from his avaricious and greedy way) may be able to
gainstand what the Council has enacted for the Good and Prosperity of the
whole Merchants in common

Hobbs in his 2 d. part of his Rudiments of Dominion, says to this purpose,
That every Society of men that live in a Corporation together, intending the
Public Good of the whole, would not rest upon a bare consent to prosecute
that, and unless there be restraints for fear of punishments on those that out
of selfish ends etc would obstruct the Weell of the Public, so that all men's
particular Wills must run in the Will of the Council, or such as are the
Governors, viz. the major part thereof.

Fourthly. I will not take upon me to mention any particular ways how Traffic
may be advanced in Towns, it being more propper for a Dean of Gild Court (which
would be needful to be always of the ablest and most judicious of the
Merchants, and such as are of most public Spirits,) yet it may not be amiss to
offer these things to consideration.

Consider to what good improvement one man (as I have seen in my time) did
bring the Manufacture of Stockings, viz. G. P. in Aberdeen, whereby there was a
Trade in some measure kept up not only with Merchants at the South and West,
but also with severals that carry them both to England and Ireland; and if one
man by his own private Industry, did bring the Country People to such a
perfection in good Stockings, what may a Corporation do, if a serious care were
had for such improvements in this and many other things.

Secondly, Seeing we have Commodities of our own Nation sufficient to bring us
home all necessaries from France, Holland, and the Nations on the Baltick-Sea,
to serve our Towns and Countries about us, only we have little of our own to
send to London, and our Neighbour-Nation of England; wherefore, such of our
Nation as travel thither, are constrained to ca^ry in Money to their great
expense and hazard, ^or to draw Money upon Bill at a dear rate. To prevent
this, if it shall please the LORD, (who has in his good Providence united both
Nations under one KING, as well as in one Protestant Religion and Language,) to
take off these Acts which are made to obstruct the mutual Freedom and Trade
betwixt the Kingdoms, or to make up a complete Union, (which were rather to be
wished) it were most expedient to consider what Commodities we have in our
Country, that would go best off there, as our Linning-Cloath, Linning-Yairne,
Stockings of all sorts and syzes, Furrs, Feathers etc, and such like things as
active Merchants might easily find out, and would need to keep a good
Correspondence at London, seeing the Merchants there Traffeck with both the
Indies, and in all places where the Netherlanders Trade in any part of the
World: it is probable that our Commodities might in some progress of time make
a good Market there also.

CHAP. XV. Concerning some General Overtures for improvement of Trade, mostly
relating to the Chief Rulers of the KINGDOM.
BUt seeing I have been recommending the care of Merchandise to the Rulers and
Councils of our Cities and Burghs, Merchandise being an employment whereby not
only Burghs, but Kingdoms and Commonwealths does mostly prosper and
flowrish, if well and rightly improven, therefore it not only concerns the
Merchants of the Burghs to endeavor the advancement and improvement of Trade,
but with due submission it is conceived, the Powers and Rulers of the Kingdom
may lay themselves out seriously to encourage it as a special concernment
lying upon them to promove, seeing it mostly advances the good of the whole
Nation, and the decay thereof tends so much to the Public prejudice.

Therefore First, It is humbly to be wished, that our Rulers would take
special care and make diligent enquiry by the Custom-Books and other evidences
that are propper, to know whether the Kingdom or Commonwealth be losers or
gainers by their Trade, by casting the balance betwixt the value of the Goods
imported into the Kingdom, and the Goods exported Yearly; for if there be a
greater importation then there was of exportation, there is so much loss to the
Nation by how much the importation exceeds the exportation, because the
superplus beyond the value of the Goods exported exhausts so much Money which
is drawn forth of the Kingdom to pay it, and so gradually if the super expense
continue, the Trade and Nation must come to ruin.

A Second mean of improvement is, that our Rulers would be pleased to take a
special care of the Coin of our own Nation, and of the value of Foreign Coin
imported, and that the Money paid in by the Merchants for Bullion may be
employed for buying of Bullion, so that the Mint-house lose not the benefit of
the mixture which they must needs lose if they melt Foreign Coin.

A Third is, That they would take care that the Princes and States of Foreign
Nations may grant Favor that there be no impositions laid on upon the product
of our Country, whereby to debar us from Trade with them, as that Denmark and
Norway may not obstruct the Trade of our Victual, etc.

A Fourth is, That there be an encouragment given to the Fishing, such as Code,
Herring, and Whale-Fishing, both as to the exportation, and the Goods to be
imported by the Money that is purchassed by the same; and withal, that
Strangers may be debarred from having the advantage that is more propperly due
to the Natives, for it is reported that the Governors of our North-Isles are
more kind and favorable to the Hamburgers then to our own Natives, in selling
their Fishes to them rather then to our own Contrymen.

A Fifth is, That special notice may be taken how to improve the natural
product of our Land, such as Coal, Salt, and all kind of Grain Wool, Hyde,
Tallow, Skins, Linning-cloath, Plaiding, Fingrams, Stockings, Salmond, Herring,
etc. As First, That Coal and Salt may be appointed to be transported to the
propper Ports as shall be thought most fit, where men may be appointed as
Factors to have care thereof, that the exporters be not necessitated to sell at
the time of fallen Mercats, since they are Commodities that may wait for a
better Market without loss, and are such as cannot be wanted.

Secondly, As to Corn and Grain, that care may be had as is said in the Third
Mean, or Paragraph foresaid.

Thirdly, As for Skins and Hydes, if we had access to American-Plantations, or
if a liberty could be procured to a Select Company, and no others to have Trade
there but they, then Skin and Hyde would be a good Commodity, being well Tanned
or Barked, or made in Shoes; which would not only tend to the great profit of
Merchants, but would occasion many Tradesmen to be set on work at home in our
own Country, seeing we have attained to a good perfection both in Barking,
Tanning and Currying.

Fourthly, As for Wool it needs not be exported at all, if our Manufacturies at
home were carefully looked to; for though we have few or no select
Manufacturies in this Land, yet we can improve the whole Wool of the Kingdom to
better purpose, and sell cheaper abroad then any Foreign Manufacture in the
World can afford it, particularly upon Plaidings, Fingrams, or any kind of
raw-Cloaths; in respect saving of Charges is the life of all Manufactures, for
particular select Manufactures must have servants well appointed both as to
bedding and diet, whereas all the Wool of Scotland may be wrought by the
Commons of this Nation at a very easy rate, because of their sober way of
living, and working but at such times as their other Countrey-work permits. For
illustration whereof, it will not be amiss an instance that fell out several
years ago in my own time, which may evince that the Plaiding and Fingrams made
by the Commons in the Country, is to much greater advantage, then by setting
up a particular Manufacture for the said employment.

There was a substantious Merchant in Edinburgh, called Mr. Barnes, who
considering the great Sumes of Money that was brought in to this Kingdom by the
Plaiding Trade, especially by the Merchants of the Town of Aberdeen, who bought
mostly all their Wool from Edinburgh and the South Parts; so that they had it
but at the second hand, and did sell it out in smalls to the Countrey-People
there about, after they had been at Charges for transporting and born the
hazard by Sea, etc. Whereas he considering, that he might have Wool without any
such expense or hazard, and causing make Plaiding in a particular Manufacture,
there he could not but make greater profit in Holland then they of Aberdeen
could make, seeing he could save such a considerable expense which they were
necessitated to ware out: whereupon he sets up his Manufacture and wrought
about ten Sea-Packs of Plaiding, which might be reckoned worth twenty thousand
Pounds; but when he perceived the Merchants in Aberdeen did sell their Plaiding
at as low a rate as his stood himself at home, and yet with advantage, he fell
a wondering what could be the reason, and meeting with Alexander Farquhar a
Merchant in Aberdeen his acquaintance, enquired how it could be, laying before
him the former considerations, to which Alexander Farquhar replied, that the
people that wrought their Plaiding, had not by far such entertainment as his
servants had, and that they drank oftener clear spring Water than Ale: and
therefore they had their Plaiding much cheaper than he had his, whereupon he
quickly gave over his Manufacture.

Notwithstanding that our Commons live at such a sober rate, they are so set at
work upon the account of their advantage in the North Parts of Scotland, that
in former years the product of their labors has brought into this Kingdom
yearly, upwards of an hundredth thousand rex dollars for many years together;
without this the Nobility and Gentry in their parts could not get their Money
Rents well paid, which Trade and Employment has been their several years
under great decay, so that the Plaiding and Fingrams are become to be sold at
the half of the value which they did formerly, neither is the half exported,
which is mostly upon the account of their deceitful mismannadgment thereof,
which may be helped by appointing particular knowing men, and giving them
allowance to attend the Mercats for visiting and judging the sufficiency of the
Cloth, which would augment the quantity, and advance the Price to the value of
all the Wool that is vented abroad, and unless some such qualified Persons be
empowered, and by an settled allowance induced to a diligent inspection and
judging of the samen, all our Acts of Parliament which has been so
commendablie enacted for regulating these things, will prove but ineffectuall
as constant experience has too much evidenced.

The Fifth Country Commodity is Stockings, which has been within their few
years admirably improven by one Man in Aberdeen, (as was instanced before) to
wit George Pyper, who encouraged the Country People so, by giving them a
little money or some linning at times, that from five groats the pair, he
caused them work at such a fynness that he has given twenty shillings sterling
and upward for the pair: but as the su^ficiency of Plaiding and Fingrams may be
recovered by careful visitors to the great advantage of the Country, so the
Stockings may be made the more saleable, if the su^ficiency of them with the
due length and shape both of Men and Women's be diligently observed, for which a
gage may be made according to the principal gage, and dispersed through all
the Country, that no Stockings may be censured, or confiscated through
ignorance of the owners, and the visitors allowance for his mark and seal
appointed, that all Forraign-Countries may come to know the due esteem that our
Stockings are to be had in.

As the neglect of the sufficiency of Plaiding and Fingrams have been a great
cause of the decay of Trade, so the loss of the Plantations by the Dutch West
India Companies is likewise a considerable cause thereof; which requires that
we should wisely consider, how and where we may recover a good off-tract of
these Commodities, for it was the Dutch Plantations in Brasile (which the
Portuguyes now possess) that were furnished with our Plaiding and Fingrams and
it were worth the while to consider, if we could find a way with any of these
that have Plantations in America now, or if we could fall upon a way of
furnishing the French King his Armies with these Scottish Clothes, seeing there
is no Nation in Europe can serve them at an easier rate, not only in Plaiding
and Fingrams but also in such other Clothes, as Perpetuanes and Sairges.

The Sixth Country Commodity named, is Salmond and Herring, they would be
carefully, seen unto, that they be in all points according to the Acts of
Parliament, particularly the 33 Act of the first Parliament, K. Charles the 2
d. And Magistrates to be diligent in their inspection of Cowpers, by which that
Trade also may flowrish.

A Sixth mean for improving the Trade of the Nation, is that the Estate of the
Burrowes would humbly petition our Rulers in the next Parliament that sits,
that they would be pleased to consider the great damnage the Royall-Burrowes
sustain, and the great discouragment it is to the Trade of the Nation, that
Burghs of Regality and Barrony have got so great Privileges by the 5 th. Act
of the 3 d. Session of the 2 d. Parliament of K. Charles the 2 d. seeing they
may not only buy in Mercats and Faires all Scots Commodities, the product of
the Country, and bring all Staple Ware, but they may also export the same to
other Nations, and bring home with the money or value thereof, what Commodities
for the use of the Country they think fit, very inconsiderable exceptions
being reserved, notwithstanding that the Royal-Burrowes pays the sixth part of
the KINGS Taxation, and the Burghs of Regality and Barrony bear no part nor
proportion thereof less or more, notwithstanding of their enlarged Privileges
and great Traffic, which makes little difference betwixt them and
Royall-Burrowes, as any understanding man may perceive. And it is the more
remarkable, there were several Acts of Parliament rescinded that had been made
in favors of the Royall-Burghs, which the next Parliament may be entreated to
take into their consideration, and what was the cause and grounds of these
Acts. As the 24 Act of the first Parliament of K. Charles the first. So the Act
of Ja. 4. P. 6. c. 84. So Ja. 6. P. 12. c. 152. Ja. 6. P. 19. c. 6. Let the
Burrowes consider that the Convention of Burrowes and the Privileges of the
Deans of Gild etc are now of little significancy by this late Act.

Seventhly, It is worthy of consideration if it be not for the advantage of
Trade, that the Custom and Excyse of Merchant Goods were set and fermed by the
general Taxmen to the special Burghs and the precincts of the same, whereby
several inconvenients might be remeded, as the Customs and Excyse of these
goods that are brought home to Burghs of Regality and Barrony which are
concealed and no count thereof gotten, whereas the Sub-taxmen of the special
Burrowes would be concerned to look more narrowly to it then any other.

Next, whereas there are heavy burdens of Taxations lies on the Royall-Burghs,
so that many Inhabitants remove from them, and others set up in these other
Burghs, seeing they enjoy so great Privileges of Trading to the great decay of
the Royall-Burghs, as may be evidenced, that a great large Lodging with all
accommodations may be had in some of the Royall-Burrowes at a great dale more
easy rate than a very common thack house in some of these Burghs of Barrony,
as may be easily instanced.

Next, the Burgesses of the Burghs of Regality and Barrony getting mostly their
Merchandise stolen free of Custom and Excyse, thereby are in a capacity to
under-sell the Merchants of the Royall-Burghs in such commodities very
considerably, to the no little discouragment of the Royal-Burghs, for they may
sell their wares as far below others as the Custom and Excyse will extend to,
so that the Merchants of Royal Burghs need look for no change, so long as the
other has these commodities.

Eighthly, It would be much for the advancement of Trade as is conceived, if our
Rulers would ordain a competent number of Knowing Merchants out of the
principal Burrowes of the Kingdom, to meet at such seasons and places as shall
be appointed and thought most expedient, for considering and fixing upon a
solid way, for putting in practice all good Overtures, which they or any other
may suggest unto them for promoving the Prosperity of the Trade of the Nation.
And for the further assistance of these, it were good that the Convention of
Burrowes would appoint the Magistrates of every Royall-Burgh, to ordain some of
the most Understanding of their Inhabitants, to meet at such times as they
shall judge fit to consider, debate and argue anent the Trading with these
Commodities which are most in use by the Merchants of the respective Burghs;
and what Overtures they can fall upon for improving the samen and when they
have agreed and condescended there upon, to give an account thereof subscribed
with their hand, or the hand of their Praeses chosen by them, to the Provest,
Bailies and Council of the place, and they to give in the same after a serious
revieu and consideration to the Convention of Burrowes, or any Committie
deligated by them for that effect, and that they may consider, and approve or
disapprove the samen, and give in their Reasons accordingly to the Committie of
Trade; that so after a serious and solid consideration thereof, it may be
recommended to the Parliament, or the KINGS Council for their Approbation and
Authority.

But if it be said that few will be at the pains to wait upon such meetings to
consider things so rypely, to the neglect of their own affairs, as the
proposal seems to require.

To which it may be answered, If the importance of the matter be duly weyed,
and the weighty results seriously considered, it will be found well worth all
the pains and expenses that can be wared, if the Affair be not altogether
turned into a mere formality.

But particularly let all concerned consult and consider the great Revenue
these improvement would raise to the Crown, by the Customs and Excyse, the
Honor, Fame and Esteem it would purchase to our Nation abroad, the great
increase and encouragment it would be to Seamen and Shipping, the plentiful
and comfortable livelihood of several hundreds and thousands of Familie^ in
our Land: and with all, the Virtuous and Praise Worthy Improvement of all these
Commodities that are the natural product of our Country, by which not only
the strength and stock of the Kingdom would be augmented, but the Wealth and
Riches of many privat^ men greatly multiplied, providing that in all our
deportment and industry we walk so, as we may upon good ground expect a
Blessing from the Lord our God. See Psa. 127.1, 2.

CHAP. XVI. Concerning Mechanick-Trades.
IT were a most commendable piece of Government, if Rulers would be at pains to
set down ways how every idle person within Cities and Towns might be
discovered, and strict accounts thereof be exacted accordingly, that all
Persons of every Rank might be known, how, and by what means they live, by what
Trade, Industry and Virtue they mantained themselves and Families.

Diodorus reports that it was a Law amongst the Egyptians that every one should
give up his name to the Magistrate within whose precinct he lived, and show by
what Trade, and by what gain he lived; and if any were found to lie, or to live
by unlawful means, they were put to death, which severity was reckoned the
more just, because idle lazy persons are the poison of a City, its they that
are most pron to Whordom, Drunkenness, and all Debauchrie, its they that hate
the best men, are covetous of others Goods, are seditious, mutinous and
unworthy to be permitted to live amongst Civil and Virtuous People. Wherefore
seeing every one has not a competency of Money to be a Stock for
Merchandising, it were good policy to advert to the natural Genius and
Disposition of young Boys, for what Trade or Employment they may be fittest,
if they are skilled in Writing and Arithmetic and of lively active Spirits fit
for Merchandising, that they might be employed accordingly. If their Talent lie
in a disposition for any Mechanic Trade* that fit Masters may be pitched upon
for their education, in the particular employment their minds are most inclyned
unto. And if there should be found a remarkable Acumen or Mind more then
ordinary, that such might be sent abroad to other Nations (after some time of
breeding at home.) where he may be best perfected in his Art upon the public
expense, with special provision and surety that he should return and serve the
Town in his calling as he should be employed; which would be a good mean to
furnish our Towns with all excellent Arts and Manufactures. If we would lay our
selves out to improve such means and ways, there is no doubt but this would in
a few years tend much to the good of our Cities and the reputation of our
Nation. For my own part, I ever looked upon an excellent Artist and one who had
a good engyne or ability for working excellent things in his calling, beyond
the ordinary strain and common custom o^ men of his Trade, to be an useful
O^nament to a Town in his own Sphere. Therefore virtuous men in every calling
ought to be regarded and encouraged with all respect due to their merit and
carriage, and idle, drunken and thriftless persons rebuked, punished, yea
declared incapable of any place or trust within the Corporation. If this were,
there would be more industry and commendable diligence amongst all sorts; and
less extraordinary drinking and sinful spending of time in Taverns and
Alehouses amongst Tradsmen then there is, for it is both shame and sin for men
to consume their health and time in doing nothing but satisfying their lusts
and carnal appetites. M. Cato in his book of Manners wrote exceeding well in
comparing the Life of Man to Iron; which if ye use it wears away, but yet with
beauty and splendour; but if ye use it not, it is consumed with rust. Virtuous
persons by honest exercises spend themselves so, as they have inward peace,
glory and reputation in the World; whereas vicious and idle wretches gain
nothing but ignominy and contempt. The same Cato spoke well to his Soldiers at
Numantia Consider with your selves Soldiers, (said he) if ye do any good thing
with travel or labor, the labor soon passes away; but the good remains; but
if ye do any business for pleasure, the pleasure soon evanishes but the shame
remains. Which expression shows nothing worse than Idlesit, and nothing better
than Virtuous Industry.

What a comely thing is it to see all persons in Towns diligent in their
Callings, and al^ Tradesmen in their useful occupations industriously
laborious like Bees, all joining their pains to provide what is useful to
humane Society* What can render a Town more illustrious then useful Arts and
Trades, inviting Neighbors and Strangers to resort thither to take away our
Manufactures, and bringing their best things to supply what we need? So much
lies on Rulers to bring from abroad the best of Tradesmen, and to encourage our
own that they may not only be able to gain their livelihood, but may live
comfortably and be useful in the Commonwealth as occasion requires.

Also Rulers would guard against all abuses and oppressions committed readily
by Tradesmen upon new Intrants, whereby they are brought so low in their
condition and so plunged in debt before they can be free in their Trad^ that
they are hardly able in many years to recover and get themselves out of burden.

CHAP. XVII. Concerning Planting, both for Profit and Pleasure.
HAving touched several things that may seem worthy of a Councils
consideration, for making a Town flowrish, in the foregoing Chapters or
Partitions, I cannot ommit to offer it to their Judgments to deliberat, if it
be not very expedient both for profit and pleasure to consider how their Cities
may be beautified with Planting of useful Trees in all places in and near the
Town, where it may be most conveniently had, for it is no small reproach upon
the generality of our Nation, that our People are so negligent and careless in
this particular, notwithstanding of the great contentment and satisfaction that
may be reaped thereby, for Planting is not only delightful to the eye, and in
a manner exhilirating the heart of every beholder, by its beauty and greeness,
inviting the cheerful Birds to chant and express their melodious Notes to the
great refreshment of the hearers often times, but also, in few years (due
diligence and care being taken to plant them aright, and to prune and keep
them) they are very useful for public and private use as need and expediencie
shall require. We find that the most flowrishing and rich Nations have great
abundance of many so^ts of Planting, and that not only by Nature, but by Art
and Industry of the Inhabitants; and Divine Providence has evidenced her
bounty in a liberal measure to us in that matter, no less then to others our
Neighbors round about us, as may be witnessed by the many Woods and Forests
that have been well furnished with Oaks, Elmes, Firrs, Ashes, etc. and
Fruit Trees, which in every generation are much destroyed and cut down, and few
or none to repair them; and how can we but undergo the just reproach of a
careless and lazy People in this thing, and the rather, that no Laws and Acts
of Parliament made by our Gracious and Virtuous KINGS, and Estates of the
Kingdom; particularly by K. James the 5 th. in his 9. Act of Parl. 4. and our
late K. Charles the 2 d. Parliament 1. Act 41. cannot prevail.

It is obvious to the sense of every beholder, what an Ornament Planting is to
Great men's houses who are worthy of their due commendation that have taken
pains herein.

I think it worthy the considering, that when GOD created Man in his primitive
Innocence and Integrity, he placed him in a Garden, and put that exercise upon
him, even in a sinless state to dress and keep it. Genesis 2.8, 15. whence it may
be observed, that Planting and the care thereof is an exercise not unbecoming
the best of Saints, nor the Greatest of men, we may see many Proofs o^ this,
as First in that Good and Holy Man that found Grace in GODS sight, when all the
World (save a few with him) perished, Genesis 9.20. And Noah began to be an
Husband man and he planted a Vyne-yard. Secondly, Abraham the Friend of GOD,
and Father of the Faithful, Planted a Grove in Beersheba, and called there on
the Name of the LORD. Gen 21.33. Next, King Solomon a Great and Wise KING
Eccles. 2.4 5. I made me great Works I builded me Houses, and planted me
Vyne-yards. I made me Gardens and Orchards, and I planted in them all kind of
Fruits. So Uzziah delighted in this Employment, 2. Chron. 26 10. He had
Husbandmen and dressers of Vynes, etc. Yea our Blessed LORD JESUS did honor
this Industry, by his frequenting the Garden, Joh 18.1. When JESUS had spoken
these words, he went over the brook Cedron, where was a Garden, into which he
entered with his Disciples. Ver. 2. And Judas also who betrayed him knew the
place: for JESUS oftentimes resorted thither with his Disciples.

I could name many Great men that have taken pleasure in Planting, as Cyrus the
younger, King of Persia, who planted Orchards and Gardens with his own hand.
See Cicero de Senectute p. 210. But I shall forbear to insist, only desiring
our Cities and Towns may seriously consider the profit and pleasure, and that
it will very far counterballance the expense and pains, by a constant and
yearly recompense, I mean a well furnished Garden and Orchard when carefully
keept and waited upon.

Therefore, I shall close this purpose with a friendly desire that all
Magistrates and Town-Councils may seriously consider, how they may in this give
best obedience to the laudable Acts and Laws of the Land, and with most profit
and satisfaction to their respective Incorporations, and that it may be
remembered, when Adam sinned he was sent forth from the Garden of Eden to till
the ground, which was a more painful and inferior employment and not
permitted to enjoy that sweet and refreshful mansion of the Garden. It was a
part of Gods Curse upon a land, when Trees were smitten and taken away from it.
Exodus 9.25. Amos 4.9. Joel 1.12. And it is a promised Blessing, To plant
Gardens, and eat the fruit of them. Jer. 29.5. Amos 9.4. Ezekiel. 34.27.

Therefore these Precepts may be pertinently applied to this purpose. Tit.
3.14. Let ours also learn to mantain good Works for necessary uses. And that of
Philip. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoev^r things are of good report: if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things. Much of our Corne-fields about some
Towns have been improven for Herbs and Roots by common Gardners, and why not
some of the choicest Soyles and Situations be also made use of for pleasant
Gardens and fruitful Orchards, which are to be seen frequently in well ordered
and flowrishing Towns abroad, to their great profit, health and delight without
their Towns, and few of our Nation have little worse Grounds for such things;
save that Walls and Dykes may be found expensive, and sparing many unnecessary
superfluities in other things, and bringing home Tyle for ballast in Ships from
Holland etc may help that, and the profit accrewing by a fruitful and well
ordered Orchard in a few years will recompense all expensses (with GODS
blessing) abundantly.

CHAP. XVIII. Concerning Charity, and care of the Poor.
THough there may be many Duties incumbent upon Magistrates and Town-Councils,
who are Governors of Cities and Burghs, which the judicious will understand as
their occasions and stations will discover unto them, that there is one Duty,
(which is none of the least) that all are bound to consider, because the
Supreme Governor of Heaven and Earth takes special notice thereof, and has
carefully recommended to all his People: and that is a tender care over, and a
cordial Charity toward the Poor. See for this Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8 9, 10, 11. If
there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren, within any of thy gates,
in thy land which the LORD thy GOD gives thee, thou shall not harden thy
heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother: But thou shall open thy hand
wide unto him, and shall surely lend him sufficiently for his need in that
which he wants.

Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, The seventh
year, the year of release is at hand: and thine eye be evil against thy poor
brother, and thou give him naught, and he cry unto the LORD against thee, and
it be sin unto thee. Verse. 10. Thou shall surely give him, and thine heart
shall not be grieved when thou give unto him: because that for this thing the
LORD thy GOD shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put
thy hands unto. For the poor shall never cease out of the land: therefore I
command thee, saying, Thou shall open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy
poor and to thy needy, in thy land.

This Scripture is so full and pungent to this purpose, that all that fear the
LORD will find it more binding than any Act of Parliament, or any Humane Law
whatsomever; for it has in its bosom, both threats to the disobedient, and
comfortable Promises to the due observers of this Command. Wherefore, Christian
Magistrates should seriously consider upon suitable ways how the Poor within
their gates may be most carefully and discreetly provided for. I know in most
of the considerable Towns in the Land, there are Hospitals, some for Men, some
for Women, some for Orphans and Children, and there are sums of money have
been Mortified and appointed for that end, that the Rents thereof might be
furthcoming for such uses by Pious and Charitable Citizens. Of this the Rulers,
and all that are in Charge should be careful, lest any part of such sums
should be delapidated, and that the Revenues thereof should be duly and
discreetly distributed to the fit Objects, and that care may be had that the
wills of the Mortifiers be punctually observed, lest others perceiving a
negligence herein, might be discouraged from such Pious Mortifications and
Donations.

But where these are wanting or comes short to answer the urgent necessities
of the numerous Poor people that are in a Town, care would needs be had, and
pains taken that all Poor ones whether elder or younger that are in a capacity
to work or go about any profitable employment may be set to work, and young
ones, whether Males or Femals put to learn at Schools and Trades according to
their Capacities and Inclinations, and for this, by the Prudence of Wise
Magistrates, ways may be fallen upon, and Collections of Moneys obtained with
consent of the Inhabitants, that may supply what will be found requisite for
such Charitable and Pious Uses: as supplying the Aged, Decrepit that are not
able to work, and setting the Young Poor to suitable Callings and Employments.
Sure I am, where this care is Christianly and Charitably minded, they have the
promise of a Faithful GOD, that for this thing the LORD shall Bless them in
all their works, and in all they put their hand unto, therefore all would need
to beware of resting upon a bare formality of making a triffling Offering in
Public upon days for Worship, but look upon the Duty as seriously recommended
by Him, who is the Author of all our Mercies, and giver of all our Good things:
see for this, Isa. 58 7. when this Hypocritical formalists were dissatisfied,
that GOD took no more notice of their fastings, and frequenting of Ordinances,
as verse. 2, 3. of that chapter holds forth: the LORD shows them the Reasons,
verse. 4.5. and shows them plainly verse. 7. that the Fast that he regardes is,
To deal thy Bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the Poor that are cast
out to thy house, when thou see the naked that thou cover him, and that thou
hid not thy self from thine own flesh.

Mind that Command, Heb. 13.16. But to do good, and to communicate forget not,
for with such Sacrifices GOD is well pleased. And they that mind most the
pleasing of GOD, he will never be behind hand with them, for Psalm. 41.1.
Blessed is he that considers the Poor, the LORD will deliver him in time of
trouble. It was Jobs Glory, and did afford him no small Peace and Comfort in
the day of his sad distress, that he could say from a Testimony of a Good
Conscience, Job 31.19. If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any
poor without covering. ver. 20. If his loins have not blessed me, and if he
were not warmed with the fleece of my sheep. This man was a blessed Magistrate,
and happy were it if all that are in Authority in the Nation could have such a
Testimony from their own hearts, and that the Power^ull and Rich in the Land
could employ their abundance to such commendable, yea acceptable uses before
GOD, they might upon good ground expect Jobs reward, and such an outgate from
all their troubles, as Job 42.10. Yea they have a promise from his mouth who is
faithful and true, yea Truth it self, that not so much as a Cup of cold water
given to a Disciple shall in no wise lose his reward. Mat. 10.42. Let all
consider this, and so I proceed.

CHAP. XIX. Concerning Magistrates in General, and the Qualifications required
in them.
INtending (if the LORD will) to hold out the Duties of the particular
Office-Bearers in our Royal-Burghs in the Chapters following, I judge it
expedient to set down in the first place the Qualifications of a Magistrate in
general, for the happiness of a Town depends very much upon well qualified and
faithful Magistrates. And for this, it is the duty of all Citizens to endeavor
^o be good men, whereby they may be in a capacity to do good service when
called to places of Trust in their respective Towns, and all that ^ears God
should pray fervently to the Lord to ^aise up many such amongst them.

A Magistrate is an Officer, or Office-Bearer, who has power to command in a
State or City. There be many Office-Bearers that are not Magistrates, because
they have not power to command, nor to punish Offenders. Now we shall point out
some of their Qualifications, and what kind of persons they ought to be.

A Magistrate or Ruler ought to be carefully chosen after the draught of
Scriptur-Magistrats, Exodus 18.21. according to these properties, First, let him
be an able man of body and mind to do the Commonwealth service, not an
ignorant, that can do nothing without the Clerk. This Ability comprehends three
Qualities, first, he must be a man of understanding, and must know the Duties
of his Place, and know how to discern in all matters that comes before him,
else he is unfit to be a Magistrate: he must distinguish betwixt the weight and
justice of the complaint and malice of the Plaintiff, and must be one that can
speak the Law, and judge according to the rule thereof, not weak for abilities
of Government. Thus William Shepherd in his Epistle to the Reader before hi^
Book on the Justice of Peace, who has set down these Qualifications that none
needs expres^ them better, to which I referr the Reader.

Secondly, He must be a man of Courage, that will do what ever he finds to be
his Duty, notwithstanding of all opposition from men, Psalm. 82.3, 4. Defend the
poor and fatherless, deliver the poor and needy, and rid them out of the hand
of the wicked. Men that would perform such Duties would needs be men o^ Spirit,
for so does the word Defender and Deliverer import: hence it is, that Faithful
Rulers are called Patres Patriae, Fathers of their Country, because defenders
of their Country, because defenders and deliverers. Therefore one that will be
boasted, and put from their Duty by the threat of a greater person, or down
cast of countenance from men, or the like; is not fit to be a Magistrate. Men of
Spirit and Courage will not be frighted from their Duty by any thing, but will
hazard all that is dearest to them in the discharge of a necessary Duty, (the
Rules of Prudence being duly and discreetly observed) and for this ought not
to be judged as proud or wilful, for the work is the LORDS, and therefore
has the promise of his presence and out-bearing. 2. Chron. 19.6, 11.

Thirdly, An able man is a wise man, and this teaches not only the Duties
themselves, as to the matter, but reaches the circumstances of them, as the
time, place and manner of doing them. So Prove. 8.15. By me (says Wisdom) Kings
Reign, and Princes decree Justice. And verse. 20. I lead in the way of
Righteousness, in the midst of the paths of Judgment. So that a man by Wisdom
will propose not only a good end, and endeavor to perform a good Duty, and
also will use right means, and so circumstantiat it, as every very step and
path of his way shall be in Righteousness. A wise man ponders all his actions.
Psalm. 112.5. He will guide his affairs with discretion, discerning when to do,
and when to forbear; and the manner how, and how not every thing is to be done,
thus much for an able man.

Fourthly, He must be a man fearing GOD, not a man wicked in life and
conversation, for Power without Piety is but armed injustice, and if he be an
active man that can do much, he will be sure to do much mischief. I think it a
bad maxim, that an ill man may be a good Magistrate, it seems to have more
truth in it, that he that has no care to reform himself, will never have care
to reform others. Magistrates are called Gods, Psalm. 82.6. I said ye are Gods.
And it were well that they did represent more of Divine Perfections, and it is
a shameful thing to see a man in honor have no likness to GOD in Holiness.
The Emperor Constantius said, when he had made a discovery of these Courtiers
who were easily tempted to forsake the Christian Religion, They can never be
faithful to me, that are not faithful to GOD. It is the fear of GOD that
makes a Magistrate behave himself as one that GOD takes special notice of in all
his administrations, and will be more afraid to do any wrong, than if all the
men on Earth were to judge him for his actions, ever remembering that word,
Psalm. 82.1. GOD stands in the congregation of the Mighty, he judges among
the Gods.

Thirdly, He should be a man of Truth, that is, a plain upright man, that loves
truth in himself and others, and counts it his duty and dignity to sift it out
in all things, and having found it, to embrace and mantain it to the uttermost;
for he will easily prove a false friend that will at any time dare to falsify
truth for his friend: such men cannot be stable and firm in any good duty,
neither will he stand for the Truth and Righteousness in an hour of temptation*
Jam. 1.18. The double minded man is unstable etc.

Fourthly, He must be a man hating Covetousness, there is little ground to
expect justice from such as are covetous, for Prove. 28.21. Solomon says, for a
piece of Bread that man will transgress, that is, for any carnal advantage or
gain that man will wrest justice, for coveto^sness is not only Idolatry, but
it makes a Judge an Idol as Psalm. 115.5, 6. That has eyes and see not, ears
and hear not, and a mouth but speaks not.

Fifthly, He should be a just man, equal to all, not partial nor respecting
persons, this is holden out from 2. Sam. 23.3, 4. He that rules over men must
be just, ruling in the f^ar of GOD, etc. Rulers should do as the LORD himself
would do, 2. Chron. 19.7. With the LORD there is no respect of persons, nor
taking of gifts.

Sixthly, He must be a man, Gentle, Affable, not a froward, hasty or passionat
man, for such will not patiently endure to hear many complaints of the Poor.
Moses a great Ruler is highly commended for his Meekness, Numb. 12.3. So CHRIST
as a KING is said to be Meek. Mat. 21.5.

Seventhly, He should be an active man, and diligent in prosecution of duty and
not lazy.

Eighthly, He should be a man of good repute, and known amongst the People, as
Deuteronomy. 1.13.15. Not an obscure and mean man, for Power will arm Skill, I say
not that every Magistrate in a Town must be worth so many Thousands etc, but he
had need to have so much as he may live honestly upon, without being
necessitated to use any Trade or Employment unbeseeming his Office.

It was a fault amongst the Carthaginians, justly taxed by Aristotle, and
esteemed to be one of the causes of the ruin of that great and mighty
Commonwealth, that in their choice of their Magistrates, they had a greater
regard to rich men then to men of worth and virtue, and their reason was,
because men of great Estates might the more easily attend the Effaires of the
Commonwealth: therefore, when men are rich and virtuous also, they are
preferable to all others. But this was a ready way to open a door to all
avarice and fraud said that great Philosopher, and to take the Government from
the Noble and truly Virtuous, and monopolize it into the hands of a few
covetous ambitious rich men, whereas they might have easily, and in duty ought
to have prevented it, by taking such order that the best men, and these of
greatest abilities and virtues might not only abstain from base Callings and
Employments when they were actually Magistrates, but also when they were out of
Office, so that Corporation in their Government might have been cured, and
their ruin happily prevented.

It were good policy to prefer the Virtuous though meaner, than the vicious
and unworthy though richer for it were fit he did excel other men though not
in Riches and Estate, yet in Wisdom, Piety, Courage and better Qualifications.
Prove. 12.26. The Righteous is more excellent than his neighbor. Its such that
prepares their heart for their Duty and will make conscience of diligence
therein, and seek the advancement of the interests of CHRIST, the Cities
prosperity and the good of all and every one under their Charge, and for this I
would recomend to all Magistrates to study these Scriptures well. Psalm. 75.2.
Psalm. 101.8. Psalm. 82. throughout.

But some say, we cannot find Magistrates with such Qualifications in every
Town, and therefore we must take them as we have them.

I Answer, That should not hinder to set down all the best Qualifications
which are to be wished in Magistrates, and which all good Magistrates ought to
study to have, and Cities are to choice the best they can have, seeing the Holy
Scriptures have recomended such Qualifications, we ought to pray that GOD would
raise up many such, and then we must do as we may, when we cannot do as we
would.

Wherefore, having hinted at the good Qualities Magistrates should have, I shall
also touch a little what a sad thing it is for a City to have ill men to be
their Rulers, because Contraria juxta se posita clarius elucescunt. Contraries
set together, make both the more discernable.

Psalm. 82.5. David regrates this as a sad judgment in his time, that men in
Authority were ignorant and perverse, etc. They know not neither will they
understand, they walk on in darkness: and therefore he subjoyns, All the
foundations of the Earth are out of course.

They know not, This implies not so much a blockish ignorance, for it is like
they might have natural Parts like other men, but they know not that GOD
stands among them, that His eye is on them taking special notice of their
iniquity and injustice and bearing more favor to the wicked, nor to the poor
and innocent.

Next, though they may read in the Scriptures that GOD stands among them, and
notices their doings, yet They will not understand, this holds out their
perverseness, and wilful Atheism, as Psalm. 10.11. He has said in his heart,
GOD has forgotten: he hides his face he will never see it. verse. 13. He has
said in his heart, Thou will not require it, and therefore he boldly dares to
do any injustice that his lusts will put him to, though it be really in the
presence of his Great Judge.

They walk on in Darkness, Though their Duty were never so clearly hold out to
them, they will not yield to the Obedience of it, but walk on after the
perverse dispositions of their own hearts, and their obstinate wills, and not
the pure Word of GOD, and His revealed Will.

In this caise the Psalmists conclusion will hold, That all the Foundations of
the Earth are out of course, that is, all Judges and Judicatories which ought
to be refreshfull to the Poor, needy and oppressed, that ought to strengthen
the hands of them that do well, and to be a terror to evil doers, are now
running in a just contrary course and when the foundations are destroyed, what
can the Righteous do, Psalm. 11.3. Sure they need look for no relief from all
their oppressions and inj^ries from men, but commit themselves to GOD who is
the helper of the fatherless, Psalm. 10.14. and 12.5.

From all this it may be seen, the great blessing it is to a City or Town to
have faithful, able and pious Rulers, Prove. 29.2. When the righteous are in
authority the people rejoice, but when the wicked bears rule, the people
murmur. It is therefore an incumbent duty on all to pray, that the LORD would
raise many able men up in their respective Towns, and also to seek it of GOD to
make all the present Incumbents that are in Authority among them, to be such as
they ought to be.

CHAP. XX. Concerning the Duties and Office of the Provest.
HAving recommended several Duties, which the Magistrates and Council in
general are to take notice of, for the good and prosperity of the Town, in the
foregoing part of this Treatis^ I presume next, to set down the Duties of the
several Magistrates and Office-Bearers, that use to be chosen out of the number
of our Councils at every Years Election. This is not that I presume to know
these Duties better than others, but for the satisfaction of new Entrants, who
have not had occasion to be acquainted with such Employments.

The first and chiefest Magistrate in all Burghs-Royal is the Provest. Who in
England is called Mayor, the Romans called him Consul. quia been Rei-pub.
consulat Its his place to have a chief care of all the Effaires and
Concernments of the Commonwealth and therefore he is not only to discharge
this duty in ordinary and emergent Affairs, but he is to forsee and provide
for all things that may conduce to the good thereof; and this care will require
serious consideration of all that may advance the welfare of the public, or
any part thereof, and of any danger or evil that may fall out to the damnage
thereof, to prevent it and guard against it.

Secondly, It is his place to preceed in Council, and moderat the samen and to
take special notice of all the referrs thereof that are to be done.

Thirdly, He is to conveen the Council upon extraordinary days, in all
doubtsome matters or emergent occasions.

Fourthly, He is to oversee the rest of the Magistrates and Office-Bearers, that
they all do their Duties and acquit themselves diligently in all things that
relate to their charge, for its not enough to give good advice and Counsel, if
the samen be not put in execution tymeously and seasonably.

Fifthly, He is to be careful that all the Charters and evidents, and every
Paper that is of importance to the Towns Concernments be punctualy kept in
the Towns-Charter-Chists, or where they ought to be preserved; and not left in
any other hands else where, least they may come to be missed, and be in
seeking, to the great neglect of these that have the charge of keeping them,
which ordinarily is the Provest chiefly and some of the Bailies.

Sixthly, And above all, he is to have a care he be just, innocent and of
singular integrity in all his behavior, for an ill example in a Magistrate is
far greater than a fault in inferior persons: Therefore the chiefest Magistrate
should have the chiefest care of his public Charge, and of his own personal
behavior. I need the less insist upon this which concerns him as the chiefest
Magistrate, having so fully holden forth the Qualifications he should aim at in
the last Chapter.

CHAP. XXI. Concerning the Office and Duties of the Bailies.
THe next Office of Magistracy is the Bailies, whom the English call Aldermen,
and the Ancient Romans called Praetores, quia praeerant. They have the same
Authority with the Provest in all our Burghs, as to Decreets and execution of
Justice, hence it is, that some have called the Provest Primus Balivorum.

The Bailies being four in number in all our chief Burghs, their charge is one
and the same though for order, and easing the Burden in some things they are
divided, and so they divide the Town in four Quarters, and every one of them
has his propper Quarter alloted to him by choice or lots according to
agreement.

First, It is his Duty to take up an exact account of all the Families and
Persons living within his Quarter, and to know what they are, if Citizens or
Strangers, and what is their Trade or Occupation, and by what means they live
and mantain themselves, that so no idle, suspect, or scandalous person be there
without due notice taken.

Secondly, They are to wait ( per vices) every one a month about in the Towns
public House, or Clerks-Chamber thereof, so many hours every day, that is,
from ten to twelve forenoon, and an hour or two afternoon, to hear Complaints,
examine Parties and Witnesses, and accordingly if there be cause to set down
Convictions, and bring them to the next ordinary Councill-day, that the guilty
persons be censured by the whole Council according to merit.

Thirdly, Its his duty to wait on the weekly and public Courts of Judgment,
which are but two days ordinarily every Week with some, to wit, every Tuesday
and Saturday of the week be ten of the clock in the forenoon, where he sits in
the public Townhouse as sole Judge in all Legal Processes that are amongst
Citizens in Civil Differences, that are not peculiarly competent to be
determined by the Lords and Senators of the College of Justice, (who are the
Supreme Judges in all Civil Controversies for the whole Nation,) and so in this
place Bills are read, Summonds are called, Officiars or Serjants faithful
Executions thereof carefully noticed and cleared; agreements proposed, and
reasonings pro and contra heard from the Advocats of the respective Parties,
Processes carried on to Interloquitors and final Decreets, as is usual before
any other Civil Judge in the Kingdom. In matters of great difficulty, the
Bailie is to have the advice and judgment of the Towns Consulter, who ought
always to be the most Learned, Judicious and Discreet Lawier that conveniently
may be had.

And yet the Magistrate ought not wholly to captivat his Judgment to what ever
he advises, but is bound to ponder well, and advise if his Information and
Judgment be according to the known Laws and common Pratticks of the Nation,
and according to Conscience; for this it concerns every Magistrate that sits in
Judgment, to be a Judicious and Intelligent Person, and one that is careful
to have knowledge of the Acts of Parliament and Civil Pratticks, lest otherwise
he may ignorantly be made to pronounce Decree which is not according to Equity
and Justice, through the partiality of the Consulter, who possibly has been
solicited or brybed by the injurious Party, and therefore the Consulter should
be not only able, but a person of singular Integrity.

Next, I judge the whole Magistrates, Provest and Bailies, should advert to all
the particulars in the foregoing Chapters, which are laid before the Council
for the good of the Town, as opportunities may be offered and occasion given,
seeing the Magistrates are as the hands, as well as the heads of the Council,
to put in execution what ever they enact; for though a Council did make all the
profitable Acts and Constitutions imaginable for the Public Good, it were to
small purpose if diligent and active Magistrates be wanting. Therefore, let
Magistrates notice these desirable Qualifications, that they should be endued
with, mentioned in the former Chapter of this Treatise.

CHAP. XXII. Concerning the Office and Duty of the Dean of Gild.
THe next Office-bearer to the Provest and Bailies is the Dean of Gild, whose
Duty is according to the Charge usually given him after his Election.

First, He is the Towns-Fiscall, and therefore is to accuse all Fore-stallers
of Staple Commodities, and see them convicted by the Magistrates according to
Law, and so to be censured by the Council at their next siting; also, to accuse
all other public Transgressors, as incroachers upon the Towns Privileges or
Magistrates thereof, or brakers of the Paenall Statutes.

Secondly, He is to receive and count for all the Fines and unlawes of the
convicted persons censured by the Council, and if personal punishment be
inflicted with an alternative, as to be redeemed therefrom by such a sum of
Money, he is to see that the sentence be executed accordingly, and cause the
Clerk insert it in the book of Convicts and Fines, otherwise he is to be
countable for the Money, it being always to be supposed by the Auditors of the
Towns Counts, that where there is no evidence of inflicting of the personal
punishment, that in that caise the Dean of Gild has received the Money as the
alternative thereof, he is likewise to receive the Fines of Fore-stallers as
convicted, and then censured by the Council.

Thirdly, He is to receive all the Money for Casualities belonging to his
Office; as for instance, if there should come a Stranger with any Merchant
Commodities to the Town, that could not be divided amongst the Merchants
according to their due proportions, but it would cause mistakes and strifes to
arise, if some got thereof and others nothing, in which caice it is his Duty to
conveen the Merchants by public intimation with the hand Bell, and represent
the caice to them, and with their consent obtained, to roup the Commodity, and
what profit he gains more than he is to pay the Stranger, he is to charge
himself therewith, either amongst the common accidents belonging to the whole
Town, or in his Count of the Gild-Box for their Poor, as shall be condescended
by the meeting.

Fourthly, He is to have special care that no private person buy any Foreign
Commodity from a Stranger, but to buy it himself; yet with all to be sure that
it be taken off his hand at the rate agreed for and with profit, seeing
Strangers are not Burgesses and not free to Trade, therefore the Stranger is
holden to make his first offer to the Dean of Gild, and not to sell to any
other private Burger till then, and that no private person shall have it under
wha^ he offered it for to the Dean of Gild.

Fifthly, It is his Duty to look carefully that the Towns Statutes be keept, as
to the Prices of all things which the Council has se^ down for that Year.

Sixthly, He is to see that all the Weight and Measures whether public
belonging to the Town, as the public Weights in the Weigh^ house, Barrells,
Kinkins, Firlots, Pecks Elnes and Metts: as also these of private person in
their Trading and private Shops or Maltmen, Wine and Ale-sellers, their Elnes,
Stoups, Weights, etc that all these be according to the Act of Parliament, and
the several standards appointed and approven thereby, for he being Censor
Morum and Delictorum has a very great Charge lying on him, and who ever they
be that are faulty or short in these things he is to accuse them and see them
convict and censured by the Magistrates and Council, and therefore he ought to
take in the help of his Assessors, in consulting what abuses are to be noticed
in the Town, as being of alse great moment to his place as to give Judgment in
matters of controversy betwixt Merchants in his Court.

Seventhly, He is to be careful to recommend to the Council, that they elect
for his Assessors the Wisest, Gravest and most Experimented Persons in the
Town, who will make Conscience to assist him in the faithful discharge of his
Duty, and with those he is to keep Court every week once and as occasion
requires; where he is to preceed for hearing and judging of all causes and
differences betwixt Merchants amongst themselves, and Merchants and Seamen,
according to Jac. 6. Parl. 13. c. 180.

Eighthly, With these his Assessors he is seriously to consider how to increase,
preserve and distribute the money of the Gild-Box, for relief of decayed and
poor Brethren of Gild, their Relicts and Children, according to discretion and
Charity.

Ninthly, He is seriously to propose at the meeting of his Court, if any have
an Overture to offer that may be made practicable, for promoving, securing and
advancing the Trade of Merchandising in the Town, and gravely to debate
thereanent, and prosecute it after due deliberation according to Reason and
Discretion.

Tenthly, He is to press them earnestly to consider, if there be any abuses or
transgression of Public Laws, or Towns-Statutes by any that keeps the weekly
Mercats in any kind of these things that contraveen the Statutes, that redress
may be made and the guilty punished, and for this, the Towns-Statutes for
regulation of prices would every Year be written in the Gild-Court-Book, and
often read for memories sake.

Eleventhly, He is to consider what reparation the Towns-House or Tolbooth,
Pack-House, Weigh-House, or other public Works that belong only to his Charge
requires, and to cause the same diligently be performed by the respective
Artists and Tradesmen: and if there be any thing whereby the Town may be better
accommodated or adorned without profusness, or prodigal expenses, he is to
think upon such things and propose them to the Council.

By these foresaid particulars this charge may be seen to be very weighty, for
if there should be found gross disorders in the Town in matters relating to his
Office as before mentioned, it may be justly imputed to the neglect and
unfaithfulness of the Dean of Gild more immediately than to any other of the
Magistrates, though it still lies upon them to put him to his Duty if he shall
be found wanting.

But if a man shall worthily acquit himself in all duties belonging to this
Charge, which is without doubt one of the weightiest in the Commonwealth; he
may remember how the famous Roman Cato was surnamed the Censor, all his life
and ever since also, not as if there had been none in that Office but he: there
were many be ore and after him in that Charge at Rome, but because he did
discharge his Duty most faithfully and diligently, he obtained that
designation, as if in that Office he had obtained a victory or gotten a
Triumph. Even as Scipio was surnamed Africanus, from these Heroic Victories he
obtained there. Wherefore, I shall only say as Paul the Apostle said of an
Elder that ruled well, 1. Tim. 5.17. That he that discharges the Office of
Dean of Gild well, is to be counted worthy of double Honor.

CHAP. XXIII. Concerning the Office and Duty of the Towns-Thesaurer.
THe next Office-bearer is the Thesaurer, of whose Duty he is to receive a
particular account Yearly after his Election from the Towns-Clerk.

It is alwise expedient he be a person who can command ready money, for if his
predecessor be super-expended he is to pay him at the Term immediately ensuing
to the Election, and to advance any money due to the Towns-Stipendiaries at the
said Term; as also any other ordinary, and some times extraordinary
advancements, which the public good of the City may require.

For which he is to gather in the Towns propper revenues, whether they be Fwes
of Lands within the Freedom of the Town, or as some Towns have Fwes of
Salmond-fishings, and all their ferm duties as of Mills, Pack-house and
weigh-House, Customs and Tolls, and all other such like duties as are insert in
his charge; and if all these will not serve, he is to advertise the Magistrates
and Council thereof, that either moneys belonging to the Town, and resing be
other persons may be called for, or an taxation to be imposed upon all the free
Citizens, may be tymously granted and collected for his satisfaction, before
the year of his office expyre

I must add for the encouragement of any person that shall be in this Office, I
never knew any a loser in their debursments for the Town, unless it had been
through their own neglect, in not timely taking up and using diligence against
the persons and estates of those who are indebted to the Town; and if it fall
out otherwise, it is a reflection upon the Magistrates and Council as defective
of discretion, in not timely provyd^ng for his satisfaction if the Thesaurer
have given them timely warning.

There are several other Office-Bearers next to these formerly mentioned, and
they are according to the different constitutions of the several Royall-Burghs
in the Kingdom, some have the charge of the Kirk-Works and Bridge-Works, some
have the charge to the Mortified-Moneyes, and some have the charge of the
Hospitals, and some have the charge of the Shore or Harbors, or Works
belonging to them, etc. But seeing the settled Office-bearers that are fixed and
constant in every Royal-Burgh are spoke to at some length, I need say little to
the other, seeing every one of them are to have their distinct charge which is
sufficient to instruct and direct them in their duty, and by consulting the
Magistrates and any other that are best skilled in their Effairs, they may be
counseled what to do and how to behave in all these concernments, as become
judicious and discreet Persons that are chosen to these Employments.

CHAP. XXIV. Concerning the Office and Duty of the Towns-Clerk or Recorder.
THough the Clerk have no vote in Council, yet he is a necessary constituent
Member in every Judicature and Court, and ought to be a wise, sober and
faithful man: a person well acquainted with the Laws both National and
Municipall; eloquent in Speech, an able Penman, and one addicted to diligence
in all the Duties of his Charge, and one that will make Conscience to serve GOD
and Man in his station.

He should be First, Wise and Judicious, that thereby he may discern what is
legal and just, and expedient to be done, and if he perceive somethings done
otherwise, he may modestly and reverently express it in Council, or to the
Magistrates as the caice requires.

Secondly, He should be sober, otherwise he will (as one puffed up with
self-conceit) incroach upon the Duty of a Magistrate or Counselor, and take
upon him to carry more highly than becomes, which is most unseemly in him, and
seldom without a tacit reflection on those who should command him, to wit, the
Magistrates.

Thirdly, He should be faithful, else it is like he may be carried with
Faction, and by^assed with respect of persons in his collecting and marking of
Votes, and conceiving and recording of Acts which is most detestable, and were
sufficient to render a man incapable of all trust.

Fourthly, He should be well acquainted with the Laws of the Kingdom and
Municipal-Laws of the Town, that thereby he may order processes, and keep the
Courts for common Pleas, where the Bailies sit Judges in due form, and happily
may be capable according to his abilities to consult the Bailies indifficult
Law caices, seeing it may fall out, and oftentimes de facto does fall out, that
some young men are made Magistrates that are little acquainted with many such
like things incumbent to his Office, which an intelligent and discreet Clerk
may be often very isntrumental to help.

Fifthly, Eloquent in speech, for it may fal^ out that need require an able man
to expres^ the respects of the City to a PRINCE, o^ some Eminent Noble Person,
or to represen^ the caise or cause the Town has to lay before him, and
therefore it were very requisit^ he were Eloquent and confident to discharg^
this Duty, since it is to be supposed his Breeding and Education may prompt him
more to it, then men, that are frequently Magistrates i^ Cities, though
otherwise they may be jud^cious and su^ficiently qualified.

Sixthly, He would needs be an able Pe^ man, not only for conceiving clearly
Acts an^ Decreets, but missive Letters to Persons of a^ qualities, he only and
propperly being the Towns Secretary.

Seventhly, Addicted to be diligent in all the duties of his Charge, because he
is intrust^ with recording all Acts of Councils, and all D^creets of Bailies
and Dean of Gild Courts; Bo^ and all such public Concernments in the Tow^ he
is to beware of loytering or leaving hi^ self behind in filling up of Books and
Registers, and therefore the Council may deligat some in particular, to see
that the minute of their Acts be rightly drawn up and carefully looked to in
their Public Register before their next Meeting.

Lastly, He would needs be one that makes Conscience to serve GOD and Man in
his station, and if he has this Quality joined to his other abilities, all the
forementioned requisits will be the better performed. He will not covetously
extortion any he has to do with in his Employment, but rest contented with
such rewards as the Magistrates and Council appoint for him according to his
several Duties, which in discretion they ought to do, and not leave him to
exact what he lists.

CHAP. XXV. Concerning some Duties incumbent upon the Magistrates jointly.
HAving briefly touched the duties of the Council in several Chapters, and
pointed at the Office and Duties of the Magistrates and every Office-bearer by
themselves apart, I crave liberty to mention somethings that may concern the
Magistrates in common and jointly together.

As First, Its ye that are to visit the Schools at least every quarter, with
such persons as ye think fit to call to go along with you for examina^ion of
Grammer-Rules, Themes, and interpretation and analizing of Authors: and for
this it were fit before ye went, 1. To cause read such Mortifications as
concern the Grammer-School, if there be any, that ye may discharge your Trust
according to Conscience. 2 ly. At every Visitation read over the Laws of the
School, which in some Towns have been several times Printed, and are recorded
in the public Register of the School. 3 ly. Be careful there be no partiality
in distributing the Praemia or Rewards, that the best Scholars may be most
encouraged. 4 ly. That every Visitation be particularly Registered in the
School-Register, with the names of the Visitors, and the Scholars that gain
the Praemiums may set down their own names, with the ground upon which they did
obtain the Praemium, and thus the putting their names upon record, will be as
considerable an encouragement as the Praemium it self. 5 ly. The Masters
attendance and faithful discharge of Duty, and the observance of the appointed
hours would be carefully inquired into, and their exercise of Discipline
toward the Scholars, and defects when they are found reproved and recorded in
the Register, that it be amended against the next Visitation, and if so, the
amendment to be recorded, and so the last blot taken off. This much for the
visitation of Schools, and if there be any further requisite, I leave it to your
ryper considerations, as the constitution of Schools in the several Burghs may
require.

Secondly, Ye would need to meet together shortly after your Election when
every Office-bearer has got his Charge from the Clerk, and take every one a
day a part, because this work would be done to purpose and not posted over, and
cause read over his Charge whom ye call first, and recommend it to his care and
diligence what is incumbent: with all adding that in respect he will have more
time and opportunity to perceive what is amiss under his Charge, and what will
be fit to be done by him, that upon discovery thereof he may acquaint the
Magistrates or Council that course may be taken therewith as shall be found
most convenient. This would be done exactly with every Office-bearer.

Thirdly, It would be a work very suitable to your place, to fall upon the most
Prudent, Judicious and Discreet Men in the Town, few or more as ye think fit,
with some of your own number, and call them and lay it upon them
Authoritatively, to take notice of all differences, plyes, mistakes, discords
or heart-burnings that fall out amongst neighbors to reconcile them; and
accordingly ye ought to call the Parties, and show them that as Magistrates ye
look upon your selves as engaged before GOD amongst other Duties, to keep the
Citizens in Peace and Love one to another: and that timely notice be taken of
all pleas in Law, that expenses may be prevented and Love and Friendship
preserved in the Town. Justitia and Benignitate Pax inter Concives. If there be
any incendiarie, or bad instrument in a Town, let such be noticed and rebuked.

Fourthly, It were a commendable thing if ye that are Magistrates would meet
among yourselves once every week, and probably it might seem fit at an
afternoon before your Councill-day, that ye might prepare and rypen matter^
that are under refer for the Council, or what else ye may think fitest to be
done in the Towns Effaires, this would not only shorten your work upon
Council-days, but would evidence that your Actings were done with good
advysement and deliberation.

Fifthly, It will be worth your consideration, to fall upon a way to make up a
public Liberary of such books as are most fit for qualifying Magistrates and
persons in public trust, such as these that treats of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths etc, and Laws thereof and Histories, Geographie, that treat of
the manners of Nations, our own Acts of Parliaments, Regiam Majestatem, and
generally all other such like Books that may become Civil Rulers to be
acquainted with. But it may be there are but few acquainted with the
Latin-Tongue or French-Language, that afford several such, as Bodin that writs
copiously of a Commonwealth in French. So Franciscus Patricius Senensis that
writs of the Institution of a Commonwealth, and of the Institution of a
Kingdom; Wendilini Polititia, but these are in Latin and are old; but there
are many Modern that may be found at London. Also books fit for a Dean of Gild
and his Assessors, as Lex Mercatoria, Roberts Map of Commerce, the knowledge of
the Sea-Laws, as the Roll of Oleron, or Consolato of Barcellona, etc. which
being keept in some Public Place, where the Magistrates and Counselors (by
the persons that had the trust of them under inventour) might at all occasions
have access unto. Sure I am, it were a very commendable thing to have such a
Liberary in your Council-house which would be at hand, and continually under
your eye and care, and might be made use of at any time convenient.

Sixthly, Ye are with the rest of your Neighbors of the Town once every year
to ride your Land-Marches, both outward and inward Marches; the outward is that
ye see that none of your Neighbour-Heritours encroach upon your Freedom-Land,
nor upon the properties of your Fewers.

And the inward Marches is, that ye may see none of the Heritors of the
Burrow-Roods encroach upon the Highways or beyond the bounds of your
March-stones: and while I mention this, it were fit ye should take some
effectual course with the Highways or Avenues that come into the Town, that
horses with loads may come into the Town all the Seasons of the Year, in Winter
as well as in Summer and the rather, that ye have the advantage of the public
Acts and Orders for your assistance therein.

Seventhly, Were it not worth your serious consideration, to fall upon some
suitable way to stir up all Magistrates and private persons to perform notable
services to the welfare of the Town, and to bethink your selves what may be of
greatest efficacy to encourage all sorts of persons thereto?

I think amongst many other ways (which ryper judgments may fall upon) it
might be a good one to imitate the LORDS own way, set down in Mal. 3.16. Then
they that feared the LORD spoke often one to another, and the LORD hearkened,
and heard it, and a Book of Remembrance was written before him, for them that
feared the LORD, and thought upon his Name. See verse. 17. And they shall be
mine, says the LORD of Hosts, etc.

This was a bad time, for they that wrought wickedness were set up, and they
that tempted GOD were delivered; and the proud were called happy, and because
it was rare to hear any speaking aright of the Ways of GOD, yet they that
feared the LORD did speak often together, and GOD hearkened and heard it, and
insert it in a Book of Remembrance for time to come. For they shall be mine
says the LORD of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare
them, as a man spares his own son that serves him. This was the way the LORD
took, even to record notable Service, that in due time he might reward them.

So when the LORD blesses any man to do any notable Act for the common Good of
the Town, either for profit or reputation, I think such an Act ought to be
recorded even in a Register apart, that they and theirs may find the more
respect, if there fall an opportunity to manifest it in t^me to come.

The putting Mordecai's good Service on record, was the occasion of his
exaltation, the Jews preservation, and Hamans destru^tion. Esther 2.23. And
6.1, 2, 3.

The Romans and Graecians had their own ways for stirring up their Citizens to
all Heroic Acts, but they were deeply tainted with vain glory as their Triumph
and Lawrel-Crowns, as their Corona Ovalis of Myrtle, for a victory gotten with
little hazard, Corona Civica made with leaves of Oak for him that saved a
Citizen from the Enemy: so also Corona Populea, for Young men that were found
industrious and studious in the exercise of Virtue which was made of Poplar
leaves. These were but trivial things, but much intended to gratify vain
glorious humors.

But the putting notable Services and Acts upon record, is for the encouragement
of the Posterity, and others that may be observers thereof; and therefore may
be done with such solemn circumstances as may be thought fit and most
consistent with modesty and sobriety so as the posterity may be influenced to
the same, or such like exercises. Romans 13.3, 4. They that do good are to have
Praise and Rewards from Rulers as well as evil doers are to be punished by them
who are to be a terror to such.

If these had been recorded, there had been Honorable mention made of many
stately Buildings and Monuments in many of our Royall-Burghs, which long ere
now, or shortly will be quyte forgotten. Neither these Artists and private
persons that do good Service, or find out good inventions for profit or
ornament to the Town should be neglected.

CHAP. XXVI. Concerning Justice of Peace Courts, to be holden within Burgh by
the Magistrates thereof.
IN the foregoing Chapters I have presumed to suggest several particulars
which may conduce to advance the Polilcy, good Government and prosperity of a
City or Commonwealth as men, and in his I am to mind the Rulers more
particularly ^ow they shall order it as Christians, in evi^enceing their zeall
against sin, for the honor and Glory of Him who is the PRINCE of ^he KINGS of
the Earth; and upon whose ^houlders the government is laid, from whom ^lone all
blessings of peace, prosperity and pre^ervation can be expected, and without
whose ^racious favor, no skill, power, wisdom or ^eans that men shall use can
profit, according ^o Psalm. 127.1. Except the LORD build the ^ouse they labor
in vain that build it. Except the LORD keep the City, the watchmen waketh ^^t
in vain. Then seeing all our mercies spring from this fountain, it concerns all
Magistrates very near, to be careful that no gross sin be indulged amongst
them, such as Whoring, Drunkenness and Swearing; these are the most common
Scandalls unsuitable to the Gospel and such as profess it; that are to be found
in Cities and Towns. These are sufficient to provock GOD to withdraw his
mercies and to send sad Plagues and Rods; and to confound all your Counsels
and blast your best Endeavors: for suppressing whereof, I know no better
outward mean then a conscientious, faithful and diligent Court of Justice
kept by well principled Magistrates, assisted by pious, honest and zealous
Constables weekly

Now I hope no tender Christian will judge me too presumptuous, to offer to
propose a rule to the Royall-Burrowes, how they shall bear down these common
Vices, seeing I can say it in sincerity, it is more from a respect that I owe
to GODS Glory, and the real regard I have to the Honor and Welfare of all
the Burrowes of SCOTLAND, that I humbly hold out my mind unto them in this
matter.

Therefore I wish that all Magistrates in their respective Towns, would choose
out of every Quarter of their Town, four, five or six, well qualified, sober
and discreet men, to be Constables (it were expedient that some of them were
members of the Church-Session) that with them they might meet and hold a Court
every week upon such a day as shall be judged most convenient, and there the
Constables may give in their delations upon those persons they have found
guilty in Whoredom, Drunkenness or Swearing, who may be ordered to be summoned
against the next Court day, that then and there they may be censured and
punished according to their merit by Fynes, Imprisonment or so as the
Magistrates in their discretion shall think fit, not exceeding the censures
imposed by Acts of Parliament. And for the more effectual bearing down of
Swearing, it will be found fit that one of the Constables with one of the Towns
Officiars or Serjants should go through the Town on every Market day per vices,
when the Country people are conveened, and greatest confluences of people to
be seen; and whatever person they find taking GODS Holy Name in vain, or
swearing any other Oath, that they may immediately exact some small money from
every one that are found so doing: and after the Market give in all that money
to the Collector, or to the Magistrate, to be laid up for public use, and a
note thereof to be keept in the Register. I know by experience, that in few
Months this way diligently gone about in a Town where thousands of people have
frequented the Market place, there has not the meanest Oath been heard in that
place; but it is sadly to be regrated that this Zeal waxes too soon cold.

But if any shall object, that Church-Sessions or Consistories are sufficient
to take order with these evils* and are fitter than any Magistrate or Civil
Court?

I answer, It is true, that Ministers and Church-Sessions continue to do some
thing of this according to the custom in Country Parishes, and some Acts of
Parliament authorizing them therein; but in this Polemick-Age when many things
are controverted, which were not questioned formerly, it is found a matter very
extrinsick to Church Officers or Guids, to meddle with any thing that is
propper to the Civil-Magistrat, such as Fynes, Imprisonments, or Corporal
Punishments, seeing Magistrates within Burghs may easily perform that Duty,
whereas in Country Parishes they cannot be so conveniently had.

Secondly, It may be easy to any understanding men to perceive, how Heteroclit
a thing it is to see Preachers speaking to such delinquents more Magisterially
liker a Civil Magistrate than Ministerially, menacing their Persons and exacting
on their Purses, whereas it were more becoming Ministers of the Gospel to
endeavor to awaken and convince their Consciences which is their propper work,
because the Weapons of their Warfare should not be Carnal. 2. Cor. 10.4.

Thirdly, Neither is this design to weaken their hands, but to strengthen them
in their propper work; seeing the end of both Courts is to suppress Sin, and it
is the more likely to take the desired effect, when Civil and Ecclesiastic
Rulers do every one their Duty in their propper Sphere.

It is more suitable to a Christian Magistrate, to execute Justice by Civil
Punishments upon delinquents with a tender compassionat heart, and to speak to
the Consciences of sinners, then for a Preacher of the Gospel to threaten
Corporal Punishments; tho they can pretend to no more zeall then James and
John, Luke. 9.54, 55. whom CHRIST rebuked, saying, Ye know not what manner of
spirit ye are of, for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to
save them.

But some may say, why may not this Court take order with Blood-wicks and
Ryots, and the breach of all other Paenall-statutes?

I answer, Not, because this were to encroach upon the Privilege of the Dean
of Gild, whose duty it is to accuse and see these convicted and punished that
are guilty of the breach of these Civill-statutes, and to collect their Fynes,
but he used not to notice persons guilty of Whoreing, Swearing and Drunkenness,
but most ordinarily these were either laid over to Church-Sessions, or
altogether neglected and little noticed, unless it was Whoredom, and the
unfitness and inexpediency of this is spoke to before, which I referr to the
Readers serious consideration.

Happy were every City and Town in this Land, if the Zeal (which in some places
is often times too apparent for self-interest,) were running in no other
channel, but that which is pure, holy and harmless, for the Honor of GOD, and
the welfare of Souls, which in Christian Meekness and Love might sweetly vent
it self to the joy of GODS Spirit, edification of all Pious and sober minded
People and the conviction of the most stubborn and obstinat offenders.

But as the best and most Religious Duties of GODS Worship may degenerat and
turn to a form of Godliness without the Power, as 2. Tim. 3.5. which feed the
fancy, and in some the itching ear with Rhetorical flowrishes and specious
outsyde dresses. 2. Tim. 4.3, 4. rather then building up souls in the most holy
faith. Jude 20. So these means tho never so much strengthened and established by
Law, may through remissness and want of true Zeal be also turned into a mere
form, without any fruit or effect according to the temper and disposition of
the instruments, or the iniquity of the times when Sin lifts up its head and
comes to that hight of arrogance and pride, that it will not admit of a check:
but however a Duty remains a Duty, and when we cannot do what we would, and
impediments become insuperable, In magnis voluisse sat est.

The great and many Advantages that will or may accrue by a diligent
prosecuting of this Justice Court weekly may be easily perceived, for thereby
sin may be duly punished, Swearing and all Oaths banished out of the streets,
and a considerable sum of money collected for the poor and other pious uses,
the Clerks pains liberally rewarded as a punctual Register kept for that end
may evidence, for, as Uno dato absurdo multa sequuntur. So one Good comes
never alone.

CHAP. XXVII. Concerning some Considerations laid before the Youth, in every
City or Corporation.
HAving written at some length of the Duty of Rulers that have the Government
of Burghs, I cannot close this Treatise till I lay some considerations before
the Young Men of all our Cities and Towns in the Nation, that are born and bred
therein: as also, to the Inhabitants and Freemen of our Cities.

As to the Youth, I would have them consider that they are the seed and
seminary of their respective Corporations, and that the Blessing and Happiness
of a Town does much depend upon them and their behavior; for if they be
Virtuous, Wise and Sober, they may procure in due time, a great commendation to
the Place of their Nativity and Residence; if otherwise, they do what in them
ly to draw disgrace and contempt upon it. See Prove. 11.11. By the Blessing of
the Upright the City is exalted, but it is overthrown by the mouth of the
wicked. For by Riotousness and Debauchrie they ruin themselves, and make way
for Strangers to be Inhabitants. See Prove. 2.21, 22 For the upright shall dwell
in the land, and the perfect shall remain in it; but the wicked shall be cut
off from the earth, and the transgressors shall be rooted out of it.

Wherefore in the first place, I recommend to them in the fear of the LORD,
that they would above all make it their care to know GOD and his living Motions
in their hearts, whereby he bears witness against all the Sins they are
inclyned unto, and points out their Duty and the Way they should walk in,
according to Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth,
for tho they follow the corrupt ways of their hearts in the days of their
youth, yet (says Solomon) Knew thou for all these things GOD will bring thee
into judgment. Eccles. 11.9.

Wherefore O Young Men! be faithful to the Light of GODS Spirit in your
hearts, for its there ye shall here a word behind you, saying, This is the way
walk ye in it: when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.
This is a teacher which shall not be removed into a Corner. Isa. 30.20, 21.

And therefore, be much in reading and studying to know the Mind of the LORD in
Holy Scripture, and join Prayer therewith, and be serious n it, and let it not
be a bare form; but look up to GOD in all, and wait on him till thou obtain the
desired blessing. See Prove. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. My Son, if thou will rceive my
words, and hide my Commandments with thee; so that thou incline thine ear
unto-Wisdom, and apply thine heart to Understanding: yea, if thou cryest after
Knowledge and liftest up thy voice for Understanding: if thou seek her as
silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasure: then shall thou understand
the fear of the LORD, and find the Knowledge of GOD. For the LORD gives
Wisdom: out of his mouth comes Knowledge and Understanding.

Next I recommend to you to set your hearts to prosecute some virtuous Calling
or Employment, whether it be Merchandiseing or Mechanick-Trade, particularly
(in the LORD order it) to choice every one of you the Trade of your Father,
though herein ye are not to be limited, but by a diligent and skillfull
prosecution of some Virtuous Calling and Employment, ye will not only be able
to preserve that Portion left to you by your Patents, but by the Blessing of
GOD to augment the samen to your great credit and reputation. The sooner ye
betake your selves to your Callings, the better. Parents are oftentimes
b^ame-worthy, that keep their Sons at Schools and Universities though their
Talent and Inclina^ion run not in that Channel, till they are unit for
breeding in their Callings, whereas the Knowledge of the Languages and
Arithmetic mi^ht be sufficient to qualify them, as men mee^ to live in these
civil Employments fit for a C^tizen.

It has been observed frequently by wise and sober men of all ranks, that it
has been the ruin of Burgers Children that they followed not their Fathers
Trade, but i^ their Parents purchased any considerable Estate by their Trade
and Industry, the Children (bred up at a far higher rate both in appar^ll diet
and breeding, then their Parents were or their Trade could allow,) became more
high-minded, proud and vain, that they judged it below them to stoup to do many
things which their Parents did. Hence through want of fit Education, and foolish
pride and conceitedness, many have become idle men, and spent their whole life
without any Calling, and so have become poor and left their Children in a mean
condition, or have been necessitated to go off the Country to seek a
livelihood else where: from hence it needs not seem strange to see old Families
in Cities wear quyt out, and to have no Posterity to preserve any memory of
them, for how soon any competent Estate is gained by the Parents, the Children
(as I have said) become vain and riotous oftentimes, and forbear any virtuous
or commendable Calling, and live an idle life, which does not a little reflect
upon the Rulers and their Government; and upon the reputation of the Town.
Wendelin in his 2 d. book 12. Chap. cites Cicero in his 7 These Page 198.
saying, Tamdiu duravit in Civitate Gloria, quamdiu Adolescentibus Romae vagari
otiosis non licuit. That is, Glory or Renown remained in the City, so long as
idlesit was not permitted to the Youth in Rome.

Its reported that Marcus Aurelius the Emperor in his time, did condemn all
those to the Public Works that walked in the Mercat-Place without the bage of
their particular Calling. If such Laws had place, it would serve to abate the
vain conceitedness in many that will not abase themselves to keep Shops, or
these Employments which their Predecessors did use; and i^ may be, were the
first mean of their riseing, or coming to any respect in a World: forgeting
that word, Prove. 12.9. He that is despised and has a servant, is better then
he that honors himself and lacks bread, Which plainly speaks out to this
purpose, that it is far more commendable to Trade and use any lawful
Employment, and thereby to live comfortably, then out of a vain conceit of
themselves of being above such mean Employments, to spend their time idly,
and so bring inevitable want upon them and theirs: whereas it were far more
commendable, to see the Children of Old-Burgers continuing to follow their
Parents Trade whereby they might prevent inevitable Poverty, and spend their
days with much Comfort and Peace both outwardly and inwardly, and give good
example and means of education to their Posterity, and retain the respect and
esteem which their Parents or themselves have gained in their City. These are
the fruits of that Virtue which is the product of a truly Wise, Humble and
Sober Spirit.

It is a matter worthy of consideration for all that are in Power and Authority
in Burghs and Cities, who would rejoice to see their Fellow-Citizens prosper,
and Virtue to grow amongst them, to give all due encouragement not only to
Trade in general, but particularly to such as evidence a virtuous disposition
in following the Trade and Way of their Parents and Predecessors, especially
seeing this has been so little in use these many Years, yea Generations.

And as this Duty is not only Blessed with many Personal and Domestic
Advantages, to these that carefully and prudently follow the same, so it has
its own advantages for the good of the City. As First, the Offspring of Old
Families will not be a burden to the Town, which oftentimes gives occasion of
reproach to Latter-in-comers to upbraid them, and bury the Virtues and good
Offices their Worthy Ancestors have manifested in their time, to the advantage
of the Commonwealth in utter oblivion. It could not but move the beholders to
see M. Hortalus, the only Stock of the Noble Hortensian Family, to plead for
Charity with his four Children in his hand, before the Emperor Tiberius, and
the Lords of the Senate of Rome, laying out his Poverty before them, tho he was
descended of so many Consuls and Dictators, yet through want of honest
Industry, or that Frugality requisite, had fallen into extreme necessity:
whereas if he, or his immediate Parents had not through Ambition wasted, or
through idleness suffered their Estates to ruin, as the Emperors answer to him
did insinuat, he and they might have prevented this shame. Cor. Tacitus lib.
2.8.

Secondly, In like manner, by this the Town is better furnished with able and
understanding men for Rule and Government, and better management of the Towns
effairs, seeing it is evident, that these who are born and bred in the Town,
are for most part better educated in Learning and brought up more carefully at
Schools then Strangers, or Countrey-people are, who for most part come from the
Country to be Merchants and Tradesmen in Burghs.

As also, many Towns-Youths have occasion to be bred in Foreign Countries, and
thereby to attain better accomplishments then others who never had such
opportunities, so that they may be far more useful and skillful for public
effaires then others.

Thirdly, By this Old Families may be continued to many Generations through the
blessing of GOD, if not in growing prosperity in Wealth, Credit and Esteem; at
least in a continuance of what has been already attained thereof, as has been
seen in many great and flourishing Cities abroad, whereof abundance could be
instanced. And this would wear out the common reproach put upon Cities by the
indiscreeter sort of Gentry, who look on them as Carles and base spirited-men
which is mostly occasioned by the frequent access of too many that are such who
take up Trafficking and Merchandising, and supply the rooms of many of these
who think themselves too good to Trade.

And seeing there is nothing can make a man more properly a Gentleman then
Virtue and descent from virtuous persons, by Birth and Antiquity joined with a
competent Estate and Living, and good accomplishments of the mind, our Cities
being furnished with the Offspring of old Inhabitants well educated and bred,
and virtuous in their Callings and Behaviors, might upon good ground be
reputed Gentlemen as well as many others that without question are held so;
seeing that Merchandiseing in it self, may be esteemed as consistent with a
Gentleman as Tillage of the Land may be to these Gentlemen who labor their own
Lands, which doubtless is very commendable in it self and becoming the Greatest
Persons: seeing the Spirit of GOD gives this Counsel by a Royal and Princely
Hand as the Penman, Prove. 12.11. He that tilleth his Land shall be satisfied
with bread, but he that follows vain persons is void of understanding. The
meaning whereof is very plain, preferring Industry in the most common and
ordinary Calling to an idle life, under what ever pretense of Gentility,
esteeming such in plain terms fools and void of understanding.

Fourthly, By this our Cities and Towns would be better furnished of public
Spirits, that would be more tender of the good of the Commonwealth; for it is
without all doubt, that when the Inhabitants are born and bred in the Town, and
it may be, descended of several Generations of Ancient Citizens, they will not
only be more ready to lay out their pains and labor for the Credit and good
of the Town, but will more willingly spend and be spent, yea, lay down their
lives if called thereto, then probably can be expected from New-incomers, who
cannot have that natural love and respect to the place which others cannot but
have. Hence it is reported of the Generous Romans, that after the battle at
Cannae, when almost all ground of hope was lost of preserving Rome, Florus lib.
2. cap. 6. said, Aerario deficiente privati opes suas Reip. conferunt. That is,
When the Thesaurie was exhausted all the private men bestowed their Wealth upon
the Publict.

I would have all Citizens to consider the way and manner of the most
flowrishing Cities abroad, where Traffic and all kind of Trade is vigorously
prosecuted to the great increase of Wealth and Prosperity, and that by the most
considerable men in their Towns, some one way and some another by
Mechanick-Trades, as well as by Merchandiseing. Let all inform themselves, of
the Industry of the Inhabitants of the Towns of the United-Provinces, who by
their pains and industry in their several Callings are become so great and
powerful, yea ^ormidable, that there is no KING nor PRINCE ^n Europe but will
honor them with the Title ^f High and Mighty Lords: whereby they have ^aunted
the pride of the Spaniard, and more ^hen once coped with the most Powerful
PRINCES in Christendom. Let also the In^ustry of the Hans-Towns in Germany, and
^he Cities on the Baltic Sea be considered, and that it is that makes each of
them so considerable as they are.

It is reported, that the Grand-Seigneor a^ongst the Turks, who is one of the
greatest PRINCES of the World, that even he must ^lso have some Handy-Trade,
such is the re^pect, that even Infidels put upon Virtue, when ^any that are
called Christians are in this worse ^en Infidels, who refuse to provide for
their ^amilies by commendable and virtuous Cal^^ngs and Employments. By these
and the ^ke considerations, I earnestly entreat that all ^ur Inhabitants, of
what ever rank or quality ^ey be, would seriously ponder the great im^ortance
of Trading, every one according to their Talent and Ability, and that the
meanest may be encouraged in all fit ways becoming, especially Young Men. The
Romans thought this much worth the noticeing, for they Crowned publicly all
Young Men that were studious of virtuous Exercises and Employments; with Corona
Populea, with Poplar leaves as I touched in the twentyfifth Chapter of this
Book.

CHAP. XXVIII. Directed to the Inhabitants, and Freemen of Cities.
IT may be easily believed, how much of the welfare of every particular
Citizen depends upon the well-being of the public Estate and Condition of
their respective Towns, for a City or Commonwealth is but one Body, as was
well expressed by one showing it was as absurd for the Members of the
Commonwealth to grudge to contribute their uttermost endeavors for the
Public good, as it were for the Members of the natural Body of a Man to
repyne against the Stomach, because the Hands work, the Feet walk, and go
about business, etc, whereby the Stomach might be brought to utter indigencie
and want through famine, it is easy to conjecture how soon the Hands should
hang down, the Feet wax feeble, the Eyes become dim etc. The application of
this is clear that it will be no otherwise with every Member of the
Commonwealth where the Public is neglected.

It was the sense of this (as I hinted before) that made the Generous Romans
after the Bat^ell of Cannae, every one both Senators, Knights, and
Privat-Citizens, to cast in their Privat-Wealth into the Common-Thesaurie, when
it ^as quite exhausted: yea, this made the Tradesmen, as Measons and Carpenters
etc, to employ their pains and labors without wages in that ^xtremity for the
Good and Preservation of their City, by which Public spiritedness, they ^on
recovered their pristine Glory, Renown and Wealth, being thereby delivered (by
the ^rovidence of the ALMIGHTY) from that ^minent danger, which then did
threaten ^eir utter ruin, by a powerful and prevail^g Enemy Hanniball and
his victorious Army. See Walter Raleighs History, and Florus.

Let all therefore consider, if a Town or Commonwealth be under a great decay
and heavy burdens, that are like to ruin the same, if surable and seasonable
remedies be not provided, whither it be not as needful for Citizens to deny
themselves, and give up their private interests to be disposed of for relief of
the Public, as it is for a diseased person that is threatened with death by a
deadly disease, to submit to let blood and to purging evacuations, though the
potion were never so bitter and unpleasant to the taste, especially if there be
hope of health and life thereby. We must not be as Children who are led merely
by sense, but as Men who by Reason can deny Sense and force themselves to
submit to such Medicines as may effectuat the cure, though never so unpleasant
to the pallat.

It is therefore an unbeseeming thing in any, to grudge at any Impositions that
may relieve the Public Burdens of the Commonwealth. And surely those Towns
whose Inhabitants voluntarly consent to such reliefs, without the Imposition of
the Supreme Authority, are highly to be commended, as Dundee and Glasgow, such
cannot but flowrish and prosper, as is to be seen by the considerable
acquisitions which the City of Glasgow has made within their few years, yea in
building a new Town at the mouth of their River with all accommodations for
Trade, etc. I could be glade that all the Citizens in this Kingdom would but
inform themselves of the public spiritedness of that People their many years by
gone, and emulat with them; and to give but one instance of this. In the time
when the Englishes had the Government of this Nation, when Gess and Excyse was
great; they of their own accord did agree to pay six Shillings-sterling upon
every Boll of Malt, whereby they paid all the public Dues, and the whole
Sallaries of their Stipendiaries; and had their Public Revenue of their
Thesaurie still free from any out-givings all that time, whereby they shortly
after acquyred Lands of great Rents. An Old-Provest of that Town J. G. told me,
that though they were divyded among themselves in some things, yet if any one
should make a motion that might tend to the Public Good, they all agreed as
one man.

So that it may be said in some respect of them, as Florus in his second book;
Chap. 6. said of Rome, after the Battle of Cannae. O populum dignum omnium
faevore and admiratione hominum! compulsus ad ultimos metus ab incepto non
destitit: and de sua urbe solicitus. (that is) O people! worthy of the favor
and respect of all men; and of their admiration; though redacted to the last
extremity; yet careful of their Town.

If such a Spirit did act the Citizens of our Nation, our Towns would be in a
more prosperous condition by far then they are: and in order to this, I will
lay before you this consideration, either ye are Citizens born or not. If ye be
Natives? it is but natural to all men to love the place of their Nativity.
Many have not thought their Lives dear to them, and to undergo all perils and
hazards for the Honor and Well-being thereof, according to that old saying.
Dulce est pro Patria mori. It is grateful to die for their Native-Countrey.

And they that are not born, but now made Free-Citizens may mind that their
Children are born there, and Parents for most part travel and toil for their
Children, and so in freeing the Public Debts and Burdens, ye free your
Posterity of Burdens.

But some possibly may jealous the Administration of their Magistrates as
unfaithful, etc.

To which I can say, (having several years born Office in our own Town,) I
never knew any cause for such a thought, nor that ever a Magistrate was so base
as to be guilty of such a Crime, which the Romans called, Crimen Peculatus:
when Magistrates or others took of the Public Money to make their personal
gain, which is to be abhored by GOD and Man, and is enough to procure a Curse
upon them and their Posterity, who ever should be guilty of such baseness.

I have read of several brave Men amongst those we call Heathens, that have
been Persons of greatest Trust, who have been so faithful, that rather then
appropriat of the Public to their private use, they have preferred to dye poor:
so that they have been buried on the Public Expense, and their Children
educated and provided by the same means. It ought to be far more abhorrent to
these that profess Christianity.

But because it is frequent with many to admit of a dissatisfaction with their
Rulers, and apprehend their might be had many fitter to Govern then they who
are present Incumbents, I suppose if they had their choice, it would fare with
them as it did with the People of Capua, when they were about to have murdered
their whole Senate, had not Clavius Pacuvius, who had great respect amongst the
People desired them (being conveened in a Public Assembly) to fall upon the
choice of a New Senate before they destroyed the Old. There was not a man that
any could name, but he was rejected by the multitude for some fault or other,
or as base and unworthie: wherefore he prevailed with them to spare the
Senators and to take a new trial of them. I apprehend it would be even so in
many Cities, where the people are most dissatisfied with their present
Magistrates are they could agree amongst themselves.

Therefore seeing the best of men are but men, let none discover their fathers
nakedness, but patiently and charitably bear with human infirmities, and all
concur in their stations, to seek the Welfare of the Public.

CHAP. XXIX. Some Overtures, humbly offered to the Nobles and Gentry of the
several Shires in Scotland.
HAving written some Memorialls for the Burghs of this Nation, I crave favor,
that I may with freedom make this address to You, in laying humbly before you
suggestions, which being better pollished by your mature and sharper
Understandings, may tend to the Universal Good of the whole Kingdom. In order
to which.

I wish you all consider, that its the fear of the LORD that teaches Wisdom,
without which no project nor purpose can attain a blessed success, or arrive at
a happy end. Its only they that acknowledge the LORD, that have the promise to
be directed and guided in their paths. It were a great Mercy to this Land, if
this were practically believed by all, especially by you who may greatly
influence your inferiors, and it were but a suitable effect of that
Gospel Light which has shined in most parts of this Nation since the
reformation, and to stir you up the more effectually to this.

Look back and consider the many Mercies the LORD GOD has bestowed upon this
Land since ever we were a People, that though we be far short of many other
Nations in outward advantages; yet it has been our happiness to receive both
Honor and Spiritual Blessings beyond the most in Europe, for both which I
shall give some instances.

As for Honor, it was the Glory of our Naion after long and many bloody
conflicts with the Romans, to set bounds to the Roman Empire, that we had
matter to say as GOD Himself said to the Sea, Job 38.11. Hitherto shall thou
come, but no further: and here shall thy proud waves be stayed. Though its our
duty to say as Psalm. 115.1. Not unto us O LORD, Not unto us, but unto thy Name
give Glory. For though this was the LORDS mercy, yet he made use of the valor
and conduct of that renowned King Corbredus, surnamed Galdus, the twentyfirst
King of Scotland, and the courage and valiant indefatigability of your noble
Ancestors, so that the Roman-Armie consisting of above ten Legions, or sixty
thousand men, when they first came under the Command of Julius Agricola, they
were so beaten and worn out by the Scots and Pights, that they came to twenty
thousand, who came to be so beleaguered within their trenches, and brought to
that strait, that they sent their Ambassadors to our King who commanded in
Chief, which because it may be looked upon as a greater Glory (in the Vulgar
esteem) then any other Kingdom in Europe can boast of: I have thought fit to
insert their address and speech here, as not unworthy of record which is as
follows.

Upon this occasion, (having granted them liberty and cessation of Arms) there
came four Grave and Venerable Men from the Roman-Camp, (clothed with
Roman-Gowns, no less decent then gorgious,) to these confederated Kings sitting
in the Assembly of the Nobility of both Nations, when they approached to the
presence of the Kings, did prostrat themselves upon the ground: who (immediately
at the command of these Kings, being raised up) one of them who was appointed
as Spoksman, said.

Most invincible PRINCES, the Roman-Army and their Commanders, though
Conquerors ^f the World, implores Your Favor: whom they ^ave these many years
prosecuted by Hostile-War, and humbly begs your pardon and mercy. Neither ^ould
there any thing fall out amongst such glorious Actions for your Honor and
Renown, or more wor^hy of memory amongst your Posterity, then that the
Roman-Ambassadors should have fallen down at our feet, to whom all Kings and
People being sub^ued are forced to pay obedience. Ye have overcome us we
acknowledge, with you is the power of ^ur Life and Death, by reason of the
anger of the Gods whom we have found to be highly offended for ^ac War which we
have most unjustly engaged you ^^to. Use these at your own pleasure, so as
(...) may advance your Glory and Renown. All we ^eg is, that ye may overcome
your wrath, who have ^vercome the Conquerors of the World. Or if ye ^ill rather
choose to be subdued by your passion, kill ^very one of us to the last man, for
we cannot deny ^^^t we have deserved it. But it is a small matter ^^at ye who
inhabit the uttermost ends of the earth, ^ould conquer by your Valor all other
Mortals, by which ye do transcend the highest pitch of Human ^ower: but it
will be yet more when ye have over^^me many more powerful, if yet ye shall
preserve ^ive so many brave men. We have felt the force of your arms, we have
felt the wrath of the Gods, we humbly implore we may feel your Mercy and
Clemency, and because we acknowledge our selves beaten and rendered unto you,
what ever conditions of Peace ye shall appoint us, we are willingly to accept.

These things being said, they all weeping did throw themselves down at the
feet of these Kings, and with many tears prayed they would spare their
conquered and submissive Petitioners* And entreated they might be satisfied,
that the Gods had so abundantly avenged themselves upon them for this unjust
War, and the impious wrongs they had done unto them.

This is particularly related by our Scots Historian Hector Boys, in the life
of this King Corbr^dus Galdus, who asserts the most he had se^ down concerning
our conflicts and wars wit^ the Romans, he had it not only from the Famous
British Historians, but from the Roman Writters themselves; particularly, from
Co^nelius Tacitus, Lampridius, Herodianus, Paul^ Diaconus, Elius Spartanus,
Strabo, etc: as man be seen in Boys his Epistle Dedicatory to K. Jam^^ the
fifth.

Now I suppose, that neither France, Spain* Germany, nor England, etc: can
boast of suc^ an Honor as the LORD GOD did he^ by put upon this our Nation,
according a^ Honor is ordinarily esteemed by the most (...) people of the world.

Scaliger in his Epitaph upon Geo. Buchanan our ^ountrey-Man, and our Historian
closes it up ^ith their two lines, Imperii fuerat Romani Scotia limes,
Romani Scotia eloquii finis erit.


Again, as to Spiritual Blessings, consider, ^cotland was amongst the first of
the Nations ^ho embraced the Christian-Religion, which ^as at the time when
Donald the first did reign (...) Scotland, about the Year 187 after CHRIST'S
^irth. And also, were amongst the first that ^id forsake the Idolatry and
Superstition of the Roman-Antichrist, and all this by the special Mercy and
Providence of GOD, who all a^^ngst has given eminent evidences of his great
^egard and compassion unto Scotland, both before Christianity was embraced, and
when we ^ere Heathens: and also, when we were lying under the darkness of
Popish-delusions, as was ^imessed by our deliverances from the Tyrra^y of the
Danes, obtained by signal Victories under several of our Kings, of some of
which ^he Famous Predecessors of the Families of ^rroll and Marischall were
eminently instru^entall at Luncartie and Barrie.

And from the powerful invasions of the ^orvegians under Acio, who was
defeated by King Alexander the third: and from the mi^^culous deliverances,
from the unjust and hor^^d devastations by the Edwards the first, second and
third of England: by the incomparable Valor of William Wallace, and that never
enough admired Prowess and Conduct of that Famous and most Renowned King,
Robert Bruce.

Wherefore it remains, that when the LORD GOD has blessed you with times of
Peace and Tranquillity, that ye should say with King David, Psalm. 116.12. What
shall we render unto the LORD for all his benefits toward us, that we are not
under the power and constant fear and slavery of cruel and enraged enemies,
killing our Children and dear Relations, ravishing our Virgins, Wives and
Daughters, spoiling our Goods, burning our Houses, depopulating our Towns and
Cities, and in a word ruining, laying desolat our Country without Inhabitants.

This has been the Lot of many of your Ancestors in sundry former
Generations, and should not these considerations move and excite you to bethink
yourselves, what shall we do for the Honor of the GOD of our Mercies, for the
good of our Native-Countrey in these our days, and for the Advantage of our
Children and Posterity in succeeding Generations.

Though I doubt not, but there are many brave and eminent Spirits amongst the
Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, that can judge wha^ things are most conducible
to all these Hono^able Ends now mentioned; yet under favor, and with your
liberty, I shall presume to men^^on a few things unto you.

It is reported by Plutarch in the life of Theseus ^^at such was the barbaritie
of Ancient Times, ^^at men placed their virtue and valor in kill^^g,
slaughtering and destroying of men, and (...) best in oppressing of others and
making of ^^^ves, yea, it is to be regrated, that in our ^^me, they are by many
reckoned the sharpest ^^d prettiest men, that can overreach and go ^^yond or
oppress their peaceable Neighbors.

Whereas the Doctrine of Christianity teach^^h its professors more myld and
righteous ^^ings, not to render evil for evil: These. 5.15. ^ath. 5.44. much
less to do any evil with^^t a cause. The Primitive Christians were (...) a far
other Spirit, as is testified by Origin, ^^stin Martyr, Tertulian in their
Apologies, par^^^ularly by that famous letter which Marcus ^^relius Antoninus
Emperor wrote to the Senate ^^d People of Rome, wherein he shows, that (...)
his great distress he had called the Christians (...) his assistance, who came
without Weapons, ^^munition, Armor or Trumpet; as men ab^^ing such preparation
or furnitur, but only ^^^^sfied in the trust of their GOD, whom they ^^^ry
about with them in their Consciences. This (...) far contrary to the old
Barbaritie, which alace has revived to the full, under the defection and
apostasy from the purity and simplicity of Christianity, as is evident by the
fr^quent and bloody wars amongst both Papists an^ Protestants.

But now it is that the LORD GOD i^ calling for these illustrious and splendid
Ve^tues, which are most suitable and congru^^ to the Spirit and Light of the
Gospel, which if they were more in esteem and practice, y^^ should have little
use for that Valor and Ve^tue which Heathens and Infidels do so much cry up
and admire. If ye were laying you^ selves out to Honor GOD, by seeking aft^^
truth, and doing righteousness, the LORD GOD would doubtless employ his Power
an^ Providence to preserve you in peace and pro^perity. Exodus 34.23, 24.

And in order to this, it were requisite in the first place, that the Sheriff
head Courts in eve^^ Shyre (which meet twice or thrice every year were improven
to better purpose, then me^^ly to cite the names and to make the absen^ liable
to fynes, and these present to give mone^ upon Instruments, both which might be
do^^ to good purpose, if the Courts when co^veened did improve their Meetings
to bett^^ Ends

As First, Every Court would notice the di^cords within their respective Shyres
and P^^vinces, for what ever cause the difference were, which was a special
effair that some of the best ^f our KINGS did ever much concern themselves in,
to agree all discords amongst Sub^^cts that were at variance. See Buchanan, in
^^e beginning of the Reign of K. Gregorius, ^ag. 177. And to forbear mentioning
more, K. James the sixth took much pains in this to ^ood purpose, see
Spotswood, Page 364. See ^sal. 133.1. throughout, Behold, how good, ^^d how
pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell to^^ther in unity, etc.

So these Courts might appoint fit persons, ^^ch as are preferable for Prudence
and Skill (...) the Effair, or are of most probable Qua^^y as near in relation,
or in great favor and ^^spect with the Parties, so the difference may (...)
taken away, Friendship and Union made (...), unnecessary charge and expense
prevented (...) being heard at Law, that so there might (...) no distance,
heart burning, rancour or ^ath in any of the respective Shyres: but love ^^d
mutual friendship, which is one of the ^^iefest ends and designs of the Law of
GOD ^^d Men.

This would transcend the Laws of Justice ^^d Righteousness, for where true
Love and ^eaceable and friendly disposition were in the ^^minion, Parties would
rather condescend to (...) losers of their due right, then brake the ^^s of
friendship and love.

It is reported by some of the Historians of our Nation, to the great
commendation of the Old-Barrons of the Mearns that there never fell out any
debate amongst them, but their Neighbors did so concern with it, that they
took no respit till the matter was put to a friendly close. If this were the
custom and way of the whole Nation, what a mercy it would be to our Country
and whole Kingdom? what great advantage it would be to the Public and to
Particular Families? it is easy for every one to judge.

Concordia res parvae crescunt, discordia maximae dilabuntur. This was an old
saying in Salustius, and holds true in all Ages and in all respects.

Next, it were fit that in these Head-Courts consideration were carefully and
cordially had of such Acts of Parliament, whether old or late, that did most
concern the good of the Country, and in order thereto, that some of the most
fit persons, and of most public spirits and activity in every corner and
precinct of the respective Shyres, were appointed to see these put in
Execution, and to report at the next Head-Court their diligence.

First, If this were, our Hye-wayes for Travelers would be neatly repared.

Secondly, Bridges, where most danger is would be builded carefully up, though
upon the account of the public charge in each respective Province.

Thirdly, Sturdy-Beggars, Thieves, Robbers, ^dle-Persons notably suppressed.

Fourthly, Our Country in Planting, Parking, Hedging and Dycking beautifully
trimmed.

Fifthly, All policy, as Dove-houses, War^ands, or Cunningers, commendably
advanced.

Sixthly, The Poor in every Parish conscien^^ously provided.

Seventhly, The Young-ones put to Schools and Trades timely and in fit season,
and all virtue, ^iety and good order should eminently flowrish.

Eighthly, Scandalous and provocking Sins, ^s Drunkenness, Whooring, Swearing
and Oaths, and idle gaming at Cards and Dyce etc, punc^^ally punished.

Whereby the LORD GOD of all our ^ercies would graciously be pleased to
multi^^y his Blessings of Peace, Plenty and Prospe^^ty upon us, according to
Isa. 62.4. Thou ^^alt no more be termed forsaken, neither shall thy ^^nd any
more be termed desolate; but thou shall be ^^lled Hephzibah, and thy land
Benlah, for the LORD delyteth in thee, and thy land shall be ^arried.

It is well worth the noticeing, what Bodin (...) his third book of his
Republic, Chap. 7. Page ^2. writs of the Province of Languedock in France at
the Nobility and Gentry of that Country, in their conventions, had ordered
1200 Livers, or an hundred pound sterling yearly, for training up the Youth of
that whole Country in the City of Nimes: besides what was done by other
Societies, and that they builded brave Fortresses, or Forts, in the Kingdom.
That they caused execute Buzac who was the most noble and notable Volens or
Robber in that Age, whom neither Judge nor Magistrate, no nor the Parliament of
Toulouse it self could get any order taken with.

Also they appointed other great sums, for other brave uses and ends of public
concernment. And so goes on to show the great profit which accrues to a Nation
or Country by such conventions and societies: and shows that these were
better governed in the Cantons of the Switzers then in any other part of the
World; for every Canton, yea every rank of men, as Merchants and Trades had
their common and general Meetings there, for the good of the Public. Also,
that the ten Circuits of the Empire of Germany have their distinct Meetings a
part, all which are in such order and correspondence one with another, that the
Empire (says he) would have long ago been brought to ruin, had not this
Policy and Government prevented it.

It were much to be wished that there were appointed dyers of Meeting from that
Love and Friendship which ought to be amongst Neighbors and Relations, in the
bounds of every Presbitry or Parish, and it were expedient, that some Justice
of Peace might be present, where conveniently they may be had, to confer what
might tend to the good of the bounds within their precincts, and accordingly ^o
put such things in practice, and to prepare Overtures at every such meeting for
the good of ^he whole. This questionless would greatly ^end to the good of the
Land, and would ^ypen matters not only for more public conventions; but also
for a Parliament, when ^uch occasion offered, or for any other meet^ngs which
the Kings Council appoints, as they ^id lately for repairing Hye-Wayes and
Bridges.

Every Parish might have their Heritors, with ^uch others of the discreetest of
their Yeomanrie, ^o meet once or twice every Month in a con^enient House,
unless it be in Winter; which ^ere a mean to preserve freedom and friendship ^n
the Parish: where they might confer at large ^nent the general Concernments
thereof as the ^roportioning of the Cess or other Subsidies, and laying down a
way for a public Purse, ^r defraying public Charges of the Parish, ^roviding
for the Poor, mending Hye-Wayes, Bridges and Calsies within their bounds, and
^^king course with idle persons.

Numa Pompilius; King and Lawgiver to the ^omans; Solon and Lycurgus these
Graecian-Law^^vers, were much for such Meetings and Fraternities, and all such
means as might tend to beget and confirm Friendship and Love, and advance the
common interest; see Plutarch on Solon and Lycurgus lives.

These are but a few hints of such Virtuous Employments and Improvments as our
Great Men might lay themselves out in, which is humbly conceived might tend
much to the Honor of GOD, Good of the Country, and profit of Posterity, if
effectually prosecuted.

But because many great Wits are ready to reject every motion which flows not
from themselves, or from some of a higher station then they are, and for^this
end raise objections against such things. I shall answer this with one
singular observation of the forementioned French Author, Bodinus in his fourth
book Page 593.

There are (says he) two remarkable faults, which oftentimes men of sharpest
spirits fall into concerning the Government of Societies, etc. One is, that
they look narrowly to the inconvenients of a Law, or of a good motion, without
considering the good that may flow from it.

The other is, they run from one extreme to another. So I shall wish the
Benefits which may flow from this, may be laid in the balance against any
inconvenients which men can imagine can follow upon this.

Next, I wish such may not run from the diligent and careful observation of
such good Overtures and profitable Motions, to a supine and total neglect of
all that may tend to the Glory of GOD, good of the Country, and of their
Posterity: but rather (as I hinted in the beginning) may improve their accutest
Parts, and more noble Enduements, to fall upon a way of prosecuting these
Honorable Ends ^o the compleatest period. In which caice, I have attained all I
ever aimed at, being a true Zelot of the Public Good, and in soberness shall
close with one that was a good Countryman in his time, who said, Vive, vale
si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti, si non his utere mecum.
Englished thus.
Live and farewell if better things thou knows,
Impairt them freely, if not make use of those.


PHILOPOLITEIUS.

A Succinct SURVEY Of the famous CITY OF ABERDEEN, With its Situation,
Description, Antiquity, Fidelity and Loyalty to their SOVEREIGNS. AS ALSO, The
gracious Rewards conferred thereon, and the signal Evidences of Honor put
upon many chief MAGISTRATES thereof.

With a Catalogue of THEM since the CITY was burned for LOYALTY, about the Year
1330.

TOGETHER WITH The Epigrams of ARTHUR JOHNSTOUN Doctor of Medicin upon the said
CITY, and several other of the Principal ROYALL-BURGHS in this Ancient
Kingdom of SCOTLAND: Translated into English by I B.

By a Zealous Lover of BON-ACCORD(...).

Aberdeen, Printed by John Forbes 1685.

BON ACCORD

Insignia Vrbis abredonie


Psalm. 87 4. I will make mention of Rahab, and Babylon, to them that know me;
behold Philistia, and Tire, with Ethiopia: this man was born there. verse 6. The
LORD shall count when he writes up the people, that this man was born there.

Prove. 17.6. The glory of children are their fathers.

Philip. 4.8. Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.

Unto the Right Honorable, SIR GEORGE SKENE of Fintray, Lord Provest. ALEXR.
ALEXANDER, Bailie. WALTER ROBERTSON Bailie. ALEXANDER GORDON, Bailie. ANDREW
MITCHELL, Bailie. PATRICK GELLIE Dean of Gild, JOHN GORDON Thesaurer,
And to the rest of the Honorable Council of the City of ABERDEEN.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
It has been the ^avourable Advantage and signal Providence that has
attended Aberdeen for many Ages, that it has had a honorable Character among
the Burghs of Scotland, (which I wish may never declyne) the sense whereof made
me recollect what I knew or had read concerning it, at least since the fatal
Overthrow thereof in the days of King David Bruce about the year 1330, by the
total burning of it, and the universal slaughter of those that did not
escape. And finding that Sir Robert Sibbald, Dr. of Physic the Kings
Geographer, by a warrant from Authority; had emitted an Advertisement for a
true information of the several Shyres, Burghs, Universities etc, of this
Kingdom. I looked on it as a fit Opportunity to communicate what I knew unto
^ou, that ye might dispose thereof ^s ye should see meet. I have therefor set
down a Survey of Aberdeen at some length, that all may see and perceive what a
City it is, and ^ath been; not only for conside^able Buildings, but also as to
the ^enown of its Inhabitants. If there ^e ought judged worthy of Praise ^r
Remark, ye may look upon that ^s an incitement for imitation, and ^ quickening
motive for your Pos^erity to endeavor a studious Pro^ress in the commendable
ways of Virtue; for here may be seen the ^minent Evidences of that Loyalty
which was conspicuous in your Ancestors: Also, the Princely Rewards and Royal
Marks our ^overaignes did bestow upon your City and Magistrates. Here also may
be seen the assiduous care and diligence our Magistrates have at all occasions
evidenced for advanceing Virtue, and what might tend to the Honor and
Reputation of the City.

If Rome had matter to glory of her Heroes in several Generations, Aberdeen
has not wanted occasion to speak well of many of her Rulers in diverse Ages? I
love not to be guilty of giving the least appearance of evil, or what may
savor of flattery or ostentation. One thing I aim at, is, that ye may outvye
all that have gone before you in Virtue, Wisdom, Fidelity, and care of the
Welfare of your Commonwealth. And in a word, that I may say as the Wiseman
said of the Virtuous Woman, That your own works may praise you in the gates,
which is the earnest desire, of

Right Honorable A cordial Well-wisher to the prosperity, true Honor and
Welfare of ABERDEEN, and all its Rulers. PHILOPOLITEIUS.

Epistle to the Reader.
COURTEOUS READER,
IT may be looked upon by some, that this Survey of Aberdeen may savor of
Ostentation, seeing there are few, or perhaps no other Town in the Kingdom that
is descryved, or has any of their Acts published: To which I may say, that
such vanity in so doing far from my mind, seeing there is nothing more
ordinary amongst all Nations, then to set down what has been the most
remarkable Providence of GOD to their Countries and Places of their Nativity;
whereby Posterity may observe the Mercies of the LORD to their Ancestors; the
neglect or ommission of such thankful remembrances is threatened Psalm. 28.5.
Because they regard not the Works of the LORD, nor the operations of his hands,
he shall destroy them and not build them up. Amongst the many sins for which
the LORD is pleading a controversy with this Nation, this may have its own
weight, that we are not thankful, that the LORD did furnish us with well
Qualified and Able Men to bear rule in Cities and Shyres, which when they are
removed without successors suitable to fill their rooms, is no small stroke on
a Nation, according to Isa. 3.1 2, 3. For behold, the LORD, the LORD of Hosts
will take away from Jerusalem, the Mighty Men, and the Man of War, the Judge
and the Prophet, the Prudent and the Ancient, the Captain of ^iftie and the
Honorable Man, the Counselor and the cunning Artificer, and the Eloquent
Orator. Wherefore, I hope none will misconstruct me ^or making a respectful
remembrance of these whom the LORD honored and does at this time honor ^ be
worthy Magistrates of our Town in their day and generation, for it is said Prove.
17.6. The Glory of Children are their Fathers.

Another Reason is, that it may be, these who are in Authority in the Nation
over us, nay be induced to have a respect to some Great Persons, who in their
place deserve to be honored with all that respect which is due, yet not to the
^rejudice of the interest of Burghs: To obviat which judge it not amiss to show
forth what good sub^^cts, and of what due esteem a Burgh or City ^ight to be
had in; that in times of greatest need ^ave been so useful in their
Soveraignes-Service, ^^ particularly Aberdeen has been many times, ^^ History
and Records can witness.

It were to be wished, that all the most considerable Burghs in this Kingdom,
would set apart some of their ablest Men to collect out of their ancient
Records, what has been most remarkable in their Towns in former Ages, or at
present; that the Nation might be convinced of their usefulness, and of that
respect and honor that ought to be put upon them, so as it might be seen, they
ought not to be born down or discouraged when any weighty Concernment of theirs
comes in question. Upon these accounts I have made this short Essay, hoping at
least it may be a motive, to induce and stir up a more accurat Pen to be
employed in this or the like; not only in reference to our City, but also, to
the rest of the Cities and Towns of the Nation, who without vanity, shall
subscryve my self at present according to truth

PHILOPOLITEIUS.

A succinct SURVEY Of the Famous CITY OF ABERDEEN.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Situation of ABERDEEN, Its Longitude and Latitude.
ABERDEEN is a City in the North of Scotland, near the mouth of the River of
Dee, within the Province of MAR, which is a part of the Shyre thereof. It
lies within the North Temperat Zone, though much inclyning to the colder side
thereof, being much nigher to the Pole then to the Equinoctiall-Line; for its
Latitude or distance from the Equinoctiall-Line, is 57 degrees and 10 minutes,
and its distance from the Pole is only 32 degrees and 50 minutes.

Its Longitude, or distance from the Meridian of the Canarie Islands, is 22
degrees and 30 minutes.

It is a Parallel, or equal Latitude and climate with the Merchant-Isles in
Nova-Britannia in America, the Southmost cape in Norway, called the Noas of
Norway, Stockholme in Swedland, Lavonia, and the middle parts of Russia, and
territories of Muscovia in Europe, the Cosacks, and other middle Countries in
Tartary, in Asia.

In which Parallel, the longest day is of length in Sunshine 17 hours, and 40
minutes; being within the tenth Climate, reckning the first Climate to begin
where the longest day is 13 hours long, and every Climat to be that space in
Latitude, wherein the longest day is half an hour longer, and consequently the
length of the shortest day at Aberdeen is 6 hours, and 20 minutes, viz. as much
as the longest day wants of 24 hours.

From the first day of the month May to the twentytwo day of July, it is
constant day light, the Sky all that time never fully setting even at midnight,
for the twilight never goes fully down till the Sun be 16 degrees under the
Horizon: whereas all that time at Aberdeen, he is not so low at midnight, the
Suns depression below the Horizon in the longest day, being only 9 degrees 20
minutes at midnight, and his Meridian-hight in the shortest day just as much.

His Meridian-Altitude in the Equinoctial-Line, is here 32 degrees, 50 minutes,
and the greatest hight the Sun ever comes to at Aberdeen in the longest day at
12 hours, is only 56 degrees and 20 minutes, near a degree less then the hight
of the Pole on the North-side.

560 Miles be-North Aberdeen, the Frozen-Zone begins, where, on the longest day
the Sun does not set at all, nor ryseth in the shortest: The Fixt-Stars within
57 degrees 10 minutes of the North Pole do here never set, and these within as
much of the South do here never rise nor appear.

It lies almost directly under the middlemost Star of the great Boar's tail,
and under the Constellation of Cassiopeia.

A degree of Latitude is, as over all the Earth, sixty Scots Miles from South
to North, and a degree of Longitude in this Parallel, is only 32 Miles,
answering to a degree of Latitude, by ^eason the Circles of Longitude grow
always ^esser the nearer to the Pole.

It flows at Aberdeen South and by West, and North and by East, and
consequently is Full-Sea at the Change and Full-Moon at 12 hours and 45 minutes.

The Sun at his greatest hight wants 33 degrees 40 minutes from being Vertical
at Aberdeen. This much for the Longitude and Latitude and the Appendixes
thereof.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Description of ABERDEEN.
ABERDEEN is pleasantly seated upon three Hills, which are all joined together
by easy descents, so as in the middle of the Streets they are scarcely
discernable. It is of Circuit about 2141 double spaces, through which six Gates
enter, being built as it presently stands, it is difficult to be fortified, in
the ordinary and regular way of fortifications, though it has been diverse
times attempted in this our Age since the late Troubles began.

In the beginning of the late Troubles, it was able to set forth Eight hundred
men in good array and Military Furniture to the Fields, well trained for
service when called thereto.

It being seated between the Rivers of Dee and Don, is said by George
Buchannan, our Scots-Historiographer, to be piscatu Salmonum nobilis, that is,
Excellent, or Famous for Salmond-Fishing.

As for the Accommodations and Ornaments of our City, we have an indifferent
good entry to our Harbor for Ships, especially since that great Ston called
Craig Metellan was raised up out of the mouth of the River of Dee, and
transported out of the Current thereof, so that now, Ships can incurr no
damnage, which was done by the renowned Art and Industry of that Ingenious and
Virtuous Citizen, David Anderson: As also, by that considerable Bulwark, the
Magistrates of late years caused erect, at the Mouth of the South Side of the
River; extending up the Shore such a great length, so that very great Ships may
enter and be safely preserved when they are in, without hazard.

It will not be impropper here to insert this following Information, for the
benefit of Seamen or Strangers, who may have occasion to come by Sea to
Aberdeen, which skillfull Mariners have observed and been at pains to set
about at the Magistrates desire, which is as follows.

A Ship coming from the South, bound for the Road and Harbor of Aberdeen, a
mile to the Southward of the Road, ye will see a Bay with a Country Church
standing in the middle thereof, called the Kirk of Nigg; to the Northward
lies the Girdle-ness (or Aberdeen-ness,) which when ye come by, come no nearer
the same then a long Cable length, and so soon as ye come by it, ye will see
two sharp spire Steeples, which Steeples ye must run to the Northward until
ye open the West-most Steeple a sailesbreadth to the Northward of the
East-most, there ye may Anchor on nine or ten fathom water, where ye may ride
with Southerly, Northerly, or Westerly Winds. As for the Harbor, in the entry
thereof is a Bar, whereon at low water there is scarce on it two foot water:
on the South Side of the Bar there stands a Beackon, which in the incoming ye
must leave on your Larboard-side a Ships breadth free thereof, where commonly
the best of the Channel does run. From the Beackon to the Eastward even to
the Girdleness is all Rocks. At Spring-tydes there will be thereon about 15
foot water; at Neep-tydes there will be no more then about nine or ten foot.
But I shall not advise a Stranger to seek that Harbor without a Pilot; because
it is a Pilots fair way: and as soon as ye come to the Road, ye can always
have a Boat for putting out a Vaiffe at all occasions, for Piloting you into
the Harbor. The nearest rake of the said Harbor is North-East and South-West,
and when ye are within the said Harbor ye lie land locked for all winds, but
at low water, your Ships lie dry on very good ground.

If ye be bound for the Harbor coming from the Northward ye may borrow into
the Land or upon the Shore four or five fathom, and with Westerly-Winds into
three fathom. The flowings of the said Harbor within, are South and be West;
and in the road South-South-West.

ABERDEEN has ever had since the time of Popery a great and fair Fabric,
containing two great and spacious Churches for Public Worship; the Greatest
toward the West is called the Old-Church, the lesser toward the East is
called the New-Church, with a stately Spire or Steeple, the Churches and
Steeple are covered beautifully with Lead, and within plenished neatly with
good Dasks and Galries of excellent Workmanship of Wainscot, and great and
large Lights and Windows.

In the Steeple are three great and harmonious Bells, in sound each descending
below another, but by one Musical Note as upon a Bimull-Clieff, and these
three Bells strick 24 strokes at every half hour in a sweet and pleasant
Concord, the great Clock having four fair Horologes with conspicuous Figures
clearly gilded, one to every Airth, viz. South, North, East and West, for use
to every part of the City and Suburbs. These Bells being rung for conveening to
Public Worship, on the Sabbath Days there is but one Bell rung first, at the
second two Bells, and at the third three Bells, which make a grave and
melodious Melody.

Also there is another Fabric in the midst of the City, of a large length
called the Gray-Friars-Church, with a little Spire or Steeple, and a Bell,
which is always rung for conveening to all public Lessons in the College,
and a public Clock.

Also, another Fabric called the Trinity-Church, with a little Steeple lately
repaired by the Trades. There is a Chapel at the Castlehill called St.
Ninians, it had wont to be employed for the Comissar Court, and the rest of it
for the common Use of the Cities-Effairs, but now the Bishop has taken back
that Court to the Old-Town, as being his Privilege.

There is a smaller Fabric builded by the Citizens for the Inhabitants of the
Village of Futtie, appointed for Catechiseing that People which since has had
a Minister to preach, though not as a distinct Parish. All the Citizens and
that People being under one Session or Consistoriall for Discipline.

There is a great Towns-house in the Mercatplace called the TOLL-BOOTH, which
has a fair and spacious Rowm for the Courts of Judicature to sit in, such as
the Head-Courts of the Shyre and City, with the Sheriff and Bailie Courts:
above which there is a MAGAZINE or Storehouse) for Warlike Ammunition, etc. It
has also another large stately Rowm, where the Magistrates and Town-Councill
conveen, under which is the low Councill-house, where the Dean of Gild and his
Assessors meet, for effairs peculiar to the Brethren of Gild: as also, the
Commissioners of the Shyre, for Cess or such like common concernments: together
with an other Rowm called the Clerks-Chamber, which has accommodations for
Clerks and Writters. Upon the East end thereof there is an high-Tower with two
Battlements, upon which there ^s erected a high and stately Spire, or Steeple,
^overed with lead, under which is a great Clock and Bell, and under the samen
are several Rowms for Prisoners both high and low.

There is also a large and high House, called ^he Pack-house and Weigh-house,
wherein are a ^reat many Rowms for Merchant-Wares of all ^orts near to the
Shore, the Shore being (as ^ said) of late years greatly enlarged, so that it ^
a pleasant considerable walk from the City to go to the furthest end thereof,
which leads to the Fields, and toward the Harbour-mouth.

The Mercat-place is larger then in any Town of the Kingdom, being an hundredth
twenty and four double space in length, and about a third part thereof in
breadth where it is narrowest, so that two Regiments of foot Soldiers may be
drawn up in rank and fyle, tho in open order.

There is one of the stateliest Bridges in the Kingdom, over the River of Dee,
of seven Arches of a like and equal largeness, within two short miles of the
City: And there is another be-North the City, of an high and great Arch over
the River Don, both which are mantained by the City, upon propper Rents
mortified for the same use.

In the middle of the City there is a Philosophie-Colledge the houses whereof
were purchased by the City, in consideration, that George Earl Marischall,
Grandfather to this present Earl, out of his zeal to the Public Good, and his
respect to the City of ABERDEEN, did mortify public Rents for the Principal
and four Regents of the said College, whence it is called the Marischall
College, and makes up an half of the Carolin-University for it has a
Principal and four Regents o^ Teaching-Masters, and now has a public
Professor of School Divinity, who teaches a public Lesson two days every
Week during the sitting of the College: Also a Professor of Mathematics, who
upon other two days every week teaches two Lessons. There are also Lessons of
Arithmetic and Geometry taught by ^ther Masters thereunto appointed, by that
Renowned Famous and Learned Physician DR. DUNCAN LIDDELL who mortified a
con^^derable Rent to the Professor of Mathematics, and six Mathematical and
Philosophical Bursers or six years. There are many sums of mo^ey mortified to
the said College since the e^ection thereof, (whereto the Town-Councill of
Aberdeen are mostly Patrons) so that it appears, ^here has been more Charity
extended within ^hir hundred and twenty years, since the Re^ormation of
Religion from Popish Idolatry and Superstition, then has been in all the Ages
be^re, which our Towns Counts of Mortified Mo^ies, for Schools, College,
Hospitalls, Gild-Box Common Poor etc. can evidence.

This College has a copious Library, which was at first plenished by the City
of Aberdeen, who ^ook all their books they had laid up in the ^pper rowm above
their Session-house, and trans^itted them to their own Library in the Col^dge,
for the uses of all concerned: and Dr. Reid Secretary in the Latine-Tongue to
King Charles the first, left a Sallary to the keeper ^f the said Library. which
Library has been ^ugmented in its books by several Mortifiers, ^ by the said
Dr. Reid, the forementioned Dr. Liddell, who mortified about 2000 Merks worth
of Books, and 20 Merks yearly to buy Mathematical Books and Instruments, and
Dr. William Johnstoun Phisician and Professor of the Mathematics here: and by
Dr. Patrick Dun a learned Physician, and Principal of this College.

Also there is a Grammar School, which has a chief Master, and three teaching
Masters under him, to whom the said Dr. Dun mortified 1200 Merks of yearly
Rent, by which the City is disburdened of what they paid yearly to the former
Masters thereof.

We have a School for Music, which was taught of old by very eminent Musicians
in this City.

There wants no opportunities in this City for Youth both Male and Female to
learn any manner of good, and commendable skill or knowledge in such things as
may best qualify them.

There are four Hospitalls in this City, one for decayed Brethren of Gild. A
second for indigent Widows and Virgins of Brethren of Gild, lately purchased
by a sum of money, mortified by Dame Marion Douglas daughter to the somet^me
Earl of Buchan, and late Lady-Drum, for the Honor the Magistrates and Citizens
conferred on her deceased Husband at his burial in Aberdeen 1632. The rents
whereof were augmented by a considerable sum, mortified to this Hospital by
James Milne Elder, Merchant, who also mortified 100 Pounds yearly to two
Philosophical Bursers in this College, with 500 Merks to this Kirk-session.

A third Hospital for Tradesmen, founded and built by the deceast Dr. William
Guild, sometime Preacher in Aberdeen, and lately Principal of the KINGS-
College in the Old-Town. This Hospital has a spacious comely Rowm, where the
Deacon or Conveener-Courts meet.

A fourth Hospital for Litsters, the Rent whereof was mortified by Archbald
Beans, Litster, by which they have builded a goodly House, with a stately
entry. The use of this Rent is for the benefit of decayed Litsters, their Wives
Children and Servants, several of whose Daughters have been provided with
suitable portions out of the said Rent, and thereby honestly married.

There are eight Mills belonging to the City, and lands thereunto pertaining,
whereof a new Windmill is builded of stone and lyme at the South-entrie of the
City, which may be of excellent use if carefully kept. There are two
Water-Mills within the suburbs of the City, and five near by in the adjacent
territories belonging to the City.

We have a choice Medicinal Spring, called the Well of Spa, at the
Wool-man-hill, built with hewen-ston, very specific for Gout, Gravel, Colic
and Hydropsie, as the late Famous Dr. William Barclay, Physician, did learnedly
describe 1615, which is now reprinted when the Well was rebuilt 1670, the
copies whereof the Dean of Gild has in his custody, to which every person
concerned to know its Virtues, and how to use the same, is referred.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Antiquity of ABERDEEN.
AS for the Antiquity of the City of ABERDEEN, it is certain that Ptolomie, the
most Ancient Geographer, who lived about 1500 years since, in the days of
Antonius Pius the Emperor, in his Geographicall-Tables, making a description of
the Isles of Britain, to wit, Albion and Ireland, with the little adjacent
Isles he calls this City Devana, and the River adjacent thereto Diva: whom
Camdenus the English Historiographer, in his Britannia cites, for proving the
Antiquity of Aberdeen, whose words are these. Devana Urbs per-antiqua a
Ptolemeo, nunc vero Aberdonia, id est, Devae ostium Britannica dictione ab
ipsis Scotis appellatur So that for Antiquity this CITY may be reckned amongst
the most ancient of this ISLE.

This City was Erected into a Burgh-Royall by Gregorius, who for his Justice,
Temperance and Fortitude, was surnamed the Great, and was the 73. King of
Scotland; whose Honorable Acts, both in Scotland, England and Ireland are at
length set down in Hector Boys History, and in Buchannans in the year after
the birth of CHRIST 893 years. So that since Bon-accord was erected in a
Burgh-Royall it is seven hundredth fourscore twelve years, this year being the
year 1685.

After the decease of the said King Gregory, the Erection and Infeftments given
by him to this City (by the iniquity of the times, and many incursions) were
lost: for Edward the first King of England, called Langshanks, made it his work
to burn and destroy all the old Evidents and Monuments within this Kingdom
where ever he came, or his Power could reach.

Moreover in the time of King David Bruce, the City being surprysed with an
Army of Englishes, sent by Edward the third of England: most of the
Inhabitants, Men, Wives and Children were all put to the sword and killed; the
City burnt for six days together, as Spotswood and Boys Histories declare,
all our Registers and Old Evidents were destroyed about the year 1330, because
the Citizens a little before had killed the Soldiers that kept Garrison in
the Castle; who had sorely oppressed them, and taken it and rased it to the
ground.

It being then rebuilt upon the Hills where it is now seated (having formerly,
been cituated from the Green, and Eastward under the Hills except the
Castle-gate,) hence it is called the New-Town of Aberdeen, and not with
relation to that Burgh of Barronie, which is now the Bishops seat, since is was
translated from Mortlick, in the time of King David, anno 1137, according to
Spotswood page 101. when Nectanus was Bishop, the foundation of which
Bishopric was by King Malcome the second Anno 1010 at Mortlick.

In King James the fourth his time; Bishop William Elphinston builded the
KINGS- College in the Old Town; that Town being seated near the River of Don,
about a 1000 space from Aberdeen, is commonly called the Old Town of Aberdeen,
not, as if it were of greater Antiquity then the Burgh-Royall of Aberdeen, for
I was informed by a very intelligent Gentleman near that place that there were
some old Evidents designing it the Old Town of SEATOUN after the Lands thereto
adjoining.

But the Bishop of Aberdeen has had his residence there, ever since his Seat
was translated from Mortlick, where there was a Magnificent Structure of a
Cathedral builded thereafter, as also a stately College; custom and
i^norance calls it the Old-Town of Aberdeen, it having been Erected in a Burgh
of Barrony in favors of the Bishop of the Diocese of Aberdeen. It is reported
that some call Aberdeen only Urbs, a Town, and the Old-Town where the Bishop's
Seat is, Civitas, a City. But I take that distinction betwixt a Town and a
City; as it relates to a Bishop's-Seat to be the spurious product of a
Popish-Institution; because many Towns were called Cities before there was a
Bishop in the world. A Town propperly re^ates to the Buildings and Houses; a
City denotes the Citizens and Freemen that are the Inhabitants: But for this
let these that would ^ppropriat the name of a City to a Bishop-Seat, ^ead the
Bishop of Cajetan de Institutione Reipub. ^^b. 1. Tit. 3. sub fine, and he will
show what (...) City is.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Government of the City of ABERDEEN.
WE have matter to bless GOD for the equal and just constitution of
Government, which is in our Ctiy and particular Commonwealth, granted to us by
our KINGS, and left unto us by our Worthy Ancestors, which is thus.

Our Town-Councill is chosen yearly out of the whole Citizens and Burgesses of
the City, the Roll of our whole Brethren of Gild being first read at every
Election of the Council, which holds upon the Wednesday before Michaelmess-day,
there being a large Catalogue drawn up of all the Brethren of Gild amongst us,
every Person (whom any of the Old-Councill desires to be lifted among these out
of whom the New-Councill is to be chosen) is presently set down in that new
list, and when the list is completed, by the reading over the whole Brethren
of Gild of the Town, there is an indefinit number set down upon a large sheet
of Paper, with lines drawn after every one of their names, and this is given
to the present Provest, Bailies, and whole Old-Councill, that every one may
make choice of thirteen Brethren of Gild to be named for the New-Councill for
the year to come, and most Votes or Marks make up the number.

Next, they of the Old-Councill choose out of their own number four, who are
called the Old-four, which being added to the former thirteen, make up the
number of seventeen Brethren of Gild. And lastly, having got the Roll of all
the present Deacons of Trades, there are two of these Deacons chosen which make
up the compleit number of ninteen for the Council the year ensuing.

The new chosen Counselors being all sent for, and come in the afternoon, the
whole Old and New-Council with the six Deacons of Trades, and the four Deacons
of the Old and New Council, which make up ten Deacons of Trades and thirty
Brethren of Gild, making up in all, the number of 40 Votes, they altogether
choose first the Provest: then four Bailies, a Dean of Gild, a Thesaurer, a
Master of the Kirk-work and Bridge work, a Master of the Mortified Moneys a
Master of the Gild Hospital, a Master of the Shore, called Master of the
Impost, and six single Counselors who bear no Office, but sit and Vote in all
Effairs that come before the Council with the two new Deacons of Trades. If in
this Election there fall to be one having equal Votes, the Provest in this
caice has the casting Vote.

This way of Election was determined by the Convention of Burghs, and ratified
and approved by King James the sixth, after the difference that ^ell out at the
Common-Cause 1593.

When any matter of more then ordinary importance comes to be consulted off, if
the present Council find it meet, they call the former years Council, and
join both in consultation and determination. And if it be a business of
setting on of a Tax, or levying of Money, whither for National or Particular
Us^, or such like; the consent of the whole City is called for in a Public
Head-Court conveened by Authority of the Magistrates, where the reasons of the
said Tax or Imposition are holden forth by the Provest etc. unto them.

So by this it is evident to the Judicious, that we have the best Ingredients
and Advantages of all the several sorts of Government: And to complete our
Power, our Provest and Bailies are made Sheriffs within their own City and
Freedom-Lands, by K. CHARLES the first 1633 by which our Citizens are fred from
the Power of any Sheriff that at times have sought to oppress them, yea to
pannell them for life without a just cause, as in Allexander Rutherford Provest
his time, when the Sheriff-Deput pannelled a Burger, called Patrick Corser for
resetting stolen Brass which he had bought on a Ma^ket-day innocently and
would not admit of surety for any sum of money whatsoever offered by the
Provest (the Sheriff having a pick against the man pannelled,) which the
Provest perceiving that no reason could prevaill, commanded Patrick Corser down
stairs upon any hazard that might follow, and so fred him.

As also, the Magistrates a month or thereby before the yearly Election, cause
the Drummer go through the Town, inviting all the Inhabitants Freemen, to come
and hear the accounts of all the Office-bearers counted, fitted and subscrived
by the Magistrates, and the rest of the Auditors of the counts chosen in the day
of the Election for that end, so that any that pleases may see how uprightly
all the Towns-Revenues and Moneys received, are bestowed.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Fidelity and Loyall-Duty, which the Citizens of
Aberdeen have always paid to their SOVEREIGNS, together with the gracious
Rewards conferred thereon, and the signal Evidences of Honor put upon many
chief Magistrates thereof.
THis City having been erected into a Burgh-Royall by King GREGORY the Great
and Privileged with many Donations by Him as some Notes and Scrolls bear
Record, gathered by the Recorders and Town-Clerks afterward. The Principal
Evidents being destroyed in the common Callamities of these sad times formerly
hinted at.

This City was had in special favor with many of the succeeding KINGS, as by
King William, surnamed for his Valor and Fortitude, the Lion. He built a
Palace in Aberdeen where sometime he remained with his Court, which afterward
he dedicated to a new order of Friars (called the Trinity-Friars) for setting
up an Abbacie for them, two of that order, which Pope Innocent the third had
newly Erected, being recommended by the Pope and sent from Rome. To this
Abbacie he gave Gifts, and some Rents intending if he lived to give them
greater, this Order was erected 1211. Which Abbacie was burnt when the City was
destroyed, where now the Trades-Hospitall stands, being re-edified but of late
years by Dr. William Guild.

Likewise it is Recorded that the three Kings Alexanders had here in this City
a pleasant Palace, which afterward was translated to the Friars-Predicators
or Dominicans.

Alexander the second did greatly adorn this City, and give it Liberties and
Privileges the like with Pearth 1214: which was the first year of his Reign,
immediately after the death of his Father King William.

Boys holds forth in his History, page 283. ver. 65. That this KING came to
Aberdeen with his Sister Isobell, (after he returned from England,) and honored
it with many Privileges, as King Gregory, King Malcome the second, and David
brother to King William had done before.

It is said, he called this CITY His own City, the Infef^ments of the said King
Alexander the second under his Seal in green Wax is yet extant, as a Record of
the Privileges given by Him to this City, having (by Providence) escaped from
the common Calamity.

King Robert Bruce in these most troublesome times, wherein he began to Reign
or recover his Kingdom out of the hands of Edward the first King of England,
being beaten several times, and finding all his attempts unsuccessfull retired
to ABERDEEN, as a place of safety where he found that his Enemies and his
former bad success might be overcome: for when he had no hope of his Effai^s
but despaired of all Victory, intending to go out of the Kingdom, till better
times might fall out, and get Foreign Forces for his assistance. Incontinently
the Citizens of Aberdeen came and exhorted Him to better hopes, and more
confidence, and gave Him assistance both in men and money, and followed him to
the Town of Inverurie where they fought with the Enemy, and obtained his first
Victory, whereof they were the special Instruments and Helps, the King being
so sickly that he was carried in his Bed, as Boys ^elates, fol. 312. whence
there began to be a method settled to recover the Kingdom.

By which service he was moved to bestow upon the City of ABERDEEN, the whole
Lands of the Kings-Forrest, called the Stock^d-Wood, with the whole parts and
pendicles of ^he same, with the Mills, Waters, Fishings, ^mall Customs, Tolls,
Courts, Weights, Mea^ures, Free Port and Haven; and all other Privileges and
Liberties whatsomever, pertaining or that might pertain justly to a
Royall-Burgh within this Realm.

Under the Reign of King David Bruce, John Randell Earl of Murray, being for
the ^ime Governor of the Kingdom, amongst ^his chiefest Designs for
recovering the Kingdom, he saw it was most expedient to pursue David Cumming
Earl of Atholl, whom King Edward of England had appointed Governor for him,
and having collected his Forces, came ^traight to Aberdeen, where
(notwithstanding ^he Tyrrany of the Enemies they were under,) ^he was informed
where David Cumming was, knowing their Loyalty to King David Bruce their
Natural KING, and so straight way pursued him.

Some years after, the Englishes having con^inued their Rapine and Cruelty in
Aberdeen, ^y keeping a strong Garrison in the Castle, the Citizens taking
Counsel how they might free themselves of that Yoke and Servitude, at last
resolved to fall upon the Garrison whom they cut off, and thereafter levelled
the Castle with the ground. Whence it was, that in honor of that resolute Act,
they got their Ensignes-Armoriall, which to this day they bear: witness that
late Book of Heraldry, set forth by Sir George Mckenzie of Rose-haugh Knight,
His Majesty's Advocat, who has blazoned the Arms of Aberdeen particularly,
thus.

The Arms or Ensigns Armoriall of the Burgh Royal of Aberdeen, bears Gules,
three Towers triple, towered in a double-Tressure counter flowred Argent,
supported by two Leopards propper, the Motto in an Escroll above, BON-ACCORD,
whence there are these Verses.

Arx triplex, arcem testatur ab host receptam,
Hostis utrinque doces, tu Leoparde genus.
Lillia cum Clypeo, voti Rex pignora jussit
Esse, color fusi signa cruoris habet.
Haec hosts sensere, Bona at Concordia (virtue
Qua res usque viget publica) culta domi.
In English thus.
The threefold Towers, the Castle shows regained
From Enemies, who it by force mantain'd.
The Leopards, which on each hand ye view,
The cruel temper of these foes do show.
The Shield and Lillies, by the Kings-Command
As pledges of his great good will do stand.
The Color, calls the Blood there shed to mind,
Which these proud Foes unto their cost did find.
And BON-ACCORD, by which does safely come
To Commonwealths) established was at home.
I. B. And upon the reverse of the Seal of the said Burgh is insculped in a
field Azure, a Temple Argent, St. Nicholas standing in the Porch Mytered and
Vested propper, with his Dexter-hand lifted up to Heaven praying over three
Children in a Boylling Caldron of the first, and holding in the Sinister a
Crosier Ore: these were the Old-Arms of the Burgh-Royall of Aberdeen as His
Majesty's Advocat, in his book abovementioned relates

After the Castle was thus taken and ruined, the English being deeply affected
therewith, as also with the loss of their men, did gather their Forces together
to avenge this Injury against Aberdeen: The Citizens then following Joannes
Fraser, who Commanded these Forces that adhered to the Interest of King David
Bruce, did most stoutly fight the English in their own Churchyard, and
although with much Blood, and the loss of many of their men, yet at last
obtained the Victory.

Hence four years after, Edward the third having sent a great Navy to recover
his loss in their Northern-parts, his Forces fell upon Aberdeen after they had
spoiled the Religious-Houses and the City, they coming by surprise and greatly
incensed for the loss of their men, (which they had sustained both in the
Garrison and in the forementioned Fight,) did cut off Men, Women and Children,
none being spared except such as had by flight saved themselves: they burnt the
City six days together, as has been touched above, and being thereafter
rebuilt, is ever after called the NEW-TOWN of ABERDEEN.

King David Bruce had ever after a great favor and respect for Aberdeen, and
sometimes dwelt in it, and set up a Mint-House here, as some pieces of Money
not long since extant with the inscription of Aberdeen did testify, and the
King did ratify and approve of all the Donations of Lands, Waters, Fishings
and all other Privileges, which King Robert his Father, or any of his
Predecessors had formerly given or granted to the said Burgh, because of their
good Service, both to his Father and himself against the common Enemy.

Also, all the King James's, 1 st. 2 d. 3 d. 4 th 5 th. and 6 th. did all
ratify and approve all these Privileges and Donations of what ever any of
their Predecessors had done before; and some of them witnessed their favorable
Respects to the Magistrates thereof upon several occasions.

As for instance, King JAMES the fourth, upon a complaint made against SIR JOHN
RUTHERFORD of Tarlane after one of the Elections, when he had been chosen
Provest (having for many years enjoyed that Office,) The King wrote to the Town
Council, desiring an exact account of the ground of the Complaint made against
His Loved Familiar SIR JOHN RUTHERFORD, as the Kings Letter, dated November 5.
1487. recorded in the Towns Books does bear.

Again, King JAMES the fifth was often in Aberdeen, and did singularly show
Favor and Respects to the Family of the MENZIESES, who for many years did
wisely and happily Govern our City.

Also, King JAMES the sixth, did not only confirm in Parliament, all the
Ancient Privileges and Liberties given to this City by his Royal
Predecessors, but likewise, when ^s by the Laws of this Nation the King might
have exacted his Burrow-Mailes in Sterling-Money, which would have been nothing
else but the utter undoing and extirpation of this Re-publick: He out of his
Princely Clemency, and Favor which he did ever bear to this his Ancient-City,
did of new again Re-erect and found the samen; and did quite abolish and
ab^ogat the payment of Sterling-Money, by dissolving the same from the Crown in
Parliament, so far as concerns this City allennarlly: the like benefit being
denied to any other Burgh in the Kingdom: as also, disponning and giving of new
the Burgh, Common-Lands, Fishings and all other Liberties thereof whatsomever,
for payment of current money allennarly.

And at the same time, honored our then present Provest, THOMAS MENZIES of
Durne or Cults, with the Title of Knighthood in his own Privy-Chamber, in the
presence of the best sort of the Nobility of both the Kingdoms, whom he
acknowledged (before them then present,) worthy of that honor, be reason of
his Birth, besides the good service lately done by Him and the City of Aberdeen
to the King, by the gentle entertainment of his Honorable Servants, who came at
that time to visit Aberdeen by the Kings appointment 1617.

This SIR THOMAS MENZIES of Cults having procured that Famous Pearl which was
found in the Brook or Burn of Kellie, as it runs into the River of Ythan,
which Pearl, for beauty and bigness, was the best that has been at any time
found in Scotland: our said Provest having found by the Judgment of the best
Jewelers in Edinburgh, that it was most Precious and of a very high Value, went
up to London and gifted it to the King, this was in the year 1620.

Who in retribution gave him twelve or fourtteen Chalders of Victual about
Dumfermling, and the Custom of Merchant-Goods in Aberdeen during his life.

But it pleased GOD he dyed at Wooller on the Border in England, in his return
home. Nevertheless, this did signify the special Favor the King did bear to
our then Provest, though he did not live to enjoy the effects of the Kings
Royal and Princely Respects. This Pearl was reported to be one of the Jewels
of the Crown of England.

Likewise, when the King called the Commissioners of both Kingdoms to treat
anent the Union betwixt Scotland and England, ALEXANDER RUTHERFORD Provest of
Aberdeen, being one of the four chosen for the State of the Burrowes, the King
did put it upon Him to speak in behalf of the Burrowes, who did acquit himself
so satisfyingly to the King, that pulling a rich Diamond Ring from his Finger,
he gave it him as a token of his Royall-Respects. I have heard some relate,
that when he had delivered his discourse in our Scots-dialect, which was not so
intelligible at that time to the English Commissioners, he spoke to the same
purpose in Latin, that the Bishops might understand: then gave a like account
to the Nobility amongst the English Commissioners in the French-Language, which
did affect the King with very much complacency, who carried a singular Respect
to the Subjects of this his Native-Country and Ancient Kingdom, and made every
thing acceptable that had- a tendency to the repute thereof.

The Battle of Harlaw did witness the Zeal of Aberdeen against the Enemies of
the King, and for the Peace of the Kingdom 1411. where the Provest and many of
the best Citizens did assist to gain the Victory of that day with the loss of
their lives.

Also that fatal Battle of Pinkie, where there were lost and killed many
brave Townsmen of Aberdeen, that went thither (though at so far a distance)
for the Honor of their Sovereign and of the Nation.

King CHARLES the first in the year 1633 at his Coronation in this Kingdom,
confirmed and ratified all our above written Privileges and Liberties of new,
given and granted by his Royal Father and Progenitors with this addition,
making and constituting the Provest and Bailies, Sheriffs within their Burgh
and Freedom-Lands, and the Privilege of having an unground Malt-Market, and
honored PAUL MENZIES of Kinmundie then present Provest with the Honor of
Knighthood.

In the year 1649, when the Parliament of Scotland, out of their dutiful
Respects, and Loyalty to their undoubted Sovereign, King CHARLES the second,
had proclaimed Him King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, and immediately
did choose Commissioners of all the three Estates of this Kingdom, to invite
their King to this his Ancient Kingdom, to receive the Crown which had now of
right descended to him from 108 Kings.

The Parliament made choice of ALEXANDER JAFFRAY of Kingswells Commissioner for
Aberdeen, to be one of the two Burrowes to go over to Holland to the King, who
was a Wise, Pious and Discreet Man all his time. And he (to be faithful to the
City he had his Commission from) entreated the Parliament to consider the most
important Article in his Commission, that so he might undertake that weighty
Employment with the greater Alacrity, which was to visit the counts of the
extraordinary losses of Aberdeen relating to the Public. The Parliament had
that respect to him, and was so desirous to grant his so just demand, that
forthwith they did Deput some fit Members, who after hearing and considering,
made their report, and thereupon the Parliament by an Act did acknowledge
themselves, (as the Representative of the Nation) to be justly resting to the
City of Aberdeen the sum of nine hundredth threescore and nine thousand Merks,
and did grant the Cess of the City to be allowed to them for as many Months as
drew to eighteen thousand Merks; because this great sum that was due to them
had exhausted the sums of Money that was Mortified to Hospitals Schools, the
College, and the Common-Poor of that City; and had ruined almost the Common
Thesaurie thereof; but this was all they could spare at that time, till an
opportunity might fall out to make them more full payment, which hitherto has
ever failed, and has been the cause of the several heavy burdensome Taxations
that have of late years been laid on, and of procuring that relief which has
been obtained their five or six years bygone by the Magistrates, who withal have
made themselves liable to the grudge of such as are so selfiish, that before
their particular suffer but a little, they could let the Public come to utter
ruin and perish without remedy and unavoidably: but of two evils the least is
to be chosen.

But to return, Our abovenamed Commissioner obtained also an Act of Parliament,
that no Soldiers should be quartered in Aberdeen for three years thereafter,
such was the great respect the Parliament had to him, whereupon he went to the
King with the rest of the Commissioners of the three Estates.

And after his return, being Commissioner to the Convention of Burrowes at
Queensferrie, obtained half a merk down of Aberdeens proportion of the 100
Pound of Stent-Roll, which was a great advantage to the City.

He being chosen that year Provest of Aberdeen, went with the rest of the
Commissioners the next year 1650 to the Hague in Holland, where it pleased GOD
so to prosper their endeavors, as to bring the King home with them. Aberdeen
being the first City of the Kingdom he came to, there he was received with all
the Demonstrations of joy and cheerfullness that the Magistrates and Inhabitants
could evidence: as also, the Silver-Keyes of the City were delivered to him by
the Provest (who tame sometime before to prepare for the Kings, reception) with
an Eloquent and Pertinent Harrangue therewith made by Mr. James Sandilands, of
Cotton, the Cities Recorder, or Clerk.

In the end of February and beginning of March 1651, the King came to Aberdeen,
where he stayed a week at which time, Mr. Robert Farquhar of Munie was Provest,
( Alexander Jaffray who had been Provest the former year, having been taken
Prisoner at Dumbar-fight which was on the third of September 1650.) the King
was pleased to honor our then present Provest with the Honor of Knighthood,
together with Patrick Leslie of Eden who had been Provest some years before
with the like Honor.

As also, in the Year 1681, GEORGE SKEN^ of Fintray was Honored with the Title
of Knighthood at EDINBURGH, by JAMES Duke of Albany and York, then Commissioner
to the Parliament of SCOTLAMD, for the late KING, CHARLES the Second, His
ROYALL-BROTHER.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the STATE of ABERDEEN.
AS for the State of ABERDEEN, if it be taken for the Yearly Revenue of their
Thesaurie, it is not so considerable as some lesser Towns in the Kingdom.

It is mostly exhausted in paying Stipendiaries and other incidencies,
especially since the time of Queen Mary, at which time our Freedom-Lands and
Salmon-Fishings were all fewed out to particular men; which though it brought
in considerable sums at first, yet now the Fewes both of Lands and Waters are
but very inconsiderable: all of them extending but to seven hundredth sixteen
Pounds ten shillings Scots money.

Yet that it may appear how considerable this City is in reference to the Kings
Exchequer, if we consider the Customs and Excyse of Merchant-Goods, one with
another; as also, the Excyse of Ale, Beer and Aquavitae or Strong Water; with
the Yearly Supply given to the King, by Act of Parliament, this City one Year
with another, will be of in-come to the Exchequer about thirty thousand Pounds
of Scots money.

If this were duly considered, it might easily be perceived, that the
Prosperity and Flowrishing of this City is of special concernment to the King,
and the Public Interests of the Nation; and incaice of its decay, the
prejudice of both will be no less considerable.

We acknowledge, we have several of the Chiefest Staple Commodities in the
Kingdom, as Plaiding, Fingrams, Stockings, Salmond, Stuffs, Serges, Sheepskins
and Lamb-skins.

When Plading was giving good price in Holland, the old Conservator SIR PATRICK
DRUMMOND frequenty reported that the Kingdom of SCOTLAND was more obliedged to
the City of ABERDEEN for the abundance of money the Merchants thereof brought
to the Nation, then to all the Towns of this Kingdom besides: but the Trade of
this so profitable a Commodity is greatly decayed and become very low.

The Rivers of Dee and Don, besides what is brought from Ythan and Ugie, (which
two last Rivers belong to the Earl MARISCHALL and some other Heritors of the
Shyre) these two first Rivers afford our Merchants above an hundredth and twenty
Lasts of Salmond or thereby one year with another, which are carried to France,
Holland and sometimes to Spain and other foreign places.

I knew a Merchant in my time who sent to Dantzick thirty thousand Lamb-skins
in one year; but our Trade is much decayed by what it has been forty or fifty
Years ago, before our late Intestin Troubles began.

CHAP. VII. A Catalogue of these who have been PROVESTS in ABERDEEN, whereof
any record may be had, either by Scrolls, Charters or Infeftments, before or
since the burning of the said City.
Anno Dom.
1310. Duncanus Melavill found in the Bishop of Aberdeens old Registers. 1326.
Simon Gilchach found in an authentic Scroll. 1329. Willielmus de Strabrok in a
Scroll. 1142. David de Fingask in a Scroll. 1349. Simon Lynto in an old
Evident. 1350. Robertus de Edynhine in an old Evident. 1352. Willielmus Leith
in a Scroll. 1360. Thomas Mercer in an authentic Scroll. 1361. Thomas Mercer
in an authentic Scroll. 1366. Laurentius Garvock in a Scroll. 1367. Laurentius
de Fety in authentic Scrolls. 1382. Alexander Bannerman in authentic Scrolls.
1384. Laurentius de Fety. 1385. Laurentius de Fety. 1392. Willielmus de Camera
Pater. 1393. Willielmus de Camera Pater. 1395. Willielmus Filius Andreae. 1396.
Willielmus de Camera Pater. 1398. Willielmus de Camera Pater. The oldest
Court-book of this City, is of this years date, which is in the Latine-Tongue.
1399. Adam de Benyn, tenet cum libro. 1400. Adam de Benyn, tenet cum libro.
1401. Laurentius Leith, tenet cum libro. 1403. Laurentius de Leith. 1404.
Willielmus de Camera Filius. 1405. Robertus Filius David. 1406. Robertus David.
1407. Robertus David. 1408. Robertus Filius David. 1409. Ioannes Fitchet. 1410.
Robertus Filius David, slain at Harlam. 1411. Andreas Giffurd. 1412. Thomas de
Camera. 1413. Willielmus Jackson, from this forth we can find no Court Book
till Gilbert Menzeis time 1426. 1416. Thomas Roll in an old Charter. 1419.
Andreas Giffurd. 1423. Gilbertus Menzeis. 1425. Ioannes Vaus. 1426. Gilbertus
Menzeis, tenet cum libro. 1427. Gilbertus Menzeis, tenet cum libro. 1428.
Ioannes Vaus 1429. Ioannes Vaus. 1433. Thomas de Camera, tenet cum libro. 1434.
Thomas de Camera. 1435. Ioannes Scroggis, tenet cum libro. 1437. Ioannes Fyffe,
tenet cum libro. 1438. Thomas de Camera, tenet cum libro. 1439. Gilbertus
Menzeis. 1440. Ioannes Fyffe. 1441. Matheus Fitchet. 1442. Ioannes Mar junior.
1443. Alexander de Camera. 1444. Ioannes Vaus. 1445. Ioannes Vaus. 1446.
Alexander de Camera. 1447. Willielmus Sherar. 1448. Ioannes Fyffe. 1449.
Ioannes de Scroggis Filius. 1450. Ioannes de Scroggis Filius. 1451. Ioannes
Fyffe. 1452. Ioannes de Fyffe. 1453. Ioannes Mar. 1454. Andreas Menzies. 1455.
Ioannes de Scroggis Filius. 1456. Ioannes de Fyffe. 1457. Ioannes de Fyffe.
1458. Ricardus Kintore. 1459. Ricardus Kintore 1460, 1461, 1462, 1463, 1464,
1465, 1466. totidem annis. 1467, Alexander Cameron 1468, 1469, totidem. 1470.
Andreas Allanson. 1471. Ricardus Kintore. 1472. Andreas Sherar. 1473. Andreas
Allanson. 1474. Alexander de Camera. 1475. Alexander Menzeis. 1476. Andreas
Sherar. 1477. Alexander de Camera. 1478. Andreas Sherar. 1479. Alexander de
Camera. 1480. Alexander Menzeis. 1481. Iacobus Lesty. 1482. Robertus Blinshell.
1483. Ioannes Rutherford de Migvie. 1484. Alexander de Camera. 1485. Ioannes'
Rutherford de Tarlane miles. 1486. Alexander Menzeis. 1487. Ioannes Rutherford
de Tarlane miles. 1488. David Menzeis. 1489. Ioannes Rutherford de Tarlane
miles. 1490. Ioannes Rutherford de Tarlane miles. 1491. Ioannes Cullen. 1492.
Ioannes Rutherford de Tarlane miles. 1493. Alexander Reid. 1494. David Menzies.
1495. Alexander Chalmer de Murthill. 1496. Ioannes Rutherford miles. 1497.
Ioannes Rutherford miles. 1498. Ioannes Rutherford miles. 1499. Ioannes
Rutherford miles. 1500. Ioannes Rutherford miles. 1501. Alexander Menzeis.
1502. Alexander Menzeis. 1503. Alexander Menzeis. 1504. Ioannes Lesly de
Wards. 1505. Gilbertus Menzeis. 1506. Andreas Cullen. 150, Gilbertus Menzeis
1508, 1509, 1510, 1511, 1512, 1513. totidem annis. 1514. Ioannes Mar. 1515.
Ioannes Mar. 1516, 1517, 1518, 1519, 1520. Gilbertus Menzeis totidem annis.
1521. Ioannes Collison, nota, electus fuit ante diem ordinariam, virtute
literarum Regiarum desuper directarum. 1522. Gilbertus Menzeis de Findon. 1523.
Gilbertus Menzeis de Findon. 1524. Gilbertus Menzeis de Findon. 1525. Thomas
Menzeis de Pitfoddels. 1526 Gilbertus Menzeis. 1527. Gilbertus Menzeis. 1528.
Gilbertus Menzeis, 1529, 1530, 1531, 1532. totidem annis. 1533. Thomas Menzeis
de Pitfoddels. 1534. Thomas Menzeis de Pitfoddels. 1535. Andreas Cullen. 1536.
Gilbertus Menzeis de Findon. 1537, Thomas Menzeis de Pitfoddels, 1538, 1539,
1540, 1541, 1542, 1543, 1544, totidem annis. 1545. Georgius Comes de Huntly,
Dominus Gordon and Badzenoch ac locum tenens Generalis Boreae. 1546. Georgius
Comes de Huntly etc. praepositus. 1547. Thomas Menzeis de Pitfoddels, annuatim
electus fuit praepositus ad annum 1576. 1576. Gilbertus Menzeis de Coullie.
1577. Gilbertus Menzeis de Pitfoddels. 1578. Gilbertus Menzeis de Pitfoddels
annuatim ad annum. 1588. 1588. Mr. Thomas Menzeis de Durne. 1589. Mr Thomas
Menzeis de Durne. 1590. Alexander Cullen. 1591. Alexander Rutherford. 1592.
Thomas Menzeis apparens de Durne. 1593. Mr. Ioannes Cheyn. 1594. Ioannes
Collison. 1595. Thomas Menzeis de Durne. 1596. Alexander Rutherford. 1597.
Alexander Chalmer de Cults. 1598. Alexander Rutherford. 1599. Alexander Cullen.
1600. Alexander Rutherford. 1601. Alexander Cullen. 1602. Thomas Menzeis de
Durne. 1603. Alexander Rutherford 1604. David Menzeis Senior. 1605. Alexander
Rutherford. 1606. Alexander Cullen. 1607. Alexander Rutherford. 1608. Alexander
Cullen. 1609. Alexander Rutherford. 1610. Alexander Cullen and quia vitam obiit
penultimo Octobris, Alexander Rutherford electus fuit in ejus vicem 1610. 1611,
Alexander Rutherford 1612, 1613, 1614, totidem annis. 1615, Thomas Menzeis de
Cults, 1616, 1617, in qua anno factus fuit miles. 1618, 1619, 1620, totidem
annis, and quia dictus Dominus Thomas vitam obiit in mense Septembris 1620, in
suo itinere in rediundo ab Anglia, Mr. David Rutherford electus fuit
praepositus in ejus vicem. 1621. Mr. David Rutherford. 1622. Georgius Nicolson.
1623. ad annum 1633. Paulus Menzeis de Kinmundie and eo anno nominatus Dominus
Paulus, miles. 1634. Patricius Lesly de Eden, ab Officio privatus 14. Januarii
1635, and dictus D. Paulus Menzeis electus fuit praepositus in ejus vicem; sed
postea Patricius Leslie anno 1639. electus and restitutus fuit. 1635. Robertus
Johnstoun de Crimond, remotus fuit per decretum Dominorum Secreti Concilii, and
Mr. Alexander Jaffray de Kingswells virtute dicti decreti, electus fuit
praepositus in ejus vicem. 1636. Mr. Alexander Jaffray, de Kingswells. 1637.
Robertus Johnstoun, de Crimond. 1638. Mr. Alexander Jaffray. 1639. Patricius
Lesly de Eden. 1640. Patricius Lesly. 1641. Mr. Alexander Jaffray. 1642.
Patricius Lesly. 1643. Patricius Lesly. 1644. Mr. Robertus Farquhar, de Munie.
1645. Mr. Thomas Gray. 1646. Mr. Thomas Gray, in mense Februarii. 1647.
Patricius Lesly electus fuit. 1647. Patricius Lesly electus apud Gilchonstoun,
quia Pestis erat in Urbe. 1648. Mr. Thomas Gray. 1649. Alexander Jaffray de
Kingswells. 1650. Mr. Robertus Farquhar. 1651. Alexander Jaffray. 1652.
Georgius Morison de Pitfour. 1653. Georgius Morison. 1654. Georgius Morison.
1655. Mr. Thomas Gray. 1656. Georgius Cullen qui obiit in dicto officio. 1657.
Ioannes Jaffray de Dilspro. 1658. Ioannes Jaffray. 1659. Ioannes Jaffray. 1660.
Gilbertus Gray. 1661. Gilbertus Gray. 1662. Gulielmus Gray qui vitam obiit eo
anno. 1663. Gilbertus Gray. 1664. Mr. Robertus Patrie de Portlethin. 1665. Mr.
Robertus Patrie. 1666. Gilbertus Gray qui vitam obiit in dicto Officio. 1667.
Mr. Robertus Patrie. 1668. Mr. Robertus Patrie. 1669. Mr. Robertus Patrie.
1670. Mr. Robertus Patrie. 1671. Robertus Forbes de Robslaw. 1672. Robertus
Forbes. 1673. Robertus Forbes. 1674. Robertus Patrie. 1675. Robertus Forbes.
1676. Georgius Skene de Fintray, ad praesentem annum 1685.
This City has not been a barren Mother or Nurse in our Israel, in bringing
forth and breeding up many eminent men and brave Spirits, whereof there might
be set down a large Catalogue, not only in bypast years, but even of Men
eminent for abilities in their several Professions in this same Age, whom I
have known by face in my own time, and that both in Grammar, Music,
Philosophy, Medicin, Mathematics, Poesy, the Civil and Cannon-Law,
School Divinity, the Art Military, who have in their Times been not only
Ornaments to this City, but even to the whole Kingdom. But lest this might
favor of ostentation, and upon several other considerations I forbear, and
shall leave it to any other to perform this task, if it be found needful; and
therefore shall sum up the description of this City, with the Elogies written
upon some of the Ancient Citizens and Families thereof in these Epigrams made
by DR. ARTHUR JOHNSTOUN as follows.

CHAP. VIII. The EPIGRAMS of DR. ARTHUR IOHNSTOUN, Physician in ordinary to
King CHARLES the first upon the City of ABERDEEN.
Arthuri Johnstoni Epigrammata, De ABERDONIA Urbe.
Cune populo quisquis Romanam suspicis urbem,
Et mundi dominam, deliciasque vocas?
Confer Aberdoniam, Thytis hanc servilibus undis
Alluit, Urbs famulo nec procul illa mari est.
Utraque fulta jugis subjectos despicit amnes:
Utraque fulminea spirat ab arce minas.
Illa suos Fabios, invictaque Fulmina belli
Scipiadas jactat, Caesariamque domum.
Mennesios Urbs haec proceres, Gentemque Culenam,
Et Collissonios, Lausoniosque patres.
Urbe Quirinali minor est Urbs Grampica, Caves
Sunt tamen HIG Animis, Ingeniisque pares.
Englished thus, by I. B,
Who e're thou art, that Rome do magnify,
And her extol as people fondly, do:
Entitling her the Earths delight and Queen,
Compare with her the City ABERDEEN:
A City which does neighbor with the Sea,
To which the Oceans waves do constantly
Flow up at Handmaids; yet ere they approach
They stoop as fearing too far to encroach.
From lofty hills both Cities view with pride,
The little Brooks which through the Vallayes glyd:
Both from their stately and their thundering Tower,
Defye with threatenings all unfriendly power.
Rome of her Tabii and unconquered Hosts,
Of Scipios, and of great Caesar's boasts.
This CITY of her Menzeises great worth,
Of Cullens, and of Lawsons here brought forth;
And Collisons, all men of great esteem:
Of these she boasts, these does her Glory deem
I^ Bigness may amongst Praises reckned be,
Rome is indeed of greater bulk then She;
But in all Gifts, and Ornaments of mind,
Rome may her Equals in this CITY find.
ABERDONIA-NOVA.
URBS-NOVA piscosi quam dictant ostia DEVAE,
Urbibus Antiquis praeripit omne decus.
Hanc DELUBRA A beant totum Cantata per Orbem,
Templaque mortali non fabricata manu.
Haec prope Romuleis Aedes Sacrata Camaenis
Surgit, Athenaeum non procul Inde vides.
Ardua sideriis rutilant Praetoria primis,
Hic ubi planities panditur ampla fori.
Adspicis hic Procerum vicina palatia Coelo,
Et Populi pictos, Aureolosque Lares.
Quid memorem ternos, trita propugnacula, colles
Qualibus Urbs surgit qua caput Orbis erat.
Hanc quoque Lanaris Mons ornat, amaenior illis,
Hinc ferrugineis SPADA colorat aquis.
Inde Suburbanum JAMESONI despicis Hortum,
Qu^^ Domini pictum suspicor esse manu.
Salmonum dat DEVA greges, maris equora gazas,
Memphi, tuas, and quas India jactat opes.
Pons septem gemino cameratus fornice DEVAM
Integit, AUTHOREM juncta Tiara notat.
Haec celebret Vulgus. solos Ego prae^ico Cives,
His collata nihil caetera laudis habent.
Martia men's illos commendat and aurea virtus,
Rebus ^^ in dubiis saepe probata Fides.
Hospita Gens haec est and Comis and annula Divum,
Quaeque regnunt alios, huic famulantur opes.
Si locus est meritis, Urbs haec Regina vocari
Et Dominae titulum sumere jure potest.
Caetera Mortales producunt Oppida, solos
Urbs haec Haeroas, Semi-Deosque parit.
Englished thus.
NEW-ABERDEEN enriched by Dees clear streams
All praise from Ancient Cities justly claims;
It Is blessed with Churches famous in all lands,
And Temples framed by no mortal hands.
Muses alse famous as once Rome did grace,
Have hallowed a House into this place.
A College may be seen not far from thence,
Where Learning fixed has its residence.
The Mercat-place where men resort for gain,
Is stretched out into a spacious Plain:
There you the stately Judgement-House may view
Whose Battlements are of a Starry-Hew:
There Palaces of Peers you may espy,
Whose Lofty-Tops approach unto the Sky,
And Towns-Mens-Houses there you may behold,
Which garnished are and shining like the Gold.
What need I further the three Hills to name,
Which as three-Bulwarks fortify the Same.
Like these on which that City does stand,
Which once as Head did all the Earth command.
The Wool-man-hill which all the rest out-vyes
In pleasantness, this City beautifies:
There is the Well of Spa, that healthful Font,
Whose Yr'ne-hew'd-Water colloureth the Mount.
Not far from thence a Garden's to be seen,
Which unto Jameson did appertain:
Wherein a little pleasant House does stand,
Painted (as I guess) with its Masters hand.
Dee does afford of Salmon wondrous store,
The Neighbour-Sea brings up into the Shore.
The Riches whereof Egypt makes her boast,
And Indian-Treasures come into this Coast.
A Bridge does reach along the River Dee,
Wherein seven double stately Arches be:
Who built this sumptuous-Work if ye would know,
The Myter which is carved thereon does show.
But let the Vulgar sort these things commend,
The Citizens to praise I do intend.
If all these things with them compared be,
They do deserve no praise no memory:
That Martiall-mind which often appeared has,
That golden Virtue and unstained Faith
Which lodges in them all these jointly do
Concur to raise their Name and Fame on high:
They are a courteous People and a Kind,
Men of aspiring Spirits, and noble Mind:
Riches which does the baser sort enslave,
They have them; but they them as servants have
If Worth have place, of Cities this may be
Entitled- Queen, and claim Sov'raigniti'.
All other Cities Mortals bear; but This,
Of Demigods and Hero's Parent is.
I could add many more Verses in Latin and English upon ABERDEEN; but being
loath to nauseat the Reader I forbear; I have some Verses made in Latin by Mr.
JOHN JOHNSTOUN, and also some Latine-Verses upon the Learned-Men that lived in
this same Age; but shall forbear to multiply these Poeticall-Elogies: let these
suffice to stir up the Citizens and their Posterity so to behave themselves in
all their deportments, as they may most imitat their Worthy-Ancestors in every
Virtue purely imitable, and not be accessory to occasion the old Renown and
Esteem that ABERDEEN had gained, to fail in their Persons.

CHAP. IX. Dr. IOHNSTOUNS Epigrams, upon several of the Royall-Burghs in this
KINGDOM; as may be found in his Poems printed at Middle-Burgh 1642. Translated
into English, by I. B.
HAving taken pains to write this Survey of ABERDEEN My Respects to the other
Burghs are such, that I have prevailed so far with my good Friend MR. JOHN
BARCLAY Person of- Cruden, as to Translate the Epigrams of DR. ARTHUR JOHNSTOUN
out of Latin into English to show my Good Will and Desire, and to evidence my
real Respects to them when I can but catch an occasion: The ability of the
TRANSLATOR and HIS Justice may be seen in the Latin and English Translation of
His Epigrams on Aberdeen, which may serve as an Emblem to the rest that
follow, and as the Burghs of the Kingdom see it needful, they may set able
Persons on work, to satisfy the desire of the Printed Advertisement and
Queries thereof, set forth by SIR ROBERT SIBBALD, ( Physician in ordinary and
Geographer to the late KING CHARLES the Second, within the Kingdom of
SCOTLAND,) for answering the then KINGS Mind in reference to the completing
the Description of this Kingdom.

Tho these Epigrams being Printed in Latin might satisfy Strangers; yet I
suppose they will be no less acceptable to our own Contrymen to have them in
English, hoping the discreet Reader will not impute the Superstitious or
Hyperbolicall-Expressions which appear in these Epigrams to Me or the
Translator, seeing the Author of them in Latin (who was one of the most
excellent Poets of his time) did expect the Common-Liberty allowed to Such.

EDINBURGH.
That EDINBURGH may view the Heav'n^ at will
Its built upon a lofty rising Hill,
The Fields and Rivers which its Handmaids be
It thence views, and the Tributary-Sea.
Here where the Sun displayes its morning-light,
The Palace does present it self to sight.
That Princely-Dwelling under Arthures-seat,
Adorned by most Ingenious Art of late.
Toward the West the raised Castle stands,
Which with its Thunders gives loud Commands
A Church appears in middle of the Town
Which is this Cities and the Earths-Renown.
A Structure reared by Ancient Piety,
Within its Walls all things most stately be,
Its gilded top which is of Marble-fine
Shaped as an interwoven Crown does shine.
The Hall of Judgment by the Temple stands,
A Building of most curious Artists hands.
Each Citizen has such an House that It
Might PEERS of highest quality befit.
The threats of Foes do not make Them affrayd,
Nor need They be by their Assaults dismayed.
Tiber does Rome, the Sea does Venice fright,
But EDINBURGH defyes the Waters might.
Trust Me, no City worthier is to be
With presence graced of ROYAL-DIGNITIE:
And for a KINGLY-CITY none can wish
A Seat that is more convenient then this.
The TRANSLATORS Addition.
Of late pure Waters hither are conveyed,
The Citizens are thereby well supplied:
Who views the distant Springs from whence They run,
The Conduits which are deep under ground:
The Wells which in the Street these Streams do fill,
Will judg't a Work of more then human-Skill.
LEITH.
LEITH, by that Water which is named by thee,
To thee a thousand Favors granted be;
Thy bosom is a safe and happy Port,
To which a thousand Veshells do resort:
Thou art a Pilot-Town, thy Ships are such
As are ambitious to out-sail the Dutch.
The utmost parts of Earth thy Sails descry,
Through Eastern and through Western-Seas they fly.
Thou knows the paths by which the glorious Sun
Fullfills His Course, and where the Moon does run.
And where the sparkling Stars themselves do roll,
And counts the shyning Signs of either Pole.
When in the Ocean thou displayes thy sail,
Both Wind and Waves to thy Commands do vail.
Thou worthy Town who have the Sailing-Art,
From Typhis learned, or did to Him impart.
LITHGOW.
LITHGOW's a Noble Town, first look upon
Its coastly Temple built of polisht Ston.
For splendour does the PALACES near by
With It contend, which Other shall outvy.
These Towred-Buildings which more precious are
Then both the houses of the Sun by far.
An unwald Lake is near unto the Town,
Wherein the scaled-Flocks float up and down:
When Grampion-Arms their Enemies defeats,
These Ponds afford them their Triumphal-Treats.
This of the Kings-Lake does enjoy the name,
As Caesar that in company did claim.
The Lucrine-Lake for Luxury served more,
But LITHGOW's yields the most delicious Store.
STIRLING.
Who is by Verses able to set forth,
Or to declare the lovely STIRLINGS worth:
Our KINGS often in this place of safety,
Secure into their little Cratches or Gradles
ly.
Its Air is pure by Heavens near influence*
From Foes assaults no Town has more defense*
A Castle on two Rocks stands here so fair,
That with Tarpeian-Joves it may compare.
The Arched-Bridge here meets FORTH* glyding-Streams,
And to its Vault obeisance from't does claim:
As in the Phrygian-Coasts Maeander runs,
And winds it self about in various turns:
The River here does force its Passage so,
Flows and returns is tossed too and fro.
The Traveller whose found of daily change,
And through the Earth with tedious steps does range;
When hither he does happen to retire,
This Town and Countries Wealth he does admire.
These strange things do deserve the sweetest lays:
But Warlick-Vertue mertits further Praise.
The Roman pride how often has STIRLING queld,
Their Conquering Swords IT more then once repelled.
The Flood wherewith this Cities-fields are wet
Did bounds to their O're-running Empire set.
PEARTH.
BERTH first, now PEARTH thou Town of Ancient Fame,
Art called by a great APOSTLES Name;
In Praise thou do deserve to have thy share,
For Cleanliness and for thy Wholesome Air:
And for that River by which thou do stand,
Whose Streams make fertile all its Neighboring Land:
These ruins of thy Bridge we yet do see,
Its well cut Stons, thy Wealth do testify:
The swelling Floods their force upon it spent,
The Showers made them impatient of restrent.
Their violence (so HEAVEN willed) did break down
That sumptuous BRIDGE the Glory of thy TOWN.
The Grampian Poets to commend, there is found
An Isle here, which the Wattrie Streams surround
A little Isle, but by the Highland LORDS
A Battle fought therein to it Fame affords.
Here the brave Youth the Noble Horses train,
With which the Wing'd-ones could no Race mantain.
This Isle, MARS- Field may be entitled,
By Light SCOTS Chariots often enobelled.
Near by Thee, there are Woods where one may kill
The Staigs and Roes ensnare, with nets at will:
And from the Carse (not far off is) which bears
Most fragrant Aples and most luscious Pears:
Whilst thus thou do a happy mixture make,
A gain with pleasure nothing thou do lake:
And so the Crown of Praise and Dignity
As Thy just due does appertain to Thee.
DUNDEE.
An Ancient Town, to which Tay's entry do
Willing obedience, and subjection show.
The bones of conquered and slain Danes are found
Here scattered, ill buried in the ground.
When Genoa thee views, it does despise
^s Marbles, nor does barbarous Egypt pryse
Her Pyramids, and Gargara does deem
^s Harvests to deserve but small esteem.
The Lyburne Land thinks not her Veshells fair,
When as she them does with thy Ships compare.
Venice her self in poverty thinks-lost,
And Cnidus of her Fishes dare not boast.
The Spartan Youth to equal thine does fail,
Romes Senators unto thy Consuls vail.
He as an Artless fool should branded be,
Who from Tay's-Gulph did beg a name to Thee;
Since thou by more then Human-Art are framed
DON-DEI the Gift of GOD thou should be named.
GLASGOW.
GLASGOW to Thee thy Neighboring Towns give place,
^Bove them thou lifts thine head with comely grace
Scarce in the spacious Earth, can any see
A City that is more beautiful then thee.
Toward the setting Sun you are built, and finds
The temperat breathings of the Western-Winds.
To thee the Winter colds not hurtful are,
Nor scorching Heats of the Canicular.
More pure then Amber is the River Clyde,
Whose Gentle Streams do by thy Borders glyd;
And here a thousand Sail receive commands
To traffic for thee unto Forraign-Lands.
A Bridge of pollisht Ston, does here vouchase
To Travelers over Clyde a Passage safe.
Thine Orchards full of fragrant Fruits and Buds
Come nothing short of the Corcyran Woods.
And blushing Roses grow into thy fields.
In no less plenty then sweet Paestum yields.
Thy Pastures, Flocks, thy fertile Ground, the Corns,
Thy Waters, Fish, thy Fields the Woods adorns,
Thy Buildings high and glorious are; yet be
More fair within then they are outwardly.
Thy Houses by thy Temples are out done,
Thy glittering Temples of the fairest Stone:
And yet the Stones of them how ever fair,
The Workmanship exceeds whlch is more rare.
Not far from them the Place of Justice stands,
Where Senators do sit and give Commands.
In midst of thee the COLLEGE.
APOLLO's Court is placed,
With the resort of all the Muses graced.
To Citizens in the Minerva Arts
Mars valor, Juno, stable Wealth impairts:
That Neptune and Apollo did (its said)
Troy's famed Walls rear, and their foundations lai^
But thee, O GLASGOW! we may justly dee^
That all the Gods who have been in esteem,
Which in the Earth and Air and Ocean are
Have joined to build with a Propitious Star.
Upon the Arms of the City of GLASGOW, viz. an SALMON, an OAK- Tree, with a
BIRD sitting on it, a BELL, a GOLD-RING found in the SALMON's- mouth.

The SALMON which a Fish is of the Sea,
The OAK which springs from Earth that lofty Tree.
The BIRD on it which in the Air does flee,
O GLASGOW does presage all things to thee!
To which the Sea or Air, or fertile Earth
Do either give their Nowrishment or Birth.
The BELL, that does to Public Worship call,
Says HEAVEN will give most lasting things of all.
The RING, the token of the Marriage is
Of things in Heaven and Earth both thee to bless.
DRUMFRISE.
Apollo, from Amphrysus Banks did see
The goodly Pastures at DRUMFRISE which be:
And when he He viewed them he did freely tell
That all Admetus Hills they did excel.
The fatted Flocks which here in Meadows feed,
Are numerous as Grass which Earth does breed:
To Stranger Nations they are sent abroad,
And often do the English-Tables load.
The Corns yet more abound upon the Field.
The River bears Ships, and Fish do yield,
And store this Town from bounteous Sea does find:
Whose Waves are smoothed here by Western-Wind.
Diana's Temple, and all else which grace
The Greeks Land, to the Temple here gives place.
Here Cumming who betrayed his native Land,
His Blood and Life lost by the BRUCES hand.
DRUMFRIESES Altars should much honored be,
For Here did SCOTLAND gain Its liberty.
AIR.
This City does with Heavens good Gifts abound
The Air in It is pure and wholesome found;
From whence its name it has, or from some Mine
Of Brase, wherewith Its ground perhaps do shine.
Its small in bulk; but in Its worth by far
It does excel Towns which more greater are.
In worth small Gemms, the biggest Rocks exceed,
The mighty Oak grows from a little Seed.
The overflowing Nilus sevenfold springs,
Are unto Men almost unknown things.
Take Cowrage then, for Tibers famous Town
Which Seas and Lands and Empires did tread down.
The Great and Mighty Rome it self (its told
Of it,) that it a Village was of old.
HADDINGTOWN.
Next unto Berwick, HADDINGTOWN faced all
The greatest dange^s, and was SCOTLANDS wall:
By valiant Arms often guarded it from Woes,
And often carried home the Spoils of Foes.
By Force, not Valor, It has been overcome,
Gave many Wounds, when It received some.
Believe it not, that only here should be
Brave Captains and the Flower of Chevalrie
Who in this City did make their abodes;
But here dwelt Scotlands Titularie-GODS.
The Coast-side Towns of FYFFE.
A tract of Towns by FORTH's- Streams watered,
From Northern-blasts the Grampian-hills you shed:
Neptune you taught to handle Oars and Sails,
To spread forth to the Clowdy-Southern-gales.
No Scylla, no Charibais, no such Sea
As dampt Uli^es Ships you terrify.
If ragged-Rocks to pass you do essay,
Or through Quicksands, through these you^ force your way:
And as't were not enough the Seas to plow,
The Earth its Intralls must make bare to you.
You search the Fires which in its bosom be,
Scarce from your view are Hells-dark-regions free
By your unmatched Skill you do not fail
To cause the Waters into Stones congeall.
The Ocean with that Salt your Borders fills,
Which Saxons boast they hew from Rockie-hills
Let SCOTLAND praise your Industry and Art,
For if It lacked those Gifts which you impart;
Too fie^ce and nipping were its Winter frosts,
And all its Denties-savour should be lost.
St. ANDREWS.
Thou were regarded by the World of late,
The Earth affording no more Sacred-Seat.
Thy Temples whilst by Jove with blushing seen
He his Tarpeian-Chapell thought but mean.
Had He Diana's-Temple who adorned
Viewed thine, he his own work had surely scorned
The Vestments of the Priests were no less fine,
All here did with an Heav'nly-lustre shine.
Here SCOTLANDS-PRIMATE in great State did sit,
To whom Its Patriots did themselves submit.
But this thy Ancient-Honour now is gone,
And thou thy former Glory do bemoan.
Thy Temples almost to the ground are laid.
Thy BISHOPS wonted Grandeur is decayed;
Yet art thou by the Muses honored still,
The Ministers of Phoebus here distill.
The Streams of Learning and an Honor, this
No greater then thou well deservest is.
The Eastern-Sun who does the Muses love,
Its careful Rays darts on thee from above.
And when the Mornings-blushes beautify
The Muses-dwellings, likewise does the Sea
With noise of tumbling-Waves to them resort,
And bids their Children make their sleep but short
The tired Students in a field that is near
Refresh themselves, and do their Spirits cheer.
Phocis of old did great Apollo's love,
As Act did the wise Minerva's move:
Both of them now aggreed seem to be
To have their fixed-Residence in Thee.
COWPER of FYFFE.
O Venus will thou Residenter be
Amongst SCOTS, choose COWPER as a Seat for thee:
Near it the Flowers adorn the Hills and Fields,
To which Idalium and proud Eryx yields.
Under the rockie Hill which Herbs o'regrow,
Swift Horses running make a goodly show.
Elis which the Olympick-Games did grace,
Did carry some resemblance of this Place.
Here may thou see the handsome Youths, whose hearts
With fyre-Brands thou may smit, or with thy Darts.
The Water Aden, by this Cities side,
As pure as Ac^dalian Streams do glyde.
Here thou wilt behold the lovely Swans in flight,
Here Myrtles grow, which in the Shoars delight
With these (thou Goddess) shall environed be
A double Swan's fair wings do carry thee.
Thy veiled Adonis here is blushing found,
Crocus hurt by thy Fires does haunt this ground.
The Fields yield Corns, despise not Ceres aid,
Without which Love does quickly freez and fade
Here cheerful Gides delicious Aples pull,
And pleasant Cherries rypned to the full:
And all the Fruits are here exposed to view,
Which in the famed Hesperian-Gardens grew.
Heast hither Venus from all other Parts,
Bring here thy Chains, thy Firebrarnds and thy Darts,
The Name of Cypria thou from Cyprus claimed
From Cowper, Cupria thou wilt be henceforth named.
FARFAR.
The ruins of a Palace thee decore,
A fruitful Lake and fruitful Land much more.
Thy Precincts (it is confessed) much straightened be,
Yet Ancient SCOTLAND did give Power to thee:
Angus and other places of the Land,
Yield to thy Jurisdiction and Command.
Nobles unto the People Laws do give,
By Handy-Crafts the Vulgar-sort do live.
They pull off Bullocks-hydes and make them meet
When tanned, to cover handsome Virgins feet:
From thee are Sandals to light Umbrians sent,
And solls with latchets to Rope-Climbers lent:
And Rullions wherewith the Bowrs do go
To keep their feet unhurt with Ice and Snow.
The Ancient Greeks their Boots from this Town brought
As also hence their Ladies Slippers sought.
This the Tragedians did with Buskings fit,
And the Commedian-shooes invented it.
Let not Rome henceforth of its Puissance boast
Nor Spartans vaunt much of their warlick-Host
They laid their Yoke on necks of others Land
Farfar does tie their feet and legs with bands.
BREECHIN.
This fertile Town does 'twixt two Rivers stand
One to the North, one to the Southward hand:
The Watters down betwixt the Rocks do glyde,
Both Bridges have and many Foords beside.
The Vict^rie of the Northren KING does much
Commend this City, since its men were such
As stood and by their Valor vanquished,
When as their Neighbors treacherously fled.
Here is a Bishops-House, and near to it
A Tower seems built by Phidias Art and Wit.
Its bulk so little, and its top so high,
That it almost does reach unto the Sky:
Its Structure's round, look to it from a-far,
You would imagine It a Needle were:
Its built so strong, it fears no Wind nor Rain,
And Joves three-forked-Darts it does disdain.
Compare the Fabrics, BREECHINS- Tower exceeds
(Proud- Egypt) all thy stately Pyramides.
MONTROSE.
The Noble Town from ROSIE-MOUNT does claim
Its Present, as from Heaven its Ancient Name:
Near it is a Hill by which a River glydes,
Both which to it Delicious Fare provyds:
The Hill does Flocks, Salmon the Flood brings forth,
Or what in Nero's Ponds was of more worth.
The Lillies on the Banks refresh the sight,
The Roses on the Hills afford delight.
Toward the East the Seas themselves do spread,
Which with a thousand Ships are covered.
A large Field by the Sea is stretched fo^th,
Begirt with Waters both at South and North.
Some Youth train Horses here, some use the Bow,
And some their Strength in rolling great Stons show.
Some wrestle, some at Pennie-stones do play.
The rolling Balls with Clubs some drive away.
Should Jove or Venus view this Town, sure He
His Capitol, Her Ida leave would She.
The OLD-TOWN (vulgarly.) called OLD-ABERDEEN.
A Pious BISHOP dwells and rules in thee.
Don makes thee Prosperous, and the neighboring Sea:
Don by a wondrous Bridge is overlaid
Of one Arch, which the Gods belike have made
Such was the Rhodian Coloss work of old,
Where Ships with hoised Sails to pass were bold:
Near this the Salmon swim, and Snares are set
For them, and they are caught in every Net.
In thee an old, and stately Temple stands,
The Rest demolisht are by Strangers hands:
That Temple with two Towers does rise, which be
(As Pharos guids) to Travelers at Sea:
Phoebus and Pallas Palaces not far,
From that fair Temple to be viewed are.
Buildings fit for these Guests and over them
There is a Gilded-Cross and Diad^m.
An Holy BISHOP raised this Fabric, which
The KING did with fair Revenues enrich.
And Rome which does by words her bounty show
Did Names of Honor upon them bestow.
So many Greeks (who ruined Troy by force,)
Did not brake forth out of the Trojan-horse;
As that brave HOUSE of Learning has brought, forth,
Of Shyning-lights, and Men of greatest Worth.
Thou do not need thy Praises should be sung
Thou Noble Town by any Strangers Tongue:
Since by this People who reside in thee,
Thine Honor fitly published can be.
KINTORE.
Look to KINTORE, nor thou ELEUSIS shall,
Nor CICILY thereafter fertile call;
Its Fields are wat'red by the River DON,
Then which in SCOTLAND pleasanter there is none
Therein are Fishes in such plenty found,
That it may be called richer then the Ground.
Here PEARLS are gathered which much better are
Then in Hydaspes or Reid-Sea by far.
Hence was the UNION into EGYPT sent,
Which CLEOPATRA on a vain Intent,
Her Humor and her Pride to gratify,
In Vinager would have dissolved to be.
The People yearly view into this place,
The SCOTTISH- Youth to run the Horses-Race:
His Boon who does the rest overcome by speed,
Is such as does th'OLYMPICK- Pryze exceed.
Here first I sucked the Muses breasts when young,
It was here first I learned the Latine-Tongue.
Let ATHENS by MAEONIAN Songs be raised,
It Is fit KINTORE be by MY Verses praised.
INVERURIE.
Thou art the Town I love which URIES Stream
Does water and you are called by Its Name.
DON's Christal-Waters also flow to thee,
Which joined to URIE much increased be.
What is the cause ( My dearest Town) that thou
Can no MIGDONIAN- Pillars in thee show:
Why does there not in Buildings which are thine
Some PYRAMIDE with splendid-Titles shine.
Why does Heath-Shrubs thy lovely Houses stain,
To which the LAUREL rather does pertain.
Here formerly the BRUCE his Foe defeat,
And still hereafter Prosperous was his State.
Nere thee did STEWART beat the Rebels down
And with their Blood, HARLAW almost did drown
Of thee if I do boast, it is no shame,
In thee some speciall-Interest I claim.
The Land which Fuel furnishes to thee,
It was the Land of My Nativity.
Near thee it was I first drew Vital Breath,
I wish near thee (when Old) to meet with Death.
BAMFF.
BAMFF near the Ocean does thy self confess
In Bulk then Trica, or Hypaepe less:
Yet art acknowledged by the Neighbouring-lands
To be their Regent and the Boyne Commands:
Nor Corns nor Pastures wanting are to thee,
Nor stately Ships which do lanch forth to Sea.
Thou art adorned by a Temple-great,
And by the Muses and Astrea's Seat.
A place is near which was a Field until
Our Ancestors did raise it to an Hill.
Hither the Sea flows up to Diveron's-food,
A stately-Castle also on it stood.
A Warlick-Fort, Its rubbish yet appears,
The rest's consumed by Time, which all things wears.
The Buildings which join to the Mercat-place,
The Parian-Pillars which uphold them grace:
Strong for defense, and specious to the sight,
In them does dwell a Noble Ancient Knight:
A Virtuous People does inhabit thee,
And this O BAMFF! thy greatest Praise must be.
ELGIN.
To ELGIN's Praise the Ancient BAJAE yields
HESPERIAN- Gardens, and brave TEMPE's- Fields:
Both Sea and Land does still Thy needs supply,
That Fishes, This Corns does afford to Thee.
CORCYRA, Aples unto Thee has sent,
DAMASCUS, Pruns, CERASUS, Cherries lent.
The Bees seem to have left their ATTICK- hyve,
And come to Thee, their Honey-trade to dryve.
The Silver Streams of LOSSIE here does glyde,
By crooked paths unto the Sea they slide.
With Stately-Castles You Are environed,
Within with pleasant Buildings garnished.
All Here is lovely and delights the Eye,
But the torne-Walls and Rubbish when you see
Of that Great TEMPLE, which e're yet appears,
Bid SCOTLAND now bedew Her Cheeks with tears.
INVERNESS.
A Town not far from Sea in fertile Land,
Even near unto Our North-most Coast does stand,
With Palaces of KINGS you are garnished
And Lakes with Blood of PIGHTS often colored.
With Ness pure Streams thy Borders watered be,
Where Ships float and approach for serving thee:
This River freezeth not by Winter cold,
Its Water to the Sea flow uncontrol'd.
The Earth does plenteous Harvest here dispense
In spite of Northern Stars cold influence.
Thule and Iernie which thy Neighbors be
And all the Northern Isles send Wealth to thee:
Forth long ago the chief Command does claim,
And EDINBURGH yields not to thee the Name
Of the Chief CITY; yet they eve^ shall
Thee an EMPORIUM of this KINGDOM call.
Both Nature and the Genius of the Place,
Have with this Honor joined thee to Grace.
INVERLOCHIE.
This Town where KINGS did dwell, now utterly
Is ruined, and its Ashes here do lie:
Consuming time Its Forts has undermined,
Which Pights could not, when they against It combyn'd.
If yet there Here remain a Marble-Stone,
Let Muses grave this Lasting Verse thereon:
Let none henceforth prefer safe Peace to War,
The Evils of That, do This exceeed by far.
War to this Town a Mother was; but Peace
A Step-Dame has become unto this Place.
These are all the Towns upon which DR. ARTHUR JOHNSTOUN wrote His EPIGRAMS,
though there be many Towns that are ROYALL-BURGHS in SCOTLAND to the number of
threescore and two: Several of which are comprehended under that Designation
of the Coast-side Towns of Fyffe, as Dysart, Kircaldie, Anstruther Easter,
Burnt-Island, Ennerkything, Kinghorn, Pettenweem, Dumfermling, Anstruther
Wester, Cryle, Culrose, and many more such like Towns, on which He wrote no
Epigrams.

THE CONCLUSION Containing some few Lines, Composed by MR. WILLIAM DOUGLAS
Advocat in EDINBURGH, upon the CITY of ABERDEEN.
APELLES stareing long, did look upon
The Learning, Policy and Generous Mind
Of that brave CITY, placed 'twixt DEE and DONE;
But how to Paint IT, HE could never find:
For still HE stood, in judging which of Three,
A COURT, A COLLEGE, Or, A BURGH, IT be.
The Contents ( or Index) of the SURVEY of ABERDEEN.
CHAP. I Concerning the Situation of Aberdeen, Its Longitude and Latitude. Page
209 CHAP. II. Concerning the Description of Aberdeen. 212 CHAP. III. Concerning
the Antiquity of Aberdeen. 222 CHAP. IV. Concerning the Government of the City
of Aberdeen. 226 CHAP. V Concerning the Fidelity and Loyal-Duty which the
Citizens of Aberdeen have always paid to their Sovereigns, together with the
gracious Rewards conferred thereon, and the signal Evidences of Honor put
upon many chief Magistrates thereof. 230 CHAP. VI. Concerning the State of
Aberdeen. 244 CHAP. VII. A Catalogue of these who have been Provests in
Aberdeen, whereof any record may be had, either by Scrolls, Charters or
Infeftments, before or since the burning of the said City. 246 CHAP. VIII. The
Epigrams of Dr. Arthur Iohnstoun ( Physician in ordinary to King CHARLES the
first) upon the City of ABERDEEN. 256 CHAP. IX. Dr. Iohnstouns Epigrams, upon
several of the Royall-Burghs in this Kingdom; as may be found in his Poems
printed at Middle-Burgh 1642. Translated into English, by I. B. 261


FINIS.
It is expected, that the Courteous Reader will be pleased ( before He peruse
this Book,) to take notice of and correct with His Pen these few Escapes of the
Press ( for the most Exact and Vigilant will have some,) whereby He will be
keept from a Stop when He comes to Them in His ordinary Reading.

Page, Page, Line, Errors, Corrected. 131 16, 17 Corporation Corruption 139 2
agreement arguments 155 11 Politita Politica 194 7 Volens Voleur 252 24 qua quo


