A SALVE FOR EVERY SORE OR, A Collection of PROMISES out of the whole Book of
God, and is The Christian Centurions Infallible ground of Confidence or, His
poor Souls most assured comfortable companion at all times, and in all things.

PSALM 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight
my Soul. PSALM, 119.50. This is my comfort in my affliction; for thy word
has quickened me. And is for more breuity, and better portage a very brief
extract out of a much larger written Copy.

By PHILLIP SKIPPON. Serjent Maj^r General, etc.

MAT 8.6. Lord I am not worthy that thou should (...) under my roof. VERSE.
7. Wherefore neither thought I my self worthy to come unto thee. COLOS. 3.11.
Christ a^l in all. LONDON, Printed by E.G. for Samul Enderby living in
Popeshead-Ally, at the sign of the Star, 1643.

In extremitate maxima, Me juvit and juvabit Jehovah.
Lord by the help of thy most gracious spirit
Which I crave, res^^n, wait for through Christ merits
With heart, hand, tongue, in life to death I am,
Spiritual for truth, to which I set my Name.
Phillip Skippon.

Reader at adventure.
Have thou a misconceit of this or me,
Suspend thy censure till that heard I be;
It Is Conscience, Justice, Reason, Charity,
It Is all I crave, you may it not deny.
Wherein I fail, i will not my self excuse,
Guilty, to cry where needs not, I refuse.
Where need requires, amend what is amiss,
Where it is well let it be as it is.
Behold, I will show thee that which is noted in the Scripture of truth Daniel
10, 21. Lo this, we have searched it, so it is, hear it, and know thou it for
thy good, Job 5.27. Therefore search the Scriptures whether these things be so
Ioh. 5.3^. Acts 17.11. CAn he be poor whose portion is
Gods (...) and faithful Promises?
Much I have lost, and still may lose,
Far well to all; These these I choose.
Beyond Sea service me undid,
Because to shark conscience forbid.
I am not like (as't is) to gain
Except my labor for my pain.
I then did trust, and still will make,
Gods promises my surest stake:
His promised help I then did find:
More of the same is still behind.
Can I be poor whose portion is
Gods free and faithful promises?
To all Soldiers of real honor and honesty of what degree soever P. S.
Wishes all grace and good now and always.
FEllow Soldiers; take it not ill I give you no other Titles, I conceive
customary complements, in such a case as this, to be uncomly: out of my real
respect unto you I present you with this small Treatise, which cost me no small
labor, let the wise and honest judge, well as it is, if you have a share among
those that mourn in Zion, Isa. 61.3. You will relish it; howsoever knowing
there are many among you that understand the Language of Canaan, Jsa 19.18. I
desire all may be judiciously perused before any part be rashly censured, be
not too curious or captious; I am no Scholar, I desire to be a Christian,
look to the matter more then the handling, be wise for your selves, my Soul
wishes you all well: I aim neither at thanks, commendations nor benefit, I
slight envy scorn and censure: I shall avoyde needless circumstances and
apply my self to brevity, truth and plainness: I desire to honor God, not to
humor men; if our poor souls get any good hereby, I have enough; your good
is intended, neglect it not, despise nothing because of my insufficiency; if in
judgment and sincerity any will inform me, I promise thankfulness, and (by
Gods grace) amendment: for good received bless God and pray for me,
(unworthy). The Lord of hosts, the great Jehovah who is a man of War, our Chief
Captain, be entreated to govern, strengthen preserve and prosper you all as
mine own self, Amen.

To my wife and Children.
MY most dearly beloved, for your and mine own private use, this Treatise was
at first especially intended, and this is the best provision J can make for
you: though outward comforts should fail you, these will always be most
useful to you, for Piety has the promise, 1 Timothy 4.8. And Promises in your
hearts are better then pearls in your Chests: but J counsel, beseech, and
charge upon ev^ry one of you most earnestly (as it most nearely concerns you,
and the neglect whereof will the more condemn you) that as you love God, and
your own Souls, as you tender my affection, and will answer before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, 1 Timothy 6.13. To remember apply and practice, to
read, study and observe what J by Gods grace, with so much care and pains
have thus collected for you, endeavor to get and keep the Testimony of a good
conscience in all things, Acts 24.16. Sin not against the light thereof
wilfully for any respect, 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. Away with known sins whatsoever
you do, for those are most heinous, uncomfortable, dangerous, and (without
repentance showed by amendment) damnable, Number. 15.30, 31. Deuteronomy 19.19.20.21. In
well doing commend all to the Lord, Ps. 37.3.5.7. And be content with his good
pleasure, Heb. 13.5, 6. Yea trust him most in greatest extremity, Isa. 50.20.
As he is God he will send help in every need, Ps. 50.15. and 9.9. and 46.1 and
142.4, 5. and 72.12. And go all how it will, all shall (through the Lords free
mercy in Christ go well with you, Hos. 14.4. Col. 3.11. To. 8.28. Eccl. 8.12.
Isa. 3.10. Ps. 37.37. For so run all the Promises through him unto you, 2 Cor.
1.20. 1 Cor. 1.30. 1 Timothy 4.8. Peruse them J pray you.

Now I most humbly and unfainedly beseech the Lord God our heavenly Father,
with his most holy spirit, thoroughly to sanctify every one of you, that you may
walk with, call upon, and trust in him aright, and by his infinitely wise,
Almighty, most merciful, faithfully promised, never failing help to make
every one of you every manner of way truly happy here and for evermore through
our alone all-sufficient Savior and perpetual intercessor, the Lord Jesus
Christ, Amen.

A few helpful Meditations concerning the use of the following Promises.
Eternal Lord God, by virtue of thine own most free and Infallible covenant
only, in Jesus Christ my reconciled God, my Heavenly Father, my alone Al
sufficient helper, my hearts desire is, that as thoa have pleased most
graciously in some measure to reveal unto me thy p omised favors for this and
a better life, thou will also make me fit to receive them, by working,
restoring, continuing increasing in me every one of those Infallible marks and
every circumstance of each, whereby I may be fully assured that all thy
Promises are my portion in the beloved. O cause me througly to understand and
rightly to use every one of those well warranted rules for the right applying
of every one of them, O Lord my God, I (by thy Grace, know and believe because
thou have said it, let me in each particular seasonably and effectually feel
and find it, that all thy Promises are freely made, and undoubtedly belong
unto me, are all as one easily to be performed by he, that as thou never have,
thou never wilt fail in performing any one of them unto me, I have thine own
hand to show for them, thine own oath confirms them, thy Ministers (at thy
command) Preach that thou will fulfill them, thy Christ himself employed his
own Ministry for more assurance of them, the death of him the Testator yet the
noe ratifies them, the earnest of thy spirit assures my right to them, the Law
cannot disanull them, thou have in thy counsel, Son, Sacraments and by thy
spirit sealed them, experience in all Ages further Testisies thy keeping of
them, thine in greatest extremity have made and ever make them their stay
chiefly, Thou who promisest art goodness it self, most willing, able, and
true to perform them, thou who promisest art Omnipresent, omniscient, most
wise, holy, just, abhorrest, destroyest the unjust, love, blessest the just,
decreeest, willest, workest all for the glorifying of thy self according to
thy word, and by thine own especial providence ordaynest and orderest all
things in most remarkable manner, to manifest unto thine own that thou ever
have been, art, and ever wilt be theyrs for good, according to each part of
thy immutable truth whatsoever opposes, thou who promisest misest art
unchangeable in thy nature, attributes, promises, and were not God if thou
should not exactly and fully keep thy word: it being thus, yea as it is
thus, I can say no more, I must humbly and earnestly beseech and urge thee, let
me in all places upon all occasions, in every present and future pressing
inward and outward necessity, find favor in thy sight and help at thy hands,
according to every one of thy most precious promises (although I be most
unworthy and merit the worst of evils in all extremity,) yea then, even when I
am most hopeless, and seem all never so impossible, most especially my Lord,
my God, my Father, my Helper be pleased for thine own sake in thy Christ my
Jesus as thou have here plainly, expressly, and plentifully promised, cause me
to know, remember be ashamed of, loath my self for, be confounded in my self
for my sins, etc. Thus turning the words into a prayer, will no doubt be found
a most warrantable, comfortable, acceptable and prevayling way of praying: and
so I conceive (without a thought of giving offense, or any way limiting
Christian liberty) one may take one chief head or more at a time, or such
places as most especially concern his especial occasions some one time and
some another and turn them into prayers, so speaking to God in his own
Language, in reverend, affectionate, distinct and earnest manner with a
judicious believing heart, will wonderfully direct, cherish, settle and further
us; only let us in well doing wait upon God in the lawful use of all good
means for the obtaining of whatsoever grace or blessing we want or desire, and
it cannot be but we shall have help one way or other in every necessity, for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, all his attributes lie at the stake to
do it, what can hinder it? Isa. 46.11. Let me humbly affirm it, I my self
have always found it, all glory to my God for it.

And leek what promise he does make
his household to defend,
For just and true they shall it take
all times without an end, Psalm 39. ult.

Gods Promise J do mind and praise
O Lord J stick to thee:
I do not care at all assayes
what flesh can do to me.
I glory in the Word of God
to praise it I accord,
With joy I will declare abroad
the promise of the Lord. Psalone 56.5.10.

Though Heaven and Earth and all should vanish quite,
Rely Isa. 50.10
upon my mercy Ps. 5^.8.
truth Ps. 119.^0
and might, ^sa. 18.2 and 59 9.

Not the least l^ttle of my word shall fail thee,
But be f^^lfil^ed Mat. 5.18
whatsoever may ayle thee, Jer. 30 7.

Yea I have said it and will do it too,
Stight all in Earth or bell that dares say no, Isa. 46.10.11.

Well Lord I trusst thee on thy word Act. 27.25
and it,
Make good unto me as thou see most fit, A^^. 21.24

Thy promisd grace and glory I implore, Ps 84.11,

It is enough, it is all, I Will have no more. Ps. 73.24.25, 6.

Only the maine parts of this Collection, and chiefest divisions of each, most
briefly set down, and how readily to find them at large.
EIrst, twenty eight undeniable Proofs of the Infallibility of the Promises,
Page 1. to p. 20 Secondly, Diverse Infallible marks to whom the Promises do
belong, p. 21. to p. 41. Thirdly, To whom they belong not. p. 44. to p 47.
Fourthly, Diverse well warranted and necessary Rules for the right applying of
the Promises, p. 47. to p. 55. Fifthly, The Promises themselves divided into
six maine parts, as First, The general Promises, p. 55 to p. 58 Secondly, Such
Promises as assure us freedom from 1. The guilt, p. 58. to 66. of Sin. 2. The
punishment, p. 66. to p. 71. of Sin. 3. The power, p. 71. to p. 76. of Sin.
Thirdly, Such Promises as assure us. 1. Many Saving graces, p. 76 to p. 87. 2.
Ability to worship GOD aright, p. 87 to p. 90. 3. Abilities for our particular
calling, p. 90. to p. 91. 4. Increase and perseverance in good, and of
acceptance, p. 91. to p. 102.
Fourthly, Such Promises as assure us. 1. Many Comforts concerning affliction
in general, p. 102. to p 112. 2. Concerning particular Afflictions. p. 112. to
p. 140. 3. Concerning perils in general and particular, p. 140 to p. 158. 4.
Concerning Death, p. 158 to p. 164.
First, such Promises as assure us mamany outward blessings, as the Lord sees
best for us. 1. Such as concern our selves. p. 164 to p. 183. 2. Such as
concern (...). p. 183. to p. 187. 3. Such as concern Gods Church, p. 187 to
p. 192.
Sixth, Such promises as assure us plenty of merciful rewards of several
Graces and Virtues. 1. To many saving Graces. p. 192. to 230. 2. To works of
Charity, p. 230. to p. 250. 3. To our conscionable worshipping of God, p. 250
to p. 287. 4. To avoiding diverse Sins. p. 287, to p. 297. 5. To embracing
several Duties. p. 297. to p. 313

Where readily to find out such P^omises as I conceive concern Soldiers more
especially. 1. That we shall have direction sufficiency, and valor, p. 90, 91,
92, 93. 2. Jf we be wounded or Captives, p. 128, 129. 3. Against Perils in
general, in particular, of Fire, Water, storms at Sea, or in and against any
perilous employment of War. p. 140 to. p. 147. 4. The Lord will give us
advancement and bless our warrantable proceedings and journies, p. 170.174,
175. 5. If we pray in any fear, or danger, or being prisoners, or hungry or
thirsty, or if we pray for direction in our courses p. 259.260, 261, 262, 263.
6. To governing our Affairs wisely, to courage, diligence, and faithfulness.
p. 320. to 317. 7. To avoiding evil company Adultery, and all other
uncleanness, injuring others, wrath, contention, lying, evil speaking,
swearing, being among many other the common crying sins of our calling, p.
289, 291, 295, 296.
Under the general heads, and every one of their maine parts, which are here,
but very briefly expressed, are many other particular branches of much
concernment, and more then some at first will imagine, Let them be looked after,
The generals will lead you to particulars.
Doubt not, but search and try, observe, and do, Believe, God says it, we
shall find it so.

Errata.
PAge 27 l 6. r. 1 Cor. 10.24. l. 17. r 2 Cor. p. 29. l. 10. r. Deuteronomy 10 p 30.
l. 15. r. Ex. 23. p. 31. l. 21. r Number 9. p. 34. l. 4. r. v. 10. l. 25 insers
Ps. 57. l. p 35 l. ^3 r. Ephesians. 2.5.7, 8, 9. p 38. l. 6. r. Ps 68. 20. p 43. l.
11. irecet ^ Tes. 5. 7 p 44 l. 4. r insers Isai. p 49. l. 3. r. 2 Chronicles 20. p
50. l. 22. r. 13 v. p 51. l. 6. r. 25 v 6.8. p 53 l. 19. r. 1 Chro. p 54. l. 4.
r. Prayer p. 55. l. 2 insers Mica. 2.7. p. 56. l. 5. R. hiding place p 70. l.
19. r. Heb. 2. p. 89 l. 24. r. then p 92, r. v. 22. p 93. l. the last r. Isa.
55. p 97. l. 9. r. John 15. p 98. l. r Jer. 31 3. p 99. l. 24. r. 2 Thessalonians. p
102 l 17. r. v. 12 p. 107. l. 23. r. Correct p. 109 l. 2. r. Ps. 42 p. 110. l
5. r Nchu^. p 120. l. 17. r. provide p. 128. l. 23 r. v, 39. p 131. l. 12
shall. l. 14. 1 68. 6. p 147. l. 12 r Ps. 71. p 154. l. 14. insert Ps p 155. l.
26. r Jer. 20.11. p 156. l. 26. r v. 47. p 159. l. 19. r v. 27. p 170. l. 13. r
Deuteronomy. 8. p 179. l. 18. r stort p 186. l. 18. r. Isa. 30. p 187. l. 3. r Deuteronomy.
28. p 196. l. 21. r Job 5. p 198. l. 1. relay. p 205. l. 5. r Levit. 26. 11,
41. p 297. l. ^. but to p. 208, l. 7. r. v. 2, 3. p 209. l. the last r.
everlasting life p. 210 l. 26. r Ioh. 7. p 230. l 1^ r. v, 16. p 241. l 11. r
happy ^ he p. 244. l. 7. r, v. 21. p. 255. l. 15 r. v. 9 p 289. l. the last r.
2 Cor. 6. p. 295 l. 11. r. v, 29. p. 300. l 13. r v. 25 p 315. l. the last r.
v. 24. p. 316 l. 4. r, Pre. 13. p. 317. l. 6. r. v, 25 p 318. l. 26. r Isa. 56
p 321. l. 21. r. v. 20. p 379 l. 12 r. lived the world, l. 26. r. 1 Ich. p 326.
l. 6. r Isai, 60 p 329. l. 10. r. be with me where.

XXVIII. UNDENIABLE Proofs of the Infallibility of the Promises.
FIrst, all the promises are freely made unto us by the Lord notwithstanding
our unmeasurable great unworthiness.

Thus says the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes O house of Israel, but
for mine holy names sake which ye have profaned Ezekiel. 36.22.

The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the Promise by faith of
Je^^ Christ might be given to them that believe. Gal. 3.22.

I will love them freely, Hos. 14.4.

Secondly, the promises, belong to us as well as to our forefathers.

For the promise is unto you and to your children, and to all that are afar
off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call, Act. 2.39.

That the Gentiles should be fellow heirs and of the same body, and partakers
of his Promises in Christ by the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.6.

Therefore it is of faith that it might be by grace, to the end the promise
might be sure to all the seed: not to that only which is of the Law, but to
that also which is of the faith of Abraham the father of us all, Romans 4.16.

That promise made to Joshua, 1.5. I will not fail thee nor forsake thee,
applied by Paul, Heb. 13.5.6.

Thirdly, all the promises are called one, and as if they were but one, most
easy to be performed by the Lord.

Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promises, Heb.
6.17.

That the Promise of Jesus Christ might be given, Gal. 3.22.

Fourthly, the promises were made before the world was, yet hitherto God never
failed any one word (...) ^s goodness.

In hope of eternal life which God that cannot lie promised before the world
began, Tit. 1.2.

Ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one thing has
failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spoke concerning you
(...) are come to pass unto you, and not one thing has failed thereof, Josh.
23 14. and 21.45.

Fifthly, we have the writings of God for them, they are upon record in
Scripture, and shall we mistrust when we have Gods own hand to shfor it?

I the Lord speak righteousness, I d^clare things that are, Isa. 45.19.

Thy word is true from the beginning and every one of thy righteous judgments
endures for ever right, Ps. 119.160.

For the word of the Lord is right and all his works are done in truth, Ps.
33.4.

Sixthly, the Lord has bound himself by his oath to perform his promises
unto us.

The Lord of hosts has sworn sayn^ surely as I have thought, so shall it come
to pass, and as I have purposed, so shall it stand, Jsa. 14.17.

I have sworn by my self: the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness,
and shall not return, Isa. 45.23.

God willing more abundanly to show unto the heirs of Promise the immutability
of his counsel, confirmed it by oath, Heb. 6.17.

Seventh: we have the word preached unto us by ^ds ambassadors sent of purpose
at the Commanment of God, who has enjoined them to make it manifest, that he
will be as good as his word unto us.

But has in due time manifested his word through preaching, which is committed
unto me according to the Commandment of God our Savior, Tit. 1.3.

Eight; Christ Himself did employ his Ministry to confirm the promises.

Jesus Christ was a Minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to co
firm the promises Romans 15.8.

Ninth: we have the death of the Testator to confirm this new Testament and all
the promises contained therein (a) so as in Christ they are all, yea and amen
unto us (b) there can be no nay nor denial of them, they may now be well
pleaded in my Christ of the lustice of God. (c)

(a) For this cause he is the Mediator of the new Testament, that by means of
death for the redemption of the transgressions, they which are called might
receive the promise of eternal inheritance, He. 9.15

(b) For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him a^^en, unto the
glory of God by us, ve. 6.2 Cor. 1.20.

(c) He is faithful and just to forgive t^ our sins, and to cleanse us from
all u^ righteousness. 1. Ioh. 1 9.

Tenth: the graces of Gods Sirit powered out up^^^ us are our assurance that he
will not hold from us our regal privileges, viz. his promises.

Now he which stablisheth us with you, in Christ, and has anointed us, is God,
who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts, 2
Cor. 1.21.22.

In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of
promise, Ephesians. 1.13.

Eleventh: the Law cannot disanull the promises.

For if they which are of the Law be heirs, faith is made void, and the
promise made of none effect, Romans 4.14.

And this I say that the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ,
the Law which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disanuld that
it should make the promise of none effect: for it the inheritance be of the
Law, it is no more of promise, but God gave it to Abraham by promise. Gal.
3.17.18.

Twelfth: the Lord has sealed his promises unto us.

1. In his counsel, which book the Lion and the Lamb now has opened.

The Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David has prevailed to open the
book, and to lose the seven seals thereof: thou art worthy to take the book,
and to open the seals thereof, Rev. 5.5.9.

2. In his son, God made all sure when he sent out Christ, he sealed his
comissi^n in all things that concerned the happinesss. of his people.

Him has God the father sealed. Ioh. 6.27.

3. By his spirit, this is Gods privy Seal, and thus are all believers said to
be sealed with the spirit of promise.

In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of
promise, Ephesians. 1.13.

4. In the Sacraments, which are given us as Gods broad seal, and outward
tokens and pledges to confirm our faith (...) the promises.

And he received the sign of circumcision a seal of the righteousness of
the faith which he had, yet being uncircumcised. Romans 4.11.

Thirteenth: we have the experiences of all (...) that whatsoever God promised,
the same he (...) also most certainly performed.

I have declared the former things from (...) beginning; and they went forth
out of (...) mouth, and I showed them, I did them suddenly, and they came to
pass, Isa. 48.3.

Examples.
Promises made

(d) And I will put enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy seed
and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel, Genesis
3.15.

(e) Unto thee and unto thy seed, I will give all these Countries, and I will
perform the Oath which I swore unto Abraham thy Father, Genesis 26.3. and 17.8.
and 12.7.

(f) And he said I will certainly return unto thee according to the time of
life, and so Sarah thy wife shall have a son Genesis 18, 10.

(g) Thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall
serve them, and they shall afflict them 400 years and also that Nation whom
they shall serve will I judge, and afterward shall they come out with great
substance, Genesis 4.14.

(h) Ye shall spoil the Egiptians, Exodus 3.22.

(i) I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou go, and
will bring thee again into this Land, for I will not leave thee, until I have
done that which I have spoken to thee of, Ge. 28.15.

(k) He shall build an House for my Name, and I will stablish the throne of
his Kingdom for ever. 2 Samuel 7.13.

(l) For thus says the Lord that after seventy years be accomplished at
Babil^n, I will visit you, and perform my good Word toward you in causi^g
you to return to this place Jeremy 29.10.

(m) And it shall come to pass afterward that I will power out my Spirit upon
all flesh, etc. Joel 2.28.29.

(n) And behold I send the Promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the
City of Ierisalem until ye be endued with power from on high Luke 24.49.

Performed.

(d) But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
Woman, made under the Law; to redeem them that were under the Law, Gal. 44.

(e) Go over this jordan, thou and all this people, unto the Land which I do
give to them, even the children of Israel, Josh. 1.2.

And these are the Countries which the children of Israel inherited in the Land
of Cannan, Io. 14.1. etc.

(f) And the Lord visited Sarah as he had said, and the Lord did unto Sarah as
he had spoken: for Sarah conceived and bare Abraham a Son in his old age, at
the set time of which God had spoken to him, Genesis 21.1.2.

(g) And it came to pass the self same day that the Lord did bring the
children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt, by their Armies, Exodus 12.51. The
Lord overthrew the Egiptians in the midst of the Sea, chapter 14.27. See cha.
12.36.41.

(h) And they spoiled the Egiptians, Ex. 12.36.

(i) And the man increased mightily, Genesis 30.43.

The God of my Fathers has been with me, Ge. 31.5.

God suffered him not to hurt me, ver. 7. see ver. 24.42.

God has dealt gra^ciously with me, I have enough, Genesis 33.11.

And Jacob came unto Isaac his Father, Ge. 35.27.

(k) And the Lord has performed his word that he spoke, and I am risen up in
the room of David my Father, and sit on the throne of Israel as the Lord
promised, and have built an house for the Name of the Lord God of Israel, 1 Ki.
8 20.

(l) Now in the first year of Cyrus King of Persia (that the Word of the Lord
by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled) the Lord stirted up the spirit of
Cyrus King o^ Persia, etc. Ezra. 1.1. see all that Book.

(m) But this is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel. and it shall come
to pass in the last days (says God) I will power out of my Spirit upon all
flesh, etc. Acts 2 16, 17, 18.

(n) And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one
accord in one place, and suddenly there came a sound from Heaven, as of a
rushing mighty wind etc. Acts 2.1, 2, 3.

According to all that he promised there has not failed one Word, of all his
Promises which he promised, 1 Ki. 8.56.

Fourteenth: the patriarchs embraced the promises as the chief stay of their
lives in their pilgrimage on Earth.

And were persuaded of them and embraced them, and confessed that they were
strangers and pilgrims on the Earth, Heb. 11.13.

Fifteenth: the LORD who promises is the fountain of all goodness, therefore
all good promised may, must and ought to be expected from him.

Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above and comes down from
the father of lights, Iam. 1.17.

There is none good but one that is God. Mat. 19.17.

Thou art good and do good, Ps. 119.68.

Sixteenth: the LORD is most willing to give us the good things that he has
promised.

Come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy Wine and Milk without money and without
price, Isa. 55.1.

The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, but is long suffering to us
ward not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance, 2. Pet. 3.9.

I will give to him that is a thirst of the fountain of the water of life
freely Re. 21.6.

Seaventeenth: the Lord is almighty, therefore most able to perform all that he
has promised, whatsoever opposes.

I am the Almighty God, Genesis 17.1.

Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, Re. 15.3.

I will work and who shall let it? Isa. 43.13.

Being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was also able to
perform, Romans 4.21.

Eighteenth: the LORD is most true and faithful to perform his word.

He is the Rock, his Work is perfect: for all his ways are judgment, a God
of truth and without iniquity, just and righteous is he, Deuteronomy. 32.4.

The Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keeps covenant, Deuteronomy.
7.9.

Faithful is he that calls you who also will do it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.

Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, for he is
faithful that promised, Heb. 10.23.

Ninteenth: the LORD who promises is omnipresent. Therefore no place excludes
our assurance of his performing his word unto us, but wheresoever we are, we
may, ought and must rely upon his promises.

Am I a God at h^nd says the Lord and not a God a far off? Can any hide
himself in secret places, that I shall not see him says the Lord? Do not I
fill Heaven and Earth says the Lord? Ier. 23.23, 24.

The eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole earth, to show
himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him, 2
Cro. 16.9.

Twentieth: the LORD who promises is most wise, therefore thoroughly
considers when, where, by what means and in what manner, or how far to let
us experimentally find the truth of his word, so that we may rest assured
thereof, as shall be best for us, go all how it will with us.

Now unto the King eternal immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor
and glory for ever and ever: Amen, 1 Timothy 1.17.

O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledgeof God! Romans 11 33.

The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations. 2 Pet. 2.9.

Twenty one: the Lord who promises, is omniscient. Knowing perfectly, in which
how many and how far we stand in need of his help, to vouchsaf he same
according to his word.

Great in counsel, and mighty in work, for thine eyes are open upon all the
ways of the sons of men, to give every one according to his ways, and
according to the fruit of his doings, Jeremy, 32.19.

The ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth al his
goings, Pro. 5.21.

Twenty two. The Lord who promises is most holy, therefore cannot d^e a thing
so contrary to his most holy nature as to break his promise.

Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts. Jsa. 6.3. Rev. 3.7.

The Lord is righteous in all his ways and holy in all his works, Psa. 145.17.

There is none holy as the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.2.

Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity,
Hab. 1.13.

Twenty three, the Lord who promises is most just and it is one especial
property of a just man to keep his promise.

Will thou condemn him that is most just? Job. 34.17.

To show that the Lord is upright: he is my Rock, and there is no
unrighteousness in him, Psa. 92.15.

A just God and a Savior, there is none beside me, Jsa. 45.21.

The just Lord is in the midst thereof he will not do iniquity, Zeph. 3.5.

Twenty four. The Lord abhors and destroys the unjust, but Loves and
blesses the just, how should he then be unjust himself in not keeping his
word.

Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing, the Lord abhors the bloody and
deceitful man, Psalm. 5.6.

Thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, with favor will thou compass him as
with a shield, Psa. 5.12.

The righteous Lord loves righteousness, his countenance does behold the
upright, Psalm, 11.7.

Twenty five. The LORD decreed, wills, works all things for his own glory,
unto the setting forth, whereof the faithful performing of every one of his
promises does exceedingly extend, and from which the not performing any one of
them would so far derogate, that all that is, or can be conceived, revealed or
expressed concerning him were nothing if he were not every ways as good as his
Word.

For of him, and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be glory for
ever, Romans, 11.36.

The Lord has made all things for himself, Pro. 16.4.

Who works all things after the counsel of his own will. Ephesians. 1.11.

Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor, and power: for thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created, Rev. 4.11.

Twenty six. The LORD by his especial and only providence ordains and
orders all things in most especial remarkable manner to manifest to his own
that he is, and ever will be their God for good according to his Word.

Now therefore be not grieved nor angry with your selves, that ye sold me
hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life: God sent me before
you, to preserve you a posterity in the Earth, and to save your lives by a
great deliverance; so now it was not you that sent me hither, but God, Genesis
45.5.7.8.

^t as for you ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good, to
bring to pass as it is this day, to save much people alive, Genesis 50.20.

And we know that all things work together for good, to them that love God,
Romans 8.28.

Twenty seven. The LORD who promises is unchangeable in his Nature,
Attribute, and Promises, yea whatsoever he has revealed Himself to have bin,
the same he is, and ever will be to his own for good, which fully answers all
suppositions, objections, fears, and doubtings whatsoever, against the
infallibility of the promises.

I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3.6.

With whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning, Iam. 1.17.

Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Hebr. 13.8.

The gifts and calling of God are without Repentance, Rom 11.29.

Even from everlasting to everlasting thou art GOD, Psalm 90.2.

I the Lord the first, and with the last, I am he, Isa. 41.4.

Twenty eight: and l^stly, the Lord were not God, if he kept not his Word.

The strength of Jsrael will not lie nor repent: for he is not a man that he
should repent, 1 Samuel 15.29.

God is not a man that he should lie, neither the Son of man that he should
repent: has he said and shall he not do it, or has he spoken and shall he
not make it good? Number. 23.19.

He abides faithful, he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13.

I hope of eternal life which God that cannot lie promised before the word
began, Tit. 1.2.

Ye know it that no lie is of the truth, 1 Ioh. 2.21.

Thus far of the undeniable proof of the infallibility of the promises. Which
being rightly understood, seriously considered, and soundly applied, will
thoroughly settle a true Christians heart, in and against the greatest
calamities that can befall him.

Alas, for that day is great, so that none is like it, it is even the time of
Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it. Ier. 30.7.

Well, he that walks in darkness and has no light, let him trust in the
name of the Lord, and stay upon his God, Isa. 50.10.

And David was greatly distressed, but he encouraged himself in the Lord his
God, 1 Samuel 30.6.

Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation,
my God will hear me. When I fall I shall rise, when I sit in darkness, the
Lord shall be a light unto me, Mich. 7.7, 8.

He has said he will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: so that we may
boldly say, the Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto
me, Heb. 13.5, 6.

Lord, with my soul have I desired thee, yea with my spirit within me will I
seek thee early, Isa. 26.9.

Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth, that I desire
beside thee, Ps. 73, 25.

As thou have promised (my God) be with me so will I be with thee. Josh. 1.5.

To whom the Promises in Christ do assuredly belong.
OMitting all other, here are set down Diverse choice and infallible marks of
uprightness of heart, out of a true lively, justifying, saving faith in
Christ, in whom and for whose sake alone all the promises are our portion: The
which whosoever can find in himself, may safely conclude he is in the savor
of God, and shall be truly happy here and ever according to all his promises
contained in his most holy Word.

Godliness is profitable unto all things having promise of the time that now
is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by the Faith of
Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.

As many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, Gal.
6.16.

The Lord God is a Sun and shield the Lord will give grace and glory, and no
good thing will he withhold to them that walk uprightly, Ps. 84.11.

And to him that orders his converstion aright, will I show the salvation of
God Ps^^. 50.23.

First, to examine our selves so seriously and impartially (p) by the perfect
rule o^ Gods Law (q) thereby to co^^ to the knowledge of our most sinful (r)
and write ed^st^te (.s)

(o) I commune with mine own heart and my spirit made diligent search, Ps.
77.6.

(p) Let us search, and try our ways, Lam. 3.40.

(q) The law of the Lord is perfect, Ps. 19.7.

(r) By the Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20.

(s) It is written, cursed is every one that continues not in all things which
are written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10.

Second. To desire the Lord unfainedly (t) to engage our hearts, and to reveal
unto us our misdeeds, especially those most displeasing unto him (u) that
herein we shall deal directly (w) as in the sight of God (x) who searches the
heart and reins (y) not leaving back for any one respect. (z)

(t) With mine whole heart have I sought thee, Ps. 119.10.

(t) Examine me Lord and prove me, try my reins and my heart, Psalm 26.2.

(u) I acknowledge my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said
I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, Ps. 32.5.

(w) Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, Psalm. 119.80.

(x) I have set the Lord always before me. Psalm. 16.8.

(y) I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, Ier. 17.10.

(z) Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his
tongue, though he spare it and forsake it not, but keep it still within his
mouth Job. 20.12, 13.

If I covered my transgression as Adam: by hiding my iniquity in my bosom,
Iol. 31.33 (a)

Third: to endeavor to confess our sins with their circumstances (b) with
godly sorrow (c) grieving that we can be no more grieved for them. (d)

(a) Who confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy, Pro. 21.13.

(b) We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and
have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments.
Dan. 9.5

(c) Therefore now says the Lord turn ye unto me with all your heart, and
with fasting and with weeping, and with mourning, Joel. 2.12.

(d) be afflicted and mourn and weep: let your laughter be tureed into
mourning, and your joy into heaviness. Jam. 4.9.

Oh that my head were water and mine eyes a fountain of tears, etc. Ier. 9.1.
See for all these, Ps. 51.

Fourth. To resolve most seriously to sin no more hereafter, as we have done
heretofore (e) even as we would God should forgive us our sins past, and not
punish us for them.

(e) I said I will take heed to my ways, Psalm. 39.1.

I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes, Psalm. 101.3.

I have sworn and I will perform it, that

I will keep thy righteous judgments Psalm. 119, 106.

Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee, Ioh. 5.14.

We will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our
hands, ye are our gods. Hos. 14.3.

Ephraim shall say, what have I to do with Idol? Hos. 14.8.

First, to study (f) purpose (g) pray (h) watch (i) endeavor (k) and practice
(l) that all our ways be ordered (m) as in Gods presence (n) according to his
word (o) aiming at his glory (p) the edifying of others (q) in all good
conscience (r) abhorring all by respects (s) laboring to approve our selves to
him (t) and this in respect of his worship (v) of our particular calling (w)
family, carriage (x) and common conversation (y) by all means to draw nearer
and to cleave faster to him (a) therefore for our furtherance in knowledge and
practice in our whole duty to exercise our selves in Gods Word carefully and
constantly. (b)

(f) I thought on my ways and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. Ps. 119.59.

(g) And exhorted them all that with purpose of heart, they would cleave unto
the Lord, Acts, 11.23.

(h) Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it unto the end;
give me understanding and I shall keep thy Law; yea I shall observe it with my
whole heart, Ps. 119.33.34.

(i) Take heed to thy self and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget,
Deuteronomy. 4.9.23.

Watch and pray, Mat. 26.41.

And what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch Mar. 13.37.

(k) Herein do I exercise my self to have always a good conscience void of
offense toward God and toward men, Act. 24.16.

(l) You shall observe to do therefore as the Lord your God has commanded
you: you shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left, Deuteronomy. 5.32.

(m) Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have dominion over me
Ps. 119.133.

Therefore shall ye observe all my statutes and all my judgments, and do
them, I am the Lord, Levit. 19.7.

(n) But as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 2.17.

I have walked before thee in truth, and have done that which is good in thy
sight, Isa. 38.3.

(o) Thy word is a lamp unto my feet and a light unto my path, Ps. 119.105.

We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19.

(p) Whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31.

(q) Let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth, 1 Cor. 20.24.

Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5.16.

(r) I have lived in all good conscience before God until this day, Act. 23.1.

(s) I love thy commandments above gold, yea above fine gold, Ps. 119.127.

(t) Not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends,
1 Co. 10.18.

(v) In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of
men, Mat. 15.9.

God is a Spirit and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and
truth Ioh. 4.24.

This I confess that after the was that they call heresy, so worship I the
God of my Fathers, Act. 24.14.

(w) Yet know that with all my power I have served your Father: Thus I was in
the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night, and my sleep departed
from me; thus I have been twenty years in thy house, Genesis 31.6.40.41.

Then the presidents and princes sought to find occasion against Daniel
concerning the kingdom, but they could find no occasion nor fault, forasmuch
as he was faithful, neither was there any error or fault found in him, Dan.
6.4.

(x) I will behave my self wisely in a perrect way, O when will thou come unto
me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart, Ps. 101.2.

And I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him,
and they shall keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19.

(y) for our rejoicing is in this the testimony of our conscience that in
simplicity, and godly sincerity not with fleshly wisdow, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the World, 2 Co. 1.12.

Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles that whereas they speak
against you as evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall
behold, glorify God in the day of visitation, 1 Pet. 2.12.

Ever follow that which is good both among your selves and all men, 1 These.
5.15.

(a) It is good for me to draw near to God, Ps. 73.28.

Thou thalt fear the Lord thy God, him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou
cleave, Deuteronomy. 18.20.

(b) This Book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall
meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according to
all that is written therein. Josh. 1.8.

But his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate
day and night. Ps. 1.2.

I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto my ways, Ps. 119.15.

Sixth, to have respect unto all Gods commandments (c) and to turn from every
evil way (d) avoiding the practice of every gross sin (e) and the occasions
thereof (f) and all appearance of evil (g) not wilfully allowing our selves
in the least evil against conscience (h) nor to take settled likeing in any
evil motion (i) or to dally with contemplative wickedness (k) or dispensing
with our selves in the omitting of any warrantable duty (l) at least in every
one of these with full purpose of heart to fear, serve, and cleave unto the
Lord (m).

(c) Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect to all thy Comandements,
Ps 11.6.

What does the Lord thy God require of thee but to sear the Lord thy God to
walk in all his ways, Deuteronomy. 10.12.

All that the Lord has said, will we do, and be obedient, Ex. 24.7.

And in all things that I have said unto you, be circumspect, Ex. 22.13.

(d) I have refrayned my feet from every evil way, Ps. 119.101.

I will ^e^ ^^ wicked thing before mine eyes, Ps. 101.3.

(^) Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not have
dominion over me, Ps. 19.13.

(f) And it came to pass as she spoke to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened
not unto her, to he by her, or to be with her, Gen 39.10.

(g) Abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.

(h) I was also upright before him: and I kept my self from mine iniquity,
Psalm. 18.23.

Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of Heaven, but whosoever
ever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom
of heaven, Mat. 5.19.

(i) If I regard iniquity in my heart the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. 66.18.

Ye that love the Lord hate evil, Psalm 97.10.

(k) Wash thy heart from wickedness, how long shall vain thoughts lodge in
thee? Ier. 4.4.

(l) But the man that is clean, and is not in a journey, and forbeareth to
keep the passover, even the same soul shall be cut off from his people, Number,
19.3.

And it came to p^sse by the way in the Inn, that the Lord met him and sought
to kill him etc. Ex. 4.24.

(m) Ye shall walk after the Lord your God and fear him, and keep his
Commandments, and obey his voice, and you shall serve him, and cleave unto
him, Deuteronomy. 13.4.

Seventh: That we find nothing to trouble us more then to have sinned (n) and
can have no rest till peace be renewed by renowed presence (o) being more
watchful afterward not to offend so again. (p)

(n) Have mercy upon me Lord, for I am weak? O Lord heal me for my bones are
vexed, Ps. 6.2.

I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me: against thee
only have I sinned and done evil in thy sight, Psa. 51.3.4.

(o) There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger, neither is
there any rest in my bones because of my sin, mine iniquities are gone over my
head, as an heavy burden they are, too heavy for me Psalm 38.3.4.

Return O Lord, deliver my soul, O save me for thy mercies sake, psalm, 6.4.

When I kept silence my bones waxed old, for day and night thy hand was heavy
upon me; I acknowledged my sin unto thee and mine iniquity have I not hid, I
said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin, Ps. 32.3, 4, 5.

Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden and I will give you
rest, Mat. 11.28.

(p) And all Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do no more any such
wickedness as this, Deuteronomy. 13.11.

And all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously,
Deuteronomy. 17 13.

Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established, Pro. 4.26.

Eight: In all wholly to deny our own wisdom (q) and strength (r) desiring
and relying upon the direction (s) and power of the Lord alone (t) for the
discharge of our duty. (u)

(q) Lean not unto thine own understanding: be not wise in thine own eyes,
Pr^. 3.5.7.

Neither make thy self overwise, Eccles 7.16.

(r) Not that we are sufficient of our selves (...) think any thing as of our
selves, 2 Cor. 3.

Without me ye can do nothing, Ioh, 15.^.

(s) Cause me to know the way, wherein should walk, for I lift up my soul
(...) thee Ps. 143 8.

In all thy ways acknowledge him and he shall direct thy paths, Pro. 3.6.

(t) Be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.16.

I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me, Phil. 4.13.

Our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5.

The Lord is my strength and shield, my heart trusted in him, and I am helped,
psalm 28.7.

(u) I will cry unto God most high: unto God that performs all things for me,
psalm. 57.2.

Ninth: Lastly, and above all, in all our faylings, by prayer to desire (w) and
by faith apply (x) the free grace the rich mercy (y) infinite love (a)
undeserved favor (b) unchangeable goodness (c) tender compassions (d) of our
God (e) in Jesus Christ (f) for remission (g) Sanctification (h) acceptance
and a blessing (i) yea for all good things revealed and assured to us in his
most holy word, so giving the Lord all the glory according to the same (b).

(w) Be merciful unto me O God be merciful unto me for my soul trusts in
thee.

(^) In whom we have boldness and ac(...) the faith of him ^^ph. 3.52.

He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in
faith, giving glory to God, To. 4.20.

(y) Therefore it is of Faith that it might be by grace, Romans 4.16.

Where sin abounded grace did much more abound, Romans 5.20.

There is a remnant according to the election of grace, and if by grace, their
it is no more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace, but if it be of
works then it is no more of grace, To, 115.6.

But by the grace of God I am that I am 1 Cor. 15.10.

Not I, but the grace of God which was with me, Idem, my grace is sufficient
for thee, 2 Cor. 129.

To the praise of the glory of his grace wherein he has made us accepted in
the Beloved: in whom we have redem^tion through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace, Ephesians. 1, 6 7.

By grace ye are saved; That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding
riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through C^^^ist Jesus, for by
grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift
of God; not of works lest any man should boast.

(z) But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us,
Ephesians. 2.4.

The same Lord over all is rich unto all, Romans 10.12.

(a) Can a Woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion
on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, Isa.
49.15.

But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners
Christ died for us, Romans 5.8.

Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the sons of God, 1 John 3.1.

(b) I will love them freely, Hos. 14.4.

Thus says the Lord God I do not this for your sakes O house of Israel, but
for mine holy Namessake, which ye have profaned, Ezekiel. 36.22.

The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you because ye were more
in number then any people, but because the Lord loved you. Denetronomy, 7, 7, 8.

(c) I have loved thee with an everlasting love, Ier. 31.3.

Having loved his own, which were in the World, he loved them unto the end,
Ioh. 13.1.

O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee?
Ps. 31.19.

The goodness of God endures continually, psalm. 52.1.

(d) He being full of compassion forgave their iniquity and destroyed them not,
psalm. 78.38.

But thou O Lord art a God full of compassion and gracious, long suffering and
plenteous in mercy and truth, psalm. 86.15. and 145.8.

Let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, ps. l. 79.8.

Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses, psalm. 25.6.

According to the multitude of thy tender mercies, psalm. 51.1.

Who crowns thee with loving kindness and tender mercies, psalm. 103.4.

The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works, psalm.
145.9.

(e) He that is our God is the God of salvation, psalm. 86.20.

Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us, Isa. 25.9.

For this God is our God for ever and ever, psalm. 48.14.

(f) But to us, there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we
in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things and we by him, 1 Cor.
8.6.

Christ is all, and in all, Col. 3.11.

But of him are ye in Christ Jesus who of God is made unto us, wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.

(g) Whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins, Acts 10.43.

Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to
give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins, Acts 5.31.

In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, Ephesians.
1.7. Col. 1.14.

(h) See 1 Cor. 1.30. as to letter (f.)

(i) To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted
in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.

Acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 pet. 2.5.

(k) God having raised up his Son Jesus sent him to bless you, Acts 3.26.

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3.

(l) In God I will praise his word, in the Lord will I praise his word, psalm.
56.10.4.

Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory, for thy mercy,
and for thy truths sake psalm. 115.1.

This is that faith that purisieth the heart (l) that works by love (m) that
is full of good works (n) that procures us peace (o) and that entitles us to
the promises (p) and our case standing thus we may, we must confidently and
comfortably conclude, the Lord is our God (q) himself and his word is our
portion (r) and that we shall find him every way good unto us according to the
same, and every part thereof (s) in due time (t) notwithstanding all our
unworthiness (u) and all other impossibilities (w) as shall be most for his
glory (x) and our salvation (y) for though Heaven and Earth should fail, not
one jot or tittle of his word shall fail till all be fulfilled (z) therefore O
my soul do not fear, faint or doubt (a) but hope beyond hope (b) believe
beyond sense (c) and with an holy carelessness cast thy care on God who cares
for thee (d) who has never failed thee (e) who (f) never will forget or
forsake thee, so shall thou live by most comfortable experience (g) in the Lord
to praise his word (h) and for his word to praise the Lord (i) and go all how
it will, all shall go well. (k)

(l) Purifying their hearts by Faith, Acts 15.9.

(m) Faith which works by love, Gal. 5.6.

(n) That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, fruitful in
every good work, Col. 1.10.

(o) Therefore being justified by Faith we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1.

(p) That the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that
believe, Gal. 3.22.

All the promises of God in him are yea, and in him are amen, 2 Co. 1.20.

(q) In God is my salvation and my glory, the rock of my strength and my resuge
is in God, psalm. 61.7.

My God shall be my strength, Isa. 49.5.

My Lord and my God, Ioh. 20.28.

O my Soul, thou have said unto the Lord thou art my Lord, psalm. 16.2.

O Lord I said thou art my God, psalm. 31.14.

(r) God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever, psalm. 73.26.

Thou art my portion O Lord, psalm 119.57.

This is my comfort in my assliction, for thy word has quickened me, psalm.
119.50.

(^) There sailed not ought of any good thing which the Lord had spoken, all
came to pass, Josh. 21.45.

(^) The Vsion is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and
not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not
tarry, Hab. 2.3.

In due season we shall reap if we faint not. Gal. 6.9.

(u) For mine own sake, even for mine own sake I will do it, Isa. 48.11.

I had pity for my holy Name, which the house of Israel had profaned, Ezekiel.
36.21.

(w) I will work, and who shall let it? Isa. 43.13.

(x) For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory
for ever, Romans 12.36.

(^) I know that this shall turn to my salvation, phil. 1.19.

We know that al thi^g^ work together for good to them that love God, Romans 8
28.

(^) Verily I say to you, till heaven and Earth pass, one jotor one tittle
shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fullfilled. Mat. 5 18.

(^) Have not I commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage be not affrayd,
neither be thou dismayed, for the Lord thy G^d is with thee whither soever thou
go, I^sh. ^.9.

Why art thou cast down O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope
thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance
and my God, psalm. 43.5.

(b) Who against hope believed in hope, Romans 4, 18.

(c) Being fully persuaded that what he had promised, he was able also to
perform, To. 4.21.

(d) Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you.

(^) According to all that he promised there has not failed one good word of
all his good promise, which he promised 1 Kings. 8.56

(^) He has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5.

(g) I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my God,
psalm. 4^.11.

He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness,
Micha. 7 9

(h) In God will spraise his word, in the Lord will I praise his word, psa.
56.10.

(^) Bl^ssed be the Lord God, which spoke with his mouth and has with his hand
fulfilled it 1 King 8.15.

(k) Surely I know it shall be well with them that sear God, Eccl. 8.12.

Say ye to the righteous that it shall be well with him. 3.10.

Thus far to whom the promises do (in Christ assuredly belong.

To whom the promises belong not.
THese most precious pearls are not for filthy Swine, neither is this
childrens bread for dogs (^) ^ll unregenerate men that live in their sins
without repentance are strangers from the Covenant of promise, and have no part
in the Testament, they have no hope, but are without God in the World (m)
Therefore I bes^^ch and warn you (as I do mine own soul, to lay this
seriously to heart, (n) lest we miserably deceive our selves (o) and lose our
labor (p) for this is certain, if we dare to live in any one sin without
Repentance in stead of the promised blessings we may look for threatened
vengeance: and whosoever cannot (as none such can) rightly lay hol^ on the
promised comforts, may justly expect the plagues according to the contrary
threatring (q) this is a maine point, and worthy our best consideration (r).

(l) Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before
Swine, Math. 7.6.

It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs, Mat.
15.26.

(m) Ye were without Christ, being aliens from the Common Wealth of Israel,
and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in
the World, Ephesians. 2.12.

(^) Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, 1 Timothy 4.15.

(^) Benot deceived, God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, that shall
he also reap Gal. 6.7.

(^) Turn ye not aside, for then should ye go after vain things which
cannot profit nor deliver, for they are vain, 1 Samuel 12.21.

I will declare thy righteousness, and thy works: for they shall not profit
thee, Isa. 57.12.

The wages of sin is death, To. 6.23.

(q) For it is written, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed is every one that continues not in
all things, which are written in the Book of the law to do them, Gal 3.10.

Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point is guilty of
all, Iam. 2.10.

Compare, Deuteronomy. 28. ve. 1. ver. 25. With v^. 15. To the end. See especially
ver. 8. and 61.

(r) Who so is wise and will observe those things, even they shall understand
the loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm 107.43.

Who is wise and he shall understand these things? prudent and he shall know
them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and they shall walk in them, Hos.
14.9.

Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces and there
be none to help, psalm. 50.22.

That they may see, and know, and consider^, and understand together, etc. Isa.
41.20.

Diverse necessary Rules for the right applying of the Promises.
FIrst, in general, seeing it has pleased God (^) in his word to make promise
of good things (t) more then we could ask or think (u) we shall want nothing
that is good (w) and whatsoever comes shall be for our good. (x)

(s) Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good
pleasure which he had purposed in himself, Ephesians. 1.9.

I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent and have revealed them unto babes even so
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight Mat. 11.25, 26.

(t) The Lord thy God blesses thee, as he premised thee, Deuteronomy. 15.6.

Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, 2 pet. 1.4.

(u) Unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we can
ask or think, Epl. 3.20.

(w) Lord is my Sheapheard I shall not want, Psalm. 23.1.

They that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing, Psalm. 34.10.

No good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11.

(x) And surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God, Ecle.
8.12.

Say ye to the righteous that it shall be well with him, Isa. 3.10.

We know that all things work together for good to them that love God, To. 8.22.

In spiritual things:

(y) Who is among you, etc. That walks in darkness and has no light? Let
him trust in the Name of the Lord and stay upon his God, Isa. 50.10.

Therefore I will look upon the Lord: I will wait for the God of my salvation,
Micab. 7.7.

(z) In temporal things, in greatest outward calamities, when we see no way of
help, yet to believe that God will surely help one way or other, y.

(z) O our God we have no might, etc. Neither know we what to do, but our
eyes are upon thee, 1 Chro. 20.12.

He shall deliver the needy when he cries, the poor also and him that has no
helper, Psalm. 72.12.

I looked on my right hand and beheld: but there was no man that would know me,
refuge failed me, no man cares for my soul, I cried unto thee O Lord, I said
thou art my refuge, Psalm 142.4.5.

If thou altogether hold thy peace all this time, then shall there
enlargement and deliverance arise from some other place, Hest 4.14.

Alas for that day is great, so that none is like it, it is even the time of
Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it, Iere. 30.7.

Briefly, if we will profit by the promises thus collected to our hands, let
us wisely and carefully use these few briete and well warranted rules following.

We must labor to understand the premises rightly (a) remember them seasonably
(b) believe them faithfully, (c) weigh our own condition seriously, (d) what
good Word of God is made thereto discreetly, (e) applying that to the same
powerfully (f) praying over them often and earnestly. (g) resting thereon
steadfastly (h) submitting to Gods will wholly, (i) awayting the performance
patiently (k) in the use of all good means conscionably (l) when God makes
good any promise to give him the glory of his truth only (m) for every one of
these to pray fervently, frequently, and constantly (n) for wisdom (o)
disposition (p) and strength (q) to conceive (r) believe (s) and do
accordingly. (t)

(a) That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of glory, may give unto
you the spirit of wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of him, Ephesians. 1.17.

Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom, and with all thy
getting, get understanding pro. 4.7.5.

(b) Remember the word which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you, etc.
Josh. 1.14.

Remember the word that I said unto you, Ioh. 15.20.

These things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye my remember
that I told you of them, Joh. 16.4.

(c) Believe in the Lord your God so shall you be established, believe his
Prophe^s so shall ye prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20.20.

Wherefore sirs, be of good courage, for I believe God, that it shall be even
as it was told me, Acts 27.45.

(d) Commune with your own heart. Psalm. 4.4.

I communed with mine own heart, and my spirit made diligent search: is his
mercy clean gone for ever, does his promise fail for evermore? Psalm. 77.58.

(e) In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul,
Psalm. 94.19.

(f) I know that my redeemer lives, etc. Job. 19.25.26, 27.

Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners, of whom I am chief, 1 Time.
1.15.

He has said I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, therefore we may
boldly say, the Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto
me, Heb. 13.5.6.

(g) Therefore now Lord let the thing that thou have spoken concerning thy
servant, and do as thou have said, 1 Chronicles. 17.23.

See to the end of that, Chap. and ver. 17.

Establish thy word unto thy servant, let thy mercies come also to me O Lord,
even thy salvation according to thy word. Remember thy word unto thy servant,
upon which thou have caused me to hope, Psalm. 119.38.41.49. See 25.76 116.154.
Verses.

(h) He that walks in darkness and has no light, let him trust in the Name
of the Lord, and stay upon his God, Isa. 50.10.

Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation,
my God will hear me: rejoice not against me O mine enemy, when I fall I shall
arise, when I sit in darkness the Lord shall be a light unto me, Micah. 7.7.8.

Being fully persuaded that what God had promises, he was able also to
perform, Romans 4.21. See 18, 19, 20. Verses.

(i) It is the Lord: let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.18. 2 Samuel
10.12.15.26.

Good is the word of the Lord, which thou have spoken, 2 Ki. 20.19.

O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, never the less
not as I will, but as thou will, Mat. 26.39.

(k) For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God
ye might receive the promise, Heb. 10.36.

Rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him, psalm. 37.7.34.33.20.

O Lord be gracious unto us, we have waited upon thee, Is^. 33.2. Mich. 7.7.

(l) Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall thou dwell in the Land, and
verily thou shall be fed, Psalm. 37.3.

He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways, Psalm.
91.11.

Arise therefore and be doing, and the Lord be with thee, 2 Cron. 22 16.

(m) Thou have dealt well with thy servant, O Lord, according to thy word,
Psalm, 119.65.

In God will I praise his word, in the Lord will I praise his word, Ps. 56.10.

(n) Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty
things that thou know not. Ier. 33.3. See Job. 8 5.7.

Evening and morning and at noone will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall
hear my voice, Psalm. 55.17. See. Pro. 2.3 4.

Continue in praying, Col 4.2. See, Ephesians. 6.18.

(o) If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him, Iam. 1.5.

I am thy servant, give me understanding that I may know thy Testimonies, Psalm.
119.125.18.

Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart, 1. Ki. 3 9.

(^) Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, P^al. 119 36.

(q) Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain
mercy and find grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16.

(r) Teach me good judgment and knowledge: give me understanding according to
thy word, Psalm. 119.66.169.

(^) Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief, Mar. 9.24.

(t) Give me understanding and I shall keep thy Law, yea I shall observe it
with my whole heart, Psalm. 119.34.

Do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly.

But for further help every manner of way, in the right understanding and use
of the Promises I most earnestly commend, Master Culverwells and Master Balls
Treatises of Faith, also Master Byfields Treatise called the Promises, and
Doctor Gouges whole Armor (...) God, especially that part thereof, where h^
Treats of the shield of says.

Now follow the promises themselves as fitly and orderly, as J was able to
digest them.
THe first maine part containing General promises to be applied upon any
accasion, in case for the present we cannot remember the particular promises
concerning our present necessities and this part has these four Branches.
1. Safety from Evil. (v)

2. Removal of Evil. (w)

3. Supply of all good. (x)

4. A turning all to our good. (y)

As our God sees most for our good. (z)

(^) But the Lord is faithful who shall stablish you, and keep you from
evil, 2 Th^ss. 3 3.

Thou art my biding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble, Psalm. 32.7.

There shall no evil befall thee, Psalm, 91.1.

(^) God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave for he shall redeem
me, Psalm. 49.15.

Many are the afflictions of the righteons; but the Lord delivers him out of
them all, Psalm. 34.19.17.6. ver.

I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver (...), Psalm. 9.15.

(x) There is no want to them that fear him, Psalm. 34.9.

They that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing, Ver. 10.

The Lord is my Sheapheard, I shall not want, Psalm. 23.1.

The Lord is a Sun and Shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, no good
thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11.

But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you. Math, 6.33.

My God shall supply all your need, according to his riches in glory by Christ
Jesus, Phil. 4.19.

Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you, 1 Pet. 5.7.

He has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee; so that we may boldly
say, the Lord is my helper, etc. Heb. 13.5.6.

O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help, Hose. 13.9.
All are yours. 1 Cor. 3.22.

He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall
he not with him also freely give us all things? Romans 8.32.

(y) We know that all things work together for good to them that love God,
Romans 8.28.

I know it will be well with them that fear God, Ecle. 8.12.

Say ye to the righteous that it shall be well with him Isa. 3.10.

M^ke the perfect man, and behold the upright ^rth end of that man is peace,
P^^^^ 37.37^.

(^) Now therefore be not grieved nor angry with your selves that ye sold me
hither, for God did send me before you to preserve life.

So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God, Genesis 45.5.8.

But as for you, you thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good, Genesis
50.20.

The Lord shall give that which is good, Psalm. 85.12.

See al those proofs, of Letter. y.

The second maine part containing such Promises as assure us freedom, 1. from
the pollution. 2. from the punishment, from the power of sin.
First, from the Pollution of sin, as

1. THat we shall know (o) remember (p) b^ ^hamed of (q) loath our selves for
(^) b^ confounded in our selves from our sins. (^)

(^) He shows them their Transgressions, Job. 36.9.

(p) Then thou shall remember thy ways, Ezekiel. 16.61.

Ye shall remember al your doings wherein you have been defiled, Ezekiel. 20.43.

Ye shall remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good,
Ezekiel. 36.31.

(q) Thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed, Ezekiel. 16.61.

(r) Ye shall loath your selves in your own sight, for all your evils that you
have committed, Ezekiel. 20.43.

(^) That thou may be confounded and never open thy mouth any more, Ezekiel.
16.63.

I abhor my self, Job. 42.6.

2. That we shall confess our sins (t) with diligence (u) and the sins of
our Fathers (w) That we shall be humblea (x) and mourn (y) and weep for our
sins (z) and acknowledge Gods judgments to be due unto us for them (a. s

(t) They shall confess their iniquity, Levi. 26.40.

(u) In their affliction they will seek me diligently, Hos. 5.15.

(^) They shall confess the iniquity of their Father, Levit. 26.40.

(x) If then their uncircumcised bearts be humbled, Levit. 26.41.

(y) They shall mourn for him ( viz. Christ who was pierced for their sins,) as
one mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that
is in bitterness for his first borne, etc. ^. Zec. 12.10

(z) They shall come with weeping, Jeremy, 31.9.

In that time says the Lord, the children of Israel; shall come, they and the
children of Judah together, going, and weeping, Je. 50.4.

( a. 6.) Ye shall loath your selves in your own sight, for all your evils that
you have committed, Ezekiel. 20.43. and 36.31.

3. That the Lord will forgive all our sins in general (b) our back slidings
(c) these particular sins viz. Original sin (d) ignorance (e) blasphemy (^)
^dolatry (g) uncleannesse^ (h) unrighteousness (^) Vowing, swearing* rashly,
lying, fraud, rob^ery, violence oppression, perjury (^) The sins of our ^oly
duties. (^) yea every particular sin (m) al^hough our sins be never so heinous
(n) yea, that all our sins are forgiven us, only for Jesus Christ his sake who
suffered for them. (o)

(b) The Lord, who forgive^^ ^ll thine iniq^^^ies Psalm. 10^.3.

He shall redeem Israel from al his ^^quities, Psalm. 130.8.

Who is a God like unto thee, that part doneth iniquity, and passes by
transgression? Mica. 7.18. Thou will cast a^ our sins into the depths of the
Sea Verse 19.

All manner of sin shall be forgiven unto you, Mat. 12.31.

I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no more, Ie 31.34. See
50.20. and Isa. 40.2. and 43.25. Mark. 2.5 and 3.28. Heb. 8.12. and 10.17.

And be said unto her. Thy sins are forgiven, Luke 7.48. So also. c. 5.20.
and 12.10.

(c) I will heal your backslidings, I^. 3.22. and 33.8.

To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgiveness, though we have rebelled
against him, Dan. 9.9.

If any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, he (God) will
deliver his soul from going into the pit, etc. Job. 33.27.28, 29, 30. See
Deuteronomy. 4.30.31.

(d) If through the offense of one, many be dead, much more the grace of God,
and the gift by grace, by one man Jesus Christ has abounded to many;

The judgment was by one to condemnation, the free gift is of many offenses to
justification, To. 5.15.16.

(e) If a Soul shall sin through ignorance against any of the Commandments
of the Lord, Levit. 4.2. if it be the whole congregation, ver. 13. if it be a
Ruler ver. 22. or if it be any one of the common people, ve. 27. Atonement shall
be made for them and it shall be forgiven them, v, 20.26.31.35.

(f) All blasphemies wherewith soever men blaspheme, shall be forgiven them,
Mark. 3.28. so Mat. 12.13.

(g) From al your idols will I cleanse you, Ezekiel. 36.25. See also Deuteronomy.
4.28.29.31.

(h) From al your filthiness will I cleanse you, Ezekiel. 36.25. And I will save
you from al your uncleanness, v. 29.

There shall a Fountain be opened to the house of David for sin, and for
uncleanness, Zech. 13.1.

(i) I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, Heb. 8.12.

If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just, to cleanse us from al
unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9.

(k) If a Soul swear, pronouncing with hi^ Lips (or vowing) to do evil or to
do good: And he shall confess that he has sinned in that thing. The Priest
shall make an atonement for him, for his sin, and it shall be forgiven him, Leu.
5.4.5.10.

If a Soul sin, and lie unto his neighbor in that which was delivered him to
keep, or in dealing, or in a thing taken away by violence, or has deceived
his neighbor, or have found that which was lost and lies concerning it and
swears falsely. Then it shall be if he shall restore that which he took
violently away, or the thing which he has deceitfully gotten, or that which
was delivered him to keep, or as a lost thing which he found, or all that
about which he has sworn falsely; he shall even restore it in the principal,
and shall add the fifth part more thereto, and give it unto him to whom it
appertains, and atonement shall be made for him, and it shall be forgiven him,
Lev. 6.2.3.4.5.7.

(^) That Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the children
of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts, Exodus 28.38.

(m) All manner of sin shall be forgiven unto you, Mat. 12.31.

(n) The Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious, long suffering and abundant
in goodness, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin, Ex. 34.6.7.

Though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow, though they be
red like crimson, they shall be as Wool. Isa. 1.18.

I have blotted out as a thick Cloud thy transgressions and as a Cloud thy si^.
Isa. 44.22. See Je. 33.8.

(o) With his stripes we are healed: The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of
us al: For the transgression of my people was he stricken; He shall bear their
iniquitles, Isa. 53.5, 6.8.11.

He shall save his people from their sins, M^t. 1.21.

This is my blood, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins, Mat.
26.28. See Lu. 22.19.20.

The Son of man came to give his Life, a ransom for many, Mark 10.45.

And that remission of sins should be preached in his name, Lu. 24.47. See
Act. 2.38. and 10.43. and 13.38.

Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the World, John. 1.29.

Him has God exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to g^ve forgiveness of
sins, Acts 5.31.

Who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification,
Romans 4.25. and 8.32.

Christ dyed for our fins, 1 Cor. 15.3. and Romans 5.8.

He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God, in him, 2 Cor. 5.21 In whom we have redemption through
his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, Co. 1.14. and 1 Pet. 1.18.19.

Who gave himself for our sins, Gal. 1.4. and Tit. 2.14.

Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, Heb. 9.28. See 1 Pet. 2.24.
and 3.18.

The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from al sin, 1 Ioh. 1.7. Se c. 2.12.
and 3.5. and Re. 1.5.

Thus ^ar of our freedom from the Pollution of sin.

Secondly, from the Punishment of sin: as

1. THat the Lord will have compassion upon us (p) and be gracious and
merciful unto us (q) that he will defer his anger (r) and turn away the
same from us (s) and will spare us (t) and forgive the punishment of our
iniquities (u) and not destroy us. (w)

(p) He will have compassion upon us, Mica. 7.19. See Deuteronomy. 13.17 and. Psalm.
103.8.

(q) Therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you, and
therefore will he be exalted that he may have mercy upon you, Isa. 30.18.

The Lord is merciful and gracious, Psalm. 103.8. So Deuteronomy. 13.17.

(r) For my names sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise sake will I
refrain for thee, Isa. 48.9.

The Lord is slow to anger, Ps. 103.8.

(s) That the Lord may turn from the fierceness of his anger, Deuteronomy. 13.17.

I will heal their backsliding, for mine anger is turned away from him, Hose.
14.4. So Isa. 12.1.

(t) I will spare them, as a man spares his own son, that serves him, Mal.
3.17.

(u) Thou forgavest the punishment of my sin Psalm. 32.5.

(w) The Lord thy God is a merciful God, he will not destroy thee, Deuteronomy. 4.31.
So Ex. 34.7. and Numb. 14.18. and Mi. 7.18.

I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, Ier. 3.12. and Isa. 54.9. and
56.57. and Hose. 11.9. and Psalm. 103.9.10.

Repent, so iniquity shall not be your ruin, Ez^. 18.30.

The Lord is gracious and merciful and repents him of the evil, Joel. 2.13.
and Iona. 3.9.10. and Ps. 145.8.

2. That we are saved from the wrath of God, only through Christ Jesus. (x)

(x) To wait for his Son from Heaven, even Jesus, which delivered us from
the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.

We shall be saved from wrath through him, Romans 5.9.

Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us,
Gala. 3.13.

There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, To. 81. See Heb.
2.14.

3. That the Lord justifies us from all sin (y) only through Jesus Christ (z)
by imputing our fins to him (a. 7.) and his righteousness to us (b) all being
apprehended by Faith. (c)

(y) He is near that justifies me, who will contend with me? The Lord God will
help me who is he that shall condemn me? Isa. 50.8.9.

Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies:
who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died. etc. Romans 8.33.34.

He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness in
Israel. Numb. 23.21.

He shall receive righteousness from the God of his salvation, Psalm. 245. and
Isc. 61.10.

Jsrael shall be saved in the Lord, with an everlasting salvation, Isa. 45.17.

He justifies the ungodly; R. 4.5. See Zech. 3.4.

David describing the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works, says, Blessed are they, whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered.

Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord will not impute sin, Romans 4.6.7.8.
Compared with, Psalm. 32.1.2.

(z) This is his Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness,
Je. 23.6. and Mal. 4.2.

Christ Jesus of God is made unto us, righteousness, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.

( a. 7.) He has made him to be fin for us, who knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21.

Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18.

His own self bare our sins, 1 Pet. 2.24.

(^) Christ is made unto us righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.

(c) Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes, Romans 10.4.

By him all that believe, are justified Act. 13 39.

Faith is counted for righteousness, To. 4.5.9.15. to 24.

4. That our God is reconciled to us (d) in Christ Jesus. (e)

(d) He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him, and he shall see
his face which joy, Job. 33.26.

The Lord will repent himself concerning his tervants, Psa. 135.14.

(e) God has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ.

God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.18.19.20.

Jesus Christ the righteous is the propitiation for our sins, 1 Ioh. 2.1.2. and
4.10. Romans 3.25.

The chastisement of our peace was upon him, Jsa. 53.5.

That he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest to make reconciliation
for the sins of the people, Heb. 21.17.

Now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far of, are made nigh by the blood
of Christ;

For he is our peace: and having abolished the enmity, has reconciled us to
God Ephesians. 2.12. to 18.

Thus far of our Freedom from the punishment of sin.

Thirdly, from the power of sin, that weshall not serve any sin in the
lusts thereof.

1. THat the Lord will mortify our sins, (f) and convert us from them (g)
that sin shall not rigne in us, (h)

(f) He will subdue our iniquities, Micah. 7.19.

I will purely purge away thy dross. Isa. 1.25.

When the Lord shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem, by the spirit of
burning, Isa. 4.4. and 27.9.

I will cleanse them from all their iniquities, Ie. 33.8. and Joel. 3.21. and
Ezekiel. 36.25.

I will remove the iniquity of that Land, in one day, Ze. 3.9.

(g) They shall return unto me with their whole heart, Ier. 24.7. and 30 31.

The remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob unto the mighty God, Isa.
10.21. and 17.7. and 19.22.

All the ends of the world shall turn unto the Lord, Ps. 22.27.

(l) Stu shall not have dominion over you; Rom 6.14.

VV^lke in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Gal.
5.16.

2. That the Lord will heal the evil of our naturts (i) and recover us from
our backslidings (k) and bring us to newness of life. (l)

(i) The Lord heals al thy diseases. Psalm. 103 3.

They shall return to the Lord, he shall heal them, Isa. 19.22.

Jesus said unto them, they that be whole need not a Physician, but they that
be sick?

I came not to call the righteous, but sin ners to repentance, Mat. 9.12.13. and
Mark. 2.17. and Lu. 5.31.32.

(k) I will heal your backslidings, Je. 3.22. and 33.6.

Though he fall, he shall not utterly be cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him
with his hand, Psalm. 37.24. and 23.3. and 145.14.

If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up, Job. 22.23. and
33.25. to 30.

I will bring again that which was driven away and will bind up that which was
broken, Ezekiel. 34.16.

The Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and shall prese ve me to his
Heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.18.

(l) And you being dead in your fi^^^^ has he quickened together with him,
(Christ) Col. 2.13.

That you might be partakers of the Divine nature, having escaped the
corruption, that is in the World through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4.

3. That the Lord will convert us from, or mo^tifie in us, or preserve us from
falling in o a^^articular si^ (n) from evil company (n) from whoredom (r)
from, Adultery (p) idolatry (q) hardness of heart (^) pride (s) lying (t)
unclean nesse (u) unrighteousness (w) worldly ^usts (x) Family sins (y) and
from backs^ ^ing (z) All which are promised us in Christ Jesus (^.8)

(m) The Lord shall preserve me from every evil work, 2 Timothy 4.18.

(n) When wisdom enters into thine heart, discretion shall preserve thee, from
the way of the evil man, from the man that speaks froward things, who leave
the paths of uprightness, etc. pro. 2.10. to 16.

(o. p.) She shall deliver thee from the strange woman, which forsakes the
guide of her youth, pro. 2.16, 17.

Who so pleases God, shall escape her, Eccl. 7.26.

(q) Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with idols? Hose. 14.8. and
Ezekiel. 37 23. and Hose 2.17.

He shall not look to the Altars, the work of his hands, Isa. 17.8.

Ye shall defile the covering of thy graven Images, thou shall cast them away
as a menstruous cloth, Isa. 30.22.

From all your Idols will I cleanse you, Eze. 36.25.

(r) Neither shall they walk any more after the stubbornness of their evil
heart, Ier. 3.17.

(s) Thou shall no more be haughty in my holy mountain, Zeph. 3.11.

(t) The remnane of Israel shall not speak lies, neither shall a deceitful
tongue be found in their mouth, Zeph. 3.13.

(u) From al your filthiness will I cleanse you, Ezekiel. 36.25.

(w) He is faithful to cleanse us from al unrighteousnes, 1 Ioh. 1.9.

(x) The grace of God teaching us to deny worldly lusts, Tit. 2.11.12. and 2
Pet. 1.4.

(y) Thou shall put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacles, Job. 22.23. and
5.24.

(z) The Law of God is in his heart, none of his steps shall side, Psalm. 37.31.
and 16.8. and 21.7. and 26.1. and 145.14.

Thou shall walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble, Pro. 3.23.

Thou shall call me my Father, and shall not turn away from me, Jer. 3.19.

I will heal their backsldings, Hos. 14.4

The Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from evil, a These.
3.3. and 2. Tim. 4.18.

If ye do these things, ye shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1 10.

( a. 8.) Our Savior Jesus Christ, gave himself for us, that he might purify
unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2.13, 14.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us
from this present evil world. Gal. 1.4.

God sent his Son Jesus to bless you, in turning away every one of you from
his iniquities, Acts 3.26. and 5.31.

How much more shall the blood of Christ purge your conscience from dead works?
Heb. 9.14.

Thus far of our Freedom from the power of sin and of the second maine part of
this Collection.

The third maine part contains such Promises as assure us many excellent
gifts from the Lord.
First, many saving graces are promised unto us. As

1. THat the Lord will give us his holy Spirit (^) for which Christ has prayed
on our behalf (c) and will sanclisie us to himself (d) in the Lord Jesus. (e)

(b) A new spirit will I put in you, Ezekiel. 36.26.

I will put my Spirit within you, ver. 27. and 11.19.

I will power out my spirit upon al flesh. upon servants and handmaidens in
these days will I power out my spirit, Joel. 2.28.29. and Acts 2.17.8.39.39.

How much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy spirit to them that ask
him? Lu. 11.13.

I will send unto you from the Father the Spirit of truth, Ioh. 15.26.

Now we have received not the spirit which is of the World, but the spirit
which is of God, 1 Cor. 2.12.

(e) I will pray the Father, and he shall give you the Sririt of truth, Ioh.
14.16, 17.

(l) I the Lord sanctify you, have seveter you from other people that you
shou^^ be mine, Levit. 20.8.26. and 21.8.15.23 and 22.9.16.

He shall Baptize you with the hei^ Ghost, Mat. 3.11. and Mark. 1.8. and L^.
3.16. Acts 1.5.

My grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9.

Having predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to
himself. Ephesians. 1 5.

The very God of peace sanctify you wholly;

Faithful is he who calls you, who also will do it. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.24. and
4.3.4.

Ye are an holy Nation, a peculiar people. 1 Pet. 2.19.

(e) Of his fullness have al we received. Joh. 1.16.

Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us sanctification, 1
Cor. 1.30.

Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it, that it should be holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.25 26.27. and
Tit. 2 14. and To. 6. chapter and Heb. 9.14.

By the will (of God) we are sanctified through the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ, Heb. 10.10.

2. That the Lord will cause us to know him (^) and our duty to him (g) and
give us Faith in him. (h)

(f) I will give them an heart to know me, J^r. 24.7 and 16.21. and 31.34.
compared with Heb 8.11.

Thou shall find the knowledge of God, Pro. 2.5.

Then shall we know if we follow on to know the Lord, Hose. 6.3.

I shall show you plainly of the Father, John. 16.25.

(g) I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shall go, Psalm.
32.8. and 25.8.9.12.14. and Isa. 48.17.

He will be our guide even unto death, psa. 48.14. and 73.24.

You need not that any man teach you, but the same anointing teaches you of al
things. 1 John 2.27.

The secret of the Lord is with the righteous, Pro. 3.32.

Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye
in it, Isa. 30.21. and 29.18.

Then the Eyes of the blind shall be opened, and there shall be a way that shall
(...) called the way of holiness, the wayfaring men though fools shall not
err therein, Isa. 35.5.8. and 42.16. and Lu. 4 18.

I will direct al his ways, Isa. 45.13. and 54.13.

And he said unto them, unto you it is given to know the mystery of the
Kingdom of God. Mark. 4.11.

If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, Ioh. 7.17.

(h) In his Name shall the Gentiles trust, Mat. 12.21.

Unto you is it given to believe on Christ Phil. 1.29.

The just shall live by his Faith, Habak. 2.4. and Heb. 10 38.

They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, Zech. 12.10.

Jesus said unto them; this is the work of God that ye believe on him, whom
he has sent, Ioh. 6.29.

I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw al men unto me, Joh. 12.32.

Faith, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8.

3. That the Lord is our God (i) and Father (k) and loves us (^) with an
undeserved (m) infinite (n) unchangeable love (o) of which he will assure us,
(p) in which he will confirm us unto the end (q) by his holy Spirit (r) in
Christ Jesus. (s)

(^) I will be their God. 2 Cor. 6.16. and Exodus 29.45. and Jeremy 7.23. and
31.1.33. and Heb. 8.10.

I ascend unto my God, and your God, Joh. 20.17.

(k) I will be a Father unto you and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says
the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18.

I am a Father unto Israel. Je. 31.9.

I ascend to my Father, and your Father, Joh. 20.17.

(l) The Father himself loves you. John 16.27.

The Lord thy God will love thee, Deuteronomy. 7.12.13.

God will be favorable unto him, Job. 33.26. and Ps. 5.12. and 149.4. and Pro.
3.4. and 12.2.

The Lord loves him that follows after righteousness, Pro. 15.9.

I will betroth thee unto me in loving kindness, Hos. 2.19.

I will call her beloved; that was not beloved, Romans 9.25.

(m) I will Love them freely, Hose. 14.4.

(n) Can a Woman forget her suckling child, that she should not have compassion
on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, Isa.
49.15.

(o) I have loved thee with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3.

Having Love^ his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end,
Joh. 13.1.

I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come nor height nor depth, nor
any other C^^ture shall be^able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.38.39.

(p) The Lord shall stablish you, 2 Thessalonians. 3.3. and 2.17.

He shall strengthen your heart, Ps. 31.24.

(q) The Lord Jesus Christ shall confirm you unto the end, 1 Cor. 1.8.

(r) The Spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God, Romans 8.16.

God has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit, in our hearts, 2 Cor.
1.22. and Ephesians. 1.13, 14.

(^) God stablisheth us, in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.21.

4. That the Lord will give us inward peace (t) in Christ (u) that he our God
(w) and our Savior (x) will give us inward joy, or spiritual satisfaction by
the work of the Holy Ghost, (y) and that freely (z) and which shall never be
taken from us (a. 9.) which comforter God the Father, and Christ our redeemer
have promised to send us (b) for which on our behalf our Savior has prayed
(c) a Yea all the consolations of the holy Ghost we shall assuredly enjoy in
his Name and for his sake (d).

(t) The Lord will speak peace to his people, and to his Saints, Ps. 858. and
29.11. and 125.5.

And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, Gal. 6.16.

His soul sha dwell at ease, Psalm. 25.13.

Lord, thou will ordain peace for us, Isa. 26.12:

Great shall be the peace of thy children Isa. 54.13. and 55.12. and 66.12. and
57.19.

I will reveal unto them, the abundance of peace and truth. Je. 33.6.

The peace of God shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus, Phil.
4.7.

Being justified by Faith we have peace with God, Romans 5.1.

Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, Joh. 14.27.

(u) Christ is our peace, Ephesians. 2.14 17.

God has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5.18.19.

(w) Let the righteous rejoice before God, Psalm. 68.3. and 33.21. and 97.11.
and 64.10 and 107.42.

My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation, Psalm. 13.5. and 34.2. and 36.8.9. and
45.15. and 63.7. and Isa. 61.10.

In thy Name shall they rejoice all the day, Ps. 89.16.

Thou shall have thy delight in the Almighty, Job. 22.26.

God gives to the man that is good in his sight, joy, Eccl. 2.26. and Isa.
29.19. and Jer. 31.12, 13, 14, 25.

The redeemed of the Lord shall return with singing, and everlasting joy shall
be upon their heads. Isa. 51.11. and 55.12. and 56.7. and 35.1.2.6.10. and
65.13, 14.

The Lord shall yet comfort Sion, Zach. 1.17.

Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall Laugh. Luke 6.21. and Mat. 5.4.
and Acts 2.28.

The God of al comfort, comfort us in all our tribulation, 2 Co.r. 1.3 4. and
7 6.

(x) The water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water, springing up
to everlasting Life, Joh. 4.14.

(y) The Comforter, the holy Ghost, he shall teach you al things Joh. 14.26.

(z) I will give of the Fountain of the water of Life freely, Revel. 21.6.

(a. 9.) Your sorrow shall be turned into joy, your joy no man takes from you,
Joh. 16.20.22.

(b) The Father, he shall give you another Comforter who shall abide with you
for ever, Joh. 14.16.26.

I will send the comforter unto you, Ioh. 16.7

(c) I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, the spirit
of truth, Joh. 14.16.17.

(d) A Comforter, that may abide with you for ever, Joh. 14.16.

5. The Lord will give us his fear (e) which shall never depart from us (f.g.)
and will cause us and our seed to love him with all our hearts (h) and will
give us a new heart and a new spirit (i) and will make us both willing (k) and
able to obey him (l) yea our Savior will make us zealous to serve him. (m)

(e) I will put my fear in their hearts, Jer. 32.40.

They shall fear thee as long, as the Sun and Moon shall endure, Psalm. 72.5.
and Isa. 59.19.

Israel shall fear the Lord and his goodness, in the latter days, Hose. 3.5.

(f.g.) I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for
ever, and I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from
me, Jer. 32.39, 14.

(h) The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to
love the Lord thy God with all thine heart and with all thy Soul, Deuteronomy. 30.6.

He has chosen us in Christ, that we should be without blame before him in
love, Ephesians. 1.4.

(i) A new heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, Ezekiel.
36.26. and 11.19.

(k) This people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Psalm. 110.3.

One shall say, I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of
Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, Isa. 44.5.

I will take the stony heart out of their flesh and will give them an heart of
flesh, Ezekiel. 11.19.

I will turn to the people a pure Language, that they may serve the Lord with
one consent, Zeph. 3.9. and Zech. 8.20.21.22.23.

(l) I will give them an heart, that they may walk in my statutes, and keep my
Ordinances, and do them, Ezekiel. 11.19.120. and 36.26.

I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my
people and I will be their God, Jer. 24.7. and Heb. 8.10.

I have ordained you, that you should go, and bring forth fruit, and that your
fruit should remain, Joh. 15.16.

It is God, that works in you, both to will, and to do, of his good pleasure,
Phil. 2.13.

(m) Jesus Christ gave himself for us, that he might purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works. Titus, 2.13, 14.

Thus far of the first head of the third maine part.

Secondly, ability to worship the Lord is promised unto us, as

THat the Lord will cause us to worship him aright (n) to pray unto him (o) to
praise him (p) to hear his word (q) to remember good things (^) to meditate
thereon (s) to confer thereof (t) to make (u) ^and pay holy vow s unte him (w)

(n) The hour comes, and now is, that the true worshipers, shall worship the
Father in spirit, and in truth, Joh. 4.23. and Psalm. 22.27. and 86 9.

In mine holy mountain, says the Lord, there shall all the house of Israel
serve me, there will I accept, and require your holy things. Ezekiel. 20.40. and
Jer. 17.26.

(^) Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, Job. 22.27. and 14, 15 and 33.26.

Every one that is godly shall pray unto thee, Psalm. 32.6. and J^r. 30.21.

He shall call upon me, and I will answer him, Ps 91.15. and Jer. 29.12.13 and
3.19.

They shall return, and seek the Lord their God, Hose. 3.5. and Zeph. 3.9.

We know not what we should pray for, as we ought, but the spirit it self
makes intercession for us, To. 8.26.17.

(p) They shall come from al places, bringing Sacrifices of praise unto the
Lord, Jer. 17.26. and 30.19.

They shall praise the Lord that seek him, Ps. 22.26.

This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise, Isa.
43.21. and 51.3.

Ye shall be satisfied, and shall praise the Name of the Lord your God, Joel.
2.26. and Ps. 50.15.

(q) The ears of them that hear, shall hearken, Isa. 32.3. and 50.4. and Act.
28.28.

The ears of the deaf shall be unstopped, Isa. 35.5.

Other Sheep I have, and they shall hear my voice. Joh. 10.16.

(r) The holy Ghost shall bring al things to your remembrance, that I have said
to you, Joh. 14.26.

(s) Thine heart shall meditate terror, Isa. 33.18.

(t) They shall ask the way to Sion with their faces thitherward, saying, come,
and let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant, that shall not
be forgotten, Jer. 50.5.

(v) They shall vow a vow unto the Lord, Isa. 19.21.

(w) Thus shall pay thy Vows, J^b. 22.27.

Thus far of the second head of the third maine part.

Thirdly, the Lord promises us diverse Abilities for our particular callings,
and other commendable virtues, as

1. THat the Lord will give us direction (x) and sufficiency to discharge our
duties. (y)

(x) I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shall go. Psalm.
32.8. and 25.12. and 37.24.

In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths, Pro. 3.6. and
28.5. and Isa. 45.13.

God gives to a man that is good in his sight wisdom and knowledge, Eccl. 2.26.
and 8.5. and Jer. 33.3.

(y) And the Lord said unto him. Go in this thy might, and thou shall save
Israel, have not I sent thee? And he said, O my Lord wherewith shall I save
Israel? Behold my Family is poor, and I am the least in my Fathers House,

And the Lord said, surely I will be with thee, and thou shall smite the
Midianites. Judge. 6.14.15, 16. and Ex. 3.12. and 4.10.11.12.15. and Josh. 3.7.

I will go in the strength of the Lord God, Psalm. 71.16. Man's goings are of the
Lord, Pro. 20.24.

2 Such places as may move us to be courageous, and do valiantly (z) That we
shall not fear (a. 10.) That the Lord will give us true valor, boldness, or
courage of heart (b) and enable us to fight resolutely against his and our
enemies. (c)

(z) Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them; for the
Lord thy God he it is, that does go with thee, he will not fail thee, nor
forsake thee, Deuteronomy. 31.6.8. and 7, 18. and 20.1, 2, 4. and Josh. 8.1. and
10.8.25 and 11.6. 1 Chronicles. 28.20.

Be strong and courageous, be not afraid, nor dismayed for the King of Assyria,
nor for all the multitude that is with him; for there be more with us then with
him,

With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to help us,
and to fight our battles, 2 Chronicles. 32.7.8. and 13.12. and 1 Chronicles. 22.13. and 2
Ki. 6.16. and Joel. 2.21.

Thus says the Lord, that created thee, fear not, I have redeemed thee, thou
art mine;

When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, when thou passest
through the fire, thou shall not be burnt; For I am the Lord thy God, the holy
one of Israel, thy Savior, Isa. 43.1, 2, 3. and Ier. 46.28.

( a. 10.) Thou shall be steadfast, and shall not fear, Job. 11.15. and
5.21.22. and Deuteronomy. 3.32. Thou shall not be afraid of them, but shall well
remember what the Lord thy God did unto Egypt,

Thou shall not be affrighted at them, for the Lord thy God is among you, a
mighty God, and terrible, Deuteronomy. 7.18.21. The Lord is my salvation, whom shall I
fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? though an
host should encampe against me, my heart shall not fear, Psalm. 27.1.23. and
Isa. 12 2.

When thou lie down, thou shall not be afraid, Pre. 3.24. and Jer. 23.4. and
30 20.

(b) He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might, he
increases strength,

They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall run and
not be weary, they shall walk, and not faint, Isa. 40.29.31. and 2 Samuel
22.3.33. and Psalm. 18.1, 2.31.32 and 28.7.8.

He shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord, Ps. 31.24. and
68.35. and 71.16.

Through God we shall do valiantly, psalm. 60.12. and 108.13.

The Lord is my Rock, and my salvation, he is my defense, I shall not greatly be
moved, Ps. 62.2.

Thou shall be secure, thou shall take thy rest in safety, none shall make thee
afraid, Job. 11.18, 19.

He that walks upnightly, walks surely,

The way of the Lord is strength to the upright, pre. 10.9.29.

Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Iehova is everlasting
strength, Isa. 26 4. and 28.5, 6.

I, even I am he that comfort you: who art thou that thou should be afraid
of a man that shall die, and of the Son of man, that shall be made as grass?
Ise. 52.12.

(o) They shall be all mighty men, which tread down their enemies in the mire of
the streets in the battle, and they shall fight, because the Lord their God is
with them,

I will strengthen them in the Lord, Zech. 10.5.12.

The people that do know their God shall be strong and do exploits, Dar. 11.32.

3. That the Lord will give us contentation (d) and enable us to govern our
tongues (e) and our carriage (f) and will cause us to deal justly in our
common dealings (g) and in executing justice. (h)

(d) That every man should enjoy the good of his labor, it is the gift of God,
Eccl. 3.13. and 5.18.

I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.

Every where and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry,
both to abound and to suffer need;

I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me, phil. 4.11, 12, 13.

(e) I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say, Ex. 4.12.15.

The tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly, Isa. 32.4. and
50.4.

(f) I will teach you what you should do, Ex. 4.15.

(g) Thou shall understand righteousness, judgment, and equity, Pro. 2.9. and
8.20.

(h) The Lord shall be for a spirit of judgment to him that sits in
judgment Isa. 2.8.6. and 32.1.

It is joy to the just, to do judgment Pro. 21.15.

Thus far the third Head of the third maine part.

Fourthly, that the Lord will increase good gifts in us (i) particularly,
Saving knowledge (k) true Faith (l) righteousness (m) expression of knowledge
(n) That we shall persever in good (o) That the Lord accepts our persons (p)
and services (q) particularly. Our public worship (^) our prayers in general
(s) our prayers for or there is (t) for such as are in authority (u) oue thanks
giving (w) for others (x) for such as are in authority (y) our singing psalms
(z) our Alms (a. 11.) our Charity to our kindred (b) our Suffering wrong (c)
if we serve God in right eousnesse, peace and joy in the holy Ghost (d) We and
all our services are accepted only in Christ Jesus. (e)

(i) Though thy beginning was small, yet shall thy latter end greatly increase,
Job. 8.7

They go from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7.

The righteous shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon, Those that be plainted in
the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God,

They shall still bring forth fruit in old age, Psalm. 92.12 13 14. and 115.14.
and 1.3 and Pro. 11 28. and Isa. 35.1.2.

The path of the just is as the light that shines more and more unto the
perfect day, Pro. 4.18.

I will pour my spirit upon thy seed and my blessing upon thine offspring.

And they shall spring up as among the grass, as willowes by the water
courses. Isa. 44.3 4.

I am the Lord thy God, which teaches thee to prefit, Isc. 48 17.

Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, He shall be as a Tree planted by
the waters, he shall not cease from yielding fruit, Jer. 17.7.8. and 31.12. and
Hose. 14.6, 7, 8.

Ye shall grow up as Calves of the stal, Mal. 4.2.

Whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance, Mat.
13.12. and 25.29. and Luke 8.18. and 19.26.

He hat abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit. Joh.
65.5. and 2.

If these things be in you, and abound, they make you that you shall not be
unfruitful, in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.8.

(k) I will show unto you, great and hidden things, which thou know not. Jer.
33.3. A man of knowledge increases strength Pro. 24.5.

(l) The righteousness of God is revealed from faith to Faith, Romans 1.17.

(m) The Lord will cause righteousness to spring forth, Isa. 61.11.

(n) The wise in heart shall be called prudent, and the sweetness of the Lips
increases learning, Pro. 16.21.

(o) Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work
in you, will perfect it unto the coming of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6.

Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth Him
with his Hand, Psalm. 37.24. and 28.

The Lord shall never suffer the righteous to be moved, Psalm. 55.22. and 66.9.
and. Pro. 10.30. and 12.3.

My mercy will I keep for him for evermore and my covenant shall stand fast
with him, Ps. 89.28. and 2 Samuel 7.15. and 1. Chron. 17.13, 14.

The Lord will not cast off his people, neither will He forsake His inheritance,
Ps. 94.14. and 1 Samuel 12.22.

The righteousness is an everlasting foundation, Pro. 10.25.

I will build them up, and not pull them down, I will plant them and not pluck
them up. Jer. 24.6.

I have loved thee with an everlasting love 1.31, 3.

Thus says the Lord, if Heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of
the Earth, searched out beneath, I will also cast off the seed of Israel, for
all that they have done, Ier. 31.37. and 33.25.26.

I will betroth thee unto me for ever.

I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, Hose. 2.19.20.

I give unto them eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
man pluck them out of my Hand;

My Father which gave them me is greater then all, and no man is able to pluck
them out of my Fathers Hand, Joh. 10.28.29.

Jesus, having loved his own, he loved them unto the end. Ioh. 13.1.

I am persuaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities,
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,

Nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us
from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8 38 39.

Who shall also confirm you unto the end, 1 Cor. 1.8.

The Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, 1 Thessalonians. 3.3.

Who are kept by the power of God, through Faith unto salvation, 1 Peter 1.5.

(p) In every Nation he that fears Him, and works righteousness, is
accepted of Him, Acts 10.35.

If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? Genesis 4.7.

(q) Their burnt offerings and their Sacrifices shall be accepted on mine
Altar, Isa. 56.7. and 60.7.

Thou shall be pleased with the Sacrifices of righteousness, Ps. 51.19.

That the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by
the Holy Ghost, To. 15, 16.

(r) See the proofs immediately before.

(s) The prayer of the upright is his del^ght, Pro. 15 8.

(t.v.w.x.y) I exhort, that first of al supplications, prayers, intercessions,
and giving of thanks be made for almen,

For Kings, and for all that are in authority,

For this is good, and acceptable in the sight of Godour Savior, 1 Timothy 2.1.2.3

(z) I will praise the Name of the Lord with a Psalm, this shall please the
Lord. Psalm. 69.30.31.

(^.^^) To do good, and to communicate forget not, for with such Sacrifices
God is well pleased, Heb. 13.16.

If there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and
not according to that He has not, 2 Cor. 8.12.

(b) Let children, or nephews learn to show kindness at home, and to require
their parents, for that is good, and acceptable before God, 1 Timothy 5.4.

(c) If when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God, 1 Pet. 2.20.

(d) The Kingdom of God is not meat, and drink, but righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost,

For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable unto God, Romans
14.17.18.

(e) He has made us accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.

Through him we both have an access by one Spirit unto the Father, c. 2.18.
and 3.12. and Heb. 10.19.20.22. 1 Pet. 3.18.

Thus far the fourth and last head of the third maine part.

The fourth maine part contains such promises as concern Affliction.
First, Concerning Affliction in general, as

1. THat the Lord will have his to suffer (f) and will visit his for sinning
(g) and yet will enable us to bear affliction aright. (h)

(f) In the world ye shall have tribulation, Ioh. 16.33.

I will cause you to pass under the rod, Eze. 20.37.

Whosoever does not bear his Cross, and come after me, cannot be my Disciple,
Luke 14.27. and Heb. 12.6 7.

We must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14.22.
and 2, Tim. 3.1.2.

Unto you is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on Him, but
also to suffer for His sake, phil. 1.29.

(g) As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, Rev. 3.19.

They that are left of you, shall pine away in their iniquities, Levit. 26. 39.
See also v. 14. to 42.

He shall be my son; if he commit iniquity I will chasten him, 2 Samuel 7.14.
and 1 Ki. 11.39. and Ps. 89.32. and pro. 3.12.

By fire and by his sword, will the Lord plead with all flesh;

For I know, their works and their thoughts, Isa. 66.16.18.

Thus says the Lord, because you are all become dross, I will gather you into
the midst of Jerusalem, As they gather filver, and brass, and iron, into the
midst of the Furnace, to blow the fire upon it to melt it, so will I gather you
in mine anger, and melt you, I will gather you, and blow upon you in the fire
of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst thereof, Eze. 22.19, 20, 21,
22.

You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore I will
punish you for all your iniquities, Amos. 3.2. and Heb. 12 6.

(^) God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are
able, 1 Cor. 10.13.

They shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity, Levit. 26.43.

We faint not in afflictions, 2 Cor. 4.16.

2. That we shall gain much good by Affliction (i) particularly, The trial of
our Christian graces (k) assurance we are Gods children (l) that the Lord loves
us (m) that we belong to Christ (n) the mortification of our sins (o)
Sanctification to newness of life (p) the stirring us up to earnest prayer (q)
to confidence in the Lord (r) it procures us peace (s) preserves from hell (t)
furthers us unto (u) and assures u^ of Heaven. (w)

(i) He chastens us for our profit, Heb. 12.10.

Happy is the man whom God corrects Job. 5.17. and Psalm. 94.12,

(k) The Lord tries the righteous, psalm. 11 5. and Job. 23.10.

Some of them of understanding, shall fall, to try them, Dan. 11.35. and Ze.
13.9.

(l) The Lord scourges every son whom he receives,

If ye endure chastening the Lord deals with you, as with sons, Heb. 12 6,
7, 8. and pro. 3.12.

(m) Whom the Lord loves, he chastens, Heb. 12.6. and Pro. 3.12. and Rev. 3.19.

(n) To you is given in the behalf of Christ, to suffer, Phil. 1.29.

(o) By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is the fruit to
take away his sin, Isa. 27.9.

If they be holden in cords of affliction,

Then he shows them their Transgressions;

He opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that they return
from iniquity, Job. 36.8, 9, 10.

(p) Many shall be purifyed, and made white, and tried, Dan. 12.10. and 11.35.

Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed, day by day, 2
Cor. 4.16.

(q) Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy
chastening was upon them, Isa. 26 16 and Zech. 13.9.

They shall cry unto the Lord because of the oppressors, Isa. 19.20.

In the time of their affliction they will seek me early, Hose. 5.15. and Ier.
2.27.

(r) I will bring them through the fire, and they sha^ll say, The Lord is my
God, Zech. 13.9.

(s) Chastening yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness, to them which
are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.11.

Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest that thou may give him rest from
the days of adversity, Psalm. 94.12, 13.

I know the thoughts that I think toward you says the Lord, thoughts of
peace, Ier. 29.11.

(t) If any say, I have sinned, and it profited me not,

He will deliver his soul from going into the pit. Job. 33.27.28.

(v) We must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts
14.22.

Our light affliction, which is but for a moment,

Works for us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4
17.

(w) If we suffer we shall also reign with him, 2. Tim. 2.12.

3. That no affliction shall be too heavy for us (x) no new nor strange
affliction shall befall us (y) the Lord will afflict us in manner and measure
convenient for a (z) N^^ ^^^ing us thereby to contend with him (a. 12.) nor
sin against him (b) he has a fellow feeling of our miseries (c) and lays
them to heart to deliver us (d) he will ease us therein (e) and deliver us
thereout (f) yea out of them all, though never so great (g) and that speedily
(h) in due season (i) at the appointed time (k) so as he will afflict us no
more (l). He despises not our afflicted estate (m) nor hides his Face from us
(n) nor forgets us (o) but knows our sorrows (p), sees our troubles (q)
bath respect unto us (r) and hears our groans (s) desires (t) sighings (u)
cries (w) and calling upon him (x) not suffering our hope to perish (y) but
remembers his Covenant (z) all those to assure us, he is our ready help at
hand (a. 13) in greatest extremities (b) when we are most hopeless. (c).

(x) God will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, 1 Cor. 10
13.

(y) There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man, ibid:

(z) I will convert thee in measure, Ier. 46.28.

Has he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? or is he slain
according to me slaughter of those that are slain by him?

In measure, when thou sendest it forth, thou will debate with it, Isa. 27.7, 8.

( a. 12) He will not lay upon man more then right, that he should enter into
judgment with God, Job. 34.23.

(b) The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the. righteous; lest
the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity, psalm. 125.3.

(c) In all their afflictions he was afflicted, Isa. 63.9.

(d) I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of
peace, to give you an expected end, Ier. 29.11.

(e) The Lord will lighten my darkness, 2 Samuel 22.29. and 18.28. and 112.4.
Mica. 7.8.

Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest, Mat. 11.28.

(f) The righteous is delivered out of trouble, pro. 11.8.

He makes sore, and binds up, he wounds and his hanes make whole Job.
5.18.

Why art thou so cast lown O my soul hope in God, I shall yet praise him Psalm.
43.3.

I will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted, Mica, 4.6.

(g) Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out
of them all, Psalm. 34.19.

God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave, Ps. 49.15.

Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a Dove
covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold, Psalm. 68.13.

Thou which have shown me great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again, and
shall bring me up again from the depths of the Earth, Psalm. 71.20.

They draw near unto the gates of death, Then they cry unto the Lord in their
trouble; he saves them out of their distresses, Psalm. 107.18.19.

Though I walk in the midst of trouble thou will revive me, Psalm. 138.7.

The Lord he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will
bind us up, Hose. 6.1.

Rejoice not against me O mine enemy; when I fall, I shall arise, when I sit
in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me, Mica. 7.8.9.

The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, Nehu. 1.7.

(h) Behold at eventide trouble, and before the morning, he is not, Isa. 17.14.

His anger endures but a moment, weeping may endure for a night, but joy
comes in the morning, Ps. 30.5.

Yet a little while, he that shall come, will come and will not tarry, Heb.
10.37. and Hab. 2.3.

(i) The Lord will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble
Psalm. 9.9.

(k) The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and
not lie, Ha. 2.3

(l) Though I have afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more, Naham 1.12.

Though the Lord, give you the bread of adversity and the water of affliction,
yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, Isa. 30.20.

(m) He h^th not despised nor abhorred the ^ffliction of the afflicted, Psalm.
22.14.

(n) Neither has he hid his f^^ (...).

(o) The needy shall not always be forgotten, Psa. 9.18.

(p) The Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people, for I know
their sorrows, Ex. 3.7.

(q) God looked upon the children of Israel, Ex. 2.25. And see the precedent
quotation.

(r) God had respect unto them, Ex. 2.25.

(s) And God heard their groaning, v. 24.

(t) Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble. psalm. 10.17.

(v) For the sighing of the needy, now will I arise says the Lord, Ps. 12.5.

(w) The righteous cry, and the Lord hears, Psalm. 34.17.

(x) When he cried unto him he heard, Psa. 22.24. and Ex. 2.23. and 3.7.

(y) The expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever, Psalm. 9.18.

(z) God remembered his Covenant, Ex. 2.24.

( a. 13) God is a very present help in trouble, Psalm. 46.1.

(b) Alas, for that day is great, so that none is like it; it is even the time
of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved ou^ of it, ^er. 30.7.

(c) I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would
know me, refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul,

I cried unto thee O Lord, I said, thou art my refuge, Psalm. 142.4, 5. and
71.20. and Mica. 7.8.

Thus far the first head of the fourth maine part.

The second Head concerning diverse particular Afflictions, as

First, to such as are persecuted for the truth.

SVch shall be enabled to suffer (d) to answer for themselves at the very push
(e) The Lord will maintain their cause (f) and be their strong redeemer (g)
and deliver them (h) and avenge them on their adversaries (i) Their estate is
happy (k) they shall be rewarded here plentifully (l) and in heaven eternally.
(m)

(d. e.) When they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall
speak. for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak,

For it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your Father which speaks in
you, Mat. 10.19.20. and Mark. 13.11. and Lu. 12.11.12.

(f. g.) Their redeemer is strong, the Lord of hosts is his name, he shall
thoroughly plead their cause, Jer. 50.34.

(h) I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee
out of the hand of the terrible, Ier. 15.21. and Psalm. 72.14.

(i) He will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to
his adversaries, Deuteronomy. 32.43.

Shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though
he bear long with them?

I tell you that he will avenge them speedily, Lu. 18.7.8.

(k) Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, Mat. 5.10.

Blessed are you when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from
their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the
son of man's sake, Lu. 6.22.

(l) Jesus said, verily I say unto you, there is no man that has left House,
or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife or children, or lands
for my sake, and the Gospels.

But he shall receive an hundred fold, now in this time, Houses, and brethren
and sisters, and mothers, and children and lands, with persecutions; Mark. 10
29.30. and Mat. 19.29.

(m) Theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat 5.10. and Lu. 6.22.23.

He that Ioseth his life for my sake shall find it, Mat. 10.39. and 16.25. and
Mark. 8.35. and Lu. 9.24.

They shall receive in the world to come eternal life, Mark. 10.29.30. and
Math. 19.29.

Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life, Revel. 2
10.

Secondly, to such as are hated for God and goodness sake.

Such shall have joy (n) are in a blessed state (o) and those that hate them
shall be (ashamed. (p)

(n)(p) Your brethren that hated you, an^ cast you out for my names sake, said,
Le the Lord be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be a
shamed. Isa. 66.5.

(o) Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you for the Son of man's sake. Lu.
6.22.

Thirdly, to such as are cast out of the Congregation for the same cause; See
the foregoing proofs at. (k)(n.)

Fourthly, to such as are reproached, reviled, rayled upon, and evil spoken of
for the same Cause.

Those that use us so shall not hurt us as they would (q), The Lord will
cleanse our innocence (r) and cause reproach to cease (s) and so cause them and
others to see we are wronged (t) their thus abusing us is an assurance that
Gods spirit rests on us, and he is glorified by us (v) Our estate is blessed
here (w) and shall be rewarded in Heaven. (x)

(q) Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue Job. 5.21. and Ps. 3.20.

(r) He shall bring forth thy righteousness, as the light, Psalm. 37.6.

(s) I will no more make you a reproach, Joel 2.19.

(t) I will bear the indignation of the Lord, until he plead my cause: he
will bring me forth to the light; Mica. 7.9. and Eze. 36.15.

(u) If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, for the spirit
of glory, and of God rests upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but
on your part he is glorified, 1 Pet. 4.14.

(w.x.) Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and shall say all manner of
evil against you falsely for my sake,

Great is your reward in Heaven, Mat. 5.11.12. and Lu. 6.22.23.

Fifthly, to such as are tempted to sin, and troubled in mind.

Christ having suffered, and been tempted, (y) is sensible of our sufferings
(z) and able to suco^r us (a. 14.) We shall be supported, obtain m^ray and
find grace therein (b) temptations shall not prevail against us (c) Satan
shall not have his will over us, Christ has prayed for us (d) God will
strengthen us to bear the temptation (e) The Lord Jesus will ease us thereof
(f) God will give us victory over Satan and all temptations (g) so that we
shall be delivered from them (h be they never so great. (^)

(y.z.) We have not an high Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities, but was in all points tempted, like as we are, Heb. 4 15.

( a. 14) In that he himself has suffered. being tempted, he is able to
succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18.

(b) Let us therefore come boldly to the thron of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need He. 14.6.

(c) The gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church, Mat. 16.18.

(d) The Lord said; Satan has desired you, that he may sift you as wheat,

But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, L^. 22.31 32.

(e) God will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able; but will
with the temptation make you able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13.

(f) Ye that labor, and are heavy laden, I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28.

(g) The God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16.20.

R^sist the devil, and he will flee from you, Iam. 4.7.

(h) The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, 2 Pet. 2.9.

God will with temptation make away to escape, 1 Cor. 10.13.

(i) Alas, that day is great, there is none like it, it is even the time of
Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it, Ier. 30.7.

Sixth. To such as are desolate, and forsaken of Friends.

The Lord will have compassion upon us, and remember us with everlasting mercy,
yea when our spirits are afflicted, although he seem to be angry with us and
to have forsaken us (k) he will never forsake us, whosoever do (l) nor forget
(m) nor fail us (n), but will come unto us (o) and dwell (p) and continue with
us always in this condition (q) he despises not (r) but hears our prayers
(s) and will perform his promises to us (t) he will take care for, help and
deliver us when we cry (u) even when our nearest and dearest friends forsake us
(w) and when we are counted as castawayes (x) and all help fayles us (y) and
no man looks after us (z) yet the Lord will restore us to joy, and dignity, be
we never so much hated, contemned, and rejected. (a. 15)

(k) The Lord has called thee as a woman forsaken and a wife of youth when
thou wast refused: for a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great
mercies will I gather thee,

With everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, Isa. 54.6.7, 8.

(l) I will not leave thee, Genesis 28.15. and Heb. 13.5.

I will not forsake my people, 1 Kings, 6.13. and Ps. 94.14. and 2 Samuel 12.22.
Deuteronomy. 31.6.8.

(m) Can a woman forget her sucking child? yea they may forget, yet will I not
forget thee,

Behold I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are
continually before me, Isa. 49 15, 16.

(n) I will not fail thee, Heb. 13.6. and Josh. 1.5. and Deuteronomy. 31.8.

(o) I will come to you, Ioh. 14.18.

(p) I will dwell among the children of Israel, 1 Ki. 6.13.

The Lord forsakes not his Saints, Psalm. 37.28.

(q) Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world, Mat. 28.20.

I am with thee in all places whither thou go, Ger. 28.15.

(r) He will not despise the prayer of the destitute, Psalm. 102.17.

(s. (v.) He shall deliver the needy when he cries; the poor also, and him
that has no helper, psalm. 72.12.

(t) I will not leave thee until I have done that which I have spoken to thee
of, Genesis 28.15.

(w) When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up,
Psalm. 27.10.

(x.y.z.) I will heal thee, says the Lord, because they called thee an
outcast, saying, this is Sion whom no man looks after, Ier. 30.17. ( a. 15.)

Seaventhly, To the Fatherless.

The Lord will be their Father (b) their Savior will not leave them
fatherless (c) he will come to them (d) and show them mercy (e) and hear
their prayers (f) and send them help (g) and relieve their wants (h) and
preserve them alive and prove for them food and raiment (k) and maintain their
cause (l) and do them right against such as wrong them. (m)

(b) God is a Father of the fatherles, Psalm. 68.5.

(c.d.) I will not leave you Orphans, John 14.18.

(c) In thee the fatherless finds mercy, Hose. 14.3.

Thou will cause thine Ear to hear the fatherless, Psalm. 10.17.18.

(g) Thou art the helper of the Fatherless, verse. 14.

(h) The Lord relieveth the Fatheriesse, Psalm. 146.9 (i)

(k.l.m.) He does execute the judgment of the Fatherless, giving him food ^^d
ralment, Deuteronomy. 10.18.

Thou will judge the Fatherless, Psalm. 10.18.

Eighthly to Widows.

The Lord will preserve them (n) and relieve their wants (o) and maintain
their cause (p) and will do them right (q) and bless their estate. (r)

(n) Let thy Widows trust in me, I will preserve them, Jer. 49.11.

(o) The Lord relieveth the Widow, Psalm. 146.9.

(p) A judge of the Widows is God in his holy habitation, Ps. 68.5.

(q) He does execute the judgments of Widow, Deuteronomy. 10.18.

(r) The Lord will establish the border o^ the Widow, Pro. 15.25.

Ninth. To Strangers.

The Lord loves (s) preserves (t) provideth for them (u) and will dee.

(s.v.) The Lord loves the stranger, (...) giving him food, and raiment, Deuteronomy.
10.18.

(t) The Lord preserves the strangers, Psalm. 146.9.

Tenth. To these, or any of these, or any other any way injured by others.

The Lord respects their miseries (w) accepts their enduring grief (x) and
outward wrongs (y) he will hear their prayers against them that wrong them (z)
and maintain (a. 16) and defend thest cause (b) and execute judgment for them
(c) and do them right (d) and preserve them from such, when they sigh unto him
(e) and will deliver them out of their hands, though they be most wicked and
cruel (f) although the oppressed be poor and miserable, and though their
oppressors be t^o strong for them and spoil them, (g) and will avenge those
or them (h) and plain such terribly (i) and will save the oppressed from their
hands, though they watch to wrong them (k) and seek to stay them (l) and have
caught them (m) and would condemn them (n) and had judged them (o) they shall
not be left to their wills that hate them, (p) God will help them (q) and
cause the oppressors, and their terror to cease (r) and will bring them under
us, deal they never so deceitfully, and violently against us (s) All these the
Lord will work for us, against such as do us any kind of injury (t) That
oppress us (u) that vex us (w) That oppress us with Usury (x) that spoil us
(y) That deceive us (z) That do us violence (a. 17) That rob us (b) that wrong
us in justice (c) that tyrannize over us (d) or an^ way trouble us (e) for our
further assurance of all these, The Lord beholds the injuries done unto us (f)
and takes our cause into his own hands (g).

(w) Precious shall their blood be in his sight Ps. 72.14.

(x.y) If a man for conscience toward God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully,

This is acceptable with God, 1. Pe^^ 2. 19.20.

(z) Thou shall neither vex a stranger nor oppress him,

Ye shall not afflict any Widow, or Fatherless Child,

If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely
hear their cry,

If thou lend money unto any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shall not
be unto him as an Usurer,

If thou at all take thy brothers raiment to pledge, thou shall deliver it to
him;

It shall come to pass, when he cries unto me, that I will hear, for I am
gracious, Ex. 22.21.22, 23.25, 26, 27. and Ps. 10.14.18. and 12.5. and 22 24.

( a. 16) The Lord shall thoroughly plead their cause, Ier. 50 34.

(b) Their Redeemer is mighty, he shall plead their cause, Pro. 23.11. and 22,
23.

(c) The Lord executes righteousness, and judgment for all that are
oppressed, Ps. 103.6, 7.8. and 72 4. and 146.7.

(d) See the foregoing proofs, and Ps. 9.8.

(e) For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I
arise says the Lord, I will set him in safety, Thou O Lord shall preserve
them, Psa. 12.5.7.

(f) I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee
out of the hand of the terrible, Ier. 15.21.

(g) Lord, who is like unto thee, who deliverest the poor, from him that is
too strong for him, yea the p^ore and the needy from him that spoileth him?
Psalm. 35.10. (h.i)

(k.l.) The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him,

The Lord will not leave him in his hand, Psalm. 37.32, 33.

(m) I will set him in safety from him that would ensnare him, Psalm 12.5.

(n) He shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from those
that condemn his soul, psalm. 109.31.

(o.p) The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is
judged, psalm. 37.33.

(q.r.) The poor commits himself unto thee, thou art the help of the
fatherless, that the man of the Earth may no more oppress, psalm. 10.14.18.

(s) He shall judge the poor of the people he shall save the children of the
needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.

He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence, psalm. 72.4.14.

(t.u.w.x) See the quotation at the foregoing letter (z) Exedus 22.21.22.23.25,
26, 27.

(y) See the foregoing (g) psalm. 35.10.

( z.a. 17) See the precedent (s) psalm. 72.14.

(b.c) Rob not the poor, neither oppress the afflicted,

For the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoil
them, pro. 22.22.23.

(^) See the foregoing quotation at (f) Jeremy 15.21.

(e) If thou afflict them in any wise, I will surely hear their cry. Ex. 22.23.

(f.g) Thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it with thy hand, psalm.
10.14.

Eleventh. To such as are Banished for the Truth.

The Lord pitties them, there is hope for them, (h) They shall return home
again (i) to their own heritage (k) They shall be blessed here pleatifully,
and enjoy heaven for evermore.

(l) See the fifteenth.

(h.i.) There is hope in thine end, says the Lord, that thy children shall
come again to their own border, Jeremi. 31.17.

(k) It shall come to pass, after I have plucked them out, I will bring again
e^^ man to his heritage, Ier. 12.15.

(l) Every one that has forsaken Houses, brethren or sisters or father or
mother^ wife or children, or Lands for my name sake, shall receive an hundred
fold, an^ shall inherit everlasting Life, Mat. 19.29 and Mar. 10.29.30.

Twelf. To such as forsake whatsoever is nearest and dearest to them for the
same Cause, See the precedent Quotation. (l)

Thirteenth. To such as suffer the loss and spoiling of their goods for the
same cause.

The Lord will defend their cause (m) and restore their losses (n) Those that
sp^yle us shall be sp^yled (o) Those, that rob us shall be robbed (p) The Lord
will sp^yle their Souls (q) and restore rest to us (r) and bless us here (s)
and give us heaven for ever (t) and all that were our Adversaries shall be
captived. (v)

(m) The Lord will plead their Cause Pro. 22.23.

(n) The Lord has torn, and he will heal us, and he has smitten, and he
will bind us up, Hose. 6.1.

(o.p) They that spoil thee, shall be a spoil, and all that prey upon thee,
will I give for a prey, Ier. 30.16.

(q) The Lord shall spoil the soul of those that spoil them, Pro. 22.23.

(r) Jacob shall return, and be in rest, Jeremy 30.10.

(s) See the precedent. (l)

(t) Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing that you have in
Heaven a better, and an enduring substance, Heb. 10.34.

(v) All thy adversaries every one of them shall go into captivity, Ier. 30.16.

Fourteen: To such as are wounded for the same Cause.

The Lord will heal us. (w)

(w) I wound, and I heal, Deuteronomy. 32.29. Hose. 6.1.

I am the Lord that heals thee, Ex. 15.26. and Job. 5.18.

Fifteen, To Captives.

The Lord will not cast such off (x) nor abhor (y) nor destroy them (z) nor
root them out (a. 18.) but will plant and build them again (b) and not break
covenant with them, nor despise them (c) but will have compassion upon them (d)
and remember his Covenant to them (e) and be a Sanctuary for them (f) yea
though they were Captives a far off, and among the heathen (g); God will give
them favor in the sight of their captivers (h) that they shall use them well
(i) it shall go well with them (k) The Lord will regard them to do them good
(l) he will hear their mourning (m) and be found of them (n) and will reward
their sufferings (o) and deliver them (p) and will bring them back to their own
Country (q) and heritage (r) not forgetting one of them (s) though never so
much scattered (t) Our captived children shall be delivered (u) when they and
we are in greatest extremity (w) He will settle us in our former estate, (x)
and will preserve us safe (y) and give us rest (z) and make us prosper (a. 19)
(...) will contend with them; that contend with (...) (b) None shall makeus
afraid (c) All these things will he Lord do for us, that his Name may begl^
(...) among his and (...) enemies. (d)

(x.y) When they be in the Land of their enemies, I will not cast them away,
neither will I abhor them, Levit. 26.44.

( z.a. 18. b) I will bring them again to this Land and I will build them, and
not pull them down, and I will plant them, and not pluck them up. Ier. 24.6.

(c) Neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break my
covenant with them, Levit. 26.44.

The Lord despises not his prisoners, Psalm. 69.33.

(d) I will cause their captivity to return, and have mercy upon them, Jeremy
33.26.

(e) I will for their sakes remember the Covenant of their Ancestors, Levit.
26.45.

(f.g) Thus says the Lord God, although I have cast them far off among the
heathen, and although I have scattered them among the countries, yet will I be
to them as a little Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 11.16.

(h) He made them to be pitied of all them that carried them captives, Psalm.
106.46.

(i.k) The Lord said Verily it shall be well with thy remnant, verily I will
cause the enemy to entreat thee well in the time of affliction, Ier. 15.11.

(l) I will set mine eyes upon them for good, Ier. 24.6.

(m) The Lord did hear the groaning of the prisoner, Ps. 102.20.

(n) I will be found of you, says the Lord, Ier. 29.14.

(o) Thy work shall be rewarded, Jeremy 31.16.

(p) Thou shall go even to Babylon: there shall thou be delivered, Mics. 4.^.

He brings out those, which are bound with chains, Psalm. 6.8.6.

The Lord loses the prisoners, Psalm. 146.7.

I will cause their captivity to return, Ier. 33.26.

(q.r.s.) I will bring again every man to his hentage, and every man to his
Land, Ier. 12.15. and 31.17. and 24.6.

I will bring you again into the place, whence I caused you to be carried away
captive, Ier. 29.14.

I will assemble you out of the courtries, where you have bin s^^ttered, and I
wi^^ gi^e you the Land of Isra^l, Ezekiel. 11.17. and (...) 30.10. and 46.27.

(t) See the precedent Quotations, and Ezekiel. 20.41.

(u) I will save thy seed from the Land of their captivity, Jeremy 30.10 and
46.27.

(w) The Lord will loose those that are appointed to death, Psalm. 102.20.

(k) I will bring them again to this Land, and I will build them, and plant
them, Jer. 24.6.

(y) I will cause them to walk in a strait way, wherein they shall not stumble,
Jer. 31.9.

(z) a. 19) They shall return, and be in rest and be quiet, Jer. 30.10.

(b) I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, Isa. 49.25.

(c) None shall make them afraid, Jeremy 46.27.

(d) I will be sanctified in you before the heathen, and ye shall know that I
am the Lord, when I have wrought with you for my Names sake, Ezekiel. 20.41.44.

Sixteen. To such as are Sick.

That the Lord will strengthen (e) and case us (f) and take away all manner of
sickness (g) and Diseases (h). See before the fourteenth.

(e.f.) The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, thou will make
all his bed in his sickness, psalm. 41.3.

(g) I will take sickness away from the midst of thee, Ex. 23, 25.

(h) The Lord will take away from thee all sickness, and will put none of the
evil Diseases of Egypt upon thee: Deuteronomy. 7.15.

Seventeene. To such as suffer Hunger, and Thirst.

The Lord will not forsake such (i) but will hear (k) and deliver them (l)
when it is greatest (m) so that there seems no relief (n) The Lord will give
food (o) to fullness (p) yea in abundance (q) of the best things (r) in due
season(s) assuredly (t). The Lord will provide such a dwelling place (u) and
settle them (w) They shall sow and plant (x) and be satisfied (y) with
fruitful increase (z) rea rather then fail God will work wonders for such. (a
20)

(i) When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue
fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not
forsake them, Isa. 41.17.

(k.l.m.) Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them,

Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble and he delivered them out of
their distresses, psalm. 107.5.6.

(n) See the precedent Quotation, at (i).

(o) The Lord gives food to the hungry. Psalm. 146.7.

Verily thou shall be fed, psalm. 37.3.

(p) The first borne of the poor shall feed, Isa. 14.30. and Deuteronomy. 10.18.

(q) Thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good, psalm. 104.28.

(r) He should have fed them, with the finest of the wheat, psalm. 81.16.

(s) Thou give meat in due season, Psalm. 104.27.

(t) In truth thou shall be fed, psalm. 37.3.

(u.w.x.) He makes the hungry todwel; that they may prepare a City for
habitation,

And sow the fields and plant vineyards Psalm. 107.36.37.

(y) I will satisfy her poor with bread, Psalm. 123.15.

(z) He makes them sow the fields, which may yield fruits of increase, Psalm
107.37.

( a. 20) When the poor seek water, and there is none, I will open rivers in
high places, and fountains in the midst of the Valleys, I will make the
Wilderness a poole of water, and the dry land, springs of water. Isa. 41.17.18.

Eighteen. To such as are naked.

That the Lord will cloth them (b). (b) If God so cloth the grass of the
field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much
more cloth you; O ye of little faith? Mat. 6, 30. and Lu. 12.28.

Nineteen. To such as are in any kind of outward want.

The Lord forgets not their complaint (c) nor their poor estate (d) He will
not forsak (e) nor despise (f) nor hide his face from us (g) nothing good for
us shall be wanting (h) Our hope shall not perish for ever (i) The Lord will
show us mercy (k) esteems our sufferings dearly (l) will preserve our Souls
(m) and be our hopein adversity (n) and our strength (o) even when we are in
distress (p) He will prepare our hearts to seek him (q) will up at our sighs
(r) hear our desires (s) and prayers (t) He will be our refuge (u) our portion
(w) God will provide (x) in greatest extremity, apparently (y) and will take
care for us (z) and sustain us (a. 21) and nourish us as a Father (b) He is
our helper, when we are poor, and in Heavines (c) He will deliver us out of
all our trouble (d) though never so great (e) when we have no helper (f) He
will help us in due time, (g) and raise us from a poor to a better estate (h)
yea to dignity and authority (i) and give us power to get wealth (k) and make
us rich (l) and increase our estate (m) though our beginning be small (n) yea
though our Condition be needy, mean beggarly, and most contemptible, yea from
the dust and dunghill (o) The Lord will save the poor (p) and the children of
the needy (q) He chooses such to be rich in Faith (r) and heirs of heaven. (s)

(c.d) He forgets not the cry of the afflicted.

The expectation of the poor, shall not perish for ever, psalm. 9.12.18.

(e) The poor, (...) the God of Israel will not forsake, Isa. 41.17. and Heb.
13, 6.

(f.g) He has not despised the afflicted neither has he hid his face from
him. Psalm. 22.24.

(h) There is no want to them that fear Him,

They that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing, Psalm. 34.9.10. and
23.1. and 84.11.

(i) Thine expectation shall not be cut off. Pro. 23.18.

The poor has hope, Job. 5.16.

(k.l.m) He shall spare the poor, and shalsave the Souls of the needy,

Precious shall their blood be in his sight, Psalm. 72.13, 14. and 116.15.

(n) Thou art my hope in the day of evil, Ier. 17.17.

(o p.) Thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his
distress, Isa, 25.4.

(q) Thou will prepare their heart, Psalm. 10.17.

(r) For the sighing of the needy, now will I arise says the Lord, Psalm. 12.5.

(s) Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble, psalm. 10.17.

(t) This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, psalm. 34. and 6.22.24. and
72. and 12.69.29.33.

(u) The Lord will be a refuge for the oppressed. psalm. 9.9.

(w) The Lord is the Portion of mine inheritance, psalm. 16.5.

(x) And Abraham said, My son, God will provide, Genesis 21.8.

Consider the Ravens, for they neither sow, nor reap, and God feeds them,
how much more are ye better then the fowls, Lu. 12.24.

Seek ye the Kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added unto you.
ver. 31.

(y) In the mount of the Lord, it shall be seen, Genesis 22.14.

(z) Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you, 1 pet. 5.7.

( a. 21) Cost thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall su^^aine thee psalm. 55.22.

(b) As a man feeds his son, so the Lord thy God feeds thee, Deuteronomy. 8.5.

(^) I am poor and sorrowful, let thy salvation.

(s) God set me upon high psalm. 69.29.

Behold God is mine helper, psalm. 54.4.

I am poor and needy. Thou O God art my helper and deliverer, psalm. 70.5. Heb.
13.6.

(d) This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his
troubles, psalm. 34.6.17.

The just shall come out of trouble, pr^. 12.13.

(e) Thou which have showed me great and sore troubles, shall bring me up
again from the depths of the earth, Psalm. 71.20.

(f) He shall deliver the poor and him that has no helper. psalm. 72.12.

(g) The Lord will be a refuge in times of trouble, psalm. 9.9.

(h) The Lord raises the poor out of the dust.

(i) And lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among Princes,
and to make them inherit the throne of glory, 1. Sam. 27.8.

(k) The Lord it is that gives the power to get wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18.

(l.m.n) Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end shall greatly
increase, Job. 8.7.

(o) He raises the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the
dunghill, Psalm. 113.7.

(p) The afflicted people thou will save, 2 Samuel 22.28. and psalm. 18.27.

(q) He shall save the children of the needy, psalm. 72.4.

(r.s) Has not God chosen the poor of this world rich in Faith, and heirs of
the Kingdom? Iam. 2.5.

Thus far of the second head of the fourth maine part.

The third head, contains such Promises, as concern Perils in General, and
diverse Perils in particular.

First, Concerning Perils in General.

THat the Lord will preserve us from them (t) and deliver us out of them (u)
yea out of every mischief (w) though they be many (x) and great (y) from and
out of all (z) every where (a. 22) in due time (b) speedily (c) carefully (d)
constantly (e) continually (f) that the mischief shall not touch us (g) nor
come nigh us (h) For more assurance of all these the Lord is and will be our
Buckler (^) Savior (k) Salvation (l) Refuge (m) Rock (n) Fortress (o) Shield
(p) Tower (q) defense (r) Deliverer (s) Help (t) Strength (u) Hope (w) He is
and will be with us (x) charges his Angels to secure us (y) assures us we
shall not be confounded in Evil times (z) nor left to the will of our Enemies
[a. 23]

(t) The Lord shall keep you from evil. 2 Thss. 3.3. and 1 Samuel 2.9.

In the time of trouble, he shall hide me in his pavilion, Psalm. 27.5. and 32.7.
and 91.4.

The Lord preserves the faithful, Psalm. 31.23. and 97.10 and 116.6. and
145.20.

Be not affrayd of sudden fear,

For the Lord shall keep thy foot from being taken, pro. 3.25.26.

And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God we have waited for him,
and he will save us, Isa. 25.9.

(u) The Lord is my deliver, 2 Samuel 22.2. My heart trusted in him, and I am
helped. He is the saving strength of his anointed, psalm. 28.7.

The Lord will deliver him in time of trouble,

Thou will not deliver him unto the will of his enemies, Psalm. 41.1.2. and 91.15.

God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave, psalm. 49.15.

(n) Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
them al, psalm. 34.19.

(x) He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil
touch thee, Job. 5.19.

(y.z) See the precedent quotation at. (w)

( a. 22) Thy life will I give unto thee for a prey, in all places whither thou
go, Jer. 45.5.

(b) The Lord is a refuge in times of trouble, Psalm. 9.9.

(c) God shall help her, right early, psalm. 46.5.

(d.e.) I the Lord do keep it: I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it,
I will keep it night and day, Isa. 27.3.

(f) The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in; even for
evermore, psalm. 121.8. and 125.1.2.

(g) Troubles shall not touch thee, Job. 5.19.

(h) A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but
it shall not come nigh thee, psalm. 91.7.

(i) I am thy buckler, Genesis 15.1.

(k) Thou art the Savior of them, that put their trust in thee, psalm. 17.7.

(l) He is become my salvation, Ex. 15.2.

(m) The eternal God is thy refuge, Deuteronomy. 33.27.

(n.o) And he said. The Lord is my Rock, and my fortress, 2 Samuel 22.2.

(p) He is my shield, psalm. 144.2.

(q.s) My high Tower, and my deliverer, ibid. and 2 Samuel 22.31.

(r) He is my defense, psalm. 62.2.

(t) He is our helper, psalm. 33.20.

(u) Thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in
distress Isa. 25.4.

(w) Thou art my hope O Lord God, psalm. 71.5.

(^) The Lord of hosts is with us. Ps. 46.11.

(y) He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways.
psalm. 91.11.

(z) They shall not be ashamed in the evil time, psalm. 37.19.

( a. 23.) Thou (Lord) wilt not deliver him unto the will of his Enemies, psalm.
41.2.

There are many the like frequent and obvious.

Second: concerning diverse particular Perils, as

1. Of Fire.

T The Lord will shelter us there from (b), it shall not hurt us, though we
were in the midst thereof. (c)

(b) There shall be a tabernacle for a shadow from the heat, Isa. 4.6.

(c) When thou walk through the Fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall
the flame kindle upon thee, Isa. 43.2.

2. Of Water.

The Lord will preserve us therefrom (d) will be with us in the midst thereof,
that we be not hurt thereby (^

(d) Surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh unto him,
psalm. 32.6.

(e) When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the
Rivers, they shall not overflow thee, Isa. 43.2.

3. Of storms at Sea.

The Lord will be a refuge there from and therein (f) and give deliverance
there out (g) when Fear, Sorrow, Extremity be at the highest (h) and when
every one is at his wits end, and knows no more what to do (i) God makes the
storm which he raised, a calm, and the raging waves still (k) and turns our
grief unto gladness, by making all quiet, though the waves went never so high
and hollow (l) and brings us to our desired haven (m), The Lord Jesus by one
word causes the violentest tempest to be a great calm (n) though the Ship be
covered with waves (o), and filled with water (p) and ready to sink (q) and
though the Lord seem to neglect us (r) and we be ready to perish (s) for the
winds and Seas obey his voice (t) Read at large that great deliverance of Paul,
and those with him at Sea, from that most terrible tempest (...) all was most
desperate (u), and look to the Lord in like distress (w) for he rules the
raging of the Sea, when the waves thereof arise, he stilleth them. (x)

(f) Thou have bin a refuge from the storm Isa. 25.4.

(g.h.i.k.l.m.) He commands and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up
the waves,

They mount up to the Heaven: they go down again to the depths; their soul is
melted because of trouble,

They reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man and are at their wits
end. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them out of
their distresses,

He makes the storm a calm; so that the waves thereof are still;

Then are they glad because they be quiet: so he brings them unto their
desired haven, Psalm. 107.25.26.27.28, 29, 30.

(o.p.q.r.s.^) There arose a great tempest in the Sea, insomuch that the ship
was covered with waves, (and was now full) but he was asleep,

And his Disciples came unto him, and awoke him saying, Lord save us, we perish
(or, Master, carest thou not, that we perish,)

And he says unto them; why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he
arose, and rebuked the winds and the Sea, and there was a great calm,

But the men marveiled saying, What manner of man is this, that even the winds
and the Sea obey him? Mat. 8.24, 25, 26, 27. Compared with M^^k. 4.37, 38 39,
40.41.

(u) See Acts 27.14. To the end of the Char.

(w) Thou which ^ast showed me great and sore troubles, shall bring me up
again, from the depths of the earth, psalm. 17.20.

(x) The words of, Ps. 89.9.

4. Of Famine.

The Lord will not suffer us to famish but preserve us in time of Famine (y) He
will leave a little remnant from the famine (z) and will now (...) us (a. 24.)
That in the days of famine we shall have enough (b) in famine he will deliver
us from death (c) and greatest extremity (^) He will restore us plenty (^) and
lay no more famine upon us (f) for all these the Lords Eye on us. (g)

(y) The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish, pro. 10.3.

The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him; To deliver their soul from
death, and to keep them alive in famine, psalm. 33.18.19.

(z) I will leave a few of them from the famine, Ezekiel. 12.16.

( a. 24) He shall sustain thee, Psalm. 55.22.

(b) In the days of famine they shall be satisfied, psalm. 37.19.

(c) In famine he shall redoeme thee from death. Job. 5.20.

(d. g) See the Quotation at the foregoing, (y).

(^. f.) I will call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine
upon you, Ez. 36.29.

(g) The eye of the Lord, is upon them that fear him, to keep them alive in
famine, Psalm. 33.18 19.

5. Of Pestilence.

The LORD will leave a few there from (h) and deliver us thereout, ^e it never
so noy^ me, (i) and destroying (k) cutting of day and night (l) though a very
f^u escape (m) we shall no be afraid thereof, be it never so terrible (n) The
^ame shall not come nigh us, (o) nor our dwellings (p) though never so many
perish round about (...) (q)

(h) I will leave a few of them from the pestilence, Ez. 12.16.

(i.k.) Surely he shall deliver thee from the noisome pestilence.

Thou shall not be aff^ayd for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that
flies by day, Psalm 91.3.5.

(m) See the precedent. (^)

(n.o.p.q) Thou shall not be affrayd, for the pestilence, that walks in
darkeness^^ nor for the destruction, that wastes (...) noone day,

A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it
shall not come nigh thee. psalm. 91.6.7.

6. Of Enchantment.

The same shall not hurt us. (^)

(^) There is no enchantment against Jacob Numb. 23.23.

Promises to comfort settle,

The LORD will fight for us (s), W^^shall not go with haste and disorder
against our Enemies (i) nor fly from them (u), The LORD goes with us (w) His
presence is more for us, then al^ that can be against us (x) God can as easily
help with none, as with the greatest power (y) He will preserve us, from our
Enemies (z) is most perilous times (a. 25.) when we call upon him (b) and will
deliver us out of their hands (^) though they tompasse us (d) with multitudes
(e), and thrust sore at us (f) We shall not be hurt by the sword (g) no not in
the day of Batteh (h). As he has preserved us (i) he will preserve us (k) The
greatest must have safety from him (l), when nothing clse can avayle, (m) We
shall ^e secured from our foes, be they never so (...) (n) ^^gilant (o), and
industrious (p) wick (...) (q) cruel; Though never so many fall about us (i)
though never so few escape (s) thoug^ (...) f^are them (t) We shall not fall by
the sw^r^ (u) The l^ast harm shall not befall us (w) nor com^nigh us (x) None
shall touch us to hurt u^ (y) though no other means can secure us (z) The LORD
will be an Enemy to our Enemi^ (^.26) He will afflict them that afflict us (b)
he will frustrate their subtle enterprises (c) (...) violent attempts against
us (d) None shall stan^ against us (e) nor presp^r (f) Their secr^^ Counsels
shall be confound (g) they shall fear us (h) and flee from us (i) We shall
chase then (^) One shall chase many of them (l) many ways with great disorder
to them (m) They shall fall before us (n) and be overthrown (o) We shall tread
them under foot (p) God shall trea them down for us, (q) He will cast them o^^
(r) and destroy them all (s) and root them o^ (t) and give them before us (u)
and destroy th^^ with a mighty destruction (w) even their nam^ from under
Heaven (x) They shall fall by our sword (y) they shall be cast down, and
destroyed su^denly (z) till they be brought to naught (a. 27) Without mercy (b)
Therefore their hearts shall be hardened to come against us (c), The LORD will
subdue them unto us (d) and cloth them with shame (e) and give us power to be
avenged ^n them (f) and lift up our heads above them (g) We shall see their
fall (h) and have our desire ^p^n them (i) and rejoice in their ruin (k) and
laugh them to scorn (l) yet fear, considering Gods judgments upon them (m):
for all these the LORD who is a man of War (n) walks in the m^^st of our Camp
(o) and is our chief Captain^. (p)

(s) The Lord shall sight for you. Ex. 14.14. and Deuteronomy. 1. 29.30 and 3.22. and
20.3, 4. and 2 Chror. 32.8. and Ps. 118.6, 7.

(t.u.) Ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight: Isa. 52.12.

(w) The Lord your God is he that goes with you to fight for you, Deuteronomy 20.4.

(x) Fear not, for they that be with us, are more, then they that be with
them 2 Ki. 6.16.

(y) And Asa. cried unto the Lord, and said; Lord, it is nothing with thee to
help, whether with many, or with them that have no power, 2 Chronicles. 14.11.

(z) I will call upon the Lord who is worthy to be praised, so shall I be saved
from mine enemies, Ps. 18.3.

( a. 2^) They shall not be ashamed in the evil time, Psalm. 37.19.

(b) I will call on the Lord, who is worthy to be praised; so shall I be saved
from mine enemies, 2 Samuel 22.4.

(c) He shall deliver you out of the hand of all your enemies, 2 Ki. 17.39. and
Exodus 14.13. and 1 Samuel 7.3. and 2 Samuel 22.2. and Jer. 1.8.

(d.e.f) They compassed me about, all Nations compassed me about, but in the
Name of the Lord I will destroy them, Thou have thrust sore at me, that I might
fall, but the Lord helped me, Psalm. 118.10.13.

(g) He delivers David his servant from the hurtful sword, Psalm. 144.10.

(h) Thou have covered my head in the day or battle, Ps. 40.7. and 55.18.

(i.k.) David said, The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, he
will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistim, 1 Samuel 17.37.

(l) See the preceding g.

(m) This is the Word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by Army, nor by
power, but by my Spirit, Zech. 4.6. and Ps. 33.16, 17.

(n) I will not be affrayd of ten thousands of people, that beset me round,

Salvation belongs unto the Lord, Psalm. 3.6.8. and 27.1, 2, 3. and 2 Chrona
20.15.

(o.p.q) The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him,

But (...) sa^^^tion of the righteous is of the (...) shall deli^e^ them from
the wicked, Psalm. 37.32.39, 40. and Jer. 15.21.

(r) See, Psalm. 91.7.

(s) I will leave a few of them from the sword, Ez. 12.16.

(t.u) Thou shall not be given into the hands of the men of whom thou art
affrayd. For I will surely deliver thee, and thou shall not fall by the Sword,
Jer. 39.17, 18.

(w) There shall not an hair fall from the head of any of you, Acts 27.34. and
Mat. 10.30.

(x) See 91.7.

(y) I am with thee, no man shall set on thee to hurt thee Act. 18.10.

(z) An horse is a vain thing for safety, Behold the eye of the Lord is upon
them that fear him, to deliver their soul from death, Ps. 33 17, 18 19.

( a. 26. b) I will be an enemy unto thy enemies, and I will afflict them that
afflict thee, Ex. 23.22.

(c.d) The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be affrayd?

When the wicked even mine enemies came upon me to ea^e up my flesh, they
stumbled, and fell, Psalm 27.1.2.

(e) There shall not a man of them stand before thee, Josh. 10.8. and Deuteronomy.
11.25.

(f) Fight you not against the Lord God, for you shall not prosper, 2 Chronicles.
13.12.

(g) Be not affrayd, fight for your brethren, And when our enemies heard, that
it was known unto us, and God had brought their counsel to naught, that we
returned every one to his work, Nehemiah, 4.14 15.

(h.i) I will send my fear before thee, and I will make al thine enemies turn
their backs unto thee, Exodus 23.27. Deuteronomy. 11.25.

(k. l. m. n.) Ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you, by
the Sword,

Five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand
to flight, Levit. 26.7.8. Josh, 23.10. Deuteronomy. 32, 3^. and Deuteronomy. 28.7.

(^) My persecutors shall be ashamed, the^ everlasting confusion shall never be
forgotten, Ier. 2.80.

(^^) Through God w^ shall do (...) For he it is that shall tread down our
enemies, Ps. 60.12. and Mal. 4.2.

(r.s) I will destroy all the people, to whom thou shall come,

And I will send hornets, that shall drive out the Canaanite before thee, Ex.
23.27, 28. and 33.2.

(t.u.w.x) The Lord thy God, will put out these Nations before thee,

I shall deliver them unto thee, and shall destroy them with a mighty
destruction, Thou shall destroy their name from under heaven, Deuteronomy. 7.22, 23,
24.

(y) See, Levit. 26.7.

(z) He shall bring them down before thy face, so that, thou shall destroy them
quickly Deuteronomy. 9.3.

( a. 27) See the foregoing, t.

(b.c) It was of the Lord, to harden their hearts that they should come against
Israel in Battle, that he might destroy them utterly, that they might have no
f^vour. Josh. 11.20.

(d.f) It is God that avengeth me, and brings down the people under me, 2 Samuel 22 48. Psalm. 18.27.

(e) His enemies will I cloth with shame, Psalm. 132 18.

(g) Now shall my head be lifted up above mine enemies round about me, Psalm.
27.6.

(h) The righteous shall see their fall, Pro. 29.16.

(i) The Lord takes my part, with them that help me, therefore shall I see my
desire upon them that hate me, Psalm. 118 7. and 59.10. and 91.8.

(k.l) The righteous see it, and are glad, and the innocent laugh them to
scorn, Job. 22.19. and Ps. 58.10.

(m) The Righteous, shall see and fear, Psalm. 52.6.

(n) The Lord is a man of War, Ex. 15.3.

(o) The Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy Camp, to deliver thee, and
to give up thine enemies before thee, Deuteronomy. 23.14.

(p) God himself is with us for our Captain, 2 Chronicles. 13.12.

Joshua lift up his eyes, and behold there stood a man over against him, with
his sword drawn in his hand,

And he said, as Captain of the host of the Lord, am I now come, Josh. 5.13, 14.

Thus far, the third chief head, of the fourth maine part.

The fourth chief head contains such Promises, and comfortable places, as
concern Death.

THE LORD has appointed Death to all Men (q) He sends it (r) and has set
the time (s) The place (^) The manner thereof in general (u) in particular, as
if we die by the Sword (v) by famine, (x) by pestilence (y) or in Captivity (z)
None can deliver, either himself ( a. 28) or any other from Death (b). The Lord
will be with us when we are dying (c) to direct (d) to comfort us (e) to
deliver us from the fear thereof, for which Christ dyed, and overcame the
Devil (f) He will deliver us from Death, that it shall not hurt us (g), nor
have power, or victory over us (h) Our Death, when, where or howsoever it be,
is highly esteemed of God (i) We need fear none evil in the midst thereof (k)
By death, we are freed from all sin (l) and misery (m.) Our Souls are
presently carried into heaven (n) by the holy Angels, to that end appointed by
the Lord (o) Our bodies shall rest in their graves, as in a sweet bed, in peace
(p) Our rotting flesh shall rest in hope (q) Our stinking carcasses shall have
an happy Resurrection, (r) and these our vile bodies shall be changed into
incorruptible (s) immortal (t) spiritual (u) and most glorious bodies, like
to the glorified body of Christ Jesus (w) and this by his all powerful working
(x). We shall be most graciously acquitted, and received by our blessed
Savior, at that great day of judgment (y), and then in Soul and body enjoy
all perfect holiness, and happiness in heaven for evermore (z) See the Promises
of everlasting life; So that death by Christ is to us advantage, (a. 29.) and
the passage to life eternal (b) By death we are the Lords (c) to live for ever
with him (d) The Righteous has hope in his death (e) The day thereof is
better, then the day, that one is born. (i)

(q) It is appointed unto all Men once to die, Heb. 9.17. and Psalm. 49.19. and,
Eccl. 3.2.

(r) The Lord kills; he brings down to the Grave, 1 Samuel 2.6. and Deu.
32.39.

(s) Job. 28.3.

(^) There ye shall die, Ier. 42.16.

He shall die in the place, whither they have led him captive, Ier. 22.12. Ez.
17.16. Isa. 22.18.

(u) Unto God the Lord, belong the issues of death, Psalm. 68.20.

(w.x.y.z.) Thus says the Lord, such as are for the Sword, to the Sword, and
such as are for the famine to the famine; and such as are for the captivity to
the captivity, Jer. 15.2.

Ye shall die by the Sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, Ier 42.22.
and 21.9. and 38 2. and 42.17. and Ez. 7.15 Amos 7.11. and Ez. 5.12. and 6.12.
and 17.16.

( a. 28) What man is he that shall deliver his Soul from the hand of the
Grave? Psalm. 89.48.

(b) None can by any means redeem his brother that he should not see
corruption, Ps. 49.7.9.

(c) Though I walk through the Valleys of the Shadow of Death; thou art with
me, Psa. 23.4.

(d) He will be our guide even unto Death Psalm. 48 14.

(^) Thy rod, and staff, they comfort me, Ps. 23 4.

(f) He himself took part of the same, that through Death, he might destroy
him that had the power of Death, that is the Devil,

And deliver them, who through fear of Death were all their life time, subject
to bondage, Heb. 2.14, 15.

(g) I will ransom them from the power of the Grave, I will redeem them from
death Hos. 13.14.

(b) See the preceding g and, 1 Cor. 15.54.

(i) Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the Death of his Saints, Psalm.
116.15. and 72.14.

(k) In the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil. psalm. 23 4.

(l) He that is dead, is freed from sin, Rom 6.7.

(m) Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord, they rest from their labors,
Re. 14.13. and Isa. 57.2.

There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest,

They hear not the voice of the oppressor,

The servant is free from his Master, Job. 3.17.18, 19.

(n) And Jesus said unto him, to day thou shall be with me in Paradise, Luke,
23.43.

(o) Are they not ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall
be heirs of salvation? Heb. 1.14.

(^) He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, Isa. 57.2.

(q) My flesh shall rest in hope, Psalm. 16.9.

(r) Though after my skin* worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God, Job. 19.26.

Many of them, that sleep in the dust shall awake, some to everlasting life,
and some to everlasting shame and contempt, Dan. 12.2.

This is the Fathers will, that al which he has given me, I should raise up
again at the last day. John. 6.39.40. and Matthew. 24.30.

There shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust, Acts 24
15. and 1 Thessalonians. 4 15. To the end. 1 Cor. 15. Cap.

(s.^.u) The dead shall be raised incorruptible,

For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality,

It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. 1 Cor. 15.44.52.53.

(w) The Lord Jesus shall change our vile body, that it may be f^shioned like
unto his Glorious Body, Phil. 3.20.21.

(x) According to the working, whereby he is able to subdue al things to
himself, ibid.

(y) Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, come ye blessed of my
Father, Inherit the kingdom prepared for you. Matthew. 25.34 and 23. Ez. 18.22. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.10.

(z) See the forequoted, Rev. 14.13. at. m.

( a. 29) To me to die is gain, Phil. 1.21.

(b) He that believes on him that sent me, is passed from Death to Life, J^h.
5 24.

(c) Whether we live or die, we are the Lords, Romans 14 8.

(l) We which are alive, shall be caught up in the Clouds, to meat the Lord in
the Air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.

(e) The words of Pr^^. 14.32.

(f) Eccl. 7.3.

Thus far of the fourth and last head, of the fourth maine part.

The fifth maine part, assures us many outward blessings, as the Lord sees best
for us.
First, Such as concern our selves, as

1. THat the Lord will bless us (g) with all manner of blessings (h) in all
that we set our hand unto (i) he will command his blessing to be upon us (k)
and nothing shall hinder or alter it (l) His blessing shall appear in keeping
Evils from us (m) in removing things hurtful (n) in that no good things shall
be wanting (^), Al^ things shall be ministered (^) and all our necessities
supplied (q) The Lord will do us good (^) and all shall go well, go all how
it will (s), yea, rather then sail he will work wonders for us. (f)

(g) I will bless thee, Genesis 26.3 and Deuteronomy. 7.12, 13. and 30.16. Psalm. 115.12,
13 Pr^. 10.6.

(h) All these blessings shall come on thee, and shall overtake thee, if thou
shall hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God Deuteronomy. 28.2.

(i) The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in all that thou shall set
thine hand unto, Deuteronomy. 28.8. Genesis 49.29.

(k) See the preceding, i.

(l) He has blessed, and I cannot reverse it Number. 23.20.

(m) There shall no evil befall thee, Psalm. 91.10.

(n) Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, Psalm. 50.15.

(o) There is no want to them that fear him, Psalm. 34.9

(p) All these things shall be added unto you, Mat. 6.33.

(q) God shall supply all your need, Phil. 4.19.

(r) The Lord will rejoice over thee for good, Deuteronomy. 30.9. Psalm. 85.12. Job.
22.21. I^e. 1.19.

(s) All things work together for good, to them that love God, R^m 8.28. Deuteronomy.
4.40. and 6.3.24. and 28.8. Eccl. 8.12 Isa. 3.10.

(^) I will open you the windows of heaven, and power you out a blessing. Mal.
3.10. Psalm. 46.1.2. Mica. 7 8.

Alas, for that day is great, so that none is like it, it is even the time of
Jacobs trouble but he shall be saved out of it* J^r. 30.7.

2. That the Lord will dwell with us (^) and make us dwell safely (^),
therefore he will cover us (x) all the day, (y) when we walk (z) when we rest
(^. 30) No evil Creatures shall harmeus (b) we shall be quiet from f^are of
evil (c) and sleep in peace and safety (d); for, for all these the Lord
watches over us carefully and continually. (^)

(v) I will dwell amongst the children of Israel, Ex 29.45. Levit. 26 11, 12. 2
Cor. 6 16. 1 Ki. 6.13.

(w) Whosoever hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, Pro. 1.33. Levit. 25.18 19.
and 26.5.6. Deuteronomy. 33.12.27. Micha 4.3. Zech. 3.10.

(x.y) The Lord shall cover him all the day long Deuteronomy. 33.12.

(z) Thou shall walk in thy way safely Pro. 3.23.

( a. 30) Thou shall lie down, and none shall make thee affrayd. Job. 11.19.

(b) I will rid evil beasts out of the Land, Le. 26.6.

(c) Pro. 1 33.

(d) Levit. 26.5, 6.

(e) A land which the Lord thy God cares for: the eyes of the Lord thy God are
always upon it from the beginning of the year, even unto the end, Deuteronomy. 11.12.

3. That the Lord will give us outward peace; he will ordain it for us (f) and
send it (g) and settle it among us (h), We shall enjoy the fruit of our labors
which War had destroyed (i) The enemy shall no more destroy the same (k) The
Sword shall no more go through the Land (l) Violence shall no more be heard in
the Land (m) nor desolation, nor destruction any more seen (n) The Lord will
cause our enemies to haste from (...), all w^apons of War shall be turned into
instruments of peace (p) and war shall be quite out fuse. (q)

(f) Lord thou will ordain peace for us. Isa. 26.12.

(g) The Lord will bless his people with peace, psa. 29.11.

(h) He sets peace in thy borders, Psalm. 147.14.

(^.k) I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies,

But they that have gathered it, shall eat it, and praise the Lord, Isa. 62.8.9.

(l) Neither shall the Sword go through you^ and. Lev. 26.6. Mic. 4.3.

(m. n) Isa. 60.18.

(p. q) They shall beat their Swords into plow-shares, and their Spears into
pruning hooks; Nation shall not lift up a Sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn War any more, Mic. 4.3.

4. That the Lord will give us a settled outward condition; For he will appoint
a place for us (r) even of our own (s) and settle us therein (t) in peace (u)
and safety (w), without inward vexation or outward trouble (x) or being any
more removed (y) though our estate be most miserable and unsettled (z).

(r.s) I will appoint a place for my people, and will plant them, that they may
dwell in a place of their own, and move no more, neither shall the children of
wickedness afflict them any more, a Sam. 7.10.

(t) They that wait upon the Lord, shall inherit the land, Psalm. 37 9.

(v.w) My people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings,
and in quiet resting places, Isa. 32.18.

(x) See the foregoing, (r, s)

(y) Neither will I any more remove the foot of Israel from out of the land, 2 Chronicles. 33.8.

(z) The redeemed of the Lord, whom he gathered out of the lands from the East
and from the West, from the North, and from the South,

They wandered in the wilderness, in a solitary way, they found no City to dwell
in.

Hungry, and thirsty, their soul fainted in them,

Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of
their distresses,

And he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a City of
habitation, Psalm. 107.23. to 7.

5 That the Lord will give us plenty (a. 31) of the best things (b), without
scarcity (c) or lack of any thing (d) all this in safety (e) he will giv^ us
power to get substance (f) that it shall be mavlelous. (g)

( a. 31) The Lord shall make thee plenteous for good, Deuteronomy. 28 11. and 11.25.
and 33.28. Genesis 49.25. ps. 107 35 37, 38.

(b) He fills thee with the finest of the Wheat, Psalm. 147.14. and 81.16.
Deuteronomy. 33.28.

(c) I will call for the Corn, and will increase it, and will lay no famine upon
you, Ezekiel. 36.29.

(d) Thou shall eat bread without scarceness, thou shall not lack any thing,
Deuteronomy. 8.9.

(^) Israel then shall dwell in safety alone, Deuteronomy. 33.28.

(f) It is the Lord, that gives the power to get wealth, Deuteronomy. 18.18.

(g) Ye shall eat in plenty, and praise the name of the Lord that has dealt
wondrously with you, Joel. 2.26.

6. That the Lord will give us advancement (h) authority (i) and honor (k)
though our condition be mean and low, poor and b^ggarly, vile and miserable
(l) though we be sorrowful and in heavines (m) God will increase the honuor of
his servants (n) and make them very high and to be extoll^d. (o)

(h) Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee, psalm.
37.34. Deuteronomy. 28.13. and 15.6.

Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South,

But God is the Judge; he puts down one, and sets up another, Psalm.
75.6, 7. Pro. 4.8.

(i) The Lord raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar
from the dunghill, to set them among princes, 1 Samuel 2.7.8. psalm. 113.7.8.

(k) Them that honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2.30.

(l) See the preceding i. and, Psalm. 107.41.

(m) That those which mourn may be exalted to safety, Job. 5.11. Psalm, 69.29.

(n) Thou shall increase my greatness, Psalm. 71.21

(o) My servant shall be exalted, and extolled and be very high, Isa. 52.13.

7. That the Lord will give riches (p) in abundance (q).

(p) The Lord makes rich, 1 Samuel 2.7.

(q) A faithful man shall abound in blessings, pro. 28.20. and 15.6. Psalm.
112.3.

Thou shall lay up gold as dust, and thou shall have plenty of silver, Job.
22.24, 25.

3. That the Lord will open his treasures to us, to help us out of debt, and
make us able to lend and that we shall not be forced to borr^n. (r)

(r) The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, and thou shall lend unto
many Nations, and thou shall not borrow, Deuteronomy. 28.12. and 15.6.

9. That we shall have a good name (s) among alt (t) even where we have
suffered shame (u), for God will clear our innocence (w) and our memory shall
be blessed (x). See reproach.

(s.t.u) I will give them praise and fame in every land, where they have been
put to shame,

I will make you a name and a praise, among al people of the earth, Zeph.
3.19.20. Romans 13 3.

(w) Heshal bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as
the noone day, Psalm. 37.6.

(x) The memory of the just is blessed Pr^. 10.7.

10. That the Lord will give us health; for we shall not be si^k (y) but be
kept from Discases (z) and our mal^dies shall be remove^ (a. 32) health shall
be restored (b), cur^ and amendment shall be granted, (c).

(y) The inhabitant shall not say, I am sick Isa. 33.24.

( z.a. 32. b) The Lord will take away from thee al sickness, and will put none
of t^^ evil Dileases of Egypt upon thee, Deuteronomy. 7.15. Ex. 15.26.

I will restore health unto thee, Jer. 30.17.

(e) I will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them, Ier. 33.6.

11. The Lord will give us favor with men (d), he will make our enemies at
peace with us (e) they shall have compassion on us (f) He will cause them to
entreat us well in our ^fflictition. (g)

(d) will give this people favor in the sight of the Egiptians, Exodus 3.21. and
12.36. Pro. 3.4.

(e) When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at
peace with him. Pro. 16.7.

(f) He made them to be pitied of all those that carried them captives, Psalm.
106.46, Ier. 42.12.

(g) I will cause the enemy to entreat thee well, in the time of evil, and in
the time of affliction. Ier. 15.11.

12. The Lord will bless our warrantable proceedings in our particular
callings (h) for he will never fail, forsake, or forget us therein (i), but
will certainly be with us (k) that we shall presp^r (l) and have good success
(m) and all shall go well (u) and our work shall have a reward (o) He will
direct our ways (p) and establish our counsels (q) and enterprises (r) and
bring our business to pass (s) He will command his blessing to be with us, in
all we set our hand unto (t) and in every particular employment (u) As he was
with others of his, he will be with us (w) in despite of all discouragements
and oppositions. (x)

(h) Thou shall eat the labor of thine hands, happy shall thou be, and it
shall be well with thee, psalm. 128.2.

(i) I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5.

(k) I am with you says the Lord of Hosts,

According to the word, that I covenanted with you, when ye came out of Egypt,
so my spirit remains amongst you, Hag. 2.45. Ex. 3.7.

(l) Then shall thou prosper, if thou take heed to fulfill the statutes and
judge^ents 1 Chr. 22.13.

(m) Then thou shall have good success. Josh. 1.8.

(n) See the quotation at (h), Psalm. 128.2.

(o) Let not your hands be weak, for your work shall be rewarded, 2 Chronicles. 157.

(p) In all thy ways acknowledge him, an^ he shall direct thy paths. pro. 3.6.

(q) Thou shall decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee, Job.
22.28.

(r) By him actions are ordered, 1 Samuel 2.3

(s) Commit thy way unto the Lord, (...) he shall bring it to pass, psalm. 37.5.

(t) The words of Deuteronomy. 28.8.1 Ki. 2.3.

(u) The Lord thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of thine hand,
Deuteronomy. 30.9.

(w) As I was with Moses so will I be with thee, Josh. 1.5.

(x) Be not affrayd of their faces; for I am with thee, to deliver thee. Ier.
1.8.

13. The Lord will bless our journies; For he will never fail, forsake, or
forget us in them, (y) himself is (z) and will be with us in them (a. 33) his
own especial presence shall go with us (b) oimselfe will go before us (c) to
the place appointed (d), he will send his Angel before us (e) to keep us in the
way (f) and to bring us to the place (g) he will give his Angels charge to
guard us in all our journies (h) that the least harm shall not befall us (i),
Therefore they are commanded to look carefully, and tenderly to us (k) till
they bring us where we would be (l). The Lord himself will keep us,
wheresoever we gee (m), He will go down with us, and bring us up again (n) he
will protect us going, and returning (o) and will bless us, coming in and
going out (p) and that continually (q) that the least inconvenience shall not
betide us (r) At the end of our journey, he will give us rest (s) and will
never leave us, till he has performed his promises unto us. (t)

(y) The Lord, he it is that does go before thee, he will be with thee, he will
not fail thee, neither forsake thee, Deuteronomy. 31.8. Genesis 28.15.

( z.a. 33) See the preceding proofs.

(b) My presence shall go with thee, Ezod. 33.14.

(c) See before (y).

(^) I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee
into the place which I have prepared, Exodus 23 20.

(e.f.g) See the foregoing d.

(h.i.k) He shall give his Angels charge ove. thee to keep thee in all thy
ways.

They shall bear thee up in their hands; left thou dash thy foot against a
stone, Psalm. 91.11, 12.

(l) See d before and, Ex. 32.34.

(m.n) I will keep thee in all places whither thou go, and will bring thee
again into this land, Genesis 28.15.

(o) The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in, for evermore,
psalm. 121.8.

(p) Blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and go out, Deuteronomy. 28.6.

(q) See o before.

(r) Thou shall walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble, pro.
3.23. and 4.12.

(s) I will give thee rest. Ex. 33.14.

(t) I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee
o^ Gen 28.15.

14. The Lord will bless our dwellings (u) a^ ^e has blessed (w) and does
bless the same (x) (...) that the plague nor any other evil shall (...) them
or us (y) Sur^ly he will wake for (...) make our ^abitation pros^ ^us (z), Sin
shall be banished from (a. 34) peace shall be within (b) and quietness without
our dwellings (c) We shall dwell safely (d) free from fear of evil, (e) our
dwellings shall flourish (t) with pleasure and wealth (g) and be established
(h) so that it shall be apparent (i).

(v.w) Now it has pleased thee to bless the house of thy servant, thou
blessest O Lord, and it shall be blessed for ever, 1 Chro. 17.27.

(x) He blesses the habitation of the just, pro. 3.33.

(y) There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwellings psalm. 91.10.

(z) The words of Job. 8.6.

( a. 34) Thou shall put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacles, Job. 22, 23.
and 5.24.

(b.c) My people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in quiet resting
places, Isa. 32.18.

(d, e) Whosoever hearkneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear
of evil, pro. 1.33.

(f) The tabernacle of the upright shall flourish, pro. 14.11.

(g) There is treasure to be desired, and Oil in the dwelling of the wise,
pro. 21.20.

(h) The house of the righteous shall stand, pro. 12.7.

(i) Thou shall know that peace shall be in thy tabernacle, Job. 5.24.

15. The Lord will bless our store, for he will command his blessing to be
thereon (k) our Ordinary provision shall be blessed (l) ye our meanest
provisions though but of bread and water shall be blessed (m) so that we shall
have provision from year to year. (n)

(k) The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses, Deuteronomy.
28.8.

(l) Blessed shall be thy basket, and thy dough, Deuteronomy. 28.5.

(m) He shall bless thy bread and thy water, Ex. 23 25.

(n) Ye shall eat old store and bring forth the old because of the new,
Leviticus 26.10.

16. The LORD will bless us in the field or fruit of the ground (o)
plentifully (p) this in every k^^^ of fruit (q) in the fruit of our land (r)
of our tree (s) of our Cerne, of our Wine (r) our Oil (u) a^ these with
increase (w) abundantly (x) that we shall be satisfied (y). He will give rain
to our seed when we sow (z) and bread, of the Earths increase (a. 35) Our
sowing (b) our planting shall bring forth fruitful increase (c) yea
exceedingly (d). The Lord will give good things, and our land shall give such
increase, (e) that one year shall bring forth for three (f) Our threshing
shall reach to the vintage, our vintage shall reach to sowing time with
plenteousnes (g) and to the fall (h) this from year to year, for until the
fruit of the new come, we shall eat of the old (i) all this for our wealth (k)
Therefore our ground shall be fat and fertile (^) the fruit of the ground shall
not be devoured (m) neither shall the vine be barren (n) These blessings we
shall enjoy, although there be great scarcity by former miscarriage of fruits
(o) yea all these God prepares, and appoints for us (p) and unto this end,
the Lord will send seasonable weather in sowing time (q) in our several
reapings for Corn, for Wine and Oil, (r).

(o.p) Blessed shall thou be in the Field, Blessed shall be the fruit of thy
ground, The Lord shall make thee plenteous in the fruit of thy ground, De.
28.3^4.11

(q.) The Lord thy God will make the plenteous in every work of thine hand, in
the fruit of thy Land for good, Deuteronomy. 30.9.

(s) I will multiply the fruit of the Tree, Ezekiel. 36.30.

(t.u) He will bless thy Corn, and thy Wine, and thine Oil, Deuteronomy. 7.13.

(w) I will call for the Corn, and will increase it, Ezekiel. 36.29.

(x) The floores shall be full of Wheat, and the fats shall overflow with Wine
and Oil, Joel. 2.24. Hos. 2.21.22.

(y) I will send you Corn and Wine and Oil, and ye shall be satisfied
therewith, Joel. 2.19. Levit. 25.19.

( z.x. 35.) He shall give the rain of the seed, that thou shall sow the ground
withal; and Bread of the increase of the Earth. Isa. 30.23,

(b.c.d) They sow Fields, and plant Vineyards,

He blesses them so that they are multiplied greatly, psalm. 107.37, 38.

(e) The Lord shall give that which is good, and our land shall yield her
increase, Psalm. 85.12.

(f.g.h.) Ye shall eat your fill,

The land, it shall b^ing forth fruit for three years,

Until her fruits come in, ye shall eat of the old store, Levit. 25.19.21.22.

Your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto
the sowing time, Levit. 26.5. Psalm. 107.36.37.38.

(k) The Lord will make thee plenteous for good, Deuteronomy. 30.9.

(l) The earth shall be fat and plenteous, Isa. 30.23.

(m.n) I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the
Fruits of your ground, neither shall your Vine cast her Fruit before the time,
Malac. 3.11.

(o) I will send you Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and ye shall be satisfied
therewith,

And I will restore to you the years that the Locust has eaten, the
Canker-worm and the Caterpillar, and the Palmer-worm, Joel 2 19.25.

(p) Thou preparest them Corn, when thou have so provided for it psalm. 65 9.

(q.r) I will give you the rain of your land in his due season, the first
rain, and the latter rain, that thou may gather in thy Corn, and thy
Wine, and thine Oil Deuteronomy. 11.14. and 28.12. Levit. 26.4. Icel. 2.23. Isa.
30.23. psalm. 65.10.

17.

Promises of seasonable weather upon any occasion.

See the last proofs to (q.r.)

Thus far the first head of the fifth maine part.

The second head of the fifth maine part containing such Promises, as concern
ours.

1. Such as concern our children, as, that

THE Lord is in covenant with them to be their God for ever (s) he will give
them his word and spirit continually (t) he will circumcise their hearts that
they may love the Lord unfaignedly (u) he will increase his graces in them (w)
his promises belong to them (x) they shall be blessed (y) and not beg their
bread (z) The Lord will preserve them though they be poor (a. 36) and provide
for them (b) and settle them (c), we shall perceive our seed to be many and
great (d) and mighty (e) it shall go well with them after us (f) We shall see
our childrens children (g) The Lords loving kindness and righteousness shall
never fail them. (h) Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven (i) for they are holy,
(k)

(s) I will establish my Covenant, between me and thee, and thy seed after
thee in their Generations for an everlasting covenant to be a God unto thee,
and to thy seed after thee, Genesis 17.7.

(t) My spirit and my words shall not depart out of thy mouth nor out of the
mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, Isa. 59.21.

(u) The Lord thy God will circumcise the Heart of thy seed, to love the Lord
thy God, with all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul, Deuteronomy. 30.6.

(w) The Lord shall increase you and your children, Ps. 115.14.

(x) The promise is unto you, and your children, Acts 2.39.

(y) His seed is blessed, psalm. 37.26. pro. 13 22 and 20.7.

(z) Yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their
Bread, Psalm. 37.25.

( a. 36) He shall save the children of the needy, psalm. 72.4.

(b) His seed shall inherit the Earth, psalm. 25.13.

(c) The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be
established before thee, psalm. 102.28.

(d) Thou shall know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine offspring as
the grass of the earth, Job. 5.25.

(e) His seed shall be mighty upon Earth, Psalm. 112.2.

(f) Thou shall keep his statutes, that it may go well with thy children after
thee, Deuteronomy. 4 40. and 5.29.

(g) The words. psalm. 128.6.

(h) The mercy of the Lord, is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them that
fear him, and his righteousness unto childrens children, psalm. 103.17.

(i) Jesus said, suffer little children to come unto me, for of such is the
Kingdom of God, Matthew. 19.14. Mark. 10.14. Luke 18 16.

(k) Your children are holy, 1 Cor. 7 14 Mal. 2.15.

2. Such as concern our Cattle.

The fruit of them in general shall be blessed (l) particularly of our kine
(m) of our sheep (n) and thus with increase (o) plentifully (p) exceedingly (q)
without diminishing (r) The Lord will send Grass in our Fields for our Cattle
(s) and feed them in large, fat, and healthful pastures. (t)

(l.m.n.o.p) Blessed shall thou be in the fruit of thy Cattle, the increase
of thy Kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.

The Lord shall make thee plenteous in the fruit of thy Cattle, Deuteronomy. 28,
4.11. and 7.13. and 30.9.

(q.r) He blesses them, that they are multiplied greatly, and suffers not
their Cattle to decrease, psalm. 107.38.

(s) Deuteronomy. 11.15.

(t) Thy Cattle shall feed in large pastures, Isa. 36.23.

3. Of blessing upon the fruit of the Womb either of man or beast, as

The fruit of the Womb is the gift of God (u) He will keep from barrenness
(w) he makes the barren fruitful (x) preserves the fruit in the Womb (y)
keeps from untimely births (z) and every way blesses the fruit of the
Womb. (a. 37)

(u) The Lord shall make thee plenteous in the fruit of thy body, and in the
fruit of thy Cattle, Deuteronomy. 20.11.

(w) There shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren in thy Land, Exodus,
23.26. Deuteronomy. 7.14.

(x) He makes the barren Woman, to be a joyful mother of children, psalm
113.9.

(y) He will bless the fruit of thy Womb, Deuteronomy. 7.13.

(z) See the foregoing (w).

( a. 37.) Thus shall the man be blessed, that fears the Lord, Psalm. 128.4.
and 127.3. and Deuteronomy. 7.13.

Thus far the second head of the fifth maine part.

The third head of the fifth maine part, containinh such promises as concern
the Church of God.

First, of general restoration after general desolation.

THat the LORD will cause the ruined places to be reedifyed (b) and all things
to be ordered after the former manner (c) be the places never so desolate (d)
and be all never so much out of Order (e) be our Estate never so despised or
forsaken (f) were we never so far scattered (g) be it never so unlikely, and
impossible i^ man's judgment (h) that all that hear thereof shall wonder,
fear, and tremble (l) especially considering how the Lord will plague them,
that plagula us (k) and establish us in all peace (l) prosperity (m) health (n)
safety (o) joy (p) and pleasure (q) fully freeing us from the hands of our
Enemy. (r)

See before promises to Captives: And concerning this at large, Ez. 34. and 3^
cap. and Isa. 49. and 60. cap. etc.

(b.c) Thus says the Lord, the City shall be builded upon her own heap, and
the palace shall remain after the manner thereof, Ier. 30.^8.

(d. e) Again there shall be heard in this place that is desolate, with ut
man, and without inhabitant, and without heast.)

The voice of joy, the voice of the Bridegroom, the voice of them that shall
bring the sacrifice of praise into the house o^ the Lord, Ier. 33.10.11. and
18.20.

(f) I will heal thee of thy wounds, because they called thee an outcast
saying, this is Sion whom no man seeeketh after, Ier. 30.17.

(g) Lo, I will save thee from afar, Jer. 30.10.

(h) If it be mavelous in the eyes of the remnant of this people, should it
also be mavelous in my eyes says the Lord of hosts? Zech. 8 6.

(i) And it shall be to me an honor before all the Nations of the Earth, and
they stral fear and tremble for all the prosperity, that I procure unto it,
Jer. 33 9.

(k. l) They that spoil thee, shall be made a spoil,

Thy children shall be as aforetime, and their Congregation shall be established
before me, and I will punish all that oppress them, Ier. 30.16.20. Levitious
26.6.

(m. n. ^) Jacob shall return and shall be in rest, and in quiet, and none shall
make him afraid, J^^. 30.10.

There shall yet old men, and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem,

And the streets of the City shall be full of boys and girls, playing in the
streets thereof Zech. 8.4, 5.

(^. q) See before (d.e) Jer. 33.10.11.

(r) Strangers shall no more serve themselves of him, Ier. 30.8.

Secondly, that the Lord will restore his pure worship among us; yea in the
very place where we formerly'd enjoy the sam^ (^) and in the same manner (t) we
shall be freed from evil teachers and will provide for us good teachers (u)
who shall bring us good tidings, (w) and shall teach us what G^^ commands (x)
in due season (y) watchfully (z) (...) constantly. (a. 38)

(s.t) Again there shall be heard in this pl^^^ the voice of them that shall
say, praise the Lord of Hosts, and of them that shall bring the Sacrifice of
praise, Jerem. 33.10, 11.

(v) I am against the Sheaphards, I will cause them to cease from feeding the
flock neither shall the Sheapheards feed themselves any more,

I will feed my flock in a good pasture and they shall lie in a good fold,

I will set up one Shepherd over them, Ez. 34.10.14.23.

(w) I will give to Jerusalem one that brings good tidings, Isa. 41.27.

(x) I will raise them up a prophet, and he shall speak unto them. all that I
shall command him, Deuteronomy. 18.18.

(y) The Lord has given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how
to speak a word in season, Isa. 50.4.

( z.a. 38) I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never
hold their peace day nor night, Isa. 62.6.

Thirdly, the Lord will restore good government among us, namely good Judges
and Counselors as in former times (b) They shall be endued with wisdom for
counsel (c) and judgment for Justice (d) They shall reverence and cherish the
Churches welfare (e), so that all good government in the Commonwealth shall be
maintained (f).

(b) I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the
beginning, Isa. 1.26.

(c) The Lord gives wisdom, Pro. 2.6.9.

(d) In that day, shall the Lord of Hosts, be for a spirit of judgment, to him
that sits in judgment, Isa. 286.

(e) Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy nursing Mothers,
Isa. 49.23. and 60.16.

(f) I will make thy officers, peace and thine exactions righteousness, Isa.
60.17 Psalm. 85.10.11, Zech. 8 3.

Fourthly, We shall see the wealth of Gods Church and peace upon Israel (g).
Psalm, 128.5.6.

Thus far of the third and last head of the fifth maine part.

The Sixth and last maine part, containing, 1, Such promises as assure plenty
of mererfull rewards to several (...) saving Graces, and other good Gifts.
1. Sanctification, Uprightness, or conseiable Obedience;

SVch an one is the child of God (h) and in his favor (i) he shall have saving
knowledge (k) his sins shall be forgiven (l) he is justified from them (m) and
freed from Gods anger punishing of them (^) He fears God (o) shall leave sin
(p) hates lying (q) has the Lords Name for his refuge (r) his prayers are
heard (s) he shall be strong (...) the Lord (t) and walks surely (u) and
bold^ (^) even as a Lion (x) He shall have joy (y) and peace (z) His enemies
shall be at peace (a. 39) and al creatures in league with him, (b) he shall b^^
reserved from evil (c) and escape out of troubl (d) shall have an happy outward
estate (e) he shall want no good thing (f) God will honor him (g) so will our
Savior (h) He excels his neighbor (i) The evil man shall bow before him in
fear, obedience and respect to him (k) his house shall have much treasure (l)
The riches of the wicked shall fall to his share (m) he shall find favor with men
(n) he shall have content in mind (o) If he be poor, he is dears in Gods
sight, and worthier then the ungodly rich (p) If he be in presperity others joy
(q) if in authority the people rejoice (r) the poor have Justice from them,
and fare the better for them (s) He is a joy to h^s parents (t) His children
shall escape evil (u) and be blessed after him (w) The land where he lives shall
be preserved, and if it be in distress be delivered by his means (x) The
place where (...) shall prosper, (y) He is and shows himself truly wise (z) He
shall be well governed (a 40) keeps his Soul (b) Shows he love Christ (c)
belongs to Christ (d) GOD the Father ^^d Christ the Redeemer loves him (e) and
will reveal himself to him (f) Ask what he will, he shall have it (g) He
shows he is justified by Christ, (h) All shall be great gain to him (i) He
(...) all find that Christ esteems, affects, remembers, will guide, preserve,
provide for, and every way do good unto him, as if he were his brother,
fifter, Mother, for so he names him (k). Of what Nation, calling, degree soever
he be, the Lord will give him glory, honor and peace (l) He shall have long
life on Earth (m) be happy in death (n) be freed from damnation (o) His labor
shall not be in vain (p) but he shall have a merciful and full reward of
every good work (q) He has right in the Tree of life, and shall enter into the
Gates into the City (r) shall sit in the throne of Christ's Majesty with him (s)
and judge the World (t) and the evil Angels (u) He shall be every way blessed
here (w) and for evermore. (x)

(h) For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God,
Romans 8.14. psalm. 15, 1.2.

(i) So shall thou find favor and good understanding in the sight of God and
man. Pro. 34. He loves him that follows a ter righteousness, Pro. 15.9.

(k) A wicked man hardneth his face: but as for the upright he directs his
way. The integrity of the upright shall guide them. The righteousness of the
perfect shall direct his way, Prove. 21.29. and 11.3.5.

(l) By mercy and truth iniquity is pu^ged: and by the fear of the Lord men
depart from evil, Pro. 16.6.

(m) The just man walks in his integrity. He that follows after
righteousness and mercy, finds life, righteousness and honor, Pro. 20.7.
and 21.21.

(n) Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivers from
death Pro. 11.4.

(o) He that walks in his uprightness fears the Lord, Pro. 14.2.

(p) The high way of the upright is to depart from evil, Pro. 16.17.

(q) Good understanding gives favor: but the way of Transgressors is hard,
Pro. 13 15.

(r) The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower: the righteous man runs to it,
and is safe, pro, 18.10.

(s) But if any man be a worshiper of him and do his will, him he hears, Joh.
9.31.

(r) The way of the Lord is strength to the upright, Pro. 10.29.

(u.w) He that walks uprightly walks surely, pro. 10.9.

(x) But the righteous are bold as a Lion, Pro. 28.1.

(y) But the righteous do sing and rejoice. Light is sown for the righteous:
and gladness for the upright in heart, pro. 29.6. psalm. 97.11.

(z) And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy,
and on the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. Pro. 15.15.

( a. 38.) When a man's ways please the Lord, ^ee makes even his enemies to be
at peace with him, Pro. 16.7.

(b) For thou shall be in league with the stones of the Field, and the Beasts
of the Field shall be at peace with thee, J^b. 15.23.

(c.d.) The righteousness of the upright shall deliver him,

The righteous in delivered out of trouble Pro. 11.6. Id. 8.6.

(^) What man is he that desires life, and loves many daye^, that he may see
good. Depart from evil, and do good, seek peace, and pursue it, Ps. 34 12.14.

(f) No good thing will he withhold from them that w^lke uprightly, Ps. 84.11.

Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added to you, Mat. 6.33.

But he that keeps the Law, happy is he, Pro. 29.18. Godliness is profitable
to all things: having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is
to come, 1 Timothy 4 8.

(g) For them that honor me I will honor, 1 Samuel 2.30.

He that follows after righteousness, and mercy, finds life,
righteousness, and honor, Pro. 21.21.

(h) If any one serve me, him will my Father honor. Jo. 12.26.

(i) The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, Pro. 12.26.

(k) The evil bow before the good, and the wicked at the Gates of the
Righteous, Pro. 14.19.

(l) In the House of the righteous is much Treasure. pro. 15.6.

(m) Though he heap up silver as the dust, and he prepare raiment as the day:
he may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide
the silver, Job. 27.16.17.

(n) Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck, write
them upon the Table of thine heart: so shall thou find favor and good
understanding in the sight of God and man, Pro. 3.3.4.

(o) The righteous eats to the satisying of his soul, pro. 13.25.

(p) Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, then he that is
perverse in his ways though he be rich, Pro. 28.6.

(q) When it goes well with the righteous the City rejoices, pro. 11.10.

(r) When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice, pro. 29 2.

(s) The righteous considers the cause of the poor, pro. 29.7.

(t) The Father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice: and he that begets
a wise child shall have joy of him, Pro. 23.24.

(u) But the seed of the righteous shall be delivered, pro. 11.21.

(w) The just man walks in his integrity; his children are blessed after him
pro. 20.7.

(x) He shall deliver the Island of the innocent: and it is delivered by the
pureness of thine hands, Job. 22.30.

(y) When it goes well with the righteou the City rejoices, and when the
wic^ed perish there is shouting.

By the blessing of the upright the City is exalted, pro. 11.10.11.

(z) Who so keeps the Law is a wise for pro. 28.7.

( a. 39) By the wisdom of the upright the City is exalted, pro. 11.11.

The integrity of the upright shall guide them, v. 3. The righteousness of the
perfect shall direct his way, v. 5.

(b) He that keeps the Commandment, keeps his own soul, pro. 19.16.

(c. d. e. f.) He that has my Commandments and keep them, he it is that
loves me: and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will
love him, and manifest my self to him, Io. 14 21.

(g) If ye abide in me and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will,
and it shall be done unto you Jo. 15.7.

(h) For not the hearers of the Law are j^stified before God but the doers of
the Law, Romans 2.13.

(i) But godli^esse with contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6.

(k) For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same
is my brother, my sister, and mother, Mat. 12.50. Mar. 3.35. My mother, and my
beethren are these which hear the word o^ God and do it, Lu. 8.21.

(l) But Glory, Honor, and peace to every man that works good, to the Jew
first, and also to the Gentiles, Romans 2.10.

(m) What man is he that desires life and loves many days that he may see
good? depart from evil, and do good seek peace and pursue it, Psalm. 34 12.14.

(n) But the righteous has hope in his death Pro. 14.32.

But righteousness delivers from death, chapter 10.2. and 11.4.

(o) In the way of righteousness there is life and in the path way thereof
there is no death, Pro. 12.28.

(p) Be ye stedtash, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord for
you know that your labour^s not in vain in the Lord, 1 Corin. 1.15.58.

(q) Bless are they that do his Commandments that they may have right in the
Tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the City, Rev. 1.22.14.

(s) And Jesus said unto them, verily I say unto you, that ye which have
followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the Thro^e of
hi^ glory, ye also shall sit upon (...) Thrones, judging the twelve tribes o^
Israel, Mat. 19.28.

(t.u) Do you not know that the Saint^ shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2. Know
you not that we shall judge Angels? Much more things that pertain to this
life? v. 3.

(w) But he that keeps the Law happy i^ he, Pro. 29.18.

Blessed is he that keeps the sayings. (...) the prophecy of this book, Rev.
22.7. I^ ye know these things appy are ye ^ ye do them, Job. 13.17.

(x) To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory, and
honor, and immortality; eternal life, To him that orders his conversation
aright, will I show the salvation of God, Ps. 50.23. and 15. and 24.

Righteousness tends to life, Pro. 11.19. In the way of righteousness is
life, Pro. 12.28. He that follows after righteousness and mercy finds
life, righteousness, and honor, Chapter 21.21.

Who so walks uprightly shall be saved, Chapter 28.18.

2. To saving Knowledge.

Such shall understand Gods Word and walk in his ways (y) shall discern things
aright in his calling (z) shall be guided in the way of life. (a. 40) and
instruct others (^) and govern his tongue (c) and increase thingin (d) and be
est^emed wise (e) and increase in wisdom (f) walking sleeping, wakeing he shall
have peace and good government (g) and honor (h) and find good (i) and be
strong in grace, and virtue and boldness (k) and increase his strength (l).
His Family shall prosper, be made rich, and be established (m) (...) shall have
eternal life (n) and a great measure of glory. (o)

(y) Who is wise and he shall understand these things, prudent and he shall
know them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in
them, Hos. 14.9.

(z) A wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment, Eccl. 8.5.

( a. 40) When thou go it shall lead thee, when thou sleep it shall keep
thee; and when thou awakest it (...) talk with thee. For the Commandment is a
lamp, and the Law is light. Pro. 6.22.23.

(b) Daniel 10.

(c.d) The heart of the wise teaches his mouth, and adds learning to his
lips, Pro. 16.23.

(e.f) Understanding is a wel-spring of life to him that has it, pro. 16.22.

(g) When thou g^est it shall lead thee; when thou sleep it shall keep
thee; when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee, Pal. 6.22.

(h) Length of days are in her right hand and in her lefe hand are riches, and
honor, Pro. 3.16.

(i) He that handles a matter wisely shall (...) good, Pro. 16.20.

(k.l.) A wise man is strong: yea a man of knowledge increases strength, Pro.
24.5.

(m) Through wisdom is an house builded, and by understanding it is
established. And by knowledge shall the Chambers be filled with all precious
and pleasant riches, Pro. 24.3.4.

(n) And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Jo. 17 3.

(o) And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: and
they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever, Dan.
12.3.

3. To confession of sins.

He that does so, though for his sins he were fallen into extremes misery; the
Lord will not forget, despise, abhor, or forsake him utterly; but will remember
his covenant to deliver him (p) He shall have mercy (q) and have all his sins
forgiven him (r) His Soul shall be restored often times (s) shall escape Hell,
and enjoy Heaven. (t)

(o) If they shall confess their iniquity and the iniquity of their ^athers,
with their trespass which they trespassed (...) me, and I that also they
hvewalked contrary unto me.

And that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the
Land of their enemies, etc. Ver. 41, 42, 43.

I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them to destroy them utterly,
and to break my covenant with them, for I am the Lord their God. But I will for
their sakes remember the covenant of their Ancestors, whom I brought forth out
of the Land of Egypt, in the sight of the Heathen, that I might be their God,
Lev. 26 40, 41, 42 44.

(q) But who so confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy, Pro. 28.13.

(r) If we confess our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 Ioh. 1.9.

(s.t) He looks upon men and if any say I have sinned, and perverted that
which was right, and it profited me not: He will deliver his Soul^ from going
into the pit, and his life shall see the light; Lo all these things works God
often times with man, To bring back his Soul from the pit, to be enlightened
with the light of the liveing, Job. 33.27, 28, 29 30.

4. To an humble heart, and godly sorrow for sin.

The LORD dwells with such an one (u) and has especial respect to his
griefs (w) he is nigh at hand to hear, and to help in distresses (x) a
contrite spirit is acceptable to God, a broken heart he will not despise (y) he
heals the broken hearted and binds up his sores (z) He will revive the
spirits of the humble (a. 4) And the heart of the contrit^^ones (b) and will
not contend herein for ever, nor be always wrath, l^st the spirits should
fail before him (c) The Lord will restore comforts to such mourners (d) their
condition is blessed (e) they shall be comforted (f) and their sorrow shall be
turned into joy (g) the LORD takes especial notice of such relenting, weeping*
humbling (h) He will preserve such from general calami^^ (i) and give them his
heavenly Kindom (k).

(u) For thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name
is called holy; I dwell in the high and holy place: with him also that is of a
humble and contrate spirit to (...) the spirit of the humble, and to revive the
heart of the contrite ones, Isa. 57.15.

(w) But that this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a
contrite spirit, and that trembles at my word. I have seen his ways and will
heal him, I will lead him also, and will restore comforts unto him, and to
his mourners, Isa. 66.2. and 57.18.

(x) The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart: and saves such as
be of a contrite spirit, Psalm. 34.18.

(y) The Sacrifice of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart
(Oh God) thou will not despise, Psalm. 51.17.

(z) He heals the broken heart; and binds up their wounds, Psalm. 147.3.

( a. 41. b) I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble and to revive
the heart of the contrite ones, Isa. 57.15.

(c) For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth; for the
spirit should fail before me and the soul which I have made, Isa. 57.16.

(d) I have seen his ways and will heal him: I will lead him also, and
restore comforts unto him and to his moumers, verse. 18.

(e.f) Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5.4.

Blessed are ye that weep: for ye shall laugh, Lu. 6.21.

(g) Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sara that bare you; for I called
him alone and blessed him and increased him.

For the Lord shall comfort Zier.

He will comfort all her waste places, and he will make her wilderness like
Eden: and her desert like the garden of the Lord: Joy and gladness shall be
found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody, Isa. 51.23.

(h) Because thy heart was tender, and thou have humbled thy self before the
Lord, when thou heard st what I spoke against this place, and against the
inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and have
rent thy cloths, and wept before me; I also have heard thee, says the Lord, 2
Ki 22.19.

(i) Behold therefore I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shall be
gathered in to thy grave in peace, and thy eyes shall not see all the evil that
I will bring upon this place, v. 20.

Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5.3.

5. To our mourning for the sins of the times.

The Lord gives his Angel most strickt charge to mark such, that they may be
spared from, and to preserve such, that they be not so much as touched, by any
general calamity. (l)

(l) And the Lord said unto him go through the midst of the City, through the
midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and
that cry for all the abominations that are done in the midst thereof. Slay
utterly old and young; both maids, and little children, and women but come not
near any man upon whom is the mark. Ezekiel 9 46.

6 To true Faith in Jesus Christ.

Such as have the same are Gods children (m) shall have remission of their
sins, and justification from them (n) The father himself loves them (o) Such
shall repent (p) and be obedient (q) And abound in grace (r) and patiently
wait Gods leisure (s) They are in a blessed estate (t) shall prospe (u) shall
not perish (w) but by death shall pass to life (x) And have everlasting like.
(y)

(m) But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of
God, even to them that believe on his name, Io. 1.12.

Now to Abraham and his seed, were the promises made, Gal. 3.16.

(n) To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins, Acts 10.43.

(o) For the Father Himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have
believed that I came out from God, Joh. 16.27.

(p) He that believes in me though he were dead, yet shall he live. Joh. 11
25.

Whosoever believes on me, should not abide in darkness, Jo. 12.46.

(q) Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me the works that I
do, shall he do also, and greater works then these shall he do because I
got unto my Father, Ioh. 14.12.

(r) He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly
shall flow Rivers of living waters, Joh. 17.38.

(s) He that believes, shall not make haste, Isa. 28.16.

(t) Blessed are they that have not seem, and yet have believed, Jo. 20.29.

(u) Believe in the Lord your God: so shall you be established believe his
prophets: so shall ye prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20.20.

(w) That whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting
life. He that believes on him is not condemned. He that believes on the
Son has everlasting life, Ioh. 3.15.18.36.

He that hears my word and believes on him that sent me has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from Death unto Life.
Chapter 5.24.

And whosoever lives, and believes in me; shall never die, Chapter 11.26.

(x) He that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
Death to Life, Joh. 5.24.

(y) And this is the will of him that sent me that every one that sees the
Son, and believes on him may have everlasteing life (...) 6.40.

For God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son that whosoever
believes on him, should not perish but have everlasting life, Chapter 3.16 and
20.31.

Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and thy House, Acts
16.31.

For by grace you are saved, through Faith, and not of your selves, Ephesians. 2.8.

For God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World: but that the
World through him might be saved Joh. 3.17.

For therefore we both labor and suffer reproach, because we trust in the
living God, who is the savior of all men, especially of those that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10.

7. To turning from, or forsaking of sie.

Such shall have mercy (z) The LORD is reach to forgive such (a. 42) And will
forgive such (b) And repent of the evil threatened (c) And will not suffer his
wrath to fall upon such (d) nor keep his anger against such (e) nor punish such
(f) He will return to such (g) And dwell with such (h) And be always with
such for good (i) such shall enjoy outward blessings (k) and inward peace (l)
Christ will give such light both light of knowledge, and comfort (m) such shall
not be damned (n) But saved (o).

(z) He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses and
forsakes them, shall have mercy, Pro. 28.13.

( a. 42.) Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord and he will have mercy upon him;
and to our God for he will abundantly pardon, Isa. 55.7.

(b) It may be that the House of Juda will hear all the evil that I purpose to
do unto them, that they may return every man from his evil way, that I may
forgive their iniquity, and their sin, Jer. 36 3.

(c) Turn ye unto me with all your heart, with fasting with weeping, and with
mourning. And rent your heart and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord
your God. for he is geacious, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil, Ioc^. 12.13.

(d.e.) Return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause
mine anger to fall upon you: for I am merclfull, says the Lord, and will not
keep anger for ever, Jer. 3.12.

(f) And go not after other Gods to serve them and to worship them and provoke
me not to anger with the works of your hands, and I will do you no hurt, Ier.
25.6.

And the redeemer shall come to Zion, and to them that turn from transgression
in Jacob, Isa. 59.20.

(g) Turn you unto me, says the Lord hosts, and I will turn unto you, says
the Lord of hosts, Zoc. 1.3. Mal. 3.7.

(h.i) Now let them put away their whoredom, and the carcasses of then Kings
far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever, Ez. 43.9.

(k) If ye be willing and obedient, you shall eat the good of the Land, Isa.
19. If thou will put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shall thou
not remove, Jer. 4.1.

(l) Ask for the old paths where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye
shall find rest for your Souls, Jer. 6.16.

(m) Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light, Ephesians. 5.14.

(n) But if the wicked will turn from all his sins, that he has committed,
and keep al my statutes,

And do that which is lawful and right: shall surely live he shall not die, Ez.
18.21.

(o) O Jerusalem wash thy heart from wickedness that thou may be saved, Jer.
4.14.

8. To VVatchfulnesse over our ways.

We are in a happy condition (p) and shall be most happy when our Savior comes
to us either by leath, or judgment (q) For the Lord will plentifully reward us
(r) and make us most happy in Heaver, where Christ himself will servens. (s)

(p) Happy is the man that fears always, pro. 28.14.

(q) VVatch therefore for you know not what hour your Lord will come. Blessed
is that servant, whom his Lord, when he comes shall find so doing. Mat. 24.42
46.

(r) Vide supra (q) of a truth I say unto you he will make him ruler over all
that he has. Blessed are those servants whom the Lord when he comes shall
find watching: verily,

(^) I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to
meat, and will come forth and serve them.

And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find
them s^, blessed are those servants, Lu. 12.43.44.37.38. v.

9. To hope in, or patient awaiting for Gods help.

He that does so is in a blessed estate (t) his ho^^ shall not fail nor
deceive him, (u) he shall not (...) ashamed (w) the Lord thinks thoughts of
peac^ toward him, and will give an and according to his hop (x) The Lord will
comfort him (y) the end shall be gladness (z) he shall have outward prosperity
(a. 43) The Lord will hear him (b) and increase his spiritual and temporal
welfare. (c) Hereby he may be assured of salvation (d) And shall enjoy
unconceiveable, unutterable happin^sse in heaven (e).

(^) Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the
Lord his God, psalm. 146.5. Jer. 17.7. Blessed i^ he that waits, Dar. 12.12.

(u) The expectation of the poor shall no perish for ever. psalm. 9.18.

(w) Let none that wait on thee be ashamed, psalm. 25.3.

(x) For I know the thoughts I think toward you, says the Lord,

Thoughts of peace and not of evil, to give you an expected end, Ier. 29.11.

(y) Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he will strengthen thy heart;
wait I say, on the Lord, Psalm. 27.14.

(z) The hope of the righteous shall be gladness^, Prove. 10.28.

( a. 43) But those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the Earth,
psalm. 37.9.

(b) I will wait for the God of my salvation my God will hear me, Mic. 7 7.

(c) Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.
^o he shall be as a Tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out her
(...) by the River: and shall not see when heat comes; but her leaf shall be
green and shall not be careful (...) the year of drought, neither shall cease
from yielding Fruit, Jer. 17.7, 8.

(d) For we are saved by hope, Romans 8.24.

(e) For since the beginning of the World, men have not heard nor perceived by
the care, neither has the eye seen O God, besides thee, what he has
prepared for him that waits for him, Isa. 64 4.

10. To trust in God.

He that does so is blessed (f) the Lord takes especial notice of him (g) and
will be good unto him (h) he will preserve such from backsliding (i) and
comfort his heart (k) Surely his heart sha^ Joy in the Lord (l) The eye of the
Lord is upon him (m) Such shall be delivered from greatest extremity (n) And be
preserved in famine (o) Such shall be exalted (p) The Lord will be a sh^eld to
him (q) And give him good success (t) And a plentiful roward for ever (^).

(f) Who so trusts in the Lord happy is ^e, Pro. 16.20.

He that puts his trust in the Lord shall be made fat, Pro. 28.25.

Blessed is the man that trusts in him. Psalm 34.8. Vid^s^pr^ (c) (...)
17.7.8.

(g) The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them
that trust in him, Nahum. 1.7.

(h) The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the Soul that seeks
him, Lam. 3.25.

(i) I have trusted also in the Lord, therefore I shall not slide, Psalm. 26.1.

For the King trusts in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most high he
shall not be moved, Ps. 21.7.

(k) Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart,
Psalm. 27.14.

(l) For our heart shall rejoice in him: because we have trusted in his holy
name, psalm. 33.21.

(m.n.o) The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope
in his mercy, psalm. 33.18.

To deliver their souls from death, and to keep them alive in famine, v. 19.

(p) But who so puts his trust in the Lord shall be safe, Pro. 29.25.

(q) He is a buckler to all those that trust in him, Psalm. 18.30.

He is a shield unto them that put their trust in him, Proverbs 30.5.

(r) Trust also in him: and he shall bring it to pass Psalm 37 5.

Believe in the Lord your God so shall you be established: believe his Prophets,
so shall you prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20.20.

(s) Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has a great recompense of
reward, Heb. 10.35.

11. To such as have inward Peace.

It is acceptable to God (t) And the God of Peace, will be with us (u).

(t) For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and
peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost. For he that in these things serves Christ is
acceptable to God, and approved of men, Romans 14.17, 18.

(u) Live in peace: and the God of love and peace shall be with you. 2 Cor.
13.11.

12. To such a^ have joy in the holy Gh^st

That Joy is cur strength (w) And cou^eth go^^ b^a^th (x) And ma^^th a
cheerful countenanc^ (y) And causes continually (...) in the Lora^ Name (z)
We are herin as^eptable to God (a, 44) And shall have our hearts desire (b) And
be every way bessed (c).

(w) For the joy of the Lord is your strength Neb. 8.10.

(x) A merry heart does good like a medicine, Pro. 17.22.

(y) A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance. Pro 15.13.

(z) Blessed is the people that know the jo^full sound: they shall walk, O
Lord. (...) the light of thy countenance. In (...) name shall they rejoice all
the day, a (...) in thy righteousness shall they be ex^^ted. For thou art the
glory of (...) strength, and in thy favor our ho^^ (...) be ex^lted, Psalm.
89.15, 16, 17.

( a. 44) Vide suprd (t) Romans 14.17 18.

(b) Delight thy self in the Lord and he shall give thee the desires of thy
heart, Psalm. 37.4.

(^) Blessed are the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk, O
Lord, in the light of thy countenance, ps. 89.15.

13. To such as fear God.

As the Texts quoted are annexed thereunto, out of the 112. Psalm as
follows, He is in a blessed condition (d) his seed shall be (...) sled (e)
And mighty (f) He shall have abundance (g) with contentment (h) is justified by
Christ's righteousness (i) in greatest sorrow he shall have comfort, and in
greatest need, deliverance (k) He is endued with mercy, compassion, sincerity,
and charity (l) He shall persevere in goodness; and the Lord will never forget
him (m) Nor his good works (n) He shall live fearlesse in evil times (o) And
not be troubled at evil tidings (p) His heart is fixed (q) yea established (r)
He trusts in the Lord (s) He shall see his desire upon his Enemies (t) He
shall be happy here and for ever (u). And further out of the 28. Psalm, he is
and shall be bl^ssed (w) God will provide for him (x) And prosper him in his
particular calling (y) He shall be blessed with many sweet children (z) He
shall see the peace of Gods people all his days (a. 45) And his childrens
children (b) The wicked shall be extremely vexed at his prosperity (c). And
lastly out of diverse other places of Scripture, he is accepted of God (d) The
Lord will teach him and be in covenant with him (c) He shall depart from evil
(f) Be justified from sin, have his Soul Eased, and his evil nature healed
(g) his inward peace shall be continued (h) And he shall increase in grace (i)
Gods fear is the beginning of wisdom (k) The Lord will show him the b^s^ way
(l) his Eye is upon him (m) to preserve him in famine (n) To keep him from
Calamity (o) T^ deliver him out of extremity (p) He is, (q) An^ shall continue
in the way of life (r) he shall have riches, and honor (s) Life, and health
(t) J^ (u) And contentment (w) And outward prosp^rity (x) His seed shall
prosper also (y) he shall prolong his days (z) And shall persevere in go^ (a.
46) God will hear his cry (b) And fulf^^ his desires (c) he shall prevail
against his Enmies (d) he is in the right way to happiness (e) An^ shall be
saved. (f)

(d) Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, Psalm. 112.1.

(e.f) His seed shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the upright,
shall be blessed, v. 2.

(g.h.i.) Wealth and riches shall be in his house and his righteousness
endures for ever, v. 3.

(k.l) Unto the upright there arifeth light in the darkness: he is gracious,
and full of compassion, and righteous. A good man shows favor, and lends:
he will guide his affairs with discretion, v. 4.5.

(m) Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance, v. 6.

(n) He has dispersed, he has given to the poor: his righteousness indureth
for, ever, v. 9.

(o.p.q) He shall not be affrayde of evil tideings: his heart is fixed
trusting in the Lord, v. 7.

(^) His heart is established, he shall not be affrayd, v. 8.

(s.u) (s) Vide supra (o) (t) vid. (r) vid. (n).

(w) Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, Psalm. 128.1.8.

(x) For thou shall eat the labor of thy hands, v. 2.

(y) Happy shall thou be, and it shall be well with thee idem.

(z) Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house: thy
children like Olive-plants round about thy Table. Behold, thus shall the man be
blessed, that fears the Lord, v. 3.4.

( a. 45.) The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion: and thou shall see the good
of Jerusalem, all the days of thy life. v. 5.

(b) Yea, thou shall see thy childrens children and peace upon Israel. v. 6.

(c) The wicked shall see it and be grieved, he shall gnash with his Teeth and
melt, away, psa. 112.10.

(d) But in every Nation he that fears him, and works righteousness is
accepted of him, Act. 10.35.

(e) The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him: and he will show them
his covenant, psalm. 25.14.

(f) By the fear of the Lord, men depart from evil, Pro. 16.6.

(g) But upon you that fear my name shall the son of righteousness arise with
hea^ing in his wings, Mal. 4.2.

(h) His soul shall dwell at ease, an^ his seed shall inherit the Earth, psalm.
25.13.

(i) Vide supra (g) Mal. 4.2. And ye shall go forth and grow up as Calves of
the st^ll.

(k) The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, pro. 1.7, psalm. 111.10.

(^) Who is the man that feireth the Lord Him shall he teach in the way that
(...) choose, Ps. 25.12.

(m) The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, psalm. 33.18.

(n) To deliver their soul from death: and to keep them alive in famine, v.
19.

(o) The fear of the Lord tends to life, and he that has it shall abide
satisfied: he shall not be visited with evil, Pro. 19.23.

The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of
Death, pro. 14.27.

(p) Vide supra (m) and (n) psalm. 33.18.19.

(q.r.) The fear of the Lord tends to life, and he that has it shall abide
satisfied: he shall not be visited with ev^^ Pro. 19.23.

(s.t) By humility and the fear of the Lord are riches and honor, and life,
Pro. 22.4.

Fear the Lord and depart from evil: it shall be health to thy navell, and
marrow to thy bones, pro. 3.7, 8.

(w) His soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed

(x, y) shall inherit the earth, Psalm. 25.13. (w.x.y.)

(z) The fear of the Lord prolongeth days, Pro. 10.27.

Like as a Father pitie^h his children: so the Lord pitieth them that fear
him, Psalm. 103.13.

( a. 46) The fear of the Lord tends to life; and he that has it shall
abide satisfied, Pro. 19.23.

(b.c.) He will fulfill the desires of them that fear him he also will hear
their cry: and will save them, Ps. 145.19.

(d) Ye shall tread down the wicked: for they shall be ashes under the soles
of your feet, M^l. 4 3.

(e) Vide supra ( c. 46.) pro. 19.23.

(f) Vide sura (b.c.) psalm. 145.19. Whosoever among you fears God, to you is
the word of this salvation sent, Acts 13.26. pro. 22.4. Vide supra (s.t.)

14. To such as fear Gods Word.

The Lord will look to him for good (g) And reward him in mercy (h).

(g) But to this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite
spirit, and trembles at my word, Isa. 66.2.

(h) Who so despises the word shall b^ destroyed: but he that fears the
Commandment shall be rewarded, Pro. 13.13.

15. To such as love God and Christ.

God the Father (i) Christ our Savior loves him (k) And will reveal himself
to him (l) our Father and Redeemer will come unto him, and dwell with him (m)
God will bring him to his house, there his service shall be accepted, and he
shall be refreshed (n) The Lord preserves such here (o) And will make them
happy in heaven (p).

(i) He that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
will manifest my self unto him, Joh. 14.21. I love them that love me, pro. 8.17.

(k.l.m.) If any man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him, Jo. 14.23.

(n) Also the Sons of the stranger that join them selves to the Lord, to
serve him and to love the Name of the Lord, even them will I bring to my holy
mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt offerings
and their services shall be accepted upon mine Altar: for mine House shall be
called an House of Prayer, Isay, 56 6.7.

(o) The Lord pres^^veth all them that love him, psalm 145.20.

(p) Eye has not ^ene nor ear heard, neither have en^ed into the heart of
man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9.

Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried he shall
receive the Crown of life which the Lord has promised to them that love Him.
Jam. 1.12.8, 2.5.

16. To delight in Gods Word.

Such an one shall have his hearts desire (q).

Delight thy self also in the Lord and he shall give thee the desires of thine
heart. Psa. 37.4.

17. To love to Gods Word.

Such shall have no hurt (r) But great presperity (s).

(r.s.) Great peace have they which love thy Law: and nothing shall offend them,
Psalm. 119.165.

18. To delight in Gods Word.

All as to the fear of God before, page 124, 125. out of the 112. Psalm.

19. To our love to Gods Church.

The Lord will bless (t) And prosper suol. ((...))

(^) And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee,
Genesis 12.3. Numb. 24.9.

(u) Pray for the peace of Jerusalem they shall prosper that love thee. Psalm.
122.6.

20. To our love to Gods Ministers.

In receaving (w) in hearing them, we receive and hear Christ (x) The good we
do to them, is done to Christ (y) And the same will be reward accordingly. (z)

(w) He that receives you receives me, Mat. 10.40.

(x) He that hears you hears me. Lu. 10.40.

(y) He that receives whomsoever I send, receives me, I. 13.20.

(z) He that receives a prophet in the name of a Prophet shall receive a
Prophets reward: and he that receives a righteous man, in the name of a
righteous man shall receive a righteous man's reward, Mat. 10.41.

21. To our love to Gods Children.

Thereby we know we are of the truth (a. 47) And our hearts are assured (b) We
are true members of Christ's Church, and shall continu^ so to the end (c) And
are translated from Death to life (d) And shall inherit Heaven for even (e).

( a. 47. b) Let us not love in word, nor in tongue; but in Deed and in Truth.
And hereby we know that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our hearts
before him.

(c) In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honoreth them that fear
the Lord, Ps. 15.4.

(d) We know that we have passed from Death to Life because we love the
brethren, 1 John 3.14.

(e) Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall abide in thy holy hill? He
in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honoreth them that fear the
Lord, psalm. 151.4.

22. To our love to Christ's coming.

We shall have everlasting life. (f)

(f) Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of ^ighteousnesse, which the
Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day, and not unto me only, but
to them also that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8.

23. To live in untry peace and concord.

Such the God of love and peace will live with (g) And will bless here (h) And
make happy for evermore. (i)

(g) Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the
God of love and peace shall be with you, 2 Cor. 13.11.

(h. i.) Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to live together
in unity! For there the Lord commands his blessing, even life for evermore,
Psalm. 133.1.3.

24. To those that counsel others for peace.

They shall have Joy. (k)

(k) But to the counselors of peace is joy, Pro. 12.20.

25. To those that make peace with others.

They shall be called Gods Childen, and are blessed. (l)

(l) Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of
God, Man. 59.

26. To the humble hearted.

God will teach such his way (m) They are wise (n) The Lord beholds them with
love and care (o) And will preserve and deliver them (p) even when others are
cast down, they shall be sensibly upheld, and lifted up (q) Their reward is
riches (r) H^nour (s) And glory (t) And advancement (t) God gives grace to such
(u) Will save them from his wrath in the very day thereof (w) The final and
full reward of humility is everlasting life. (x)

(m) The meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he teach his way,
Psalm. 25.9.

(n) But with the lowly is wisdom, Pro. 11.2.

(o) Though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly, psalm. 138.6.

(p.q.) When men are cast down, then thou shall say there is lifting up: and he
shall save the humble, Job. 22.29.

(r) By humility and the fear of the Lord is Riches, and Honor and Life, Pro.
22.4.

(s) And before honor is humility, Pro. 15.33.

(t) But honor shall uphold the humble in spirit, Pro. 29.23.

(u) Remove the D^adem, and take off the Crown: this shall not be the same:
Ex^lt him that is low, and abase him that is high, Ezekiel. 21.26.

And he that humbles himself shall be ex^lted, Matthew. 23.12. Luk 14.11. and
18.14.

(u) But he gives grace to the lowly Prove. 3.34. Iam. 46.1 Pet. 55. The same
words.

(w) Seek ye the Lord all the meek of the Earth, which have wrought his
judgment, seek righteousness, seek meekness: It may be ye shall be
hid in the day of the Lords ange^ Zeph. 2.3.

(x) Vide supra (r) pro. 22.4. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as
this little child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18.4.

Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
5.3.

But honor shall uphold the humble in spirit, Pro. 29.23.

27. To the meek in carriage.

They shall be taught spiritual (y) And temporal wisdom (z) And find rest to
their Souls (a. 48) And have inward and outwary joy (b) They shall joy in the
holy one of Israel, though they should want outward comforts (c) The Lord will
relieve their wants (d) And give them prosperity (e) And honor (f) And full
contentment (g) They shall escape Gods wrath (h) And have great and glorious
deliverances. (i)

(y) The meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he teach in his
way, psalm. 25.9.

(z) But with the lowly is wisdom, Pro. 11.2.

( a. 48) Come unto me al ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will give
you rest, Mat. 11.28.

(b.c.) The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord and the poor among
men shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel Isa. 29.19.

(d) The Lord lifts up the meek, Psalm^ 147.6.

(e) But the meek shall inherit the Earth: and shall delight themselves in the
abundance of peace, psalm. 37.11.

(f) Before honor is humility, Prove. 18.12.

(g) Vide supra. [^] psalm. 37.11.

(h) Vide^u ra (w) Ze. 2.3.

(i) He will beautify the meek with salvation, Psalm. 149 4.

28. ^o such as bear affliction aright.

They are blessed (k) And shall receive the Crown of glory. (^)

See to hope, page 120. And to trust in God page 121.

(k.l.) Blessed is the man that indureth temptation, for when he is tried he
sha^ receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him. Iam. 1.12.

29. To our increasing in goodness.

Abundance of all happiness in heaven for ever more. (m)

(m) Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in few
things: I will make thee ruler over many things, enter into the joy of thy Lord
and Master. Matthew. 25.21. Read the whole parable, Lu. 19 11. To ver. 20.

30. To perseverance in grace and goodness.

The Lord will be our God, and make us his Children (n) Our Savior will
confess our Names before his Father, and the Angels (o) He will not put our
Names out of the Book of life (p) We shall be rewarded in due season (q) And
not be damned (r) But essaredly saved (s) Christ will grant us to sit with him
on his thron (^) And there to enjoy all fullness of blessedness for evermore. (u)

(n) He that overcommeth shall inherit al things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my Son, Rev. 21.7.

(o.p) He that overcommeth the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and I
will not blot his name out of the Book of life, but I will confess his name
before my Father, and before his Angels, Rev. 3.5.

(r) He that overcommeth shall not be hurt of the second death, Re. 2 11.

(q) Let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall reap if we
saint not, Gal. 6.9.

(s) But he that shall endure to the end the same shall be saved, Mat. 24.13.

(t) To him that overcommeth will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, Rev. 3
21.

(u) Vide supra (n) Rev. 21.7. Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee
a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.7 10 11.

To him that overcommeth will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, v. 17.

To him will I give power over the Nations, v. 26.

And I will give him the Morning, Star. Verse. 28.

Thus far of the first head of the sixth maine part.

The second Head of the sixth maine part containing Promises of blessings to
giving Alms or works of Charity.
1. To Alms in general.

WIth such Sacrifices God is well pleased (w) The will for the deed is acceptes
(x) Although it be never so little, but a Cup ^cold water (y) Yea more then
much given un^illingly or for by-respects (z) The Lord wi^^ (...) all we
undertake, or that concern^s (...) (a. 49) We shall have plenty (b) And be
blessed abundantly (c) And shall have a sure reward (d) Such honor (e) And
lend to the Lord (f) And shall be recompensed of him (g) The Lord will not
forget it (h) But accounts it as done to himself (i) Such shall obtain mercy
(k) And have favor from God (l) God will guide such continually (m) When they
call and cry, the Lord will answer and help (n) The Lord will give such inward
peace (o) And joy (p) Such shall increase (q) And persevere in grace (r) Such
shall have a good name (s) And have adversity turned into prosperity (t) Such
shall be provided for (u) And not want (v) Neither such (w) Nor theirs shall be
forsaken nor beg their bread (x) But be blessed also (y) Such shall be
preserved from harm (z) And delivered from their Enemies (a. 50) Such shall be
strengthened in trouble (b) E^^^d in Sickness (^) And delivered out of misery
(d) God will mercifully reward our alms with everlasting happiness. (e)

(w) But to do good, and to communicate forget not, for with ^uc^ Sacrifices
God is well pleased, ^eb. 13.16.

(^) For i^ there be first a willing mind, i^ is accepted, according to what a
man has, 2 Cor. 8 12.

(y) And there came a certain poor widow and she cast in two mites, which
make a farthing; And he calls unto him his Disciples and says unto them,
verily I say unto you that this poor widow has cast more in then al they
which have cast into the treasury. For they did cast in of their abundance but
she^ of her want did cast in all that she hid even all her living, Mark.
12.42.43.44.

For whosoever shall give you a Cup of water to drink in my Name, because you
belong to Christ verily I say unto you he shall not lose his reward. Mark. 9.41.
Mat. 10.42.

(z) Vide supra (p) In the four quoted places.

( a. 49.) If there be among you a poor man, or one of thy brethren within any
of thy Gater.

T^ou shall not harden thine heart, no^ shut thine hand from thy poor brother.

Thou shall surely give him and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou
give unto him: because that for (...) thing the Lord shall bless thee i^, all
thy work and in all that thon put thine hand unto, Dent. 15.7.10.

He has dispersed, he has (...) to the poor: his righteousness endures
for ver^ his home shall be exalted with honor, Psalm. 1.12.9.

But he that has mercy upon the poor, is he, Pro. 14.21.

(b) The merciful men do good to the own soul, pro. 11.17.

(c) Honor the Lord with thy substance and with the first fruits of all thine
increase, so shall thy barnes be filled with plenty; and thy presses shall burst
o^ with new wine, Pro. 39.10.

(d) But to him that sows righteous^esse shall be a sure reward, Prove. 11.18.

But when thou do Alms, let not thy right hand know what thy left (...)
does. That thine Alms may be in ^^cret, and thy Father which sees in secret,
shall reward thee openly. Mat. 6.3.4. Vide supra (y) Matht. 10.42.

(e) But he that honors his ^^ker has mercy on the poor, Prove. 14.31.

(f.g) He that has pity upon the poote lends unto the Lord, and that which
he has given will he repay him, Pro. 19.17.

(h.i) For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love which
ye have showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and
do minister, Heb. 6.10.

(k) Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Mat. 5.7.

(l) Then shall thy light break forth as the morning and thine health shall
sprir^^ forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee: the glory
o^ the Lord shall be thy rereward, Isa^ 58.8.

(m) And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in
drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou ^hak be like a watered Garden, and
like^ spring of water whose waters fail not Isay; 58.11.

(n) Then shall thou call and the Lord shall answer: thou shall cry and he shall
say he^^ am I, Isay 58.9.

(o.p.q.r) Vide supra (m) Isay. 58.11.

(s) Vide supra (l) Isa. 58.8.

(t) And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry and satisfy the afflicted
soul: then shall thy light rise in obs^urity, and thy darkness be as the
noone day, Isay, 58.10.

(v) Now he that ministers seed to the sower, both minister bread for your
food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your
righteousness 2 Cor. 9.10.

And God is able to make al grace abound toward you, that ye always, having
al sufficiency in all things, may abound in every good work, v. 8.

(w.x) I have been young and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous
(...) saken, nor their seed begging their bread, psalm. 37.25.

(y) He is ever merciful: and his seed is blessed, psalm. 37.26.

(z) Blessed is he that considers the poor: the Lord will deliver him in the
time of trouble, Ps. 41.1.

( a. 50. b. ^.) The Lord will strengthen him in his bed of languishing: thou will mak^ all his bed in his sickness, psalm. 41.3.

(d) Vide supra (z) psalm. 41.1.

(e) Go thy way, sell whatsoever thou have and give to the poor: and thou
shall have treasure in Heaven, Mar. 10.21.

He that follows after righteousness and mercy finds life, pro. 21.22.
Mat. 19.21. As before. Mar. 10.21.

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand come ye blessed of my
Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
And the King shall say unto them in so much as you have done it unto one (...)
the least of these my brethren ye have done it unto me, Mat. 25.34, 40. and
6.20. Lu. 18.22. As before Mark. 10.21. and 12.33.

Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded nor
trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God who gives us all things
richly to enjoy. That they do good that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.17.18.19.

2. To diverse particular works of charity.

As I find them annexed in the Texts; although all places quoted to alms in
general may be applied to each of these particulars.

1. Lending to the Poor.

Gods blessing in all that concerns us (f) and to our seed is promised. (g)

(^) If there be among you a ^oore man of one of thy brethren within any (...)
thy gates -- thou shall not harden th^ne heart, nor shut thine hand from thy
poor brother. But thou shall open thine hand wide unto him, and shall surely
lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he wants. Thou shall surely
give him, and thy heart shall not be grieved, when thou give unto him:
because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless^ thee ^^al thy works
and in all ^h^t tho^ put thine hand unto, Deuteronomy. 15.7.8.10.

(g) He is ever merciful and lends: and his seed is blessed, P. 37.26.

2. To rest^ring the P^edge.

It is a note of Righteousness in us, and of ou Justification by Christ unto
us (h) and that we shall be saved (i) and not be punished, or perish for our
Fathers unrighteousness (k).

(h) And if the man be poor, thou shall not sl^^e with his pledge. In any case
thou shall deliver him the pledge again when the Son goes down, that he
may sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee: and it shall be righteousness^
unto thee before the Lord thy God, Deu. 24.12, 13.

But has restored to the debtor his pledge, has spoiled none by violence,
has given his bread to the hungry and has covered the naked with a garment:
He that has not given forth upon Usury neither has taken any increase that
has drawn his hand from iniquity, and executed true judgment between man and
man, Ez. 18.7.8.

(i) Has walked in my statutes and has kept my judgments to deal truly: he
is just, he shall surely live, says the Lord, v. 9.

(k) He shall not die for the iniquity o^ his fathers: he shall surely live
says the Lord, v. 16.17.

3. To leaving gleanings of Corn, or Vintage.

The LORD will bless all the works of our hands. (^)

(l) When thou cuttest down thy harvest if the field and have forgot a sheafe
in the field, thou shall not go again to fetc^ it: It shall be for the
strangers, for the fatherless, and for the widow, that the Lord thy God may
bless thee in all the work of thy hands: when thou beatest thine Olive Tree,
thou shall not go over the boughs again, it shall be etc.

When thou gatherest the Grapes of the Vineyard, thou shall not gleane it
afterward it shall be for the stranger, for the Fatherless, and for the widow,
Deuteronomy. 24.19, 20 21.

4. To Selling Corn to the Poor.

The blessings of the LORD shall be upon such. (m)

(m) He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him, but blessings shall
be upon the head of him that sells it, Prove. 11.26.

5 To feeding the Hungry, giving Drink to the Thirsty, Lodging to the
harbourlesse, clothing to the Naked, visiting the Sick, and Prisoners, and
receiveing poor Strangers.

These are signs of our Justification by Christ and that we shall not be
punished, or perish for our Fathers faults (n) Christ takes all as done to
himself (o) And will accept and acquit us in mercy according to such Works at
the last day (p) And reward them with Eternal life. (q)

(^) Vide supra Ez. 18.7.9. (g(h).

(o) And the King shall answer and say unto them, verily I say unto you, in as
much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto me. Man. 25.40.

(p) Come vee blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from
the ^oundation of the world.

For I was an hungry and you gave me meat: I was thirsty and ye gave me
drink: I was a stranger and ye took me in. Naked and ye clothed me: I was
sick, and ye visited me, I wat in prison and ye came unto me, Mat. 25.34.35,
34.

(q) And these shall go away into everlasting punishment; but the righteous
into life eternal, v. 46.

6. To relieveing our poor Kindred.

It is acceptable to God, and honest in the fight of men. (r)

(r) But if any widow, have children or nephews, let them learn first to show
^iety at home and to requite their parents, for that is good and acceptable
before Go^, 1 Timothy 5.4.

7 To comforting the souls of others.

As before out of Isay. 58.10.8, 9. 11.12.

Thus far of the second head of the sixth maine part.

The third head contains Promises to our conscionable worshipping of GOD.
1. General.

THat the Lord will hear us (s) We shall be settled among his people (t) And
glorify our Grd. (u)

(s) But if any man be a worshipper of God and do his will: him he hears
Job. 9.31.

(t) If they will diligently learn the ways of my people to swear by my Name
(The Lord lives, and they taught my people to swear by Baal) then shall they
be built in the midst of my people, Jer. 12.16.

(u) And thou shall swear. (The Lord lives) in truth, in righteousness, and
in judgment, and the Nations shall bless themselves in him, and in him shall
they glory. Jer. 4.2.

2. In particular.

To our worshipping the Lord egether in his horse in our families, or with
others. The Lord will come unto us (w) And be in the midst of us, be we never
so few, to assist and bless us, in our duties (x) Whatsoever we shall ask
shall be given us (y). He will bless us in our other proceedings (z) And
oppose our enemies, and increase, and secure our state (a. 15.)

(w) In all places where I record my name, I will come to thee, and will bless
thee, Ex. 20.24.

(x) For where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the
midst of them Mat. 18.20.

(y) If two of you shall agree on earth, as touching any thing that they shall
ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew, 18.20.

(z) Vide supra^^.) Ex. 20.24.

( a. 51) For I will cast out the Nations before thee and enlarge thy borders,
neither shall any man desire thy Land, when thou shall go up to appear bel^
the Lord thy God, thrice in the year Ex. 34.24.

3. To receiving the public blessing.

The Lord will bless us with mercy, peace, comfort, safety, and welfare. (b)

(b) On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel saying unto them. The
Lord bless thee, and keep thee. The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and
be gracious unto thee. The Lord lift up his Countenance upon thee and give thee
peace. And they shall put my Name upon the Children of Israel and I will bless
them, Numb. 6.23, 24.25 26, 27.

4. To sanctifying the Sabbath.

It is a sign of our sanctification (c) God will give us a name and place in
his Church (d) We shall know the Lord is our God (e) And serve him willingly
(f) To our great joy and contentment (g) Our service shall be accepted (h) We
shall delight in the Lord (i) And prosper (k) And increase in grace and good
(l) Our welfare shall be established (m) And we shall have honor (n) And
everlasting life (o).

(c) Moreover also I gave them my Sabbaths, to be a sign between me and
them, that they might know that I am the Lord, that sanctifis them, Ezck. 20.12.

Verily, my Sabbaths ye shalkeepe, for it is a sign between me and you,
throughout your generations, that ye may know that I am the Lord that does
sanctify you, Ex. 31.13.

(d) Even unto them will I give in mine house, and within my walls, a place and a
name better then of sons and daughters: I will give them an everlasting name
that shall not be cut off, Isay 56.5.

(e) And h^^low my Sabbaths, and they shall be a sign between me and you, that
ye may know that I am the Lord your God Ez 20.20.

(f.g.h) Even them will I bring to my holy Mountain: and make them joyful in
my house of Prayer, Their burnt offerings, and their Sacrifices, shall be
accepted upon mine Altar: for mine house shall be called a house of prayer for
all people, Isa. 56.7.

(i) If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath from doing thy pleasure on
my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable
and shall honor him; not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own
pleasure, nor speaking thine own word. Then shall thou delight the self in
the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the Earth and
feed thee with the hearitage of Jacob thy Father: for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it, Isay, 58.13 14.

(k) Then shall there enter into the gates of thy City, Kings and Princes siting
upon the Throne of David, riding in Chariots and on Horses, they and their
Princes the me^ o^ Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: and this City shall
remain for ever.

And they shall come from the Cities of J^dah, and from the places about
J^rusalem, and from the Land of Benjamin, and from the plain, and from the
Mountains, and from the South, bringing burnt-Offrings and Sacrifices, and
Meate-Offrings, and incense and bringing Sacrifices of praise unto the House of
the Lord, Jeremy 17.25.26.

(l) Vide supra (k) Jer. 17.26.

(m) Vide supra (k) Jer. 17, 25.

(n) Vide supra (i) Isay. 58.14.

(o) Vide supra (d) Isay 55.6.

5. To our prayers in General.

In what distress soever we be, if we call upon the LORD for help, he will
assuredly (...) us. (p)

(p) Call upon me in the day of trouble I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me, psalm. 50.15.

The Lord will hear, when I call unto him, psalm. 4.3.

The Lord will receive my Prayers, Psalm. 6.3.

For thou Lord have not forsaken them that seek thee. When he makes
inquisition for blood he remembers them he forgets not the cry of the the
humble, Ps. 9 10.12.

The Eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous; and his Ears are open to their
cry. The righteous cry, and the Lord hears, and delivers them out of al
their troubles, Ps. 34.15.17. and 38.15.

Evening, morning, and at noone, will I pray and cry aloud, and he shall hear my
v^yce, Psalm. 55.17.

The Lord is nigh to all them that call upon him: to all that call upon him in
truth. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he also will hear
their cry, and will save them, Psalm 145.18.19.

In the day of my trouble, I will call upon thee, for thou will answer me, Psalm.
86.7 and 91.15.

Fool because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are
afflicted. Their Soul abhors all manner of meat: and they draw near unto
the gates of death: Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: he saves
them out of their distresses, Psalm 107.17, 18 19.

If ye seek him, he will be found of you 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

If thou would seek unto GOD betimes: and make thy supplication to the
Almighty; Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly
increase. Job. 8.5.7.

Thou shall call, and I will answer thee. Job 14.15. and 22.27.

He will be favorable unto him, and he shall see his face with joy. Chap.
33.26.

And his ears are open unto their prayer, 1 Pet. 3.12.

Then shall ye call upon, and ye shall go and spray unto me, and I will
hearken unto you; And ye shall seek me and find me, when you shall search
for me with all your heart, Jeremy, 29.12, 13.

Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall be delivered, Joel. 2.32.
Acts 2.21. Romans 10.13.

Seek the Lord, and ye shall live, Amos 5.4.6.

I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God will hear me. Mica 7.7.

They shall call upon my name and I will hear them, Ze^. 13.9.

Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find; knock and it shall be
opened unto you. For every one that as^eth, receives; and he that seeks,
finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened, Mat. 7.7.8.

And al things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing ye shall receive,
Mat. 21 22. Mar. 11.24.

But if any man be a worshipper of God and do his will, him he hears Ioh.
9.31.

If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and
it shall be done unto you, John 15.^. Luke 11.9.10. The same with Mar. 7.7.8
Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you, Iam. 4.8.

6. If in any of these particulars following, we call on the Lord for help, he
has promised to hear, and help us, as.

1. If we have fallen into grievous sins, an^ afflictions, the LORD, will
forgive our sins, remove his Judgments, and hear our Prayers. (q)

(q) If I shut up Heaven, that there be no rain, or if I command the Locu^s to
devour the Land, or if I send pestilence among my people. If my people which
are called by my Name shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my Face, and
turn from their wicked ways: then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive
their sin, and will heal their Land. Now mine eyes shall be open, and mine
ears attent unto the Prayer that is made in this place, 2 Chronicles. 7.13.14, 15.
and Chap. 6. from Verse 21. To the end.

2. Be our troubles never so many, the Lord will hear and deliver us out of
them all (r)

(r) The righteous cry, and the Lord hears and delivers them out of all
their trouble, Psalm. 34 17.

3. If we be in any danger whatsoever, we shall be heard, helped, and
delivered. (s)

(s) In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I
helped thee: and I will preserve thee and give thee for a Covenant of the
people, to establish the Earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritage,
Isay, 49.8.

4 If in danger of our Enemies.

Or for Soldiers in or against any perilous employment, (t) We shall be
secured from harm (u) Our Enemies shall turn back (w) God will fight against
and afflict them. (x)

(t) I will call upon the Lord who is worthy to be praised? So shall I be saved
from mine enemies, Ps. 18.3.

(v) He that delivered my Soul in peace, from the Battle that was against
me for there were many with me. GOD shall hear and afflict them, even he
that abides of old, Psalm 55.18, 19.

(w) When I cry unto thee: then shall mine E^emies turn back, Ps. 56.9.

(x) Vide supra (u) Ps. 55.18.19.

5 If we be Prisoners.

The LORD will hear, and not^d spise us, or o^^ Prayers (y) He will be found
of, and enlarge us. (z)

(^) For the Lord hears the poor, and depiseth no his prisoners, Ps. 69.33.

(z) And ye shall seek me, and find me when ye shall search for me with
all your heart. And I will be found of you says the Lord, and will turn away
your captivity: and I will gather you from all the Nations, and from all the
places, whither I have driven you, says the Lord, and I will bring you again
into the place, whence I caused you to be carried away captive, Jeremy,
29.13.14.

6. If we be desolate, and forsaken of friends.

The Lord will turn unto and not despise our Prayers. (a. 52)

( a. 52) He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their
Prayer, Psalm. 102.17.

7. If we be wronged by others.

The Lord will deliver us. (b)

(b) For they shall cry unto the Lord, because of oppressors, and he shall send
them a Savior, and a great one, and he shall deliver them, Isay 19.20.

8. If the wronged Fatherless, Widow, or Stranger do pray.

The Lord will hear their cry, (c)

(c) Thou shall neither vex a stranger nor oppress him: for ye were strangers
in the land of Egypt. Ye shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child. If
thou afflict them in any wise and they cry at al unto me, I will surely hear
their cry, Ex. 22.21.22, 23.

9. If we be Hungry or Thirsty.

The Lord will relieve us, (d) Though he sh^^ work wonders for us. (e)

(d) Hungry and Thirsty: their Soul fainted in them. Then they cried unto the
Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distresses, Psalm.
107.5, 6.

(e) When the poor and needy seek wate^ and there is none, and their tongue
fails for Thirst, I the Lord will hea^ them, I the God of Israel will not for
sake them; I will open Rivers in hi^ places, and fountains in the midst: the
Valleys, I will make the wilderness a poole of water, and the dryland spri^^ of
water, Isay 41.17, 18.

10. If we be in Temptation.

W^e shall find mercy grace, and help i^ need, (f)

(f) For we have not an high Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities, but was in all points tempted as we are, yet without sin. Le^
us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy,
and find grace for help, in time of need, Heb. 4.15.16.

11. If we be in doubting.

We shall be directed (g) and our business shall be effected. (h)

(g) Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established,
pro. 16.3.

(h) Trust in the Lord and wait patiently for him, fret not thy self because
of him that prospers in his w^y, because of the man who brings wicked
devises to pass, psalm. 37.7.

12. If we pray for the Knowledge of God.

We shall find is. (i)

(i) Yea if thou cryest after knowledge and liftest up thy voice for
understanding. Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God, pro. 2.3, 5.

13. If for Faith.

It shall be granted. (k)

(k) Jesus answered if thou know the gift of God and who it is, that says
to thee, give me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have
given thee living water, Joh. 4.10.

14. If for the fear.

(l) And favor of God, (m) We shall obtain them.

(l) If thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
understanding. Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God. For the Lord gives wisdom, (...) his mouth comes
knowledge, and ^^derstanding, Pro. 2.3.5.6.

(m) He shall pray unto God and he will befavourable unto him, and he shall see
his fa^ with joy, Job. 33.26.

15. If for inward joy.

We shall have it (n) to the full. (o)

(n) Vide supra (m) Job. 33 26.

(o) Ask and y^ shall receive: that your joy may be full, Ioh. 16.24.

16. If we lack wisdom and strength, to bear Affliction aright.

The Lord will bestow it freely, and plentifully. (p)

(p) If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask it of God that gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him, Iam. 1.5.

17. Or to order our Affairs wisely.

We shall have it assuredly. (q)

(q) But they that seek the Lord, understand all things, Pro. 28.5.

18. If we pray for increase of good Gifts in general;

(r) Or of saving Knowledge (s) Or for Gods spirit to supply all our
necessities (t) They shall be vouchsafed to us.

(r) If thou would seek to God be times, and make thy supplication to the
Almighty.

Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly increase,
Job. 8.57.

(s) Call unto me and I will answer thee and show thee great and mighty things
which thou know not, Jer. 33.3.

Covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet show I unto you a more excellent way,
1 Cor. 12.31.

(t) If ye then being evil know how to give good gifts to your children: how
much more shall your Heavenly Father give the holy spirit to them that ask him,
Lu. 11.13.

But my God shall supply all your need, according to his riches in glory by
Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.19.

19. If for the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousesse.

I^ shall be given us, and all other things shall be ministered unto us. (u)

(u) Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness: and all their
things shall be added to you, Mat. 6.33.

20. If we pray for Others.

Sins shall be pardoned, and judgments removed. (w)

(^) Is any si^ke among yo^? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let
them pray over him, anointing him with oil, in the Name of the Lord.

And the prayer of Faith shall save the sick; and the Lord shall raise him up:
and i^ he have committed sins, they shall be forgiv^n him.

Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another that ye may be
healed, the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man, avayleth much, Iam.
5.14, 15, 16.

21. If we pray for the peace of Zion.

We shall prosper. (v)

(x) Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee, Psalm
122.6.

22. If for the peace of the place where we live;

Therein we shall have peace, though the people be our Enemies. (y)

(y) And seek the peace of the City, whether I have caused you to be carried
away captives, and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof shall ye
have peace, Ier. 29.7.

23. If Gods people pray together;

Our Heavenly Father will hear and help us. (z)

(z) If two of you shall agree on Earth, as touching any thing that they shall
ask. it shall be done for them of my Father my Father which is in Heaven,
Matthew. 18.19.

Further, many most comfortable places, abundantly, and infallibly declaring in
what most gracious manner, the Lord will hear our Prayers.

7. He hears our inward groans in our extremest Miseries.

Even when we cannot express our selves (a. 53) Our mourning (b) Sighs (c)
Desires (d) Tears (c) Complaining (f) Our very voye (g) And naming of Christ
(h) He will hear, wi^^ cut despising our prayers (i) Or hitting us is the
Teeth with our fore-past sins, or present frailties (k) He will prepare our
hearts too, and help us to draw our petitions (l) He accepts our prayers (m) He
takes delight in them, and in hearing of them (n) He looks down of purpose to
hear our groans (o) To deliver us when we are past hope (p) His Ears are
open, there is not the least impediment in his hearing (q) It is his very
nature to be a GOD that hears prayers, It is not contrary to his disposition
(r) He thinks thoughts of place to give an end to our troubles according to our
expectations (s) He will be plenteous in mercy to all that call upon him (t)
And will give us liberally (u) He will remarkeably help us, and show us
sometimes, wondrous things that we know not (w) He will refresh us also with
much joy and comfort of heart, he will be many times as the dew, to our hearts.
(x) He will hear every one that asks of him aright (y) Yea in whatsoever we
ask, we may have what we will, according to his will (z) When we cannot pray
as we ought his Spirit shall help our infirmities. (a. 54) God will Crown our
prayers with this honor, to be sign^s of (...) Sanctification (b) And
Salvation (c) (...) will hear us speedily (d) In the very (...), in due time,
when we are in trouble, yea so as he will in our affliction in especial
manner, let us know he is our God, and will deliver u^. (e) He is ready to be
found (f) He will hear at the very first, even while we are speaking to him
(g) And answer us before we can express our selves (h) Yea the Lord hears
us, when we think he has forsaken us (i) all our prayers are heard and
granted only through Christ Jesus. (k)

( a. 53.) And God heard their groaning, and God remembering this Covenant with
Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob, Ex. 2.24.

(b) From Heaven, did the Lord behold the Earth, to hear the groaning of the
prisoners, Ps. 102.19.20.

(c) For the sighing of the needy, now wi^ I arise (says the Lord) I will set
him i^ safety, from him that puffs at him, Ps. 12.5.

(d) Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their
heart, and wilt cause thine ear to hear, Psalm 10.17.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him: to all that call upon him in
truth. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he also will hear
their cry, and will save them, Psalm 145.18.19.

But the desire of the righteous shall be granted, Pro. 10.24.

(^) Hold not thy peace at my Tears P^^l. 39.12.

But thou my Tears into thy bottell, Psalm. 56 8.

(f) He forgets not the cry of the humble Psalm. 9.12.

(g) My voice shall thou hear in the morning, Ps. 5.3. and 55.17.

He will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry: when he shall
hear it he will answer thee, Isay 30 19.

(h) And let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19.

(i) I will regard the Prayer of the destitute, and not despise their Prayer
Psalm. 102.17.

(k) If any of you lack Wisdom, (...) him ask of GOD that gives to (...) men
liberally, and upbraideth not Jam. 1.5.

(l) Thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine Ear to hear, Psalm
10.17.

(m) But the prayer of the upright is his delight, ^r^. 15.8.

(n) I will praise the Name of God with a S^ng: and will magnify him with
Thanksgiving. This also shall please the Lord better then an Ox or Bullock,
that has horns, and hoofes, Psalm 69.30.31.

(o.p) For he has looked down from the height of his Sanctuary; from Heaven
did the Lord behold the Earth. To hear the groaning of the prisoners: to loose
those that are appointed to death, Psa. 102.19, 20.

(q) His ears are open to the righteous cry psalm. 34.15. 1 pet. 3.12.

(r) Hear my cry, O God, attend unto my prayer, Ps. 61.1.

(s) For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord,
thoughts of peace and not of evil to give you an expected end. Then shall ye
call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you.
And ye shall seek me, and find me, when yea shall search for me with all
your heart, Ier. 29.11.12, 13.

(t) Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is
near. Let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon, Isay 55.6, 7.

(v) Vide supra. (k) Jam. 1.5.

(w) Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty
things which thou know not, Jer. 33.3.

(x) He shall pray unto God, and he shall be favorable unto him, and he shall see
his face with joy, Job. 33.26.

I will be as the dew unto Israel, Hose. 14 5.

(y) For every one that asks, receives; and he that seeks sindeth, Luke
11.10. Mat. 7.8.

(z) What things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive
them, and ye shall have them, Mark 11.24.

( a. 54.) The spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought, but the spirit (...) self makes intercession for
us with groanings, which cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26.

(b) But if any man be a Worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears,
Jo^. 9 31.

(c) He shall call upon me and I will (...) swer him: I will be with him in
trouble, I will deliver, and honor him, Psalm. 91.15.

(d) In the day when I c^l, answer me speedily, ps. 102.2.

My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O God, psalm. 5 3.

(e) The Lord also w^^ be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of
trouble, Psalm 9.9. and 50.15.

He shall call upon me and I will answer him, I will be with him in trouble; I
will deliver him, and honor him. Psalm. 91.15.

(f) God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble, psalm.
46.1.

(g) From the first day, that thou did set thine heart to understand, and
to chasten thy self before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for
thy words. Dan. 10.12.

(h) And it shall come to pass, that before they call I will answer: and whiles
they are yet speaking I will hear. Iay, 65.24.

(i) For I said in my ^^ste, I am cut off from before th^^e (...): nev^^ the
less, thou I eardest the voice of my supplication, when I cried unto thee,
P^al. 31.22.

(k) Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he sh^^ give it you,
John 16.23.

And watsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do, that the Father may be
glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in my Name, I will do i^.
J^^. 14 13 14.

And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
(...) cording to his will, he hears us.

And if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask we know that we have
the petition that we desired of him, 1 J^. 5.14.15.

For through him we both have an access by one spirit unto the Father, Ephesians.
2.18.

8. To our Thankesgiving to the Lord.

It is a good thing (l) (...) (m) It is most acceptable to the Lord (^) And
(...) is glorified thireby. (o).

(l) It ^s a good thing to give thank (...) unto the Lord, and to sing praises
unto thy Name, O most high, Psalm 92. 1.

(m) Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for praise is comely for the
upright, Psalm. 33.1.

(n) I will praise the name of God with (...) Song and will magnify him wi^h
Thanksgiving. This also shall please the Lord, better then an Ox^ or Bullock.
that has horns, and hoofes, Psalm^. 69.30, 31.

(o) Whose offreth praise, glorifieth me, psalm. 50.23.

9. To our conscionable hearing Gods Word.

It is a sign we are in Gods Covenant (p) And of Christ's Flock (q) And most
near and dear to him (r) He knows us, and takes especial notice of us (s) We
shall be enabled to hear better (t) Grace in general (u) Saving knowledge (w)
True Faith (x) The fear of the Lord (y) Holy joy or spiritual satisfaction
(z) Increase of grace in general (^. 55) Increase of Faith (b) Here^^ shall be
wrought in us (c) We shall be bless^^ here (d) Art freed from Damnation (e) And
be assured of Salvation for evermore. (f)

(p) Incline your ear and come unto me^^ hear and your Soul shall live: and I
will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David, Isay
55 3.

(q) My Sheep hear my voice: and I know them and they follow me, John 10.27.

(r) Behold my Mother and my Brethren. For whosoever shall do the will of God,
the same is my Mother, and my Sister, and brother, Mark 3.34.35.

(s) Vide suprid (q) Ioh. 10.27.

(t.v.) Vide supra (p) Isay 55.3.

(w) But unto them that are called both Jews and Greeks Christ the power of
God, and the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24.

(x) So then Faith comes by hearing and hearing by the Word of God, Romans
10.17.

(y) Come ye Children hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord,
Psa. 34.11.

(z) Psalm,

( a. 55.) For this cause also thank we God without ce^sing, because when ye
received the Word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as ^^ew and
of men, but ^s (it is in such) the Word of God, which ^ff^ctually works also
in you that believe, 1 Thessalonians. 2.3.

(b)) For I am not ash^med of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God
unto S^lvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the
G^^k. For therein is the Righteousness of GOD revealed, from Faith to Faith,
Romans 1.16, 17.

(d) B^essed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy; and keep those things which are written therein, Rev. 1.3.

(^) ^^e that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life and shall not come into condemnation. J^^. 5.24.

(f) It pleased God by the foolishnessed pre^ching to save them that b^ (...) 1
Cor. 1.21. Vid. (...) (c) ^o. 1.16.

10. To our reading in Gods Word.

If any in authority, or in any condition els^ lo so conscionably, they are
assured the Lord will teach them, his fear, and to obey him and shall be
preserved from pride and backsliding, and procure prosperity in their
particular employments, and long life in their place, and the prosperit^e of
their Children (g) We shall be every way blessed (h) And know and sinde the
way to eternal life. (i)

(g) And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his
life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of
this Law, and these statutes, to do them. That his heart be not lifted up
above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the Commandment, to the
right hand, or unto the left, to the end that he may prolong his days in his
King some, he and his children in the midst of Israel, Deuteronomy. 17.19.20.

(h) Blessed is he that reads, etc. Rev. 1.3.

(i) Search the Scriptures for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and
they are they which testify of me. And ye will not come to me, that ye might
have life, John. 5.39.

11. To Meditation on Gods Word.

Preservation from sin, especially from whoredom (k) Direction to good (l)
Increase in grace (m) Safety from evil, s^eeping and waking (n) good success
in all things (o) Perseverance in grace. (p)

(k) For the Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is light, and reproves of
instruction are the way of life: To keep thee from the evil Woman, from the
flattery of the Tongue of a strange Woman, Proverbs 6. 23.24.

(l) When thou go it shall lead thee, when thou sleep it shall keep
thee; and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee, Verse 22. And again,
Verse 23.

(m) He shall be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of water, that brings
forth his fruit in his season, his leaf also shall not whither, and whatsoever
he does shall prosper, Psa. 1.3.

(n) Vide supra, Prove. 6.22.

(o) But thou shall meditate therein D^y and Night -- for then thou shall make
thy way prosperous and then thou shall have good success, Jeshua 1.8.

(p) Vide suprd (m) in Ps. 1.3.

12. To holy Conerence.

The Lord takes gracious notice thereof, and Records the same (q) He favoures
such, and will spare us as a man spares his own Son (r) He will put a
difference between such and the wicked (s) And all shall go well with us (t)

(q) Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and the Lord
hearkened, and heard it; and a Book of remembrance was written before him, for
them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name, Mal. 3.16.

(r) And they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts in that day when I make
up my Jewel^^, and I will spare them an a man spares his own Son that serves
him, v. 17.

(s) Then shall ye return, and discern between the Righteous and the
Wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not, Verse. 18.

(t) Vide sup^d (c) Josh. 1.8.

13. To holy Fasting.

We shall obtain our desire (u) GOD will remove evils from us that we feel
(w) And prevent those we fear and deserve (x) He will punish the instruments
of our harms (y) He will restore us the good we have lost (a. 56) And give us
good things in abundance (b) The means shall serve our turn (c) Our prayers
shall be turned into Thankesgivings (d) We shall be assured of GODS Favor (e)
And his goodness shall continue with us always. (f)

(v) Turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting and with
weeping, and with mourning.

Fear not, O Land, be glad and rejoice for the Lord will do great things,
J^^^. 2.12.21.

(w) But I will remove far off from you the Northern Army, and will drive them
into a Land barren and desolate with his face toward the East Sea, and his
hinder part toward the utmost Sea, and his stink shall come up, and his ill
savor shall come up, because he has done great things, Ver. 20.

(x) Then will the Lord be Jealous for his Land, and pity his people. Yea the
Lord will answer, and say unto his people: Behold I will send you Corn, and
Wine, and Oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith; and I will no more make
you a reproach among the Heathens.

And ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the Name of the
Lord your God, he that dealt wonderously with you: And my people shall never
be ashamed, Joel. 2.18 19.26.

(y) Vide supra, (w) in Joel. 2. 20,

( c. 56) And I will restore to you the years, that the Locust, has eaten,
the Canker-Worme, and the Cater-pillar, and the Palmer-Worme, my great Army,
which I sent amongst you, Verse, 25.

(b) Vide supra (x) in Verse. 19.

(c) Beglad then, ye Children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God: for
he has given you the former rain moderately, and he will cause to come down
for you the rain, the former rain, and the latter rain, in the first month,
Jeel. 2.23.

(d) Vide supra (x) verse. 26.

(e) And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the
Lord your God, and none else: and my people shall never be ashamed, Verse 27.

(f) Vide supra (x) in verse. 26.

14. To Swearing Religiously.

Hereby God is glorisied (g) Others ben^sited (h) contentions are ended. (i)

(g.h) And thou shall swear [The Lord liveth] in truth in judgment and it
righteeousnesse, and the Nations shall bless themselves in him, and in him
shall they glory, Jer. 4.2.

(i) For men verily swear by the greater, and an Oath for confirmation, is to
them an end of all strife, Hebrews 6.16.

15. Promises to comfort and settle us against our weak (if Sincere)
performing holy Duties.

The Lord tenders us dearly (k) And will not extinguish the least beginning
(l) But will strengthen our weakness. (m) And accept the will for the deed,
the desire for the performance. (n)

(k) He shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd. He shall gather the Lambs,
with his Arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are
with young, Isay 40.11.

Behold at that time I will undee all that afflict thee, and I will save her
that h^lteth, and gather her that was driven out, Zeph. 3.19. Michael 4.7.

(l) A bruised Reed will he not break: and smoking flax shall he not
quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory. Mat. 12.20. Isay. 42.3.

(m) I will seek that which was loft, and bring again that which was driven
away and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which
was si^k, Ez. 34.16.

(^) F^r if there be first a willing mind it is acce^ed according to that a
man has and not according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12.

16. The Lord will make our holy duties profita^le to our Soul^s (o) So that
our labors neither are nor shall be in va^ne ((...)) But shall be rowarded. (q)

(o) For I will pour Water upon him that is Thirsty, and Floods upon the dry
ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed and my blessings upon thine
offspring. And they shall spring up as among the Grass as VVillowes by the
VVater-courses, Isay 44.3.4.

(p) Be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lordforasmuch as you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. 1 Cor.
15.58.

(q) Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands he weak for your work
shall be rewarded, 2 Chronicles. 15.7.

And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap if we
faint not, Gal. 6.9.

Thus far of the third head of the sixth maine part.

The fourth Head of the sixth maine part contains such Promises as are made to
avoiding diverse particular sins, as
1. To avoiding sin in General.

THat the Lord will bless us (r) Our sins though never so heinous shall be
pardoned (s) We shall be justified from them (t) We shall have spiritual
contentment (u) And outward prosp^rity (w) And a long life (x) and be aved. (y)

(r) Blessed is the man that does this, and the Son of man that lays hold
on it: that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and keeps his hand from
doing any evil, Isay. 56.2.

(s) Learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
Fatherless, plead from the Widow. Come now and let us reason together, says
the Lord, though your sianes be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow,
though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as wool, Isay, 1.17.18.

(t) He that has not given forth upon Usory, neither has taken any increase;
that has withdrawn his hand from iniquity, and has execute true judgment
between man and man, has walked in my Statutes, and has kept my judgments
to deal truly: he is just, he shall surely live, says the Lord God, Ez^k.
18.8, 9.

(v) Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the Lord, and depart from evil: It
shall be health to thy Navell: and Marrow to thy Bones, Proves b^ 3.7.8.

(w) If ye be willing and obecien^ ye shall eat the good of the L^nd, Isay
1.19.

(x) What man is he that'd streth life, and loves many days, (...) see good?
Depart from ^^ll, and do good, seek peace, and pursue it, Psalm 34.12.14.

For he that will love life and s^e good days, let him refrain his T^^^ue
from evil: and his lips that ^^y speak no guile. Let him eichew evil and do
good, let him seek peace and ensue it, 1 Pet. 3.10.11.

(y) Vide supra (t) in Eze. 18.89.

2. To avoiding evil Company.

The Lord will receive us and be our Father, and make us his children (z) And
will bless us (a. 57) We shall increase in grace (b) And prosper in all we do
(c) And persev (...) goodness. (d)

(z) Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord
and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. 2 Cor. 16.17.

( a. 57) Blessed is the man that walks not in the Counsel of the ungodly,
nor stands in the way of sinners nor sits in the seat of the scornful,
Psalm. 1.1.

(b.c) He shall be like a Tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings
forth his fruit in his season;

(d) His leaf also shall not whither, and whatsoever he does, shall prosper,
verse 3.

3. To avoiding evil Counsel.

(B.c.d.) in Is^. 1.3.

4. To avoiding Idolatry.

As before out of, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. And we shall be saved. (e)

(e) And has not eaten upon the mountains, neither has li^t up his eyes to
the Idols of the house Israel neither has defiled his neighbors wile, neither
has come near to a menstr^ous Woman. But has walked in my Statutes, and has
kept my judgments to deal truly: be is just, he shall surely live, says
the Lord, Ezekiel. 18.5.6.9.

5. If we fly Adultery,

God in mercy will justify, and save us. (f)

(f) Vide supra (e) in Ezc. 18.5.6.9.

6. And avoid dealing with a Separate Woman. (g)

(g) Vide supra (e) in Eze. 18.5.6.9.

7. If we avoid all oaths sorts of Uncleanesse.

The Lord will receive us, and be our Father, and makes us his children. (h)

(h) Touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father
unto you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, 2 Cor. 6.18.

8. If we avoid oppression, and injuring others.

The Lord will justify and save us (i) And be our defense (k) And provide for
us (l) And exalt us here (m) And glorify us hereafter. (n)

(i) Vide supra (e) Eze. 18.5, 6, 9.

(k.l.m) He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, he that
despises the gain of oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding of
bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes
from seeing evil. He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be munition
of rocks, Isa. 33.15, 16.

(n) Thine eyes shall see the King in his breauty: they shall behold the Land
that is very far, off, verse. 17.

See as before to Alms out of Isay, 58.8, 9, 10, 11.

9. If Covetousness,

We shall prolong our days, Pro. 28.16.

10. And if Usury,

It is a token we are of Gods Church (c) He will justify and save us. (p)

(o) Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, who shall abide in thy holy hill?
He that puts not out his money to Usury Psalm. 15.1.5.

(p) He that has not given forth upon Usury, neither has taken any increase
-- He is just, he shall surely live, says the Lord, Ez. 18.8.9.

11. Bribery.

As before out of Isay 33.15, 26, 17. (m) We are of Gods Church, (q) shall live
happily here (r) And be saved for evermore. (s)

(q) Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, who shall abide in thy holy hill?
-- He that takes not a reward against the innocent, ps. 15.1.5.

(r) But he that hates gifts, shall live, Pro. 15.27.

(s) He that does these things shall never be moved, Ps. 15.5.

12. And slandering of others.

It is a sign we are of Gods Church here, and shall be saved for evermore (t).

(t) Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? etc. He that back-biteth not with
his tongue, nor does evil to his Neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against
his Neighbor, he that does these things shall never be moved, Psalm. 15.1.3.5.

13. And receiving Slanders.

The last words of the third Verse.

14. And Scorning others in Heart.

As before, Psalm 1.1.3. In) b)

15. And Scornful mocking gestures.

As Psalm. 1.1.3. Isa. 58.8,9,10.

16. And mocking Words.

Both the same.

17. And justifying our selves and others in sin.

As Psalm. 1.1.3. In (a.b)

18. And the scornful, Idem.

19. If we cast out the Scorner.

Inward strife, outward contention, and reproach shall cease. (e)

(e) Cast out the Scorner, and contention shall go out: yea strife, and
reproach shall cease, pro. 22.10.

20. If we avoid judging others.

We shall not be judged of others. (f)

(f) Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge yet
shall be judged, and with what m^asure ye mete, it shall be measured to you
again, Mat. 7.1.

Judge not, and ye shall not be judged, condemn not and ye shall not be
condemned, Luke 6.37.

21. If we avoid Wrath, Anger, Passion.

Such an one is of great wisdom (g) And shows great discretion (h) it is his
glory to pass by an^ff^nce. (i) He prevents (k) And appeaseth strife (l) is
better then a mighty man (m) And then he that wins a City (n) For it is his
honor to cease from strife. (o)

(g) He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding. Prove. 14.23.

(h.i) The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to
pass over a Transgression, Prove. 19.11.

(k) A soft answer, turns away wrath, Pre. 15.1.

(l) But he that is slow to anger appeaseth strife, Pro. 15.18.

(m.n) He that is slow to anger, is better then the mighty: and he that
rules his spirit then he that takes a City. Pro. 16.32.

(o) Iti^an honor to a man to cease from strife, Pro. 20.3.

22. And Discord, Strife, and Contention.

All the same as to the last.

23. If we avoid Lying.

See to speaking truth.

24. And evil Speaking,

As before out of Isay 58.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

25. And swearing falsely.

We are of Gods Church, are justified, shall be blessed, and saved. (p)

(p) He that back-biteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor,
nor takes up a reproach again his Neighbor. In whose eyes a vile person is
contemned; but he honors them that fear the Lord: he that swears to his
own hurt, and changes not. He that puts not out his money to Usury, nor
takes reward against the innocent: he that does these things, shall never be
moved, Psalm. 15.3, 4, 5.

26. And surety-ship.

We are free from much sorrow, shame, vexation, trouble, loss, and charge. (q)

(q) He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it: and he that hates
suretiship is sure, Pro. 11.15.

Thus far of the fourth head of the sixth maine part.

The fifth head of the sixth maine part, containing Promises to embracing many
duties specified, as
1. If we receive and embrace Instruction.

WE are in the way of life (r) We show our love to knowledge (s) it is a (...)
of wisdom (t) We shall get understand^^g (u) And judge among the wise (w) The
Lord will teach us his ways (x) We shall increase as Wisdom (y) And grace (z)
And be preserved from mischief (a. 58) it graceth us (b) it procures us
honor (c) And much good (d) And long life (e) We shall persevere in goodness
(f) And be happy for ever. (g)

(r) He is in the way of life that keeps instructions, Prove. 10.17.

(s) Whosoever loves instruction, loves knowledge, Pro. 12.1.

(t) But he that regards reproof is prudent, pro. 15.5.

(u) When the wise is instructed, he receives knowledge, Pro. 21.11.

But he that hears reproof, gets understanding, pro. 15.32.

(w) The ear that hears the reproof of life, abides among the wise, prove.
15.31.

(x) Turn you at my reproof, behold I will pour out my spirit unto you, I
will make known my words unto you, prove. 1.23.

(y) Teach a just man, and he will increase in learning, pro. 9.9.

( z.a. 58.) The Law of the wise is a fountain of life: to depart from the
snares of death, pro. 13, 14.

(b) My Son hear the instruction of thy Father; and forsake not the Law of thy
Mother. For they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head and chains about
thy neck, pro. 1.8.9.

(c) But he that regards reproof, shall be honored, pro. 13.18.

(d) A reproof enters more into a wise man, then a hundred stripes into a
fool, prove. 17.10.

(e) Hear, O my Son, and receive my sayings, and the years of thy life
shall be many, prove. 4.10.

(f) Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou may be wise in thy
later end, prove. 19, 20.

(g) Take fast hold of instruction let her not go, keep her, for she^ is thy
life, prove. 4.13.

2. If we instruct and reprove others.

Such as are wise will love us (h) And gain knowledge by us (i) And increase
inwisdom (k) And perform an acceptable work to God (l) And shall at length
find more favor then a flutterer (m) We shall have contentment (n) And enjoy
Gods blessing. (o)

(h) Rebuke a wise man and he will love thee, Pro. 9.8.

(i) When the wise is instructed, he receives knowledge, por. 21.11.

(k) Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser: teach a just
man, and he will increase in learning, Prove. 9.9.

(l) As an eare-ring of Gold, and an Ornament of fine Gold. So is a wise
reprover upon an obedient ear, Prove. 25.12.

(m) He that rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor, then he that
flattereth with the tongue, Prove. 28.23.

(n. o) But to them that rebuke him shall be delight, and a good blessing shall
come upon them, prove. 24.23.

3. If we be Instruments to Conven^ Others.

It is a sign of wisdom (p) We shall cover many sins (q) And shall be a
means to save Souls (r) And shall have great glory in Heaven. (s)

(p) He that wins Souls is wise, Prove. 11.30.

(q.r) He which converteth the Sinner from the error of his way, shall save a
Soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins, Jam. 5.20.

(s) And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and
they that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan.
12.3.

4. If we pass by Offenses.

It is a true mark of a wise man, (t) And an honor to us (u) And a means to
gain love. (w)

(t)(u). The discretion of a man, deferreth his anger: and it is his glory to
pass by a Transgression, Pro. 19.11.

(w) He that covers a Transgression seeks love, prove. 17.9.

5. If we forgive Others.

God will forgive us (x) And deliver us from our adversaries. (y)

(x) If ye forgive men their Trespasses, your heavenly Father also will
forgive you, Mat. 6.14.

Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven, Luke 6.37.

(y) Say not thou I will recompense evil: but wait on the Lord and he shall
save thee, Prove. 20.22.

6. If we do Good for Evil.

The Lord will recompense us (z) And their punishment that wish and seek our
shame and harm, shall be the greater, (a. 59)

(a) If thine enemy be hung^y give him bread to eat: and if he be thirsty give
him water to drink.

( a. 59.) For thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord
shall reward thee, Proverbs 25.21, 22. Romans 12.20.

7. If we be Secret.

It shows a wise (b) And a faithful heart (c) And we glorify God. (d)

(b) A prudent man concealeth knowledge, pro. 12.23.

(c) But he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter, pro. 11.13.

(d) It is the glory of God to conceal a thing. Pro. 25.2.

8. If we keep Silence it is a note of Wisdom.

See to governing the Tongue, (e).

(e) But a man of understanding holds his peace, Prove. 11.12.

9. To speaking the Truth.

It is a sign we are Gods Children (f) God delights in us (g) We shall get
understanding from God, and be reputed wise among men, we shall have favor
from God, and good will from men (h) We shall be enabled to deal directly (i)
And delight great men (k) They will love us (l) And employ us gladly (m) We
shall have long life (n) And happy days (o) We shall persevere in grace (p)
And enjoy heaven. (q)

(f) Lord who shall abide in thy T^bermacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy hill?
-- He that speaks the truth in his heart, Psalm. 15.1.2.

(g) But they that deal truly, are his delight, Pro. 12.22.

(h) Let not Mercy and Truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck, write
them upon the Table of thine heart. So shall thou find favor, and good
understanding in the sight of God, and man, Pro. 3.3, 4.

(i) He that speaks Truth, shows forth righteousness, pro, 12.17.

(k. l.) Righteous lips are the delight of Kings; and they love him that
speaks right. pro. 16.13.

(m) Every man shall kiss his lips, that gives aright answer, Pro. 24.26.

(n.o) What man is he that desires life? And loves many days that he may
see good. Keep thy tongue from evil and thy lips from speaking guile, Ps.
34.12.13. 1 Pet. 3.10.

(p) The lip of Truth shall be established for ever, pro. 12.19.

(q) Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? etc. He that speaks the truth
in his heart. He that backb^teth not with his Tongue, Psalm, 15.1, 2, 3.

10. If we deal Truly.

The Lord delights in us, and will keep us from harm (r) See to dealing
justly.

(r) There shall no evil happen to the just, but the wicked shall be filled
with mischief. Lying Lips are abomination to the Lord but they that deal
truly are his delight.

11. If we perform our lawful Oaths. Covenants, Contracts and Promises,
though made to our own, hinderance.

We are Gods children, shall persevere in grace, and be saved. (s)

(s) Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy hill?
He -- in whose eyes a vile person is contemned: but he honors them that
fear the Lord: he that swears to his own hurt and changes not. He that
puts not out his money to Usury: nor takes a reward against the innocent:
he that does these things shall never be moved, Psalm 15.1.4, 5.

12. If we instruct our Children.

They shall by Gods blessing reap continual benefit thereby (t) See the next
proofs.

(t) Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will
not depart from it, Pro. 22.6.

13. If we correct our Children.

Their natural perverseness shall be driven out (u) They shall be made wise
(w) We shall have peace by them (x) and pleasure in them (y) Our correcting
shall not hurt them (z) But be a means to save them. (a. 60)

(u) Foo^ishnesse is bound in the heart of a Child, but the rod of correction
shall drive it far from him, Prove. 22.15.

(w) The rod, and reproof give wisdom. Pro. 29 15.

(x) Correct thy S^nne and he shall give thee rest: yea he shall give delight
unto thy soul, Pre. 29.17.

(y. z) Withhold not correction from the Child, for if thou beatest him with
the rod, he shall not die, Proverbs, 23.13.

( a. 60) Thou shall beat him with the rod, and deliver his Soul from death,
prove. 23.14.

14. I we obey our Parents.

We shall have long life, and prosper on Earth. (b)

(b) Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, that thy days may be long upon the
Land which the Lord thy God gives thee, Ex^dus 20.12. Dew. 5.16.

15. If we obey Superiors.

The two last and we shall be praised, (c).

(c) VVilt thou then not be affrayd of the power, do that which is good and
thou shall have praise of the same, Romans 13.3.

16. If we have a good name.

It procures great contentment, (d) And is more worth then great riches. (e)

(d) And a good report makes the bones fat, pro. 15.30.

(e) A good name is rather to be chosen then great riches, pro. 22.1.

17. If we govern our minds it is a note of VVisdome, (f)

We shall be reputed wise (g) And be able to govern our Tongues (h) And
express good government (i) And excel. (k).

(f) With the well advised is wisdom, Prove. 13 10.

(g) The wise in heart shall be called prudent prove. 16.21.

(h) The heart of the wise teaches his mouth, and adds learning to his lips.
prove. 16.23.

(i) He that is slow to anger is better then the mighty: and he that rules
his spirit, then he that takes a City, Prove. 16.32.

(k) A man of understanding is of an excellent spirit, pro. 17.27.

18. If we govern our Tongues.

We shall have long life, and happy days (l) Our talk shall abound with
goodness (m) It is a sign of wisdom in any (n) Yea the foolish in that is
counted wise (o) It declares understanding (p) It is a sign of Sanctisication
(q) We edify many (r) And converse acceptably (s) We prevent, and deliver our
selves from much mischief (t) We procure our selves contentment (u) And health
(w) We keep our selves secure (x) We prevent and appease wrath and contention
(y) We use knowledge a^ight (z) Wear esteemed wise and well governed (^. 61)
We preserve our Souls from afflictions (b) (...) Sum, quiet and di^quiet,
f^lly, and wisdom, saf^^y, or harm, life or death, are in the power of the
Tongue. (c)

(l) What man is he that desires li^e, and loves many days, that he may
see good? Keep thy Tongue from ev^ll, and thy lips from speaking guile, Psalm.
34.12, 13. 1 pet. 3.10.

(m) The mouth of a righteous man, is a well of life, Pro. 10.11.

(n) In the lips of him that has understanding wisdom is found, Prove. 10.13.

(o) Even a fool when he holds his peace is accounted wise, pro. 17.28.

(p) He that refraineth his lips is wise, Pro. 10.19.

(q) The Tongue of the just is as choice silver, Pro. 10.20.

If any man among you seems to be religious and bridleth not his Tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is vain, Iam. 1.26.

(r) A wholesome Tongue is a Tree of life. The lips of the wise disperseth
knowledge, Pro. 15.4.7.

(s) The lips of the righteous, know what is acceptable, pro. 10.32.

Pleasant words are as an hony-combe, sweet to the Soul, and health to the
Bones, Pro. 16.24.

A word fitly spoken is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, Pro. 25.11.

(t) But the mouth of the upright shall deliver them. pro. 12.6.

(u) A man shall be satisfied with good, by the Fruit of his Mouth, Proverbs
12, 14.

(w) But the Tongue of the wise is health, Prove. 12.18.

(x) He that keeps his mouth keeps his (...) pro^. 13.3.

But the lips of the wise shall preserve them. prove. 14.3.

(y) A soft answer turns away wrath, prove. 15.1.

(z) The Tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright, prove. 15.2.

( a. 61.) He that shuts his lips is esteemed a Man of understanding, prove.
17 28

(b) Whosoever keeps his Mouth, and his Tongue keeps his soul from troubles,
prove. 21.23.

(c) A man's belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his Mouth: and with the
increase of his lips shall he be filled. Death and Life are in the power of
the Tongue, and they that love it, shall eat the Fruit thereof, pro. 18.20 21.

19. To ordering our Affairs wisely.

Such shall gain more wisdom (d) And shall be preserved from sin and misery
(e) He shows understanding (f) And wins commendation (g) And carries himself
acceptably (h) Cir^umspectly (i) worthily (k) He seareth and evoydeth iniquity
(l) Abounds in knowledge (m) And makes fools ashamed (n) He is a delight to
wise men, even to great men (o) He walks uprightly (p) Shall find good (q) And
be esteemed prudent (r) And guides his mouth wisely (s) And has much
contentment (t) Thugh mean, he shall rule over the greater (u) And come to
wealth (w) His countenance ^ews wisdom (x) He seeks (y) And obtai^^th
knowledge (z) He understands deep c^unsell (a. 62) Has happiness in his
house (b) Prevails against great strength (c) Discerns evil ere it come,
and avoyds it (d) He is of great sufficiency (e) And increases therein (f)
Furthereth the peace of the Land where he lives (g) Discovers the pride and
self-conceitednesse of others, (h) Shall be delivered out of trouble (i) Is a
joy to his parents (k) Shall understand the Will of God in his Word (l) And
have great glory in Heaven. (m)

(d) A wise Man will hear, and will increase learning, Proverbs. 1.5.

The wise in heart shall be called prudent; and the sweetness of the lips
increases learning.

Understanding is a wellspring of life unto him that has it: but the
instruction of fools is folly.

The heart of the wife teaches his mouth, and adds learning to his lips
prove. 16.21, 22, 23.

(e) When wisdom enters into thy heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy
Soul. Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee: To
deliver thee from the way of the evil man, from the man that speaks froward
things, Prove. 2.10.11, 12.

(f) But a man of understanding has wisdom prove. 10.23.

(g) A man shall be commended according to his wisdom. pro. 12.8.

(h) Good understanding gives favor, pro. 13.15. and 16.24.

(i) The prudent man looks well to his g^ing prove. 14 15.

(k) Every prudent man deals with knowledge, prove. 13.16.

(l) A wise man fears, and departs from evil, Prove. 14.16.

(m) The prudent are crowned with knowledge, prove. 14.18.

(n. o) Wisdom rests in the heart of him that has understanding: but that
which is in the midst of fools is made known, Prove. 14.33.

(p) A man of understanding walks uprightly, prove. 15.21.

(q) He that handles a matter wisely, shall find good, prove. 16.20.

(r) The wise in heart shall be called prudent, prove. 16.21.

(s) Vide supra (d) in prove. 16.23.

He that has knowledge spares ^is words, Pro. 17.27.

(t) Wisdom is before him that has understanding, pro. 17.24.

(u.w) A wise servant shall have rule over a Son that causes shame: and shall
have part of the inheritance among the brethren, pro. 17.2.

(x) Vide supra (t) in pro. 17.24.

(y.z.) The heart of the prudent gets knowledge: and the Ear of the wise
seek^eth knowledge, pro. 18.15.

( a. 62) Counsel in the heart of man is like deep water: but a man of
understanding will d^aw it out, pro. 20.5.

(b) There is Treasure to be desired, and Oil in the dwelling of the wise,
prove. 21.20.

(c) A wise man scaleth the City of the mighty: and casts down the strength
of the confidence thereof, prove. 21.22.

(d) A prudent man fore-seeth the evil. and hides himself, Prove. 22.3. and
27.12.

(e. f) A wise man is strong, yea a man of knowledge increases strength, Prove.
24.5.

(g) By a man of understanding and knowledge the state of the Land shall be
prolonged, prove. 28.2.

(h) The rich man is wise in his own conceit, but the poor that has
understanding searches him out, Prove. 28.11.

(i) But whosoever walks wisely, he shall be delivered, prove. 28 26.

(h) Whosoever loves wisdom, rejoices his father, prove. 29.3.

(l) Whosoever is wise and he sh^^ underst and these things; prudent, and the shat
know them? Hos. 14.9.

(m) And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the fi^mame ^^nd
they that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever, Da^.
12.3.

20. To courage in a good C^use.

Gods Angel is by ^uch (^) God will not forsake ^^ch (o) See to trast in God.

(n) The Lord is with thee thou mighty man of vasour, Judge. 6.12.

(o) Blehold God is mig^ty and despises not any: he is mighty in strength,
and wild^^, Job. 36.5.

21. To Diligence.

Such shall be employed by great men (p) And shall be advanced (q) And gr^wrich
(r) With clenty (t) and contentment (u).

(p) See th^^ a man delight in his bu^^nesse? he shall stand before Kings,
he shall not stand before mean men, prove. 22.29.

(q) The hand of the diligent shall b^are rule, prove. 12.14.

(r) The hand of the diligent makes rich, prove. 10.4.

(s) The Soul of the diligent shall be made fat. prove. 3.4.

(t) The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousnesse, prove. 21.5.

(u) Vide supra(s) In prove. 13 4.

22. To Faithfulness.

Such secure themselves and others (w) Are most acceptable to them that employ
them (x) Shall abound with blessings here (y) And be plentifully rewarded for
evermore, (z).

(w) A faithful Ambassador is health, Prove. 13.17.

(x) As the cold of Snow in the time of harvest: so it a faithful Messenger to
them that send him; for he refreshes the soul of his masters. Prove. 25.13.

(y) A faithful man shall abound with blessings, prove. 28.20.

(z) Well done good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a
few things: I will make thee ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of
thy Lord, Mat. 25.23. See all the parable Lu. 19.12.

23. To Contentation.

It is a sign of godliness ( a. 63) And is much better with a little, then
abundance with strife (b).

( a. 63) The righteous eats to the satisfying of his soul, prove. 13.24.

(b) Better is little with the fear of the Lord, then great Treasure, and
trouble therewith. Better is a Dinner of herbs where love is, then astalled
Ox, and hatred therewith, pro. 15.16.17.

Better is a dry mo^sell and quietness therewith: then an house full of
Sacrisices with strife, pr^. 17.1.

24. To Thriftinesse.

Such shall increase in wealth, (c).

(c) He that gathers by labor shall increase, pro. 13 11.

25. To executing Justice in Judgment.

Such shall have long life and happy days (d) The Lord will assist such in
judgment (e) And bless them (f) To do justice is more acceptable then
Sacrifice (g) It preserves, and ectablisheth the Judge (h) Maintains the
Coun^ry (i) Procures inward peace, and outward quietness, and great assurance
(k) And honor (l) And safety (m) And succor (n) God will bring such to his
house (o) And accept his service, and make him joyful thereby. (p) Shall be
Justified from sin (q) and saved. (r)

(d) That which is altogether just shall thou follow, that thou may live and
inherit the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee, Deuteronomy. 16.20.

(e) And he said to the Judges, take heed what you do for ye judge not for
man but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.

(f) Blessed are they that keep judgment: and he that does righteousness at
all times, Ps. 106.3.

Thus says the Lord, keep ye j^dgement, and do justice: for my salv^tion is
near to come, and my righteousness^ to be revealed.

Blessed is the man that does this, and the Son of man that lays hold on it,
etc. Isay 65.1.2.

(g) To do justice and jugement, is more acceptable to the Lord then
Sacrifice, prove. 21.3.

(h) Mercy, and truth preserve the King: and his throne is up holden by mercy
prove. 10.28.

The King that faithfully judges the poor: his throne shall be established
for ever. prove. 29.14.

(i) The King by judgment establishes the land prove. 29.4.

(k) And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of
righteousness^ quietness, and assurance for ever, I^ay 32.17.

(l) He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, etc.

(m.n) He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munition of
rocks, bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure.

Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty: they shall behold the Land that
is very far off, Isay 33.15.16, 17.

(^. ^) Keep ye judgment, and do Justice.

Even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and make them joyful in my House
of Prayer: their burnt-Offrings, and their Sacrifices shall be accepted upon
mine Altar, Isay, 56.1.7.

(q) He that has executed judgment between man and man. Has walked in my
Statutes, and has kept my judgments to deal truly: he is just, he shall
surely live, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 18.8.9.

(r) Keep ye Judgment, and doc Justice: for my Salvation is near to come
Isay 56.1.

26. To dealing Justly with others in our common course.

The Lord loves such (s) And delights therein (t) It is a mark of Gods
Child (u) Others shall deal so with us (w) Such shall have long life (x) And
prosperity (y) Are more happy with little, then others with great riches of
Unrighteousness (z) Shall have honor (a. 64) Be justified, and saved (b).

(s) But he loves him that follows after righteousness, Prove. 15.9.

(t) But a just weight is his delight, Prove. 11.1.

(u) Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill?
He that walks uprightly and works righteousness, Psalm: 15.1.2.

(w) With what measure ye mete, it shall be meted to you again. Matthew. 7.2.
Lu. 6.38.

(x) Thou shall have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure
shall thou have, that thy days may be lengthned in the Land, which the Lord
thy GOD gives thee, Deutre. 25.15.

(y) That which is altogether just shall thou follow, that thou may live and
inherit the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee, Deutero. 16.26.

(z) Better is a little with righteousness, then great Revenues without right,
Pro. 16.8.

( a. 64) He that follows after righteousness and mercy finds life,
righteousness and honor, prove. 21.21.

(b) He that has walked in my Statutes, and has kept my judgments to deal
truly: he is just, he shall surely live, says the Lord GOD Ezekiel. 18.9.

Lastly, Such places of Scripture as assure us of infinite, and endless
happiness in Heaven, being the most merciful, final, and full reward of all
our sincere, (though never so weak) endeavors, in Christ Jesus (c) There we
are assured to be fully freed from all sin (d) Sorrow (e) And misery (f)
Curses (g) And death (h) And to enjoy all holiness (i) Joy (k) Peace (l) Glory
(m) And life (n) And this for evermore (o) The same is given us of GOD through
Jesus Christ (p) And is reserved for us in Heaven (q) Yea our alone
all-sufficient Savior Jesus Christ is go^e thither before us, to prepare a
place for us, and will come again to receive us to himself (r) That where he
is, we may be also (s) and this, he who was heard in all things that he
desired, has prayed for (t).

So that we shall never perish, neither shall any pluck us out of his hand, For
our Heavenly Father which gave us to him is greater then all, and none is able
to take us from him, out of our Fathers hand (u) And this is the promise that
he that promised us, even eternal life. (w)

(c) To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of
God, Psa. 50.23.

With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my Salvation, psalm 91.16.

For God so loved his Son, that h^e gave his only begotten Son: that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life, John
3.16.

Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of
man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1. Cor. 2.9.

Now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be:
But we know that when he shall appear we shall be like him: for we shall
see him as he is, 2 Ioh. 3.2. Rev. 21.

(d) For without are Dogs and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and M^rderers and
Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie, Revelati. 22.15.

And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination or makes a lie: but they which are written in
the Lambs Book of Life, Rev. 21, 27.

(^) And the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of
crying, Isa. 65.19.

He will swallow up Death in victory, and the Lord God will wipe away Tears
from off all Faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off
all the Earth, Isay 25.8.

The Lord shall be thine ever lasting light and the days of thy mourning shall
b^ ended, Isay 60.20.

And God shall wipe away all Teare^ from thine eyes: and there shall b^ no more
Death, neither Sorrow, no^ crying, neither shall there be any more pain for
the former things are passed away, Rev. 21.4.

(f) Violence shall no more be heard in thy Land; wasting nor destruction
within thy borders, Isay 60.18.

They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor Sun smite them,
Isay. 49.10.

Where no thief approaches, nor moth corrupts, Lu. 12 33.

Vide supra (e) Rev. 21.4.

(g) And there shall be no more Curse, Rev. 22.3.

(h) And he will swallow up Death in victory, Isai. 25.8.

And there shall be no more Death, Rev. 21.4.

(i) Thy people also shall be all righteous, Isai. 60.21.

Nevertheless we according to his promise, look for new heavens, and a new
E^rth, wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13.

(k) In thy presence is fullness of joy, psalm. 16.11.

Behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people joy. And I will rejoice
in Jerusalem, and joy in my people, Isai. 65.18, 19.

I will make thee an eternal excellency, the joy of many Nations, Isai. 16.15.

(l) To them who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory, and
honor, and immortality; eternal life. Glory, honor, and peace to every man
that works good, Romans 2.7.10.

(m) I will deliv^r him, and honor him, psalm. 91.15.

If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. For
I reckon that the suff^ings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared
with the glory, which shall be revealed in us.

Whom he justified them he also glorified, To. 8.17.18.30.

For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
ex^eeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Co^. 4.17.

Henceforth there is laid up for mee^ Crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but to them
also that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8.

When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
him in glory, Col. 3.4.

(n) He that believes my Word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life. And tehy shall come forth they that have done good, to the
resurrection of life, Joh. 5.24, 29.

(o) At thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. psalm, 16 11.

For as the new heavens, and the new Earth which I shall make shall remain
before me, says the Lord, So shall your seed and your name, remain. And it
shall come to pass, that from one new Moon to another and from one Sabbath to
another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, Isa. 66.22.23.

And they that be wise shall shine as the brighnesse of the Firmament, and they
that turn many to righteousness as the Stars) for ever and ever, Dan, 12.3.

But the righteous into life everlasting, Mat. 25.46.

Whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life, Ioh.
3.16.

We have a building of God, a house made without hands, eternal in the heavens,
2 Cor. 5.1.

And this is the record, that God has given us eternal life, 1 John 5.11.

And they shall reign for ever, and ever, Rev. 22.5.

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ which according to his
abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead, To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled,
and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you, 1 pet. 1.3 4.

(p) But the gift of God, is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Rom
6.23.

For God has not appointed us to wrath: but to obtain salvation by our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9.

(q) Vide supra(o) In 1 pet. 1.3.4.

(^) I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for
you, I will come again, and receive you, unto my self, that where I am there
ye may be also, Ioh. 14.2.3.

(s) Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me where I am, Joh.
17.24.

(t) Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying, and tears, unto him that was able to save
him from death, and was heard in that he feared, Heb. 5.7.

(u) And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hand.

My Father which gave them me is greater then all: and no man is able to pluck
them out of my Father hands, Joh. 10.28.29.

(w) And this is the promise that he has promised us even eternal life, 1
Iok. 2.25.

And Jesus Christ said unto me, these words are faithful and true (x) And the
spirit, and the bride said com^ and let him that hears, say, come and let him
that is athirst come, and let whosoever will take of the water of life fr^ely;
He which testified these things says surely I come quickly; even so come Lord
Jesus Amen. Rev. 22.17.20. (x) Rev. 22.6.

Thus far of the fifth and last head, of the sixth and last part of this
Collection of Promises.

CAn he be poor whose portion is
Gods free and faithful Promises?
Much I have lost and more may lose,
Far well to all; These these I choose.
Beyond Sea service me undid,
Because to s^^ark conscience forbid.
What if J never more shall gain
Except my babour for my pain^?
I then did trust, and still will make,
Gods promises my surest stake:
His promised help I th^n did sinde:
More of the sam^ is still behind.
Can I be poor whose portion it
Gods fr^^ and faithful ^^^mises?
Blessed be the Lord that has given rest unto his people Israel: according to
all that he promised: there has not failed one word of all his good promise,
which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant, 1 Kings 8.56.

All possible praise be only to my God, through Jesus Christ, who has most
graciously given me, (who am most weak and unworthy) Understanding Dersie,
Time, Health, and Ability, to begin, continue, and finish this work: which I
beseech him of his mere Mercy, by the effectual work of his holy spirit
(whatsoever opposes) to make profittable to his people, comfortable to my
Soul, to the Souls of mine, and of every one that mournes in Zion, through
Jesus Christ, amen. Even so be it, Amer.

A Soliloquy between the most gracious Lord, and his most unworthy Servant.
LORD alone Ps 44.
At home Ps. 101 2
Abroad Genesis 24.63.
In thought Isai 55.7
word Ps. 34.13
deed 1 last
.

To do what is good 1 last
and fly what^s ill take heed Isa. 1.16, 17.
.

With whom thou have to do 1 Cor. 20.31.
where ere thou art, Ps. 139.7.


In all thy ways from Gods ways never start, Ps. 119.6 15.59.


All by respects abhor Ps. 119.113.1: 8.
regard thou not, Luke 6.22 23.


A bad man's censure Luke 6.22 23.
it is a good man's lot, Ps. 33, 15, 16.


If good and bad men both should judge amiss, Isai 66 5


Keep Conscience clear, thou neen'st not care, I wisse, 1 Pette 3.16.


When, and wherein thou fayl'st, with me make peace, Hes. 14.1^^.


Be wise Ex. 23.13
warned Ephesians. 5.15
watchful Mar. 13.37.
Labor me to please Acts 11.^3.
.

Be confi^lent Ps. 27.14
thy cause I will maintain, Jer. 50.3, 4.


Peace 2 Ps. 85 8
credit Zep. 3.19
comfort Ps. 68.3.
welfare thou shall gain Eccle. 8.12.
.

Ser. Lord make me humble Mic. 8.8.
circumspect Ex 23.13
upright Genesis 17, 11.
.

Guide Joh. 16.23.
govern me Ps. 119.133.
in darkness be my light Mica. 7.8.
.

Make me my God as thou would have me be, Ps. 119.35.


And give me all thou know good for me. Ps. 84.11


Forgive Ps. 25.18
give faith Lu. 17.5.
on thy never failing word, Ps. 119.89.


Cause me rely Ps. 119.42.
thy promised aid afford, Ps. 119.49.


O that I could in doing well commend,

All unto thee Ps. 37.3.
thou surely help wilt send; Ps. 37.5.


In Christ, thy Christ, my Christ hear, help, grant do, Dan. 9.17.19.


Speak but one word, it must, it shall be so Ps. 33 9 Mat. 8.8.


Lord, I the Lord say it, therefore it must be, Isay. 16 11.


My grace alone shall be enough for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9.


It was, it is, it shall be so for ever Ps. 33.11.
.

My mercy Ps. 136
power Cor 98
truth decays never, Ps. 117.72.


Take courage the^ Ps 27.14.
though all that can be named.

Should it oppose Genesis 18.14
thou shall not be ashamed. Ps. 34.5.


Be^i^v^ Mar 5 36
await Ps 27.14.
submit unto my wi. Ps 37.5.
.

I Will help in need Ps. 50.15
and bring good out of il. Genesis 40.20.


Serve. So then my Soul, do no^ fear, faint or doubt. Psa. 4^.5.11.


No woe so great, but God will help thee ou^, Ier. 30.7


All that he is, he is thine to do thee good, Ps. 62.


What can a^noy if this be understood. Isa 43.11


As thou art God declare this every way. Ps. 86.15 16, 17.


That blessed my state may be both here and aye. Ps. 145.15.


Let all be done as thou Lord God see fit, Mat. 26.39


Amen, amen Ps. ^^.19
Lord Jesus so be it. Rev. 22.20.


Thy humble, faithful servant, Lord I am Ps. 116.6
I trust thy word Ps. 119.42
and so subscribe my name Isai. ^4.5
. Phillip. Skippon.

Miles Christi indignissimus. Mat. 8.8. No end of truth there is, 1 Pet. 1.25.
Isa. 40.8. Ps. 100.5. Ps. 1.7.^. Ps. 93. ult.

But here is the end of this.

FINIS.

