The Christian CENTURIAN Observations, Advices, and Resolutions: Containing
Matters DIVINE and MORAL.

Collected according to his own experience, By PHILIP SKIPPON
Serjeant-major-generall, etc.

In all things I have said unto you be circumspect,

Exodus 23.13. Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely whatsoever things are of good report, etc.

Phi. 4.9. Those things which ye have both learned and received, and heard, and
seen (according to Gods warrant, Isa. 20.8.) do,

Phil. 4.10. London printed by T. B. for Samuel Enderby at the Star in
Pope's Head Alley, 1645.

To all Soldiers, of what degree soever, that desire to walk Christianly and
Circumspectly.
Fellow soldiers and friends:
TO the two former Treatises of Gods promises of good things to us, and of our
Vows of obedience to him, which by his alone help I have published; I add
these few fragments following, and because I will be as little tedious as I
can, I shall only commend them to your careful consideration, observation and
practice, as you may find them agreeable to sound doctrine and good manners,
and useful to your occasions, and them and you to the especial blessing of
our God in the Lord Jesus.

The Contents.
RIght rules to live by, page 4. A sure Stay in extremity, p. 8 The right way
to go to work, p. 46. Brief Prayers upon diverse occasions, p. 53 Short
Ejaculations, p. 69 Comforts against the Nickname of Puritan, p. 81 Many
divine and moral Observations, p. 98 Renewed Resolutions, p. 115 Some marks of
a malicious man, and the contrary, p. 131 The former Observations continued, p.
133 Resolutions in an especial business p. 142 Christian carriage in a great
calamity p. 145 Commendable carriage in his place, p. 148 More Observations
added, p. 155 Sufficiency of Gods grace, p. 171 How to urge the Lord to
preserve us from sin, p. 173 Concerning governing the tongue, p. 175
Concerning walking with God, p. 181 Brief Rules for particular practice, p.
191 Examples of godly Soldiers, p. 19^ Rules of Justice, p. 19^ Undeniable
proof of the truth ^^ Gods Word, p. 22^ A few plain and pleasing in
structions for all times, p. 23^ An Advertisement about the s^^ of our Calling,
p. 23^ Concerning general Obedience, p. 272 Five sorts of Verses, p. 277 The
Observations continued, p. 290 More of vvalking with God, p. 292 More holy
Resolutions, p. 296 Of mourning for the sins among us, p. 299 His
acknowledgement of God, p. 301 How to carry himself conscionably and
commendably in the Leaguer, p. 305 How to stir up right Christian Resolutions
for Gods Cause and against his Enemies, p. Of Mortification, p. 332 Helps to
an holy Life, p. 337 Motives to Watchfulness, p. p. 342 More Christian
Resolutions, p. 343 Decay in Prayer, p. 346 Serious Admonitions to his Family
when they are to worship God, p. 379
Thus far of the Contents briefly, and acording to these numbers (God
willing) you shall find the several matters marked.

A Prayer.
O Lord God of all wisdom, goodness, grace, power and truth, my reconciled
God, most gracious Father and only helper in Jesus Christ; I the most
ignorant, sinful, unworthy, weak, wretched of all other, do most humbly,
unfainedly, instantly, entirely and uncessantly befeech and urge thee of thy
infinite mercy, through thy unsearchable wisdom, by thy unresistable working,
according to thy infallible promises, notwithstanding my dark ignorance,
unmeasurable sinfulness, great weakness and most extreme wretchedness; yea,
notwithstanding all my unworthniesse and all other impediments, speedily,
seasonably, effectually and constantly, through the assistance of thy most holy
Spirit, to stir up my heart diligently to fearch, to enlighten my
understanding, clearly to discern, to strengthen my memory constantly to
retain, to sanctify my affections feelingly to apply, to enable me in my
practice conscionably to make use of every particular of the following
observations, advices and resolutions, as may be most to thy great glory, the
good of thy Church, the gracing my Christian profeision, the stopping the mouth
of profaneness and injury, the preventing distasting others, and other
advantage against me, the benefit of my Family, my outward credit and comfort
in thy fear, with thy favor and blessing, my poor souls present peace, and
everlasting happiness, all as (...) best in thy sight, only through the
all-sufficient merits and pe^petuall mediation of thy most dear and only Son,
my alone sweet Savior and intercessor Christ Jesus, through whom (as I have
infinite cause beyond all I can conceive, remember or express for all thy
mercies, for this and a better life afforded and assured to me, especially for
the understanding, life, health, time, opportunity and grace thou have pleased
to vouchsafe unto me, to collect and write these observations, advices and
resolutions, for my better government, greater setting and further edification)
to thy most glorious Name be all honor ascribed by all means for evermore,
Amen, even so be it, Amen, Amen.

Some short and straight, solid and sound Rules to level his life by.
1. WHen thou risest, let thy thoughts ascend, that grace may descend; let thy
Sacrifice be an inocent heart, offer it daily with that devotion, that it may
show thou both know, and acknowledgest his holiness and greatness with
whom thou have to do. 2. Where thou owe, pay duty, where thou find return
curtifie, where thou art known deserve love, desire the best, disdain none but
evil company, take heed of proud, peevish, prating, passionate, dissembling,
distasteful, jeering, malicious, lying, contentious, tippling, filthy fellows.
3. Grieve, but be not angry, at discurtesies, redress, but revenge no wrongs,
do good to them that use thee unkindly, yet so remember pity, that thou
forget not decency. 4. Let thy attire be such as may show a sober mind, frame
thy self with such modesty, as may silence the untemperate tongue. 5. Be
mindful of things past, careful of things present, and provident of things to
come. 6. Go as thou would be met, sit as thou would be found, speak as
thou would be heard, and do as thou would be seen. 7. Bear affliction
patiently, converst cheerfully, order thy business secretly, wisely, surely;
avoid freeness and familiarity, discover no affection hastily, speak not thine
own suspicions suddenly, meddle not in others matters needlessly, trust God
most in greatest extremity, forget not how he has helped formerly, commend all
in well-doing unto him continually. 8. Demean thy self in all things, as in
the sight of God con^^^ually, who is acquainted with all thy ways thoroughly,
who though thou be never so secret sees thee, and who doubtless will have
a strict account of thee, therefore deceive not thy self, for he will not be
mocked by thee. 9. Take heed of sin and the occasions thereof watchfully,
having sinned, lie not therein impenitently, neither sooth thy self therein
foolishly, for sin will bring sorrow and shame undoubtedly. 10. Repent, break
off, beg pardon, grace and peace speedily and soundly, watch to do well
sincerely, believe, all shall be well, Piety has the promise infallibly, 1 Timothy 4.8. 11. When thou go to bed read over the carriage of that day
seriously, reform what is amiss unfainedly, give humble thanks for what is
orderly, and so commit thy self to him that watches over thee fatherly,
powerfully, faithfully.
Lord make me in all things upright before thee, and be in all things God
all-sufficient to me, Genesis 17.1.

A sure stay in greatest extremity.
BEing in most extreme perplexity of spirit, and in great outward distress,
all threatening uttermost misery, even without any appearance of remedy; knowing
no other way to comfort and settle himself, he plied his prayers, and betook
him to Gods promises, submitting to his good pleasure for the issue, especially
(by the Lords good grace) he remembered these choice places of Scripture, and
they upheld him, he had else fainted utterly.

Who is among you that fears the Lord? that walks in darkness, and has no
light, let him trust in the Name of the Lord and stay upon his God, Isa. 50.20.

Alas, for that day is great, so that name is like it, it is even the time of
Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it, Jer. 30.7.

The Lord also will be a refuge son the oppressed, and a refuge no time, of
trouble, Psalm. 9.9.

God is our strength and refage; a very present help, in trouble, therefore we
will not fear though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be
carried into the midst of the Sea, Psalm. 46.1, 21.

Behold I am the Lord, the God of all flesh, is there any thing too hard for
me? Jer. 32.27.

God has power to help and to cast down; Amaziah said, but what shall I do
for the 120 Talents? he said, the Lord is able to give thee much more then
this, 2 Chronicles. 23.8, 9.

If the^^ altogether hold thy Peace at this time, then shall their
enlargement and deliverance arise from another place, Est. 4.14.

God spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast, Ps. 33.9.

He shall deliver the needy when he cries, the poor also, and him that has
no helper, Psalm. 72.12.

When the poor and needy seek water and there is none, and their tongue
fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not
forsake them; I will open Rivers in high places, and Fountains in the midst
of the Valleys; I will make the Wilderness a poole of water, and the dry Land
springs of water, that they may see, and know, and consider, and understand
together; that the hand of the Lord has done this, Isa. 41.17, 18, 20.

He clave the Rocks in the Wilderness, and gave them drink as out of the great
dept is, Psalm. 78.15. Numb. 20.11.

And the Lord said unto Moses, is the Lords hand waxed short? thou shall see
now, whether my word shall come to pass unto thee or not, Numb. 11.23.

Prove me now herewith says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the
windows of Heaven and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room
enough to receive it, Mal. 3.10.

Jesus fed 5000. men, besides women and children, with five loaves and two
fishes, Matthew. 14.17, 21.

With God all things are possible, Mat. 19.26.

I know that thou can do all things, Job 42.2.

He performs the thing that is appointed for me, and many such things are
with him, Job 23.14.

The Lord is good, and a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them
that trust in him, N^h. 1.7.

The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, 2 Pet. 2.9.

God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
able, but will with the temptation make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13.

He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall
he not with him freely give in all things? Romans 8.32.

Besides, the Lord says, call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50.15.

Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest, Mat. 11.28.

Thou which have showed me great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again, and
shall bring me up again from the depths of the earth, Psalm. 71.20.

Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the God of all
comfort, who comfort us in all our tribu latiods, who delivered us from so
great a death and does deliver us, and in whom we trust that he will yet
deliver us, 2. Cor. 1.10.

The Lord has delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of
the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine, 1 Sum. 17.37.

When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou know my path, I looked
on my right hand and beheld, but there was no man that would know me, all
refuge failed me, then cried I unto the Lord, O Lord, thou art my refuge and my
portion, Psalm. 142.3, 4, 5.

Why art thou then cast down O my soul? why art thou disquieted within me?
hope thou in God for I shall yet prays^ him, who is the help of my countenance
and my God, Psalm. 42.11.

My soul, look unto Jesus the Author and finisher of thy faith, consider him
that endured such contradictions of sinners against himself, least thou be
wearied and faint in thy mind, not having yet resisted unto blood, Heb. 12.3, 4.

Reekon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared
with the glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8.18.

And that though thou be troubled on every side, yet not distressed, though
perplexed not in despair, persecuted but not forsaken, cast down but not
destroyed, though the outward man perish, the inward man is renewed day by day,
for my light affliction which is but for a moment, works for thee a far
more exceeding weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.^, 8, 9, 16, 17.

Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation,
my God will hear me, rejoice not against me O mine enemy, when I fall I shall
arise, when I sit in darkness the Lord shall be a light unto me, I will bear
the indignation of the Lord because I have sinned against him until he plead
my cause and execute judgment for me, he will bring me forth to the light, and
I shall behold his righteousness, Mic. 7.7, 8, 9.

My soul, be content with what thy God has graciously given thee, and trust
him wholly, for he has said, he will never fail, forsake nor forget thee; so
that thou may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what
man can do unto me, or whatsoever shall betide me, Heb. 13.5, 6.

Yea, though I know not what to do, mine eyes and my heart are upon thee, 2 Chronicles. 20.12.

Now Lord, though I be unworn thy thou should come under my roof, speak
but, one word and I shall be helped, Mat. 8.8.13.

Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean; I will, be thou clean; say thou
unto me, and I shall be cleansed, Mat. 8.2, 3.

Lord Jesus speak unto me, that it is thou that will comfort and help me, that
I be not feared o^ troubled over much, Mat. 14.27.

Well then, by thy especial grace O my God in Christ, in the sorrow of my
spirit I will pour out my soul before thee O Lord, and ou^ of the abundance
of my complaint and grief (with Hannah) will I speak, 1 Samuel 1.15, 19.

And until God shall grant an issue out of my pressing, and even h^^plesse
f^are, grief and distress, I will (with David) continue seeking ease and
relief from Heaven. 2 Samuel 12.16.23.

And say with him (when he was in greatest misery) If I shall find favor in
the eyes of the Lord I shall be belped, but if he thus say, I have no delight
in thee, behold here I am, let him do to me as seems good unto him, 2 Samuel
15.25, 26.

And according to his example (even when he had distrusted God, 1 Samuel 29.1.
fled and fell to the enemy, verse 2. when he made show, promise, and proster of
his service against Gods people, chapter 29.2, 8. when in his absence his Town was
surprised, spoiled, pillaged, and burned, and the Wives of his Soldiers
captived, and all that he had was lost and carried away by the enemy, when he
and his people wept that they could weep no more, when they murmured against
him, laid all the blame upon him, and spoke of stoning of him; by all which,
judge how he was distressed,) I will encourage my self in the Lord my God, and
in all things seek direction and help from him; doubtless the Lord (as he did
him) will answer me graciously, and deliver me effectually, 1 Samuel 30.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 19.

And though as Jacob served twenty years ere he could provide for his own
household, Genesis 31.38. and 30.30. It has pleased the Lord that I have served
many years already, and if God spare my life, and please not to work
wonderfully for me, am like to serve many years more to serve others turns, to
the great prejudice of me and mine; I hope by the good providence of my good
God, if he sees it good for me to live the day, at Jacob did, to acknowledge my
God has dealt graciously with me, because he has vouchsafed a competency and
enough unto me, Genesis 33.11.

And although (which mercy I am most unworthy to live to receive of
acknowledge) I dare not for conscience sake to help my self by indirect means
in my misery, whereby great loss and prejudice has befallen me, yet I will
trust in this, that the Prophet in the Lords name said to Amaziah (who was
troubled with the loss of the ^00 Talents) that the Lord is able, and if he
sees it good for me, will give more then this unto me, 2 Chronicles. ^^, 8, 9.

And not to murmr, grumble, be impatient and discontented with my condition,
considering Jobs example of suffering, and the end of the Lord toward him, for
the Lord is very pittifall and of tender mercy, James 5.11.

For Job was perfect and upright, one that feared God and eschewed evil, by
the Lords own testimony, Job 1.1.5.8. chap. 2.3. yet though he looked for
good, evil came unto him, and when he waited for light, there came darkness,
Job 30.26. for the thing that he fear greatly came upon him, and that which he
was afraid of befell him, he was not in safety neither had he rest, neither wa^
he quiet, yet trouble came, Jo^ 3.25, 26. witness what follows.

The Sabeans fell upon h^^ Oxen and took, them away, (...) 1.14, 15. fire fell
from Heaven and burnt his Sheep and Se^vants, verse 16. The Caldea^^ fell upon
the Camels and ca^^ied them away, verse 17. (...) Sons and Daughters we^^
eating and drinking in the^^ elder Brothers house, and b^hold there came a
great win^ and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon the young
men, and they are all dead, verse 18, 19. Satan gat leave from God to smite his
body all over with fore and loathsome boyles, that he was forced to sit in the
ashes and scrape himself with a potsheard, chap. 2.6, 7, 8. his wife that
should have been his comfort was his heavy cross, urging him to curse God in
this condition, chapter 2.^9. and was as a stranger to him, and would hardly know
him or come at him, chap. 19.17. his nearest kindred failed him, his familiar
friends forgot him, his servants contemned him, his most inward friends
abhorred him children despised him, chapter 19.13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19. his most
godly friends that should have been his best counselors and comforters in
this his woeful and comfortless estate, grieved, censured, and pleaded
against, and reproached him, Job ^. 1^^ and chapter 16.20. and 19.21. God made his
heart soft, the Almighty troubled him, Job 23.16. and every way seemed to let
himself against him, chap. 19.8. to 13. yea, the arrows of the Almighty stuck
within him, perplexity and horror seized on him, chapter ^.^, etc. yet at length
the Lord turned away his captivity, and gave him twice as much as he had
before, and blessed the latter end of Job more then the beginning, Job 42.10,
12. and is the same Lord God and helper for ever to them that fear before,
call upon, and trust in him. My sweet Savior grant me as thou advisest and
command me, to possess my soul in patience, Luke 21.19. and to cast my
care upon thee, who take care for me, 1 Pet. 5.7. and because strict
reservednesse keeps concealed my estate and affections, and prevents giving
advantage against me, the Lord assisting me, I will follow Micahs counsel,
Mac. 7.5. not to trust in a friend, nor to put confidence in a guide, but to
keep the door of my mouth from her that lies in my bosom.

And with Abraham's servant to hold my peace, to wit, whether the Lord will make
my business prosperous or not, Genesis 24.21.

And in these times of general calamities, (as the Lord wills Baruch upon the
like occasions, not to seek great things for my self, nor to be overmuch
troubled with these trivial, personal perplexities and afflictions, but to be
humbly and heartily content if the Lord please (as he has done hitherto most
remarkably) to give me my life for a prey whethersoever I go, Ier. 45.4, 5.

To rest assured with Mordecay that God will send help one way or other, if not
as I conceived or imagine, by some other means undoubtedly, Est. 4.14.

To say as my most blessed Savior did, in his most bitterest passion, O my
Father, if it be possible let this Cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I
will, but a thou will, Mat. 26.39.

And with Abraham, to hop^ beyond hope, and to beleev^ beyond sense, being
fully persuaded, that what my God hat^ promised, he is also able to perform,
Romans 4.18.20, 21.

And never to cast away (...) confidence, which has great recompense of
reward, He. 10.3^

But as I have great need^^ embrace patience, that after have done the will of
my God (by his grace) I may recei^^ the promise, Heb. 10.36.

Being most confident, that the hatred, envy, unpeaceablenesse, malice, scorn,
cruelty of Joseph's Brethren against him, Genesis 37.4.8.11.19. their purpose to
kill him, their casting him into the pit, their selling him to the Ismalites,
the Ismalites selling him again to the Egyptians, Potiphar, verse
22.24.28.36. the stander of his Mistress, his hard imprisonment thereupon,
Genesis 39.19, 20. the Butlers, Bakers, Pharaohs dreams, the extreme dearth, and
all things whatsoever seemed to make never so much against him, wrought in the
end most remarkably for him, Genesis 41.9. and 45.5, 7, 8. and 50.24. so my God
without doubt will most fatherly, powerfully, faithfully, seasonably,
carefully; constantly work in, with and for me (being the same God for ever;
for good to his) that all my present and future inward perplexities and outward
troubles, all that Satan or any of his instruments do, or may do against me,
all the malice and scorn of evil men, all the oppositions and injuries of any
though never so great and many, all my instant seares, cares, and most
hopeless and helpless miseries, yea, my folly, sin, and misgovernment, my
felt, or looked for shame and loss, my crosses and poverty, yea, even that
intolerable hurthen (Lord thou know my meaning and necessity) that even
overwhelmeth me, and whatsoever does or may seem to make most against me, that
all shall turn remarkably for good unto me, Romans 8.28. Lord thou have spoken
it and will also bring it to pass, thou have purposed it and wilt also do it,
and nothing shall let it, Isa. 46.10, 11.

Therefore to conclude as Joseph did, and to say to my self (in every crosle
and calamity, yea, though never so grievous and desperate, even in my present
misery) as he did to his Brethren, be not grieved nor angry that this or that
betides thee, it is God that sends it to thee; and remains thy most wise and
tenderhearted Father continually, howsoever he please to afflict thee, and
whatsoever by the devil or man may be intended or wrought against thee, thy God
intends and will work all for thy good undoubtedly, Gen, 45.5.7. and 50.20.
Well then my soul, is not all this enough for thee?

I thus beset with pain and grief did pray to God for grace, (plaint
And he forthwith did hear my out of his holy place, Ps. 18 6.
On me some sign of favor show
that all my foes may see, And be ashamd, because Lord thou do help and
comfort me, Psalm. 86.17.
And now my soul since thou art safe return unto thy rest,
For largely lo the Lord to thee his bounty has expressed, Ps. 16.7
See more at large in my collection of Promises; these following particulars,
which will (by Gods blessing) afford more matter of consolation and settling in
any kind of misery, as in my book of the Promises, concerning afflictions in
general, page 102 to 112: Concerning trouble of mind, page 116. Concerning a
desolate estate, page 118 Concerning any kind of outward want, page 135
Concerning Gods blessing, page 164. Concerning the manner of Gods hearing our
prayers, page 208.


A brief commending all to the LORD.
Oh Lord help mine heart to pray, hear my prayers, thy Name shall have the
praises.

O Thou that art the only and always true God, whom alone I desire to serve
and trust; ^ternall, al-knowing, every where present, almighty, most wise,
merciful, faithful and immutable; in Jesus Christ by virtue of thine own
most free and faithful Covenant, my reconciled God, most gracious Father, and
alone all-sufficient helper; it is thy will I should call upon thee in every
need, and have promised thou will deliver me, that I may glorify thee, I have
never sought thee in vain, thou have always heard me, and that most
remarkably in greatest extremity, thou have often done more for me then I
desired or expected from thee; behold, as well as I can (though alas at the
best exceeding weakly) in the sense of my especial necessities (fully known to
thee with all circumstances) I set my soul to seek all help at thy hands
only, de^^ying all other means of relief wholly; this in obedience to thy
will, in the assistance of thy Spirit, in the name and mediation of thy dear
and only Son, my alone all-sufficient Savior and continual intercessor
Christ Jesus, founding my prayers on thy promises, which I lay before thee,
with which I urge thee, flying to thy mercies, building on thy power,
submitting to thy will, wisdom and providence, acknowledging all my inward and
outward welfare past, present and to come, to come only from thee, or else
woe, woe, woe unto me, and nothing could or can avail me; a waiting for thy
salvation continually, promising all possible praises to thee only, for
whatsoever grace or good thou have pleased to vouchsafe, or shall please to
vouchsafe unto me; and now thou that art such a God as I acknowledge thee, and
thou have revealed thy self to be entreated in mercy, as thou have promised by
thy unresistable working, in due season, upon all occasions, especially in
greatest extremities, more particularly in my particular present or future
prossing inward and outward necessities, to guide, to prevent, to govern, to
restore, to receive, to streng then, to comfort, to support, to establish, to
relieve, to protect, to deliver, every way to help and prosper me,
notwithstanding all my horrible ingratitude, most heinous sinfulness,
exceeding unworthiness, extreme weakness, and all other though never so many
and great impediments; you, according to all thy great name manifested and
magnified to thine for good (whereby so freely, plainly, plentifully,
infallibly, thou have revealed and assured audience and help to thine) to hear
and help me even beyond all that I now, or at any other time can think or ask,
that it may appear, thou Lord have done all for me, all this, and all else, as
may be most to the glory of thy name, the service of thy Zion, the gracing of
my Christian profession, the stopping the mouth of profaneness, malice, scorn
and injury, the preventing my distasting others, or others (especially such as
most wish, and would be glad of my shame and harm) having advantage against
me, the good of those most near and dear unto me, my outward credit and
comfort in thy fear with thy favor, my souls present peace and everlasting
happiness in Heaven with thee, as seems best unto thee, wherewithal in all
good conscience and Christian considence, make me contented heartily, and it is
enough for me, and all the glory shall he thine only, to whom alone the same
is due wholly and continually, Amen.

Observe:
HEr Adversary provoked her sore for to make her fret, therefore she wept and
did not eat; she was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the Lord, and
wept sore, and she vowed a Vow and said, O Lord of hosts, if thou will indeed
look on the affliction of thine handmaid, and remember and not forget me, but
wilt give unto me, etc. then I will give unto thee, etc. she spoke in her
heart, only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard: I am of a sorrowful
spirit, and have poured out my soul before the Lord, out of the abundance of
my complaint and grief have I spoken: The Lord God of Israel grant thee thy
petition that thou have asked of him; so the woman went her way and did eat,
and her countenance was no more sad, and the Lord remembered her; and she said,
The Lord has given me my petition which I asked of him, for the Lord is a God
of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed, 1 Samuel 1.6, 7, 10, 11, 13, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 27. and 2.3.

If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt
Offering and a meat Offering at our hands, neither would he have showed us all
these things, nor would as at this time have told us such things as these,
Judges 13.23.

Lord grant me the spirit of understanding and application of every one of
these, and according to my most urgent occasions (thou that art the same for
ever unto thine) let me find the comfort and profit of these, for thy mercy and
thy truth unto me; my soul, my God in Christ shall always and in all things
magnify thee, Amen.

Who knows the work of the Lord who works all, Eccl. 11.5.

My God I wait the issue from thee;
I beseech thee make it good for me;
I unfainedly promise unto thee
To observe diligently,
To remember constantly,
To regard carefully,
To acknowledge thankfully
Thy gracious dealing toward me,
In this (and every) extremity,
Which so much overchargeth me,
That I can see no remedy;
Lord I depend upon thee,
Do thy good pleasure with me;
Oh hear, forgive, accept and help me,
Amen, Amen, my God in Christ I pray thee.
Some more, though brief yet sound Meditations for his further assurance of
support and succor in his present, exceeding great, or any future, though
never so hopeless and helpless misery.
O Lord my God, thou art thoroughly acquainted with my condition, which
threatens extreme misery, thou know what is best for me, and dispofest all
things according to thine own will, for my good in the end assuredly,
whatsoever does or may oppose me; behold I look round about me, and can see no
hope of help left me, but I look up to thee in the highest Heavens, from whom
alone all my help comes; who knows thy work that works all? thou have
innumerable ways to help when al else fails, thou have oftentimes heretofore
seasonably, unexpectedly, amply and wonderfully wrought for my relief and
deliverance, when I was most helpless and whatsoever opposed, and that of
thine own mere goodness, notwithstanding my unmeasurable great sinfulness;
I know and believe thy hand is not shortened, that thou art the same for ever
unto me for good; as thou art gracious work for my relief, and deliverance,
notwithstanding my exceeding great unworthines, and all other impossibilities;
the earth is thine and the fullness thereof, all things obey thy voice, speak
but one word and it is done, command and it shall stand fast, all the world
cannot hinder it; thou have provided, thou do, can, have promised, must
and wilt provide in the Mount in greatest extremity, and apparently it shall
be, Lord let it be seen. Why then should I faint, fear, or doubt? thou art my
help in greatest need, I give over all unto thee, I call upon thee, I depend
alone on thee, I await always for thee, thou have never failed me; never, Oh
never fail, forsake, or forget me; I remember thy wonted goodness, I fly to
thy undeserved mercies, I trust in thy almighty power, I found my prayers on
thy most faithful promises, I submit to thy most wise disposing; now I beseech
and urge thee, most humbly and instantly, in mercy, as thou art wont, and have
promised, be pleased most powerfully, as seems good unto thee, to consider my
condition, to remember my estate, to pity my distress, to behold my trouble,
to regard my sighs, to hear my prayers, to relieve my wants, to prevent
feared calamities, and to deliver me out of this great misery; Oh if it be thy
will let me find (by experience) thy fatherly love, care and providence so
manifested and magnified toward me, that I may be freed from this (in man's
judgment) irrecoverable misery, with which, and with all its circumstances,
thou art acquainted fully; Oh let no man lose by me, or have just cause to
complain of me; Oh work for me, that I may live of mine own commendably,
without being chargeable to any, that I provide for mine honestly, and so
remove and prevent much trouble, in my self, and sorrow, shame and misery to
mine, that I may put all my things in good order before I depart hence, that in
this respect I may be the more willing to leave this world, and the more
desirous of a better life, that in all these I may acknowledge thy goodness,
and praise thy name, who have dealt so graciously and wonderfully with me; by
thy grace (if it please thee to do it) I will never forget it, but will
always confess that thy hand only has wrought it, and shall ever endeavor
to testify true thankfulness for it; yet O Lord my God in all these not as I
will, but as thou will, who know what is most needful for me; yea, rather
deny in mercy then give me in displeasure, what I conceive I so much want, and
do so earnestly crave, if it be thy will this burden shall grow so heavy, and
lie so long upon me, that I be brought unto the uttermost extremity, do bu^
increase inward strength within me, that I may come the nearer home unto thee,
and (...) is enough for me, I crave (...) more of thee, all shall go well with
me whatsoever betide^ me; do not, oh do not suffe^ me to use any unlawful or
unbeseeming means to help m^selfe thereby, let no by-respect prevail with me
herein, but direct and enable me conscionable and worthily to do my duty, and
so to leave the success un^^ thee, who wilt cause the sam^ to fall out well
for me; never oh never suffer me to be impatient, discontented, over doubtful,
over careful, or discouraged, or to murmr against to dispute with, to
complaint of, or to limit thee; but enable, oh enable me to possess m^ soul
in patience, to rest heartly well contented with all thou sendest, as that
which thou in wisdom, love and faithfulness see best for me, and wilt
remarkably turn to good unto me, help me to acknowledge thee aright in all my
ways, oh direct my paths, cause me with an holy carelessness to cast my care
upon thee; oh take care for me, make me to roll my burden on thee, oh nourish
thou me, raise up my heart to hope beyond hope, to believe beyond sense, to
comfort my self in thee, and in the word of thy truth unto me, to be quiet and
silent, to lay my mouth in the dust, because thou Lord do it, and as becomes
one of thine to await thy leisure and good pleasure, who assuredly at the
oppointed time and in due season wilt come and not carry, all that it may
appear thy hand has done it; oh vouchsafe thy help herein, leave my
profession of thee, praye^ to thee, confidence in thee, (...) reproached, least
my heart a^^ the hearts of thine be discouraged by thy not helping me; d^ this,
that it may appear (...) right way is the best way, th^^ it is not in vain to
seek, se^^ and trust in thee, that the mo^^ of iniquity may be stopp^^ others
of thine encouraged, a^ my poor soul more and (...) confirmed: O my most
gracious Lord, reconciled God, (...) most merciful Father and (...) helper at
all assaies, in who^^ have all, without whom I h^^^ nothing, accept the
meditation of my heart and words of (...) mouth, look favorably upon me,
stretch out thy hand to (...) leeve me, according to all (...) great name,
notwithstanding all hindrances, only through the all-sufficient merits (...)
continual mediation of thy Christ, my alone most blessed Redeemer, and most
gracious Intercessor the Lord Jesus, Amen, Amen.

Being thus instructed, resolved and strengthened by my God, ought I not to
comfort and settle my heart in him? may I not fully persuade my self that by
one means or other it will please him to afford his help unto me? and so (with
Hannah) to be quiet in heart and cheerful in countenance, and to await his
most gracious, powerful, promised relief, according to his own blessed will
in Christ Jesus, Amen.

See further yet more largely concerning this matter, in his prayer made in his
great extremity, which prayer is among ^he rest in his daily devotions.

The right way to go to work extracted out of S. B. his Sermon on Prove. 16.3.
1. The parts.
FIrst, an Advice. Secondly, a Promise of ^^^nesse.
2. The meaning.
Commit the choice ordering and success of all thy inten^^ons, words, actions
to Jehov^^

Doct. 1. Every one ought ^^ commit their ways unto (...) Lord. Proofs of this
Doctrine Psalm. 37.5. and 55.22. 1 Pet. 5.^^ Three things in this committi^^.

First, a sense and acknowledgement of self-insufficient for the work.
Secondly, a faithful dependency on God, for the appointing and effecting of
it. Thirdly, an actual recommending of it unto God by prayer.
3. The explanation of the severals.
First, we must feel our selves unable to under go the burden, and acknowledge
our weakness; (...) respect, first, of our judgment; secondly, of our wisdom;
thirdly, of our power.

First, in our judgment to choose, Pro. 21.2.25. Eccl. 11.9, 10. Gen: 11.4.
Secondly, for wisdom in managing a thing resolved on, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. Isa.
36.6. Job 5.13, 14. Pro. 5.5. Jer. 10.23. Thirdly, for power to accomplish any
work, though never so well conceived, though means are never so well ordered,
Lam. 3.37. Joh. 15.5. Deuteronomy. 8.17. Psalm. 44.3. 2 Cor: 3.5. 1 Cor. 3.7. Psalm.
127.1. 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
Of the second act of Faith in dependency on God and his efficiency.
1. On his will and allowance. 2. On his help and blessing.
For the first, see Judges 1.11. and 20: 18.23.28. 1 Samuel 23.12. and 30.8.
Numb. 27.21.

We have no Oracle but Gods Word, therefore we must go (...) that (only) for
warrant, Isa. ^.20. Therefore examine (...) what warrant we have here^^ in
every thing.

Reas. 1. Gods will is the ru^^ and pattern of holiness and justice, Romans
7.12. and 12.2. P^ 119.9. Isa. 8.20.

2. We owe him that respe^^ and obedience, as our Lord, G^vernour, Commander,
Mal. ^.6. Isa. 55.4. Amos 6.11.

For the second, the act of d^pendency, viz. a resting on God for the ordering
of our courses, as for provision of means, and for disposing and blessing of
them, Mat. 6.25. and 10.19.

Object. If I must roll my work on God, then need I not stir.

Answ. The best means must be used, or we commit not our ways to God aright,
as the word, thy works, thy thoughts do prove.

Further then, the second act of our dependency.
1. In respect of our selves. 2. Of other means.
For both our eyes must be toward him, that he may guide us with his eye,
Psalm. 32.8. Ezra 5.5.

If our business be in speech, as Moses, Exodus 4.11, 12.

If in action, as Gideon, Judge. 6.16. 2 Samuel 15.31. Genesis 24.13, 14.

Reas. 1. Gods wisdom is most exact and infinite, that where he will not
work, he knows to hinder, prevent or frustrate all means; and where he
will, to make all secondary causes to concur in an admirable harmony, which
we out selves cannot do, Romans 8.28. Genesis 45 5, 7, 8. and 50.20.

Reas. 2. Gods providence is in every thing that falls out, Prove. 20.24. and
16.2. Jo^. 14.16.

The third act of dependency is, a resting and waiting o^ God for the success
of our business and endeavors, Psalm. 37.5. Acts 14.23. Isa. 49.4. 2 Samuel
10.12. Neh. 1.11. Est. 4.16. Genesis 22.8.

Reas. 1. Because of Gods absolute power, that he is omnipotent and solipotent,
Eccl. 9.11. Dan. 3.17. 2 Chronicles. 14.11.

Reas. 2. Because of his decree, all our times are in his hands, yea, all the
actions and motions of those times, Psalm. 31.15. Pro. 19.21. Isa. 26.12.

Signs of confidence in God.
1. It casts out fear, Isa. 12.2. Romans 4.18, 19, 20. 2. And care, Dan. 3.16.
3. And causes cheerfulness, 1 Samuel 30.6. Psalm. 37.4, 5.
The last thing in committing our ways unto the Lord, is, an actual
recommending of the same to him by prayer, Isa. 37.14.

Reas. 1. It is Gods will, as in the Text, etc. 2. His wisdom invites us
hereto. 3. Also his power, Pro. 18.10. 4. His love, 1 Pet. 5.7. Psalm. 113.13.
and 57.2. Phil. 4 6. 5. His faithfulness, he has promised to give good
success, as in the Text.
The first Use, Exhortation hereunto.
1. For our own affairs. 2. For the distressed Churches. 3. For others.
The second Use, Reproof
1. Of such as rely on their own sufficiency. 2. Of such as do without
warrant, Jer. 42.20. 3. Of such as dare not depend on God, for means or
sufficiency, as Moses, Exodus 4.10.13. 4. Of such as distrust if such means
take not, or not at such time, Psalm. 78.41.3. 5. Of them that rely on their
own procurement of means Isa. 31, 1, 2. 6. Of such as use ill means 7. Of
such as trust not God with the success, Ex. 4.1.1 San 27.1.
Lord I desire, cause me rightly to acknowledge, seek and trust thee, and as
thou have assured, hear, direct and help me, Amen.

Before solemn settling himself to pray in private.
O Lord God, whose work it only is, which thou know, and I acknowledge to
be exceedingly wanting in me; be entreated in mercy, as thou art wont and have
promised, be I never so unworthy, unthankful and indisposed, to pour out upon
me the spirit of grace and supplication, that I may at this present pour out
my heart in prayer before thee, so that thou may be pleased to hear and
help from Heaven seasonably and effectually, thy great name shall have all the
glory.

Or Thus,
O Lord prepare my miserable unprepared heart to pray, hear me graciously,
though I be most unworthy, as thou have promised whatsoever opposes, thy great
name shall have all the glory.

Or Thus,
O Lord help my heart to pray, hear my prayers, thy name shall have the
praises.

If he comes into Gods House before the beginning of public worship.
O Most holy Lord God, prepare every one of our unprepared hearts, in most holy
manner, to seek thy face in every one of thy most holy Ordinances; work
effectually with thy most holy spirit upon every one of our hearts, that the
means of grace may prove effectual to every one of our most sinful souls;
to the building of them up in all grace, to our present comfort and eternal
happiness in Christ Jesus, Amen.

When Amen is pronounced at the end of the public prayers.
Amen Lord Amen, of thy infinite mercy, according to thy immutable truth, by
thy unresistable working, notwithstanding our unworthiness, insufficiency, and
all other impediments, thy great name shall have all the glory, to which alone
the same is due wholly.

When he gives Alms.
Good Lord accept the will for the deed, forgive and reform what is amiss,
vouchsafe a plentiful blessing in due season, according to thy wonted
goodness and faithful promises in Christ Jesus.

When the blessing is pronounced.
O Lord our God most mighty, merciful and true, vouchsafe graciously,
seasonably and effectually, to leave thy promised blessing of mercy, grace and
peace behind thee, Amen.

When he awakes in the morning.
O Lord my God, it is of thine own and only wonted, undeserved, infinite,
never failing mercies, that I have not in this night past been smothered in my
sleep and sins, that I may behold the light of this day in peace; awaken my
heart with all holy affections, toward thee, cause me to cast off all works of
darkness, and to walk in the light before thee, renew remission unto me for my
sins (of the night) renewed against thee, throughout this day govern me by thy
Word and spirit in all I go about, and let thy blessing be upon me in all that
any way concerns me, my soul through Jesus Christ shall more and more
magnify thee, Amen.

When he lays him down at night to take his rest.
O Lord my God by thy especial providence and assistance, I lay me down in
peace at this present, and bless thy name unfainedly, that all things
(throughout this day) has gone so well with me, whereas else I had been every
way most unhappy: Oh multiply pardon to me, for my fauls multiplied against
thee, even this day past I beseech thee, and watch over me the rest of this
night, to preserve me from sinning against thee, though never so secretly, and
to keep off whatsoever would any way harm me; for all grace and good my soul
shall more and more through Jesus Christ glorify thee, Amen.

Before his going to hear Gods Word preached.
O Lord my God, whose word I go to hear, grant me thy grace to hear it as
thy word, with all due reverence, earnest attention and holy affection, oh help
me against all dead, heartedness, distractednes and weariness; make my heart
as the good ground rightly to receive this heavenly seed, water the same with
the dew of thy grace, that it may bring forth fruit abundantly in my knowledge,
resolution and practice in faith and godliness, with all patience and
constancy; thus work in and for me mercifully powerfully, faithfully,
notwithstanding my unprepared, insensible unprofitable hearing thereof (whereof
alas I am most hainously and continually guilty, for which I beg pardon and
amendment) yea, in spite of all that the flesh, the world and the devil labor
to the contrary, Amen, Amen; my Father in Christ, herein help me, I most humbly
and earnestly beg, pray and beseech thee: Amen at this time, and upon the like
occasions continually.

When be comes from hearing Gods Word.
Now my good and gracious God, having by thy especial providence, goodness
and grace, enjoyed the gracious means, happy opportunity and thy help to hear
thy most holy word, (for which exceeding great favors make me tru^^ thankful,
and of which crave the continuance unto my lives end) bring the same to my
remembrance, affect me with each part thereof thoroughly, cause me to mix it
with faith rightly, and to put each part thereof in practice Christianly, as
the necessities of my poor soul require especially, hear and bless in
mercy, as thou have promised, though I have sinned and whatsoever opposes,
Amen.

Before his reading Gods Word in private.
O my heavenly Father, be entreated (mercifully, powerfully, faithfully, now
and at all other times, be I never so unworthy, indisposed, and whatsoever
opposes) to strengthen and bless me in the reading, understanding,
remembering, applying and practicing of thy most holy word, as may be most to
thy great glory and my eternal good through Christ Jesus, Amen.

After his reading Gods Word in private.
O my God, I most heartily thank thee for this most inestimable Jewel of thy
most holy Word, for this great freedom, and thy especial help to be exercised
therein, and for all the good that by thy blessing, my poor soul has received
thereby: Oh forgive my unthankfulness therefore, and abusing thereof, reform
these foul offenses in me, and notwithstanding the same, and whatsoever else
would hinder; continue these great mercies unto me, and make each part of thy
most holy word my guide and comfort in life and death, through Jesus Christ,
Amen, I beg of thee.

Before his meditating in private.
Good Lord it is my most humble and earnest suit unto thy most sacred Majesty,
that thou will not lay to my charge my long and wilful neglect of, miserable
averseness from, and extreme indisposition to this so much required and
exceeding needful duty of divine Meditation; but notwithstanding these, and
though I neither know how, nor have any ability to discharge the same as I
ought, I pray and beseech thee to learn me the right way thereto, and to
dispose me in some good measure, to the performance thereof; help me to begin,
go on and end, in respect of the present matter thereof, with sound judgment,
moved affection, powerful application and unfeigned purpose to put all to
conscionable practice, to the increase of all grace and godliness, through thy
alone dear Son, my alone sweet Savior Christ Jesus Amen.

After his meditating in private.
My dear God, my soul magnifieth thee, for this opportunity and assistance
thou have vouchsafed me (most weak and unworthie) in the performance of this
holy duty; oh pardon, pity and reform my ignorance, insensiblenesse and
manifold distempers herein; oh help me more and more better hereunto, and do
me this exceeding great favor, that I may constantly bear in mind, and
seasonably show forth the life and power of each part of what thou have enabled
me to think upon, according to the warrant of thy most holy word, that I may
be every way the more fit to serve thee, and in every thing find the more
comfort from thee through thy Christ my Redeemer, Amen.

Before Meals.
Our heavenly Father, be entreated to vouchsafe a gracious blessing upon these
thy good creatures which we are about to receive from thy bountiful hands;
grant us to receive them as we ought; in the strength of them vouchsafe us the
continuance of good health if it be thy will; above all, make us the more fit
to do thee all acceptable service, to thy glory and our eternal happiness in
Christ Jesus, Amen.

After Meals.
O our God, for ever blessed be thy name, for refreshing ^^ again so
graciously at this time with thy good creatures, and always providing so
bountifully for us, whereas we are unworthy of one drop of cold water, and
merit the worst of evils, whereas many of thy dear children suffer great want
of those things which we enjoy in abundance: Lord make us truly thankful,
forgive our sins, cause us to serve thee better, continue toward us thy
favors, never suffer us to want any thing thou see good for us, provide
relief for all in any distress, accept and bless us always and in all
things, through Christ Jesus, Amen.

A serious Prayer at any time.
O my heavenly Father, be entreated freely and fully to forget and forgive all
my offenses, though never so many and heinous, which make me most unworthy the
least of thy merties, and whereby I provoke all thy heaviest displeasure
against me; sanctify my soul speedily, thoroughly and constantly, that I may
serve thee all the rest of my time sincerely, watchfully, zealously; save me
from thy wrath which I fear and merit, and can by no means else escape;
continue toward me all needful favors which I can by no means else enjoy;
turn all my present and future, inward and outward sufferings to my souls
eternal good, and do what thou please with me; afford true grace, peace and
comfort to my poor soul, and I desire no more of thee; make me willing to
leave this, and fit for a better life; when I leave this, receive me to a
better life, and it is enough for me, Amen, through thy Christ my Redeemer, the
Lord Jesus my intercessor, I beseech thee.

A Thanksgiving at any time.
O my reconciled God, most gracious Father, and alone alsufficient, most wise,
merciful, faithful and immutable helper in Jesus Christ, whom thou have
freely given unto me to be an all-sufficient Savior and continual intercessor
for me; in whom thou art in covenant with me, and all thy promises are my
portion, through whom thou have afforded and assured all grace and good unto me
here, and all happiness with thee in Heaven for evermore: Behold, as I am
every way exceedingly bound beyond all I can remember or acknowledge, my souls
desire is always set to render in all, and above all things, all possible
praises to thy Majesty, acknowledging ingenuously, that all my inward and
outward, present, former and future welfare is only from thee, and that else no
heart could conceive or tongue express my misery; accept my unfeigned, though
exceeding weak desires now and at all times, to give thy great name for all,
all the glory, Amen.

When he must go abroad, and about business in have, wanting time convenient,
to seek the Lord solemnly.
O my heavenly Fatherin, the name of thy Son my Savior I go abroad and
about my business; in thou leavest me I shall do sinfully and foolishly, and
shame and harm will befall me; therefore for his sake I beseech thee govern
me wit^ thy holy spirit, let thine own blessing be with me, so shall I demean
my self discreetly and honestly, and all shall go well with me in all I
undertake, and that concerns me; according to the especial occasions guide
and prosper me more especially; as I look for all help only from thee, my
soul shall therefore give thee alone all the glory, Amen.

Short Ejaculations, set down as they came in my mind.
LORD give me a peaceable, sealed, suffering spirit.

A cercumspect, silent, sober tongue.

A fair, friendly, free carriage

A grave, gracious, gentle conversation.

Lord make me and every one of mine capable, and partakers of each part of thy
covenant of mercy, grace, peace and happiness, and it is enough.

Lord deliver and keep me from unconscionable, contentious and unreasonable
men; let none that wish or seek my shame or harm, have their will of me.

Lord cause me to walk more wisely and uprightly that I may walk more boldly
and securely; maintain my cause for thine honors sake, I beseech thee.

Lord put spirit, life and power into my devotions; always forgive, accept and
bless my weak performances.

Lord help me to worship thee seasonably and conscionably; and work with thy
grace mercifully, and faithfully, that I may walk with thee watchfully and
constantly.

Lord assure me of thy favor and help me out of debt before I dye, I beg of
thee.

Lord help me to hold fast my integrity, and to trust thy alsufficiency in my
greatest extremity, let it not be in vain for me to seek, serve and await upon
thee.

Lord whatsoever befalls me, let me never be forced to put forth my hand to
iniquity; as thou art most true, make good this truth unto me, Psalm. 125.3.

Lord pour out the spirit of grace and supplication upon me that I may delight
to pour out my heart in prayer before thee daily.

Lord cause me to love the Lord Jesus dearly, to learn o^ him who is meek and
lowely, and to apply his all-sufficient satisfaction rightly.

Lord in the sight and sense o^ my sins humble me deeply for those most
displeasing (...) thee chiefly; oh discover the^^ unto me clearly, make me t^
hate and forsake them unfairedly.

Lord as thou have expres^ promised me, Zach. 12.1^ cause me to look upon t^
Christ my Savior, whom ^^ smnes have pierced, that I m^^ mourn for them, as
one mo^neth for his only son, a^^ be in bitterness for him, as (...) the
loss of my first borne; (...) let his wounds heal me, (...) blood cleanse me,
his spi^^ comfort, and his merits sa^^ me.

Lord give me a good conscience, a contented mind, a discreet demeanor, a
competent estate, and thy fatherly blessing, it is enough.

Lord give me an understanding, believing, penetent, watchful, upright,
wel-ordered heart, and all shall be well.

Lord settle me in a Christian course of serving thee, and let me find the
sweetness thereof continually; oh let my ways please thee; and make my
enemies at peace with me.

Lord whatsoever betide me, let nothing disgrace my Christian profession of
thee, or give those that hate me advantage against me.

Lord help me in well-doing to commend all to thee, and to trust thee most in my
most helpless misery.

Lord I crave and expect all mercy, grace, peace, comfort, strength, health,
safety, succor, help, deliverance and salvation only from thee; oh grant each
seasonably and effectually unto me.

Lord work all thy works i^ me, that I may serve thee as ^ ought, and work all
my work for me, that I may prosper a thou have promised.

Lord make me as thou would dest have me, and require wh^^ thou will of me,
give me which thou see best for me, and d^^ what thou will with me.

Lord be my strength, refuge and ready help at hand, m^ sufficiency, safety and
good success, and when, where, and how thou please employ me.

Lord clear my innocence, stop the mouth of injury, faithfully, worthily and
in-offensively, make me to discharge each part of my duty.

Lord make me wise, warned, watchful and well governed by my former folly,
rashness, weakness and misgovernment.

Lord let me no more be conformable to the sinful and unseemly fashions of the
world, but reform my whole man according to thy will.

Lord forgive and keep me from those sins whereby I have most dishonored
thee, disgraced my Christian profession, injured others, clogged my conscience,
terrified my souse, or any way procured my self shame or harm.

Lord make me to make, and let me find each part of thy Word my guide and
comfort.

Lord direct, govern, restore, comfort, support, establish, enable, protect,
provide for, and bless me, as every one of my especial occasions do or may
require of thee.

Lord at one time or other, by one means or other, ere we do part hence, work
for the effectual conversion and everlasting salvation of every one of mine,
and I desire no more for them of thee.

Lord prepare me to meet the ere thy wrath come upon me; in the day of calamity
hide me under thine hand till thy indignation be over past.

Lord in wisdom, love and faithfulness visit me, and deal as thou please
with me.

Lord when all is past hope, thou can most easily help, my case is fully
known and wholly commended to thee; thou have helped remarkably, thy hand is
not shortened, thy mercy never fails, thy truth endures for ever toward me.

Lord let not my hope deceive nor thy help fail me; oh cause me to make, and
let me find thy providence my portion continually, so shall I be supplied
seasonably, and never want any thing thou see good for me.

Lord prepare me to suffer, to dye, let every thing draw me nearer to thee, let
death bring me to life eternal with thee; do then what thou will with me,
call then when, where, and how thou please for me.

Lord from sin, shame, harm, in thy fear, in a good repute and peace,
preserve me.

Lord how shall I behave my self in my present distressed estate? and how will thou therein deal with me? oh that thou would dispose and dispatch all my
business for me.

Lord all help fails me, none cares for me, every thing seem^ to cross me,
yet help thou and all shall go well with me.

Lord cause me to go the right way to work, and to submit to thy disposing
wholly.

Lord let it appear the right way is the best way; never, of never fail,
forsake or forget me, let them that now for weldoing scorn me, see thou
fovourest and releevest me.

Lord cause me secretly and sensibly to sorrow for my own sins, and to
mourn for the abominations of the times, and this uncessantly.

Lord affect me with the affections of Joseph rightly, dispose me to pray for
the peace of Zion seriously, in all reform and pardon me.

Lord give me feeling, feeling, feeling, of all the good things I know and
utter before thee, thou know and I acknowledge the same to be extremely
wanting in me.

Lord let no thought of my heart nor word of my mouth be in vain for me, but
thou that art my strength and my Redeemer, accept all my Meditations, and
expressions continually.

Lord carry me with wisdom, patience, comfort and good success, through all
my great occasions.

Lord change my disposition, reform my conversation speedily and powerfully,
wherein I am most averse from good, and prone to evil especially.

Lord that thou would instruct and enable me sincerely and circumspectly to
order my lawful affairs substantially, whatsoever others may think, speak
or work against me and that thine own seasonabl^ and effectual working to
affor^ ^n happy issue, might according to thy mercy and truth appear toward
me.

Lord put me not off with outward mercies, but vouchsafe me a portion of thy
best blessings.

From sloth, lust and carelessness, from tatling, tippling and trifling away
time, from putting off my private devotions, from discontent and discord, Good
Lord deliver me.

Grounds of comfort against the nickname of Puritan and Roundhead.
It is nothing in respect of what has been objected against Christ and the
godly, for there has been objected against them grievous things, Acts 25.7.
gluttony, Mat. 11.18.19.
madness, Joh. 10.20.
blasphemy, Mat. 26.65. Mark 9.3. Acts 6.11, 13, 14.
murder, Acts 28.4.
deceiving, Joh. 7.12. 2 Cor. 6.8.
rebellion, Acts 17.6, 7.
railing, Acts 23.4.
babbling, idolatry, Acts 17.18.
bringers of strange things, Acts 17.20.
scisme, Acts 28.22.
wickedness of life; 1 Pet. 2.12.
the abjects abused them, Psa 35.15.
drankards sang of them, Psalm. 69.12.
the basest derided them; Job 30.1.
they were a reproach of men, Psalm. 22.12.
a byword, Psalm. 44.14
a proverb, Psalm. 69.11.
a wonder, Psalm. 17.7. Isa. 8.18
gazing-stocks, 1 Cor. 4.9.
fools, 1 Cor. 4.10.
insufficient, despised, Idem.
defamed, made as filth and off-scowring; 1 Cor. 4.13.
great men rail at them, Psa. 31.13.
godly men censure them, Jobs friends, 1 Cor. 4.4.10.
and by slander excommunicate them, Isa. 66.5.
are most foully scandalized, Ps. 69.7. and 44.15.
condemned by a whole Counsel, Mat. 27.1. Joh. 11.47, 48. Acts 6.12. and
4.6.15. and 5.27. and 23.1.
yea, to suffer as evil doers: 2 Timothy 2.9. Psalm. 37.32, 33. Psalm. 41.8. Isa.
53.4.
well, if God condemns us not, what matters the censures, and reproachful
nicknames of others. 1 Pet. 3.16.


If good and bad men both should judge amiss,

Keep conscience clear, t^ou needst not care I wisse.

Alas, this is not to resist, unto blood, Heb. 12.4.
my Savior says, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and shall say all
manner of evil falsely for my sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is
your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets that were before
you; Mat. 5.11, 12.
yea, my most blessed Redeemer, so have they abused thee and all thy dearest
Servants; oh then why should I that am not worthy the name of a Servant or
Disciple, think to be above my Lord and Master, and better then others, whereas
I am the unworthiest and most misgoverned of all other; let it be enough for me
to be like, (though not equal,) to thee my Master and Lord, Mat. ^^.24, 25.
Lord honor me in suffering, prepare me for, enable me to suffer this, or any
other way for thee.

Puritan or Roundhead; who? what is either? even h^ that conceits himself
clean from his corruption, and is not washed from his filthiness; Prove. ^^.12.
he that judges others unclean and himself more holy, Isa. 65.5.
he that will be holier then God will have him, preferring men's traditions
before Gods Ordinances, Mat. 15, 3.6. Mar. 7.3.9.13. Col. 2.20, 21, 22, 23. 1 Timothy 4.3.
O my soul come not thou into their secret; Genesis 49.6.
thus I never was, nor am, nor by Gods grace never shall be a Puritan or
Roundhead.

But if to mourn and tremble in the sight and sense of my most hainously
sinful, and terribly accursed condition, by original and actual wickedness,
be to be a Puritan, Zac. 12.10. Matthew. 5.4. Ezra 10.3. Isa. 66.5. Hos. 13.1.
Lord make and ever continue me a Puritan and Roundhead,

If heartily to abhor, and seriously to resolve against sin, Job 42.6. Romans
12.9. Ezekiel. 6.9. and 20.43. Psalm. 39.1. Psalm. 101.3. and 119.106. and 97.10.
be to be a Puritan and Roundhead, Lord make, etc.

If inwardly to love, and affectionately to delight in good, Psalm. 119.119.127.
and 1.2. and 40.^. and 119.16, 24, 35, 47, 70, 77, 174.
be to be, etc.

If to affect Gods; Children dearly, if to cherish and not to grieve them, if
to honor and not to scorn them, if to help and not to harm them, Psalm. 16.3.
and 15.4. Job. 13.14. Romans 12.9, 10, 13.
be to be, etc.

If unfainedly to purpose, and watchfully to practice the power of godliness
Acts 11.23. Psalm. 39.1. and 141 3. Mark 13.33, 37. 2 Timothy 4.5. 1 Pet. 4.7.
be to be, etc.

If to turn from, and take heed of the occasions of every thing that is
unlawful and uncomely Genesis 39.10. 1 These. 5.22. Psalm. 119.101. and 101.3.
Ephesians. 3.4.
be to be, etc.

If to have respect unto, and to embrace the furtherances of whatsoever is
warrantable and seemly Psalm. 119.6. Phil. 4.9. and 1.27. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.
be to be, etc.

If to labor to be thoroughly informed and reformed by the written Word of God
Prove. 23.12. Psalm. 119.11.105 Isa, 8.20. Gal. 6.16.
be to be etc.

If to exercise my self to keep the Testimony and peace of a good conscience
at all times, and in all things Acts 23.1. and. 24.16. 2 Cor. 1.12. 1 Timothy
1.1^. 2 Timothy 1.3. Heb. 13.8.
be to be, etc.

If to embrace the means and opportunities seasonably and conscionably, to
hear, read, pray, meditate, confer and sing Psalms Gal. 6.10. Prove. 8.34.
Joh. 8.47. Rev. 1.3. Joh. 5.39. Psalm. 5.2. and 55.17. 1 These. 5.17. Genesis 24.63.
Josh. 1.8. Psalm. 1.2. and 63.6. Psalm. 13.6. and 66.2. Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16.
be to be, etc.

If to sanctify the Lords Sab bath carefully, to receive the Sacrament
reverendly, and to fast solemnly Com. 4. 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29.
be to be, etc.

If to set up Religion in my Family, and to charge mine ^^ converse Christianly
Psalm 101. Geneses 18.19. Deutrenomie 4.9. and 11.19.
be to be, etc.

If to perform every public family and private holy duty i^ spirit and truth,
and not superstitiously, or in outward show verbally, formally, customarily
Joh. 4.24. Ru^ 1.9. Romans 7.6. Phil. 3.3. 1 C^. 14.15, 16.
be to be etc.

If not to fear, neglect or be ashamed to do well for any by respect Gal.
1.10. Psalm. 119.161, 163. 126. and 138. ver. and 128. ver.
be to be, etc.

If to carry ones self circumspectly, diligently, faithfully and worthily in
his particular calling Exodus 23.13. Mat. 10.16. Ephesians. 5.15. Ezra 7.23. Dan. 6.4.
be to be, etc.

If to walk humbly with, and uprightly before the Lord Micah 6.8. Genesis 17 1.
Prove. 10.9. Job 33.3. Acts 20.19. Psalm. 101.2.
be to be, etc.

If to deal justly and equally with others, if to be compassionate and
helpful to the distressed Micah 6.8. Phil. 4.8. Col. 4.1. Zach. 7.9. Phil. 4.3.
be to be, etc.

If to be circumspect and sober meek and friendly, free-hearted and cheerful,
peaceable and faire-carriaged Exodus 23.13. 1 Pet. 4 7. Mat. 11.29. Prove. 18.24.
Genesis 25.27. Prove. 15.13. Romans 12.18. 1 These. 2.10.
be to be, etc.

If to suppress envy and malice, anger and collar, to govern filthy lusts and
unruly passions Romans 13.19. Col. 3.8. Prove. 15, 18. and 14 17. 29, Ephesians. 4. 31.
Jam. 1.19 Gal. 5.24. 1 Pet: 2.11. Tit. 1.6. Phil. 4.5.
be to be, etc.

If to part with our most precious pleasures and profits, rather then sin
against o^ consciences He^ 11.24, 25, 26. Luke 14.32.
be to be, etc.

If not to dare to drink drunk swear, lie, cozen, be unclean or not to
frequent or delight in the society of such, Ephesians. 5.18. Mat. 5.3^. Levit. 19.11.
Col. 3.9. Rev. 2^.15. Lev. 19.13. 1 Cor. 7.5. Epe. 5.5. Gal. 5.19. 1 These. 4.7.
2 C^ 6.17. Psalm. 1.1. and 6.8. and 26.5^ Pro. 28.7.
be to be, etc.

If not to slander, backbite, judge, censure, injure others, if to speak the
best and no evil of the dead or absent Prove. 10.18. Psalm. 101.5. 1 Timothy 3.11.
Prove. 25.23. 2 Cor. 12.10. Mat. 7.1. Jer. 22.3. Col. 3.25.
be to be, etc.

If, (though to please others,) not to break a jest against Piety, Charity and
Chastity Ephesians. 5.4. 1 Cor. 15.33. Col. 3.8.
be to be, etc.

If to mind ones own business and not to meddle in others matters Pre. 22 29.
1 These. 4, 11. 2 These. 3.11. 1 Timothy 5.13. 1 Pet. 4.15.
be to be, etc.

If to hold Gods Word to be the only and all-sufficient guide to true
happiness, and to reject the contrary utterly Psalm. 119.105. and 19.7, 8 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. Gal. 1.8.9. Rev. 22.21.
be to be, etc.

If to labor to live by keeping peace with God, and setting all in order, that
I may be ready to dye daily Cor. 1.20. and 3.15. Psalm. 119.165. Isa. 26.3. Jer.
27.5. Isa. 38.1.
be to be, etc.

If in well doing to use all law full means to serve Gods providence in my
particular occasions, and to trust upon God disposing and blessing only Psalm.
37.3, 4, 5. Pro. 3.5, 6, 7. and 16.3.
be to be, etc.

If to trust God most in greatest extremity, and to be contented with his
disposing submisively Psalm. ^ 1, 2. Isa. 50.10. Job 13.15. Psalm. 37.5.
be to be, etc.

If in the sense of daily corruptions, sins, wants, failing to be humbled, to
confess, (...) wail, beg pardon for, (...) strength against them, resolving
and endeavoring to (...) sake them J^^. 4.16. Psalm. 3, ^. and 51.3.1. P^^.
21.13. Jam. 4.9. Psalm. 86.16. Psalm. 17.3. and 119.28. and 106. ver. 2 Cor. 5.9.
Pro. 28.14.
be to be, etc.

If to crave especial assistance against especial faults, and more fitness
to serve God wherein I have most failed Psalm. 19.13. and 51.10, 14. Psalm. 71.9.
Romans 12.21. Psalm. 85.8.
be to be, etc.

If to resolve to suffer any shame or harm rather then to sin wilfully Heb.
11.25. 1 Pet. 3.14, 16. 1 Pet. 4.15, 19.
be to be, etc.

If speedily and seriously to dispatch those businesses that concerns my
eternal peace, and to slight whatsoever can afford no solid comfort in the
time of visitation, or at the hour of death Mat. 6.33. Luke 10.42. Pro. 10.2.
and 11.4. 1 Cor. 15.58. 1 These. 4.18.
be to be, etc.

If in the sense of any sin or affliction not to be too much dejected, if not
to despair of Gods mercies, nor to distrust his promises, nor to doubt of his
providence, or not to question Christ's all-sufficient merits and perpetual
mediation Romans 8 37. 2 Cor. 4.8, 9 Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9, 10. and 42.11.6 43.5.
Psalm. 56.3, 4, 10, 11, 13 1 Timothy 2.8 Acts 27.25. Genesis 11.8. Job 38.41. Mat.
6.25. to the end: 1 Timothy 1.15. Heb. 7.25. 2 Timothy 2.5.
be to be etc.

If when I think I stand to ta^^ heed least I fall, if to labor a renew my
first love, if to string to increase inward grace and outward practice, if to
recover from former falls, and bewail of future back slidings, if mo^^ to fear
secret sin then op^^ shame, if in things doubtful ^^ take he surest course,
if to pe^severe in godliness and live^ hope, if to dye in the fear a^ favor
of my God in Christ 1 Cor. 10.12. Romans 11.20. Rev. 2.4, 5. Col. 1.10^ 2 Pet.
1.5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 23.3. and 51.8, 10. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 21.
be to be, etc.

If by true, lively and steadfast faith (at least in unsained desire and
endeavor) to seek all wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption,
all mercy, grace, peace, consolation and happiness, according to the free,
plain, plentiful and faithful promises of our reconciled God, most gracious
Father, and alone almighty helper, in covenant with us, only through the
all-sufficient satisfaction and never failing intercession of his most dear and
only Son, our alone Savior and Mediator, notwithstanding our most heinous
sinfulness in nature, and by life; notwithstanding our daily many and great
wants, failings, doubts and discomforts; notwithstanding our unmeasurable
grievous ingratitude, unworthiness, insufficiencies, and all other though
never so many and great impediments and impossibilities, be to be a Puritan or
Roundhead, Lord in all these, make and ever continue me to be a Puritan and
Roundhead: I most humbly, unfainedly and uncestantly beg, pray, beseech and
urge, let then the devil and all his instruments let then who that will, and
how they will miscall, nickname scorn and abuse me with the name of Puritan,
with a ful^ mouth never so foully; Lord govern and help me. Mark ^^ 22. Romans
3.28. and 4.19, 20. C^^. 5.1. 1 Cor. 16.13. and 2 Cor 5.^ Gal. 3.22. Ephesians. 3.12.
and 6.1^ Col. 2.5.7. and 1 Timothy 1.5. ^^ Heb. 10.22. and 11. Chapt. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Mat. 15.22. 1 Timothy 1.^^ Gal. 6.16. 2 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 2 These. 2.16, 17. Heb.
6.17, 18, Acts 4.12. Ezekiel. 36.22. Gal. 3, 12. Hos. 14.4. Psalm. 86.5. and 130 7.
1 Cor. 1.9. and 10.13. 1 These. 5 24. and 2.3. 3 Heb. 2.17. and 10, 23. 2 Cor.
1.20. Romans 5.10 2 Cor, 5.18, 20. Col. 1.21. Psalm. 86 15, and 111.4. and 145.8.
2 Cor. 1.3, Dan. 3.17. 2 Timothy 1.12. Heb. 2 18 and 7, 25, Romans 4, 21, Psalm, 46,
1, Jer, 31, 33, Heb, 8, 10, Col, 3, 11 1 Cor, 3, 21, 22, 23, Isa, 53, chap,
Rom, 4, 25, and 3, 24, 25, 1 John 2, 1, Rom, 8, 34, Gal, 3, 19, Heb, 8, 6, and
9, 15, and 12, 24, Mat. 3, 17, John 3, 16, Heb. 11, 17, Hos, 13, 4, 2 Timothy, 2,
5, Ezekiel, 36, 22, 23, Hos, 14, 4, Isa, 58, 11, Psalm. 73, 24,

A commendable Course tending to contentment of diverse necessary as well Divine
as Moral Observations and Counsels gathered by experience.
IN regard of Gods worship, because every holy duty cannot well be every day
performed with out great have and hinderance, and so with little power and
profit, I conceive it most convenient and comfortable, no day to neglect the
most necessary, as prayer and reading the Scriptures, and for the rest to
redeem the time, to perform them as we may also; howsoever, let every holy
duty be performed with solemn preparation and sensible affection, at least
with an holy bewailing the want of the same, and that the Lord will please to
work the same in us.

In his ordinary course at home and abroad, upon all occasions, in all his
words, behavior and actions, out of conscience to God, and by his government
to demean himself circumspectly, plainly, faithfully, freely, soberly and
friendly, without any by-respect, or troubling himself with trifles, or with
what he cannot thereby prevent or remedy: in his greatest perplexities and
troubles (using only the lawful means to serve Gods providence) to commend
all to hi^ dispossing and blessing wholly, and so to rest content with his good
pleasure, who in wisdom, love and faithfulness, will assuredly cause all to
go well, go all how it will: Amen, my heavenly Father in Christ Jesus, in
mercy as thou have promised, be I never so ugworthy, and whatsoever opposes,
Amen.

Be Pious and Patient, Be Just and Quiet, Be Temperate and Peaceable, Be Direct
and Sober, Be True and Provident, Be Faithful and Contented Be Chaste and
Wary, Be Modest and Grave, Be Watchful and Reserved, Be Retired and
Compassionate, Be Secret and Charitable Be Silent and Liberal, Be Humble and
Inoffensive Be Meek and Teachable Be Friendly and Constant,
be not Profane nor Impatient, be not Unjust nor Captious, be not Excessive
nor Contentious, be not Double nor Passionate, be not False nor Prodigal, be
not Faithless nor Malcontent, be not Filthy nor Rash, be not Wanton nor
Light, be not Careless nor Loose, be not Gadding nor Cruel, be not Open. nor
Merciless, be not Lavish nor Covetous, be not Proud nor Oftensive, be not
Highminded nor Wilful, be not Surly nor Wavering.
Every one that shows a smooth face, or gives fair words is not a faithful
friend; therefore take heed what you say, and whom you trust.

Trust no man with that which if it ever be discovered, may any way prejudice
you, for he that is now for you, may hereafter fail, discover or oppose you;
neither speak ill of him that does not now befriend thee, his mind may change
toward thee, and then it will repent thee.

Be friendly to, and speak well of those that have wronged, or do not regard,
or have spoken slightly of thee; believe me it will work strangely in gaining
much affection, respect, credit and contentment to thee, whereas a sour
countenance, harsh carriage, bitter language and distasteful dealing, will but
increase their hatred and contempt, and thy disgrace and disquiet: make trial,
and take my word another time; I may truly say, experientia docet.

Hold it unchristian, cowardly and uncomely, needless, eaflesse and foolish,
to perplex thy self with that thou can neither prevent nor help, and avoid
it: in all good conscience with an holy carelessness, cast all thy care on God,
who takes care for thee, and has promised never, never to fail, forsake or
forget thee.

It is a worthy part and well done, neither slavishly to fear, nor wilfully to
distest any, converse cheerfully (and with comeliness) carelessly; but as thou
love to keep thy friends respect, and thine own peace reservedly.

Let not thine own words, countenance or doings discover, and who can
contemn, or have advantage against thee.

By and by thou art absent from those whom now thou accompaniest with, let thy
desire to please for the present procure no future inward discontent, therefore
hold thee close to those godly and moral Maxims which may best govern thee
now, and most satisfy thee afterward; to this end forget not former good or
misgovernment, and thereupon, peace or vexation.

So to regard as to strive to satisfy every ones humor, shows a foolishly
flattering disposition, questions worth and gets scorn: to keep gravity, to
discourse sparingly and solidly, though it humor not, forces them at least in
acknowledgement secretly to say, there is wisdom, honesty and good government;
and so it ought to be.

It is a most miserable mistake and arises from Ignorance, floath or
profaneness, when we think it is an hinderance to our outward proceedings, if
we first ply our private devotions, whereas to begin with them, is the right
way to prosper; otherwise, though we imagine we have made all sure, the Lord
many times by one means or other, crosses our courses, sends us losses, and
makes us smart for such foolishness: Lord grant me first to seek thy Kingdom,
and I shall have share in the rest assuredly, as thou see best for me.

In a certain case of disserence, he advised either to suppress or help them
thoroughly, so either to oblige them to help, or else disable them to hurt you;
but by no means trust their discretion or good nature, who dare say, if they
had, they would use their advantage against you, even now when they cannot
harm you; espec Ily when ingratitude, pride, ambition and conceited cause of
revenge, transports them; thus as a politician.

But as a Christian, he advises to assist them seasonably and competently, yet
warily against their common enemy, that themselves may have no leisure nor
pretense, nor the other no time nor power to trouble you; and as a Christian
politician, in the same case he thus speaks his mind plainly and freely, be
provided to prevent the worst their might can, or their malice may attempt
against you, for some speak strangely of you, and their present usage declares
the affection and respect they bear you: this for that.

To be malicious, scornful and injurious, is unchristian, uncivil and
unseemly, and commonly comes from a high conceited, villifying, quarelling
disposition in ones self; and from a soft, suffering, and therefore from a
supposed cowardly disposition of another; yet often it falls out, the man
unwilling to contend escapes with credit, and the shame and mischief falls on
his head that sought it.

Maintain your own right, but do another no wrong, and suffer stilly what
you can by no good means remedy.

If thou do well, speak not thine own praises, if it be nor with thee as
thou would, say nothing; for I have observed, the good is concealed, and the
rest lightly revealed.

By making ohers as wise as thy self, in matters wherein they before were
ignorant, will get them credit by thy lufficiency, and then they will slight
thee; answer civilly, out answer not fully (I mean hear worldly affairs,
only) keep somewhat in till afterward, so shall respect be preserved; deny out
of judgment and reason not out of pride and self conceit, hold thine own and
give no distaste

His God, his Conscience, his Country, his own honor, the memory of his dead,
and reputation of his living friend, he would not should, nor can he suffer
them to be wronged.

He held it more for a wishing that it were so, then holy fear it should be so
in some who say, England must have its turn too, so much can passion more then
piety do.

O poor England, so extremely envied for the peace thy God grants thee, be
thou humbly thankful, truly penitent, and trust thy God unfainedly, so shall
thou still prosper by his mercy, and thy malicers shall nor harm thee, nor
rejoice in thy misery.

O England, England, lay to heart, the long and lamentable calamities of Gods
Church in Germany; go to Shiloh, see what the Lord has done there, and he
will spare thee, else, woe, woe, woe unto thee.

Why should blessed England be blamed, that preferres a warrantable peace before
a bloody war; those therein engaged, would if they knew how (as thou art) be
gladly freed, but not knowing how to be released, would have thee as
themselves, entangled; and for their own advantage, would laugh if thou were
ruined; fear, serve, trust thy God, be wary; oh for ever may thou be
secured.

This was written before the bloody Wars, Lord pardon our sins, and heal
the Land for thy Christ's, for thy mercy sake.

Warre-wishers never felt nor know the miseries thereof, or only seek to please
their own ambitious and covetous humors: I am sure such as desire or rejoice
therein, long after, and are glad of the greatest plague upon earth, and I say,
God send them sorrow that love it; if it made them smart in their own persons,
wives, children, friends, houses or goods, they would soon be weary of it; for
doubtless none but fools or mad men (or those that are far enough from it)
can take delight in it, Give peace in our time O Lord.

True, the calling is lawful, honorable and necessary, when the causes urging
are just, and the ends good, and he that then declines it is base in extremity,
but not to be attempted rashly out of passion, or to please common fancy
fondly; for the wise man says, With good advice make war.

The haire-braind fool cries peace with thee Lord, and war with all the world;
the sober Christian prays peace with thee Lord, and with all men as far as
is possible.

Caussesse suspicions troubles a man's mind, and blemish his virtues.

Let not too much confidence darken foresight.

Things openly slighted may be seriously intended.

Where conscience is not informed clearly and reformed thoroughly, men are
misled with by-respects, and blinded with humane policy.

He is a good counselor and a true friend, who as he seconds tempers our
humor.

Be to friends friendly, constant and just, but not open.

Be not proud, but keep distance, admit none a full approach to thy power or
secrets.

Trivial envies, emulations, censures, oppositions regard not, but go
substantially about thine own business.

Though thou intendest not his hurt, prevent him that would do thee hurt.

Chiefes in commotions, and such as have accusing consciences are commonly but
half-couraged men.

He that is valiant and active, loves and seeks peace without fear or
softness.

Make so good use of things commendable in others, that they may be praised in
thy self; but be real in them, else thou will be scorned.

Christian circumpection may timely and easily prevent troubles, when much care
and labor can hardly, if ever deliver from them.

A man may be outwardly (at times) friendly, yet want respect toward thee
inwardly, this appears by often cross and slighting carriage.

Birds are entangled by their seet, and men by their tongues.

Take heed where, when, to whom and of what thou speak, always let thy
tongue first consult with thy brains.

Speak not at all where thy words are not heard, believed or regarded; show by
thy silence and countenance, thou art sensible of being slighted.

Forbear sometimes to tell strange things, though true, least thou be
counted and called an over-reacher.

Never interrupt another in speaking, first hear him out, then answer, there
is time enough for both.

In discoursing go not far about, bring in no needless circumstances or
parenthesis, but declare the business advisedly, deliberately, plainly,
freely, truly with a low voice and affablenesse, without interruption,
faultring, flattering, distaste or conceitednesse, and regard not how thou art
censured.

Let thy countenance to every one be grave, settled courteous, take heed of
lightness, distraction, harshnesse; accustom thy self hereto, it is
graceful, and will cause respect, by constancy herein wipe away the
remembrance of former misgovernment.

Envy not that some are praised undeservedly, or more then they merit, thou
know fear, flattery, hope of gain or the like, causes it.

Distaste not that others slight deserved praises or thy friend, if thou can
not help it, only speak a word or two, to show thou take notice of it, and
take a more convenient time to question more fully about it.

Be more friendly and less free, opennesse causes contempt, but courtesy
commendation, and reservednesse respect.

HAving renewed his resolutions in the new year (by the grace of God) to lead
a new life; he bethought himself of this course, for the conscionable
worshipping of, and walking with the Lord, which according to his disposition
of mind, and condition of life, he conceived was most fitting for, and would
(by Gods blessing) be most comfortable for him; in all having respect to the
warrant of Gods word, and Christian convenience, O Lord grant hereto thy grace
and blessing I beseech thee.

The Lord says, Isa. 1.16, 17. Cease to do evil, learn to do^ w^ll, etc.
well then, my soul, in the strength of the Almighty, from henceforth resolve,
pray, watch against all sin in gonerall, and against thy especial
corruptions (as sloth, neglect, or customary performing (...) holy duties,
habitual distractions in them, worldly-mindel-nesse, distrust, discontent,
pass on, lust, intemperance and following vain customs, etc: more especially,
resolve, pray watch, endeavor to imbrac^ and practice the contrary duties, and
every way according to the restimony of a well in formed conscience, to walk
piously, righteously, soberly, dicreetly and unblamably in this present evil
world; more particularly for his more solem^^ and settled seeking the Lord i^
his private devotions (beside his public and family duties) to observe this
course every day constantly, and at such time of the day as may be with least
hinderance and most fitness, viz. with premeditation to frame his prayer (as
briefly and substantially as he can) after this manner, inserting in their
proper places new occasions of confessions, Supplications or thanksgivings,
etc. the sum of the prayer then to be this.

First, confession of especial sins, with their especial circumstances.

2 Acknowledgment of especial judgments due, justly inflicted, yet graciously
mittigated.

3 Self-denial, renewing resolutions to amend.

4 Craving pardon and reconciliation in Christ.

5 Deprecation of Gods judgments feared, and for a lanctified use of all
present and future susterings.

6 Begging conversion and reformation, especially in especial sins and
failings, with restoration, increase and perseverance.

7 Also godly sorrow, true faith, with peace and comfort.

8 To be prepared to dye.

9 Prayer for continuance of common blessings, and for especial direction and
help in especial occasions and necessities.

10 For sincerity, confidence, patience and contentation at all assayes.

11 Thanksgiving for general and especial, inward and outward blessings.

12 Prayer for the estate of Gods Children, in general and particular.

13 For his family.

14 And for all such as he is any way bound to pray for.

Thus for his daily private prayer.

Next, to read three Chapters in the Bible every day, with a brief prayer
before and after, and holy meditation thereupon; yea, laboring to turn the
chief observations thereout into solemn prayer for conscionable practice.

Thirdly, seriously to read in some good book, and because these following
books and writings are of singular use for his edification, and that he cannot
every day read in each, he conceives it best to read only in one, and in
another the next day, etc. as for example.

On the Sabbath day affectionately calling to mind some of Gods especial
mercies, recorded by him.

On Monday, solemnly remembering some of his holy Vows written by him.

On Tuesday, cheerfully having recourse to some of Gods Promises collected by
him.

On Wednesday, attentively reading somewhat in Master By fields Marrow of the
Oracles of God.

On Thursday, somewhat in the Practice of Piety.

On Friday, the like in the Christians daily Sacrifice, or in the Observations
and Advises.

On Saturday, serious Examination by some part of the true Watch and Rule of
life.

And when God please in continuance of time, he shall have by this constant
course ended any of these, to begin again, etc. always turning what he reads
into humble and unfeigned prayer, for application and performance, a little at a
time, and that well is better, and will be more profitable then much
customarily and insensibly slubbered over.

Fourthly, every day to sing a Psalm, or part, understandingly and feelingly.

Thus for his private practice of pious duties every day.

Now for his other spare time that it be not misspent, to employ it in Christian
conversing with good men, or in reading useful moral Histories, and quoting
thereout needful observations, or in some other lawful, necessary, seemly,
profitable business or recreations.

Lord settle me in such a christian course of serving thee as may be most
acceptable to thee, and comfortable to my conscience continually.

One that had power, commanding him, more out of malice then reason, upon a
perilous employment, he said, Gods strength is my sufficiency and protection,
my safety; so I go, and shall prosper spite of your ill meaning toward me.

One that sees and uncharitably censures, or sharply reprehends his faults, not
knowing or regarding his repentance, compassionates not, or will not take
notice of his sorrows.

Be always silent where reason is not regarded, and truth is but distastefull.

Suppress pride, peevishness, passion, discontent and discord, as most
unbeseeming a wise and worthy man's mind.

This for that, now of somewhat else.

His conscience, honor and his friend
Spare, and naught else can him offend;
But if your malice and distaste
Cannot forbear, pack hence in have;
And when ye are sent for, come again,
This thanks still look for, for your pains.
Backbitten, must I needs turn pale for it,
False honors please, and lying slanders fright,
Whom? but the unworthy and vainglorious wight.
Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous, but who can stand before envy, Pro.
27.4.

Men often times speak evil of us, because they cannot speak well; not because
we deserve it, but they are accustomed to it, and therefore cannot leave it,
especially when they will not be persuaded they do evil in it.

There are some Dogs of that nature, that they bark rather upon custom then
curstness, and some so currish, they bite before they bark; he has met with
both sorts, but thanks to the Lord, neither their barking nor biting have been
able to fright or hurt him.

Desire no employment upon vainglory, refuse none for fear; Lord guide and
strengthen me, to show my self careful and resolute in action.

By virtue in valiantly doing his duty, and by modesty, in sparingly speaking
thereof, a man may best escape envy, and obtain glory.

Provoke not a suffering nature too much, least it turn to your own shame and
harm at length, though loath, he dares both speak and do.

He that is honest is bold, he that does well would not be wronged, and may be
provoked beyond his power, no coward is he that will not, base coward is he
that dares not fight; let the fear of God not of man restrain thee, where
conscience warrants show it by doing worthily.

It ought to be enough for us if we have, by Gods assistance, behaved our
selves so, that no man can tax us justly; if we deserve praise, it is only
malice keeps it from us, and a lying tongue that would disgrace us.

I dare trust any man's judgment of me, but not every man's affection toward me.

Some whose consciences must commend us, malice forces in their speeches to
condemn us, though we know and find it, we may have comfort in it.

It is mere folly, great weakness and extreme vanity, to trouble our minds
with those things, that thereby can neither be prevented nor helped.

One said (believe me, not to boast or justify himself vainly, but to
vindicate his worth and innocence, which has by malice and untruth suffered
undeservedly) who that knows me can tax me with carelessness, or any kind of
unworthy carriage justly? and if they would speak plainly as they are persuaded
of me, must they not confess the contrary?

If you hear or conceive amiss of me, if there be conscience, reason, charity
or common honesty in you, first convince, then censure, else spare me, or else
I will protest you belly me, and of mere malice detract from me, perhaps because
your own ways have not been so worthy, and therefore must not escape your
envy; this is baseness in you, and does not blemish but settle me; for wise
and worthy men will judge rightly.

Tell me of my faults but do not blaze them; think of your own, and mine will
seem the less unto you.

Would I were as wise, honest and worthy as some think themselves, and would
be esteemed, whose carriage but little show they deserve it.

Of all beasts, I hate an injurious scoffer, I cannot abide a contentious
companion, nor to have to do with one of a distasteful disposition, or that is
of a proud and disdainful demeanor.

Injurious speeches from a man in authority, are most harmfull and unseemly,
oftentimes wrong and grieve extremely; by these the innocent and worthy must
suffer and know no redress; complain they may not, contend they dare not,
grieving helps not: O poor revenge! conquest or passion, art thou in
authority, avoid it, it loses love, lessons respect toward thee, procures ill
will unto, and hard words of thee, and is a treat disgrace and blemish to thee.

Envy no man's honor, wish every one as much as he desires or deserves, but in
advancing his own, let him not impair another man's.

Do well, speak truth, boast not, so win honor and wear it, else, look for
shame instead of credit.

If he might have his desire he would choose those (if he knew them) that have
the worst opinion of him and best of themselves to be either actors with him,
or spectators of him in the most perilous employments; where God says go, for
then he is sure (live or dye, in the strength of his God) to force their
acknowledgement of his well-doing, and to stop their injurious mouths against
him.

Why cannot some men give such their due praise, whose personal service they
especially desire in greatest occasion and danger, this their necessity forces
that their envy smothers.

In my conscience the greatest boasters are the poorest doers; yet I have
observed, he that has mouthed it most, has been thought to do best.

I am sure some that looked big and swore by no small ones, were the first that
flinched.

There is no notable service has fallen out in their time, but there are some
that will assure you they have been at it, though truth is, they were far
enough from it; it is a mad world when some get more credit by lying and
eracking, then others by truth and welldoing.

He held it neither wit, honesty nor valor (out of conceited honor) to
endanger himself or others without or beyond command or warrant.

He is to be esteemed more base then baseness it self, that in his place
dares not out-dare danger and death.

I will hereafter esteem nothing of any worth, that has not many to detract
from it.
LEt us do worthily, but not lie, boast, nor detract from others for our
honor.

If thy heart tells thee thou have discharged thy duty, and that no man can
truly, or dares to thy face say the contrary, what need thou care though
others in secret out of malice slander thee.

Some that desire to have their own miscarriage held no fault^, will wrest
another man's welldoing.

Among us (Soldiers) the way to get respect from such as neglect you, is to
carry your self gravely, quietly and carelessly toward them, taking heed thou
give them no just cause of distaste or advantage against, or any way to
scorn or abuse you.

He that can hold his peace has great advantage, a fool cannot keep filence,
a talker is contemned by others, and a trouble to himself.

To discover a man's affections or business, makes a man contemptible, and no
way mends the matter.

To speak in due season with freeness, plainness, truth and boldness,
quashes a slyc, jeering, injurious companion.

Lord my God govern me.

Some marks of a malicious man, from whom good Lord deliver me, and never
suffer them to have advantage against, or to have their wills over me.
1 HE never speaks well of any, except for ^^^re or flattery, or some
by-respect of his own. 2 He always takes and makes every thing worse then it
is. 3 He will invent, divulge, aggravate, swallow any manner of untruth against
you, rather then you shall-escape his envy. 4 Yet dares justify nothing if you
call him in question. 5 His scoffs leave behind them an aspersion of in jury,
understand them how you will, and this he delights in. 6 If he see you troubled,
he triumphs the more over you, laughs the more at you, and speaks the more
against you.
By these among the rest you shall know him, take heed of him, good God bless
me from him.

A noble disposition thinks, speaks, hopes the best, and gives each his due
praise, is suffering, longs for a good occasion to stop the mouth of injury;
and then out of conscience, in the strength of the Almighty, does worthily; he
abhorres untruth, boasting and vainglory, he labors to give the Lord only
all the honor for any thing he has done well, or that has gone well; my
heart loves, I dare trust such a one: Lord be my guide and strength, my safety
and good success, I pray thee.

Simplicity without circumspection is folly.

Circumspection without simplicity is cunning.

Simplicity with circumspection is true wisdom.

Another scornful humor may be profitable, though distasteful, if we watch
to walk so as we give no cause of contempt against us, but then if he
continues scornful to us, away with him from us.

Word it with no man, but observe, be silent, and learn better government.

Wherein you can well satisfy your self, ask not another, least you
needlessly discover your disposition, which it will after grieve you to have
made known, and so fall into caussesse cavilling, which will more afflict.

Keep silence and gravity, and the most strict observer shall not discover you,
nor your greatest maligner shall have no advantage against you.

Why fear we him, we need not respect if our conscience be clear, and cause
good? surely it is a weakness we would condemn in others, and il-becomes us;
away with such needless, childish, unworthy perplexities.

These maine reasons among the rest most highly obliges me to most humble
thankfulness for former assistance received, and to most earnest prayer for
future help from Heaven, to deal directly, whatsoever envy, scorn or
hinderance I may have hereby: that my conscience is comforted, my mind quieted,
an honest repute maintained, boldness to stand before, and speak unto the
strictest authority gained, and the best accusations of vile persons not
feared, prevented, contemned, also the assurance of a merciful blessing from
the hand of God, promised and expected.

Reveal no secret to him that thou know to affect others more then thy
self, for he cannot conceal it from them.

That which thou would not have told to others, tell no body, for if thou
can not, why should thou think another will conceal what concerns thee.

Say, not it is true, and I dare justify it, yet I pray speak not of it;
rather speak not at all of it, and surely no trouble will come of it.

Trust not him again that has once betrayed thee.

A man is in the opinion of others (in regard of his own satisfaction) not as
they esteem of him, but as himself conceits he is esteemed of by them.

Labor to bring thy heart to such a temper, that no man may have a worse
conceit of thee then thou have of thy self, and a will the less trouble thee
if others dis-esteem thee.

Our hidden griefs about men's opinions of us, neither make them better or worse
toward us, walk christianly and in-offensively, and never think or respect
what others think or say of thee, it will procure great contentment to thee.

Do good unto, but never trust a reconciled enemy, except sure signs of grace
more then shown of friendship persuade thee.

Not to ask or answer questions rashly. Not to enquire after or relate news
hastily. Not to meddle in others matter needlessly. Not to dispute or cavil
vainly Not to apprehend cause given too deeply. Not to remember forepast
injuries continually. Not to speak of our own doings boastingly. Not to
rehearse others actions slightingly. Not to command with many words harshly.
Not to receive commands disputingly. Not to use men of worth (though mean)
unkindly. Not to carry our selves toward any proudly. Not to show we think of
our selves conceitedly. Not to be in countenance sour and surly. Not to
converse with others dis-respectively. Not to discover our business and
affections unadvisedly. Not to live in Gods sight profanely. Not to deal with
men unfaithfully. Not to lay open our selves lavishly. Not to talk of state
matters or great persons lightly.
Is the way to live honestly, peaceably, and praiseworthy.

Sloth breeds lust, lust feeds floath, vigilance and temperance will strangle
both.

One said, he could hardly brook him whom he observed to laugh at what he said;
were it his weakness, custom or scorn, yet it was a means to make him most
carefully to avoid whatsoever he was persuaded might move laughter in the most
ridiculous, or a malicious contemner

One that is self-conceited, favors nothing but what suits that humor, but
scorns you even for things lawful and indifferent; truly I am of Solomon's
mind, there is more hope of a fool then of him, and let him think what he
will, he is no better.

Reserved resolute words and carriage, damps perhaps may inform him.

Freeness to a Servant, equal or inferior, procures familiarnesse,
sauciness and contempt hardly to be redressed.

Freeness to thy better makes him mislikes thee, be weary of thee and flight
thee.

Toward such use respect, use no complement, be not troublesome, visit not
often, speak little.

Toward the other be grave, strict and settled, above all by thy words and
carriage keep such distance, that they may neither discover nor abuse thee.

Though a man be trusty and does what I bid him, yet if he be ill natured, does
not kindly respect me, but is self-conceited and scornful, he does not content
me: I may bear with and forbear him a while to serve mine own turn, or for
some other engagement, but as soon as I can I will rid my self of him; and
while I must use him, to do it in such things wherein I cannot miss him, and
to be as much as may be from him; still I say there is no way better to awe
him, as by forbearing questioning with him, discovering your mind to him, and
to be constantly silent and settled toward him.

Hypocritical honesty is double impiety.

He liked not, nor loved to have to do with him that (unknown) listens to his
discourses, that too captiously censures his free and harmless speeches, that
steals time to pry into his papers, that screwes himself in, to search into
his secrets, that needlessly meddles with his matters, and thrusts himself
(unsought) into his businesses; that judges of his proceedings by his own
conceited fancyes, without knowing or weighing his reasons; in a word, he will
keep himself as close from him as he can, for not quiet, but much vexation is
gotten by him.

The harshnesse of a Father, the unkindnesse of a brother, falsnesse or
bitterness in a friend, and a divine or noted professor that mock goodness,
are grievous to my Soul, and trouble me extremely.

Whether Courtiers or great men frown or laugh upon me, is all one to me, so
my conscience clear me.

His resolutions (by Gods assistance) in his businesses with some that may use
him harshly, and for their own ends seek and catch at advantage against him.
In general, to demeant himself advisedly, soberly, reservedly, gravely, and
that constantly; and to avoid rashness, passion, opennesse, lightness, and
unsetlednesse.

Wherein he shall hear or observe just cause of former distaste, or present
discontent, to pass the same by without notice taking thereof, discreetly and
meekly; and to be in speech, countenance and carriage (even unto such)
cheerful, loving and friendly; yet to free himself from such places, persons
and occasions, with wisdom, speed and secrecy, as if he had never received
cause of coffeehouse given him.

To use only pre-considerate, solid and few speeches, and those to the
purpose, with all moderation, lowness, truth and plainness; to watch against,
and cut short unadvised, frothy and superfluous discourses, also all hasty,
loud, double, and circumstantiall expressions.

To show a solemn, settled, seemly behavior in looks and resture, and to
eschew loosnesse, distemper and uncomelinesse to the contrary.

Not to listen to, regard, or be troubled with others conceits, or their
opposing speeches for their own ends; to forbear answering of them, with a
silent tongue and staid countenance to turn from them, so without distasting
of them to show he mislikes them, and to go conscionably and substantially
about his own business, notwithstanding them.

Commending all to the Lord first, and that often and earnestly; to ask
counsel of wise, honest and worthy men, deliberately, seasonably and
judiciously; to the uttermost to take heed of discovering his condition,
affections, or intentions to any, without very good assurance of secrecy, or
forced by necessity.

To resolve and do (with warrant from Heaven) that which may afford him the
freest use of what God in mercy has given him, without obligation to, or
dependence on others; but if there be no remedy, rather to trouble a friend
then a brother.

All in the only assistance and relying alone upon the wonted most wise,
mighty, merciful, and faithfully promised disposing and blessing of my
heavenly Father in Christ Jesus, Amen.

The particulars are not convenient to be expressed; well, in all with
Christian wisdom lo^^ok to what concerns his own occasions, and not to what
suits with another fancies.
BEing exceedingly troubled between hope of credit and profit, and fear of
shame and loss (in a business that exceedingly concerned him) he resolved (by
Gods government) howsoever it went not to discover himself to any, not to break
out into folly or passion, if the worst he feared should befall him; but even
then to be the more circumspect and soberminded, not to yield to dejection and
distemper, but the more to look to the hand of, and to depend upon the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20, 12. Who assuredly will cause help to come by some other means, if
not by this, Est. 4.14. and will cause even the shame and sorrow (which he
might justly suffer for his folly and sin) to turn remarkably to his good in
the end, Genesis 19.20. to rest his mind contented in the assurance of his Gods
most wise, gracious, mighty and faithful disposing of all to this end; and
because inward discontent, or outward discovering his crosses and affections
does not redress, but make worse the business, and gives the more cause of
talk, and keeps the same the longer in others memory, and would give such as
would joy in his misery the more advantage to vex and scorn him; whereas his
own strict and constant reservednesse, secrecy, and outward slighting the
business will mittigate if not suppress the tarling tongue and malicious
mouth of curiosity, contempt or injury; but if God please the business go
well with him, discreetly and christianly to triumph in Gods truth and mercy;
howsoever, until the issue, to commend all to the Lords disposing and blessing,
2 Samuel 12.16. and then with a quiet heart, cheerful countenance and
well-ordered carriage, to await the Lords leisure and good pleasure toward me,
1 Samuel 1.18. Lord govern and work for me.

Whatsoever business ever so much hereafter may inwardly trouble me, by no
means in word, countenance or carriage, to show the same outwardly; then
whatsoever thoughts trouble him, his case is undiscovered to others, and no
advantage is given against him: Besides, keeping silence gains time to
overweigh how best to behave ones self, whereas if a thing be once out and
known, it is too late to recall it.

O Lord God send me good speed I pray thee, cause me to hold my peace, to wit,
whether thou my God wilt make my business prosperous or no, Genesis 24 12, 21.

A fool utters all his mind, but a wise man keeps it in till afterward,
Prove. 29.11.

Lord thou know my meaning, my former folly, my exceeding weakness; oh
pardon what is past, pity what is present, and govern me for time to come.

Brief Observations of his own in his Calling and Place, viz,
TO receive and execute commands without arguing or unwillingnesse, readily and
faithfully, it is acceptable and furtherable.

To command advisedly, with few and plain words, freely and roundly, with grave
countenance and settled carriage, this procures obedience, gains respect and
maintains authority.

To see that what he commands be executed, to be an example of diligence,
faithfulness and resolution; it wins employment, favor, trust and honor:
Upon any Watch, in Garrison, March, Quarter or approach, to weigh seriously the
instant circumstances of time, place occasion, what Perdues, Sentinels,
passages, where and how to order all with most safety, to take the Alarm
timely and to be freest from surprise; to settle the Guard, to dispose of the
Officers, to tell them their several duties concerning the present service, to
provide Ammunition, to warn to vigilanty, and if the Guard be within reach of
the enemies Cannon, by all watchfulness to warn to avoid them; rather to dye
with honor, then to yield or fly with shame, to be an example of
watchfulness and courage; once ill done, always undone, therefore never to be
secure, say others what they will; for it may happen once that never may happen
again, then it is too late and in vain to say, who would have thought it:
There can be no greater dishonor to a Captain, then to be surprised upon his
Guard; remember the examples of other that this way have suffered in their
persons and reputation; better fall into, yea, perish by an honorable enemy,
then to be called to account and censured by your own party; your business
being well done and over, be then at rest, and let another take his turn, if I
might advise others, as I do my self, let this be our constant course: Lord
my God govern and watch for, and over me.

Fear and backwardness secures not from the perils that cause them, but often
lays more open to them, howsoever they disable exceedingly, and procure shame
and harm inevitably.

Self Meditations and seasonable Exhortations, being ready to go upon
dangerous services, viz. with our souls let us now seek and trust God, promise
and perform sincere obedience to him, if he please to grant help and
deliverance; be of good courage, in the strength of the Lord let us do
worthily; follow my example, let the Lord do what seems good unto him; we
fight for the Cause of God, for our lives, safety, honor and victory: Lord
sight thou for us, encourage, strengithen, preserve and prosper us, of thy
mercy as thou have promised, Psalm. 46.1, 2. through Christ Jesus, be we never
so unworthy, and whatsoever opposes us, Amen.

Observe this: Lord let such as shame, scorn, or wilfully neglect to seek help
of thee, or that trust to their own wisdom, worth or sufficiency, or to any
other means of help besides thee, never have help from thee: but as for me
(who am most sinful, weak and unworthy) who deny my self, and all other
means of help without thee utterly, who by thy grace, do seek for, depend
upon, and await for thy help only, afford thy wonted, needful, most gracious,
mighty, seasonable and faithfully promised help unto me.

Prove. 2, 6, Isa. 40, 13, 14.
Acknowledge and direction, Psalm. 59, 10. Prove. 3, 9.
prevention and government, Isa. 28, 5. Isa. 40.29, 31,
courage and sufficiency, 2 Cor. 3, 5. 1 Samuel 8, 6, 14.
strength and safety, Ps. 18.2. Jos. 1, 8.
deliverance and prosperity, 1 Chronicles. 29.10, 11, 12. Ps. 121.2.
come from thee (O Lord) only:

Jer. 21.33. Ephesians. 1.5.
Therefore my God, in Christ, Psa. 120.1 1. Psalm. 136. all,
I beseech thee, in mercy Psalm. 71, 20. Psalm. 119.49.
as thou have done and promised, Isa. 41, 14. Ezekiel. 36, 22.
be I never so weak and unworthy, Psalm. 9, 9. Psa. 46, 1, 2, 3.
in due season and greatest extremity, Psalm. 32, 8, Prove. 3, 6,
to instruct and direct, Psalm. 79.8. Exodus 4, 15.
to prevent and govern, Isa. 51, 12. Is 41.10,
to encourage and strengthen; Neb. 6.9. 1 Timothy 1.12.
every way to enable, Psalm. 68.12. Psalm. 68.35.
to do well and worthily, Job 15, 20, 2 Samuel 22.2.
preserve and deliver, Deuteronomy. 31.8. Deuteronomy. 28.8.11.
be with and prosper me.

Psalm. 71.16. Ephesians. 6.20.
I will go forward ^n thy strength only; Numb. 24.18. Psalm. 108, 13,
through thee I shall do valiantly; Psalm. 18.2. Psalm. 140, 7,
In the day of battle thou have covered me; Pro. 3, 6, Psalm. 37.5.
I refer all always to thee; 2 Samuel 15, 26, Mat. 6.10.
as thou please deal thou with me; 2 Chronicles. 14.11. 2 Chr. 20.12.
help thou, and all shall go well, Psalm. 33.16, 17, Ps. 128, 1, 2.
else nothing can avail me: Exodus 22, 27, Ps. 69.30, 31.
oh hear me graciously; Psalm. 34.1. Psalm. 103.1, 2,
my soul for all help blesses thee, Mic. 7.7. Psalm. 72 12.
and looks for all good only from thee; Psalm. 62.1. Hos, 13.9;
for any help thou shall vouchsafe me, Isa. 63, 7, Ps. 56.12.
my soul shall always praise thee; Ps. 41.18. Psalm. 31.9.
Amen, Amen, I beg of thee.

Love is an honest faithful thief stealing from us, and yet letting us keep
the graces God has given us; a most strange, yet most certain manner of
curing the diseased; when the Physician drinks the potion and the Patient is
thereby cured, so deals our Savior by us.

The Jews say there are 72 Members in a man's body, and understand the curse,
Deutre. 27. ult. to be 72 plagues denounced thereunto.

Let all endeavors be done out of conscience, or the best are bootlesse.

Things done in greatest show of sanctity, and not to Gods glory, chiefly
deceives us miserably, and is but painted iniquity.

Better a good work laden with weakness, if done in sincerity, then glorious
shows from a false heart; let thy heart be right with God, approve it to him,
and care not what others speak or think of thee.

This I find and expect, when his offend him, the Lord will visit their
transgressions with the rods of men; and this I know and believe his
everlasting mercies he will never take from me.

Better want the good we have had, and would have to humble us, then to abound
and forget our Maker.

Oh most miserable and accursed prosperity, where wickedness gets wealth.

Oh rich and happy poverty, that has a good conscience though with never so
little.

Afflictions of body or mind must turn to our good if they move us to seek God.

Fear not God for fear of a punishment only; yea, fear him least he should
punish thee for not fearing him.

Love not merely in hope of good, yet love him in hope he will do thee good.

Sorrow for sin, not for fear of wrath simply, yet sorrow for sin least
wrath over-whelme thee.

Practice as thou prayest, or they prevail not.

We pray rightly, when we practice conscionably.

Satan seeks to hinder one good work, by moving to another less seasonable at
the same time; therefore divide the times aright, and prefer the best first.

He that would meditate well must give his mind but to one good point at one
time, and beat that out thoroughly with prayer and application.

Better to have troubles in the flesh with a quiet conscience, then the
pleasures of sin with horror of heart.

Better to live in misery then sin.

The worst of suffering is to be chosen before the best of sisning.

Soul lost all lost, soul well all well.

Some while they think to free themselves from sorrows by living in sin,
thereby bring the same evils upon themselves and so are doubly wretched.

That which thou think shall be thy comfort, shall prove thy cross, yea thy
curse, except thou look chiefly to God in seeking it, and he please to
sanctify it.

In reading labor for knowledge, but chiefly for affection.

Miraculous help is not ordinary, yet may and must we build upon the power of
God for help, be our distress never so great, and means of relief never so
small.

By increase of inward and outward troubles, finding increase of comfort and
help, why should I not willingly suffer?

Though we often strive against an evil without prevailing, let us not give
over, but strive the more, for such striving is our victory.

Whose charity has not been recompensed? wherefore the ready way to be rich,
is to give liberally.

Yea, this is a true, though a strange saying, the way to be richer, is, having
much to give more.

The tenth to the Lord brings a tenfold blessing.

Wicked men neither know, believe nor consider they fare the better for good
men's sakes, yet it is most true.

Are they not children, fools, and mad men, who detest, scorn, slander and
abuse their dearest friends? Yet such are those though never so wise in their
own conceits, who use good men so.

It is an infallible sign we shall obtain, if we persevere to ask the thing
we want according to the will of God.

Impatiency in trouble neither eases the mind, nor relieveth the need; why
then should we give way to it?

All our carking cares cannot compass our ends, nor change the case, therefore
away with them.

Watch against all sinful distempers in any case, for the Lord is not pleased
with, nor bound to please our fond affections, but does what he pleases.

Hope beyond hope, believe beyond feeling, in well-doing trust God most in
greatest extremity, and thou shall help beyond present expectation.

The more zealous for God, the more opposed in the world.

The better man, the more hated of ill men, but most dearly loved of God.

It is a sign of goodness to be nicknamed of vain persons.

It is a sinful and false conclusion, to say, because most men and the
greatest do so, it is well done; common experience says otherwise, Gods
precepts, not examples, must be our rules.

Better go to Heaven with a few poor creatures here contemned, then burn in
hell with multitudes of rich and glorious worldlings; for there company brings
no comfort, but increases misery.

If riches made happy, woe to the poor; but the poor in spirit are the
richest, and shall be blessed.

Faithfulness in our calling is excellent, yet a diligent man may be
unfaithful to God.

He that judges himself most, censureth another least.

He that has experience and feeling of his own weakness, will bear with
another infirmities, and fear his former falls.

A profane person cries out when a good man fails, but never thinks of his
own abominations.

An unregenerate Civilian thinks his own case good, and speaks largely of
others failings, but forgets that his own case is more miserable.

Better often to fall and rise again by repentance, then live in secret sin
without remorse of conscience.

He that never doubted, never truly believed, so he that never sorrowed for
sin, never repented of sin.

Neither signs nor wonders, judgments nor mercies, prosperity nor adversity,
that can cause man rightly to seek his God, except grace work upon the heart;
witness the hardhearted Jews in our Saviors time.

No mervaile though men remain wicked, who make not right use of what they
hear, see or feel.

This is a true token of repentance, if we break off the sin we lived in.

Oh the Sugar-bit under the tongue, the darling sin! spit it out, away with
it, or it will poison all.

Better suffer open shame undeservedly, then live in secret sin impenitently.

Of all beautiful creatures, a sanctified Soul pleases God best.

After deep affliction of spirit comes much sweet inward comfort to a
conscionable Christian.

For want of humble thankfulness and careful watching, we fall into deep
dejections again.

A sharp answer to an honest heart, propounding a just matter, throws down
the mind exceedingly.

Take heed of bitterness when a matter is moved to us, considering the like
would not please us.

It is not the doing, but well doing of a good work pleases God.

It is a good sign of sincerity to humble our selves in secret, for the
failings in our holiest performances, and for such faults as others cannot
discern in us.

I take and find it a truth, that to dispense with our selves for omitting of
good duties, opens a door for the committing of foul offenses.

He that speaks by experience is not deceived, if he adds no more to it.

Bewail in private thy failings in Gods public services, hold not habitual
distractions for small matters, for that savours of falshartednesse.

As we would our courses should not be mis-conceived, let us take heed we give
no just occasion of distaste.

When we think we stand surest, we are like to fall soonest, therefore be
humble and watch then most.

Sin cannot be good, yet it is good for us we sin sometimes, to make us the
more humble and watchful thereby.

Take heed of spiritual pride, it often procures spiritual disertion.

The more knowledge, the more practice, or else the more vexation of spirit, or
sharper stripes.

It is not amiss sometimes to a good end, to do a thing that may seem
unseasonable, if the same be lawful.

All things unfitting are not unlawful, but whatsoever is unlawful, cannot be
truly fitting.

Do thou feel thou can not pray, pray that thou may pray, for prayer
quickneth prayer.

That prayer is not rejected that is without feeling, if we have prayed in
obedience, and bewail our insensiblenesse.

It is a sign we have feeling, if we feel we want it.

No good work is accepted for its own worth, nor rejected for its wants, if we
be in Christ.

Set we our hearts to seek God in the duty we do, or our service is abominable.

Ceremonies are sometimes necessary, yet make not the work good or bad simply,
for the Lord looks to the heart chiefly; yet oftentimes seemly gestures show
inward holiness; they may be used as helps to devotion, but we must not put
holiness in them.

When we ought, and do not reprove and punish sin in others, it is just with
God to let us fall into the same sins and to punish us for them.

We have to do with a most holy, al-knowing, just and jealous God, therefore
take we heed of dallying, delaying, or excuses, he sees whether our hearts
stand right or no.

He that has authority, and leaves vice unpunisht, provokes the Lord to punish
him.

He that uses not his bell means to convert his charge, shall answer before
God for such his neglect, and their miscarriage.

Readily forgive him that injures thee, but forbear not him that offends God.

Authority may and must compel to outward obedience in the use of the means,
although to convert the heart is the only work of God.

It is true, the Lord saves none against their wills; yet none can be saved by
their own free will.

It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that
shows mercy; yet he shows mercy to none but those that (by his mercy) will
and run.

Good in the worst men we ought to follow, but evil in the best, we are bound
to eschew.

He that reveals my secrets though he intends my injury, does me a courtesy,
in making me more circumspect and secret.

If one out of malice make known my misdemeanour, and I thereby amend, he does
me a kindness against his will.

He is a friend (who when his advice is neglected) will threaten to discover
our faults to our shame, if there be no other remedy; yet it is a shame and
grief to them to do so.

Though thou can not do a^ thou ought and would, yet leave not a good
work altogether undone.

Make trial, though there be small hope of prevailing.

In furthering a lawful business by lawful means, be bold and unwearied,
and let God work.

One misseth through untimely bashfulnesse, that which another obtains by
honest boldness.

This I find all means to be wanting, defective, or in vain, if the Lord work
not.

This I know, when God says let it be, all shall serve the turn; for all
things obey his voice.

If God be ours we have all, without him we have nothing.

Assurance of Gods love, and promise of Gods help ought to be enough for us.

For want of application, a man wants the sound comfort of that whereby he is
able to comfort others.

My Grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9.

To Forgive all thy sins: To Impute Christ's all-sufficient satisfaction: To
Make thee believe: To Instruct thy ignorance: To Subdue thy corruptions: To
Sanctify thee to my sevice: To Direct thee erring: To Establish thee doubting:
To Strengthen thy weakness To Raise thee being fallen: To Support thee
standing: To Make thee watchful: To Comfort thee afflicted: To Quiet thee
troubled: To Deliver thee distressed: To Settle thee distempered: To Enable
thee to pray: To Fulfill thy requests: To Work good wanting: To Increase good
begun: To Keep thee from all evil: To Turn all to thy good: To Supply all thy
necessities: To Give thee godly sorrow: To Make thee upright: To Build thee on
my promises: To Stir thee up to thankfulness: To Cause thee persevere in
goodness: To Accept thy unworthy person and services: To Bring to a blessed
end: To Crown thee with eternal happiness: To All in Christ Jesus.
Thou the Lord say it, therefore it shall be;
Thy Grace alone shall be enough for me.
My God give grace, this grace may be attained,
None then so rich, though all the world he gained:
Thou can, thou will, thou must vouchsafe it Lord,
Because thy self have said it in thy Word, Isa. 34.16.
How with an holy opportunity, to bind the Lord to preserve us from sin, be
we in our selves never so strongly tempted and sorely inclined thereunto, viz.
1 BY urging the Lord with his promises hereof, Romans 6.14. 2 Cor. 12.9. 2 With
his oath, Heb. 6, 17, 18 Isa. 14.24, etc. 3 With his power, Mat. 28, 18. Mark
14.36. 4 With his Covenant, Ezekiel. 36, 27, 29. 5 With his Sabbaths which he has
given us to be signs that he will sanctify us, Exo. 31 13. Ezekiel. 20, 12, 20.
6 With our baptism, whereby we are assured of the virtue of Christ's death, to
kill sin in us. 7 With the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, wherein the same thing
is sealed unto us. 8 And that he has pleased to strengthen us in some measure
heretofore. 9 By urging him with his superabundant grace, Joh, 1, 16 Rom, 5,
20.
Thus in all humility and earnestness, to beseech, and urge our God to have
respect unto his own glory, in every one of these, taking head of the occasions
of sin; by his blessed help, we shall be kept from gross offenses; and get
power over our secret and strongest corruptions, through Christ Jesus, Amen.

Somewhat concerning government of the Tongue.
DEath and life are in the power of the tongue, Pro. 18, 21.

If any man offend not in word the same is a perfect man, Ia. 3.2

Lord, no man offends so often and shamefully with the tongue as I do.

I said I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue; I will
keep my mouth a bridle, Psalm. 39.1. yea, I have and am purposed, my mouth shall
not transgress, Psa. 17.3.

But the tongue can no man tame, Jam. 3, 8. it is an unruly evil, full of deadly
poison, idem.

Therefore set thou a watch before my mouth, and order thou the door of my
lips, O my God, Psalm. 141.3.

Such resolutions as most concern himself in this respect, viz.

To avoid
All Profane, needless, uncertain, uncomely, offensive words.

To use
Only Christian seasonablenesse, certain, seemly, acceptable speeches.

Rather speak nothing, then to say the least thing to no good or to an evil
purpose.

Not to suster his tongue to run before his wit.

But to forethink whether it be lawful or fitting that he is about to speak,
then to refrain or speak accordingly.

To avoid
All rash, superfluous, vain, abscene, unreverend, scornful talk.

To use.
Only considerate, few, substantial, holy, reverend, respective discourse.

Not to meddle in others matters.

To deal in his own circumspectly.

To praise others discreetly.

And himself (enforced) modestly not to tell news suddenly.

To relate the same (required) warily.

To avoid
All jibing, boasting, double, flattering, fearful, false words.

To use
Only serious, humble, plain, faithful, free, true speeches.

Not speak evil of any absent or dead.

If there be or was any good in them to take notice thereof, else to say
nothing of them.

Not to answer any matter before he hear and understand it thoroughly:

Then to answer briefly and pithily.

Not to interrupt any in their speaking, by speaking with them, or taking the
words out of their mouth.

But to give full time and then to answer wisely.

To avoid
All revealing his own matters.

Unfolding his affections.
Discovering his passions.
Complaining of his wants.
Declaring his opinion.
Opening others secrets.
Where these need not, and more then needs must.

To be
Secret, silent, reserved, watchful, to the contrary.

Not to break out into passionate, contentious, spiteful, provoking,
revengefull speeches, no not against such as injure him, and when they do so.

But to deliver temperate, peaceable, gentle, suffering, pacifying words.

To appease wrath and strife.

To prevent anger and discord.

To avoid have and to use deliberation.

To avoid loudness, and to use so ftnesse in his speeches.

To avoid lightness, and to use gravity.

To avoid harshnesse, and to use friendlinesse in his talk.

In all things he utters, to be circumspect and sober.

Lord who is sufficient for these things? none so weak as I am, yet nothing is
impossible to thee.

O Lord my God, mercifully, notwithstanding my sins; powerfully,
notwithstanding my weakness; faithfully, notwithstanding all oppositions, let
thy grace be sufficient for me, to teach and enable me aright, when, where, and
how to speak and to hold my peace, at home and abroad, with whomsoever I have
to do, and in whatsoever I take in hand, as may be most and only for thy
glory, the gracing of thy Religion, and my profession thereof; the good example
and benefit of others, the safety and credit of my place and person, the
comfort and peace of my soul and conscience here, and the everlasting
happiness of soul and body in Heaven for evermore; all by the speedy,
effectual, daily, and continual assistance of thy most holy Spirit, through
the alone all-sufficient merits and mediation of thy most dear and only Son,
my alone most sweet Savior and perpetual intercessor Christ Jesus, even so be
it, Amen, Amen.

Thus far here for governing the Tongue, now to God only wise, my only
helper be all the glory.

Concerning walking with God, with some Meditations for Prayer, according to
the plain and powerful word of God to be the better enabled thereunto.
1 GOD commands it.

He has showed thee O man what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
Micah 6.8.

Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the ways and see, ask for the old paths,
where is the good way, and walk therein, Jer. 6.16.

2. Examples of Obedience.

And Enoch walked with God: Noah was a just man, and Noah walked with God, Ge.
5.24. and 6.9

3 Neglect hereof must be acknowledged.

Neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God to walk in his laws,
etc. Dan. 9.10.

4 And our ignorance, indisposition and insufficiency hereunto.

O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that
walks to direct his steps, Jer. 10.23.

Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5.

Without me ye can do nothing, John 15.5.

5 We must crave pardon for all these.

And now Lord what wait I for? my hope is in thee, deliver me from all my
transgressions, and forgive all my sins, Psalm. 39.7, 8. and 25 18.

6 We must ask a way of God in general.

Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for the old paths,
where is the good way, Jer. 6, 16.

7 Yea, this by solemn humiliation.

Then I proclaimed a Fast, that we might afflict our selves before our God, to
seek of him a right way for us. Ezra 8.21.

We must beseech him to grant us these particulars.

1 Knowledge of the good way.

Show me thy paths, O Lord, teach me thy Statutes, make me understand the way
of thy precepts, Psalm. 25.4, and 119, 27.

Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my soul to
thee, Psalm. 143, 8.

2 An heart disposed to walk therein.

Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, Psa. 119.36.

He will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths, Isa. 2, 3.

3 Ability thereto.

Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments, Psalm. 119, 35.

4 Restoration out of former errors relapsed into.

Renew a right spirit within me, restore unto me the joy of thy sal-vation,
Psalm. 11, 10, 12.

5 To be sincere herein:

I am God all-sufficient walk before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17, 1.

Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, Psalm. 25, 21.

Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, Psalm. 19, 80.

6 To be watchful hereto.

Hold thou me up and I shall be safe, and I will have respect unto thy Statutes
continually, Psalm. 119, 117.

Keep thy heart with all diligence, ponder the path of thy feet, and let all
thy ways be established, turn not to the right hand nor to the left, Prove. 4,
23, 26, 27.

7 That we may increase in all these.

Being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God,
Col. 1, ^0.

8 And be established.

Uphold me with thy free spirit, Psalm. 51, 12.

Uphold me according to thy Word, that I may live, and let me not be ashamed of
my hope, Psalm. 119, 116.

9 And to persevere.

Teach me O Lord the way of thy Statutes, and I will keep it unto the end,
Psalm. 119, 33.

I have inclined my heart to perform thy Statutes always, unto the end, Psalm.
119, 112.

10 We must pray to be freed and preferved from every evil way, in opinion and
practice.

The man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall remain in the
Congregation of the dead, Prove. 21, 16.

The wicked have laid a snare for me, yet I erred not from thy precepts, Psalm.
119, 110.

Remove from me the way of lying, I have refrained my feet from every evil
way, Ps. 119.29.101.

Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works, Psalm. 14, 4.

We must lay to heart, rely upon, urge God to reform, await his leisure, till
he please to make good his word unto us in every particular we have thus sought
him for in general.

Thy Word have I hid in my heart, Psalm. 119.11.

I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways, I will not
forget thy Word, v. 15 16.

In God will I prays his Word, in the Lord will I praise his Word, Psalm. 56.10.

Remember thy word unto thy servant, on which thou have caused me to hope, this
is my comfort in my affliction, for thy Word has quickened me, Psalm. 119, 49,
50.

Let I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, according to thy
Word unto thy servant, Psalm, 119, 76.

Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation,
my God will hear me, Micah 7, 7.

O my Father, nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will, Mat. 26, 39.

In the particulars following. 1 In that we have acknowldged our neglects and
defects.

The Lord says, he that confesses and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy,
Prove. 28, 13.

If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanst as from all unrigteousnesse, 1 John 1, 9.

2 In that we have craved pardon. The Lord says, I will save you from all your
uncleanness, etc. yet will I for this be enquired of to do it, Ezekiel. 36, 29,
37.

3 In that we have asked a my of God: He says, Ask, and it shall be given you,
Mat. 7.7.

We besought our God for this, and he was entreated of us, Ezr. 8, 23

I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way that thou shall go, and I will
guide thee with mine eye, Psalm. 32, 8.

4 To the desire of knowledge, the Lord says, If thou call after knowledge,
and cryest for understanding, thou shall find the knowledge of God, Prove. 2, 3,
5.

5 To the desire of a good disposition: Thus a new heart also will I give you,
and a new spirit will I put within you, Ezekiel. 36, 2^.

6 And of ability to walk with God: He promises thus, I will put my spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments and do them, Ezel. 36, 2^.

For it is he that works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure,
Phil. 2, 13.

7 If we desire restoration: He restores my soul, and leads me into the
paths of righteousness, Psalm. 23, 3.

8 If we desire (herein) sanctity: Ye shall keep my Statutes and do them; I
am the Lord which sanctifies you, Levit, 20, 8, 24.

9 Watchfulness: I will hearken what the Lord God will say, for he will speak
peace unto his people, and to his Saints, that they return not again to
folly, Psalm. 85, 8.

10 Increase: Call unto me and I will answer thee, and show thee great things
and mighty, that thou know not, Jer. 33, 3.

I am the Lord thy God, which does teach thee to profit, and lead thee in the
way that this should go, Isa. 48, 17.

11 Establishment: But the Lord is faithful which will establish you, and keep
you from evil, 2 These. 3, 3.

12 Perseverance: I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will
put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me; I will give
them one heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever, Jer. 32, 39 40.

I am persuaded of this same thing, that he that has begun this good work,
will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1, 6.

13 Having prayed to be kept from erring out of the right way in judgment or
life: The Lord says, Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This
is the way, walk ye in it; when thou turnest to the right hand and when thou
turnest to the left, Isa. 30, 21.

They that erred in spirit, shall come to understanding, Isa. 29, 24.

And an high way shall he there, and it shall be called the way of holiness,
the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein, Isa. 35, 8.

For one prevailing motive (among many) to a conscinable walking with God;
consider godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise of the life
that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4, 8. and the contrary course
a cause of all misery and mischife here, and eternally.

This concerning our furtherance for walking with God.

AVoid overmuch sleep; and rise timely, redeem thy (...) and walk wisely,
worship (...) God in private, in thy Family and in public, seasonably,
conscionably, and that daily.

Avoid impurity and passion, discontent, uncharitableness and excess;
converse chastely, soberly, peaceably, charitably, and temperately.

Shut up every evening with private prayer.

Examples in Scripture of Souldies that were godly; among the rest, two in the
old and two in the new Testament.
IN whom among many other graces and virtues, observe these; and remember
whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, Romans
15, 4.

David an example of prayer unto, and trust in God in greatest dangers and
praising of him for safety, strength and deliverance, Ps. 3, and 18.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 16, 17, 18, 19, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 39, 46, 48, 49.

Of acknowledging of and comforting himself in Gods word, especially of
encouraging himself in the Lord his God in extremest distresses, Psa. 27.1,
2, 3.8, etc. 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 11, 1. Sam. 30.6.

Of wisdom, valor and personal performance, 1 Samuel 16.18, 2 Samuel 22, 15, 17.

Joshuah an example of humbleness under Gods hand, Josh. 7, 6. sear of Gods
wrath, ver. 7.8, 9. seeking God in general distress, ver. 6, 7. Diligence in
seeking out offenses and the offender, ver. 16, 17, 18. gentleness to the
offondor, verse 19. zeal for Gods glory, verse 19. strictness in punishing
vice and the transgressour, verse 25. equal dealing with others, Josh. 18, 10.
contentation with it own portion, cha. 49.49, 50, Recording Gods especial
mercies and deliverances, cha. 49, 20. stirring up others to remember and
declare them, cha. 4.21, 22, 23, 24. obedience to Gods will in his martial
employments, chap. 6, 10 and 8.2, 3, 11. calling upon others to have respect
thereto, chap. 8.8. wisdom in directing and diligence in executing
stratagems, cha. 8.3, etc. keeping promise faithfully, even with deceitful
dealers, chap, 9, 19, 20. showing great judgment in employing them, chap. 9,
23, 27. wonderful power in prayer, cha, 20, 12, 13, 14, exceeding courage,
cha, 10, 25, being victorious in battles, chap. 10, 11, 12. carefulness: to
read and declare Gods will to his charge, cha. 8.34, 35. and stirring them up
thereunto, chap. 24.14, 24. resolution that himself and his house would serve
the Lord only, cha. 24.15.

The Centurian of Capernaum an example of dear love to, tender care of, great
compassion toward his distressed servant, Luke 7.2. Mat. 8.6. and diligence in
using all good meants for recovery, Luke 7.3. of humility, Mat. 8.8. loli
mindedness, Luke 7.3. sense of selfeunworthinesse, Luke 7.6, 7. of seeking to
Christ in need, Mat. 8.5. praying for his in distress, Mat, 8.5, 6. desiring
others to pray for him and his, Luke 7.4. of great faith, Mat. 8.8. Luke 7.7.
of worthy carriage with authority in his place, Mat, 8.9. Luke 7.8. of love and
bounty to Gods house and people, Luke 7.5. of gaining love, respect and
commendation where he lived and lay in garrison, Luke 7.4. of being speedily
heard, and wonderfully helped by Christ, Mat. 8.13. Luke 7.10. and whose faith
Christ exceedingly praised, Mat. 8.10. Luke 7.10.

Cornelius the Captain of the Italian Band, an example of devotion, piety in
his Family, private prayer, and charity, Acts 10.1, 2. of having those about
him, especially that waited on him, that feared God, verse. 7. giving himself
to private fasting ver. 30. a just man and of good report, ver. 22. an earnest
desirer of Gods Minister and Ministry, of calling together and stirring up of
his kinsmen, and nearest friends to Gods service. ver. 24. reverence and
willingness to he are Gods word, and in his presence, ver. 33 love of the
company of Gods Ministor, and loathnesse to let him depart, ver. 48. of having
his prayers heard and alms accepted, ver. 4.31. of being showed the way to
everlasting life and happiness in Christ Jesus, ver. 36 to 44. of obtaining
the holy Ghost accompanying the word, ver. 44. and having all favor and help,
all grace and good sealed to him by the Sacrament, ver. 48.

The Soldiers likewise demanded of John, saying, and what shall we do? and he
said unto them, do violence to we man, neither accuse any falsely, and be
content with your wages, Like 3.14.

Lord teach my hands thus to war, and gird me with strength unto the battle,
that I may fight the good fight of faith, and lay hold of eternal life, Psa.
18.34.39 1 Timothy 6.12.

Thus far of these examples.

Some collections out of Sacred writ, concerning executing Justice in
Judgment, worthy to be observed and follower.

In this case:
1 Magistrates are appointed of the Lord, Romans 13.1. Deu. 16.18. 2 Chro. 19.5.
Numb. 11.16.24, 25. and 27.15, 16. and Deuteronomy. 1.13. John 19.11. 2 Chief
Majestrates may and must make inferior ones, Exodus 18.25. 3 He must see all
places provided with good Mogistrates, 2 Chro. 19.5. 4 They must charge them to
exceute justice, 2 Chro. 19.6. 5 To this end they must urge them with all the
most powerful reasons they can: as, 1 That they judge not for man, but for the
Lord; unto whom they must give an account. 2 That the Lord himself is present
when, where, whom and what cause soever they judge, knowing thoroughly the
devises and intendments of their most secret thoughts; heating distinctly all
their words for and against the business; being thoroughly acquainted with
their just or unjust proceeding in sentence or execution; ready to bless them
if they judge justly, and to plague them if they deal unjustly. Proof for
these, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. if God be present it is not (be sure) as an idle
spectator. 3 That all be done in the fear of the Lord, conscionably, avoiding
evil forbidden, following good required in case of justice, so standing in awe
of his dreadful presence, sacred Majesty, and infallible word, 2 Chronicles. 19.7.
4 That God before whom they are has no iniquity in him, to conceive as they
conceive, to speak as they speak, to do as they do, if they dare in any
particular deal unjustly; but abhors, forbids, threatens, has plagued,
and will plague them for it, 2 Chr. 19.7. 5 That the Lord does neither respect
the persons of the Judges to accept them by their doings, be they never so wise
in their own conceits, never so applauded by others, never so able fairly to
gloze a soul matter, and be they never so mighty to go through with all
contrary to right; nor the persons that have the controversy, what favor
soever they have with the Judges, how subtly soever they can plead their own
causes or misinforme others; what power soever they have, or friends soever
they can make contrary to right; but will show his contempt of them in clearing
the innocent, and finding out the guilty party and unjust Judge by one means
or other, 2 Chro. 19.7. 6 That the Lord will take no reward, although the
corrupt, covetous, partial, and wicked judge do, neither from the unjust
Judge, to favor, further, or prosper his unrighteous counsels, pleadings,
censures, or spare him from punishment, nor from the guilty offender, whose
cause is naught, be his proffers never so many and large, but will assuredly
reward both according to their ungodly proceedings, in the course of justice, 2
Chr. 19.7

These were the reasons which moved good Jehosaphat used to the Judges, to move
them to do justly in judgment, 2 Chronicles. 19 9.20.

6 Yea, whether they be in Ecclesiastical or temporal authority, they must be
thus charged, 2 Chronicles. 19.5, 6, 8, 9.

7 The abilities of all in authority, from the highest to the lowest is from
the Lord, Numb. 11.25.

8 The Lord promises to enable them to judge justly, if they seek it aright,
viz.

1 He will endue them with wisdom for Council, Prove. 2.6, 9. 2 And with
judgment for justice, Isa. 28.6. and 31.1, 16.
9 The Lord (as an especial favor to his people) has promised to provide
for, and restore to them good Magistrates, Isa. 1.26.

10 Such Magistrates must and will by all good means labor the welfare of the
Church and Commonwealth, Isa. 49.23. and 60.16.

11 And that good government in the Commonwealth may be maintained, Isa.
60.17. and 1.16. Psalm. 85.10, 11. Zach. 8.3.

12 We are to Subject our selves unto their lawful commands, not so much out
of fear, of punishment, as for conscience sake, Romans 13.1.35. Mat. 22.17, 21.
Luke 20.22, 25. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.17.

13 And in these particulars especially, Duty, Tribute, Custom, fear and
honor, Romans 13.7.

14 Whosoever resist lawful authority, resist Gods Ordinance, Romans 13.2, 3.

15 Such shall and ought to be punished, Romans 13.2.

16 The way to escape the hand of justice and to gain praise of the same, is
to do well, and to be subject not for fear, but out of conscience as before,
(No. 12.) Romans 13.1, 3, 5.

17 Such as presume to do evil, shall and must be punished; for to that end,
and not in vain, does the Magistrate be at the Sword of justice; let such
fear as dare offend, others need not, Romans 13.4. Yet where God warrants not,
we are not to obey men, but God, Acts 4.19.

18 In all matters of controversy betwixt any manner of parties (if, they
cannot otherwise agree) both parties must present their cause of difference
unto the consideration and arbitriment of the lawful Magistrate, Exodus 22.9.
and 18.15. Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9. and 25.1.

19 We must stand to their sentence in judgment, Exodus 22.9. Deuteronomy. 17.9, 10,
11.

20 All Magistrates are most strictly bound to execute judgment aright.

1 By the Lords express Command, Deu. 1.16. and 16.18, 20. 2 Chronicles. 19, 6.
Josh. 7, 24. Prove. 31, 9. Jer. 21, 12. and 22.3. Ezekiel. 45.9, and 44.24. Isa.
56.1. and 1.17. Psalm. 72.3. Jer. 7.5. Zach: 8.16. Pro. 1.3. Amos 5.15. Micah
6.8. 2 Samuel 23.2, 3. 2 By the example of the godly, as of Abrabam, Genesis 18.19.
Moses, Exodus 18.13, 15, 26.
Samuel, 1 Samuel 7.15, 16. and 12.3, 4.
David, 1 Chronicles. 18.14. Psalm. 101.1.
Job, Job 29.14. all,
Jehosaphat, 1 Chronicles, 19.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

21 Whether they be superior or inferior Magistrates, they must judge justly at
all times, and upon all occasions, Exodus 18.25, 26.

22 What manner of men all sorts of Magistrates ought to be, and what virtues
they ought to be endued with in this calling.

1 They must be wise to understand and discern between good and evil aright;
to be able to find out, discover, confate the subtle shew-seeming allegations
against the right, Deuteronomy. 1.13, 15. 2 Men of courage, boldly and resolutely to
prefer virtue and suppress vice, who, or whatsoever opposes; stoutly
neglecting the sour frowns and high threatening looks, stoutly rejecting the
flattering or distasteful speeches, stoutly opposing the powerful, perverse
proceedings of many, of any against the course of justice, so holding their
own (for rights sake) in despite of all. 3 Fearing God, in whose presence they
are, in whose place they are set on earth, and to whom they must give account
of their devices and consultations alone and with others; of their pleading
for, and against, of their censures with or against the right; showing this
fear by fearing nothing more then to devise, speak or do any thing, in the
least measure, against the right, withal searing his heavy displeasure
therefore. 4 Dealing truly, as each cause requires, according to the
warrantable rules of justice, without studying, broaching, urging subtle
distinctions, double the aning-likely proofs; wrong-wrested book cases
contrary to justice. 5 Hating covetousness, least that makes them long-armed
and open-handed, to receive bribes; and those cause them to plot, plead,
censure and work unjustly and injuriously against judgment, conscience,
charity, reason and equity. 6 No accepters nor respectors of persons, least by
flatery or force, for fear or favor, or through any other by-respect, they
betray the righteous cause into the unrighteous hands of most accursed
unjustice; proof for these, Exodus 18.21. Deuteronomy. 1.17.
23 How Magistrates of all sorts are bound to behave themselves, that they may
in all cases and to all persons administer justice aright, viz.

1 What they must conscionably, carefully, constantly avoid. 2 What they must
in like manner embrace.
They must avoid
1 All manner of in justice by plotting, counselling, pleading, or any other
way by secret subtlely, by abuse of wit or power, furthering the same by, or
for themselves or others, Levit. 19.15.13. 2 Doing injustice with the most
voices or greatest number, desiring to please or be applauded by the multitude,
or too much regarding or fearing their frowns, scorns, censures, because they
are many and mighty, and may upon some other occasions, further or hinder them,
as they may herein please or displease the most, Exodus 23.2. Wresting the Law,
for their own or others evil ends, misinterpreting the same, seeting false
glosses thereupon, subtiely persuading, or violently working to make wrong seem
right, and right wrong, hereby to pleasure others, to serve their own turns,
and to wrong the guiltless, Deuteronomy. 16.19. 4 Judging by outward appearance
according to the a first unsearcht-seeming-simplicity or sincerity, and right
of the cause or person; or according to the like unexamined, seeming foulness
of the fact, ^nesse of the cause, or guiltiness of the party, or whatsoever
our own or others conceits may be of the matter, or manner, without due
examination, deep deliberation, and impartial judgment concerning both, John
7.24. 5 Hasty and rash judgment, before they be thoroughly acquainted with the
case and all its circumstances, and having fully heard out the party accused,
John 7.51. 1 Cor. 4.5. 1 Timothy 5.22. 6 All falsehood and double-dealing,
pretending one thing and intending another, laboring to make that which is
apparently false seem true, Exodus 23.7. 7 Taking bribes which most foully
corrupt, and often times wholly overthrowes the course of justice, and turn all
up side down, Deuteronomy. 16.18. 8 Covetousness the cause of bribe-taking, so
helping him that gives most, be he or his case good or bad, Evod. 18.21. 9
Whores who will seduce and mislead, and entice, prevail against right, and to
the Judges destruction, Proverbs 31.3. 10 Drunkenness impair the judgment,
besots the Judge, makes them forget the Law and pervert judgment, Prove. 31.4,
5. 11 Highmindednesse which causes a contempt and carelessness of doing
justice, as if it did not concern them, or that they were too good therefore,
Deuteronomy. 17.20. 12 Gathering wealth, which stirs the mind, by any way
whatsoever to attain thereto, Deuteronomy. 17.17. 13 Partiality to any, for any
regard of fear, favor, pleasure, profit, or desire of praise, etc. Deuteronomy.
1.17. and 16.19. Prove. 18.5. and 24.23. 1 Timothy 5.21. 14 Partiality to the poor
out of untimely and unfitting pity to him, his cause being bad, or because his
adversary is thine enemy, or because thou look for service from him, Exodus
23.3. Lev. 19.15. 15 Partiality to the rich and mighty, in desire of their good
will, or fear of their evil will toward us, Levit. 19.15. Deuteronomy. 1.17. 16
Wronging the poor, because he cannot fee thee, or withstand his powerful
adversary, who can pay thee better, Exodus 23.6. Prove. 22.22. Zech. 7.10. 17
Wronging the innocent, out of private spleen against him, or friendship to his
wicked adversary, etc. for God will not justify but plague such wickedness,
Exodus 23.7. Prove. 18.5. Jer. 22.3. 18 Wronging the Widow, the fatherless, the
stranger, because they are so, and so contemned, poor and helpless, or for
any of the forementioned, or any other respect, Zech. 7.10 Jer. 22.3. 19
Overthrowing a righteous cause by quirks in law, of other glosses to make right
seem wrong, wrong right, Exodus 23.6, Prove. 18.5. 20 Cruelty, oppression,
exactions, to serve their passion, lusts, covetousness, or any other base and
sinful humor, yea, though in regard of men, they have power in their hand to
do it, and may be unquestioned, Ezekiel. 45.9. 21 Fearing the face of man, be
they who they will, and take it how they will, for the judgment is the Lords
to secute them, spite of those that distaste, threaten, or would harm them for
judging justly, and to plague them if they do otherwise, whosoever may seem,
promise and endeavor to stand for them, Deuteronomy. 1.17. 22 Passing judgment upon
one Witness, be the Witness who he will, be the Offender what he will, and the
offense as it will, Deuteronomy. 19.15. 23 Weariness in doing justice to any, in any
place, upon any occasion, 1 Samuel 7:15, 16. Exodus 18.22.
2 What Magistrates must do in executing justice.

1 They must write, and study, and labor by all good means to acquaint
themselves thoroughly with Gods Law, being the ground of all good laws, to be
the better able to understand and execute justice, Deuteronomy. 17.18. 2 In fear to
offend and trembling at Gods displeasure for offending, they most must wisely
and worthily discharge this duty, Ps. 2.10, 11. 3 They must be sure their
endeavors in Christ be accepted, and blessed, least vengeance come upon them,
and they perish in their unjust ways, Psl. 2.12. 4 Their charge is strictly
given them to execute justice uprightly, Deuteronomy. 1.16. 5 They must help one
another in judgment, for more ease and better furtherance, and speedier
dispatch, Exodus 18 22. 6 They must show the parties their warrant for their
proceeding in the course of justice concerning the cause, out of Gods Word, for
that if any thing will satisfy, Exodus 18.16. 7 Solid Counsel may be given by
others, and ought to be accepted by them concerning justice, both for choosing
^^ persons to, and for the manner of executing the same, Exodus 18.^^, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 24, at large. 8 Good counsel in these must be followed, and
men must not wholly rely on their own wisdom, opinion, or sufficiency herein.
Exodus 18.24. 9 They are to choose them well qualified persons to help them in
judgment, Exodus 18.25. see before, how Magistrates should be qualified. 10.
They must warn the people to take heed they sin not (by standing in a bad
cause) least they suffer by Gods hand, and by the hand of justice, 2 Chapter 19.10.
11 In doubtful matters, they must enquire diligently, till what was obscure be
cleared, and all circumstances be rightly conceived, Deuteronomy. 19 18. Job 29.16.
Josh. 7.19. John 7.51. Genesis 3.11. and 11.5. and 18.21. Judge. 20.3.12. Prove. 18,
13. 12 They may and must require an Oath if need be for clearing the truth, and
ending of strife, Exodus 22.10. read from the 7 ver. 13 An Oath that (cannot be
disapproved) must be accepted, Exodus 22.10. 14 They must hear both parties
deliberately, patiently, thoroughly, to inform themselves in all part culars
rightly and fully, Deuteronomy. 1.17. Prove. 18.13, 17. John 7.51. 15 If the matter be
too hard for them, they must bring it to God by prayer, Deuteronomy. 1.17. 16 They may
and must give judgment upon the testimony of two or three Witnesses, Deuteronomy.
19.17. and 17.16. Matthew. 18.16. John 8.17. 2 Cor. 13.1. Hebr. 10.28. 17 They
must do with a false witness as he would have done to the party whom he
falsely accused. Deuter. 19.16. to the end. 18 They must plead the just cause of
the poor, who want the understanding, sufficiency, boldness to plead their
own case, or have no means to hire others, or friends that are willing to
plead their cause for them, Prove. 31.8, 9. 19 They must do right to the poor,
be they never so helpless, and be their adversaries never so powerful, Ps.
82.4, 5, 3. Pro. 31.8, 9. Job. 29.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. 20 They must do right to
the Widow, fatherless and stranger, be they never so much in respect of their
mean condition contemned, and by the proud and mighty never so much troubled
and injured, Job. 29.12, 13. Jere. 22.3. Isaiah 1.17. Psalm 82.2. Deuteronomy. 1.10.
21 Yea, in like manner to the afflicted, oppressed and helpless, Prove. 31.9.
and 22.21. Jer. 22.3. and 21.12. Isa. 1.11. Job 29.12. Psalm. 82.3, 4, 5. 22
Yea, although by defect in nature, they be dumb and cannot, or out of fear or
bashfulnesse, are unfit to speak for themselves, and although their adversaries
multiplying words against them clean dash them, and by their pride insult over
them, and by their greatness so crash them, that they dare not speak, or
although their distress be never so desperate, and themseves never so
friendlesse, Pro. 31.8. 23 They must do justice to any person, and to every
person that desire it, and whose cause require it, Deuteronomy. 1.16. 24 They must do
justice at all seasons, Exodus 18.22. 25 And in all places, 1 Samuel 15.16. 26
They must do justice without wear inesse, constantly and continually, 1 Samuel
7.15. 27 They must judge small matters and slight causes, without contemning
them, Exodus 18.22, 26. Deuteronomy. 1.17. 28 And great matters without thinking it too
much labor for them, Exodus 18.22. Deuteronomy. 1.17. 29. They must do justice with
diligence, Romans 12.8. Ier. 21.12. 30 And that with mercy and compassion to the
persons offending, although passing sentence justly against the offenses Zech.
9.7.
The parties contending, must be contented with the Judges just, equal and
wel-grounded sentence and decision, and not murmr against, or needlessly to
vex themselves about the same, it cannot help them, but may procure yet more
troubles unto them, Exodus 22.9. Deuteronomy. 17.10, 11, etc.

To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord then sacrifice,
Prove. 21.3.

Though the Judges in the World do it not, the judge of the World will do
right, both for him that suffers, and against him that suffers wrong, and
against him that favors and judges for the wrong doer, and who in judgment
deal unjustly, Genesis 18.15. Yea, though the wicked watches the righteous and
seeks to slay him, the Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him
when he is judged, Psalm. 37.33.

Thus far of this matter.

Eight and thirty undemable Proofs that the Scriptures are the infallible truth
of God, against the suggestions of Satan, the disputations of vain men, and
the fantasies of our own brain to the contrary, for our comfort and settling
in this case, not unfit to be well observed, and powerfully applied.
1 THere being a God, and this God being absolutely good, requiring to be
worshipped, could not be so cruel as not to leave us a rule to worship him by;
which the Scriptures must of necessity be, for then this there could be none
more perfect, containing in them every sufficient direction, for piety,
righteousness and divine worship. 2 They teach us a doctrine beyond the
doctrine of all humane Writers, that is, to love cur enemies. 3 That the
doctrine of the Scriptures, powerfully pressed, oftentimes terrifieth the
consciences of the wicked, though otherwise without control in the world. 4
That this doctrine has made of Wolves Lambs, of godless, godly men. 5 That
none whoever made his recourse to the Word of God aright, but found God as good
as his Word. 6 That many wicked men who have despised, opposed, persecuted the
same, have been most remarkably and dreadfully plagued in this life. 7 That
seeing the doctrine of affliction is found effectual in Gods children, it must
needs be the truth. 8 That the right study thereof teaches true wisdom and
consolation, so that a man may find (therein) direction and comfort in any
condition that can befall him, which no other Author not grounded thereon can
do. 9 That by the same Gods children have silenced heretics, and convinces
the consciences of wicked men, that they have acknowledged the truth thereof.
10 That the right study hereof brings such inward peace, delight, contentment
and security, that all the world besides cannot procure. 11 That wicked men
have oftentimes a kind of secret desire to be holy and happy according to the
same, confessing in their hearts, those men to be in a blessed estate that walk
according to that rule. 12 That this Word quieteth the mind in greatest
troubles, when nothing else can do it. 13 That it has an absolute consent in
all points in it self without contradiction, though written by diverse persons
in diverse ages. 14 That it sets, down the infirmities of men without all
respect of persons, fear or flattery, as well as it commends them for their
virtues. 15 And tells every one that reads them to their faces their
manifold failings, of what degree soever they be. 16 The matter contained
therein is altogether heavenly, and nothing, nor any part thereof favors
earthly, it yields to no one affection nor other, but opposes it self to
all. 17 The form and dignity of the strle and Majesty therein is such, as it
cannot be fully and wholly conceived, or uttered by any man, and it is always
more powerful in the matter then in words. 18 The Apocripha going about to
express the excellency of it in the Greek, is a very cold and barbarous thing
in comparison of it. 19 Of all things, it moves the affection of the readers,
and pierces into the secrets of the hearts, and lays open the most hidden
things which we knew not. 20 It is of most ancient and admirable antiquity,
before all other Histories, and many good things in Philosophers and Poets are
fetched from this. 21 The dreadful miracle; by which it was confirmed. 22 The
certain event of the prophesies with one consent, set down by diverse Writers
are accomplished, and so are none of the Devils Oracles. 23 Experience teaches
the truth of diverse particulars therein, as particular judgments threatened for,
executed upon particular sins, and particular promises performed to
particular virtues, etc. 24 That the want of knowledge hereof, or obedience
hereto, make men as ignorant and filthy as bruit Beasts, in respect of heavenly
things. 25 See we not this excellency thereof, beyond the power of Angels, men
and devils, how wise and subtle soever in their own kinds, that it speaks
of things to come many hundred years before as certainly, as if they were
present. 26 See we not that Almighty God maintains their authority by
effecting what he has forespoken, spite of whatsoever the devil and all the
wicked men of the world labor to the contrary. 27 That Satan uses all means
he can to make us doubt of the truth of them; this argues they are the truth
of God, otherwise he would suffer us to give credit to them as to other
Authors. 28 That they have been preserved from time to time, so that they have
not perished, whereas other books of great price and estemation have been
utterly lost. 29 Whereas persecuting Tyrants have sought to suppress the
doctrine thereof, they have still more and more flourished and been spread
abroad. 30 It is an undoubted argument, that they are his most facred Truths,
because God by such weak instruments and silly means does spread abroad the
doctrine thereof, spite of all oppositions, for none but a greater power could
subdue a lesser. 31 That it is true whatsoever doctrine it reveals, though it
make never so much against our pleasures, profits and lusts, yet till a man be
brought to it, it never works soundly. 32 There is an especial glory in the
Truth, in the Promises, and the conditions of them. 33 They teach us to know
God in Christ. 34 And the Trinity in Unity. 35 And the doctrine of
regeneration, all which are foolishness to the flesh, yet the power of God to
salvation to all that believe. 36 The constant deaths of so many wise, sober
and meek Martyrs (who ever in their sufferings for this truth, which no
torments could extort from them, have had a plain distinction from the death of
frantic and witless persons) declares the same. 37 That the Spirit of God
inclines our hearts to believe this, and to receive the same as his infallible
truth. 38 The universal and continual consent of this Book from time to time
by so many holy, humble learned men of diverse Nations, in all Ages, gives
testimony to the same.
I believe, Lord help my unbelief.

These for this.

Some few plain, profitable and pleasing Instructions for all times.
Hear and be silent, be silent and observe, observe and remember, remember and
do.

All that you see, judge not; all that you hear, believe not.

All that you know, tell not; all that ye can, do not.

Goods lost, nothing lost; courage lost, much lost; credit lost, more lost;
Soul lost, all lost.

To serve God, hinders not; to give alms, impoverish not.

Ill gotten goods enrich not, allyar prospers not.

No more of this now.

A seasonable and serious Advertisement, concerning the too common and crying
sins of our calling.
This Advertisement was written when he was a Captain in the Nether-lands, and
may not be useless here.
WHich of us does not think, and dares not say God loves me, Christ is my
Savior and Heaven my hope? whereas if we would examine our hearts and ways,
seriously and impartially, many among us should see our selves shamefully
deceived, and not to (...) about, does not our preserring our pleasing and
profitable ^^s before the will of God, our love to Carise, and walking in the
way of life, give us the lie to our faces? Wherefore it concerns us highly, to
labor effectually for some good measure of those infallible marks, which may
undoubtedly assure us we are in covenant with God, do love the Lord Jesus
dearly, and shall be saved everlastingly; unto which end, I commend Master By
fields Marrow of the Oracles of God, as an especial help (by Gods blessing,)
and because my soul desires we may not deceive our selves, and lose our labor
in this maisie matter, that so much concern our true peace here, and
happiness for evermore: I take the boldness, in zeal to my God, in good will
toward you (my Fellow-Officers of our own nation especially) freely and
plainly to beseech, warn and charge you, as I do mine own soul, to lay to
heart somewhat I have to declare unto you, that instead of those favors God
has pleased to promise to his, we bring not upon our own heads the contrary
curses; let us then lay this as an infallible foundation, that it is altogether
in vain for us to look for any good from the Lord, so long as we dare to live
in any one known sin with allowance, and without repentance, which is
accompanied with a desire, resolution and endeavor to break off the same, and
to do no more so; for all unregerate men who live in their sins without
repentance, are strangers from the Covenant of Promise, having no part in the
Testiment, they have no hope, but are without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12 Mat.
7.6. and 15.26.

But it may be said, this is fair and far off, we know we are all sinners,
and trust the Lord will have mercy on us, etc. Well, excuse me, I mean no
harm, the next will come nearer home, even into our secret bosoms; again I
say, what I say to any I say to mine own soul: The Lord says, Ier. 7.9, 10,
19. Will you steal, murder, commit adultery, and swear falsely, and come and
stand before me, and say we are delivered, although ye do all these
abominations? you provoke the Lord to anger to the confusion of your own
faces: I pray then what shall we gain but all misery and mischief? judge ye;
now let us make application for what the Lord says concerning some, his
meaning is concerning any other sin, as if it were there mentioned.

Well then, dare you drink drunk, whore, swear, quarrel, shed blood, and as
profane Beasts, make a mock of God and goodness, scorn and abuse good men,
and because the Lord yet suffers thee and seems to be silent, think thou
that God is like unto thee, and a patron of iniquity? Oh horrible impiety! he
will reprove thee, and set all thy sins in order before thee, Psalm. 50.18,
19, 20, 21. then woe, woe, woe unto thee, Ier. 13.15, 27.

Will you, dare you by your selves or others, for your selves or others,
flatter, insinuate, slander, bribe, lie, be bribed, swear, cozen, oppress,
forswear, mince, geld, dally, and play with an Oath, make others lie, swear
and forswear themselves for your base profit? They bend their tongues like
their bows for lies, but they have no courage for the truth upon the earth;
for they proceed from evil to worse, and they have not known me, says the
Lord, Jer. 9.3. Let every one take heed of his neighbor, and trust you not in
any brother, for every brother will use deceit, and every friend will dealt
deceitfully, and every one will deceive his friend, and will not speak the
truth, for they have taught their tongues to speak lies, and take great pains
to do wickedly, Jer. 9.5. and is it not just thus among us, tell me, will God
suffer this? he will not, shall I not visit for these things says the Lord?
and shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Psalm 50.21. Ier.
5.9.

Will you, dare you grind the faces of the poor ( Isa. 3.15.) Soldiers? flay
the skins from their backs? suck the marrow out of their bones, blood out of
their veins, and pull the hearts out of their bodies, by cutting, off, and
withholding their due, by forcing them to take their off-reckonings at
unreasonable rates, or by giving them none at all, or by halves, by making them
subscribe all is paid, when they never received the fifth part; by detaining
all or most part of their due for their passes, by compelling them to run
away through extreme, hard and most unjust usage? Oh consider this ye that
forget God, least I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you,
says the Lord, Psalm. 50.22.

Will you, dare you by your unlawful courses and unrighteous gains (to serve
your covetousness, lust, pride and excess) highly displease and dishonor
God, grievously wound (by sinning against the light of your consciences,)
betray the cause for which you serve, and wrong the State in which you serve?
and he that does not so, will you abhor, deride and harm him? the Lord sees it
and it displeases him, Isa. 59.15.

Will you, dare you do all these, and many more like unto these? which (to
hide your shame) I shame to reveal; for I say little of your most detestable,
most accursed false attestations, whereby all parties are grievously guilty of
horrible perjury; of your men of loose mearies, of those you make use of only
for a muster, of your passavotants, of your false billets, and mustering some
or whom you give no means, b^^ a present reward for that base service, and
then turn them o^^^ of your mustering others in the names of those long dead or
away, or in false names, or passing Soldiers of other Companies in yours, etc.
Oh Mystery of iniquity! and yet flatter your selves, that all is well and shall
be well? Or do you think that God esteems or will spare you for your pride of
heart, bravery in apparel, courtly behavior, high looks, big words, height in
place, greatness of power? No; or will he accept of your childish, foolish,
wicked, vain excuses, pretenses, extenuations? neither ^ for there be no
circumstance can make an unlawful thing lawful, Romans 3.8. neither regards
he any man's person, Romans 2.11. do not deceive your selves, is God God? and
will he be mocked? Gal. 6.7. is Gods Word truth? which declares the
heinousness and danger of these things? and dare you live in, and plead for
them? let Baal plead for himself, Judge. 6.31. I plead for my God, who has a
controversy with you, Hos. 4.1. Oh how far are all these courses from Saint
John's doctrine to Soldiers, do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely,
and be content with your wages, Luke 3.14.

Away, away then with this dung and filth, this worse and less then nothing,
if you at all esteem that inestimable Jewel of Gods Word, if you know, believe
in, love, fear, and serve, and trust in God (as you would be thought) let not
these more then base, most shameful and harmefull courses, which he hates,
forbids, threatens, has plagued and will plague, Mal. 1.6. Ier. 2.19. and
4.18. for a little bitter, sweet, short pleasure, for a little paltry pelf,
Iam. 5.1, 2, 3. rusty riches, or the like trash (which the very Heathens in
respect of virtue abhorred and rejected) so far hood-wink, befool, mislead
you, that for the love of them, Romans 6.23. you should run the hazard of losing,
of damning your poor souls, your precious souls, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. and shut
your selves out of Heaven. Oh what shall it profit a man if he gained the whole
World, and should lose his soul?

Oh let Gods glory, his Churches good, your souls welfare, be preferred before
your unlawful gains; for soul lost and all lost, and these are the highways
to hell, Rev. 22.15. or are you yet so ignorant and so obstinate that you will
not Believe this? Behold ye trust in lying words that cannot profit, Jer. 7.8.
take Gods own word for it, which will not flatter, which cannot deceive you,
your condition is and shall be most miserable; He that gets riches, and not
by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be
a fool, Jer. 17.11. and though you do evil with both hands earnestly, so that
the Prince asks, and the Judge. asks for a reward, and the great man he
utters his mischievous desire, and so ye wrap it up, Mic. 7.3. yet woe unto
you that devise iniquity, and work evil upon your beds, when the morning is
light ye practice it, because it is in the power of your hand, Mic. 2.1. yea,
though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished, Prove. 11.21.

Apply among many more these following most plain and powerful places to this
purpose, then if you dare go on, devise by your selves, consult with others,
abuse your wit and power to do evil; what then? woe and punishment shall be
your portion: for further proof of this, I beseech and admonish you, read, lay
to heart, and jest not with what follows out of Gods own Word expressly.

Woe to the wicked (be they who they will, be their wickedness what it will)
it shall be evil with him, evil of sorrow, of shame, of fearful plagues
here, of horrible destruction for evermore shall be upon him, for the reward of
his hands shall be given him, Isa. 3.11. Lo it is a day of trouble, and of
ruin, and of perplexity by the Lord God of Hosts, Isa. 22.5. and 23.9. Behold
the Day of the Lord comes, cruel, with wrath and fierce anger, and he shall
destroy the sinners out of the earth, Isa. 13.9. This day you say, is not come,
it may be you conceit it will not come, or not upon you, and so put that day
far from you, but you see God says, you see it comes, it shall surely
come, and what will you do now in the day of visitation and destruction? to
whom will you flee, for help? and where will ye leave your glory? the
privileges you presumed on will not secure you, or whatsoever you gloried in
shall nothing avail you, Isa. 10.3. for if you refuse and be rebellious
(though you thus long have escaped) you shall be devoured with the sword, a
bullet shall meet with your head or heart when you little think of it, and then
it will be too late, believe it; go the right way to work to prevent it, for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Isa. 1.20. infinite ways has God to
find out thy iniquities; fear, and the pit, and the snare are upon thee, Isa.
24.17. see Jer. 35.2, 5, 6. and 16.4, 6. and 19.15. Deuteronomy. 18.16. destruction
upon destruction is cried, for my people is foolish, they have not known me,
they are foolish children and have none understanding, they are wise to do
evil, but to do good they have no knowledge, Jer. 4.20, 22. the time will
come, that thy ways and thine inventions shall procure these things unto thee;
such is thy wickedness, therefore it shall be bitter (though it now seem
sweet) therefore it shall pierce to thine heart (which thou now make so much
of) Jer. 4.18. neither will it help that you have sought deep (by plotting and
councelling) to hide your counsels from the Lord, although they were in
darkness (never so secretly contrived and practiced) that you have said, who
sees us, who knows of it? Isa. 29.15. Therefore the Lord says; Behold, I
will bring a plague upon you which you shall not be able to escape, and that
which will be worst of all, though you cry unto me I will not hear you, Jer.
11.11. because when I called, you refused, Prove. 1.24. to 31. verse; read and
remember for your souls safeties sake I beseech you, yea, hear and give ear,
be not proud, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Jer. 13.15. oh may not
the Lord justly say to us as he said Jer. 6.15. were they ashamed when they had
committed abomination? nay, they were not ashamed, no, neither could they have
any shame; and as is Chap. 8.6. I hearkened and heard, but none spoke aright, no
man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? for many of us
think and dare say, it is shame for such as do otherwise, and instead of
repenting, most impudently say, we have not sinned; but these are rebellious
people, lying children, and children that would not hear the Law of the Lord,
Isa. 30.9. remember this and be ashamed, bring it again to mind, O you
transgressors, Isa. 46.8. the like places exceeding many; oh then plead not,
plead not against the Lord, be not high minded, but fear, Romans 9.20. be not
deceived, God cannot, will not be mocked, Gal. 6.7. these things were written
to admonish us, 1 Cor. 10.6. and if we turn not, the fierce wrath of the Lord
shall not return, until he has done, until he has performed the intents of
his heart; hereafter you shall understand it, and if you take not heed, smart
for it, for the Lord of hosts has determined it, and sworn to it, it shall
come to pass who shall disanull it? his hand is stretched out, who shall turn
it away^ it is he has consulted, it shall stand, he has spoken it, and will
bring it to pass, he has purposed it, and will also do it; the word (and
this is the word) that goes out of his mouth shall not return void, and shall
accomplish that which he will, Isa. 14.24, 27. and 46.11. and 55.11. Dare we
contend with God? oh far be it from us, or else woe unto us, for he is
stronger then we, 1 Cor. 10.^^. and we shall find it a most fearful thing to
fall into his hands when he is angry: For our God is a consuming fire, Hebr.
12.29.

How then? what remedy? oh provoke the Lord God (most mighty, just and jealous)
no more, no longer to wrath; but I most humbly for Gods sake, and most
earnestly for your own sake, beseech thee (whosoever thou art) let this my
council be acceptable unto thee, break off thy sins by righteousness, and
thy iniquities by showing mercy unto, and dealing justly with the poor,
especially under thy command, Dan. 4.24. and pity thine own poor soul, by
confessing and forsaking all secret and open ways of deceit and violence, Pro.
28.13. make peace with the Lord and be at one with him, Isa. 27.5. it will be
far the wisest and surest course, for then the Lord has promised thee, all
shall be well with thee, Is. 3.10. God has showed thee O man what is good, and
what the Lord requires of thee; surely to do justly, to love mercy, to humble
thy self, to walk with God, Micah 6.8. now therefore without any longer delay,
Psalm. 95.7. amend your ways and your works, and hear the voice of the Lord
you^ God, Jer. 26.13. that the Lord may repent him of the plague that he has
pronounced against you: Cease to do evil, learn to do well, come now, says
the Lord, and let us reason together, though your sins were as Crimson, they
shall be made white as Snow, though they were red like Scarlet, they shall be
as wools if you consent and obey, you shall eat the good things of the Land,
you shall prosper here and for ever Isa. 1.16, 17, 18, 19. 1 Timothy 4.8.

But if when a man hears the words of the curse, he blesses himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace although I walk according to the
stubbornness of mine own heart, thus adding drunkenness to thirst, the Lord
will not be merciful unto him; but when the wrath of the Lord, and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man, and every curse that is written in this
book shall light upon him, and the Lord shall put out his name from under
Heaven; and every sickness, and every plague, which is not written in the book
of this law will the Lord heap upon thee until thou be destroyed, Deuteronomy.
29.19, 20, 21. and 28.6. Behold, I have set before thee life and good, death
and evil, choose, Deuteronomy. 30.15. hear and fear, and do no more so.

Oh consider the snortnesse of life, and the certainty of death, the
suddenness of judgment, the plainnes of hell, the terror of that great day
of account, the mere nothingnesse of all worldly excuses, and conceited
privileges, 1 Samuel 12.21. and despise not the riches of Gods bountifulness,
patience and long-suffering; consider that the goodness of God ought to lead
thee to repentance, do not after the hardness of thy heart, and impenitent
disposition, treasure up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render to every man
according to his deeds, Romans 2.4, 5, 6. yea, the Lord will separate thee unto
evil, Deuteronomy. 29.21. for although sentence against an evil work be not executed
speedily, and that therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in
them to do evil, yea, though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and God
prolong his days, yet shall it not he well with him. Eccle. 8.11, 12, 13. for
sin lies at his door, Genesis 4.7. he has, neither can, or ever shall have
true peace, continuing so, Isa. 57.21. his own wickedness, Number. 32.23. and
Gods hand will find him out, Jer. 2.19. and know for all these things, God will
bring thee to judgment, Eccl. 11.9.

But some will say, I have taken too much upon me, and meddled with that which
does not concern me; I might have been more general, covert and sparing: you
see I brought my warrant with me, which makes me thus bold with you, and as to
you I speak, to my self also, therefore you may not tear this out; what if
you should tear them out hence, you dare not tear the ground of these things
out of Gods book, you cannot tear the truth and remembrance of them out of
your own consciences, Romans 2.15. neither shall you tear Gods remembrance of
them out of his book of accounts at that great and terrible day of judgment,
when he will set them all in order before you, Psalm. 50.21. when even the
chief Captains shall say to the Mountains, fall on us, and hide us from the
face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for
the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? What then
shall avail you? what then shall deliver you? Rev. ^6.15, 16, 17. besides,
though I have been plain and open, I name none, neither do I accuse or aim
at any in particular, the innocent are not wronged, the faulty deserve reproof
and warning; such faults there are, in whom they are, they know best that are
guilty of them; would God there were none such, though I herein were made a
liar; our consciences will accuse or excuse us, although their mouthy sometimes
be stopped never much, Romans 2.15. I will (...) you further, for mine own pa^^ I
look for little thanks for my labor, in being thus honestly free, but rather
expect (though there be no reason if I were rightly understood) to get nothing
but hatred, contempt, reproach, jeers, scorns, revilings, ill will and injury
from the world and hers, John 15.18, 19, 20. if such smile upon me, it is but
to deceive me, but I care not; and what need I? for such were never, nor never
will be my friends but in words and show, never did, nor never will do me
good, Jam. 4.4. but have been, are, and will be my enemies for speaking the
truth, Gal. 4.16. what then? must the truth be withheld in unrighteousness?
God forbid, Romans 1.18. my cause is with my God, he will maintain it unto the
uttermost, Isa. 49.4. I fear the face of no man, and why should I? the Lord
himself has promised to comfort, strengthen, and preserve me, Isa. 51.12, 13
and 41.10, 13, 14. who? or which of you then can discourage, hinder, or harm,
he has been is, and has assured me, he will be more for me, then all the
world that can be against me, Romans 8. I (you see) am armed, be you but warned,
or the words that I have written shall not only accuse you, but increase your
condemnation at the last day, John 12.48. and I shall (by Gods good grace and
all-sufficient help) have wherewith to answer him, that for this will call me to
account.

But methinks I hear some say, you are too hasty with us, first hear us, and
answer these few Objections thoroughly, then go on in reprehending sharply,
else revoke your opinion, and be more gentle we pray you.

Object. 1. Every man (at le^ the most) do so, and would you have us (as you
seem) to be singular?

Answ. If there be not warrant for what we do (as there is hone from God for
this) the more that do so, so much the worse, for so much the more is God
dishonored and provoked and iniquity is the more backed; therefore thou shall
not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23 ^^

2 Great ones do so, and why not others as well as they?

Answ. It is true, Gods Word and common experience declares it, but what is
that for our warrant? their greatness without goodness is nothing to the
Lord, who is greater then they, and he that is higher then the highest here,
regards; and there be higher then they, Eccl. ^.8. and if thou follow their
finnes and perish with them for company, what can their greatness avail thee?
when thou art a dying, let thy woeful experience answer me.

3 Such as have no small shows of Sanctity, such as have a great name, and
talk much of Religion, and in other things to the world walk unblamably do so,
viz. such and such, etc.

Answ. This I confess has been often cast in my teeth, and has not a little
grieved, though never a whit unsettled me, confidering their examples (if they
be faulty) can no more warrant me to do so, then Noah's drunkenness, Lots
incest, Abraham, Isaaks and Jacobs dissembling, Moses distrust, Aarons and
Miriams envy, David's adultery and murder, Peter's denial of Christ, and the
like, ought to warrant me to commit the like offenses, which the most ignorant
of us (I imagine) will not aver; besides, we must walk by Gods precepts, and
not by unwarrantable examples, the falls of Gods children be as sea-markes and
ship-wracks, to give us warning that we miscarry not in like manner; my soul
wishes for the greater glory of our God, and more gracing our Christian
profession, for the removing away this scandal, and stopping the mouth of
iniquity, for the fuller testimony to others, and more assurance to their own
consciences, that they are true Christians, to cut off these cutting
reproaches, which are often cast in the teeth of honest men, and for the more
comfort of Gods children, that such among us (especially) who would be esteemed
sincere Christians would depart from such iniquities, 2 Timothy 2.19.

4 The States force us hereunto by their evil payment, for heretofore the most
of us have, and many of us yet do give ever proper pay, for the paying of
their companies, and if we do not thus help our selves we cannot live, but
must run in debt, or spend our own means if we have any, and so prejudice if
not undo our selves and ours, besides, we desire to help our selves no more
then they take from us, and they know it well enough and wink at us; is not the
Labourer worthy of his hire, who goes to warfare at his own charge? he that
serves the Altar must live of the Altar.

What say you to this? this is Seripture too, and we believe you do not as you
say, and should do; if you can, answer to these, and then tell us what you
would have us do.

Answ. I confess cur condition by their ill payment is extreme hard and
uncomfortable that puts upon us a necessity of doing ill to help our selves, or
to suffer much in our outward estate for well-doing; yet their forcing us thus,
can no more warrant me to wrong the Land then another man's stealing from me can
warrant me to steal from him or others; besides, the States will say, we have
the eighth day to help us, which we enjoy rather of custom, and by connivance
(upon this consideration) then of right, (but Sir John Ogle has fully given
reasons for the Captains receiving the profit of the eighth day, both how
necessary and fitting the same is) further I say, we are bound in conscience to
God to prefer the worst of suffering before the best of sin, and if we be
bound, if God call us for welldoing to suffer death, how much more these
losses? Alas, this is not to resist unto blood, and it is a sign we are more
like the Gadarens then true Christians, if rather to part with our (...)
lawful helps, we will part with Christ and his comforts. Again, be assured if
we dye in well being, trust God, he would assuredly help one way or other
neither has he any need of our indirect courses to serve his providence, as if
he could not or would not help us otherwise, whereas indeed although we
consider it not, his curse secretly consumes, or openly crossed us for doing
thus, for we see very few the richer thereby, (...) by gaming, gay clothes,
whooring, drinking, debauching, live and dye miserably poor, yet in a worse
condition, that other that have not followed such courses; then for my part
(...) there be no other remedy, if I must needs dye poor, I would rather dye
poor and honest, and leave a good repute, then dye miserable and wicked, and
^ink in the esteem and report of others; or if some seem to grow rich by these
ways, I dare boldly say, such ill gotten goods shall not long prosper, but
either they or theirs shall find Gods hand one way or other against them; and
why should we not be persuaded the Lord can as easily and remarkably help us as
he has helped others and ours (though many) as if they were but one, and ou^
of the most and greatest troubles, as if they were never so few and small? for
it is all on: with him, to whom nothing is impossible; if we but as
conscionable Christians depend upon his fatherly providence; oh it is cur
propanenesse and distrust that withholds his fatherly help from us: Further,
there are I fear, but very few among us that will take no more by ill means,
then the States by ill payment take from us, witness if the profit of twelve
men would make good that charge, the profit of thirty men will not serve our
turn, and this makes them say, if we would allow the Captains ten or twelve
dead pays they would cozen us nevertheless, therefore why should they have
that allowance; true, the States know they are cozened, but know not precisely
who cozens them, or by what means, and although forcingly they conive at, they
do not approve of it, witness their strict forbidding, and if they find any
faulty, their sharp punishing of it; howsoever, if the means I use be
forbidden by God, as the very best of these are (being at least lying and
deceiving) I cannot see that any conivance or other circumstance, can warrant
me to use them. I acknowledge again ingeniously, that Captains in these
Countries serve in a most uncomfortable and unhappy condition, who by the ill
payment, are forced to live thieves or dye beggars, or spend their own means;
and that it is extreme hard, that in recompense of all our labor and danger,
(which our calling is subject to more then others) we and our wives and
children cannot ear bread except it be the bread of deceit and violence, which
though it seem sweet for the present, will choke us in the end; neither can I
see any reason or equity in them that are the cause of such our extremities,
and if they can, do not redress, neither do I see how authority will ever be
able to answer it before Gods judgment sear, that they have not removed the
cause of such unrighteous dealings, whereby (I dare aver it for experientia
doeet) it is now come to that pass, that it is impossible to serve the Land
truly, and hold fast our integrity, are we not then in a fine case? and is not
the Lands service come to a fine pass? and are we not like to prosper, when we
that are employed in the service, serve in a course of unrighteousness, or
ruin our selves and ours without remedy? and for those places, the labourer is
worthy of his hire, etc. they show what ought to be and not what always is,
for another Scripture says, woe to them that detain the Laborers hire, so
indeed we ought to have out appointed pay, or else how can we be content with
our wages; yet for all this we have no warrant to follow any unlawful ways
forbidden and accursed by God, as is proved before. Grant I do not as I say,
the truth remains truth, and if I dare do otherwise, the same will turn to
my greater condemnation, knowing and saying so much as I do, and this is that
above all I abhor and condemn in the discourses of others concerning these
things, that because they do not as they ought, they dare justify what they
do, yea, some dare say they hold it no sin to do so, and they do it and will do
it: Oh horrible presumption! it is too much we do ill, would God we were
sensible thereof, and we would not so plead therefore; but to justisie our
selves therein, as if we not only faultlesse, but did well, is too too bad;
oh, if we do no more, let us at least give God his glory thus far, as to
acknowledge we do amiss, doing so foully amiss. Take this in good part in
some part of answer to these Objections, which I vvish with my soul may
satisfy others as they do me.

To conclude, I freely, friendly and faithfully give this counsel in this case.

Take this as an infallible ground, there is no circumstance whatsoever can
make an unlawful thing lawful.

That the worst of suffering is to be chosen before the best of sin.

That it is better to live in misery then in iniquity.

That in the day of visitation, and at the hour of death (which sooner or
later will come upon every one of us) these courses cannot any whit comfort,
but if we dye not stupid, impenitent Beasts will torment us.

That God has no need of our sins to serve his providence toward us.

That this our profaneness and distrust hinders his help and blessing from us.

That the right way is the best way, procuring inward contentment, boldness
before the strictest authority, a good repute, freedom from the base
accusations of vile persons, all which our crooked ways mislead us from;
prove the Lord by trusting him in well-doing, rather, then thou shall want
convenient help, he will work wonders for thee, Mal. 3.10. and will do more
for us then we can lose thereby, 2 Chronicles. 25.9.

Let us with all due respect seek to authority for redress jointly.

Let us be humbled for what is amiss hitherto, confess, crave pardon for,
resolve to forsake, labor against, pray for strength to overcome our forepast
evils in this kind, and that unfainedly and constantly, and beseech God to work
upon the heart of authority, and that we may prefer the general good of Gods
cause before our private profit seriously, and we shall find a remarkable
change and all shall go well; for Piety has the promise undoubtedly, 1 Timothy
4.8.

And here I end this matter.

Somewhat concerning general Obedience, not to be neglected.
IT is written Acts 24.16. herein do I exercise my self to have always a
good conscience void of offense toward God and toward men, Ps. 119. then
shall I not be asnamed; when I have respect unto all thy Commandments, and
ver. 101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way.

Out of which O my soul observe these few, yet needful and profitable Lessons.
1 THat though thou do many good things, and yet dispensest with thy self
in the omitting, or evil performing any one duty required, it will not serve
the turn. 2 Though thou forsakest many sins, if thou give thy self
liberty to live in any one, thou deceivest thy self and it will not avail
thee. 3 Learn hereby to make strict conscience, every thing required, even in
the smallest matter, seem it never so much preciseness, especially of such
duties to which thou art most indisposed, or in which thou have been most
careless, or the which stesh and blood thinks least necessary; for the Lord
will have sincere and seasonable obedience in every particular. 4 Think it not
enough to do one good thing, and then, to follow some other evil; as to make
conscience of sanctifying the Sabath, and yet to take leave to take Gods Name
in vain, or to apply thy self diligently to Gods public worship, yet not to
stick to lie, swear, deceive, forswear, extort in thy particular calling, or
to be strict in thy outward conversation, and yet dare to harbor discontent,
envy, hatred, malice, discord, revenge, or to seem friendly abroad, or yet be
currish at home, or to be temperate in some places and companies, and yet to
tipple, drink healths and be drunk in some other, or to be modest in behavior,
and yet abound in filthy conceits, or to seem religious and yet want government
of the tongue, or to be just in outward dealings, and yet be uncharitable, and
the like; as also on the contrary, for every sin as well as any sin, must
be conscionably avoided, or none is sincerely eschewed. 5 Neither rest
contented in straining at a Gnat, if thou dare to swallow a Camel, or though
thou escapest gross and open sins, if thou allowest thy self in some lesser
and secret evils; these are most deceitful, dangerous, devilish (and without
repentance) damnable conceits, and are sure signs of an huge hypocrite, and
must unsound soul.
But O my soul, who is sufficient for these things? well, endeavor uprightly,
watchfully, constantly, in every particular that the Lord has revealed to
thee, and it is in Gods estimation, perfect obedience, only give not thy self
the least freedom in the least matter against conscience to transgress; then
believe, and thou may be assured the Lord Jesus Christ his alsufficient
satisfaction, both in his absolute obedience and infinite sufferings, is
imputed unto thee, and thou in him have fully obeyed, and suffered all that the
Lord can in his exactest justice require of thee; we may keep all, though we
cannot fulfill any one of Gods Commandments, we may often break and yet not
forsake his holy Covenant. Thus far of this.

His Verses on the Bible.
P leisure and profit, piety and peace,
H ealth for the soul, all happiness increase;
I n each estate within this golden Mine,
L yes couched close, yet of pe to all men's eyne;
L ets then delves search and curiously pry
I nto the same, and mark what we can spy:
P repare good instruments, the ground is hard,
P romise is made, we shall find rich reward.
S oar first in faith, with prayer above the Sun,
K eep constant courses, carelessness still shun;
I oyne with your reading reverence, be attent,
P ractice with knowledge from on high are sent;
P ray more and more such graces to attain,
O n Sacred Writ to meditate take pain;
N eglect not application of the same,
N o doubt so striving we shall win the Game.
His Verses on his Hour-Glasse.
AS this Glass runs, so runs thy Glass of life;
Each hour one hour nearer thy lives end;
Ere sand be out, Death with his fatal knife
Cats short thy days (perhaps) repent, amend:
Delay no time, see how away he hyes,
Once past, past calling back with loudest cries.
Behold this Glass, and then take heedfull view;
What Is thy estate, more brittle then the same?
Soon broke, as sand in wind, in have oh rue
Thy sins forepast with sorrow and with shame:
Henceforth aye run of godliness the race,
While thy Glass runs, and days fleet hence apace.
Let thy often turning of this running Glass
Cause in thy mind to run that thou still turn
To great Jehovah, let no hour pass,
(While God vouchsafe thou in this world sojourne)
Without some work of grace; oh spend no time
In plotting, following any sinful crime.
So though this Glass and life, at once run out,
Time past misspent (bewaild) to come redeemd,
Of dying well, thou needst not stand in doubt,
Ill having hated, done what best beseemd.
Were every hour the latest of thy breath,
The happiest hour shall be the hour of death.
Morning Thoughts.
BEthink, perform each morning thou survivest,
Thy duty to thy God while here thou live;
Arake with him in humble, cheerful wise,
Open thine heart as early as thine eyes.
Who holy thoughts his Majesty salute,
Of a true godly life, what is the fruit;
Of rising from thy sins to ways of grace,
The resurrection set before thy face,
Eke unto judgment thy most sure arising,
By light of day be with thy self devising
Of that most glorious armor of pure light,
And of thy natural darkness take in sight,
And works of darkness labor off to cast,
Bidding thy God good morrow, thus make have,
Upon his holy Name to invocate,
Confessing and bewailing thine estate,
By nature, actual offendings too,
Labor for feeling though with much ado;
Weigh, to thy sins all judgment are most due,
Thy just desert whereof take pains to rue,
With deprecation, then will fervency,
To thy good God in Christ for pardon cry;
Resolving by his grace (which beg) henceforth,
In heart, word, deed, to esteem of highest worth.
His holy fear and service every way
Believe, for these in faith, will reeling pray,
In and from danger, preservation,
Strength to resist Satan's temptation;
Comfort in grief, help in adversity,
Relief in any kind of misery;
For deaths preparing, dying to the world,
That it is and flesh his lusts may be controld:
Heaven hungered after, in each thing content,
To please the Lord in all that heart be bent;
To walk uprightly in thy lawful calling,
In others matters not thy self inthralling:
For companies and privaties right use,
Against thoughts, words, deeds, behaviors abuse;
Concerning all, in each always to watch,
That thou nor others harm thereby to catch:
Briefly to thy most blessed God commend,
Whatsoever any way thou do intend;
That better and not worse, they still may grow,
By all thou hear, see, or else do know;
Laboring to keep sweet peace with thy sweet God,
Which being even, no manner what is odd:
In every thing submitting to his will:
Then from thy heart thy mouth with praises fill,
For all his blessings great and manifold,
Past, present and to come, both new and old:
In special for protection in the night,
Judgments prevented, now with morning light,
Sweet motions grant, every gift firm, fading
For this or better life; thy self persuading,
Thy Gods rich mercy is the ground of all
Thou did before, do now, or ever shall
Enjoy; and entire thanks to manifest,
Let soul and body, all thou have be pressed
To do his will, in all his Word requires,
That thou may be such as his heart desires.
To live and dye in happy state of grace,
And so in mercy aye behold his face:
Thus as thine own, think on the Churches peace,
To attend thy prayers with practice do not cease;
And thou will not repent this little pain,
^o much will be thy comfort and thy gain;
^e: all be done as thou Lord see fit,
Amen, Amen, Lord Jesus, so be it.
Woe for the abuses of these sinful times.
Our Callings common, crying, chiefest crimes.
IS it not a wicked world when honesty
Is called and counted childish foolery?
When lying, perjury and falsehood foul,
Are followed, gract, maintaint without control?
When to extort, opresse by force, or fraud,
(Instead of right and mercy) most applaud?
When place and power abused are shamefully,
To wrong the poor, and suppress equity?
When avarice, pride, lust, excess to cherish,
We cause our own and others souls to perish?
No attestations false to prov't I need,
Those most accursed do it, leave off, take heed;
When great ones customs, though in things amiss,
Before Gods express Law preferred is?
When because most do so, it must so be?
Or who does otherwise strange man is he;
When virtue is for show, not deed esteemed?
When all is well if honest he be deemed?
Though guilty conscience tells us to our face,
Seem what we will we are in evil case:
When to our shame (if but our turns we serve)
We crouch to such who small respect deserve:
When he the wise, wise man a counted is,
That closest carries all (...) knaveries?
When he that freely, pla^^ deals, and truly,
Is worthless, witless held, (...) most unruly?
Is hated, scorned, frowned of, and hardly used,
Belyed, defamed, watched, sco^^ at and misused?
"When the malicious, partall man does threat?
"Yet his best cause before fa^^e justice seat,
"Dares not present, who darkness works hates light,
"A conscience foul dares not appeal to right;
"But underhand scandal (...) raise never cease,
"The are heard, stood for, by such, as such things pleases.
When a wrongd-just cause which craves to be righted,
Shall scarce be heard, at best put off and slighted?
When falsehood many, truth few friends shall find?
A true discovery how we are inclined)
Enough; vain foolish men run on your race,
Horror, shame, mischief, misery, disgrace
Your portion is, and truth that now is blamed,
Shall once prevail, and never be ashamed:
Comfort, help, Heaven, in no wise look you for,
Continuing thus, your ways he does abhor.
The right Religion, understand me well,
The galled, guilty, will fret, rail and swell;
He that is a grieved, and finds fault with this,
I more then think himself most faulty is;
Silence with godly sorrow, and to amend,
To just suspicion, sin, shame, harm puts end.
THe proud, peevish, jest m^ and vexing humor of a Preacher is most offensive
and unseemly.

An humble, quiet, grave and friendly carriage does much good, and is most
comely.

Hate thy sin as well as know it, forsake it, as well as beg pardon for it,
if thou my self practice it, it little availes thee to reprove it.

Do well, trust God and be merry, whosoever mislikes it.

There is no fence, against the ungrounded suspicions, o^ the slanderous,
spiteful, injurious, uncharitable speechs o^ others, which thou know not
of; in this case approve thy heart to God, give no cause of offense and care
not, for harm she they shall not.

Parents must not be tyrants, nor children masters.

To be temperate in eating and drinking.

To make a covenant with our eyes.

To be more watchful, sober and wise in speaking.

To rise every morning timely.

To premeditate before holy ^uties.

To strive against deadness, weariness, customarinesse in performing them.

To labor for an holy and harmless carriage, furthers inward quier, and
prevents outward scandal.

Avoid all by-respects, all evil thoughts, all misgovernment of the tongue,
all unscemly behavior, and all sinful actions.

Endeavor Gods glory in all things, to entertain god^ thoughts, to strive to
govern the tongue, to embrace a co^^ly behavior, to walk always as in Gods
presence, to appr^^ our hearts to him, helps forw^^ in holiness.

Pray, pray, pray, that God would show thee the right way: 1 Because he
requires it, Jer. 6.16. 2 Because he has promised to show it, Psalm. 32.8. Jer.
33.3. 3 And to cause us walk in (...) Ezekiel. 26.37. Hos. 14.19. 4. And that we
shall perseven therein, Psalm. 66.9. 5 And because the Lord has promised his
blessing to all that walk in it, Ps. 1. and 50.23. and 119. Gal. 6.16.


Or thus of the same.
Pray to be enabled to walk with God, and therefore to avoid evil company, a
maine hinderance thereof, Prove. 4.14, 1^. to embrace good society, a great
furtherance thereto, Pro. 2.^0. to be showed the right way, Ps. 119.5. part,
Jer. 10.23. to be kept from all deceitful ways, Psalm. 119.5. part, and that
the Lord will knit our hearts to fear his Name, Psalm. 86.11.

For the attaining to, and furtherance of a pious, acceptable profitable
conversation, keep my heart above all things, therefore avoid and strive against
profane, uncharitable, lofty thoughts, ungrounded discontented conceits,
spiritual and worldly pride, hypocrisy, deceitfulness in heart, dispensation
to neglect good, or to commit evil, inward danger, envy, fretting at others
prosperity, murmuring against, disputing with God, to strive against the
occasions of sin offered, and the sin it self be it never so secret.

To entertain and to labor after reverend, awful, holy thoughts, in respect
of God presence, loving charitable thoughts in respect of others humble and
lowly thoughts is respect of our selves, soundness of judgment to discern
thing aright, inward content, me^^nesse, sincerity, sobriety, st^^ednesse,
peaceablenesse; to dea good and fly evil, according ^^ the light of a well
informe^ conscience.

Pray to leave sin, whereof we are guilty, to be preserved from those whereof
we are not so apparently faulty, to mount for what we cannot mend.

For the first sort confess them, fly the occasions of them; falling
sometimes through frailty, not to lie still therein, but to repent and amend
speedly, and to watch there-against more carefully, vow the more earnestly
against them.

For the second, fear our selves, think we our selves never so free, watch
against the accasions, least we fall before we fear.

For the third, lay them before the Lord, beg reformation, endeavor to
practice all we can.

If we would pray to be heard, ground all on the word of God, pray in the name
of Christ, believe acceptance in him, await such an answer as he sees fit,
rest on the Lords all-sufficient assistance, attend with good endeavors, let
words be few, at least with great judgment and affection, let thy heart be
lift up, be advised what thou pray^^ for, strive against habitual at
stractions, passions, lusts, be fervent in spirit, with instanty without
failing or discouragement, with perseverance, truth. Lord thou requirest it,
but I am wholly insufficient to it, but thou have promised to give it,
therefore I crave it, relying thereon; for times of prayer, when he can to be
more large and solemn, wanting convenicy hereto, to be full of short
Ejaculations, and when neither of these can be conveniently performed, to pray
in hean, for all are commanded, commended, acceptable and powerful, all in the
name of Christ Jesus.

Resolve.
TO do nothing without the warrant of Gods Word.

To order all affairs by judgment.

To speak the best of all men and all things.

To resist all manner of evil thoughts, motions, purposes, affections,
passions; to use only wise, few, true, acceptable words.

To be grave, affable, circumspect, all to the Lord, shunning all by-respects.

No sufficiency in our selves, all sufficiency in the Lord.

Beg grace, and labor to understand, remember, affect, believe and practice.

In company avoid lightness, and lumplishnesse in behavior; in talk
filthiness, falsehood, jesting, rashness, superfluous words; in action,
gluttony, drunkenesse, drinking healths, Tobacco drinking, Tobacco taking.

Endeavor stayednesse and and cheerfulness in behavior, gracious, honest,
harmless discourses; in action, temperance, speedy breaking up, gratefulness.

In general, labor to hinder swearing, obicene talk, excess contention, and
to further good discourse, to bewail what we cannot help, to give no offense,
to take all in good part that concerns our selves.

More Resolutions.
OBey lawful commands willingly.
Take reproves gently.
And advice thankfully.
Do duty diligently.
Swear not rashly.
Speak soberly.
Examine complaints conscionably.
Understand both Parties thoroughly.

Deal directly.
Hate partiality.
Punish vice strictly.
Avoid words of superfluity.
Bear thy self humbly.
To each degree respectively.
Drink not immoderately.
Use not familiarity.
Be careless of others envy.
Worship God religiously.
In season and with constancy.
Strive to walk wisely.
Do all in faith sincerely,
To the Lords glory.
Learn to make Conscience of mourning, for the abom nations abounding among us.
BEcause God requires it, Jer. 22.30. complains of the negtect of it, Isa.
52.16. and 63.^^. marks those for his, and preserves them in times of general
judgments that do it, Ezekiel. 9.4, 6. and will be entreated by them, as by
Moses, etc. therefore let us seriously ponder them, and the judgments due unto
them, and acknowledge them, craving an heart to be touched with godly sorrow,
and awful fear, bceause of them, eschewing them in our selves, suppressing
them in others ill we can, begging pardon for, and reformation of them, vexing
our souls seeing or hearing of them, desiring the Lord to keep his judgments
from us, that are due for them; so sighing to the Lord sensibly because of them.

His acknowledgement of God.
THe Lord God, Psalm, 71.16.
whom I alone, 1 Samuel 7.3.
and always Deuteronomy. 14.23.
desire to serve, Neh. 1.11. Jos. 24.15.
and trust, 2 Samuel 22.3.
and in whose name, Psalm. 124 8.
fear, Isa. 8.13.
presence 2 Cor. 2.^^.
and assistance, Psalm. 121.2.
I desire to order all my ways, Psalm. 16.^^.
and from whom only I look for all grace 1 John 1.16.
and good, Jam. 1.^.
is God the Father, 2 These. 1.1.
God the Son John 10.^^.
and God the holy Ghost, Acts. 5.3, 4.
three Persons, Mat. 3.16.^^.
but one, 1 John 5.7.
only Deuteronomy. 6.4.
true Jer. 10.10.
and most wonderful Isa. 9.6.
Lord God, 1 Chronicles. 11.16.
who by his Word alone, Psalm. 33.6, 9.
most wisely, Prove. ^^
powerfully, Jer. 13.10.
graciously, Psalm. 111.^.
has created all things of nothing, Genesis 1.
who in like manner preserved, does and will preserve, Heb. 1.3.
and dispose all the works of his hands Mat. 10.29, 30.
for his own glory Pro. 16.4.
and his childrens vvelfare, Romans 8.^^.
whatsoever opposes, Isa. 14.24, 27.
who is the eternal, Dut. 33.27.
everliving, Heb. 7.25.
everlasting, Isa. 40.28.
most glorious, D^^ 28.58.
great, 2 Samuel 7.22.
tearful, Ex^^. 15.11.
invisible, 1 Timothy 1.17.
invincible, 2 Chr^^. 29.11.
unconceivable, Romans 11.33, 34.
un-utterable, J^^ 21.31.
incomprehensible, 1 King. 8.27.
inaccessible, 1 T^^ 6.16.
incorruptible, Romans 1.23.
infinitely wise, Romans ^^.27.
most holy, Isa. 6.3.
just, Job. 34.19.
jealous, Ex. 34.14
righteous, Dan. 9.14.
Almighty, J^^ 42.2.
all-sufficient, Genesis 17.1.
every where present, Jer. 23.2^ 24.
alknowing, Heb. 4.13.
most blessed Romans 9.^.
and only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15.
most gracious, Psalm. 145.^.
good, Mat. 19.17.
free, Ezekiel. 36.2^.
bountiful, Ps. 116.7.
most patient, Romans 15.5.
long-suftering, E^ 34.6
compassionate, Psalm. 78.38.
pitiful Jam. 5.11
most loving, Hos. 14.4.
fair, Psalm. 50.2.
pure, Hab. 1.13.
comely, Cant. 2.14.
beautiful, Isa. 4.2.
most merciful, 2 Cor. 1.3.
faithful, Deuteronomy. 7.9.
immutable, Mal. ^.^.
and never enough to be admired Majesty: 2 These. 1.12.
my Lord, Isa. 49.14
my God, John 20.28.
my Father, John 20.17.28.
my Redeemer, Job. 19.25.
my Intercessor, 1 John 2.1.
my Sanctifier, Romans 15.16.
my Comforter, John 14.26.
my Guide, Psalm. 48 14.
my Sufficiency, 2 Cor. 3.5.
my safety, Prove. 31.21.
my Deliverer, Ps. 40.17.
my good success, Psalm. 37.5.
my life, Acts 17.28.
my health, Psalm. 43.5.
my strength, Psalm. 28.7.
my succor, Heb 2.18.
my chief good, Psalm. 119.68.
my all in all for good, Psalm. 73.25.
my only helper at all assayes, Heb. 13.5, 6.
in greatest extremities most remarkably, Ps. 72.12.
in whom I have all, 1 Cor. 3, 22, 23.
without whom I have nothing, Hos. 13.9.
nor can do nothing, Joh. 15.5.
of whom alone I have received, 1 Cor. 4.7.
by whom alone I do enjoy, Acts 17.28.
from whom alone I crave Psalm. 5.2.
and expect Psalm. 62.5.
all good Psalm. 62.5.
for this and a better life; Ps. ^4.11.
yea, whom I desire above all things, Psalm. 73.25.
and to whom only in all, above all, always be glory, Romans 11.36.
Amen. Romans 11.36.


How to endeavor to walk with God in the Leaguer.
FIrst, to walk circumspectly: and that, 1 In dividing the times aright for the
duties of Religion, the works of my calling, and other lawful employments,
that them be no confusion, that the lesser be not hindrances, but help to the
greater. 2 By serious consideration that I have warrant out of the Word of God
for all my proceedings.


Secondly, what religious duties be performed daily with Christian convenience.

1 Prayer for my self, min^ Gods people. 2 Reading the Scripture, and somewhat
in a good books. 3 Meditation. 4 To sing out of the Psalms. 5 To embrace all
occasions for Gods public worship.
In each of these to seek the Lord conscionably.

1 Laboring for preparation, revetence, sincerity, feeling, cheerfulness and
faith. 2 Striving against carelessness, coldness, drowsiness, hypocrisy and
customary service. 3 When any urgent business of my calling causes the
deferring any of these duties, to take a more convenient time, yea, to redeem
the time for the performance thereof.
Thirdly, concerning the duties of my particular calling.

1 In general to walk faithfully, diligently and wisely. 2 In particular,
toward Supenours in all things lawful, obediently; toward those I command
gravely, toward equals friendly: 3 When I am commanded, to pursue my business
earnestly, and cheerfully till the same be effected. 4 In commanding others, to
do all distinctly, thoroughly, plainly and impartially, to se^ the same
effected accordingly, to check and punish neglect sharply. 5 If joined with
other in command, to seek and follow the best counsel and commendablest
course. 6 Not to despise the good advice of any, though never so mean, but by
all good means to grow more fit for service. 7 For better furnishing himself
with ability to listen to others discourses, to observe what others do
commendably in this or that occasion, to consider the use of things with silent
application.
Fourthly, what company to avoid; viz. of swearers, drunkards, quarrellers,
gamsters, whore-masters, filthy talkers, scoffers at goodness, etc. to embrace
the society of honest men though mean.

Fifthly, what places to avoid, as of uncleanness, excess, playing, etc.
though enticed or provoked thereto, and to frequent such places where good is
to be gotten.

Sixthly, what especial sins to strive against. 1 In heart, unadvised anger,
remembering injuries, desire of revenge, hatred, envy, impure lusts. 2 In words;
brawling, railing, reviling, scoffing, indiscreet, superfluous, obscene
boasting, unnecessary, selfconceited, censuring, ungracious, familiar,
blasphemous, speeches. 3 In behavior, lightness, lumpishnesse, pride,
familiarnesse. 4 In looks; wanderings, wantonness, lustfulnesse. 5 In action;
hard dealing, impurity, secret or open intemperance, all sin, folly, and
disorder.


Seventhly, to entertain these contrary virtues. 1 In heart, watchfulness,
sobriety, putting up wrong^, forgetting injuries, passing by offenses without
taking notice of them (if God be not dishonored or my self disabled, else, to
use all good means to stand for the truth, and clear my innocence) and
quietness. 2 In words; that they be wise, few, seasonable, to the purpost,
charitable, true, meek, gracious. 3 In behavior; gravity, modesty, humility,
courtesy, seemlinesse, to make a covenant with mine eyes not to behold vanity
with delight. 4 In action, to show tenderly artednesse, to live chastely,
temperately, thriftily, and to deal justly.


Eighthly, in case of justice and judgment: 1 Not to condemn the innocent, or
justify the offender. 2 Nor to accept persons for any respect. 3 To examine
the cause thoroughly. 4 To hear both parties deliberately. 5 To hate bribes
unfainedly. 6 To help the afflicted against the rich and mighty. 7 To execute
justice rightly. 8 To pronounce sentence according to warrant, gravely, boldly,
briefly, impartially, substantially, how many, who, whatsoever opposes.


Ninthly, for convenient maintenance, according to place and calling. 1 To
live within compass. 2 To wear plain, serviceable and decent apparel. 3 To
avoid running into debt, and to pay debts by all good means possible. 4 Not to
live at another Table 5. Not to lay out on thin^ superfluous. 6 To allow what
is fitting for my Family. 7. In weldoing to depend ^^ Gods providence.


Tenthly, in more espe^^ employments in my plate:

To propound in each Go^ glory, to have respect to hi^ Cause, to be affected,
to hi^ Church, to order all affairs ^^ judgment, where my calling requires,
though never (...)gerous, to be willing; forward courageous; bold, industrio^^
fearelesse to the death, ^^^mending my self into the (...) of God wholly, for
help, (...) and good success.

To avoid and strive aga^^^^ rash adventures without a warrantable calling,
foolish cu^osity, ostentation, unwillingnesse, sloathfulnesse, backwardness,
frivolous excuses, cowardlinesse, fear, flying, distrust of Gods help for
sufficiency and protection for safety and blessing for a good issue.

Eleventhly and lastly, concerning lawful recreation. 1 To take such time for
them, that things of more consequence ^^ the same time be not hindered by them.
2 To use such exercises as are manly, comely, and fittest for my calling, place
and age. 3 With nien most free from offense, and of a good report. 4 All with
moderation; not spending too much time, labor or cost therein. 5 Especially to
spend some spare time in reading in some good morrall Author, as Plutarks
Lives, Caesar's Co^^entaries, etc. and to ride abroad to view the Trench, Works,
etc. both for better enabling him to do service.


To endeavor all in a conscinable manner, seeking in all Gods glory chiefly,
by the help of his holy Spirit only, spite of all oppositions, trusting
through his grace in sincerity to testify obedience; and in all unwilling
failings, not to doubt of his most merciful forgiveness, gracious
acceptance, and favorable blessing, in the face of Christ Jesus, in whose
name (my Father) I beg a disposition and ability to discharge each part of my
duty, seasonably, wisely, uprightly, and constantly, according to what I have
purposed and expressed before thee, that thou in mercy according to thy truth
in him ^^ayest please at all times, and in (...) things, to be with me for
^^^d, Amen.

How to stir up and embrace right Christian resolutions, for the Cause of
God, and against his enemies.
FIrst, be fully assured it is the Cause of God, else it is sinful and shall
not be blessed; but undoubtedly it is the Cause of God, because his pure
worship accooding to his Word is stood for, because we have been, and are
grievously persecuted by tyrannous Idolaters for the same; and that
nevertheless the Lord for his great names sake, according to his truth, in
great mercy, has many and miraculously delivered and preserved us, and still
does, as at this day.

Secondly, therefore as all good Christians are strictly bound, so I my self
must endeavor to do my best to maintain this his Cause, and that because 1
The Lord requires it. 2 And curses bitterly such as help him not against the
mighty. 3 And has plagued such for their neglect. 4 Because I have the
warrantable examples of Gods children, who willingly ventured their lives for
this Cause. 5 The commendations in Scripture of such, is also a spur hereunto.
6 And the blessings of the Lord upon them, both which we may look for. 7 We are
Fellow-helpers with the Lord in his Work against his enemies, an acceptable
work.


Thirdly, the manner how to perform this commanded, warrantable, commendable,
blessed and acceptable work. 1 Zealously; and that 1 Because the glory of the
great name of the eternal God, of which he is so jealous, is the thing we
fight for, the Cause being his. 2 The preservation of his holy Word, and pure
worship among us, which is an especial token of his favor to us, being the
means to save our souls. 3 And that if the enemy should prevail, we should
not only lose these blessings, but they should be scofft at, profaned and
trodden under foot by them, and their abominations set up, to the exceeding
greeat dishonor of our blessed God, and the Loss of innumerable souls.
2 Courageously; and that 1 Because it is the Cause of God Almighty, who is
able to defend and deliver us in the midst of the greatest perils, and if
none apparent were nigh unto us. 2 Who governs all things in all places, that
no bullet can fly, or any other instrument of war move but according to his
especial disposing, nor do any hurt to me, but by his express commission,
and according to his good pleasure. 3 That he who is most faithful in
remembering and keeping his word, has abundantly promised he will preserve and
deliver me, as he sees best for me. 4 That he has preserved and delivered
others, even profane persons, who have showed little care to obey seek or
trust him, and that in extremest dangers. 5 That he has often and most
remarkably done the like to others of his, and to me (the most helpless and
unworthy) formerly. 6 That many through fear seeking to avoid danger, have the
sooner hurt and slain, and others who have been warrantably and worthily
valiant, have by Gods protection, escaped. 7 That diverse have been slain in a
Tent, hut, or house, or in other places where they thought themselves secure,
have been hurt or slain, when others in the trench or battle have been safe.
8 That if the Lord please I shall be safe, be the perils never so many and
great, for he can preserve from the greatest as well as the least, from many as
well as any. 9 If he please I end my days in fight against his foes, I dye a
Martyr, and the very instrument of my death is a means to send me Heaven. 10
If we be fearful and insufficient in our selves to do our duty valiantly, let
us seek courage and ability from the Lord, he will in some good measure
undoubtedly grant it, because he has expressly promised it.
3 Faithfully, because the Lord hates eye service, and all unfaithfulness,
and loves a faithful carriage in our callings. 4 Diligently and vigilantly,
because 1 By sloathfulnesse, negligence and backwardness, much time is lost,
much evil may ensue to the business, and much shame, disfavour, scorn and
harm may come upon our selves. 2 Because time is redeemed, the Cause advanced,
and we shall be commended, and be the better trusted with employment.
5 Circumspectly, that is, to pursue all lawful employments of our calling,
seasonably for time, place and manner, with good advice worthily, weighing all
circumstances thoroughly. 6 Conscionably, propounding Gods glory chiefly, the
goodness of the Cause seriously, and our sincere obedience to his Majesty, and
to testify we are Christians indeed, that lay his Cause to heart deeply. 7 In
faith, resting fully persuaded that our good God, of his great mercy, for the
worthiness of the Lord Jesus will graclously accept our endeavors, though
never so full of unworthiness, and will assuredly bless us. 8 Wi^h humble,
instant and earnest prayer especially, 1 That the Lord will supply with fitting
gifts for his service. 2 That our endeavors may be blessed, for the
maintenance of the Cause. 3 That he will please by all means, in all places,
continually to maintain the same, and oppose the contrary.



Thirdly, diverse motives to stir up by all means to help (to our uttermost)
to maintain the Cause of God. 1 Such as have respect to the Lord most blessed
for evermore, as he is our God in four respects, among many more: 1 That he is
our Creator, and has made us for his own glory, and that we cannot any way
better answer the end of our creation, then by offering our service, yea, to
the death (if he thinks sit) for his names sake. 2 That he is our Father,
therefore it were an unnatural, cowardly and shameful part, to stand still and
look on, when other of our Christian brethren are abused, smitten and slain. 3
That he is our Lord, then were it a base, uncivil, hateful part in us to be
quiet, when others of our dear and loving fellow servants are wronged and
persecuted. 4 That he is our chief good, from whom we have received and do
expect all good, therefore we are bound to testify our thankfulness in this
respect especially.
2 Such as have respect to the Lord Jesus Christ our Redeemer; as 1 As he is
our Redeemer and dyed for us, we should not suffer his Cross to be defaced,
his blood to be trodden under foot, as is done by Idolaters, against whom we
must in this case contend to the uttermost. 2 Because he is persecuted and
fought against in his Church; should we not take his part, who has done and
suffered so much for us that were his enemies? and with holy wrath and
indignation, and deep desire of godly revenge for the wrongs done to him, fight
and do all we can? 3 Because he says, he that seeks to save his life (and
that not for him) loses it, and he that loses his life for his sake, shall
find it. 4 And because he protests, if we be ashamed of him here, he will be
ashamed of us before his heavenly Father; and what greater shame for us, then
not to take his part against the subtle, cruel, mighty wicked enemies of his
and our fellowmembers.
3 Such as have respect to God the holy Ghost, our Sanctifier and Comforter. 1
He sanctifying us, how should we not help them whom he has sanctified together
with us also? 2 And labor to maintain the means of our sanctification even
his Ordinances, which these his enemies would bereave us of. 3 As he is our
comforter, would we be comforted by him, and should we not be a means as well
as we and all we may, to comfort others comfortless and afflicted? 4 Because
he works in us all that are his, one faith, one hope, one way, alike desires
and affections, and seals unto us the assurance of that only and eternal
happiness, and that to this end chiefly, the more to oblidge us to love and
help one another, which can no way be better manifested then in this manner.
4 Such motives hereunto as may be drawn from the consideration of the
disposition and demeanor of those his and our enemies, as 1 They blaspheme the
name of our God by their abominable idolatries. 2 They rob him of his honor
and give that to their idolatries. 3. They mock our prayers too, and serving of
God. 4 They deride our trust in his name. 5 They reproach and revile our holy
profession. 6 They have defiled, do and will defile the places of Gods worship,
where they have the upper hand. 7 They banish, imprison, torment and kill the
sevants of God, and will serve us so if they prevail. 2 They ravish and defile
Wives and Maidens, yea, before their Husbands and Parents faces, and we must
look for no less if they overcome. 9 They devour, rob and spoil all your
goods, and by inhumaine tortures, would enforce you to confess what you know
not, and give what you have not. 10 They take the bread out of your and your
childrens mouths, bereave you of all means of sustenance, and leave you and
yours to famish. 11 They burn your dwellings, and it may be your selves in
them, or reserve you for more misery. 12 They keep no promise with us further
then to serve their own turns, therefore never trust them but with sword in
hand, for it is their irreligious maxim in their Religion, keep no faith with
Infidels. 13 Though you submit unto them, and condition with them the best you
can, yet they will by one means or other ruin you; yea, though you should
turn to their Religion (to your souls destruction, you shall perhaps be
favored with a more honorable death, for dye you must: thus they have done to
diverse, and I doubt of, and would be loath to trust them, their malice is so
mortal. 14 They bind men's consciences with men's traditions, and so seek
destruction of soul and body. 15 All their inveterate hatred is against us,
because we maintain truth and oppose error, which they insatiably long and
labor to revenge. 16 They would rejoice and triumph in our overthrow, and ask
us where is our God, as if he could not, or would not, or had forgot to help
us. 17 And be hardened in their idolatries, as if their Cause were good and ours
bad, theirs having so many, and ours so few to help it. 18 And have the more
freedom and might to oppress true professors. 19 And will change all Church
and civil government, and displace good, and prefer evil governors. 20 And
every way overthrow our privileges and peace.
5 Such Motives to this end, as have especial respect to our selves: 1 That if
we help not and so they overcome, we should not only not publicly use, but
most dearly buy the most private use of the very least means grace, yea, the
keeping of a good book by us with continu^^ all fear and danger, yea, with the
hazard of our heart blood. 2. That this our particula^ free, peaceable and
happy esta^^ shall be by them turned upside down.
6 And lastly, Motives which have respect unto our brethren which do suffer: 1
That if we were in like case, how gladly would we be relieved, and how would we
think others of our brethren bound to do their best to that end. 2 We are
bound in conscience to help and deliver them all we can, as they were bound to
do the like for us, if our conditions were changed. 3 Being all members of one
body, it were against nature not to have a fellow-feeling of, and to do all we
can to succor one another. 4 If God vouchsafe them freedom, by Gods blessing
on our endeavors, how shall their ^aises abound to the glory of our God? and
how will their distressed estates be relieved, and poor hearts be refreshed? 5
The same will be one infallible testimony to our consciences, that we are true
members of that mystical body, whereof Christ Jesus is the head; and the
contrary prove us to be but dead and unprofitable members thereof, fittest to
be out off and fired, what name soever we have, what show soever we make, how
great soever our own or others opinions be of our selves, in the Church of
Christ.



Oh ought not then all these and the like, cause us to detest and fight against
these most hateful and harmfull enemies of our God and his beloved people, and
by all possible meane^ we can to oppose those, and su^cour these: Now Lord we
beseech thee affect us herewith thoroughly, enbale us here^^ rightly, and bless
from Heaven abundantly; Amen, Amen, I pray thee.

Of Mortification out of Master Wheatly's Sermon on Colos. 3.5.
ALL must study it, and that 1 From the necessity of it; and that 1 In regard
of Gods command. 2 In regard of the danger that will else ensue, and that 1 In
suffering our selves to be Satan's slaves, etc. 2 And Gods enemies. 3 Grieving
Gods Spirit. 4 Interrupting our communi^^ with God. 5 Committing gross sins.
6 Procuring sore afflictions.

2 From the good will follow ^e do it, as 1 Great peace. 2 Patience and joy in
afflicti^^ns. 3 Certain freedom from ^^sse sins. 4 Good esteem from men.
3 From the equity of the duty 1 For sin in Gods enemy. 2 A murder of
Christ. 3 A breaker of our Vows: 4 An unseasonable thing, as 1 Being contrary
to all right ^^d reason: 2 A mere cozener. 4 From the good success ^ein, as 1
We shall lose nothing ther^^ that is worth having. 2 Our endeavor herein shall
be accepted. 3 And he will reward o^^^ pains taken in this. 4 We shall surely
overcome


2 The degrees of mortification in this life. 1 The least degree we c^^ have,
if we have any, is 1 To forbear the usual practice of any gross sin. 2 And
the allowance of the least sin.
2 The highest degree of mortification, is 1 To be ever kept from any gross
sin. 2 To be freed from any set led liking of an ill motion.

3 The means of mortification, as 1 Natural, as 1 Moderation in things
indifferent. 2 Shunning the occasions ^^ sin.
2 Spiritual, as 1 Frequent and fervent prayer, as 1 Confession of the sins
and ^^rruptions we are most guilty (...) 2 Requests for strength a^^inst them,
urging the Lord ^^th such promises as he has ^^de to subdue our iniquities,
(...). 3 Thanksgiving for any ^^^ngth received against our ^^^ruptions.
1 Spiritual means. 1 Meditation. 1 Of Gods holy nature. 2 His terrible
judgments. 3 His gracious Promises. 4 Of Christ's sufferings.
2 Spiritual means, fear of our selves. 3 Watchfulness over all the powers
of our souls and memb^rs of our bodies.

4 In what manner we must use all the helps of mortification: 1 Seasonably,
when sin begins to arise, or any motions or inclinations thereto. 2
Constantly; that is, 1 Every where. 2 Continually.
3 Orderly, setting upon our master-sinne first. 4 Spiritually. 1 Not resting
on the means, or our own strength. 2 But relying on the mighty power of God.

5 And lastly, general Uses of all. 1 Examination of our selves in regard of
the time past, how we have performed this duty? 2 Humiliation, that we have not
performed this duty at all, or not in due measure. 3 Exhortation to reform the
former negligence hereafter. 4 Consolation to such as have been, and are
painful herein.



Helps to an holy conversation.
1 IN private, to eschew: 1 In general, all evil thoughts, 2 In particular. 1
Evil suspicions. 2 Remembering offenses. 3 Repining at others welfare. 4
Discontent at his own estate. 5 Spiritual pride. 6 Counterfeit humility. 7
Carking cares. 8 All needless vexation of mind.

In private to embrace. 1 In general, all good thoughts. 2 In particular, 1
Taking all in the best part 2 Passing by offenses. 3 Rejoicing at others
weifare. 4 Contentation with his estate. 5 Humility. 6 Trust in God according
to his nature and promises. 7 To cast his care on God. 8 Inward peace, joy and
assurance.

2 In his house, to avoid; 1 In words. 1 In general, all profane talk. 2 In
particular. 1 Hastiness to mine. 2 Meddling in others matters.


In his house. (...) 1 In words. 1 In general, all edifying talk. 2 In
particular. 1 Soberness to mine. 2 Speaking the best of others


2 To eschew in behavior, 1 All loosnesse. 2 Unseemlinesse. 3 Filthiness.
2 To embrace in behavior, 1 Stayednesse. 2 Comeliness. 3 Purity.

3 In company to eschew, 1 In heart: 1 Evil surmises of the words or carriage
of others toward him. 2 Partiality. 3 Self-conceitednesse.
2 In words. 1 Unadvisednesse. 2 Superfluousnesse. 3 Unseasonablenesse: 4
Uncharitableness. 5 Contentiousnesse.
3 In carriage. 1 Lightness or familiatity. 2 Strangeness. 3 Loftiness. 4
Uncomlinesse.
4 In actions. 1 Society with profane persons. 2 Excess or tippling. 3 Giving
any evil example to any. 4 Showing any liking of sin. 5 Seeking to humor men
in ill.

In company to embrace, 1 In heart. 1 Taking all in good part. 2 Directnesse. 3
Lowliness.
2 In words. 1 Pre-consideration. 2 Paucity. 3 To the purpose. 4
Charitablenesse. 5 Friendlinesse.
3 In behavior. 1 Gravity or reservednesse. 2 Affability. 3 Humility. 4
Seemlinesse.
4 In action, 1 Good company. 2 Following good example. 3 Giving good example.
4 Wisely reproving sin. 5 By all means honoring God.

4 Concerning Gods public family, or private worship. 1 To eschew, 1 All will
worship. 2 Superstition. 3 Unpreparednesse. 4 Negligence. 5 Customarinesse. 6
Habitual distractions. 7 Relying too much on the means.
And to embrace, 1 The warrant of Gods word for the duties. 2 For the manner of
performing them. 3 Preparation. 4 Attention. 5 Conscionablenesse. 6
Setlednesse. 7 Resting on Gods blessing. Amen, Amen.





Considerations to move to Christian watchfulness.
1 In seeking thus Gods glory, he will honor us again, 1 Samuel 2.30. 2 That we
are every where in the sight of God, who knows the heart, Jeremiah 17.9, 10.
hears our words, Ps. 139.4. beholds all our ways, ver. 1, 2, 3. to reward
every one according to their doings, Jerem. 17.10. 3 We shall hereby enjoy
sweet communion with our God in Christ, John 14.21. Rev. 3.20. 4 And be most
blessed here, and for evermore in every thing Ps. 144.15. and 84.11. Romans 8.28
For the moouth of the Lord has spoken it, therefore it shall be performed,
and nothing shall let it, Amens All by Gods grace only,
From henceforth constantly.
Every day seasonably,
With Christian convenience.


In the Morning,
To awake with God.

To shake off sloth.

To arise timely.

To pray for himself solemnly.

To read in Gods Word reverendly.

To call to mind some of his Vows seriously.

And some of the promises deliberately.

To sing part of a Psalm understandingly.

In the Afternoon.
To pray for his Family affectionately.

To read in Gods Word advisedly.

And in his holy Advices observantly.

And somewhat in the Oracles of God distinctly.

In the Evening.
To pray for Gods Church humbly.

To read in Gods Word holily.

And somewhat in the Practice of Piety carefully.

And in the true watch for Examination impartially.

To lie down to rest with prayer.

to avoid all occasions of impurity.

And so to sleep securely.

Every Sabbath.
Besides accustomed public Family and private duties on that day.

Three several times to ca^^ to mind some of Gods especial and recorded
mercies.

By the Lords most seasonable, merciful, powerful, faithfully promised,
constant assistance (which to this end I crave, rest on, and look for only,
without which, instead of doing better I shall do worse then formerly, yea,
every way most hainously.) I resolve and shall endeavor watchfully and
constantly to avoid all intemperance, immoderate taking Tobacco, vain talking,
unseemly carriage, pride, lust, passion and discord, and all occasions of each,
and to embrace the contrary graces and all means thereto: As thou art a God of
mercy, power and truth, show it herein unto me, and let thy grace my God in
Christ be alwales sufficient for me.

Concerning decay in Prayer.
A Lwayes when he found himself so decay in zeal and care to pray, his
conscience checked him for unthankfulness for former assistance in praying, or
for depending too much upon his prayers, whereupon he felt a deadness to all
other good duties, a yielding to the motions and occasions of sin, an inward
puffing up, a carelessness and self-presuming, yea a miserable distemper in all
things; and then he conceived himself to be near some sore temptation, foul
fall, grievous inward dejection, or great outward calamity; therefore he held
it his instantly to fall to prayer, that the Lord would please to restore unto
him the spirit of prayer, to work in him a willingness to all other holy
exercises, to give him strength to resist and overcome the provocations, to
evil, to humble him deeply in the sense of his former faults and present
corruptions, to make him truly thankful and watchful, and in the strength of
the Almighty, only out of conscience to do his duty, to bring all into good
order, and to keep all so constantly, and most graciously powerful and
faithfully, to prevent the sins, perplexities and troubles he fears, merits
and has cause to expect to be left unto, and which he else by no means can
escape; so awaiting the Lords leisure, and submitting to his good pleasure, go
all how it will, all shall go well. Amen, my Father in Christ, of thine own
mere mercy, be I never so unworthy, as thou have promised, whatsoever
opposes, Amen, Amen, even so be it, Amen.

Some most especial choice places of sacred Scripture that concern my self in
most especial manner, reduced to these heads.
1 COncerning government of the mind, page 349 2 Of the tongue, p. 351 3 Of the
conversation, page 361 4 Of passion and sobriety, p. 368 5 Of pride and
humility, p. 374 6 Of strise and peace, 7 Of envy and charity, 8 Of discontent
and quiet, 9 Of meddling and reservednesse, 10 Of sullenness and cheerfulness.
1 Concerning government of the mind.
In the hearts of all that are wise hearted, I have put wisdom Exodus 31.6.

Give therefore thy servant an under standing heart, that I may discern
between good and bad, 1 King. 3.9.

Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life, Pro.
4, 23.

The preparations of the heart in man is from the Lord, Pro. 16.1.

The wise in heart shall be called prudent, Pro. 16.21.

A wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment, Eccl. 8.5.

A wise man's heart is at his right hand, but a fools heart is at his left,
Eccl. 10.2.

How weak is thine heart says the Lord God, seeing thou do all these
things, Ezekiel. 16.30.

Set thine heart upon all that I shall show thee, Ezekiel. 40.4.

If our heart condemns us, God is greater then our heart, and knows all
things, 1 John 3.20.

A man of understanding is of an excellent spirit, Pro. 17.27.

He that has no rule over his own spirit, is like a City that is broken down
and without walls, Pro. 25.28.

Therefore take heed to your spirit, Mal. 2.15, 16.

The heart of the wicked is little worth, Pro. 10.20.

Hear thou my Son and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way, Pro. 23.15.

2 Concerning Government of the Tongue.
A word spoken in due season, ^^w good is it? Pro. 15.23.

A word fitly spoken is like Apples of gold in pictures of silver, Pro. 25.11.

In the multitude of words, there wants not sin, Pro. 10.19.

He that has knowledge spares his words, Pro. 17.27.

See thou a man that is hasty in his words, there is more hope of a fool
then of him, Pro. 29.20.

A fools voice is known by multitude of words, Eccl. 5.3.

In many words there are also diverse vanities, Eccl. 5.7.

The words of wise men are heard in quiet, more then the cry of him that rules
among fools, Ecc. 9.17

The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious, Eccl. 10.12.

A fool also is full of words, Eccl. 10.14.

Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the
day of judgment, for by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned, Mat. 12.36, 37.

Teach me and I will hold my tongue, Job 6.24.

Keep thy tongue from evil, Pl. 34.13.

His tongue talks of judgment, Psalm. 37.30.

I said I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue, Psalm.
39.1.

There is not a word in my tongue but lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether,
Psalm. 1 39, 4.

The froward tongue shall be cut out, Pro. 10, 31.

The tongue of the wise is health, Pro. 12, 18.

The tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright, Pro. 15.2.

A wholesome tongue is as the Tree of life, Pro. 15, 4.

The answer of the tongue is from the Lord, Pro. 16, 1.

He that has a perverse tongue falls into mischefe, Pro. 17, 20.

Perverseness therein is a breach ^^ the spirit, Pro. 15, 4.

Death and life are in the power of the tongue, Pro. 18, 21.

Who so keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from troubles, Pro.
21, 23.

And the Lord said, who has made man's mouth, have not I the Lord? now
therefore go and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say,
Exodus 4.11, 12.

I am purposed my mouth shall not transgress, Psalm. 17.3.

The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, Psalm. 37, 30.

I will keep my mouth with a bridle, Psalm. 39, 1.

Set a Watch O Lord before my mouth, keep the door of my lips, Psalm. 141, 3.

Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee,
Pro. 4, 24.

A naughty person, a wicked man walks with a froward mouth, Pro. 6, 12.

The mouth of the foolish is near destruction, Pro. 10, 14.

The mouth of the just brings forth wisdom, Psalm. 10, 31.

The mouth of the wicked speaks froward things, Pro. 10, 32.

The mouth of the upright shall deliver them, Pro. 12, 6.

A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth, Pro 12, 14. and
13.2.

The mouth of fools pours out foolishness, Pro. 15, 2.

A man has joy by the answer of his mouth, Pro. 15, 23.

The mouth of the wicked pours out evil things, Pro. 15, 28.

The heart of the wise teaches his mouth, Pro. 16, 23.

A fools mouth calls for strokes, a fools mouth is his destruction, Pro. 18,
6, 7.

It not rash with thy mouth, and ^^^ not thine heart be hasty to ut^^^ any
thing, let thy words be few Eccl. 5, 2.

But those things which proceed ^ut of the mouth, come forth from ^he heart and
they defile the man, Mat. 15.18.

Out of the abundance of the heart ^he mouth speaks, Mat. 12, 34.

To provoke him to speak many things, seeking to catch something ^ut of his
mouth, that they might ^^cuse him, Luke 11, 53, 54.

If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is vain, James 1, 26.

The tongue is a little member and boasts great things, the tongue is a fire,
a world of iniquity, the tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil, full of
deadly poison, James 3, 5, 6, 8.

He that will love life and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from
evil, 1 Peter 3, 10.

I will give a mouth and wisdom, Luke 21, 15.

In the lips of him that has understanding, wisdom is found, Pro. 10, 13.

He that refraineth his lips is wise, Pro. 10, 19.

The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable, Pro. 10, 31.

The wicked is (nared by the transgression of his lips, Prove. 12, 13.

He that keeps his mouth keeps his life, but he that opens wide his lips
shall have destruction, Pro. 13, 3.

The lips of the wise shall preserve them, Pro. 14, 3.

The talk of the lips tends only to penury, Pro. 14, 23.

Even a fool when he holds his peace is counted wise, and be that shuts
his lips is esteemed a man of understanding, Pro, 17, 28.

A fools lips are the snare of his soul, Pro. 18, 6, 7.

Every man shall kiss his lips that gives a right answer, Pro. ^4, 26.

I create the fruit of the lips, Isa. 17, 19.

Teach us what we shall say unto him, for we cannot order our speech because of
darkness, Job 17, 19.

Excellent speech becomes not ^ fool, Pro. 17, 7.

Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how
ye ought to answer every man, Col. 4, 6.

Sound speech that cannot be condemned, that he that is of the contrary part
may be ashamed, Tit. 2, 8.

If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to
bridle the whole body, Jam. 3, 2.

A prating fool shall fall, Pro. 10 8, 10.

Should a man full of talk be justified? Job 1.2.

The lips of a fool will swallow up himself, the beginning of the words of
his mouth is foolishness, and the end of his talk is mischievous madness,
Eccl. 10.12, 13.

Speak not in the ears of a fool, for he will despise the wisdom of thy
words, Pro. 23, 9.

A time to keep silence, and a time to speak, Eccl. 3, 7.

The vile person will speak villainy, and his heart will work iniquity, to
practice hypocrisy, and to utter error against the Lord, Isa. 32, 5.

Even so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God, which tries our hearts, 1
These. 2, 4.

Let every man be swift to hear, low to speak, James 1, 19.

So speak ye as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty, Jam. 2, 12.

Speak not evil one of another, James 4, 11.

If any man speak let him speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Peter 4, 11.

Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth, Psalm. 140, 11.

There is that speaks like the piercings of a sword, but the tongue of the
wise is health, Pro. 12, 18.

The man that hears speaks constantly, Pro. 21, 28.

Evil communication corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15, 33.

Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good
to the use of edifying, that it minister grace to the hearers, Ephesians. 4, 29.

A man of understanding holds his peace, Pro. 11, 12.

And the man held his peace, to wit, whether the Lord had made his journey
prosperous or no, Genesis 24, 21.

A man has joy by the answer of his mouth, Pro. 15, 23.

The heart of the righteous studieth to answer, but the mouth of the wicked
pours out evil things, Pro. 15, 28.

He that answers a matter before be hears it, it is folly and shame unto
him, Pro. 18, 13.

Should a wise man utter vain knowledge? Job 15, 2.

A fool utters all his mi^d, but a Wise man keeps it in till afterward,
Pro. 29, 11.

Keep the door of thy mouth from her that ly^th in thy bosom, Mic. 7, 5.

Therefore the Prudent, shall keep silence in that time, for it is an evil
time, Amos 5, 13.

Daniel answered with counsel and vvisdome, Dan. 2.14.

Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, Mar. 12.34.

Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee,
Prove. 4.25.

Neither told I any man what the Lord had put in my heart to do, Neh. 2, 12.

3 Of government of the conversation.
Keep sound vvisdome and discretion, Pro. 3, 21.

A man of understanding has vvisdome, Pro 10.23.

A man shall be commended according to his wisdom, Pro. 12.8.

With the wel-advised is w^sdome, Pro. 13, 10.

The wisdom of the Prudent is to understand his way, Pro. 14, 8. Wisdom
rests in the heart of him that has understa^ding, Pr. 14.33.

Wisdom is before him that has, understanding, Pro. 17, 24.

Cease from thine own wisdom, Pro. 23, 4.

Wisdom gives life to them that have it, Eccl. 7, 12.

Wisdom strengthens the wise, Eccl. 7, 19.

A man's wisdom makes his face to shine, Eccl. 8.

Wisdom is better then strength, Eccl. 9.16.

Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to fend out a stinking savor,
so does a little folly him that is in reputation for wife dome and honor,
Eccl. 10, 11.

Wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, Isa 33, 6.

He gives wisdom to the wife, Dan. 2.21.

If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God that gives to all men liberally
and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him, James ^, 5.

Look out a man discreet and wise, Genesis 41, 33.

Thou art a wise man and know what thou art to do; 1 Kin 2.9.

Be not wise in thine own eyes, Pro. 3, 7.

The wise man's eyes are in his head, Eccl. 2.14.

I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evil,
Romans 16.10.

He that bandleth a matter wisely shall find good, Prove. 16.20.

Give me wisdom and knowledge, 2 Chronicles 1, 10.

Wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee, 2 Chronicles. 1, 2.

Teach me good judgment and knowledge, Psalm. 119, 66.

Wise men lay up knowledge, Pro. 10, 14.

God gives to man that is good in his sight, wisdom and knowledge, Eccl. 2,
16.

Be not children in understanding, howbeit in malice be ye children, but in
understanding be men, 1 Cor. 14.20.

Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, Psalm. 73, 24.

Without counsel, purposes are dis-appointed, Pro. 15, 2^.

Every purpose is established by counsel, Pro. 20, 18.

A man prudent in matters, 1 Samuel 16, 18.

Every prudent man deals with knowledge, but a fool lays open his folly,
Pro. 13, 16.

The vvisdome of the Prudent is to understand his way, Pr. 14, 8.

The Prudent man looks will to his going, Pro. 14, 15.

The simple inheris folly, but the Prudent are crowned with knowledge, Pro. 14,
18.

A Prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself, but the simple pass
on and are punished, Pro. 22, 3.

Sergiue Paulus a Prudent man, Acts 13, 7.

I will behave my self wisely, Psalm. 101, 2.

David behaved himself wisely in all his vvayes, more wisely then all the
servants of Saul, so that his name was much set by, 1 Samuel 18.5, 15, 30.

How holily, justly and unblumithly we behaved our selves giving you, 1 These.
2, 10.

We behaved not our selves disorderly among you, 2 These. 3, 7.

To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of
God, Psalm. 50, 23. Let your conversation be as it bet^^th the Gospel of Christ,
Ph. 1.27.

Be ye holy in all manner of conversation; 1 Pet. 1, 15.

Having your conversation honest that whereas they speak against you as evil
doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God in
the day of visitation, 1 Pet. 2, 12, and 3.16.

Herein do I exercise my self to have always a good conscience, void of
offense, toword God and toward men, Acts 24, 16, and 23, 1.

Pure Religion and undefiled is to keep himself unspotted of the world, James
1, 27.

For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity
and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we
have had our conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1, 12.

We trust we have a good conscience in all things, willing to live honestly,
Heb. 13, 18.

I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou upright, Genesis 17, 1.

As for me I will walk in my integrity, Psalm. 26, 11.

Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, Ps. 143.8

Let all things be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14, 40.

A good man will guide his affairs with discretion, Ps. 112.5.

Then the Lord guided them on every side, 2 Chronicles. 32, 22.

For thy names sake lead me and guide me, Psalm. 31, 3.

I will instruct thee and teath thee in the way that thou shall got, I will
guide thee with mine eye, Psalm. 32, 8.

The Lord shall guide thee contitually, Isa. 58, 11.

There is none so discreet and vvift as thou art, Genesis 41.39.

Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee, Pro. 2, 11.

Keep sound vvisdome and discretion, Pro. 3, 21.

Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy vvayes be established, turn not
to the right hand nor to the left, remove thy feet from evil, Pro. 4, 26, 27.

In all thy vvayes acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths, Pro. 3, 6.

The way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but he that hearkneth unto
Counsel is wise, Pro. 12, 15.

A man's heart devises his way, but the Lord directs his steps, Pro. 16, 9.

Man's goings are of the Lord, how can a man then understand his own way? Pro.
20, 24.

O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that
walks to direct (...) steps, Jer. 1023.

He that despises his vv^^s shall dye, Pro, 19, 16.

As many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, Gal. 6,
16.

Let its walk by the same rule, Phil. 3, 16.

Finally my Brethren, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things, Ph. 4, 8.

4 Of passion and sobriety.
We are men of like passions, Act, 14, 15.

A man subject to like passions, James 5, 17.

Their Princes shall fall by the sword, for the rage of their tongue Hosea 7,
16.

The fool rages and is confident, Pro. 14, 16.

Cease from anger and forsake wrath, Psalm. 37, 8.

A fools wrath is presently known, but a Prudent man covers shame, Pro.
12, 16.

He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding, but he that is hasty of
spirit exalts folly, Pro. 14, 29.

A soft answer turns away wrath, but grievous words stir up strife, Pro.
15, 1.

A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment, for if thou deliver him, yet
thou must do it again, Pro. 19, 19.

A g^ft in secret pacifieth anger, and a reward in the bosom, strong wrath,
Pro. 21, 14.

Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who deals in proud wrath Pro. 21, 24.

A stone is heavy and the sand weighty, but a fools, wrath is (...) then
both, Pro. 27, 3.

Wrath is cruel and anger is out(...), Pro. 27, 4.

Give place unto wrath, To. 12.19

Be angry and sin out, let not the S^nne go, down upon your wrath, neither
g^ve place to the Devil, Ephesians. 4, 26, 27.

Let all bitterness and wrath, and anger, and claimour, and evil speaking be
put away from you; Ep^. 4, 31.

Be slow to wrath, for the wrath of ^^n works not the righteou^nesse of
God, James 1, 19, 20.

Be ^^^ hasty t^ thy spirit to be angry, for anger rests in the bosoms of
fools, Eccl. 7, 9.

As vvrathfull man stirs up strife, but he that is slow to anger appeaseth
strife, Pro. 15, 18.

He that is slow to anger is better then the mighty, and he that ru^^o^h his
spirit, then she that takes a City, Pr. 15, 32.

The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to pass over
a transgression, Pro. 19, 11.

He that is soon angry, deals foolishly, Pro. 14, 17.

It is better to dwell in the Wilderness, then with a contentious and an
angry woman, Pro. 21, 19, 9, and 25, 24.

Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shall not
go, least thou learn his vvayes and get a snare to thy soul, Pro. 22, 24, 25.

An angry man stirs up strife, and a furious man abounds in transgression,
Pro. 29, 22.

Not soon angry, Tit 1, 7.

The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge, Isa. 32, 4.

And to do nothing rashly, Acts 19, 36.

Patient, not a brauler, Tim. 3, 3

No braulers, but gentle, Tit. 3, 2.

Put away from thee a fr^ward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee,
Pro. 4, 24.

He that is of it perverse heart shall be despised, Pro. 12, 8,

He that is perverse in his ways despises the Lord, Prove. 14, 2.

He that has a froward heart f^^deth no good, and he that has a perverse
tongue falls into mischief, Pro. 17, 20.

He that is perverse in his vvays shall fall at once, Pro. 28, 18.

He that perverteth his vvayes shall be known, Pro. 10, 9.

The Counsel of the froward is carried headlong, Job 5, 13.

A froward heart shall depart from me, Psalm. 101, 4.

They are froward in their paths Pro. 2, 15.

The froward is an abomination to the Lord, Pro. 3.32. and 11.20.

A naughty person, a wicked man walks with a froward mouth, Pro. 6, 1^.

The froward mouth do I have, Pro. 8, 13.

The froward tongue shall be out out, Pro. 10, 31.

The way of a man is froward and strange, Pro. 21, 8.

Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward, he that does keep his soul
shall be far from them, Pro. 22, 5.

Let us vvatch and be sober, 1 These. 5, 6.

Sober of good behavior, 1 Timothy 3.2, 11.

Sober, just holy, temperate, Tit. 1, 8.

Likewise, exhort to be soberminded, Tit. 2, 6.

Gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, 1 per. 1, 13.

Be ye therefore sober and watch, 1 pet. 4, 7.

Be sober, be vigilant, 1 pet. 5, 8.

I speak forth the words of truth and soberness, Acts 26 25.

We should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World, Tit. 2,
12.

The fruit of the Spirit is meekness, temperance, against such there is no
law, Ephesians. 5, 22, 23.

Add to knowledge temperance, 2 pet. 1, 6.

Let your moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand, phil. 4, 5.

Wise men turn away wrath, prove. 29, 8.

5 Of pride and humility:
The fear of the Lord is to have evil, pride and arrogance, pro. 8.13.

When pride comes, then comes shame, but with the lowly is vvisdome, pro.
11, 2.

Only by Pride commenth contentention; but with the lowly is wisdom, Prove.
11.12.

Only by pride comes contention but with the vvell-advised is vvisdome, pro.
13, 10.

Pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall pro. 16,
18.

A man's pride shall bring him low, but honor shall uphold the humble in
spirit, pro. 29, 23.

Those that walk in pride, he is able to abase, Dan. 4, 37.

A perpetual desolation, this shall they have for their pride, Zeph. 2.9, 10.

He smites through the proud, Job 26, 12.

Look on every one that is proud, and bring him low, Job 40, 12, 11

Him that has an high look and a proud heart will I not suffer, psalm. 101, 5.

Though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly, but the proud he
knows a far off, psalm. 138, 6.

A proud look does the Lord hate pro. 6, 16, 17.

Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord, pro. 16, 5.

Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the lowly, then to divide the
spoil with the proud, pro. 16.19.

An high look and a proud heart and the plowyng of the wicked is sin, pro.
21, 4.

He that is of a proud heart stirs up strife, pro. 28, 25.

He that trusts in his own heart is fool, but whoso walks vvisely shall
be delivered, pro. 28, 26.

The patient in spirit is better then the proud in spirit, Eccl. 7, 8

God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble, James 4, 5. 1 pet. 5,
5.

Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, psalm. 131.1.

Before destruction the heart of man is haughty, and before honor is humility,
pro. 18.12. the haughty shall be humbled, Isa. 10.33.

Thou will bring down high looks, Psalm. 18 28.

Boast not thy self o^ to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring
forth, let another pr^ise thee and not thine own mouth, a stranger and not
thine own lips, pro. 27, 1. men shall be boasters, 1 Timothy 3, 2.

Why boasts thou thy self O mighty man? psalm. 52.1. The tongue is a little
member and boasts great things, James 3.5.

Let nothing be done through vainglory, but in lowliness of mind, let each
esteem others better then themselves, phil. 3.3.

See thou a man wise in his wneonceit? there is more hopes of a fool then of
him: The sluggardies vviser in his own conceit then ten men that can render a
reason, pro. 26, 13, 16. The rich man is wise in his own conceit, but the
poor that has understanding searches it out, pro. 28.11.

Be not wise in your own conceits, Romans 12.16.

Neither make thy self overwise, Eccl. 7.16.

Be not wise in thine own eyes, Pro. 3.7.

Lean not unto thine own understanding, Pro. 3.5.

That no one of you be puffed us, 1 Cor. 4.6.

Charity vanteth not it self, it not puffed up, 1 Co. 13.4. The scorner is an
abominaton to m^^ (...) 24.9. Surely God scorneth the scorners, Pro. 3.34.

Judgments are prepared for scorners, Pro. 19.29. The scorner is consumed,
Isa. 29.20. Scorners delight in their scornings, Pro. 22. Blessed is the man
that sits not in the seat of the scornful, psalm. 1.1.

Let it not once he named amongst you, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which
is not convenient, Ephesians. ^^

He shall save the humble person, Job. 22, 28. He forgets not the cry of the
humble, Psalm. 9.12. Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble, psalm. 9.17.
Better it is the of an humble spirit with the only, then to divide the spol
with ^^^ proud, Pro. 16, 19. honor shall (...) the humble in spirit, Pro. ^,
23. I dwell with hi^ also that ^^ of an humble spirit, to revive the spirit of
the humble, Is. 57, 15.

His sereous admonition to his Family before their worshipping of God together
therein.
NOw I pray let us again at this time in the fear and assistance of the Lord
our God, as in his presence, who is thoroughly acquainted with all our ways as
well as we can, though alas we cannot as we ought, in sincere obedience to his
will, set our souls reverendly and attentively to seek him in his holy
ordinances; so depending upon, awaiting for, comforting our selves in the
assurance of his most merciful and faithfully promised forgivenes, acceptance
and blessing through Christ Jesus, Amen. But as for me and my house ^^ Will
serve the Lord, Josh, 24, 2^ Green the Church that is in then house, Romans 16.5.

Then to read a chapter in the Bible reverendly: To observe some plain and
profitable lessons out of the same discreetly: To read somewhat in a good book
distinctly: to pray humbly: to sing part of a psalm understandingly: all every
morning and evening constantly.

His unf^ined blessing upon his family after their worshipping the Lord together
continually.
NOw the Lord God our heavenly Father, God alone, besides whom there is no
other; Lord over al, in respect of whom a^^ creatures are nothing, whose ^reat
name be blessed for evermore, whom we alone and always ^^fire to know; fear,
worship, ^^erve and trust according to my Word; besides whom we ^^ow nor
acknowledge no other ^^ide nor helper: be again and ^gain most humbly and
unfaintly entreated and urged in percy as he has done and promised, ^e we
never so unworthy be our duties never so weakly performed; and whatsoever
opposes, to forgive, accept, govern, comfort, preserve, provide for every
manner of way for good to watch over, and to bless all and every one of us,
all and every one of his now and always, through Christ Jesus, Amen, Amen.

In the morning.
Then every one to his lawful employment in the name of the Lord, conscionably
and cheerfully.

In the evening.
Then every one to rest in the ^^are and favor of the Almighty.

Let the meditations of my heart and words of my mouth be always acceptable in
thy fight o Lord, my strength, and my Redeemer, Amen, Psalm. 19.14.

Errata.
Page 9 line 3 read verse 10. p. 11. l. last. r. Nah. p. 19. l. 17. r. Chapter 25.
p. 21. l. 14. r. ver. 9. p. 22. l. 11. r. Chapter 6. ver. 4. p. 22. l. 5. r. Mic.
p. 85. l. 10. r. Chapter 30 p. 99. l. 19. r. his, p. 146. l. 9. r. Chapter 50. p. 161.
l. 20. insert have, p. 175. l. 18. insert with, p. 18^ l. 21. r. ver. 10. p.
189. l. 15. r. ver. 26. l. 21. r. ver. 27. p. 195. l. 15. r. Chapter 10. p. 199. l.
10. r. Chron. p 202. l. 16. leave out moved, l. 19. r. ver. 9, 10. p. 218. l.
2. r. Deuteronomy. 19.15. and chap. 17.6. p. 222. l. 11. ^^^^^ers, l. 15. r. ver. 14.
p 239. (...) r. Psalm. 50. p. 247. l. 1. r. chapter 15. p. 256 l. 9 r. chapter 6. p. 259
l. 13 ^ ver. ^. p. 264 l. 24 r. then, p. (...) l. 17 r. ver. 16. p. 292 l. 19
r. ^^ek. 37.24. and Hosen 14 9. (...) l. 9 r. prove. 3.19. l. 12 r. Ier. 10.12.
p. 305 l. 19 r. psalm. 141.13.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

JOHN DOWNAME.


