THEATRUM SCOTIAE. CONTAINING THE PROSPECTS Of Their MAJESTY'S CASTLES and
PALACES: Together with those of the most considerable TOWNS and COLLEGES; The
RUINS of many Ancient Abbeys, Churches, Monasteries and Convents, Within the
said KINGDOM. All Curiously Engraven on COPPER PLATES. With a SHORT DESCRIPTION
Of each PLACE.

IN DEFENSE

NEMO ME IMPUNE LACESSET



By JOHN SLEZER, Captain of the Artillery Company, and Surveyor of Their
MAJESTY'S Stores and Magazines in the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

LONDON, Printed by John Leake for ABELL SWALLE, at the Unicorn at the West End
of St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCIII.

MARIE R.

WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc.
To all our Loving Subjects, of what Degree, Condition and Quality soever,
within Our Kingdoms and Dominions, Greeting.
Whereas Our Trusty and Well-beloved John Slezer, Gent. has represented unto
Us, That he has been at considerable Charge, and great Pains in finishing the
First Volume of a Book, Entitled Theatrum Scotiae; and that he intends to
Publish Two other Volumes upon the same Subject, and has humbly besought Us,
That in Consideration of the great Charge he will be at in perfecting the same,
We would be pleased to Grant him Our Royal License for the sole Printing and
Publishing the said Book, wherein We are pleased to Gratify him; We do
therefore hereby, Grant unto him the said John Slezer, Our Royal License for
the sole Printing and Publishing the said Three Volumes of the said Book,
Entitled Theatrum Scotiae, or any of them, and do strictly Charge, Prohibit
and Forbid all Our Subjects to Reprint within Our Kingdoms the said Books, or
any of them, or any Abridgment, or any part of any of them, or to Import, Buy,
Vend, Utter or Distribute any Copies or Exemplaries of the same, or any Part
thereof Reprinted beyond the Seas, for the Term of Fourteen Years next Ensuing
the Publishing hereof, without the Consent and Approbation of the said John
Slezer, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, as they and every of them so Offending
will answer the contrary, not only by the Forfeiture of the said Books, Copies
or Exemplaries, but at their utmost Peril, whereof as well the Wardens and
Company of STATIONERS of Our City of London, as all and singular Our Officers
of the Customs in this Port of London, or any other Place within Our Dominions,
and all other Officers and Ministers whom it may concern, are to take
particular Notice, That due Observance be given to this Our Royal Command.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the 6th. Day of June, 1693. In the Fifth
Year of Our Reign. By Her MAJESTY's Command. J. TRENCHARD.

TO THE KING and QUEEN.
May it please Your MAJESTY'S,
THE Kingdom of SCOTLAND, containing so many great and remarkable Monuments of
Antiquity, and nothing of this Nature being yet Published, I do, in all
humility, present this short Account of so many considerable Places, to Your
Majesty's most gracious View.

May God Almighty grant unto Your Majesty's a long and prosperous Reign over
This and Your Other Dominions, and that Your Majesty's will vouchfafe Your
Royal Pardon for the boldness of this Dedication, is the humble Petition of

Your MAJESTY'S Most Loyal and Obedient Subject and Servant, JOHN SLEZER.

TO THE READER.
It Is a Matter worthy of ones enquiry, how a Nation, as SCOTLAND, so much
addicted to Military Arts, and so constantly engaged in both Foreign and
Domestic Wars, should have been in a Capacity to erect such superb Edifices as
that Kingdom abounds with. There is no Country in Europe that can brag either
of greater Piles of Buildings, or a more regular Architecture in its Ancient
Churches and Religious Fabrics, than Scotland was Mistress of about an Age or
Two ago. To instance One for all, the Metropolitan Church of St. Andrews was
probably the bigest in Christendom, being Seven Foot longer and Two Foot
broader than that of St. Peter at Rome; and for the Height and Embellishing of
its Pillars and Roof, the Beauty of its Stones, and Simetry of its parts, was
one of the best of the Gothic kind in the World.

READER, You may receive this Impartial Account from me as a Foreigner, who am
now settled in this Nation; and having met with the usual Civility and Kindness
Strangers are treated with amongst them, it is no wonder if I am tempted to
leave some little Marks of Gratitude behind me, in transmitting to Posterity
those Venerable Remains of former Ages, and oblige other Nations with the
Prospects of so many considerable Places; which I presume will be very
acceptable to them. It is a Work of so great Charge, and will require so many
Volumes, that I cannot satisfy the Public but from Time to Time in it. And
according to the Reception these first Endeavors shall meet with, it will
encourage me to go on with the rest. In the mean time, I hope no Person will
take Exceptions, though the Towns, and such of the Nobility, whose Arms are
here inserted, are not always placed conform to the Rank they keep in
Parliament; it being a Thing which cannot be adjusted in a Work of this Nature
till the whole Design is completed.

THE CONTENTS.
Particular Dedications. The Prospects of Plates marked Number DUke of
Hamilton. Edinburgh. 1, 2. Duke of Lennox. Dumbritton. 3, 4, 5. Earl of Mar.
Stirling. 6, 7, 8. Earl of Linlithgow. Linlithgow. 9, 10. Viscount of Falkland.
Falkland. 11, 12. Lord Secretary Johnston. St. Andrews. 13, 14, 15. Viscount of
Stairs. Glasgow. 16, 17, 18. Earl of Aberdene. Aberdene. 19, 20. Earl of
Tweddale. Haddington. 21, 22. Marquess of Montross. Montross. 23. Marquess of
Atholl. Dunkell. 24, 25. Marquess of Caermarthen. Dumblane. 26, 27. Earl of
Arran. Hamilton. 28. Lord Secretary Stairs. Air. 29, 30. Earl Marshal.
Dunotter. 31. Earl of Errol. Drybrugh. 32, 33. Lord Stranaiver. Invernesse. 34.
Viscount of Stormont. Scoon. 35. Earl of Elgin. Elgin. 36, 37. Earl of
Strathmore. Dundee. 38, 39. Earl of Southesk. Aberbrothock. 40, 41. Earl of
Cassillis. Corsregal. 42. Viscount of Tarbat. Channerie. 43. Viscount of
Strathallan. Perth. 44. Earl of Levin. Dumfermelin. 45, 46. Earl of Kincardin.
Culrosse. 47, 48. Earl of Roxburgh. Kelso. 49, 50. Earl of Farfor. Bothwell.
51. Earl of Haddington. Melrosse. 52. Earl of Panmure. Brechen. 53. Earl of
Cathnesse. Roslin. 54. Earl of Dundonald. Pasley. 55. The Basse. 56, 57.

Theatrum SCOTIAE.
To His Grace WILLIAM Duke of Hamilton, Marquess of Cliddesdale, Earl of Arran
and Lannerick, Lord Aven, Machlanshire and Pomont, etc. Lord High Commissioner
for the Kingdom of Scotland, President of their Majesty's Most Honorable Privy
Council; and Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
EDINBURGH.
EDINBVRGH is situated in Mid-Lothian, a Shire of Scotland. It is the Chief
City of the Kingdom, and Royal Seat. It far surpasses all the other Cities of
the Kingdom in the Stateliness of its Churches, the Beauty and Neatness of its
public and private Buildings, the Pleasantness of its Site, the Largeness of
its Precincts, the Number and Opulency of its Inhabitants, and Dignity of its
Rulers. By the most ancient Inhabitants it was called Dun Eden; by the Latins,
Edinodunum, and by the Germans, Edinburghen; all which signify the same thing.

Dun Eden signifies a Town upon a Hill, or rather a City of the Edeni, situated
on a Hill. The Edeni are those who by Ptolemy are termed Ottodeni, which Word
(as some Learned Men think) was mistaken for Scottodeni, the two first Letters
Sc being worn out with Time: For near to this City is Curia Ottodenorum, whose
Name remains to this Day in a Village Four Miles West from the City, called
Currie: And two Miles West from the Town is Corstopitum (which also was among
the Ottodeni) which is a Village commonly called Corstorfin.

Ptolomy calls this Place (...), Castrum alatum, the Winged Castle, which is
not so called from that kind of Wings which the Greek Builders (as says
Vitruvius) call (...), (which are double Walls so rising to the Height, that
they resemble Wings: For it is likely there was no regular building in that
Place at that time) but that they were such as by the Poet Juvenal are called
Castella Brigantum; which sort of Castles we may see described by Tacitus,
Annal. Lib. XII. where he says, That upon high Mountains, and other Places of
difficult Access, he built up Stones in Form of a Fence, where the River did
run on a slippery Ford. Now these Fences of Stone were nothing else, but Stones
cast together without Mortar, which is also clear from the same Author in the
forecited Place, where he says, The Soldiers holding their Bucklers over
their Heads for a Defense, pulled down the unwrought and ill-built Stones;
which could not have been so easily done, if they had not been cast together
without Mortar. And certainly our Ancestors chose out this as a very fit Place
for a Fort of that Nature: For the Hill where the Castle stands is exceeding
steep and craggy, and the Ascent very difficult, except where it looks to the
East, which Part they fortified with Stones cast together as before. The Ascent
on which the City now stands had, and yet has upon the North-side, a standing
Pool, which is commonly called the North-Loch. Upon the South Side of the Hill
there was likewise another standing-Pool called the South-Loch: The Verity of
which the Rights and Leases of some Houses of St. Ninian's Row, do testify,
which are let with the Privilege of a Boat annexed; and these two Lochs or
Lakes bounded the City upon these two Sides, as the North-Loch does it at this
Day upon the North-side; but the South-Loch was drained a Hundred Years ago,
and upon the Banks thereof are built two several Tracts of Houses, between
which (in the Place where the Loch it self stood) is a Street called the
Cowgate. And so the Breadth of the City toward the South, is far extended
beyond its former Limits; as likewise the Length thereof toward the West is
much enlarged, for the Grass Market and Horse Market are now within the
City-Wall.

The Reason why this Place is called Castrum Alatum, or The winged Castle, is
to be taken from the very Nature of the Place: For, besides the Lakes on both
sides, there are two Hills near the Rock on which the Castle stands, viz.
Sarisbury and Neils Craigs, so named from the sometime Owners thereof, which in
a manner resemble Wings, as is easily perceived Coming to the City from the
South-East by the Sea Side; for then these Rocks appear like Wings stretched
forth, and the Rock on which the Castle stands, like the Head of a Bird with a
Tuft. And this is the genuine Derivation of the Word.

I know there are some learned Persons who will have Ptolomy's Castrum Alatum,
to be in another part of the Country, and not to be Edinodunum, seeing he makes
his (...) to be amongst the Vacomagi; but Ptolomy must be born with in all his
Mistakes of the Situation of Places here; for being an Egyptian, living in
Alexandria, and forced to take things upon Trust, and follow the Relation of
others, it is no Wonder if he be sometimes mistaken.

The greater Part of the City is built upon the Ascent, and it is very probable
that the Castle has been the Cause of Building the City: For first the
Neighbors have built a few Houses near the Castle, that under the Reach
thereof they might be defended from the Injuries of their Enemies. The Number
of the People growing apace, the Number of the Houses likewise increased, and
stretched forth to the very Foot of the Ascent toward the East; by which the
City, together with the Suburbs of the Canon-gate and King's Palace, is become
one entire Scotch Mile in length; but in breadth it is less by the half,
notwithstanding the Suburbs be included. The High Street from the Castle to the
Abbey is adorned with stately Buildings, which are of late made of hewn Stone,
since that by an Act of the Town-Council it has been prohibited (for the
frequent burnings which happened) to build any more Timber-Houses either in the
City or Suburbs.

The great Breadth of the High Street, and of the many Lanes which lie on each
side the same, from the North to the South (which send up the Air as it were in
Pipes into the High Street) and the Nearness of the two Hills called Neils
Craigs on the North, and Sarisbury Craigs on the South, do always refresh the
Town with Air; which conduces not a little to the Wholesomeness hereof, and it
was never heard that the Plague raged in it, except brought in thither by
infected Wares. Which Purity of the Air is daily increased since the Time that
excellent fresh Water was brought into the City from a Fountain three Miles
distant from the same, and that by a most wise Act of the Council all Nastiness
is removed.

The City is enclosed with a kind of an Old Roman Wall on every side, except
toward the North, where the North-Loch does secure it instead of a Wall.

The City is entered by six Gates or Ports: Two of which are to the East, two
to the South, one to the West, and one lately made to the North.

One of the Gates to the East is called the Netherbow, which in the Year 1616,
was magnificently rebuilt, being the chief Gate of the City, adorned with
Towers on both sides.

The other Gate to the East is called the Cowgate Port, through which there is
an Entry into the Nether Street, of the length of the whole City, and is called
the Cowgate.

The Eastmost of these Gates to the South (through which is an Entry into the
City) is called the Potter-Row Port, from the Suburb called the Potter-Row.

The Westmost of these is called the Society Port, properly the Brewer's Port.
They have a great square Court in that Place, with Buildings and brave Houses
round about it, to the very Walls of the City.

The West-Gate at the other End of the City, lying beneath the Castle, affords
an Entry from the Suburb of the same Name.

The North-Gate, which was last made at the Lower End of the North-Loch, is
twofold, the Inner and the Outer Port, through which there is an Entry into the
City from the Suburb called the Mutter's Hill.

There are two Streets extending the whole length of the Town. The chief Street
which is also called the Higher, is one of the broadest in Europe: From it
there run many Lanes on both sides. The Nether or Lower Street has also many
Lanes running to the South.

In the very middle of the City there is a Cathedral Church, which is called
St. Giles's Church, of such Largeness that it is divided into three Churches,
every one of which has its own Parish. It is built of hewn Stone, adorned with
Pillars and Vaultings of Stone. In the middle it forms a perfect Cross, by four
Parts of this Church meeting together, and they support a stately, high Tower,
with a Top of curious Workman-ship, representing an Imperial Crown. Beside this
Cathedral Church there are in the City,

The South-Church, called the Gray-Friars Church, which stands in the middle of
the common Burial-place. Many Tombs and Monuments do surround the Churchyard,
amongst which that of Sir George Mackenzy does appear like a Mausolaeum.

There is also a Church of square hewn Stone with a Tower built in the Year
1641, which is called the Trone-Church.

The Collegiate-Church of the Sacred Trinity, was built by Mary of Gueldres,
King James the second's Queen, where also she lies interred.

Near to this Church is the Hospital of St. Thomas, in which the poorer sort of
Inhabitants, both Men and Women, are maintained splendidly enough, and have
their own proper Chaplain.

Over Against this Church is the Correction-House, commonly called Paul's Work,
in which there are diverse Manufacturies of Linen, Wool and Silk, where
dissolute Persons are forced to earn their Living with their Labor.

The Lady Yester's Church, was built by one of the Lady Yesters, who also left
a Sum of Money for maintaining a good and able Man to preach and perform
Divine Service therein.

Besides these Churches there are two Chapels in the City, that of St.
Magdalen's in the Cowgate, and St. Mary's in Nedries Wind. There is another
Chapel of the same Name at the Foot of the Cannon-Gate; as likewise several
Meeting Houses lately built, both in the City and Suburbs.

About the middle of the Cannon-Gate, upon the North-side of it, there is
built, within these Five Years, a very beautiful Church, and a considerable
Piece of Ground enclosed for a Churchyard, by a Mortification made by Sir
Thomas Moodie of Sachten-Hall, for that Purpose.

Near unto the Cathedral Church is the Parliament House, where the three
Estates of the Kingdom do convene. It stands in a great Court, the North-side
whereof is bounded by the Church it self; the West Side is enclosed by the
Council-House, where the Town-Council assembles; the South Side is enclosed by
the Sessions House, where the Judges and Lords of Session sit to give Justice
to the People. In the upper Part of this Building are the Privy Council and
Exchequer-Chambers. The rest of the South and East Side of this Court, is
enclosed with the Upper and Lower Exchange, and with a Tract of most stately
Buildings. Here is one of the highest Houses in the World, mounting seven
Stories above the Parliament-Court, and being built upon a great Descent of the
Hill, the back Part of it is as far below it, so that from the Bottom to the
Top, One Staircase ascends 14 Stories high.

In the middle of the Court is the Statue of King Charles the II. in Brass,
erected upon a stately Pedestal, at the Charge of the City of Edinburgh.

About Twenty Years ago the said Magistrates were at a vast Expense also to
bring one of the best Springs in Scotland into the City, by Leaden Pipes from a
Hill above Three Miles distant from it; and they have erected several stately
Fountains in the middle of the High Street, to serve the Town with Water.

In Gray's Close near the Netherbow, is the Mint-House, with a large Court,
adorned with most neat and convenient Buildings, for Accommodation of the
Overseers and Workmen thereunto belonging.

Upon the South Side is the College of King James the VI. founded in the Year
1580, endowed with all the Privileges of an University. It has most large
Precincts enclosed with Walls and divided into Three Courts, Two Lower and One
Higher, which is equal to both the other in Largeness. These Courts or Area's
are adorned on all sides with excellent Buildings. There is also a high Tower
built over the great Entry.

The public Schools are large. There is likewise a very large Common Hall, in
which Theology and the Hebrew Tongue is taught, and public Orations made.
There is a Library with all Sorts of Books and some Manuscripts. Under the
Library is the King's Printing House.

There is very good Accommodation for the Students, and neat and handsome
Dwellings for the Professors; with very fine Gardens for their Recreation.

The Castle is situated at the Head of the Town to the West, where the Hill
does rise into a large Top. It is a very (...), for it both hangs over, and
commands the Town. The Rock on which the Castle is situated, is upon the South,
West and North, inaccessible. The Entry to the Castle is from the Town. The
chief Defense on this side is of the round Battery; at the Foot of which there
is a designed Out-work, which is not yet brought to a Condition of Defense, and
will add very much to the Strength of it when finished. In the Castle also is a
Royal Palace of hewn Stone, where the Regalia of the Kingdom are kept. This
Castle is the Chief Magazine for the Arms and Ammunition of the Nation, and
has a most pleasant Prospect to the neighboring Fields, and to the River of
Forth, from whence it is saluted by such Ships of War as come to an Anchor in
Leith Road. The Governors of this Fortress since King Charles the II's
Restoration, have been, the Earl of Middleton, the Dukes of Lauderdale,
Queensbury and Gordon, and since their Sacred Majesty's Accession to the Throne
of Scotland, the Earl of Levin has the Chief Command of it.

Heriot's Hospital is likewise within the City, Situated to the West of the
public Burial-Place. It is a Nursery for Boys, in which the Citizens Children
who are poor, are brought up, under the Tutelage of a Governor, who, according
to the Constitution of the Founder, is to live Single. They have likewise a
Chaplain to instruct them in the Grounds of Learning, till they be fitted for
the public Schools and Colleges.

This Hospital was founded by George Heriot, Jeweller to King James the VI. who
was descended of the Family of Trebroun; and after he had lost two Sons by
Shipwreck going from Scotland for London, where dying without Issue, February
the 15 th. 1624. he left in Legacy to this Hospital Two Hundred Thousand Pounds
Scots Money, that Youth might be maintained therein, and instructed in Arts and
Sciences till they were of mature Age, having left the City of Edinburgh his
Executors.

This Fabric is stately like a Palace, the Statue of the Founder being erected
upon the inner Frontispiece. Round about the Houses are most pleasant Gardens
adorned with large Walks and pleasant Greens.

Without the Walls of the City are the Suburbs, amongst which that which lies
from the Netherbow to the Abbey, called the Cannon-gate, has the Pre-eminence.
It is adorned with goodly Buildings and fine Gardens. Upon the North-side of it
is the Tolbooth, where the Bailiffs of the same do convene for the
Administration of Justice. On the South Side is a very fine House belonging to
the Earl of Murray, with very pleasant Gardens adjoining.

At the Lower End of this Suburb is the Abbey of Holyrood-House, founded by
King David for the Monks of the Order of St. Augustine. This was consumed by
Fire, and the Church only remains, in which diverse of our Kings and Queens are
interred.

The Royal Palace has four Courts. The Outer Court, which is as big as all the
rest, has four Principal Entries (besides several Inlets into the adjacent
Gardens) three of which are on the West, and the other on the East Side.

The Entry of the Palace is adorned with great Pillars of hewn Stone, and a
fine Cupola in Fashion of a Crown above it. The Forepart of the Palace is
terminated by four high Towers, Two of which toward the North were erected by
King James the V. and the rest by King Charles the II. The Fabric of the
Inner-Court is very stately, with Piazza's round about it, all of fine hewn
Stone. From these covered Walks you have Access to the several Apartments which
are most Royal and Magnificent. But above all the long Gallery is remarkable,
being adorned with the Pictures of all the Kings of Scotland from Fergus I.

The Palace on all Hands is bounded with lovely Gardens. On the South lies the
King's Park, which has great Variety of medicinal Plants. Here also is an
admirable Fountain, which through Conduits serves the whole House. His Grace
the Duke of Hamilton is hereditary Keeper of this Palace.

ARCTURI JONSTONI, Carmen in EDINBURGUM.
COminus ut spectet superos coeloque fruatur,
Montis in acclivi surgit Edina jugo.
Ancillatricem Cererem Nymphas que ministras
Et Vectigalem despicit inde Thetin.
Hic ubi nascentis se pandunt lumina Phoebi,
Sede sub Arcturi regia tecta vides.
Solis ad occasum surgens arx imminens urbi;
Haec habet Arctoi tela tremenda Jovis.
Adspicis in medio Templum, decus Vrbis and Orbis:
Hac pietas stabilem fixit in aede larem.
Cuncta nitent intus: Regalis more Coronae
Plexilis aurato marmore lucet apex.
Virginis Astraea domus est contermina Templo,
Digna Polycleti, Praxitelisque manu.
Tecta colunt cives solis heroibus apta.
Nullius illa minas, nullius arma timet.
Albula Romuleam Venetam mare territat Vrbem,
Quas regit undarum ridet Edina minas.
Creed mihi, nusquam vel sceptris aptior urbs est,
Vel rerum Domina dignior Orb locus.
De EDINBURGO, JOHANNIS JONSTONI Carmen.
MOnte sub acclivi Zephyri procurrit in auras:
Hinc arx celsa, illinc Regia clara nitet.
Inter utramque patet sublimibus ardua tectis
Vrbs armis, animis clara, frequensque viris.
Nobile Scotorum caput, and pars maxima regni,
Pene etiam gentis integra regna suae.
Rarae arts and opes, quod men's optaverit, aut hic
Invenias, aut non Scotia tota dabit.
Compositum hic populum videas sanctumque senatum
Sanctaque cum puro lumine jura Dei.
An quisquam Arctoi extremo in limite mundi
Aut haec, aut paria his cernere posse putet?
Dic, Hospes, postquam externas lustraveris oras,
Haec cernens oculis credis an ipse tuis?
To His Grace CHARLES Duke of Lennox and Richmond, Duke and Peer of France,
Earl of Darnley and March; Baron of Torbolton and Settrington, Knight of the
Most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
DUNBRITTON.
DVMBARTON or Dunbritton, is a Town in the Sheriffdom of Lennox, which Beda
calls Allclyth, others Allcluith. It has its Name from Dun, which in our
ancient Language signifies a Hill or Rock, and Bar which in the same Language
signifies the Top or Height of any Thing.

The Town is situate in a Plain on the Bank of the River Levin, near the Place
where it enters into Clyde, a little below the Castle, which is excellently
fortified by Nature, owing little to Art; and seems to have been built by the
Ancient Brigantes. This Town had its Privileges procured to it by One of the
Countesses of Lennox.

The Castle has a strange kind of Situation; for where the Waters of Clyde and
Levin meet, there is a Plain extended to the length of a Mile at the Foot of the
neighboring Hills: And in the very Corner of this Meeting there rises a Rock
with two Tops, the higher of which looks to the West, with a Watchtower on the
Top of it, having a large Prospect on all Sides. The other being a little lower
lies to the East. Betwixt these two Tops are Steps hewn out of the Rock with
great Pains and Labor, which yield Passage only to one Person at a Time, to
the upper Part of the Castle. To the South where Clyde runs by the Rock which
is naturally steep, it has a little Descent, and as it were with out-stretcht
Arms embraces the plain Ground; which partly by Nature and partly by Art is so
enclosed, that it furnishes Room for several Houses and a Garden. It secures
the Harbor by its Ordnance, and obliges the smaller Boats to come up almost to
the very Gate of the Castle, the Chanal of the River running on that Side. The
middle of the Rock where the Entry to the Castle is, being built up with
Houses, makes as it were another Castle distinct from the former. This Castle,
as appears by its Prospects, does almost stand like a Sugar Loaf upon a plain
Ground. The Circumference of it is but very small, and yet it has at the Top a
little kind of a Lake and several other Springs. Besides the natural
Fortification, it is bounded on the West by the Water of Levin, and on the
South by Clyde, which are to it instead of Ditches. To the East, the Sea at a
full Tide beats against the Foot of the Rock; and when it ebbs it does not
leave a Plain of Sand, but of a soft Clay, which is divided by a Rivulet that
runs down from the neighboring Hills.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of Mar, Lord Areskin and Garioch, etc.
Hereditary Governor of STIRLING.
STIRLING.
STIRLING is the Chief Town of the Shire of that Name, where the Sheriff keeps
his Courts. It has its Name from its Situation; for the Town stands upon the
Descent of a steep Rock, at the Foot of which there runs a deep River called
Boderia or Forth. It takes its Name from the Saxon Word Ster, which signifies a
Hill, and Lin a Water.

It was of old called Binobara, which by some is judged to be Ptolomy's
Vindovara: For Bin in our old Language signifies a Hill, and Vara a River: So
that the Name which the Town now retains, is the Signification of the old Name
thereof.

At the Head of the Town stands a well fortified Castle, adorned with stately
Buildings in the former Age, by King James the V. This is the Place, as Tacitus
observes, where Clyde and Forth being carried back divide from one another. For
a great way they are separated by a small Neck of Land, which was then
strengthened by a Garrison; and all that Isthmus was possessed by Soldiers, the
Enemies being removed as it were into another Island, the Inscription on a
Stone below the Castle toward the Bridge, which makes mention of a Wing of the
Army that kept Watch there, seeming to intimate as much: And although the
Romans did several times infest some Places beyond it by their Inroads, yet the
Strength and Glory of the Roman Name had its Bound in this Place.

The King's Park lies at the very Foot of the Castle, and the City stands on
the Back of a Hill toward the South. It is enclosed with a Wall, and toward the
North, it is bounded with the River Forth, which crossed by a Bridge in that
Place.

The Bridge is of hewn Stone, and fortified with an Iron-Gate. It consists of
four stately Arches, and lies South and North.

The Ships at full Tide come up to the Bridge, and the Haven is a little below
the same.

The Church, which is of hewn Stone built very artificially, stands in the
Upper Part of the Town toward the East, adorned with a very high Tower.

Not far from the Church may be seen the Mansions of the Earls of Argyle and
Mar, notable both for their Bigness and Artifice of their Structure.

The Earl of Mar is Governor of this Castle by Heritage. It has a competent
Number of Great Ordnance, for defending the Passage of the Bridge, and a
sufficient Garrison established for its Security.

In times of Trouble the Chief Magazine of the Nation is usually transported to
this Place, it lying upon a considerable Pass, and almost in the Center of the
Kingdom.

As this City stands in a most commodious Place for Commerce, so it has a most
delectable and pleasant Prospect, by the great and various Windings of the
River Forth, which are so extraordinary, that from the Bridge of Stirling to
the Town of Allowa, it is 24 Miles by Water, and but 4 by Land.

ALLOWA, a Town in Clackmannon-shire, and seems to be the same Ptolomy calls
Allauna, is situated on a pleasant Plain to the North of Forth; and has a
convenient Harbor for Ships of Burden, many of which come thither for Salt
and Coals. Here the Earl of Mar, Chief of the Areskins, has a pleasant
Dwelling with a Wood adjacent.

ARCTURI JONSTONI, de STERLINO Carmen.
STERLINO quis digna canat? Cunabula Reges
Hic sua securis imposuere jugis.
Aura salutifera est; facit hoc vicinia coeli,
Nec datur a saevo tutior host locus.
Adspicis hic geminis structas in rupibus arces,
Tectaque Tarpeii turribus aequa Jovis.
Fortha triumphales hic, dum fugit, excipit arcus,
Cogitur and curvo subdere colla jugo.
Haud aliter Phrygiis ludit Maeander in oris:
Saepe fluit, trepida saepe recursat aqua.
Orb pererrato levis huc vestigia flectens
Advena miratur ruris and urbis opes.
Admiranda quidem sunt haec, and carmine digna:
Plus tamen hic virtus martia laudis habet.
Non semel Ausonios Sterlinum reppulit enses,
Limes and imperii, quem bibit, amnis erat.
De STERLINO, J. JONSTONI Carmen.
REgia sublimis celsa despectat ab arce
Pendula, sub biferis maenia structa jugis.
Regum augusta Parens, Regum nutricula natis;
Hinc sibi Regifico nomine tota placet.
Hospita sed cuivis, quovis sub nomine, amicus
Sive es, seu non es; Hospes an Hostis item.
Pro lucro cedit damnum; disordia tristis
Heu quoties procerum sanguine tinxit humum!
Hoc uno infaelix, at faelix caetera; nusquam
Laetior aut coeli frons, geniusve soli.
To the Right Honorable GEORGE Earl of Linlithgow, Lord Levingston and
Callander, etc. One of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury; and One of
their Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
LINLITHGOW
IS the same which Ptolomy calls Lindum, so named for its being situated on the
side of a Lake. The King's Palace stands on a little Hill, toward the middle
of the said Lake, in which there lies an Island which ascends with several
Stairs in the Form of an Amphitheater. This Palace is Magnificently built of
hewn Stone, begun by the former Kings and perfected by King James the VI.

It consists of Four Towers, between which the Court, the Chapel, and the rest
of the Buildings are extended. The Porch bears the Name and Arms of King James
the V. In the Inner Court there is a very artificial Fountain, adorned with
several Statues and Waterworks.

Close by the Palace is a Church, commonly called St. Michael's, of a most
excellent Structure, with a very high Steeple, to which the late Earl of
Linlithgow added an extraordinary neat Chapel. There is a small and easy
Descent from the Palace to the Town, where is to be seen a large Apiece
Court, in the middle of which there is another curious Fountain exceeding in
all Respects, that which is in the Inner Court of the Palace.

On the South side of this Court is the Tolbooth, which is very neatly built of
hewn Stone, having a very high Steeple with Bells; and a very fine Clock. In
this Tolbooth the Sheriff and Town-Magistrates keep their Courts.

There is a large Street reaches from the one end of the Town to the other,
which is adorned on every Side with fair Buildings; from each side of which
Street diverse Lanes do break out, which open a Passage into several pleasant
Gardens.

The Lake it self is a Mile in length, and a quarter of a Mile over, and
abounds with Perch, and other sorts of Fish. On the North side hereof lies the
King's Park.

This Town has a Harbor for all sorts of Ships near the Castle of Blackness,
where there is a large Custom-House built, with other Houses for the Use of
Merchants.

The Earl of Linlithgow is Hereditary Keeper of the Palace, and the King's
Baily in that Place.

De LIMNUCHO, Carmen ARCTURI JONSTONI.
NObile Limnuchum est, Pario de marmore templum
Hic nitet, impensae non mediocris opus.
Aemula sunt templi turrita palatia Regis,
Et Praetio superant Solis utramque domum.
Proximus est urbi nullo lacus aggere cinctus;
Squammiger illimes Grex natat inter aquas.
Ista triumphales praebent vivaria caenas
Grampiaco quoties sub Jove miles ovat.
Regius hic lacus est Lucrinus, Caesaris unda:
Plus habet hic luxus, plus habet ille dapis.
To the Right Honorable ANTHONY Viscount of Falkland, etc. One of the Lords
Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of England, and One
of their Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, in the said Kingdom.
FALKLAND.
FALKLAND is a pretty little Town in the Sheriffdom of Fife. At the Foot of
Lomon Hill, there is a stately Palace, which King James the V. caused to be
built for a retiring Place, it being most convenient also for Hunting.

The King's Park and a Wood are adjacent to it, into which, as also into the
Plain toward the East, it has a most pleasant Prospect. The Marquess of Athol
is Hereditary Keeper of this Palace, and has a considerable Rent by the
neighboring Lands and Stewardry. It gives the Title of Viscount to the Family
of Falkland.

To the Right Honorable JAMES JOHNSTON, One of the Lords of their Majesty's
Most Honorable Privy Council, and Principal Secretary of State for the Kingdom
of Scotland.
ST ANDREWS.
SAINT ANDREWS, in Latin, Andreanopolis, or Fanum Sancti Andreae, has its Name
from St. Andrew, whose Bones are said to be brought hither from Patras, a Town
in Peloponnesus, by Regulus a Grecian Monk, Anno 368. a Man in that Age much
esteemed for Piety, as appears by the Church dedicated to him, and called after
his Name. From him also (as ancient Writers report) this Town was at first
called Regimund, that is, Mons sancti Reguli; for we read that Oengus, or
Vngus, King of the Picts, did grant to God and Saint Andrew, That he should be
Head of all Churches within the Jurissdiction of the Picts.

Likewise it is manifest from Old Manuscripts, that this was the principal See
of the Culdai, who had the care and management of Holy Things from the first
reception of Christianity in those Parts.

This City is the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, and the Sea of an
Archbishop, who is Primate of all Scotland. It lies toward the East with a
pleasant Prospect to the Ocean, having a Harbor for Ships, the Sea near it
plentiful in Fishes, and Fields wholesome and spacious.

There yet remain the Marks of Venerable Antiquity, the Ruins of the Cathedral
Church and Monastery, which do abundantly testify their Ancient Glory and
Magnificence. The Town it self is situate in a Plain, from East to West, with a
most pleasant Prospect to the German Ocean. It had a very strong Castle of Old,
whose Rubbish and Ruins are yet to be seen upon the Rocks on the Seaside
toward the North. It has Streets straight and broad, stretching East and West,
whereof two lead to that once famous Abbey of Canons Regular of the Order of
St. Augustine, situate toward the East and South-East, the Wall surrounding
this Abbey being yet entire, and of hewn Stone, with many Towers and Turrets
which give it the Resemblance of a King's Palace.

The Chief Church in the Town now, is that called the New Church, not far from
the New College. In it there is to be seen a very Magnificent Monument of
Archbishop Sharp.

There is also another Church called St. Leonard's adjacent to a College of the
same Name, the Rector whereof is ordinarily the Principal of the said College;
but the greatest Ornament of the City is the University, the Athens of
Scotland, consisting at present of Three Colleges; and was first founded by
Laurentius Lindoris, and Richardus Corvellus, Doctors of Law, and public
Professors of Philosophy.

The College of St. Salvator, commonly called the Old College, was founded by
James Kennedie Bishop of St. Andrews, together with a Church beautified with an
high towering Steeple all of hewn Stone, in which his Monument of curious
Workman-ship is yet to be seen. Mr. Skene Doctor of Divinity and Principal of
the College, has of late repaired and augmented the Fabric thereof, having
made a Collection for that end. He has also founded a Library, which by the
Donations of learned Men is now very well furnished with good Books.

St. Leonard's College was founded by James Hepburn, Prior of St. Andrews; in
which are several Professors, as first the Principal, who is always Doctor of
Divinity, and Four Professors of Philosophy, to whom John Scot of Scots Tarvett
Knight, added a Professor of Philology, with a liberal Salary, and augmented
the Library with the Gift of several considerable Volumes.

It is likewise of late very much increased by Sir John Wedderburne, Doctor of
Physic, who dying left his great Collection of Books to it. Here also is the
famous Manuscript of the Scottish Chronologer, John Fordon.

The New College was founded by James Beaton Archbishop. In it are two
Professors, always Doctors in Divinity, the One styled Principal Professor of
Theology, the Other only Professor of Theology; to which of late is added a
Professor of Mathematics; the first Professor whereof, Mr. James Gregory,
erected a Commodious Observatory for Mathematical Observations in the College
Garden, having caused a Contribution to be made for that Purpose. He also
furnished it with many Mathematical Instruments much better than it had before
his Time.

Alexander the I. King of Scotland, founded a Priory here for the Monks of the
Order of St. Augustine, the Government of the Picts being abolished in Britain;
and Kenneth III. tranferred the Episcopal See from Abernethie to St. Andrews,
about the Year 850.

ARCTURI JONSTONI, Carmen de ANDREAPOLI.
URBS sacra nuper eras toti venerabilis Orbi,
Nec fuit in toto sanctior Orb locus.
Jupiter erubuit tua cernens Templa, sacello
Et de Tarpeio multa querela fuit.
Haec quoque contemplans Ephesinae Conditor Vrbis,
Ipse suum merito ridet and odit opus.
Vestibus aequabant Templorum marmora Mystae,
Cunctaque divini plena nitoris erant.
Ordinis hic sacri Princeps, spectabilis auro,
Jura dabat Patribus Scotia quotquot habet.
Priscus honor periit, traxerunt templa ruinam,
Nec superest Mystis qui fuit ante nitor.
Sacra tamen Musis Vrbs est Phoebique ministris,
Nec major meritis est honor ille tuis.
Lumine te blando Musas quae diligit eos
Adspicit, and roseis molliter afflat equis.
Mane novo juxta Musarum murmurat aedes
Rana Thetis, somnos and juvat esse breves.
Proximus est Campus, studiis hic fessa Juventus
Se recreat, vires sumit and inde novas.
Phocis amor Phoebi fuit olim, Palladis art
In te jam stabilem fixit uterque Larem.
De ANDREAPOLI, Carmen JOANNIS JONSTONI,
Quondam ibi Theologiae Professoris.
IMminet Oceano paribus descripta viarum
Limitibus, pingui quam been septa solo,
Magnificis opibus; staret dum gloria prisca
Pontificum, hic fulsit Pontificalis apex.
Musarum ostentant surrecta palatia coelo,
Delicias hominum, Deliciasque Deum.
Hic nemus umbriferum Phoebi, Nymphaeque sorores,
Candida quas inter praenitet Urania,
Quae me longinquis redeuntem Teutonis oris
Suscipit, excelso collocat inque gradu.
Vrbs nimium faelix, Musarum si bona nosset
Munera and aetherei regna beata Dei.
Pelle malas pestes Vrbe, and quae noxia Musis,
Alme Deus: coeant pax pietasque simul.
To the Right Honorable JAMES Viscount of Stairs, Lord Dalrimple, Glenluce and
Strenrare, President of the College of Justice, and One of the Lords of their
Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
GLASGOW.
GLASGOW is the most famous Empory of all the West of Scotland.
Nothwithstanding that it is inferior to many in Antiquity, yet if we respect
the Largeness of the City, the Number and Stateliness of its public and
private Buildings, its Commerce with Foreign Nations, and the Opulency of its
Inhabitants, it is the Chief of all the Cities in the Kingdom next to Edinburgh.

The City stands most pleasantly upon the East Bank of Clyde, which is
navigable up to the very Tower, by Ships of small Burden; but New Glasgow which
stands on the Mouth of Clyde, is a Haven for Vessels of the greatest Size. The
City it self is joined to the Suburbs, which stand on the West Brink, by a
beautiful Bridge of Eight Arches, built of square hewn Stone.

The most part of the City stands on a Plain, and is in a Manner apiece.
In the very middle of the City is the Tolbooth, magnificently built of hewn
Stone, with a very high Tower, and Bells which sound melodiously at every
Hour's end. At the Tolbooth Four principal Streets crossing each other do
divide the City as it were into Four equal Parts, every one of which is adorned
with several public Buildings.

In the higher Part of the City the Cathedral Church stands, commonly called
St. Mungo's. It amazes the Eyes of the Beholders for its stupendous Bigness,
and Artifice of its Structure. It consists of two Churches, of which the one is
over the other. The several Rows of Pillars, and exceeding high Towers, do show
a wonderful piece of Architecture.

Near to the Church is the Archbishop's Castle, fenced with an exceeding high
Wall of hewn Stone, and looks down to the City; but the chief Ornament of the
City is the College which was founded by King James the II. Pope Nicholas the
V. granting an Indulgence, and confirming it by his Bull to have the Rights and
Liberties of a College, where general Learning should be taught. It was erected
by the great Labor and Expenses of that Reverend Prelate William Turnbull
Archbishop of Glasgow.

The Words of the Bull for the founding of it, are, That general Study should
flourish in the same, as well in Theology, and the Canon and Civil Law, as in
all other Arts and Faculties; and that the Masters and Teachers there should
enjoy all and sundry the Privileges, Liberties, Honors, Immunities and
Exemptions which have been granted by the Apostolic See, or others, any other
way, to the Masters, Teachers, or Students of our College at Bononia. The
Fabric of the College is remarkable, consisting of diverse Courts. The
forepart of it toward the City is of an excellent Structure being of hewn
Stone. The Precincts of the College are enlarged by some Acres of Ground,
purchased by some Money granted to it of late by the King and Estates of the
Kingdom. It is separated from the rest of the Town by an exceeding high Wall.

De GLASGUA Carmen ARCTURI JONSTONI.
GLASGUA, tu socias inter caput exeris urbes;
Et te nil ingens pulchrius Orbis habet.
Sole sub occiduo Zephyri te temperat aura,
Frigora nec brumae nec canis ora times.
Glotta latus cingens, electro purior omni est,
Hic regis imperio lintea mill tuo.
Pons jugat adversas operoso marmore ripas,
Et tibi securum per vada praebet iter.
Aemula Phoeacum tua sunt pomaria, Sylvae
Ruraque Poestanis sunt tibi plena rosis.
Farra Ceres, armenta Pales, Thetis agmina gentis
Squammigerae, Nemorum dat tibi diva feras.
Tecta nitent, ipsas and tangunt vertice nubes:
Quo commendentur plus tamen intus habent.
Templa domos superant, radiant haec marmore puro,
Marmoris and praetium nobile vincit opus.
Non procul hinc Themidos se tollunt atria, patres
Hic ubi purpureos dicere jura vides.
In medio residens sua pandit limina Phoebus,
Hic cum Parnass;o Pegasis unda fluit.
Civibus ingentes animos, deus armiger arts;
Nata Jovis stabiles Juno ministrat opes.
Moenia Dardanidum posuit Grynaeus Apollo,
Et deus aequoreis qui dominatur aquis.
Glasgua te fausto struxerunt sydere divi
Quot mare, Quot tellus, Quotquot and aequor habet.
ROBERTI MAGNI, M.D. Carmen in insignia Civitatis GLASGUAE.
SAlmo, Quercus cui insidet Rubecula avis, and Campana, and
Annulus aureus salmonis ore exertus.
Salmo maris, terraeque arbor, avis aeris urbi
Promittunt quicquid trina elementa ferunt.
Et campana (frequens celebret quod numinis aras
Vrbs) superesse polo non peritura docet.
Neve quis indubitet sociari aeterna caducis
Annulus id, pignus conjugiale, notat.
De GLASGUA Carmen JO ANNIS JONSTONI.
NON te pontificum luxus non infula tantum
Ornavit, diri quae tibi causa mali.
Glottiadae quantum decorant te Glasgua musae,
Quae celsum attollunt clara sub astra caput.
Glotta decus rerum, piscosis nobilis undis
Finitimis recreat jugera laeta soli.
Ast Glottae decus, and vicinis gloria terris
Glasgua foecundat flumine cuncta suo.
To the Right Honorable GEORGE Earl of Aberdeen, Viscount of Trumartin, Lord
Haddo, Mechlick, Tarvis and Kellie, etc.
Old ABERDEEN.
ABERDEEN the Old is situated a Mile to the North of the New Town, commonly
called Bon-accord, it has its Name from its Situation, being placed at the
Mouth of the Water of Don. The Name of the River sufficiently shows that the
Picts who inhabited this part of the Country were of a Scythian Descent, for
the River which by the Latins is called Danubius, by the Germans is called
Dunave, by the Polonians Dunaum, by the Turks Tuna, being of the very same Name
with our Don.

The River is remarkable for the Multitude of Salmon and Perches which are
taken in it. About half a Mile from Old Aberdeen it has a Bridge of one single
Arch, which is both large and stately, it is made up for the most part of
square hewn Stone, both the Ends of it being fixed on Rocks. By its crooked
winding it breaks the force of the Stream, so that Nature it self seems to have
made way for its Situation. A little below it Don enters into the Sea.

Above the Bridge two Miles, is a heap of Stone artificially cast in the Mouth
of the Chanal for the easier catching of the Salmon. It is the Bishops Seat,
and has a Cathedral Church commonly called St. Machars, of a large and stately
Structure; being built of hewn Stone by the several Bishops of that See. It
anciently consisted of two Ranks of Stone Pillars, another cross Church and
three Turrets, the greatest of which, was the Steeple, which was set upon Four
Pillars of vaulted Works. In the Church likewise was a Library, but about the
Year 1560 it was almost wholly destroyed, so that the Ruins do now only remain.

But the Chief Ornament of this Town is the King's College, placed on the South
side of the Town, conspicuous beyond the rest of the Houses for the Neatness
and Stateliness of its Structure. It Is Inferior to no College in Scotland. One
side of it is covered with Slate, the rest with Lead; the Church, and Turret or
Steeple are of hewn Stone. The Windows were of old remarkable for painted
Glass, and some relics of their ancient Splendour do yet remain. Here is a
fine Monument of Bishop Elphingston. The Steeple besides others has two Bells
of an extraordinary Bigness. The Top of it is vaulted with a double cross Arch,
above which is a King's Crown, having eight Corners upheld by as many Pillars
of Stone, a round Globe of Stone with two gilded Crosses closing the Crown. In
the Year 1631 it was overturned by a Storm, but shortly after was built in a
more stately Form. It was begun by Bishop Forbes, continued by William Gourdon
Dr. of Physic, and helped on by the largesses of several Noblemen and
Gentlemen of that Country. Close to the Church there is a Library provided with
many Books, much enriched by those which Dr. Henry Scougal, Professor of
Divinity there, and the Right Reverend Dr. Patr. Scougal, Bishop of Aberdeen,
his Father, did lately bequeath to it.

This College was Founded by Bishop Elphingston, Anno Dom. 1500. and the
greatest part of the Work was likewise Built by him; but King James the IV.
assumed the Patronage of it to himself, whence it is called the King's College.
In it there is a Primar or Principal, a Professor of Theology, a Professor of
the Civil Law, a Professor of Physic, a Sub-Principal, who is also a Professor
of Philosophy, three other Philosophy Professors, and a Professor of the
Languages. This College and that in the New Town make up one University, called
the University of King Charles.

New ABERDEEN.
ABERDEEN, as I have said, is twofold, the New Town and the Old. They are
distant the one from the other about a Mile. Abredonia seems to be the same
which Ptolomy calls the City Devana, placed in the Province called Texale, upon
the mouth of the River Dee; for Aber in the old British Tongue signifies or
denotes the mouth of a River, and Deva, or Dee, is the name of the River upon
whose mouth this City is situated. But New Aberdeen is the Capital of the
Sheriffdom of Aberdeen, and the Seat of the Sheriff for Trial of Causes. It is
placed at the Eastern Corner of the Shire, where it is washed with the German
Sea. This City very much exceeds the rest of the Cities of the North of
Scotland in Bigness, greatness of Traffic, and Beauty; it enjoys a wholesome
Air, and abounds with well-bred Inhabitants, and has a great Revenue from its
Salmon fishing. The Old City seems to have been placed upon a Bank of the Sea;
because it is the common Opinion that the Monastery of the Holy Trinity which
is thought to have been formerly the Palace of King William, is situate in the
very Creek of that Sea, and not far from it are the Ruins of an old Praetorium.
In tract of time the Inhabitants seem to have filled several neighboring
little Hills with Houses, and now the City is chiefly built upon Three of those
Hills, and the greatest part upon the highest. It has an access by an ascent
every way. The exterior parts thereof are spread out upon the Plain, as
Suburbs in many places.

That there was a Mint heretofore in the City, appears by Silver Coyns there
stamped with this Inscription, Vrbs Aberdeae, which are yet preserved in the
Closets of the curious.

The Streets are Paved with Flint, or a very hard Stone resembling Flint; the
Houses beautiful both within and without, are Four Stories high, or more, and
have for the most part Gardens and Orchards belonging to them; so that the
whole City, to those that approach it, gives the resemblance of a Wood.

At the West End of the City, a little round Hill adjoining offers it self to
sight, from the foot of which Hill breaks forth a Fountain of clear Water, and
in the middle of the same, another Spring flowing down to the foot of the Hill,
bubbles out, and sends forth a Stream as rapid as a Torrent, but the spring it
self is easily distinguished both in Color and Taste from a Torrent. It is
called the Aberdonian Spaw, because both in Taste and Quality it comes very
near to the Spaw Water in the Bishopric of Liege. This Water is cold to the
touch. Doctor William Barclay a Physician, has written a Treatise concerning it.

In the High Street there is a Church of the Franciscans worthy to be taken
notice of, built of Freestone; a Work begun by Doctor William Elphingston,
then Bishop, and finished at the charge of Gavinus Dumbar, Bishop of Aberdeen
about the Year of Christ 1500.

The said Bishop Gavinus Dumbar, has also got himself immortal Honor, by a
Famous Bridge of seven Arches laid over the River Dee, about a Mile from the
City, built very firm and durable, of Freestone, which in more places than one
by Inscription testifies its Author or Builder.

But the great Ornament of the City is its College, called the Mareshallian
Academy, as founded by the Earl Marshal, George Keith, in the Year 1593, which
the City of Aberdeen has very much adorned with several additional Buildings.
It has, besides a Primary Professor, who is called Principal, Four Professors
of Philosophy, a Professor of Theology, and a Professor of the Mathematics.
There is also a famous Library Founded by the City of Aberdeen, supplied by the
Gifts of Learned Men, and furnished with diverse Mathematical Instruments.

Add to these the School-House, Founded by Dr. Dune, which has one Head Master,
and three Ushers under him. There is also a School for Music.

The Cathedral Church nominated from St. Nicholas, its Patron, is built of
Freestone and covered with Lead; has a Steeple resembling a Pyramid, and
covered likewise with sheets of Lead to a considerable height. It was divided
formerly into Three Churches, the bigest whereof was called the Old Church, the
other the New Church, and the third the Arched, named the Arch of the Lady of
Mercy. This Cathedral is propt with Pillars of Freestone, and has Three Bells
of a vast weight, which by their quick and continual Sounds divide the half
Hours. The body of this Church is adorned with a Tower and pinacled Steeple.
Here is kept the Court for the public Trials of the Townsmen, and the County
Courts, where is also a Prison and a Workhouse. Besides these there is an
Almshouse for the maintenance of the Old People of Aberdeen, that are come to
Decay, with Three Hospitals Founded by several persons. And adjoining to the
Custom-House lies the Port or Wharf.

De ABREDONIA VETERI, Carmen ARCTURI JONSTONI.
TE pius antistes colit, Vrbs antiqua, regitque,
Donaque faelicem reddit and unda freti.
Amnis aquas uno pons admirabilis arcu
Integit; autores suspicor esse deos.
Talis erat Rhodii moles operosa Colossi,
Turgida quam subter vela tulere rates.
Hunc prope Salmonum soboles argentea Nassas
Sponte subit, laqueis induiturque suis.
Est quoque quod jactes vetus and venerabile templum;
Caetera praedonum diripuere manus.
Turribus hoc surgens geminis Pharos esse putatur;
Puppibus and tutum per vada monstrat iter.
Non procul hinc Phoebi surgunt and Palladis arces;
Aurea crux illas and diadema tegit.
Has pius erexit praesul, Rex divite censu
Donavit, titulos prodiga Roma dedit.
Non tot equus pedites fudit Trojanus Achivos,
Lumina quot patriae protulit ista domus.
Nobilis urbs, extra praeconem quaerere noli,
Hunc populum qui te praedicet intus habes.
De ABREDONIA NOVA Carmen ARCTURI JONSTONI.
URBS nova, piscosi quam ditant ostia Devae
Vrbibus antiquis praeripit omne decus.
Hanc delubra beant, totum cantata per Orbem,
Templaque mortali non fabricata manu*
Haec prope Romuleis aedes sacrata Camaenis
Surgit: Athenaeum non procul inde vides.
Ardua sydereis rutilant praetoria pinnis
Hic, ubi planities panditur ampla fori.
Adspicis hic procerum vicina palatia Coelo,
Et populi pictos, aureolosque Lates.
Quid memorem ternos, tria propugnacula, Colles;
Qualibus urbs surgit quae Caput orbis erat.
Hanc quoque Lanaris mons ornat, amaenior illis
Hunc ferrugineis Spada colorat aquis.
Inde suburbanum Jamesoni despicis hortum,
Quem domini pictum suspicor esse manu.
Salmonum dat Deva greges, maris aequora gazas
Memphi tuas, and quas India jactat opes.
Pons septemgemino cameratus fornice Devam
Integit: autorem juncta Tiara notat.
Haec celebret Vulgus: Solos ego praedico cives;
His collata nihil caetera laudis habent.
Martia men's illos commendat and aurea virtus,
Rebus and in dubiis saepe probata fides.
Hospita gens haec est, and comis and aemula divum,
Quaeque regunt alios huic famulantur opes.
Si locus est meritis, urbs haec Regina vocari,
Et Dominae titulum sumere jure potest.
Caetera mortales producunt oppida solos:
Vrbs haec Heroas, semideasque parit.
Aliud ejusdem de eadem.
CVM Populo quisquis Romanam suspicis urbem,
Et mundi dominam, deliciasque vocas.
Confer Aberdoniam; Thetis hanc servilibus undis
Alluit, urbs famulo nec procul illa mari est.
Vtraque fulta jugis, subjectos despicit amnes,
Vtraque fulminea spirat ab arce minas.
Illa suos Fabios, invictaque fulmina belli
Scipiadas jactat Caesareamque domum.
Mennesios urbs haec proceres, gentemque Culenam,
Et Collisonios Lausoniosque patres.
Vrbe Quirinali minor est urbs Grampica, Cives
Sunt tamen hic animis ingeniisque pares.
De Abredonia Nova, Carmen D.J. JONSTONI.
AD boream porrecta jugis obsessa superbis
Inter Connatas eminet una Deas.
Mitior algentes Phoebus sic temperat auras,
Non aestum ut rabidum, frigora nec metuat.
Foecundo ditat Neptunus gurgite, and amnes
Piscosi gemmis alter adauget opes.
Candida men's, frons laeta, hilaris, gratissima tellus
Hospitibus; Morum cultus ubique decens.
Nobilitas antiqua, opibus subnixa vetustis
Martiaque invicto pectore corda gerens.
Justitiae domus, and stadiorum matter honoris:
Ingenio ars, certant artibus ingenia.
Omnia ei cedunt meritos genetricis honores:
Pingere non ulla ars ingeniumve valet.
To the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of Tweddale, Lord Hay of Yester, etc. Lord
High Chancellor of Scotland.
HADDINGTON.
HADDINGTON is situate on a pleasant Plain, on the brink of the River Tyne,
surrounded with several Noblemens dwellings. The most remarkable whereof is the
House of Yester, the ordinary Mansion House of the Earl of Tweddale. It is one
of the pleasantest Seats, and has the finest and greatest planting about it in
all Scotland. Of old this Town was Fortified by the English, several Vestigies
whereof are yet to be seen.

Here is a Church excellently built of hewn Stone, the Ruins whereof do
testify its former splendour. In a Chapel belonging to this Church there is an
excellent Burial-place for the Chiefs of the Family of Maitland. Chancellor
Maitland and his Lady, several others of the said Family, and the Duke of
Lawderdale, are Interred in this place.

It gives the Title of Earl of Haddington to a branch of the House of Hamilton,
who has large Possessions and fine Seats hard by it.

Henry Prince of Scotland, Son to St. David, and Ada his Countess, Founded a
Nunnery in this place.

Within Four Miles of Edinburgh, the Earl of Tweddale has another most
pleasant House and Gardens, called Pinkie. No Place in Scotland is surrounded
with more little Towns and Houses of the Nobility and Gentry than this is,
which appears chiefly from the House of Stonyhill, where the Variety of so many
Towns and Buildings, so great a Part of the Court of Lothian, the River of
Forth, and the Court of Fyfe, give a most delightful Prospect.

Carmen ARCTURI JONSTONI de HADINA.
PRoxima Bervico caput Hadingtona periclis
Obtulit, and Scotis aggeris instar erat.
Saepe Caledoniam defendit fortibus armis,
Nec semel hostiles est populata greges.
Viribus interdum, nunquam virtute subacta est,
Et cum multa tulit vulnera, plura dedit.
Grampigenas ne creed duces, Floremve Juventae
Sed tutelares hic habitasse deos.
J. JONSTONI, Carmen de Eadem
PLanities praetensa jacet prope flumina Tinae
Fluminis. Arguti clauditur ista sinu
Vulcani and Martis quae passa incendia, fati
Ingemit alterno vulnere fracta vires.
Nunc tandem sapit icta, Dei praecepta sequuta
Praesidio gaudet jam potiore poli.
To the Right Honorable JAMES Marquess of Montross, Earl of Kincardin, Lord
Graham and Mugdock, etc.
MONTROSS.
A Town in the Shire of Angus, so called (as some think) from Moinross, which
in the ancient British Language signifies a Fennish Promontory, and was of old
called Celurra.

This Town is situated at the mouth of the River of Southesk, on the North side
of it. It has a Harbor for Ships of a considerable Burden, and has frequent
correspondence with Foreigners; being adorned with fine Buildings of all sorts,
and has an Hospital for the poorer Inhabitants.

It gives the Title of Marquess of that Name to the chief of the Family of the
Grahams.

De MONTE ROSARUM, Carmen ARCTURI JONSTONI.
NObilis urbs Rosei jam gaudet nomine Montis
Quae prius a Coelo dicta Coelurca fuit.
Proximus huic mons est quem praeterlabitur amnis,
Ambrosias populo praebet uterque dapes.
Mons lectas pecudes, Salmones sufficit unda,
Lautius and si quid stagna Neronis habent.
Quae recreent oculos incingunt lilia ripas,
Ipsaque puniceis sunt juga picta rosis.
Ad latus Eoum se vectigale profundum
Explicat; and velis mill teguntur aquae.
Propter aquas populo praebet spectacula campus,
Flumine quem Boreas hinc lavat, inde Notus.
Hic Juvenum pars flectit equos, pars utitur arcu,
Pars rotat Herculea grandia saxa manu:
Sunt quos lucta juvat, pars gaudet ludere disco,
Vel volucres curvo pellere fuste pilas.
Vrbs celebris, te si spectet Capitolia Romae
Jupiter, Idalium deseret alma Venus.
De eadem Carmen. J. JONSTONI.
AVreolis urbs picta rosis, Mons molliter urbi
Imminet: Hinc urbi nomina facta canunt.
At veteres perhibent quondam dixisse Coelurcam:
Nomine sic prisco and nobilitata novo est.
Et prisca atque nova insignis virtute, Virumque
Ingeniis, patriae qui peperere decus.
To the Right Honorable JOHN Marquess of Athol, Earl of Tullibardin, Viscount
of Balquhidder, Lord Murray, Balvenie and Gask, etc. Knight of the Most Ancient
and Most Noble Order of the Thistle.
DUNKELL.
A Town in the Sheriffdom of Perth, on the North of Tay, at the Foot of the
Grampian Hills, being surrounded with pleasant Woods. It is the chief
Market Town of the Highlands, and the Bishop's Seat. The Ruins of the Cathedral
Church are yet to be seen; but that which chiefly adorns it, are the stately
Buildings lately erected by the Marquess of Athol.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS Marquess of Carmarthen, Earl of Danby, Viscount
of Dumblane and Latimer, Baron Osborne of Kiveton, etc. Lord President of their
Majesty's Council in England, and Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter,
etc.
DUMBLANE.
DVMBLANE is a pleasant little Town, on the Bank of the River Allan, where the
Ruins of the Bishops and Regular Canons Houses are to be seen. Here the Lord
William Drummond, Viscount of Strathallan, has very fine Dwellings, and
considerable Revenues in the Circumjacent Country.

Here also was a Church of excellent Workman-ship, a part of which remains yet
entire. In the Ruins whereof is an ancient Picture representing the Countess
of Stratherne, with her Children kneeling, asking a Blessing from St. Blanus
clothed in his Pontifical Habit.

Not long ago Robert Lighton was Bishop of this Place, a Man of an Exemplary
Life and Conversation. He was afterward translated to the Sea of Glasgow,
which he willingly resigned, and gave himself wholly up to the Exercises of a
pious and contemplative Life.

At his Death he left all his Books, both Manuscripts and others, to the Use of
the Diocese of Dumblane, and mortified a Sum of Money for erecting a Library.
A Salary was mortified also to the Bibliothecarius by the same Bishop's
Sister's Son. It gives the Title of Viscount of Dumblane to the Family of
Carmarthen, in England.

To the Right Honorable JAMES Earl of Arran, Eldest Son to the Duke of
Hamilton, and Knight of the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle.
HAMILTON.
HAMILTON is a Town of Lower Clidsdale, situated in a most pleasant Plain upon
the Western Bank of Clyde. Its Chief Ornament is the Palace of the Duke of
Hamilton, the Court whereof is on all Quarters adorned with most noble
Buildings; Especially the Frontispiece looking toward the East, is of excellent
Workman-ship; and has a magnificent Avenue. Upon the One Hand of this Avenue
there is a Hedge, and on the other, fair large Gardens, abundantly furnished
with Fruit Trees, and pleasant Flowers of all Sorts.

Upon the West side of the Town there is a large Park, surrounded with a very
high Stone Wall, which is about Seven Miles in Circuit; the Brook Aven running
through it.

This Park is also famous for its Forest of Tall Oaks, and for the great Number
of Hearts and Buffles it abounds with.

There is a Church adjacent to the Palace, in the Vaults whereof is the Burial
Place of the Dukes of Hamilton.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Master of Stairs, One of the Lords of their
Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council; and Principal Secretary of State for
the Kingdom of Scotland.
AIR or AIRTH.
AIR an ancient Town, and the Chief Marketplace of the West of Scotland. In
it the Sheriff Courts are kept, it being the head Town of that Sheriffdom,
which bears the same Name. It was of old called St. John's Town; but now that
Name is antiquated.

This Town though it be situated in a sandy Plain, yet it has pleasant and
fruitful Fields, and Greens equally pleasant both Summer and Winter. It has a
stately Church; and a Bridge with Four Arches joins it to the New Town, which
is situated on the North side the Water, where is to be seen the Castle of the
Lord of Craigwallace.

A Mile North of the Town, not far from the Sea-Shoar, there is a Lazer-House,
commonly called the King's Chapel, which King Robert de Bruce set apart for
maintaining Lepers.

This Town by the King's Patent is the Sheriff's Seat, and has Thirty and Two
Miles to the South and North within its Jurisdiction.

De Aira, Carmen ARCTURI JONSTONI.
URBS coeli contenta bonis, vel ab aere puro
Vel quo forte cluis nomen ab aere trahis.
Mole quidem parva es, sed molem dotibus auges,
Vrbibus and magnis nobilitate praeis.
Grandia saxa vides, exili corpore gemmas;
Plus tamen exilis gemma nitoris habet.
Et Jovis exiguo surgit de semine Quercus,
Et septemgemini fluminis or a latent.
Macte animis terras sibi quae subjecit and undas
Tibridis urbs, olim nil nisi villa fuit.
De eadem, Carmen J. JONSTONI.
PArva urbs, ast ingens animus in fortibus haeret,
Inferior nulli nobilitate Virum.
Aeris e campis haurit purissima coelum,
Incubat and miti mollior aura solo.
Aeria hinc, non Era prius, credo, illa vocata est:
Cum duris quid enim mollia juris habent?
Infera cum superis quod si componere fas est,
Aurea fors dici debuit illa prius.
To the Right Honorable GEORGE Earl of Marischal, Lord Keith and Allrie, etc.
Hereditary Marshall of Scotland.
DUNOTTER.
IT lies in the Shire of the Mairnes, and is situated upon a high and
inaccessible Rock stretched out into the Sea, and fortified with strong Walls.
It is one of the Dwellings of the Earls Marshall, the Chief of the Keiths, who
for the Warlike Valor of their Predecessors in defending their Country from
Foreign Enemies, were made Hereditary Mareschals of Scotland.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of Arroll, Lord Hay and Slains, etc. Lord
High Constable of Scotland.
DRYBRUGH.
THE Abbey of Drybrugh is situate upon the Bank of the River Tweede, in
Tivedale. 'Twas founded by Hugh de Morvill, High Constable of the Kingdom of
Scotland, for the Monks of the Order of Premontre.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Lord Stranever, Eldest Son to the Earl of
Sutherland, Hereditary Sheriff, Lord of Regality, Admiral of Sutherland and the
rest of those Seas, Colonel of a Regiment of Infantry; and One of their
Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
INVERNESSE.
THE head Town of the Sheriffdom of Invernesse, and the Sheriff's Seat, where
he keeps his Court. It is most commodiously situated on the South side of the
Water of Nesse, on the very Brink of the River, a fit Place for entertaining
Commerce with the neighboring Places.

Of old it was the Seat of the Kings of Scotland, and has a Castle standing on
a pleasant Hill, having a large Prospect into the circumjacent Fields and Town.

Near the Castle, there is lately a Bridge built over the Water of Nesse,
consisting of Seven Arches all of hewn Work.

It has a Harbor fit for smaller Vessels. As also two Churches, the one for
the English, and the other for the Irish.

De Innernessa, Carmen ARCTURI JONSTONI.
URBS vicina freto, tu surgis in ubere campo,
Et prope Parrhasiae Virginis ora vides.
Atria te Regum decorant, and sanguine fuso
Pictorum, toties qui rubuere lacus.
Vela ferens Nessus vitreis interluit undis
Et ratibus famulas applicat ille rates.
Non coit unda gelu, medio sed tempore brumae
Libera victrices in mare volvit aquas.
Nec desunt gravidae gelido sub sydere messes,
Nec minus est famuli fertilis unda freti.
Proxima te Thule vicinaque ditat Ierne,
Omnis and arctois insula septa vadis.
Abstulit imperii dudum Bodotria fasces,
Et Dominae titulo coepit Edina frui:
Tu tamen emporium regni diceris, honorem
Hunc natura tibi dat geniusque loci.
To the Right Honorable the Viscount of Stormont.
SCOON.
SCOON is a Town in the Sheriffdom of Perth, famous in former Ages for the
Abbey which was founded by King David I. for the Monks of the Order of St.
Augustine. It is situated on the North Bank of Tay, and is thought to be the
Center of the Kingdom.

Here is a Church, famous for the usual Coronation of the Kings of Scotland; in
which is the Tomb of Dav. Murray, who was the first of the Family of Bavaird,
and was made Knight Baronet by King James VI. who also erected Stately
Buildings here, which are possessed by his Heirs, under the Title of the
Viscounts of Stormont.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Elgin and Ailsbury, Viscount Bruce of
Ampthill, Baron Bruce of Kinlos, Wharton and Skeleton, etc.
ELGIN
A Town in the Shire of Murray, situated on a pleasant Plain. It is the
Bishop's Seat, and the head Town of that Sheriffdom. Upon a sandy Hill to the
East of the Town are to be seen the Ruins of an old Castle. It had a Cathedral
Church of admirable Structure, as appears by the Walls and Ruins which are yet
extant.

It gives the Title of Earl of Elgin to the Family of Ailsbury, in England.

De Elgina, Carmen ARCTURI JONSTONI.
LAudibus Elgini cedunt Peneia Tempe
Et Bajae veteres, Hesperidumque nemus.
Hinc Maris, inde vides praedivitis aequora Campi.
Frugibus haec populum, piscibus illa beant.
Huc sua Phaeaces miserunt poma: Damasci
Pruna nec hic desunt, vel Corasuntis opes.
Attica mellifici liquistis tecta volucres;
Et juvat hic pressis cogere mella favis.
Aemulus argento foecundos Loxa per agros
Errat and obliquis in mare serpit aquis.
Arcibus Heroum nitidis urbs cingitur, intus
Plebei radiant nobiliumque lares.
Omnia delectant, Veteris sed rudera Templi
Dum spectas, Lachrymis, Scotia, tinge genas.
To the Right Honorable PATRICK Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorn, Viscount of
Tannadice, Lord Lion and Glammis, etc.
DUNDEE
A Town in the Shire of Angus, so called from Dun, which in our old Language
signifies a Hill, and Tay the Name of a River, it being situated at the Foot of
a Hill on the North side of the River Tay, not far from its Entry into the
Ocean.

It stands on a most pleasant Plain, and is adorned with excellent Buildings of
all sorts. It has two Churches, a high Steeple, a Harbor for Ships of
Burden, and a considerable Traffic with Strangers, whence the Inhabitants are
generally rich, and those who fall into Decay have a large Hospital provided
for them.

Of old this Town gave the Title of Earl, and Dignity of Constable to the Chief
of the Scrimgers, but of late it gave the Title of Viscount to the Lord Dundee;
who was killed by their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary's Forces, at the
Battle of Gillicrankie.

De Taoduno, Carmen ARCTURI JONSTONI.
URBS vetus undosi cui parent ostia Tai,
Et male Cimbrorum quod tegit ossa solum.
Genua te spectans, sua ridet marmora, moles
Pyramidum floccii barbara Memphis habet.
Ipsa suas merito contemnunt Gargara messes,
Quasque regit damnat terra Liburna rates:
Et Venetum populi de paupertate quaeruntur;
Nec Cnidus aequoreas jactat ut ante greges.
Si confer lubet, pubes Spartana juventae,
Consulibus cedit Roma togata tuis.
Qui mendicatum Tai de gurgite nomen
Dat tibi, credatur mentis and artis inops:
Structa deum manibus cum possis jure videri,
Jure dei donum te tua terra vocat.
De eadem, Carmen J. JONSTONI.
QVA Notus argutis adspirat molliter auris,
Hac placide coeunt Taus and Oceanus.
Hic facile excipiens Venientes littore puppes
Indigenis vasti distrahit Orbis opes.
Saepe dolis tentata and belli exercita damnis,
Invictis animis integra praestat adhuc.
Fama vetus crevit cum religione renata,
Locis and hinc fulsit pura nitela aliis.
Alectum dixere prius, si maxima spectes
Commoda, fors donum dixeris esse dei.
Tu decus aeternum gentisque urbisque Boeti
Caetera dic patriae dona beata tuae.
To the Right Honorable CHARLES Earl of Southesk, Lord Carnegie of Kinnaird
and Leachers, etc.
ABERBROTHOCK.
ABERBROTHOCK or Arbroth is a Town in Angus, so called from Aber, which in our
Ancient Language signifies a Side or Bank, and Brothock the Name of a Water
which runs by it. It lies on the Seaside near the Promontory, called Rid-Head,
and has a Harbor for Ships.

Here was one of the Richest Monasteries of this Nation, founded by King
William of Scotland, about 1170, in Honor of Thomas Becket Archbishop of
Canterbury, with whom he was intimately acquainted. It had several considerable
Donations from Gillchrist Earl of Angus, and his Son Gillbred. It was possessed
by the Monks of St. Bennet. To the Inhabitants of which Town, for the
Monastery's Sake, at the Request of the said King William, King John of England
granted the same Privileges and Liberties through all the Kingdom of England
(except London) which the Natives did enjoy. The Patent is yet to be seen among
the Records of Arbroth.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of Cassillis, Lord Kennedy and Dunnur, etc.
CORSREGAL.
THIS Monastery (an Ancient but Stately Edifice) lies in the Shire of Carrick,
and was founded by Donkan Earl of Carrick, for the Use and Convenience of the
Cistercian Monks.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE Viscount of Tarbat, Lord Mccloed of
Castlehaven, etc. Lord Register, and One of their Majesty's Most Honorable
Privy Council.
CHANNERIE
A Town in the Shire of Ross, so called from the College of Canons Regular that
flourished there, lies on the Sea side, and is surrounded with pleasant Hills.
It had a large Cathedral Church, a part of which does yet remain, and is a
Bishop's Seat.

Here is to be seen a stately Dwelling of the Earl of Seaforth, who has
considerable Revenues in that County.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Viscount of Strathallan, Lord Drommond of
Cromlix, etc.
PERTH
THE Head Town of the Sheriffdom of Perth, and the Sheriff's Seat where he
keeps his Courts. For Dignity it is the second Town in Scotland, and is
commonly called St. John's Town, from a Church built there and dedicated to St.
John.

It is a pretty Town, placed between Two Greens on the South Bank of Tay. At a
full Tide small Vessels may come up to the Town. Of old it had a Bridge of
Stone, which was carried away by an Inundation. Here was also a Famous
Monastery, founded by King James the I. Anno Dom. 1430 for the Carthusians.

It gives the Title of Earl to the Family of Perth, chief of the Name of
Drommond.

De Pertho, Carmen ARCTURI JONSTONI.
BE^ta prius, Perthum nunc urbs antiqua vocaris,
Et simul a sancto praesule nomen habes.
Te tua mundities commendat and aura salubris,
Et qui foecundos irrigat amnis agros.
Divitias lapsi testantur fragmina pontis,
Et non vulgari fragmina coesa manu.
Hunc Jovis imperio collectis imbribus unda
Subruit, impositum nescia far jugum.
Hic quoque Grampigenae, quam tollunt carmine vates,
Est tibi flumineis insula cincta vadis.
Insula parva quidem, celebrem sed reddidit olim
Monticolas inter pugna cruenta duces.
Hic agiles exercet equos generosa juventus,
Linquit and alipides post sua terga notos.
Martius hic meruit Circus vel arena vocari,
Grajugenum levibus nobilitata votis.
Sunt tibi vicini saltus; hic figere Cervos:
Mollibus and Capreis tendere lina potes.
Carsia nec procul est, hic redolentia poma
Et pyra Crustrithis aequiparanda legis.
Vtile dum dulci mulces, punctum omne tulisti:
Et tibi debetur summus honoris apex.
De eadem, Carmen J. JONSTONI.
PRopter aquas tui liquidas and amoena vireta.
Obtinet in medio regna superba solo.
Nobilium quondam Regum clarissima seeds;
Pulchra situ, and pingui germine dives agri.
Finitimis dat jura locis, moremque modumque
Huic dare, laus illis haec meruisse dari.
Sola inter patrias incincta est maenibus urbes,
Hostibus assiduis ne vaga praeda foret.
Quanta Virum virtus, dextrae quae praemia norunt
Cimber, Saxo ferox, and genus Hectoridum.
Foelix laud nova, foelix quoque laud vetusta:
Perge recens priscum perpetuare decus.
To the Right Honorable DAVID Earl of Levin, Lord Leslie of Balgenie,
Principal Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh, and One of their Majesty's Most
Honorable Privy Council.
DUMFERMELIN
A Town situated on the West end of the Sheriffdom of Fife. It was of old the
Kings Seat: For on a little Hill near the Bridge are to be seen the Ruins of
an Old Castle, which is supposed to have been the Palace of Malcolm Canmois. It
has a Royal Palace in it, near to which are the Ruins of a stately Monastery
which was founded Anno 1130, by David I. King of Scotland, for the Benedictine
Monks, and finished by King Malcolm III. where also both he, and St. Margaret
his Queen, are buried. It is famous for the Birth of King Charles I. and gives
the Title of Earl to a Branch of the Family of the Seatons.

To the Right Honorable ALEXANDER Earl of Kincardin, Lord Bruce, etc.
CULROSSE
HAS its Name from Cul, which signifies a Bank or Border, and Rosse, which was
the ancient Name of Fife, because it lies in the Western Corner of that Shire.

It is situated on a Descent at the side of the River of Forth, its Chief
Commodities being Salt and Coals. That which chiefly adorns it, is the stately
Buildings of the Earl of Kincardin; with the Gardens and Terrace Walks about
it, having a pleasant Prospect to the very Mouth of the River Forth. Near unto
these Buildings are to be seen the Ruins of an Ancient Monastery.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Roxburgh, Lord Kerr of Cessford and
Cavertoun, etc.
KELSO
A Town in Teviotdale, situated near the Mouth of the River Tweede. It was
lately almost wholly destroyed by Fire, but is now rebuilt and adorned with
most stately Buildings. It is surrounded with several Noblemen's Manors, and
most pleasant and fruitful Fields.

Here are to be seen the Ruins of an Ancient Monastery founded by King David,
and possessed by the Cistercians, an Order instituted about the Year 1000,
under Pope Urban the II. by Robert, Abbot of the famous Monastery of Cisteaux
in Burgundy, whence the Observers of that Order were called Cistercians.

To the Right Honorable ARCHIBALD Earl of Farfor, Lord Vandall and Oyd, etc.
One of the Lords of their Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
The Castle of BOTHWELL
IN Lower Clidsdale, not far from the River of Clyde, near to which is a Bridge
of hewn Stone: The Ruins of it only are to be seen, which notwithstanding do
testify its former Greatness.

Here of old was a Prebendary enjoyed by a secular Priest, founded by Archibald
Lord Douglas.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES Earl of Haddington, Lord Binning and Byres,
etc.
MELROSSE.
IT lies in Teviotdale on the Bank of the River Tweede, was founded by St.
David, in the Year 1136, and possessed by the Bernardines, Monks so called from
St. Bernard a Burgundian; who entering the Monastery of Cisteaux, proved so
strict an Observer of Monastic Discipline, that the Regulars of the foresaid
Order took their Name from him; and are called at this Day promicuously,
Bernardines or Cistercians.

To the Right Honorable JAMES Earl of Panmure, Lord Maule, Brechen and Navarr,
etc.
BRECHEN.
BRECHEN is a Town situated upon the Banks of the Water of Southesk, in the
Shire of Angus; and is a Bishop's See. Here is a Stately Bridge over the River
Esk, consisting of Two Arches. It is a considerable Market Town for Salmon,
Horses, Oxen and Sheep. Here also are to be seen the Ruins of the Bishop's
Palace, and of the Canons Houses. Brechen likewise is famous for the memorable
Slaughter of the Danes, not far from it.

De Brechina, Carmen ARCTURI JONSTONI.
FErtile Brechinum geminos interjacet amnes:
Hic Boream spectat, respecit ille notum.
Rupibus inclusae sternuntur pontibus undae:
Sunt quoque securis flumina plena vadis.
Hanc simul Arctoi decorat victoria Regis
Perfida cum socii terga dedere Duces.
Praesulis hic sancti domus est, and pyramid aedi
Proxima, Phydiacae forsitan artis opus.
Si molem spectes, nihil est exilius illa,
Ipsa tamen coeli culmina tangit apex.
Est structura teres, nec raro lumina fallit,
Eminus hanc spectans esse putabis acum.
Daedula compages est, and ventos ridet and imbres,
Nec metuit magni tela trisulca Jovis.
Si fabricam confer lubet, Brechinia turris
Pyramidas superat, Nile superbe, tuas.
To the Right Honorable GEORGE Earl of Caithness, Lord Biridall, etc.
ROSLIN Chapel.
THIS Chapel lies in Mid-Lothian, Four Miles from Edinburgh, and is one of the
most curious Pieces of Workman-ship in Europe. The Foundation of this rare
Building was laid Anno 1440 by William St Clair, Prince of Orkney, Duke of
Holdenburgh, etc. A Man as considerable for the public Works which he erected,
as for the Lands which he possessed, and the Honors which were conferred upon
him by several of the greatest Princes of Europe. It is remarkable that in all
this Work there are not two Cuts of one sort. The most curious Part of the
Building is the Vault of the Quire, and that which is called the Prince's
Pillar so much talked of. This Chapel was possessed by a Provost, and Seven
Canons Regular, who were endued with several considerable Revenues through the
Liberality of the Lairds of Roslin.

Here lies buried George Earl of Caithness, who lived about the Beginning of
the Reformation, Alexander Earl of Sutherland, great Grandchild to King Robert
de Bruce, Three Earls of Orkney, and Nine Barons of Roslin.

The last lay in a Vault, so dry that their Bodies have been found entire after
Fourscore Years, and as fresh as when they were first buried. There goes a
Tradition, That before the Death of any of the Family of Roslin, this Chapel
appears all in Fire.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Dundenald, Lord Cochran, etc.
PASLEY,
A Monastery in the Barony of Ranfrew, founded by the Steward of Scotland, in
the Year 1160. The Monks of Clugny were the first Possessors thereof, then the
Cistercians, and after that the Monks of Clugny a second time, who were
religious Persons of the Order of St. Bennet, but reformed by Odo Abbot of
Clugny in Burgundy, from whence they had their Name.

The Monks of this Place wrote a History of this Nation, commonly called The
Black Book of Pasley. At the Reformation it was bestowed on the Duke of
Chatterault. Sir Robert Spotswood had this Book in his Library, and after his
Murder General Lambert got it, and brought it to England.

The BASSE
IS a little Island within the Forth, about a Mile distant from the South
Shore. The Prospects of it sufficiently testify how difficult the Access to it
is.

Upon the Top of this Island there is a Spring, which sufficiently furnishes
the Garrison with Water; and there is Pasturage for Twenty or Thirty Sheep.

It Is also famous for the great Flocks of Fowls, which resort thither in the
Months of May and June, the Surface of it being almost covered with their
Nests, Eggs and young Birds. The most delicious amongst these different Sorts
of wild Fowl, is the Soaling Goose, and the Kittie Waicke. There is only one
Island more in the West of Scotland, called Ailsey, where these Geese do breed;
and from these two Places the Country is furnished with them, during the Months
of July and August.

This Island of the Basse was an old Possession of the Family of Lauder, and in
King Charles II's Reign it was bought and annexed to the Crown.

ERRATA.
Page 14. l. 8. read which is. p. 16. l. 10. r. Steps. p. 23. l. 15. for Tower
r. Town. p. 34. l. 6. for Court r. Coast twice. p. 64. l. 1. r. Dundonald.

FINIS.
THE PROSPECTS.
Facies Arcis EDENBURGEENAE The Southside of the Castle of EDINBURGH.


Prospectus Civitatis EDINBURGENAE a proedio DEAN dicto The Prospect of
EDINBRUGH from ye DEAN.


Arx BRITANNODUNENSIS ab Oppido Cella Patric^^ dicto. The Castle of DUMBRITTON
from Kilpatrick.


Prospectus Arcis Regiae BRITANNODUNENSIS ab Occide^^ Their Malies Castle of
DUMBRITTON from the West.


Facies Arcis BRITANNODUNENSIS ab Orient. Prospect of ye Castle of DUMBRITTON
from ye East.


The Prospect of the Town of Sterling from the East URBIS STERLINI, PROSPECTUS
AB ORIENT.


The Prospect of their Maties Castle of Sterling. ARCIS REGIAE STERLINENSIS
PROSPECTUS.


The Prospect of the House, and of the Town of Alloa PROSPECTUS ARCIS, ET
OPPIDI DE ALLOA.


Prospectus Civitatis LIMNUCHI. The Prospect of the Town of LINLITHGOW.


Prospectus Regis Palatis LIMNUCHENSIS. The Prospect of Their Majties Palace of
LINLITHGOW.


Prospectus FALCOLANDIAE ab Orient. The Prospect of FALKLAND from the East.


Palace of FALKLAND


Faeics Civitatis Sancti ANDREAE. The Prospect of The Town of St. ANDREWS.


Ruderae Ecclesioe Cathedraelis Sancti ANDREAE. The Ruins of the Cathedral of
St. ANDREWS.


Rudera Arcis Sancti ANDREAE. The Ruins of the Castle of St. ANDREWS.


Facies Civitatis GLASCOAE ab Austro. The p^^spect of the Town of GLASGOW from
ye South.


Facies Civitatis GLASGOW ab Orient Estevo. The Prospect of ye Town of GLASGOW
from ye North East.


The COLLEGE of GLASGOW


Facies Civitatis Novae ABREDONIAE ut a propugnaculo Blockhous (...) aspicitur.
New ABERDENE from the Block house


Facies Civitaetis ABERDONIAE Veteris. The Prspect of Old ABERDIEN.


Prospectus Civitatis HADINAE. The Prospect of the Town of HADDINGTOWN.


Prospectus Oroe maritimoe LOTHIANAE a Prcedio de Stony hill. The Coast of
LOTHIAN from Stony hill.


Prospectus Civitatis MONTIS-ROSAR^ The Prospect of the town of MONTROSE.


Prospectus Civitatis CALIDONIAE. The Prospect of the Town of DUNKELD.


Ecclesia Cathedralis CALIDONIAE. The Cathedral Church of DUNKELL.


Prospectus Oppidi DUMBLANI. The Prospect of the Town of DUMBLANE.


Ecclesia Cathedralis DUMBLANI. The Cathedral Church of DUMBLANE.


Prospectus Oppidi HAMILTONIAE. The Prospect of the Town of HAMILTON.


Prospectus Civitatis AERAE ab Orientale. The Prospect of the Town of AIR from
the East.


Prospectus Civitatis AERAE a Domo de Newtown^ The Town of AIR, from ye House
of Newtowne.


PROSPECTUS ARCIS DUNOTRIE. The Prospect of Dunotter Castle.


Prospectus Oppidi de DRYBURGH. (...) Prospect of the Town of DRYBURGH.


Rudera Coenobij de DRYBRUGH. (...) Ruins of the Abbey of DRYBRUGH.


Prospectus Civitatis INNERNESS. The prospect of ye Town of INNERNESS,


Prospectus Palaty et Oppidi de SKUYN. The Prospect of the House and Town of
SKUYN.


Prospectus Oppidi ELGINAE. The Prospect of the Town of ELGINE.


Rudera Templi Cathedralis ELGINI. The Ruins of the Cathedral Church of ELGIN.


Prospectus Civitatis TAODUNI. Prospect of ye Town of DUNDEE.


Prospectus Civitatis TAODUNI ab Orient.The Prospect of ye Town of DUNDEE from
ye East.


Prospectus Oppidi ABERBROTHIAE. Prospect of ye Town of ABERBROTHICK.


Prospectus Coenobij ABERBROTHIAE. The Prospect of ye Abbey of ABERBROTHICK.


Rudera Caenoby de CORSREGAL seu crucis Sti Re^^^. The Ruins of ye Abbey of
CORSREGAL.


CHANONRIA Civitatis ROSSIAE. The CHANNERY Town of ROSS.


Prospectus Civitatis PERTHI. The Prospect of ye Town of PERTH.


Prospectus Oppidi et Caenoby FERMELODUNENS. The Prospect of ye Town and Abbey
of DUMFERMLING.


Prospectus Cenoby FERMELODUNEN* The Prospect of the Abbey of DUMFERMLING.


Prospectus Palatij and Oppidi CULROSSIAE. The Prospect of ye House and Town of
COLROSS.


Prospectus Coenobij de CULROSS. The Prospect of the Abbey of CULROSS.


Prospectus Oppidi CALSONIS. The Prospect of the Town of KELSO.


Monasterium CALSONENSE. The Abbey of KELSO.


Prospectus Arcis BOTHWELIAE. The prospect of BOTHWELL Castle.


Rudera Coenobij de MELROSS, The Ruins of the Abbie of MELROSS.


Prospectus Oppidi BRECHINAE. The Prospect of ye Town of BRECHIN.


Capella de ROSSLIN. The Chapel of ROSSLIN.


Prospectus Caenobij et Civitatis PASLETI. The Prospect of the Abbey and town
of PAISLAY.


Facies Insulae BASSAE ab ora Maris Australi. The Prospect of ye BASS from ye
South shore.


Latus Insulae BASSAE Orientale. The East side of the BASS.


The End of the PROSPECTS.

