A MOST JOYFVLL DECLARATION Made by Colonel SKIPON Sergeant Mayor General of
the whole Army, to his Regiment of Officers and Soldiers, at their Muster at
Maidenhead Ian. 12.

Wherein he does most Nobly declare his Resolution to them all, concerning his
advancing forwards to the enemy, and to give them Bataile with his Single
Rement of Foot, and his troop of Horse, and Five Pieces of Ordnance.

Likewise a Speech and Protestation to these Captains, namely Sergeant Major
Francis Captain Man, Captain Deacon, Captain Tasker Captain Hawood,
Captain Harison.

Together with their Answer to the same.

Likewise His MAJESTY'S Message sent by Cap. Hearne and read in Guildhall on
Friday last January 13, 1643.

London Printed for William Rogers 1643.

A most Joyful DECLARATION Made by Colonel Skipon, Sergeant Mayor General of
the Army, January 12. at the general Muster at Maidenhead.
Gentlemen, fellow Soldiers, and Countrymen,
I Have some Propositions that has within these few hours used from my breast,
and having such a fair oppertunity, at this time; J will God willing, declare
them unto you, which are as follows.

Most Renowned, and undaunted spirits, J am so enjoyed to see you all so
heartable, in these Military affairs, and in the performance of your duty
toward this cause, which you have now undertaken; That I am almost stricken
into a sownd for joy, and indeed you have so won my heart, by these your
valient actions, that I do not value my life at the smalest rate it can be
valued at, but am willing to spend my dearest blood, in this just cause, and
amongst you all.

Gentlemen,

Gentlemen, This which I have declared unto you by Gods help J will perform;
And am willing to hazard my Life for you all: But to declare my mind more
fully unto you, J do desire of you, that you will observe and obey these my
Instructions and advertisments to you all.

I. J do exhort you, to serve GOD, and to do your duty toward him; and in so
doing it will be the greatest means through Gods blessing, to make you all
Conquerors, and Masters of the field.

II. J do desire you, that you would offer no abuse or wrong whatsoever, to
any person or persons where you are Quartered, or Billetted; and in so doing,
you will bring honor, and fame upon your selves; And everlasting Glory and
happiness to your Souls.

III. J do here promise unto you, that this being performed by you, no duty
shall be wanting of my part, That does belong to any person, honor, and the
Military Discipline whatsoever: And as we do all now pray and desire for a
seasonable weather, so it is my hearty and earnest desire, so soon as God be
pleased to give us such a happy time, to advance toward our enemy, (which are
now raised for the after Ruin and destruction of the Protestant Religion; For
Gentlemen I must tell you, that your cause is so good, that God had never such
a work in hand, since the first Creation; And for the better encouragement of
you all, J do protest and vow unto you, that as God has been pleased to
infect upon me this little Judgment which J have through my industry obtained
unto, in Foreign Counties.

So am J fully Resolved to declare it to you all, and to show you what lies in
my power, promiseing in the presence of him that knows the secrets of all
hearts, never to leave you so long as J have breath in my body and that so long
as J have legs to stand on, or hands to hold up my weapon against my enemy, I
will do my endeavoure for the defense and safeguard of you all, Thus gentlemen
J have declared my mind to you J must now take my leave, and within these few
days, J will be with you again, where J am Resolved to advance forwards.

This speech was spoken January the 12. at the General Muster at maidenhead,
where the soldiers with loud acclamations cried out, that they would lose
their lives with him, desiring that they might fall on the enemy with all
expedition.

HIS MAJESTY'S MESSAGE Sent by Captain Hearne, and read in Guild Hall on
Friday last, 1642.
THat His Majesty does not entertain any misapprehension of the love and
loyalty of His City of London, but desires His good Subjects there, consider
what confidence he can have of security there, whilst the Laws of the Land
are so notoriously despised and trampled under foot, and Arms taken up against
His consent, and express command; and Alderman Pennington (Lord Mayor) Cap.
Ven, Foulk; and Manwaring, are there etc. And His Majesty would know, whether
the Petitioners believe, that the reviling the Book of common prayer, and
complying with, and assisting persons who have attempted to kill His Majesty,
be to defend His royal person and honor? And if they shall reform other
things displeasing to His Majesty, and apprehend and committ to safe custody,
these four men. His Majesty will speedily return to them, and offers a
general pardon, etc. and as for His Majesty's concurrence with the advice of
His two Houses of Parliament, His Majesty doubts not how far beyond the
example of His Predecessors, He has concurred in passing Laws, and used all
means to beget a right understanding between Him and them. And will therefore
apply themselves to those, who by Just, Peaceable, and honorable Propositions
to His Majesty, can only beget that concurrence.

FINIS.

