The Complete CHRISTIAN, And Complete Armor and Armoury OF A CHRISTIAN,
Fitting him with all necessary furniture for that his holy Profession: OR, The
Doctrine of Salvation: Delivered in a plain and familiar explication of the
Common Catechism, for the benefit of the younger sort, and others. Wherein
summarily comprehended, is generally represented the truly Orthodox and
constant Doctrine of the Church of England, especially in all points necessary
to salvation. By W. S. D. D.

Hac est Porta Domini, Justi intrabunt in eam Printed for the Author. 1643.

This Treatise is divided into five Parts, according to the five Parts of the
Catechism.
THe first Part, Explicating the Title, and Introduction, in the 4. first
Questions.

The Second Part, Concerning the Creed, or Articles of the Belief; the sum
of our Christian faith, in the 2. next Questions.

The Third Part, Concerning the Law of God, or ten Commandments, the Rule of
our obedience, teaching our duty and good works in the next five Questions.

The Fourth Part, Concerning prayer, and the rule or pattern thereof, the Lords
prayer, in the 2. next Questions.

The Fifth Part, The Doctrine of the Sacraments, in the 12. last Questions,
with an Appendix, Concerning holy Scripture, and the due hearing, reading, and
Art of meditating on the same.

To the thrice Excellent and Illustrious Charles, Prince of Wales, his
Highness.
Most Noble Prince,
THough the present paterns of your Royal Parents and lasting Monuments of
your famous Ancestors, remaining in Memory to all Posterity may fully and
lively de^^^ia^e, and daily instructions of your grave and learned Teachers and
Governors, may most amply express the Portraiture of a true perfect and
complete Christian; whereof the one may be said to inform, the other to
enforce you to the imitation of their Heroical virtues and graces in the
Profession of Christianity, the one guiding you by rule, the other by example,
that it may seem nothing wanting to make you abound in such heavenly knowledge
and Divine Philosophy; yet since Nunquam nimu discitur quod nunquam satis
discitur, and no word is to be accounted out of time that may be spoken
profitably, whereby and so accounted of the wiseman as apples of gold in silver
or transparant dishes, and more especially since the subject of this discourse
and Bafis whereon this Complete Christian stands and is founded, so properly
pertains as by the Laws appropriated to those of the younger sort, and your
Highness the head of the Infantery. On whom the eyes of all those Minims of
Nobility, and other the younger plants, of this flourishing Kingdom are fixed,
and ready to admire your Princely expression: and express the imitation of you
in their action. Let it not seem strange that I thus present this to you, so
properly to the younger sort, and Primarily to your self belonging as Prince of
the Youth, and Prime Mirror of all those younger Plants. The next Ages hope the
story and glory of succeeding times, or stay and prop of the flourishing of
this famous Kingdom; many things and of mean worth are usually and frequently
I know offered unto your Highness, and you have been pleased to accept of so
mean dedication, as of Grammar and other the inferior sciences: how much more
to cast a favorable aspect hitherwards: and to dayne your Graces acceptance of
this Treatise of so high and heavenly a Nature as holy Divinity, the Queen and
Mistress of all other Arts and Sciences, bringing with her, and bestowing on
her followers, such ornaments as best suite, from the meanest to the Mightiest,
to all the Professors of true Christianity: As this Treatise also may serve, if
need were, to make not only a Complementall, but a Complete Christian, and
afford to all (as we ought to desire the good of all) profit or contentment,
profit to the meanest who may learn by it, contentment to those of riper
Maturity who can best judge of it, if many of ablest judgment, and Masters in
their Profession be not deceived --

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. What the Author fails of this
and of the general good, he fails of his best vote, who heartily desires
the spiritual and best good of all. Such as it is, it lies prostrate with the
Author himself at your Highness feet, only begging such your gracious
favor, as good deservings or best desires do usually find and obraine at your
Princely hands. So tendering his Orisons, at the Throne of Grace, for the
abundant store of all heavenly and earthly blessings, for the continual
increase of your happiness, as your increase in days, to Crown and attend
you. The due and daily prayers of a faithful and sworn Servant in that your
Royal family, sometime Chaplain to your worthy and Illustrious Grand Mother
of blessed Memory, and no less for many other respects, in all dutiful
observance to your Highness,

Most Humbly Devoted Ever, William Slatyer.

The Table, or the Contents of the whole book, divided in five parts.
THe First Part, Concerning the Title, and Introduction. The Second Part,
Concerning the Creed. The third Part, Concerning the Commandments. The Fourth
Part, Concerning Prayer. The Fifth Part, Concerning the Sacraments, with an
Appendix.
The Contents of the first Part divided into five Sections.
THe First Section, discourses of the Title of the Catechism. The Second
Section, Treating of the first Question. The third Section, of the second
Question. The fourth Section, Of the third Question. The fifth Section,
Handling the fourth Question.
The second Part divided into 13. Sections.
THe first Section whereof, is of the fifth Question, and of the Creed in
general, and of faith. The second Section, a more particular explication of
the Creed. The third Section more nearly following the words of the Creed, and
the first Article thereof. The fourth Section of the second Article of the
Creed. The fifth Section of the third Article, Christ's incarnation. The sixth
Section of the fourth Article his Passion. The seventh Section of the fifth
Article his descent into hell. The eight Section, Concerning his exaltation in
five and six Articles. The ninth Section of the seventh Article his coming to
judgment. The tenth Section the eight Article, Concerning the holy Ghost. The
eleventh Section of the ninth Article, Concerning the holy Catholic Church.
The twelfth Section, the 10. 11. and 12. Article concerning the privileges of
the Church. The thirteenth Section, Of the sixth Question, concerning the sum
of the Creed.
The third part of the Catechism divided into thirteen Questions.
THe first Section, the seventh Question of the law in General. The second
Section, the eighth Question of the Commandments and the Preface to them, with
diverse necessary rules. The third Section, Of the first Table, and first
Commandment. The fourth Section, Concerning the second Commandment. The fifth
Section, Concerning the third Commandment. The sixth Section, Concerning the
fourth Commandment. The seventh Section, Concerning the fifth Commandment,
first, of the second Table, with some other necessary rules. The eighth
Section, Concerning the sixth Commandment. The ninth Section, Concerning the
seventh Commandment. The tenth Section, concerning the eighth Commandment. The
eleventh Section, Concerning the ninth Commandment. The twelfth Section,
Concerning the tenth Commandment. The thirteenth Section, the ninth tenth, and
eleventh Questions concerning the sum of the Law.
The fourth part of the Catechism, Concerning prayer, divided into eight parts.
THe first Section, the twelfth Question, a Trancision to the consideration of
prayer. The second Section, of the Lords prayer, and prayer in General. The
third Section, of the Lords prayer in particular, and the Prefaco thereof. The
fourth Section, the three former Petitions of the Lords prayer. The fifth
Section, the three latter petitions, concerning our selves. The sixth Section,
the last Petition, by some divided into twain. The seventh Section, the
conclusion of the Lords prayer. The eight Section, the sum of the Lords
Prayer both so Epitomized, and otherwise by some Explicated.
The fifth Part of the Catechism, concerning the Sacraments, divided into five
Sections, with the Appendix.
THe first Section, the fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth Question, of the
Sacraments in general. The second Section, of Baptism, in the four next
Questions. The third Section, of the Lords supper, in the four next Questions.
The fourth Section, of the due preparation to the Lords Supper, in the last
Question. The fifth Section, an Appendix, concerning the sum of the
Catechism, and ground of it and religion, holy Scripture, with the order of
hearing, reading, or meditating on the same.
The Preface to the Reader.
Friendly Reader,
FOr such I intend every good Christian, aiming at proficiency in that his most
holy profession, and Grace, I shall not be overtedious in the Preface, having
but a few things to advertise thee of, in the title and course or scope of the
Tractate and of the Marginall notes, and Table; but so, quickly even refer
thee to the book it self, ready enough to explain it self, in any thing else
that I would give thee notice of, and this so much the rather, or sooner, for
that I have more largely discoursed of some such general things, necessarily
premised to Catechizing, and the consideration thereof in another Treatise,
that may happen to come first to thy hands; for the title, (among diverse such)
if some have written of the Complete Gentleman, as well as the complete
Gentle-women, others of the resolved Gentleman, the instruction of a
Christian-woman, De Aulic^, or the Complete Courtier, and the like, well may I
on so good ground as this, furnish the Compleat-Christian also, with Spiritual
Armor, fitting for his profession, and if they have more aimed at the
Practique, and show the subjects they handled in action, I have not neglected
that neither, though I have joined Theory, more plentifully, to inform the
Practice more fully, where as after the Theorique, or Theory of the very
Practique, the same is every where inculcate, and the Practice it self urged,
where not altogether in the Argument, in the end of all other precepts, at
least by use, and application to that purpose; that if any will be so well
resolved, he may by degrees increasing in knowledge and grace, prove a better
and more accomplished Soldier, and Combatant in the Church Militant, and more
Compleat-Christian: for the course of the Treatise, it is evident, following
the words, and current of the Catechism, or as the matters, necessarily thence
flowing, offer themselves to be considered and discussed, whereby the whole may
be the better understood, and perhaps you may find, many where is comprised in
a few words, or a strait compass, diverse ampler volumes, and Commentaries, or
the pith and substance of them, but brought down so low, and laid so plain,
that even open and obvious, to the meanest Capacity, as intended for their
benefit, whatsoever necessary for them, yet as they grow to more ripeness,
more matter, to be found therein contained; when more fully apprehended, and
understood, and so not unfit, for those of higher, and better apprehension. And
whereas the whole book, though indifferent big, and seeming sufficient large,
for the subject is but a Compendium, yet of larger discourses, written thereof;
the marginall notes running by it, are also a kind of breviat or Epitome, of
the whole frame or like a hand, as it were, or Directory, pointing at the
principal matters, in the same; and if that fail, any one willing to search
any especial things, may find the table at the end, will at least furnish
them, that have but read the Treatise, and well observed the Method, and order
with any thing of note, they can desire, or that comes to their remembrance,
directing to the place exactly where it may be found, and even not failing, if
in diverse places touched, as it were per transennam, in one, else where more
Exprofesso, and directly handled, showing both the Part Section, and Question,
as the order (seen in the other Tables) leads, where to find it: So having
only thus long staid thee here at the entrance, with this conference and
direction for thy good, recommending thee with my prayers to the highest
protection, and desiring the like of thee, I now rest, bidding he most happily,

Viere, Frueie, Vale.
Another brief Table or Synopsis of this present Treatise on the Catechism.
1. Wherein the Title and first 4. Questions presenting A Preface as it were,
and Introduction to the Catechism. And being the 1. Part of this present
Treatise, a^^ Catechism, is divided into 5. Sections. 2. Wherein the Next 2.
Questions presenting The sum of our Christian faith. And being the 2. Part of
this present Treatise, a^^ Catechism, is divided into 13. Sections. 3. Wherein
the Next 3. Questions presenting The Law of God, and Commandments, the rule of
obedience, and good works. And being the 3. Part of this present Treatise, a^^
Catechism, is divided into 13. Sections. 4. Wherein the Next 2. Questions
presenting The Lords Prayer, rule and pattern of true prayer. And being the 4.
Part of this present Treatise, a^^ Catechism, is divided into ^. Sections. 5.
Wherein the Last 12. Questions presenting The doctrine of the Sacraments, with
an Appendix concerning holy Scripture. And being the 5. Part of this present
Treatise, a^^ Catechism, is divided into 5. Sections.


(...) Democharis,

(...) averseris, inest sua gratia parvia. A plain LITERAL EXPOSITION Of the
Common Catechism.
PART I.
SECT I.
The Title and Name of the book. The explication and interpretation of the
name. The persons that are to learn it; the time; The end, the sum of all
noted: as for the persons who are children: In years; and how to be
instructed: as how others are to be taught, and how is it sit and necessary
with the reason thereof: And why this Catechism to be learned so especially,
above all others, in diverse respects of necessity: And convenience, As of the
authority commanding matter and manner of it. Persons uniformity and to avoid
confusion, so the manner of teaching it. The time And and farther explained how
it pertaines to all in general to children. Ministers, masters and all
Ecclesiastical officers, to have it or to see it taught accordingly. Of
Confirmation, and how though not a Sacrament, nor superstitiously to be
abused, nor contempiuously or contentiously to be refused, but decently and
conveniently to be used, and so not expunged, nor neglected, but retained, for
diverse reasons here expressed. The matter or subject and division of the
Catechism. What Religion is, and the covenant between God and us, and duties
employed in the same, in explication of which duties is the sum and substance
of the Catechism so divided into three parts or otherwise into four, or by
some into five parts. How this Catechism differs from others, and in what
things; but in general the same with others, and in this difference how this
Catechism is of the most convenient order and method that may be, both in
regard had to the Liturgio, and natural order of the parts thereof. The
particular points in it handled to the number of 30. Or otherwife 10.
principal heads in the four parts aforesaid.

Question 1. WHat call you the Book of the grounds of Religion?
As it is expressed in the Title and superscription, and seen in the
Title Page, and Frontispice of the same.

2. How is that?
A Catechism.

3. What means that?
As the word signifies, an Instruction; understood in Religion, and the
grounds thereof.

4. How usually?
By question and answer; for the benefit of the less skillful, there intended.

5. Whose benefit named?
Children; and by them to be learned.

6. When?
Ere they be brought to the Bishop to be confirmed.

7. To what end?
To be thereby more publicly approved sit and able to be admitted to the
Communion, to be sureties and Godfathers to others; and their own sureties as
it were released, they being then able to make profession of their faith
themselves.

8. What then note you here principally in the title
1. The name of the Book, a Catechism 2. The exposition of the name, an
Instruction 3. The illustration thereof, by the use of it, being to be learned.
9. What note you in the use?
1. The persons that are to learn it, children. 2. The time when to be
learned, before the^ be brought to the Bishop. 3. The end, to be confirmed.
10. Who are accounted children?
Either primarily, children in years, the younger sort, servants and
apprentices.

Or secondarily, in understanding and discretion. Whosoever are not yet
sufficiently instructed, though perhaps more ancient and stricken in years. As
1 Cor. 3. 1. Heb. 5. 13.

11. How are children in years to be instructed?
By teaching and examination, according to the Common Catechism, by question
and answer, in the Church and else.

12. How others?
By being present, and hearing Others so examined. The Catechism expounded.


13. Is it necessary that all others should be present, as well as children?
Yes, both 1. for the encouragement of the younger sort, and of one another.

2. To increase their own knowledge, that can never be too much and too often
found scarce sufficient.

3. To make them more able to instruct and direct others, especially they that
have charge of families.

4. And that if shame to acknowledge their weakness should hold them back
from learning these grounds of Religion, yet so by often hearing the younger
sort taught, they may learn them.

14. Why should they learn it?
For many reasons. As

1. For settling men's judgments in the truth, being well grounded in the
principles of religion.

2. So the better to discover, and avoid error.

3. More profitably to read and understand holy Scripture.

4. To hear Sermons with better judgment and profit.

5. To be able to examine ourselves of our faith and duties to God and man, and
especially in our devotions, and use of Prayer, and The Sacraments.

6. To be able to render answer and account of our faith and hope.

7. The better to teach and admonish others in their duties, if occasion be
offered, or that we have charge of family, or else.

15. But why this Catechism above all others?
For Necessities sake, in some respects. Convenience, diverse otherwise.


How of necessity?
In regard of the authority commanding it, and to show our obedience to the
same. Romans 12.

16. How else of inconvenience?
In diverse respects both of the Matter, and Book it self. Persons, and their
good.


17. How in respect of the Book it self?
As being so useful and convenient as any, and most 1. Short, 2. Plain, 3.
Pithy,
And so very easy to be understood, remembered, and carried away, containing
withal the sum and substance of Religion.

18. How in respect of the persons?
1. For unity sake in opinion, and avoiding of schism, and seeds of heresy,
sown often by diversity of Religion, doubtfully by diverse set forth, and
understood.

2. Uniformity sake, and avoiding of confusion, that so all may know and take
notice of what is to be Taught by the Minister. Learned by the People.


19. What benefit thereby?
An excellent harmony, as of truth in it self, so of the minds of men in that
truth, uniformly taught in all places and congregations after the same order;
that what persons, or into what places soever, as from Parish to Parish often
removed, none need to be to seek in their answers, of what is required to be
known; this Catechism being so generally taught, and received, which
otherwise might happen disorderly, with confusion by diversity of Catechismes.

20. How is it then to be taught to the best profit of the people?
According to the directions of authority, to this purpose:

By Examination, in propounding the question, and receiving the answer.
Exposition of the sense and meaning of the words, for further benefit of all
the hearers.


21. How is the time prescribed?
Here expressed as abovesaid, before confirmation.

22. How else to be understood?
Before they may 1. Be admitted to the holy communion. 2. Be admitted to be
Godfathers and Godmothers, or sureties for any, as requisite to be able 3. To
answer for themselves, before they undertake for others:


Or can profitably and well Either Read holy Scripture: or, Hear Sermons, or
the same expounded.


23. This Catechism then generally pertaines to all?
Yes, as enjoined either to be

1. Learned by the children, as aforesaid.

2. Taught by the Ministers and others; as by

3. Masters of families, and Schoolemasters, enquired of by others, as by the
Ecclesiastical officers, whom it concerns, in case and cause of religion.

24. How is it then to be taken notice of, so to be ordered and exercised?
1. By the Ministers, who may call upon the masters of families, and
Churchwardens, to see the masters bring the youth, and all to be present at
that exercise, or cause them to be presented.

2. Churchwardens, who must see it done, or presented, if neglected.

3. Bishops, either By his Archdeacons, Officials, and Ordinaries,
who are to enquire after, and punish the neglect. Himself, and his Chaplains,
who are also to examine the sufficiency of youth, brought to be confirmed by
the same.


25. Is Confirmation then necessary?
Yes, after a sort, for public testification of the visible members of the
Church, their proficiency in that faith professed in Baptism, and approbation
of them.

26. Why is it then expunged in our Church?
It is not expunged.

27. Is it then a Sacrament?
Not so neither, but a religious ceremony, well and profitably to be used.

28. But how then in the Rubrique is it said, it is no detriment if it be not
used?
To take away the superstitious conceit in some, that without it Baptism were
imperfect, or that it is a Sacrament, or of absolute necessity.

29. But do not some hence utterly neglect it?
If they do the fault is their own, as we see from a word misunderstood, how
ready many will be to take exceptions, thence to establish their own fancy and
perverseness, and cause a world of wrangling and trouble.

30. How is it then necessary?
Only of convenience, and for political order, not as a Sacrament.

31 But he that said, Go baptize, said also to Peter, confirm thy brethren?
To be understood, as it is expounded by us, of his Stability in the faith, for
good example. Duty, in preaching, as his office. Diligence, in his calling and
Apostleship, to the comfort of his brethren, and good of the whole Church.


32. Jf it be useful, why is it neglected?
It is not.

33. Where or when is it executed?
Wheresoever required, or when it may with convenience be performed.

34. What benefit is thereby?
Much, and many ways, if we consider it, both for

1. The testification of our proficiency. 2. Approbation of our sufficiency. 3.
Gratulatory commendation of us to God by the Church. 4. Benediction from such
our superiors. 5. Prayers for further graces, then publicly made for us, and
so a 6. Comfort to the party confirmed. 7. Enabling us to further duties in
religion, and devotions that may so better be performed. 8. Relaxation of our
sureties, who stand for us engaged.
35. After the name and title, what is next to be considered at the entrance
into the Catechism?
The matter or subject, and division of the same.

36. What is the matter or subject of it?
The sum and substance of Religion, for the manner thereof also as we see, so
briefly set forth and explained.

37. What is Religion?
The bond between us and God, including our duty to him for his mercies given
to us by his covenant of grace.

38. What is that Covenant?
On Gods part mercy, that he will be our God, and give us all graces: on ours,
obedience, that we will be his servants.

39. What is then required of us?
Faith, to believe in God, and his word and promises.

Hope, to call upon him, trust in, and worship him.

Charity, the expressing of our obedience, by doing his will, and showing our
love to him and our neighbor.

40. But these are graoes of his Spirit?
Yes: but given to us, and required to be exercised by us, to his honor.

41. What is the substance then of Religion?
To exercise our selves in these; showing Our Faith, by believing in him and
his word. Hope, by prayer and depending upon him. Charity, in willing obedience
to his Commandments.


42. What then is the sum and substance of the Catechism?
The explication of these our duties,

Of Believing in him, Praying to him, Obeying his will.
The fundamental points of Religion.

And Gods worship, so briefly propounded, whence the Cate chisme principally
touches on, and explaineth

The Creed, Commandments, and Lords Prayer,
which are called summa credendor, summa faciendor, summa orandor.


The sum or breviate as it were of things that are to be Believed, Done, or
Prayed for
by us.

43. How many parts are there of the Catechism?
Especially these three, and for a Corollary of them, as it were, tho doctrine
of the Sacraments and seals of the Covenant, and our faith, and so four parts
usually expressed; or with addition of the Introduction five parts mentioned.

44. Which then are the four parts?
The exposition or explication of

1. The Creed, the Articles and sum of our belief. 2. Commandments, the
duties of us required to be done. 3. Lords Prayer, teaching how we ought to
pray. 4. Sacraments, the seals of the Covenant.
45. How else are these five parts set down?
The Introduction, in the four first questions and answers before the Creed.
Explication of the Creed, Commandments, Lords Prayer, Sacraments,
as aforesaid.


46. Are all Catechismes concerning these things?
Yes; for these are the maine points whereon they insist, howsoever in diverse
manners, as in other words or order set forth, and more or less amplified and
explained.

47. Wherein do they usually or chiefly differ from this, or one from another?
In the order of the parts.

Or, some Introduction.

Or, some Additions or other; as concerning the word of God, or Magistracy, or
the like, which yet may be reduced to the former parts; as the word of God and
Scripture, to the Belief, concerning God, who gives his word for direction of
our faith; the Magistracy, to our duty toward God, to whom they are
subordinate; and our neighbors, as all godly Magistrates and superiors are
acknowledged.

48. How differ they in introduction?
According to the variety of invention of several Authors of them; or
proceeding after diverse manners, and order, and so diversely occasioned.

49. How differ they in their order?
Sometimes by placing the Explication of the Commandments, Prayer, or
Sacraments, before the Creed, or either before other, in some other order then
is followed in this Catechism, though in substance and intention to teach even
the meanest, the very same.

50. What think you of the order and method of this Catechism?
As most convenient and profitable of all others, both following the Liturgy,
and grounded on the words of the vow made in Baptism; and so prosecuting the
parts occasioned by the same, to be considered, and also according to the
nature of the things there explained.

51. How in respect of the things?
As 1. faith, required to believe God and his promises, so the Creed first
propounded: 2. Obedience, and the fruit of faith, good works directed by Gods
will; so the Commandments secondly proposed: 3. Prayer for continuance in the
most holy course and profession of faith and good works, and so in the third
place the doctrine and rule of prayer: 4. The seals of all this from God to
us, the Sacraments, as the confirmation and ratification of his promises in the
covenant of grace.

52. How then is the Introduction fitted to this?
By putting us in mind of our name and Baptism, and so our vow and promise
for performance of the aforesaid duties and devotions, expressed and taught in
those four parts,

The Creed, Commandments, Lords Prayer, Sacraments.


53. How many points in particular in these four parts?
30. in all; the 12. Articles of the Creed, 10. Commandments, 6. Petitions of
the Lords Prayer, 2. Sacraments.


54. How are they else divided?
Into 10. heads or principal parts. viz. 3. Parts or heads of the Creed, 2.
Tables of the Law and Commandments 3. Parts of the Lords Prayer, 2. Sacraments.


And so much of the title, name, matter, and division of the Catechism: now
follows the first part of it, the Introduction.

55. Which call you the Introduction?
All contained in the four first questions, and answers of the Catechism,
reaching to the Creed.

SECT. 2. Of the Introduction; and first of the Question, What is your Name.
The first Question. How mean and trivial soever it seems. An Entrance and
making way to the greatest matters of the divine truth and our salvation. Of
the truth of Religion, and the fountain of it, Christ, the truth it self. The
way and life, And means of our salvation. In whose school these meanest
questions not to be contemned, of names the several sorts and use of them, our
Christian name, And use thereof, for our remembrance. To stir us up to devout
meditation and all other godly duties, whence, and the forgetfulness of many
herein taxed. The holy and religious use of names, And whether lawful to alter
them, and by whom, Or in what grounds, how ancient: And how far usual,
unlawful, and so the practice and example of ancient and later times: with the
unlawfulness of them; according to the good or bad intention of such change or
concealment. The good use that we ought to make of them, And their remembrance.

Quest. 1. THis seems a poor Question indeed, what is your Name?
Yet what richer treasure to be found indeed, then it is, or greater wisdom
can be shown, or better purchase to be made, then in getting a good name.

2. Yet it is a small question?
But leading to the consideration of great matters.

3. It Is a question though, that every child can tell?
Every one should, though none duly consider, if not a child of God.

4. But it is the least question that can be?
But making way to the greatest matters, that can be considered, or thought of.

5. It seems a trivial question?
Yet as the way leading to the Church door, this to the minding of the high
and holiest things.

6. It seems though too mean a one?
Nothing too mean, that may be a means to godliness, and salvation.

7. But is it not a simple and contemptible one?
Not so simple and contemptible to the eye of the foolish, as worthy the
consideration of the wisest; and leading to the knowledge and consideration of
the greatest question, that ever was put forth by or to any mortal.

8. What question was that?
What is truth?

9. How was that the greatest?
As Concerning The truth of Religion, Truth it self Christ, who is the Way
Truth. Life.

Put forth by the greatest earthly Judge that ever sat in Judgment, to the
wisest that ever was on earth.


10. How so?
By him that sat Judge on him, that was indeed Judge of the whole world, to
him that was the wisdom and Son of God, Truth it self; and therefore
appointed, and pre-ordained Judge over both quick and dead.

11. Who were they?
Pilate to Christ himself.

12. How answered?
As Incapable of the Mystery, Unworthy of the Mercy, Unmeet for the Grace,
he had.

No answer at all daigned him: and such are all they that think amiss of the
little ones in Christ's school, or of the meanest question there propounded;
since the weakness of God is stronger then the power of men; and the
foolishness of God, wiser then the wisdom of the world; and these mean
questions make way to the greatest matters of all.

13. What then is a Name?
The note of a thing, to show the nature, so near as can be; and whereby it is
known and called.

14 What name is here meant?
The Christian name.

15. How many sorts of names have we?
Two usually: the Christian name received at Baptism, and surname which we
have of our parents.

16. What use of the surname?
To distinguish our earthly kindred, and the family we come of.

17. What use of our Christian name?
As the other name minds me of my earthly parents, kindred, and
consanguinity; so this may of my heavenly Father, and spiritual affinity, and
consanguinity with Christ, and his holy Saints and Angels.

18. How mean you that?
The Consanguinity with Christ our brother, in the flesh, and all his holy
Saints of the same blood; and in him, with God the father, more nearly now;
from whom else by sin we were fallen. Affinity, as Christ the Spouse of our
souls, and his whole Church, so contracted with all Angels, and Spiritual
substances, the sons of God in Christ, more nearly to us combined; and in the
Sacraments, spiritually to be conceived, and by our Christian name received in
Baptism: So not unfitly remembered.


19. Why should we remember these things?
As ready to take any good occasion, being else very forgetful in all matters
pertaining to God and godliness.

20. But who can forget these things?
Many Christians that seem more forgetful then Messall Corvinus, that forgot
his own name; as these their Christian name and profession.

21. Can any forget their names?
Yes, and which werse, their duties, so forgetting Both God, Themselves, And
others.


22. How mean you that?
They forget or seem to forget this Christian name, that follow unchristian
and lewd courses; and so more especially.

1. Their Father, forgetting to pray, and invocate, Our father which art in
heaven, etc. as they ought.

2. Their faith, forgetting to profess, I believe in God the Father, etc. so
often as Christianly they should.

3. Their charity, when they not forgive offenses, as they should, but remember
malice more then they should.

4. Their duty to all their spiritual kindred, and affinity with the Saints in
heaven and earth, and so Their 1. Mother the Church, and her Sabbaths, Service,
Orders and Authority.
2. Brothers both 1. Christ and his merits, and mercies, by ungodliness. 2.
Men by uncharity.
3. Sisters, daughters of Sion; the Communion of Saints, the servants of God,
those that excel in virtue, by their sin and vices, that sever the soul from
God, and break the bond of peace, and that communion.


23. But were names imposed for any such memorial of holy things?
Yes, and even by God himself; as Adam, earth, to remember his original; Eva,
mother of living; and so have been altered, for such holy purposes, as in
Abram, called by God Abraham, father of many Nations; Sarai, Sarah, Jacob,
Israel.

24. Is it lawful then to alter names?
Yes, upon any good occasion, and to a good end; but not for any evil
intention or purpose.

25. How mean you that?
As God upon a blessing intended, changed Abrams name: so men upon better and
holier causes, and designs, have altered their names; whence Saul named Paul,
and Simon called also Peter: but upon any evil intention, or design, far
otherwise.

26. It is then usual?
Yes, and ancient; as we see in Abraham, Jacob, Solomon, and others; and
generally used among all, as well ancient as modern, both Christians and
others, Jews, Heathens, Turks, and Infidells, to this day.

27. As how?
As we see how,

1. Nebuchadnezzar, changed the names of Daniel and his fellows, when he
consecrated them to his Idols service, Dan. 1. 7.

2. The Turks do by their Christian Renegadoes, and their Janissaries.

3. The Popes do usually change their names, at entrance to the Papacy.

4. Kings of Scotland have done, Ominis causa, changing their names one for
another, as John to Robert.

5. Queens of England, many before the Conquest took the name of Algive, in
honor of a worthy Queen of that name; so did the Caesar's from Julius Caesar,
and diverse others.

28. How if for any evil intention?
It is unlawful, and aggravated according to the quality of the offense, and
villainy intended.

29. Who have power to change names?
The same that have power to impose them.

30. Who are they?
Superiors, as parents; or ones self: so God gave Adam his name, Adam named
his wife Eva, and gave names to all creatures; Eva named her son Cain; Rachel
hers Benoni, whom Jacob named again Benjamin; the Angel from God, and
Zachary, John the Baptist; the Angel Gabriel from God, Jesus, before conceived
in the womb.

31. How for alteration of them?
So also Abram, called Abraham by God; Sarai Sarah; Jacob Israel; Benoni
Benjamin, by Jacob; Simon also Peter, by Christ; Saint John Baptists name by
his father changed; Naomi says of herself, call me Marah. The Popes do
usually change their names, and fathers may change their childrens, with
diseretion, or on good occasion, if they mislike them.

32. Is it not a falsehood or lie to change ones name?
No, for superiors, and ones self, have such power and authority over the
name, on good occasion.

33. How in doing ill or mischief?
Then it is not only a falsehood or lie, but a mischievous and malicious lie,
or otherwise capital, according to the nature and quality of the offense and
villainy thereby intended against any, else an equivocation or imposture, and so
an offense and heinous sin before God and men.

34. How the concealing of ones name?
According to the former, lawful and tolerable on good occasion, as in danger
of life, or other eminent peril, or inconveniency: so Beza that silencing his
own name, writ a Treatise in Nath: Neskius name; Bucer of Aretius Fellinus,
with less envy to be read of others; so in ancient stories many, as Saint
Athanasius in danger of killing, silencing his name; and Saint Paul supposed
silencing his in the Epist. to the Hebrews, to be read with less envy or
prejudice by his Countrymen, who hated his person, as is seen in his story.

35. The occasion then ought to be good of the changing and concealing of ones
name?
Yes, or else it argues lightness or rashness and folly, if not worse.

36. Names are also imposed for some good reasons and occasions, as well as
distinction?
It is apparently seen in all the chiefest and the best of the ancients, and
especially in the holy Scriptures: so Adam, earth; Eva, mother of the living;
Noah, rest; Abraham, Israel; David, beloved; Solomon, peaceful; Jesus, a
Savior; and our Christian names for that blessed hope we have in Christ our
Savior.

37. What then do thou particularly mind by thy Christian name?
My Christian duty, calling, and profession.

38. As how?
As 1. my duty to God my heavenly Father, the Church my Mother, Christ my
Savior, and all the faithful my brethren and kindred in the flesh, and more
especially in him.

2. My calling to this happy estate, begun in Baptism, where I receive this
name.

3. My profession of this faith, then promised for me at Baptism, by them that
gave me this name.

SECT. 3. Quest. 2.
The imposition of the name, and benefit thereof. Authority of such imposers of
the name, with the ancient and laudable use in the Church, and therefore
retained. Of taking new, or keeping the old name, in and after baptism. Of the
new name received in baptism: and for that compared with circumcision. Diverse
instances to the contrary, and reasons of them. The general and received use
now, and reasons of it. Why children baptized as in imitation of circumcision:
and from Christ's example of receiving them. The covenant also pertaining to
them, and they can never be too soon presented to God, this being the ordinary
means of salvation, and way to heaven. How faith required with baptism, and
in very infants of faithful parents, and in the bosom of the Church. Charity
binding us to do and think the best we can of all. So the new Christian use
and benefit of Baptism, Further described, as thereby made a member of Christ,
the members of Christ's mystical body^ and the difference and degrees of them,
as in a well governed commonwealth the like to be seone. The profit of being
Christ's members, that we thereby become best the children of God. How Christ,
Angels, Men and all Creatures, Sons of God, the elect and their hope, and
preeminence. The falling Angels, And their loss and misery. How works
required, As signs of sons and heirs, not cause of inheritance. The Lawyers
question discussed, And how heaven An inheritance, or kingdom, and the
excellency of that inheritance.

1. Who gave you this name?
My Godfathers and Godmothers, who were my sureties to God, in receiving his
Covenant of grace, and promising and undertaking covenants on my part to be
performed.

2. When was it?
In my Baptism, at the Font, solemnly before God and the congregation.

3. What benefit thereby?
I was thereby made A member of Christ, The child of God, Inheritor of the
kingdom of heaven.


4. Why do you call the Sureties Godfathers and Godmothers?
Because between God and me, for my good, they did undertake such things for
me, and in my name, that I should have done my self, if I had been able.

5. What authority had they for it?
The ancient use and institution of the Church and primitive times, continued
to our days; the order of the present Church and times concurring with the
bond of charity, doing good for one another, and at the request of my natural
parents.

6. Js it an ancient use or custom?
Yes, as used near from the Apostles times, it appears in the Ecclesiastical
Histories and Decretals, as Higinus Bishop and Martyr, in the 5. Decretall
mentions: so in our Church from the first plantation of faith here, even
Adulti, those of years had Godfathers, as appears by Cunigils, King of West
Saxons, baptized by Birinus, whose Father in law and Godfather King Oswald was.

7. But how have Godfathers authority to name the child?
At the request of the parents, who have the absolute authority to name it.

8. Are the parents hereby barred?
No, it is likely, as they request the sureties, and that they do it, so at
their request, and in love, that they have the greatest stroke: and it
appears the Priest was went, before, at the Church door to ask the name of
the parents.

9. How then is it said the Godfathers do it, or are required to name it?
For public testification of it, so they do it, and that most publicly and
solemnly, by the Churches command.

10. But have not some kept their old names, as those of years baptized?
Yes, it may be so, and no doubt but parents, or themselves, or others upon
good occasions, may, and have authority at other times to change them, as
aforesaid.

11. How are names then said received in Baptism?
Generally, or for the most part, and by common practice of all, or most, being
a particular or personal and special privilege, does not infringe or
overthrow an universal law.

12. But we find many received names before baptism.
It is true, at Nations conversions, and with people of years, converted to
Christianity, it being at their own choice to keep or change their names: but
we speak generally here of children coming to baptism, of whom as well as
the ancient manner thereof, we shall speak more hereafter in the Sacraments.

13. It is then most convenient to give names in Baptism?
It is: as at our birth we receive the name of man, and surname of parents, so
at our new birth, or regeneration in baptism, to receive a new name, or
Christian name, in remembrance of the family of Saints whereinto we are by this
means engrafted; so also was it in Circumcision, in whose place Baptism
succeeds.

14. But diverse instances may be given to the contrary for Circumcision?
To be understood then of breach of the ordinance, or in case of necessity, or
some extraordinary encumbrance, or privilege, that do not disanull or
infringe a general law.

15. For Gersom, he was named ere circumcised.
It was a plain breach of the ordinance; and Moses like to have been
punished, and died for the fact, and perverseness of Zipporah his wife.

16. All the children of Israel in the wilderness not circumcised, yet had
names assuredly?
But that, a place and case of extraordinary necessity and encumbrance, when
much good order and discipline was neglected, and sometimes superciliously by
the factious Israelites contemned.

16. Benoni was named by Rachel before circumcision.
But as her wish only held, and at circumcision Benjamin by his father, who
had the absolute authority.

17. But Saint John Baptist, and Christ also by the Angels before circumcision.
Extraordinary revelation was the preparation of names for those sanctified
persons, yet the 8. day according to the Law, ordinarily circumcised, and the
names solemnly imposed, or published, to the accomplishment of the very letter
of Moses Law.

18. It stands then with best reason or convenience to have the name imposed
in baptism.
It does, and from all antiquity so received at our new birth, to receive that
new or Christian name, and that the Godfathers should impose, or publish the
same.

19. Is that most convenient?
Yes: for so is the general use, and we have no custom in the Churches to the
contrary, but many reasons for the same: As

1. Not against Scripture, but consonant to them.

2. It is most anciently received and used.

3. It proceeds from the love of parents, requesting it, and them undertaking
it.

4. It is a benefit to the infant, if the parents die.

5. It is a help to the parents, by aiding and remembering them.

6. It is a comfort, encouragement, and stirring up of the child to remember
the duties.

7. It is a means to increase mutual love and friendship among neighbors, by
performing this duty one for another.

20. But why are children baptized, being infants, and not rather when they
come to years, and discretion?
For diverse good reasons, especially these four: viz. 1. Imitation of
Circumcision, in whose place it succeeded. 2. After the example of Christ's
receiving little children. 3. For that the covenant pertaines also to them, as
well as the parents, and so that seal. 4. That we may be so presented to God
as early as may be.


21. How in imitation of circumcision?
As which was commanded the eight day, and that being the seal of the
Covenant; and so this hence administered also to infants, as that was by Gods
special command.

22. How from the example of Christ?
He not only not refusing the little children, or their good will that brought
them, but blaming them that would have them kept from him; and commanding them
to be brought, and suffered to come, and more expressing his will and good
will: By his 1. Receiving them. 2. Taking them in his arms. 3. Laying his
hands on them. 4. Blessing them, and his 5. Exhortation to all men to follow
their innocence. 6. Promising them, and them only heaven. 7. Affirming their
Angels to stand before his Father in heaven, etc.


23. How pertaines the covenant to them?
As made to Abraham and his seed, all the saithfull and their seed: whosoever
borne of faithful parents, and in the bosom of the Church, and to whom as the
Covenant, so especially this seal at first (as that of circumcision) does
pertain, and though never so little ones, yet we see respected by God and
Christ in mercy.

24. Why also presented so in the Church?
That as early as may be conveniently they may be testified so, and Registered
in the number of Gods children, as what greater happiness, and so never too
soon, and from which to be kept a misery, or abatement of the bliss, as the
utter deprivation, endless misery.

25. Then it is good children should be soon baptized?
As with conveniencie may be, and to that purpose are diverse Canons of the
Church; and though God can save without means, yet we are called upon to show
our duty and love, in not neglecting the ordinary means of our salvation.

26. Is baptism then a means thereof?
It is, though not Ex opere operato, in the bare work, yet our conduit of
grace, by the faith in Christ, and application of other saving graces, implied
in the right use, and receiving of the same.

27. Then it is faith, and not baptism that saves?
But that faith requires also Baptism, as baptism implies the virtue of
faith, and as Christ originally, faith instrumentally, so Baptism
Sacramentally cooperate, work and assure our salvation.

28. Both faith and baptism then are required?
Yes, they are; for he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; and
except a man be borne of water, and of the spirit, he cannot be saved: so not
the bare circumcision, but a new creature required.

29 How does this then pertain to Infants?
As they are borne in the bosom of the Church, and the Covenant also made to
them, and are So 1. Presented to God in the Church, and 2. By faithful
parents, and 3. Upon Gods gracious promise in Christ, in that covenant of
grace. 4. In the faith of the Church and parents.


30. But is this enough?
For them it is; but for others of riper years is required a due disposition
to faith and repentance actually performed, and grace to show forth the fruits
of the spirit, and so in men of years, as they are found in grace, they were
though fit to be baptized, as we read of Cornelius, the Eunuch, and others?

31. Many then are baptized, that are not saved?
There are surely many Hypocrites, that take the badge of Christ, but fight
under the banner of Satan; but commonly it is seen true, by their works we may
know them.

32. Is it then easily to be discerned who shall be saved?
Nothing less; for the most impenitent sinner for a while, may at last find
mercy, and be converted; and as we are to judge none, we are to hope well of
all, and to believe of our selves, as we find by our faith, of others in
charity.

33. Then are we to account all members of Christ that are baptized?
Charity binds us so to it, as who have been washed in the same Lavar of
regeneration, received into the same fellowship and visible company of Saints
and faithful that we are, though God only indeed knows who are his.

34. What use of Baptism?
The sacramental assurance of the love of God, and his graces to us, and so
admittance into his house and Church, and by faith cooperating a step to our
salvation, which as in the use, so in the remembrance may be very profitable.

35. What profit in the remembrance thereof?
To confirm the grace well begun in a man's heart, whereby to grow in grace,
and so forward to godliness.

36. How may that be effected?
If he believe, he shall be hereby more confirmed in the faith, so being a
true Christian, be hereby registered in the Catalogue of Saints, that all the
fiends in hell shall never be able to blot him out again.

37. How is this benefit here described?
By these excellent names and titles in the answer here expressed, as the
baptized is said to be made hereby

1. A member of Christ. 2. Child of God: and 3. Inheritor of the kingdom of
heaven.
38. How a member of Christ?
As ingrafted into him by Baptism, and received to be a member of his body
the Church, of which he is the head and Spouse.

39. How understand you the body of Christ?
Diverse ways, and especially these three: either his

Natural body, united to his soul, so borne, and for us offered an oblation
for redemption of our offenses: Or his

Mystical body, and that understood either

Politically of his Church, the company of the faithful.

Or Sacramentally and spiritually, but verily, in the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, exhibited to his Church, under the species and signs of bread
and wine.

40. Which of these here understood?
His mystical and political body the Church, whereof he is the head, the
whole Church his Spouse, and every good and faithful Christian a member.

41. How is he seen to be head?
By giving to the same and every member thereof Life, Motion, Direction,


42. How is any of us known so to be a member of him?
By our receiving life, motion, and direction from him: and as we feel our
souls to be 1. Living in God, 2. Moved by his Spirit, 3. Directed by his holy
Word.


43. Is there any difference in the members of this mystical body?
Yes, according to the diverse gifts and graces of Gods holy Spirit, working in
them.

44. In what manner?
Though secretly, yet evidently by the gifts appearing in them, as of
prophecy, tongues, interpretation, healing, teaching, and governing, and the
like, whence some Apostles, other Prophets, Teachers, Governors, as the same
Spirit gives power and direction.

45. How have these the names of members?
As in every well governed Commonwealth the Prince represents the head, the
State a body, his faithful Councillors, eyes; the Law the life and soul, the
Teachers the understanding. Governors the will, and all Prelates, Magistrates
and Judges, the shoulders whereon the head is borne, and all weighty affairs
of estate; the Artificers, Husbandman, and Trades, the hands which work, and
the feet whereon the Commonwealth stands: So in the Church, the like order
and distinction of members seen.

46. How is that shown?
By the Apostles own words, 1 Cor. 12. where the Prophets who are called
Seers, Apostles Teachers, etc. are shown members of that mystical body of
Christ, the Church, for the good and convenience of the body, in diverse
degrees, yet all needful, even the meanest as well as the more honorable, and
in the charity and harmony of the whole, every one, one another members, as
all together members of Christ.

47. What comes of being members of Christ?
We are thereby children of God, and so consequently in the right of Sons,
inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.

48. But were not we children of Godelse?
Not as beloved, or in grace and favor with him, for so we are only as we are
in Christ.

49. Who are then the children of God?
Either Generally, all creatures, men and Angels. Particularly, men, sons of
Adam, who was the son of God.

Most specially, the elect by adoption and grace in Christ, who is most
essentially, entirely, and supremely the Son of God.

50. How is Christ the Son of God?
By nature, of the same essence, God of God, begotten, not made, eternally,
before the world was created, the wisdom, truth, image, and beloved of God.

51. How are Angels sons of God?
As the most excellent creatures, spirits in light created for the service of
God, who is the Father of light, and Father of Spirits, the original of them,
and all things, and so Satan, (the disobedient spirit, or one of them that fell
from that excellent estate, in which created,) is said, Job 1. 6. to come and
stand before the Sons of God.

52. How are men the sons of God?
Generally, as Angels and all creatures else, as created in an excellent
estate, in the first Adam, but though disobedient in some measure, by the
subtilty and means of that Angel that fell, Satan, or the old Serpent; yet
particularly taken again into favor, and had a Savior appointed, the
eternal son of God, a means of their restoration.

53. How are the elect the sons of God?
Most specially in his favor and grace, for his love to Christ, in whom they
are accepted as his members, and having put on his righteousness, by faith and
grace given them for his sake, as it were accompanying that faith, so made
acceptable, and their souls adorned.

54. Why are not the falling Angels in like hope?
For that they in a more excellent estate created, more was required of them,
in regard of their rare perfection, whose sin and guilt was so much more
heinous, as their knowledge and estate more excellent, and so they fell in
eternity to eternity.

55. How then should men less excellent be saved?
Even in that respect, as 1. not so highly transgressing, having not received
so excellent gifts, or so many and heavenly talents; but as inferior in gifts
and graces, inferior in offense, and who in time fell, had in this world a
time of returning, and means of salvation appointed. 2. In regard of the
occasion and means of their fall.

56. How is that?
Their guilt, though heinous (as against the infinite Majesty of God) yet
inferior to that also of Angels in this, as who fell of their own accord,
perverseness and pride, when man's disobedience by the means, subtilty and
solicitation of that wicked one, the old Serpent and enemy of mankind, one of
those rebellious Angels, the original of his own, and Adams f^ll, and so all
our ruin.

57. There is then only that means left of man's salvation?
Only in Christ, the Mediator and Redeemer, one of our own blood as man, and
one with God, and in whom we are sons and beloved.

58. This is then a great privilege?
The greatest privilege and prerogative that can be, and most glorious title,
to be the sons of God, for if Kings sons on earth be honorable, how much
more sons of the King of heaven?

59. What benefit by this privilege or prerogative?
To be inheritors of the kingdom of heaven, due only to the sonship, and to
no other worthiness or works.

60. How is the inheritance of heaven then due to us?
As sons, not without doing good works, nor yet for the works sake, but for
Christ, in whom God is well pleased with us, and our works, that would else
be but splendida peccata, even our best works without Christ.

61. Why did the Lawyer then say, Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal
life?
A solecisme in both Law and Divinity, to think that inheritance should descend
by works, or doing, and not by filiation or being sons, which as sons will
do the will of their Father, yet hope to have the inheritance, not for doing
the works, but by being sons.

62. The question was not then well proposed.
It showed the propounder was no perfect scholar in Christ's school, and
howsoever signifies his good intention, yet arguing him in that point neither
good Lawyer, nor found Divine.

63. How is heaven then an inheritance?
As it belongs to the sons of God, and by them to be inherited, as they are
members of Christ.

64. Are they inheritors then only so?
Only as they are thought worthy to have the prerogative to be accounted sons
of God, being members of Christ, so accepted in him, and made acceptable by
him, who is the true Vine, and natural Olive, and all the elect the branches.

65. How is it said a kingdom?
As it has all the honor, nobility, splendour and glory, that can be ensigns,
or annexed to dominion or majesty, with stability of peace, and eternity of
durance in that most happy estate, and in so high measure of contentment, that
all earthly Kingdoms, State, and Majesty, are but dross and contemptible, in
comparison of the same.

66. How a kingdom of heaven?
In regard of the excellency and eminency of glory in that highest degree, that
nothing can be more, whereas in the kingdom of grace a small spark of peace
and comfort is only seen to the soul and conscience of the faithful, all
true sons and servants of God; there God himself in full and beatificall
vision is seen in the heavenly Jerusalem, the City of God, and supernall
Palace and Courts of that great King, filled with his glory, presented before,
and in presence of Cheruh, Seraph, with all those heavenly Quires, Orders, and
Hierarchy, that celestial company, innumerable Saints and Angels.

67. Is this the benefit of Baptism?
It is thereunto ascribed, as whereby I am so admitted into the Church, the
visible company of the faithful, and being engrafted into Christ, accounted a
child of God, and heir in hope of the kingdom of heaven.

SECT. 4. The third Question.
The Godfathers promise in Baptism, for the performance of our Christian
duties. Of repentance faith, and obedience, our Repentance in forsaking world,
flesh, and Devil. The Devil and enmity to God and man, being anthor of all
evil and sin, in heaven, paradise, ^on the (...), continually by his wicked
motions and suggestions, and Agents or instruments: so sowing tares in Gods
field. Sin in the heart of seduced mankind. The Devils works, being sias of all
sorts, so evil and opposite to the works of God, as sins of omision, ana of
commission, of ignoranc^ and of mal^ of weakness and of infirmity: Or
presumption, and the like. All works of the Devil, the wicked world with her
ompes and vanities, Or vain pompes, how to be understood, and distinguished
from the necessary ornaments of the Prince or State. How sin is vain, and
all worldly things vanity: the sinful lusts, and corruptions of the flesh, all
evil, how to be resisted, of faith, and how we make profession of it, in
Baptism, and reason Of it. The fruit of faith, obedience, So then also
professed, shown in our diligence to seek, learn, and will therein revealed
with constancy all the days of our life.

1. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?
They did promise and vow three things in my name.

2. What is meant by promise and vow?
That they did Both promise the matter, and for assurance, Confirm it with a
solemn vow, for me, and so not
Only simply and Barely promise, though promise be much to be respected, and
kept in all honest and lawful things, but solemnly vow and confirm that
promise by public profession, and protestation Made Before God and the
Church. To God and his Church: so In the face of his Congregation: and
for such things, so Good, holy and Just, and My duty,
that had they neither been promised, vowed, or protested, yet in all right
ought to have been so soon as known, acknowledged, and to the utmost of my
power performed.

3. Wherefore is this question here put?
To show the reason of the ancient custom and use, to have sureties at
Baptism.

4. What is that?
To undertake for us, between God and us, so before the face of his Church, our
Christian duties.

5. How our Christian duties here described?
By these three things, in the answer propounded.

Of 1. Forsaking evil, The Devil, and all his works. The world, and the flesh.
2. Believing the Articles of the Christian faith. 3. Both Keeping Gods holy
Will and Comandments Walking Diligently in the same. Continually all the days,
etc.




6. Whence is this question and answer taken?
From the very words of the Liturgy, where the things here repeated (in the
ordinary administration of Baptism) are required of the Infant, and sureties,
and by them vowed and promised, according to the Churches laudable and most
ancient in stitution.

7. Recite these three things briefly?
Repentance, faith, (and the fruits thereof) obedience.

8. How Repentance?
To forsake all evil.

9. How faith?
To cleaveto God, by believing on him, and pursuing that which is good.

10. How obedience?
In that general duty, to fear God, and keep his Commandments.

11. How is repentance described here?
By forsaking all evil in these three branches, intended, comprehended, the
Devil. World. Flesh.


12. What is the Devil?
The ancient and accursed enemy of Adam, and all his posterity; who fallen from
God, expelled out of heaven, devoid of grace, is the author of sin, and of our
ruin and misery.

13. How fell he from God?
By disobedience, and pride, and so called.

1. In regard of his former estate, a falling Angel. 2. His height and pride,
Lucifer, and son of the morning. 3. His enmity to God, the evil one. 4. His
enmity and malice to man, Satan and the deceiver, and destroyer. 5. His
antiquity of malice, and subtilty, the old serpent, the old enemy. 6. His
cruelty, the red Dragon, and roaring Lion, seeking whom he may kill or devour.
7. His mischievous nature and condition, the Devil.
14. Whence his enmity to God?
Out of ingratitude and despair, without grace, or hope ever to attain his
favor, having had so glorious an estate, and so contemptuously forsaken it, as
those falling Angels did, and since accursed, and reserved under chains of
Gods wrath, to judgment, thence even hating all goodness.

15. Whence his enmity to man?
Out of inveterate malice, and envy of his future happiness, as who shall by
Gods appointment, possess the place of those forlorn and falling Angels; so
rather wishing them with him involved in Gods wrath, and torments of hell, then
to attain to heavenly blessedness.

15. How is he here, and usually deciphered?
As the Author of all evil. Sower of tares, in Gods field. Seducer of mankind.


16. How the author of all evil?
As he first hatched sin, in all places,

Both Heaven, Paradise, The Earth.


17. How in heaven?
By his pride, and disobedience to God, the cause of his fall from thence.

18. How in Paradise?
By his subtilty and temptation of our first parents to sin, which bred the
subversion of them, us, and all mankind.

19. In what manner?
First, tempting Eve, the weaker vessel, to the tasting of the forbidden fruit,
and so to disobedience, setting her in the way to subvert Adam, in whom we all
sinned and dye.

20. How the offense?
Disobedience to Gods command, that proved his and all our ruin.

21. How is it our ruin?
By original guilt, as we were in his loins and in him sinned, and in, and
with him all flesh and mankind accursed.

22. How author of sin now on earth?
As at first, the cause of that first fall, and original guilt, whereby we all
perish, so still setting forward, and provoking us to evil ever since.

23. How so?
By his wicked motions, and suggestions to sin within us.

By his wicked agents and instruments, evil men without us.

24. How his motions within us?
As the good Spirit of God moves us to goodness, and gives grace; this evil
spirit taking occasion of our original guilt, and inclination to evil, as a
spirit working on our spirits, if Gods good Spirit leaves us never so little,
persuades our too yielding hearts to evil.

25. What are his suggestions?
All evil thoughts, of sin and rebellion against God and his Commandments;
all prompting occasions, and provocations to sin; by his subtilty ministered
(God suffering him) as the sight of the forbidden fruit, the tempting and lying
words, in Paradise uttered, his, and sins deceitfulness ever since.

26. What agents and instruments?
Within our selves, our own false hearts, and lusts, without us, all evil men
and lewd company, by evil words and examples, enciting us to sin, and
persuading us to wickedness, which we are by corrupted nature, too prone to
hearken unto, and follow.

27. How sows he tares in Gods field?
By such means, in the Church and members thereof, either corrupting them by
his suggestions, lewd agents, and instruments, and their wicked examples,
inciting them to evil, or detaining them from doing good.

28. How seduccth he mankind?
Adam in Paradise, who fell by actual disobedience, and involved his posterity
in originally diffused sin; and all others ever since by his like practices and
subtilties, bringing that original blot into actual and habituate offense, and
enmity with God.

30. What are his works?
Sin in all the branches, and kinds thereof, whether of omission,
commission, error, ignorance, presumption, etc.

31. How are they his works?
God is the author of all goodness, the world, and all things therein created
by him, and every good grace, thought, word and work by his power produced, so
his works accounted; when on the contrary side, all difficiency from
goodness, the work and contriving of the Devil, or a backsliding from God
and goodness, for such is the nature of sin.

32. In what manner are they his works?
As he is the first liar, and father of lies, for by his lying came error, by
error solly, by that foolishness, sin and disobedience; so sin came from him,
and all error, foolishness, lying against God, the truth, and the like, are
his works.

33. What are the qualities of his works?
Opposite to the works of God, which are done in truth, goodness, and
righteousness.

34 As how?
1. As they are found to be both false, so error, lies, foolishness,
hypocrisy, and the like, whereas the works of God are true, and stand fast
for ever, founded in verity and judgment.

2. Ill, as all sin and wickedness; but Gods, good, so all that he created was
good.

3. Unholy, but Gods works are holy, and honored for ever.

4 Works of darkness, shunning the light, and flying from the sight of God.

But Gods works are true, and righteous, and just, and holy, and good, in the
light, and perfect, stable for ever.

35. What are sins of omission?
As all sins are a blotting out of the Image of God in the soul, and original
guilt is the want of original Justice, that should be in us, as Saint Ansclme
defines it, or that inclination to ill, that we naturally drew from our first
parents loins, by ignorance in the mind, and concupiscence in the flesh, as
Hugo speaks; consisting in a pravity of nature in general, and subjection to
punishment eternal; and actual sins thence budding, are every action, both
internal and external, as thought, wish, word, or deed, against the law and
will of God: so sins of omission are the omitting of that good we ought, and by
that law that we are commanded to do, or the viclation of the affirmative
part, or commandments of that law.

36. What are the sins of commission?
The committing of that evil that we are by the law forbidden to do, or the
violation of the negative part, and commandments of the same.

37. What are sins of ignorance?
The perpetrating of that evil which we know not rightly, or the qualifying of
the offense; and so much the more heinous, as proceeding from gross, or
affected ignorance.

37. What are sins of malice?
Whatsoever wittingly and willingly is acted, with knowledge of the mind, and
deliberate intention of the will, as it were of prepensed malice, and near of
kin, or near to sins of presumption.

38. What sins of weakness and infirmity?
Sins committed besides our full intention, by impotency of affection, or
perturbation of mind, as Peter's denial of his master, and the Disciples flying.

39. And what are sins of presumption?
Sins with a high hand, of deliberate counsel, and in contempt of God, and his
divine law.

40 Are these the works of the Devil?
They are; as every good thought, word, and work, is of the power, and by the
finger of God effected; so every evil thought, word, and act, the works of
the Devil, perpetrated by his lend agents and instruments.

41. In the second place, what mean you by the wicked world?
All that is not of God produced in the world, viz. all the corruptions, and as
it is called the covetousness, and concupiscience, and pompes and vanities of
the same.

42. But are not these the works of the Devil?
Yes; and so with him, and in him considered, as the author, in the world, as
the subject, place, and matter, where seen, and acted, in the slesh, as the
agent, and instrument, the Devil uses in effecting them.

43. What is meant by pompes?
All unnecessary, proud, and superfluous excesses, in the world, exceeding that
Christian measure, and moderation, becoming the servants of God, whether in
meat, drink, apparel, or other vain ostentation.

44. Are all pompous shows, pageants, and solemnities then unlawful?
By no means, if within measure and moderation prescribed, in comparison of
the estate, or persons to whom they appertain.

45. How mean you that?
All the solemnities in the public service of God, fitting the magnificence
of him, and his Temple; all ornaments of estate, belonging to King, Magistrate,
City, or University, for the better administration of the government of the
Church and Commonwealth, all ensigns of honor, and the like, on lawful and
honest occasions used and worn; Public triumphs, and shows, in honor of
Prince, Country, City, or Commonwealth, or any member thereof, by law of God
and man, approved and allowed, or for some good end ordained.

46. What do these profit?
To the well and orderly government, and apparent honor and decency of Church
and Commonwealth, yea, to the advancement of virtue, and so encouragement of
good and virtuous minds.

47. How may it be?
By the fitting splendour and glory of Gods House, the Kings Court, City, or
University, eminently advanced in such manner, testifying the flourishing
estate, and prosperity of the same, which every good man is glad to behold.

48. Do any envy them this?
If any do, as loath, either Kingly, Courtly, or other robe, of decent
ornament, should exceed the size of the Millers or Weavers jacket, that may be
apparently seen, such more precise then wise, little respect the decency and
comeliness fitting a well ordered estate, the honor of God and his Church, or
Majesty of the Prince.

49. What is then here renounced?
Unnecessary, proud, vain, and superfluous pomp, beyond those rules of
decency, ornament, or honor, by law and wisdom prescribed.

50. What are the vanities of the world?
All these superfluous excesses, and whatsoever else savoureth of the nature of
sin, which is vain.

51. How is sin vain?
As empty of all goodness, and making the soul empty of grace, and worse then
nothing, so both vain, the use not satisfying, and in the end, extreme vanity
and vexation of spirit.

52. How says the wise man, all is vanity?
In two respects:

1. As all things in the world are but momentary and soon fading.

2. As they are too much infected with sin, the just sinning seven times a day;
and so all his actions, and all things else, even vanity of vanities.

53. What are the sinful lusts of the flesh?
Our homebred corruptions, our sins and lusts, traitors to our selves, and
own souls, by which the Devil working, takes us his captives; and so we
become servants to sin and him, whom by his means we obey.

53. What mean you by the flesh?
The worse part of man, the house of clay, the body of death, or prison of the
soul, as rebellion against God.

54 What the lusts?
All evil concupiscence, tyrannizing over the soul by the means of the
flesh, so drawing both captive to sin and death.

55. How sinful lusts?
1. By the subtilty of the Devil, suggesting them. 2. By the maliguity of the
world, fostring them. 3. By the frailty of the flesh breeding them.
And by whom the soul infected, the whole man becomes exceedingly sinful,
if we do not resist and strive against them.

56. How are we to resist them?
By faith and continual and hearty prayer to God, to give us his grace,
whereby it comes to pass, the life of a good Christian is a continual
warfare, or combat against these three spiritual enemies fighting against the
soul, the Devil, the World, the Flesh.

57. In the second place, how is faith here described?
By believing all the Articles of our Christian confession.

58. Which are they?
Expressed hereafter in the Creed.

59. Whom do they concern?
God and his Church, whereof we are made visible members of the baptism, so
received into that society.

60. Why do we profess or learn them?
That we may know God, and our own estate.

61. What of God?
How he is a most powerful, eternal, wise, glorious, and gracious God, and
our Creator, and father in Jesus Christ. Redeemer, delivering us from all our
enemies. Sanctifier, comforting and preserving us in all our necessities.


60. What of our selves?
That though by nature, we are sons of wrath in Adam, yet in Christ, adopted
sons, and made members of the Catholic Church, and communion of Saints, have
blessed hope of forgiveness of sins, resurrection of the body, and life
everlasting.

61. To what end are we taught this?
That we may both conscionably Learn, Know, Profess, Promise, Practice,
our Christian duties the better.

62. How so?
By ordering our selves, as the servants of so great and good a God, and
applying our selves to his worship, and obedience as becomes Saints.

63. In the third place, then how is obedience here decyphered?
That general duty of ours is set forth,

1. By the universal diligence in keeping and observing.

2. By the universal object of this diligence, the will and commandments of
God.

3. By the universal countenance of this diligence, all the days of our life,
etc.

64. How follows it in this place?
As a fruit of faith, whereon it depends; for if we know God, as we ought, we
cannot choose but serve and obey him.

65. How is this duty commended?
In that obedience is better then sacrifice.

66. Why so preferred?
Because by sacrifice we offer but the flesh of Lambs, Bullocks, or other
Cattle; by obedience we offer our own selves, souls and bodies to God, as a
living, holy, and acceptable sacrifice, mortifying and subduing our corrupt
affections, to the will of God.

67. How is our diligence in this duty described?
By keeping, and walking in, or observing the Commandments and will of God.

68. What meant by keeping?
Our will and desire to Seek into, Learn to know, Remember, Lay up in our
hearts, Ponder and consider.
That holy will of God, and his Commandments.

69. How to walk and observe them?
To direct our ways, and words, and works, and counsels, thoughts, and
hearts, according to the same.

70. What the object or matter here named?
The will and Commandments of God his holy Laws.

71. What is the will of God?
Our holiness and sanctification in body and spirit.

72. How is Gods will known?
As it is revealed in his holy Word.

73. Where is that word contained?
In the books of the Old and New Testament.

74. What are the Commandments of God?
The Law of God, given to us, and his will in general, as before mentioned,
for the moral part thereof, more particularly expressed in the ten
Commandments hereafter recited.

75. How long obliged to this duty and diligence?
So long as we have any being, all the days of our life.

76. Why so?
Because from him we have received our life and being, and so to his honor,
ought all to be referred.

77. How all our days?
Whether of prosperity in praises, or adversity in patience, to give him
thanks, and submit our selves wholly to his holy will and pleasure.

78. How life?
Whether our natural life, so rightly understood, or life of grace in Gods
Church and service, as well applied, that the life of grace here may be an
entrance to the life of glory hereafter.

79. Is this the sum of the sureties promise?
It is into these three parts distributed, viz.

1. Our repentance to forsake and renounce all evil, the Devil, World, and
the Flesh.

2. Our faith to believe all the Articles of our Christian faith.

3. Our obedience to keep and walk in Gods holy will and his Commandments all
the days of my life.

SECT. 5. The fourth Question.
Our Christian resolution to perform the vow made for us in baptism, and how
we are bound to perform, and that many ways, in common morality conscience,
and reason, law, and Religion, since for our so apparent good, and Church and
superior institution, and command: to which we are to submit our selves in
humility, our duty to praise God for our happy estate of salvation given to us
in Christ, by the administry of the Church and means of the Sacraments:
Confirmed and sealed to our souls, and to pray for the grace of continuance so
to persevere therein, to the (...) and here also a reason is rendered, why the
first part of the sureties, promise or vow in Baptism is passed by: and the
second part concerning the Creed, is so here first and principally insisted on,
as follows.

1. Do thou think thou art bound to believe, and do as they have promised
for thee?
Yes verily, by Gods help so I will, etc.

2. What is contained in this answer?
A fourefold resolution,

1. As a direct and resoulte affirmation of the demand, yes verily.

2. As a resolute asseveration, and protestation to the same, and by Gods help.

3. As a resolute praising of God, and giving of thanks, I heartily thank,
etc.

4. As a resolved prayer, for grace of continuance and perseverance to the end,
I pray God, etc.

3. Is then the party bound by another act?
He is, both in morality and conscience, reason and Religion.

4. Without any deputation?
Yes, since it is for his good, and if it had not been promised, yet in
conscience, and else, bound to perform that.

5. How so?
1. In common morality, since it was for his good, and so in duty for good
order, and virtues sake to do it.

2. In conscience, since for the honor of God, and good of our own soul so
obliged.

3. In reason, since by superiors, and those that have authority over us, our
parents and superiors enjoined.

4. Religion, since by the Churches authority, so for the honor of God, and
our own good ordained.

6. But can Infants be bound, or those under age, by their own, or which is
less, others acts?
By both, when it is for their good, otherwise not, if to their prejudice, and
rather by tutors and governors acts then by their own.

7. Why so?
Because they are intended of wisdom and judgment, and knowing what is
convenient, and trusted with the guiding and government of the Infant, or
young, here yet wanting discretion.

8. How appearoth it that they are so bound?
In very law as well as reason, the ground of all good laws, when it is for
their good, and necessary occasions, as meat, drink, and apparel, teaching
and bringing up, and the like; the Infant and Pupil, or heir in nonage, as
well as the most aged persons, bound to perform, pay, and discharge such dues
and promises.

9. What is the reason for it?
Because it is for his apparent good and benefit, so if he find a hand to
receive a beneficial lease in law, being an Infant, he must also find a hand
to pay the rent, and perform the condicioned covenants.

10. But how is this for his good?
In an uncomparable great and high degree, as hereby received into the heavenly
society of Saints, and to have that glorious privilege, hereby signed to him,
to be the Son of God, member of Christ, and heir of blessedness; and so as
he receives the benefit, tied to perform the Covenants.

11. How follows it that he says, By Gods grace so I will?
In acknowledgement of 1. The fountain, whence all sufficiency and ability
does flow. 2. The readiness and propensity, we ought to have to perform it.


11. Have we then no ability of our selves?
No not so much as to think a good thought, much less to perform any good
deed, but all our sufficiency is from God.

12. What is our duty then to do?
To pray for ability, from him expect his graces, and after the same, in
humility, as considering whence all our ability comes, to direct our courses.

13. Can we do this then?
Not we, as of our selves, but Gods grace and good Spirit within us, that
begins, will perform every good work to his glory.

14. What shall we do then?
Only submit our selves to his will, be pressed to obey, and do as his good
Spirit moves us, not to quench the spirit, but being ready to say, Speak
Lord, for thy servant hears, accordingly continue in well doing.

15. How shall we find or know this?
If we praise God for graces received, and pray unto him for more, as follows
in this answer.

16. Why should we praise him?
Because thanksgiving for graces received is the fruit of the former grace, and
seed of the latter.

17. What do you praise him for here?
For calling me to this state of salvation.

18. What is this state of salvation?
The state of a Christian in the love and favor of God, by his Covenant of
grace, whereof the Sacraments are signs and seals.

19. How are we else?
Out of Gods favor weltering in our own blood, and pollution of sin, by
nature, but restored to his favor thus by grace.

20. In, or by whom, or what means?
Through Jesus Christ our Savior, in whom God is well pleased, and for his
sake does blot out all our guilt, and offenses.

21. How are we brought to this estate?
We are called by God, (by whom elected) and by the Ministry of his Church, by
his appointment, and the voice of his holy Word, and thus lastly sealed for
his, receive these signs, the Sacraments, with the virtue and effect of them,
pledges of his favor.

22. What are we then to do?
To pray for continuance and perseverance in this so holy and happy estate.

23. Can we fall from this estate?
Never, if we be truly his.

24. Why then should we pray for it?
To show that we are truly so; for if we be his, we cannot choose but do so,
and if we do not so, it shows we are not his; notwithstanding the outward
sign of Baptism, for grace, which is the inward part, and as it were the very
soul of the Sacrament will show it self in praise and thanksgiving, which is
also a blessed token of Gods servant, as who honors his master, and shall be
honored of him.

25. What pray you for here?
The grace of continuance and to persevere.

Can we not continue else in this estate?
No more then begin, unless he lend power and grace, as the precedent, and
preventing, so also the consequent and continual grace of continuing and
perseverance.

26. Then we assume to our selves no power at all?
Not unto us we ought to say, not unto us, but unto thy Name, O Lord be praise,
for there is nothing that we have not received, and so are to honor God for
it; and such is the very estate of Saints and Angels, who have all their
excellency from God, and so shall evermore praise him.

27. If we or they have no excellency, or sufficiency of our selves, why then
so honored?
As Instruments of his praise, and for his glory, which shall be such abundant
blessedness, as no mortal heart able to conceive the happiness or glory
thereof.

28. How long pray we so to continue?
To continue in the same to my lives end, viz. to have continuance of grace
here, the earnest penny of endless glory hereafter.

What may this teach us?
The difference of our estate here, in the Church, in grace, and that in glory
hereafter.

The dependancy of one on the other, the former being the door, gate, or
entrance to the latter.

29. This then is the sum of this answer?
It is, comprehending an earnest and resolved Affirmation, yes verily.
Asseveration, and by Gods grace, etc. Praising God, I heartily thank. Prayer,
I pray God, etc.


30. What follows?
The Creed, or sum of our Christian belief, the second part of the
Catechism, occasioned by the second part, the vow in Baptism, in the Question
and Answer last before rehearsed, and so here ends the first; the
Introduction comprehended in these four first Questions and Answers.

31. Why is not the first part of the threefold promise here likewise as
distinctly handled?
As the Second concerning the Articles of faith: or third concerning the
commandments.


Because that as at the latter end of the Creed, the estate of the damned is
left out (though a part of the faith) as less principally pertaining to the
comfort and consolation of the godly, in their most holy calling; where the
estate of the Elect is deciphered, to life everlasting, as the prime scope the
vessels of grace do aim at, in eternal glory, or only intimated Exopposito,
in the same: so here the consideration of the Devil, the World, and the Flesh
(that are to be renounced and left) so only pointed at, are passed over, sicco
pede, as it were; and the second and third part, as more material to the
information of the Christian, are more principally here insisted on; and thus
punctually prosecuted, whiles the other left so soon as only intimated, or but
remembered.

32. But good instruction to repentance arises from the first well considered?
Yes; but the more material foundations of our faith, though in the second
place promised, for orders sake so proposed, here principally prosecuted; as
the other thought sufficiently at this place, so only touched, and at other
places, on good occasion, more fully handled, as in the Sacraments.

33. But might it not well have been more insisted on here?
No, that it might not stay us from better and more substantial matters
concerning the foundation of faith in the Articles of the belief, though
withal it is intimated in the very belief it self; for who can believe in
God aright, except he renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil? God and
Mammon, light and darkness, Christ and Belial (...) not dwell together; but as
most necessary, faith the groundwork, and foundation of our salvation, here
first expended; for what else comparable to that consideration, or what else to
be here seen in them more then as before noted, considerations moving us to
repentance, that cannot yet be perfited, nor indeed well begun without the
groundwork of faith, whereby only we can most truly see these, to fly them
being such evils, and so opposite to the divine goodness:

As the 1. Devil, so ready to devour us, that roaring Lion, old Serpent, red
Dragon, the accuser of the brethren, and ancient enemy of mankind, that attends
All 1. Mischief, and evil against the godly, as in Job. 2. Times, the Sabbath
not free from his seducements, other times how much less. 3. Places, as 1.
Heaven not exempt, whence he fell for pride, and where he accused Job. 2.
Church, where he shuts the eyes, ears, hearts, mouths of his. 3. Paradise,
where he tempted our first parents, and what places then privileged.
4. Societies in Heaven, where among Angels, Lucifer, Paradise by him
subverted. Christ's Disciples, where a Judas, and what holier societies ever
found.
5. Occasions in all times, places, and societies whatsoever
2. World: 1 That is a Vale of tears, and flood, or torrent of troubles, sea
of misery, turmoiled with continual tempests of cares, tribulations, and
sorrows, like waves so raging and violent, without all quietness, till the
world passed, and heaven that haven of rest attained. Yet the body so glewed to
the world, and the soul by it, so cleaving to the Mammon, and things or mucke
and dung thereof, that it can hardly be thence separated, or won to cleave
steadfastly to God.
2. Where are a sort of Canaanites, Ismaelites, Moabites, etc. enemies of God
and his people: fools like children following feathers, bubbles, vanities,
pleasures, and like Indians or Glaucus, Exchanging gold for iron, silver for
pibbles,
And all sorts ready, perire, or perdere themselves or others, as 3. The 1. Men
with cares, troubles, or tribulations. 2. Youth with vanity, lightness, and
folly, overtaken all with sin, ignorance, error, and blindness.

Children not yet born, perishing by the mothers hand, cup, or knife, or throat
cut by her foot, or poisoned. born starved in body or soul or both; bred idle,
untaught, untutored, that better unborn, or abortive.


3. Fathers either idle, exposing them to want, beggary, theeving, etc. or as
bad. By Mammons providing a sword for the soul, whiles the body fed, pampred,
proudly clothed, but the soul naked, starved, and clothed in rags, O poor
soul no better cared for.


3. Flesh, and all the lusts, exorbitant passions, vanities.


So many enemies, furies or fiends, within us,
to torment us and betray us when any External enemies, occasions and
temptations, or tempters, will but set on it, to tempt the soul, and seek the
subversion of the same.

34. And this is a necessary consideration?
Yes, and a good preparation to repentance; but faith, the principal and most
necessary matter, yet preferred, and the rather, for that in that one word, I
believe is necessarily included the forsaking of all these things, and so that
first part of the promise thus else overpassed, is yet thereby as effectually
as possibly may be, intimated.

The second part of the Catechism. Wherein of the Creed in general.
SECT. 1. Quest. 5.
The Creed of the Apostles, and why so called. How it is the Symboll, or note
of a Christian, and so called the Symboll, or token of their faith and unity in
it. The twelve Apostles composers of it by tradition, and so partition of it
into 12. Articles. The authority of this Creed, and compared with others:
received of the Church: this being the most ancient and sum of them. They the
illustration of this, and all the rule of faith and unity, and so with the
description of faith premised, is set forth and declared. How and why first
propounded, with the nature of says, and the several sorts of it: both
historical faith, temporary faith, and degrees thereof. Faith of miracles, and
lastly true and saving faith, which is only properly called faith: with the
extent, root and fruit of the same. The substance also and degrees of this
faith, and difference from the others seen by the root, fruit, and
continuance. The wsake faith, yet be true says, and how it is to be
strengthened. The strongest faith, yet imperfect, requiring increase: and diverse
good effects of it. How faith is else diversely in holy Scriptures taken; with
the causes whence produced, the efficient God he giver, Isntrumental, the word
and Sacraments, Natural and formal in our apprehension, and application,
final cause in Gods glory and our jestification. The value of works, and of
general ana special, Or explicate and implicise faith. The effects of true
and saving faith, and how are need both i^, and works for a testification of
the same, both to our selves, and our own souls. The comfort and assurance of
the true faith above the vain arrogance, and presumption of the others, the
means of preserving it, and parts of Creed.

1. REcite the Articles of thy Belief.
I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

2. What is here contained?
Summa credendorum, the sum of our faith, or Christian belief.

3. How are these Articles usually called?
Either the Symboll of the Apostles, Symbolum Apostolorum: or, The Apostles
Creed.


4. Why so called?
Because it summarily contains the principal points of Religion, handled and
propounded in the doctrine and books of the Evangelists and Apostles.

5. Is there any other reason rendered?
Yes, as though by some, compiled by the Apostles themselves, yet wheresoever
dispersed over the whole world, in preaching or propagating the Gospel, as an
abridgement thereof, this holy Symboll might be a rule to their Disciples, and
a token of their agreement in the one only and true faith.

6. To what end?
Both by the analogy thereof to direct the doctrine of the teachers, and right
understanding of the hearers, in these principal points of faith; and so
consequently any heresies arising by these, as a touchstone tried, found
dross, might be rejected, and so thereby to know a true Christian.

7. Js it then thought composed by the Apostles themselves?
So Saint Augustine and others have been of opinion, but whether by
themselves, or their disciples out of their writings and preachings, it is
assuredly found to be most Orthodox, and even from their times. Most Anciently
Universally
received.


8. Why called a Symboll?
As a token or badge of their faith, and also as jointly compiled by them, as
aforesaid; and so thought according to the number of the 12. distributed into
12. Articles, by Saint Augustine and others remembered.

9. In what manner?
To each of the 12. Apostles, as to the compilers thereof an Article assigned:
viz.

1. To Saint Peter, I believe in God the Father, etc. 2. John, Maker of heaven
and earth, etc. 3. James, And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, etc. 4.
Andrew, Which was conceived, etc. 5. Philip, He suffered under Pontius Pilate,
etc. 6. Thomas, He descended into hell, the third day, etc. 7. Bartholomew, He
ascended into heaven, and sits, etc. 8. Matthew, From thence he shall come
to, etc. 9. James Alph. I believe in the holy Ghost, etc. 10. Simon Zelot. The
communion of Saints, etc. 11. Judas Iacobi, Forgiveness of sins,
resurrection of, etc. 12. Matthias Life everlasting.
Or thus:

1. I believe in God, etc. 2. And in Jesus Christ, etc. 3. Which was conceived,
etc. 4. He suffered under, etc. 5. The third day he rose, etc. 6. He ascended
into heaven, etc. 7. From thence he, etc. 8. I believe in the holy Ghost, etc.
9. Holy Catholic Church, the communion of, etc. 10. Forgiveness of sins,
etc. 11. Resurrection of body, etc. 12. Life everlasting.
10. Of what authority is this Creed?
If it were penned by the Apostles, then as Canonical Scripture indeed; but
howsoever of greatest authority next to them, above and before all others, as
most anciently and universally received.

11. Are there any other Creeds then?
Other, in form of words, according to several occasions of the times, and
compilers, but one and the same in substance and matter, and so may seem
expositions of this former.

12. Who were those compilers of them?
Some of them General Councels, some others worthy and reverend Fathers,
lights of the church in those times, and for the most part occasioned by
heresies arising, for the plainer discerning, and confutation of the same.

13. Which are they?
The Nycene Creed, composed by the Fathers in that Council, Constantine the
great, Emperor, being present and President, to explain the Apostles Creed,
and extirpate Arrius impiety.

Athanasian Creed compiled by Saint Athanasius, persecuted by the A^ians, for a
testimony of his sincerity in the truth, and to instruct and confirm others.

Ephesine, Chalcedon, Agathen, and others the like, in several Councels, on
the like occasions set forth.

14. How should I then know and rightly understand which to receive and embrace?
In receiving this one of the Apostles, we receive all, for they are but
expositions upon several occasions, or explanations of this former.

15. What use of this, and those others?
Diverse and sundry uses, and no less manifold then excellent, both for a

1. Rule of faith. 2. Preservative from and against heresy. 3. Means of
distinguishing true Christians from heretics. 4. Brief memorial at entrance
into Christianity, to know thereby what 1. To have continually before their
eyes for profession. 2. To stand in defense of it, even to the death. 3. To
answer at Baptism.

16. In what form was the Creed first propounded?
In form of an answer; as that of Philip, Acts 10. If thou beleevest, thou
may be baptized; the Eunuch answered, I believe that Jesus is the son of God:
So in the Primitive Church, the question to the Catechumeni, (those that were
turned from Gentilisme, and to be admitted to Christianity) being made, How
beleevest thou? answer was made, I believe in God the Father, etc.

17. Why say we not, We believe, in the Creed, as well as Our Father, in the
Lords Prayer?
Because every one shall live by his own faith.

18. What is faith?
It is generally described, and said, that fides est eorum quae non vides, and
though of things so unseene, yet of that infallible truth, grounded on Gods
most sacred word, and revelation, the only (...) of infallibility, as by whose
word all things have their truth and being, that being more high, holy, and
certain, then all else, humane knowledge of reason or sense, the ordinary
gates of knowledge, that are often deceived, even in things near us, as
Stars, Orbs, and Elements, how much more in things farther off removed from
the soul or sense; but the the very confirmation and certainty both of them,
(as Christian Philosophy above all the knowledge of the Heathens, in knowing
the true ground and foundation of things from God the eternal truth, when they
but from some mediate causes,) and especially in discerning those highest and
holiest things concerning God, and the soul, and her truth, essence, estate,
and fountain, whence chiefly all other knowledges depend, where Creed and
intelliges, is the beginning of all most refined, divinest knowledge, and as
reason more excellent then sense, so this then reason, by even as many degrees,
as spiritual and heavenly things exceed earthly and corporal, or Gods truth
man's reason: yet not to think every opinion, conceit, or fancy of vain men,
doting on the idols of their own deluded imaginations, or sometimes
prejudicate opinions against God and his truth, to be matters of faith; as were
the fancies of many miserable schismatiques, fanatique persons, and heretics,
this faith being indeed so only of highest and holiest things, and according to
Gods word and revealed truth, opened and declared by his holy Spirit, in the
ministry of his Church, and so known to be, by the approbation and testimony
of those holy and reverend Governors, by him appointed to that ministration in
the same: and whatsoever else but of private spirit and fancy, if repugnant to
the former, to whom the custody of his Church and sacred Oracles are committed,
and hence the malady may be observed of the many schisms, heresies,
blasphemies, and errors of all seditious and turbulent persons, both of former
and present times; such the case of Arius, Manes, Eutyches, Sabellius,
Eunomius, Novatus, and all that rabble, whose wicked opinions have often been
newly furbished, and sometimes with some additions, by foolish men of later
times, (as what folly, mischief or madness so gross almost, that has not
found some to give it entertainment?) of which all times, stories, and authors
are full, and show too wretchedly abundant testimony.

19. Of how many sorts is says?
Of two sorts:

Either Common: or, That of the elect, Tit. 1. 1.


20. What call you common faith?
That faith which as well the rebrobate as the elect may have.

21. How manifold is this?
Threefold.

Either Historical, Temporal, or Faith of miracles.


22. What is historical faith?
That whereby a man does believe the outward letter and history of the word,
and truth thereof; and it has two parts or degrees.

23. Which are they?
The Knowledge thereof, in respect of that word of God, the object of it.
Assent, and this is in the very Devils themselves, who believe and tremble,
James 2. 19.


24. What is temporary faith?
That which lasts for a season, and not commonly to the end of ones life, or
if it do, bears no due fruit, nor has the root of love and charity figured
in the seed, which fell in the stony ground; yet is of diverse sorts.

25. Which are they?
The first degree beyond historical faith:

Having three parts or degrees in respect of the word both 1. Knowledge of it,
2. Assent to it, 3. Professing it with some fair show,
and go no further:

All which he may do which has no love to the word; this was in Simon Magus,
Act. 8. 13.

26. What other kind of this faith?
That in these five degrees seen.

1. In Knowledge of the word.

2. Assent to it.

3. Profession of it.

4. Inwardly rejoicing in it.

5. Bringing some kind of fruit; but for want of the root of love of no
growth, and fading and falling a way at last.

27. What is the faith of miracles?
Whereby a man grounding himself upon some special promise, and revelation
from God, believes some strange and extraordinary thing he desires or prays
for shall come to pass, by the work of God, held to be in Judas as well as
the other Apostles, and may be in some that want true and saving faith.

28. What is that saving faith, or the faith of the Elect?
A supernatural gift of God, apprehending and applying the saving promises of
God made unto us, of salvation in Christ, with all the circumstances of the
same to the soul, receiving the benefit to the conscience, for purging and
comforting it, and bringing forth fruit through the same.

29. How differs this faith from the others?
Besides those first five degrees, it proceeds further, in extention and
perseverance to the end.

30. How that?
It comprehends the former.

1. Knowledge, 2. Assent, 3. Profession, 4. Rejoicing.
And further adds,

1. Application to the soul. 2. Purging the conscience from dead works. 3.
Comfort in the holy Ghost. 4. Bringing forth much fruit. 5. Perseverance to the
end.
31. What is the fruit thereof?
Assurance and confidence in God, for both things temporal and eternal.

32. How is that?
That we shall

1. Have our souls saved in the day of the Lord, by this justifying faith,
apprehending and applying Christ and his merits to the same.

2. Want of no manner of thing that is good and profitable, or convenient for
either body or soul, since to whom God has given Christ, in him he has
given all things necessary and convenient for them, and this is our confidence
in the Lord.

33. Where is the substance of this faith expressed?
In the Creed, rightly understood.

34. Are there any differences or degrees in this true faith?
Yes, though a true and saving and justifying faith, yet found in some a
weaker, in others a stronger faith, yea and in the same person sometimes a
weaker, or otherwhile stronger faith.

35. How is it then known, being weak, from the former sorts of faith that
sade or fail?
1. To God, by the heart, and his own work in the same. 2. To men, only by
the effects. 1. The fruit thereof. 2. And continuance unto the end.
36. But is not the hypocrites or reprobates faith often hardly by men
distinguished from true faith?
It may be for a time, and for some temporary or other respects, more servent,
and fair in outward appearance to the world, then the weaker faith, though a
true faith of the elect, but for the most part discovered at last by the want
of the Root, love. Fruit, good works. Continuance, to the end.


37. How may we know the true, though weak faith?
By many good signs in ones self, longing after God, and proficiency in
grace, and especially by this one grace of God, of unfeigned desire, not only
of salvation, which the wicked and graceless may desire, but of reconciliation
with God in Christ.

38. Is this a true sign of true faith?
It is, and only peculiar to the elect, proceeding out of a touched and
humbled heart for sin, and whosoever have it, have in themselves the ground
and substance of true and saving faith, which afterward may grow to greater
strength; and so, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst, etc. Matthew. 5. 6.

39. How many ways may faith be weak?
Either by want of due Knowledge of the Gospel. Application to the soul,


Though in that measure of knowledge that may else seem sufficient.

40. How is it to be strengthened?
By using diligently the means appointed of God, the Word and Sacraments, so
humbly walking before God, it is known to be a true faith, and daily
increased.

41. What is a strong faith?
That whereby a man so apprehends and applies the promises of God in the
Gospel, that he can distinctly and truly say of himself, he is fully
resolved in conscience that he is reconciled to God, in Christ, and so not
neglects to find all godly signs, and show the fruits of the same, in his
cheerful service of God.

42. Js there any faith perfect?
No: for howsoever it may be strong, and stronger then others, yet it is
always imperfect, and requiring increase, and confirmation, for which we must
pray, and strive for; so also our knowledge, is, and will be, so long as we
live in this world, as mingled with ignorance, unbeleefe, and sundry sorts of
doubting.

43. Have not all sorts of saving faith their fruit following?
Yes, according to their degrees, more or better, all in some acceptable
degree, obedience to the will of God, and willing profession of the truth; and
more particularly confession of the faith of Christ.

44. Why must we confess it?
For diverse reasons, these especially, that

1. With the mouth outwardly confessing, we may glorify God, and do him
service both in body and soul.

2. By confessing of the faith, we may sever our selves from all false
Christians, hypocrites, and seducers whatsoever.

3. We may incite, confirm, and strengthen others in the same.

45. Js there any other acceptance of this word faith?
It is sometimes taken for the doctrine of the truth, as 1 Timothy 3. 9. and 4. 1.
as well as that habit or Theological virtue, thence, and by the gift of God
produced in the mind, of which we spoke before: also where a dead faith,
false and fained faith, hypocritical faith, and the like, they are understood
to be want of faith, or a temporary only, or historical faith, as faith to be
healed, Matthew. 8. under faith working miracles 1 Corinthians. 18. of all which
before.

46. What is else necessary to be known concerning faith?
To observe the causes and effects of this true faith?

47. What causes?
The Efficient cause, matter, form, and end of this true faith, how wrought and
formed in us.

48. What efficient cause?
Either principal, or isntrumental.

What principal?

God 1. The Father, Ioh. 6. 29. this the work of God, that ye believe in him
whom he has sent. 2. The Son, Heb. 12. 2. the author and finisher of our
faith, Jesus. 3. The holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 4. 14. the Spirit of faith, and former
of it, in us, without our preparation or works.


49. What the isntrumental cause?
The word of God and Sacraments, and comfortable learning and using of them.

What the matter of faith?

In respect of the Subject Understanding to apprehend, Will to assent, and
apply, Conscience to make use of the promise, and grace of God.
Object referred to the 1. Understanding the truth of Gods promise. 2. Will,
grace of God, manifested in Christ. 3. Conscience, joy and comfort in the holy
Ghost.



50. What is the form of faith?
1. To believe, or to seek to apprehend, and know the mercies of God, with our
best understanding.

2. Receive, and apply to our souls the free mercies of God in Christ, with
our whole heart and will.

3. Make use of it in our conscience, to the Purging, and rooting out of dead
works, and sin. Bringing forth good works, fruits of a living faith.


51. What the end of faith?
In regard of God, his glory, in his mercies. Us, our justification by his free
mercies in Christ.


52. What is justifying, or our justification?
To be Discharged before God of our guilt. Approved before him, free and
innocent. Accepted of God, and allowed his favor and presence.


53. Does faith do this?
Faith is said to do it, as the instrument whereby we apprehend, apply, and
take benefit of Christ and his merits, the very original and principal cause
of this, as in whom only and alone, we are Discharged, and acquitted, Approved
innocent, and accepted.
God is well pleased, and reconciled.


54. But Saint James says, we are justified by works.
Saint James does not there speak of our justification, as the cause whereby
we are justified inwardly before God, (which is only faith in Christ) but of
the outward justification, as the testification approving thereof to our
consciences, to the world, that we have faith, seen by the fruits thereof.

55. What of the distinction of general, and special, explicit and implicit
faith?
General and implicit faith are indeed no faith, or not true faith; explicit
and special may be, as they may be rightly understood, the same with our
faith, and the saving and true faith.

56. What are the effects of faith?
Many, or at least by many names styled, and called in holy Scripture, and may
be reduced to These two, 1. Putting off the old, 2. Putting on the new
Man, or this one word encluding both repentance.

57. How else called or described?
Either Works of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. death to sin, and life to
righteousness, Romans 6. walking not in the flesh, but the spirit, Romans 8.
Renewing the mind, Ephesians. 4. 22. True holiness and righteousness, ibid. 23.
A new creature, Gal. 6. 15. Generally good works, Jam. 2. Tit. 2. etc.


58. But if these works do not justify us, what need we do them, and why?
For diverse reasons, especially these, 1. Because they are good, and so to be
done. 2. They are for the glory of God and his Gospel, and nothing more against
God then the works of sin. 3. They are to the good of the Church, and faithful.
4. They testify our faith, James the 2. 5. They confirm our election, Jo. 4.
12, 13. 6. They win others to the Gospel, 1 Pet. 3. 7. They adorn the Gospel.
8. There is a reward for the righteous.


God will crown these his works and us, though not through desert of the
works, but of his grace, and according to the works, with eternal glory,
Heb. 6. 10. and Athanasius Creed.

59. Can none be saved without good works?
No; for though not for the works, yet neither without the works can we be
safe, for they testify we are in Christ justified, and have Gods Spirit, with
us, working our sanctification, and so cannot be idle, but fruitful in him;
whence it is true, the works are via regni, not corona regnandi, which is only
Christ and the Instrument faith.

60. What follows of these fruits, and effects of faith?
Manifold comforts, As

1. Peace of conscience.

2. Joy in tribulation.

3. Increase of hope.

4. Hearty love to Gods house and children.

5. Assurance of election.

6. Joyful waiting for a Crown of glory; and many other the like, which are,
and may be true tokens of our true faith, and signs to examine it by, the more
the better, both for our own good, and confirmation of others.

61. Can any then be assured of true faith?
Yes, by the testimony of Gods Spirit, to the heart, soul, and conscience, and
the signs and tokens aforesaid duly examined.

62. But many fears and doubts will arise?
Yes, but true faith and love of God casts out fear, and vanquisheth all
doubts at the last; which fears and doubts may indeed proceed from weakness
of flesh and blood, but Gods Spirit crying in our hearts Abba Father,
comfort and strengthens us against them all, and gives us assurance.

63. Is it not arrogance, or presumption to assure ones self he shall be saved?
Nothing less, done as it ought to be; for it is true humility, rightly to
assure himself, he shall be saved by Jesus Christ, since so, he renounceth
himself, and whatsoever is in man, or other creature, and cleaves to Gods
mercy, humbled in his own eyes.

64. By what means is faith preserved and increased?
By the same means that as first it was caused, and wrought in us at first.
viz. Inwardly, the Spirit of God. Outwardly reverent Hearing, reading,
meditating on the Word of God. Receiving and using the Sacraments, and prayer.



65. In a word then, what is faith?
A resting upon Christ alone for salvation, as Psalm. 2. 12. Acts 16. 31. etc.

66. Is this expressed in the Creed?
It is, and so principally insisted on, and especially described in the same.

67. Of how many parts consists the Creed?
Vulgarly accounted of the twelve parts before rehearsed, the twelve Articles,
as to every Apostle, as compiler thereof, was attributed his Article, usually
else as in the Catechism,

Of three parts concerning God the 1. Father, in the first Article. 2. Son, in
the next six Articles. 3. Holy Ghost, in the 5 last Articles


Or otherwise four parts, concerning 1. God the Father in the first Article. 2.
God the Son in the six next. 3. God the holy Ghost in the (...) 4. The Church,
or Gods people (...) four last.


Hitherto the general division and consideration of the Creed, now follows
the particular explication of the same.

SECT. 2. The particular Explication of the Creed, I believe in God the Father.
etc.
Our belief in God, and the parts thereof, in respect of his essence, and
persons: for his essence gathered from the book of nature and reason,
confirmed by the grounds of all true and good Philosophy, as also from other
Books of Gods judgments, and his justice and equity. The Book of prophecy
and revelations, showing the divine power: and very heathen Oracles confessing
and confirming the same. The consent of Nations, and Books of Scripture and
Conscience proving and acknowledging the verity of the true God, who is but
one, proved also by all grounds of reason and religion, as well authority both
divine and humane, what God is, and what his Essence, subsistence, Attributes,
and actions, whereby we learn to ^^ know him. Of his existence, and therein
considered, the manner of it, and persons in the Trinity, shown and proved by
many places of holy Scripture, and other reasons and similitudes whereby more
illustrated to our capacity: and how all three persons are one only true God:
with the relation between themselves and to the creature. Where also their
unity in their actions and operations ad extra, and their unity in the
personal proprieties, and therewith determination of such their actions, is
further ilustrated, with diverse similitudes and comparisons to that purpose:
whereby the eye of reason more elevated toward the higher pitch of the eye of
says, may, in (...) some sort though but darkely, and as in a glass or far
off, take a view of the same, or be humbled herein.

1. WHat is here comprehended in these Articles?
The sum of all things necessary to be known, and believed unto salvation.

2. What and how many things?
Two, concerning 1. God the principal and main task, and best knowledge of a
Christian. 2. His Church, a profitable, and thence dependant consideration.


3. What concerning God is to be learned?
These two principles,

1. What God is in his Essence, in unity one God.

2. How distinguished in his existence, in Person, in Trinity, Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, to us manifested.

4. What learn you first concerning God and his essence?
To know 1. That there is a God. 2. That there is but one God. 3. What or who
that one God is.


5. How know you there is a God?
By the 1. Books of nature and reason. 2. Book of Gods judgments. 3.
Revelation of prophesies. 4. Consent of all Nations. 5. Book of Scripture: and
6. Book of Conscience.


6. How by the Book of Nature?
All creatures, by a secret instinct, acknowledging and confessing the same, by
their subjection, excellent order, frame, and continuance, arguing a workman,
the heavens, and world, an excellent Author, time a beginning, since eternity;
places ascending to Gods throne, above all places; causes showing a supreme
cause above all; and every thing as it were signifying there was a supreme
goodness which gave it, and al things else their being, not able to have it of
themselves, or give it to themselves, but of a much more excellent being, and
beginning, then themselves, which is and must needs be good.

7. How does reason confirm this?
By her best and purest power, surveying the creature, the order, course, and
causes of things in nature, and their excellencies, finds a supreme cause
above all other causes, and being above all other beings, and goodness above
all finite things, inhabiting a place above all finite places, and time beyond
finite time, and so finds God in heaven, and eternity by the grounds of true
Philosophy.

8. Explain this more fully.
Many letters cast together could never make a book, without the hand or head
of some wise and learned composer, how much less could all the creatures, and
heaven and earth themselves, be made or come together, in that excellent order
and frame they are, without the hand of an excellent, powerful, and wise
composer, which could be no other then that divine power, wisdom, and
excellency we call God. So causes depend from one another, till we come at a
supreme and infinite cause, of none depending, which is God. Place, in the
higest or be of heaven, points toward an infinite extent, beyond all places
or comprehensions, the throne and majesty of God. Time likewise, before her
first point, and at her end of date, shows her bounds to be limited, but
some durance; to be beyond all limits, eternity; and so, the enduring of the
eternal Majesty.

9. How by the Book of Gods judgments?
Not only singling out sinful persons, and showing strange tokens of divine
wrath on notorious offenses, as on Sodom and Gomorrah, and on Achan, and Jonah
by lots, wonderful discoveries of murders, and other villainies, oftentimes by
punishments attending, but even if they escape, no less, reason persuading
there is a God, a righteous Judge, will at last render justice to the oppressed
righteous, and bring the cruel unjust oppressors, tyrants, and murderers, to
account, and judgment.

10. How seen by revelations or prophesies?
That there is such a Divine power foreseeing, and foreshewing so wonderful
things to come, passing the reach of humane or mortal capacities, the only
note of true Prophets, and pointing at the divine providence, and power, and
wisdom of the true God, and which the Idols and Heathen gods, did wholly
want, Esaias 41. 23.

11. What say you then to their Oracles?
They were either false, or by the devils subtilty and craft, only
conjecturall, or doubtful, and so both always inclinable, that they might be
to any side, even contrary senses applied: so,

Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse: might be that either he should vanquish
the Romans, or the Romans him. So, Inimici intrabunt regnum tuum, and
subjicient-ur domui tuae, either subjectierunt, or subjicient-ur, (.i.) ignem,
to be understood.

12. But did not these Oracles prejudice the knowledge of God, or of his truth?
To some blind and foolish Pagans it might, to the more wise and judicious it
might confirm them, there was a truth to be known, though beyond the devils,
or his Oracles reach or capacity, and so the knowledge of these spirits, and
their ignorance, might rather prove there was some spirit above them,
omniscient, which is God.

13. How by consent of Nations?
Since all peoples, tongues, and languages, have from the beginning of the
world, ever made this confession, none so barbarous or brutish, but
acknowledging a divine power, governing the world, beneficial to mankind, and
avenging sin and injustice, though according to their knowledge, or civility,
some after a more excellent and religious manner then others, and many of their
very Heathen Poets, Bards, and Philosophers, writing and speaking most divinely
of him.

14. How by the Scripture?
Most fully and plainly, and as in all the knowledge of God, so particularly
and distinctly in this, that nothing more, that as indicted by the most ancient
and divine Philosophers, Prophets, and others, so excellently proving the
divinity, by their divine consent and testimony, it may stand one for all.

15. How by the book or light of Conscience?
If all testimonies failed, yet the very soul and conscience secretly
acknowledges the divinity and supreme power over all; so the eyes and hands
ready to be lift up toward heaven, even of the very infant, or other, in
distress, as thence expecting aid, or blessing, and so confessing a God; nay
the nature of man so much abhorring atheism, that rather then no God, will make
himself an Idol, which falsity or false god, may seem strongly to evince,
this natural ingrafted axiom, and set on the mind, to seek and acknowledge
the verity of the true God.

16. How know we that there is but one only true God?
By both reason, and her principles, and all authorities grounded on reason and
revelation.

17. How by reason?
Clearly, since God is infinite, there cannot be two or more infinites, for so
there should be somewhat beyond the infinite, and uncomprised therein, which
were a contradiction in it self; so there is but one infinite, and so one true
God; and so likewise all the Attributes of omnipotence, independency, supreme
goodness, and the like, are all only capable of unity, or otherwise imply
irreconciliable impossibility, and contrariety.

18. How by authorities?
Both of all sound Philosophers, Platoniques, and others by the grounds of
reason, and true Philosophy, as well as all other the tractates, of Fathers,
Schoolmen, And Scriptures,
proving it by the grounds of true and sound divinity.

What then is God?
A Spiritual Essence, of himself subsisting, most simple, pure, and
absolutely good, infinitely present, holy, wise, just, and mighty, the Creator,
governor, and preserver of all things.

19. What note you herein chiefly?
His Essence, Attributes, and Actions.

20. How in particular?
His 1. Essence and being, as his Name, I am, or Jehovah. 2. Nature,
spiritual, as Father of Spirits, more noble then corporeal substances. 3.
Subsistence, and existence, undepending, and of himself subsisting. 4.
Attributes, Most simple, without mixtion, or composition of parts or accidents.
Most pure, free from all corruption, stain, or imperfection. Absolutely good of
himself, as fountain of all essences, and goodness. Infinitely beyond all
comparison, 1. Present, filling all places, heaven of heavens, and the world,
and all time, or durance, from eternity to eternity. 2. Holy, the holiest of
Angels, not near, or to be compared with him. 3. Wise, knowing all things,
past, present, and to come, secrets of all hearts, and even entia and non
entia. 4. Just to all, both good and evil. 5. Mighty, able to do whatsover he
please, his will only rule of his power.

5. Actions, 1. Creator by his creation of all things of nothing. 2. Preserver
of all creatures in heaven and earth, men and Angels. 3. Governor and guider
of them all, to and for his only glory the end of all, etc.



21. What note you of the Essence and nature of God?
That it is infinitely pure and excellent, transcending our understanding, and
capacity, fully to conceive of the same.

22. What know or learn we concerning the existence of God?
The manner of his existence, or manifestation of his Majesty, sitting to our
capacity, and conceiving of the divinity in the persons of the Trinity.

23. How call you them persons?
As Hypostasis, or manners of existence, of the divine Essence, each
individual existence, of which divine Essence, is a several Intellectual
Hypostasis or person.

24. How many persons?
Three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

25. Why three persons?
Because in the same God has manifested his gracious presence and existence,
in relation both toward mankind, and all his other creatures.

26. How show you this?
By large testimonies of holy Scriptures principally, as well as all other
reasons and similitudes.

27. How in Scriptures?
Matthew 3. 16. the voice from heaven, this is my beloved Son, etc. where the
Father gives testimony from heaven of the Son, and the holy Spirit descends
in the visible form of a Dove, and resting on him.

28. How else demonstrated?
So Mat. 28. 19. Go teach, baptize in the name, etc.

1 John 5. 7. In heaven, three bear witness, the Father, Word, and Spirit.

Psalm. 33. 6. By the word of the Lord the heavens were made, and their heasts
by the breath, or Spirit of his mouth.

So in the 1. Genesis Elohim, the Trinity, and the Lord, his Wisdom, and Word,
and Spirit mentioned, the like Jo. 1. and diverse other places.

29. How by other reasons and similitudes?
By many similitudes and reasons urged by some, but most especially of man
created in Gods Image, in respect of his soul.

1. The soul, the fountain of all the faculties, as the Father.

2. Understanding, as the wisdom and eterternall word or truth, and character
of the Father.

3. Will, or love, whereby God loves himself, and image, essential in
himself, loved of it, and for it and his own sake, all things else, so God by
his wisdom or word, or truth, his eternal Son, one with himself in Essence,
created the world and his holy Spirit, moved on the waters, his will and love
comforting and preserving, as still guiding and governing the works of his
creation.

30. How are all three persons called God?
Because they are all one in Essence, infinite, and so God.

31. Are there not rather, as three persons, three Gods?
No; for all truth confesses one God, infinite and eternal, and besides him
none other, but divine revelation manifests a Trinity of persons, or manner
of existence, in relation to all creatures, in that unity and one divine
essence.

32. Is it only then in relation to the creature?
Not so neither; but the foundation thereof is in the nature of the Godhead it
self, which as infinitely wise, and powerful, knowing it self, and in his
mind producing his own likeness, that character or image of that divine
Essence, knowing it self, is in the mind and breast of God the Father, forming
that image the Son, so begotten from eternity, and as infinitely happy,
blessed and good, loving it self, that love of the Father to his Image and
Son, or Wisdom, or Truth, and of the Son to the Father, the holy Spirit of
God, is from them both proceeding, from all eternity: by which Wisdom, or
Truth, and Love, his Son and holy Spirit, God the Father creates, guides, and
governs all things.

33. Js this the foundation of that relation to the creatures?
It is: And for his own sake he produces all good, and so loves it as good,
and both by creation, governance, guiding and preservation, directs all to
eternal good, his alone glory, which what creature soever seeks, is therein
happy, and in his grace, and thereby apparently good, and consequently shall be
thereby eternally blessed.

34. How is the unity of the Godhead further manifested?
By the unity of the actions, undivided in their operations, toward all
creatures, the Father creating by the Son and holy Spirit; the Son and holy
Spirit, with and from the Father, exercising the power of the Father, and
Godhead, so God created the world by his Wisdom, or Son, in his Love, or holy
Spirit.

35. How the Trinity of the persons therein distinguished?
By their personal proprieties, and determination of the joint actions of the
Godhead, according to that propriety.

36. How are the proprieties?
The Father begetting, the Son begotten, and the Holy Ghost proceeding.

37. How the joint actions determined?
Creation to the Father, redemption to the Son, sanctification to the Holy
Ghost; so the Father styled Creator, the Son Redemer, and the Holy Ghost
Sanctifier.

38. How is this to be understood?
Creation attributed to the Father, though effected by the Son, in the Holy
Ghost; Redemption from the Father, by the Son, in the Holy Ghost;
Sanctification from the Father, and the Son, by the Holy Ghost; and to that
third person attributed.

39. How to reason further manifested?
Faith is above reason, more then reason above sense; and hence many have fame
into heresy, by striving to subject to humane reason, such high and divine
mysteries, yet as not contrary, but excelling reason, they may in some sort be
illustrated by reason, unto some measure of humane capacity.

40. How this mystery?
That though three persons, yet but one only God in substance or essence, one
infinite in power, majesty and eternity, as that one soul of man, having these
three excellent powers or faculties of understanding, will, and memory, so
distinct in that one and individual soul.

41. How else illustrated?
By Saint Augustine also intimated, as the light of the Sun, or Moon, and in
the Air, all but one light, and of that one Sun; how much more, Trinity so in
unity in that Lo. of Nature, whose high nature, works, and essence, are above
the laws of our low nature, or reason, being the Creator, Lord and Commander
of all?

42. Are not then comparisons to be made hereof?
Not in way of equality, or simply, for that were to the derogation of that
infinite Majesty, since infiniti ad finitum nulla est proportio, there is no
proportion or comparison, but only in assistance of our weak capacities, ex
part, as it were, and imperfecte, with this notion; moreover that
acknowledging our weakness to apprehend, or comprehend such things, and their
disproportion, we proceed with Christian modesty and moderation, not proudly or
peremptorily, to the derogation of divine Majesty.

43. How mean you this?
In such divine mysteries, the true objects of faith, rather then humane
reason, not to tie him. who is Lord of Nature, to the limits or rules of poor
weak Nature, his vassal and creature, and to whom, had he pleased, he could
have given other laws then are now prescribed; so not to say or think, this
cannot be, in earth or nature, and therefore neither in heaven, or Divinity,
which were a poor and absurd conclusion.

44. Explain it further.
As to say or think, a man cannot beget a son sibi contemporaneum, or of
essence and time with him; therefore God cannot; which were to make the Lord
only like man, to whom the whole world is but as a drop of a bucket, and
less, being in comparison, nothing to him, who inhabiteth eternity, and of his
Almighty and infinite power may do what he please, and so have his Son, and
Holy Spirit, blessed persons, in one essence with him, from all eternity.

45. How can reason comprehend this?
It may, after a sort, but faith is the sitter instrument of the soul, to
apprehend these mysteries: And it shall be enough for reason, if she can but
apprehend, and have a sight of her own weakness, and faith shall thereby have
the better perfection.

46. How shall reason with reason be humbled?
If she consider how many and small things, as worms and flies, and some so
near as her own self and soul, there are, even before our feet, in the
world, such things whereof she is ignorant, and can hardly or never find out,
or comprehend them, how much more likely is it she may fail in such high and
divine mysteries, so far remote from sense, and so above our understanding;
for if Aristodemus, (as Saint Augustine remembers) labored many years in
seeking out the nature of a Be, which yet finally he never attained; how
shall she think to comprehend the infinite, eternal, and invisible Trinity?

47. What use hereof?
To humble reason, that faith hereby may be the more exalted, that whereas I
profess, with the tongue, so with the heart, I may indeed believe in God.

48. Where is the substance of this faith professed?
In the Creed before rehearsed.

49. In which words?
In these, I believe in God.

SECT. 3. A more particular Explication of the words of the Creed, I believe in
God the Father, etc.
So to take her sight thereof, more clearly from the eye of faith: the Analysis
or division of the first Article of the Creed, where the action, what it is to
believe, and what to believe in, declared and the object of that belief, God
or his Church. And the action of belief applied first to the object, God in
his Essence, in unity one God, and meant in the manner of his existence in the
Trinity in the thrce persons united in nature and Essence, but distinguished in
their personal proprieties ana persons, in whom is ^o inequality, or
precedence either to other in respect of their Godhead, being all one, but only
difference, for order sake in the distinction of their person, or parts of
them. A farther explication of the word of believing, ^ the diverse acceptance
of the same, and application of it to the soul, the subject and God the object
of it, and to the first person here, many ways described, or Father of all
creatures, Christ, and in him all the elect: whereby we are sons, and have his
grace, protection, and image, in righteousness, and true holiness: and cared
for and provided of all things, even a royal inheritance of the Saints in
heaven. Further shown as he is alsufficient and almighty or omnipotent, which
is by and from him communicated, with his essence, to the other persons: which
omnipotence is chiefly shown and seen by us in that world of the creat a
work finite, virtutis: and though opera Trinitatis ad extra be indivisa, this
principally attributed to him, so styled Creator, as originally from him,
wherein considered the decree and execution of it in the production and
preservation as it were a continued creation of al things. The subject of which
his mighty power and operation, the heaven and earth, and all their glorious
and excellent creatures in them contained, and so with them in these words
mean! and intended.

1. What note you generally in the words?
Two things, the Action, and Object.


2. What is the action?
Faith, or belief, which is diversely understood here, according to the
diversity of the object,

Which is either God, His Church and graces.


3. How diversified?
As the words imply, and import by Believing in, or Believing only.


4. What is the difference?
To believe is one thing, to believe in, another, or as the same, yet intended,
or extended, with an addition to the former.

5. In what are we to believe?
In God only, who is Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

6. What are we to believe?
The Articles concerning the Church, and Gods graces, or actions, and
privileges, conferred on, and done for the same.

7. What profess we when we say we believe in?
These five things that we Know, consent, acknowledge, Apply It to us, and our
hearts, Us to it,
Put confidence in it.


8. What when we believe?
The four first only, acknowledge, assent, acknowledgement, and applying it.

9. Do we profess this faith to every Article?
Yes, either to believe in, or to believe it, to which our hearts ought to be
applied in that faith.

10. How manifold is this profession?
Twofold, with the Heart, to justification, Tongue, to salvation.


11. What is the object of faith?
That about which our faith is employed, and which it does apprehend, or
acknowledge.

12. How manifold is it?
Twofold, according to the former division of the Creed, either God, or his
Church.

13. How set forth there?
The first concerning God, in all the former part of the Creed, eight Articles,
till you come to the holy Catholic Church, the second part from that to the
end, the four other Articles.

14. What confess you concerning God?
Our faith and belief in him, that is, with special trust and confidence in
him, and his grace and mercy.

15. How manifold is your confession and consideration of him?
Twofold, Generally and essentially, Particularly, and personally.


16. How understood?
Generally and essentially, as I say, I believe in God, which is the Essence of
the Deity, communicable to the three persons.

And 1. Particularly, or personally, as I profess God the Father Creator. 2.
God the Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior. 3. God the holy Ghost, the
Comforter.


17. How many Gods are there?
Only one God, so the Nycene Creed, and holy Athanasius expounding it, say, I
believe in one God.

18. But does not Scripture name many gods?
The name of God in Scripture is understood and taken

1. Either properly, and so there is but one God, infinite in Essence and
power, inhabiting eternity.

2. Improperly, so Magistrates are called gods, Psalm. I have said you are gods,
as his Vicegerents.

3. Falsely, so Idols by the abuse, and Idolatry of the people under the name of
strange gods.

19. What note you then in the Godhead chiefly?
Both the union and unity in the Essence, and the distinction in the persons.

20. What call you the unity?
The one, and entire Essence of God, appliable to the Trinity of persons
aforesaid, whereby the unity in Trinity, and Trinity in unity is to be
worshipped.

21. What call you the Trinity?
The three persons communicating wholly, each of them in the whole nature and
Essence of God, expressed in that unity in which is founded, their union, as in
their personal proprieties, their distinction.

22. What is their union?
Their being united in that one nature, the unity and Essence of the Deity,
whereby all three persons are co-essentiall, co-eternall together, and coequall.

23. What is their distinction?
That personal propriety, whereby each person in the manner of his existence is
distinguished from other, whereby the Father is not the Son, and the Son is not
the Father, and the holy Ghost neither.

24. Which are those proprieties?
The Father to beget or produce the Son, the Son to be begotten, the holy Ghost
proceeding from both; so the Son cannot be said to proceed, nor the holy Ghost
to be begotten, nor the Father to be begotten or to proceed.

25. How are these Attributes known from others?
For that all other Attributes, as almighty, incomprehensible, uncreated,
infinite, eternal, omniscient, most holy, good, wise, God and Lord, are
attributed to all persons, equally, and indifferently, as they are indeed one
Essence, God, and so the Father God, the Son God, and the holy Ghost God, and
Lord, and Almighty, and the rest: But these are only attributed to one of the
three persons, and not to the others, so the Son only is begotten, and not the
Father, nor the holy Ghost, and the like of the rest.

26. Is there any precedence, or priority in the Trinity?
None, for in the Trinity none is a fore, or after other, none greater or less
then another, but all three co-essentiall, co-eternall, and co-equall.

27. Why is the Father first mentioned?
For orders sake only, for in the Deity is no imparity, but the Son was from
all eternity, and before all worlds, with the Father, God of God, Light of
light, and the Wisdom, Word, Truth, and Council of God, and so was the holy
Ghost.

28. But is not the Son, said under and inferior to the Father?
Not as touching his Godhead, for so he is equal, only inferior as touching
his Manhood, when for our sakes, he would assume our nature in the flesh, and
be humbled.

29. But were not the Son and the holy Ghost, sent after a certain time?
At the fullness of time God sent his Son, yet his Son eternally was willing,
and from eternity with the Father, decreed, and did consent, and came
voluntarily; one God, and one with God, before all worlds, only in his humility
and humanity, after a time manifested in the flesh; so the holy Ghost,
eternally God, yet said after a certain time sent, and yet coming himself, and
so more visible apparent to the Church, who before all time was God, and with
God, coequall in power and majesty.

30. How explain you further your belief in God?
I believe with my heart, and profess with my mouth, this one God, and so I
put my whole trust and confidence in him, and his mercy, grace and truth.

31. How express you what you conceive in this word, I believe?
I believe not only

1. That there is a God, which is credere Deum:

2. His words are true, credere Dei verba esse firma, certa, vera, stabilia:

3. God in his promises and words is true, which is credere Deo, all which the
Devils do believe, even beyond, and better then some reprobates, and any
reprobates may do this:

But which is more, I believe in God, which is credere in Deum, to put my
trust, affiance, and confidence in him.

And confess it a Deo, as the gift of God, whence invocation, obedience, all
good works, and good life, in Deo, and propter Deum, and ejus Christum, do
proceed, which is and ought to be the fruit of faith, so showing it a true,
saving, and justifying faith: and whereby the Soul is purified, Life
sanctified, Conscience pacified,
of a good Christan.

32. How apply you this faith?
To my soul, as the subject, as it is to be saved, justified, sanctified,
purified, and pacified by the same.

To God, as the object, and author of it, almighty, alsufficient, and able to
perform this in me.

33. How to God referred?
Both in the Unity of Essence, and Trinity of Persons, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, the author and finisher of this faith, and object of the same.

34. How is this general Confession first applied here?
To the first Person in Trinity, the Father; so I say, I believe in God the
Father.

35. How is the Father here described?
By his Title of personality, Father. Attribute of omnipotency, Almighty.
Action of creation, Maker of heaven and earth


36. How is the title of Father attributed to God?
1. Either indefinitely, as creator and producer of all things, and so in some
sort attributed to the all three persons, Esa. 9.

2. Or respectively, as the first person is Father by nature of the second, and
in him by adoption, of all his Elect.

37. How many ways is he Father?
Three ways principally,

Generally, of all creatures by creation, so Father of light, and Spirits.

Specially, by adoption, and grace, so Father of all the Elect in Christ.

Particularly by nature, of Christ his Son, by eternal generation.

38. How is Father understood here?
All these three ways; though most particularly, and as foundation of the
rest, as Father of his own, and only Son by nature.

39. What note you in that especially?
Three most observable and wonderful concurrents, in that eternal generation,
beyond all others.

1. That the Father communicates his whole essence to the Son, who is very
God of very God.

2. Produces him, within himself, for without him is no place.

3. Has his Son equal to himself, in being and beginning, as equal in
essence, and majesty, so in time and co-eternity, that there was no time nor
durance when the Father had not this Son, equal so to himself, in time, by
eternal generation.

40. What profit to us in this?
That for his sake, his eternal Son, whom he loves so dearly, we having
his love, shall be saved; so as sons by creation, we have his power and
providence, but as Sons by adoption, in Christ, we have his grace and
goodness attending over us.

41. What special comfort therein?
That as he is our Father, and we are his children, we shall want no manner
of thing that is good either for body or soul, for this life, or the life to
come.

42. What duty are we hereby obliged unto?
The duty of sons, to love, honor, and obey our Father, to strive to be like
him, or to resemble our Father, and bear his image, and as our heavenly Father
trust in him, and cast our cares on him.

43. What image of him?
Of righteousness and true holiness.

44. How shall we resemble him?
1. By holiness, as he commands, Be ye holy as I am holy.

2. By mercy, as be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful.

3. By love, for God is love, and so both to love one another, and even our
enemies, doing good to all, after his example, who raineth, and whose Sun
shines on the just and unjust.

44. Why or how should we cast our care on him?
Because as our Father he cares for us, and who feeds the Ravens, and
clotheth the Lillies, will do much more for his children, if they serve him.

45. Js all care to be abandoned?
All superfluous and excessive care of worldly things, for if we seek heavenly
things chiefly, all other things shall be given sufficiently.

46. How may this be further illustrated?
By the example of Kings children, or heirs, who having great provision of
Kingdom, and best things, what should they carke for pinnes, or trifles, and
if heaven be provided, why carke and care for earth and earthly vanities, and
if Christ be theirs, what can be wanting or withheld?

47. What of the attribute, Almighty?
To learn that he is able, and can do al things.

1. Whatsoever he pleases, his will only the bound of his active power.

2. More then he will by his supreme and absolute power, and so nothing is
impossible with God.

48. Is the Father only omnipotent?
No: for every attribute, saving the personal proprieties, are attributed and
common to all three persons.

49. Why is it here particularly so applied?
In the Hebrew is (...) which is alsufficient, though here rendered by
omnipotence, and referred to God, as placed before Father, yet conveniently
enough in our Western languages, referred and attributed to the Father.

50. How so?
As the fountain of all power, grace, goodness and sufficiency, and by him,
with his essence communicated to the other persons in Trinity.

51. Are not all other divine attributes so too?
Yes, but this more especially, as belonging to him and his person, as the
foundation of the Trinity, fountain of goodness, and founder of all things
else by creation, which seems to have a more particular limitation and
determination to his person, as salvation and redemption to the Son, the Truth,
Wisdom, and Word of God; and sanctifying, comforting, and strengthening, to
the holy Ghost; though indeed opera Trinitatis ad extra, sunt indivisa; and all
three Persons concur in all these, and the like actions, and have them
attributed secondarily, howsoever to one of them, in regard of person or
office, more particularly and principally referred.

52. How is the Omnipotency chiefly seen?
In that effect of Creation, that action attributed to the Father principally.

53. It is then also attributed to the other persons?
It is secondarily, but to the Father primarily, so the Father, by the Son, his
Wisdom, Word, and Truth, did create the world, Genesis 1. and without it nothing
was created, Ioh. 1. and the Spirit also of God, in the creation, moved on the
waters. Genesis 1.

54. What then is principally attributed to the Father?
The original spring, fountain, and beginning of all things and works, yet
working by the Son and by the holy Ghost.

55. What to the Son?
The dispensation of all things in wisdom and truth, yet from the Father, and
by the holy Spirit, and more particularly Redemption.

56. What to the Holy Ghost?
The finishing and perfection of all Gods works, and so especially
sanctification, yet from and with the Father and Son.

57. How is Gods omnipotency seen in the creation?
By his alsufficiency of Power, wisdom, will, and thence proceeding. Justice,
mercy, goodness.


58. In what order is the Creation considered?
1. In the original decree, from eternity, so were all things appointed and
decreed.

2. In the execution of that decree, so in time, and in the beginning of time,
the Creation began, in the beginning God created heaven and earth.

59. What are the principal points considerable in the Creation?
The production of all things out of nothing.

The preservation of the things so produced.

60. What in their production?
The wonderful manner of it, in regard of both the

1. Action it self, creating all things out of nothing, which not only passes
mortal power, but even almost understanding.

2. Instruments used, none but his will and word, commanding and all things
were made.

3. Facility of his actions, though never sogreat, he only spoke the word, and
they were created.

61. What else observable therein?
The time wherein created, six days, not that the Lord needed any such time to
consummate his work, that could be in an instant if he pleased, finished, but
for our learning and good:

1. For order sake, and to consider their excellent order.

2. For distinctions sake, that we distinctly and particularly might enter into
consideration of the same.

3. For manifestation of his sovereign power over all, that could make light
be without the Sun and Stars, trees to grow without their influence, that we
may know that though he uses means ordinarily, yet he is not tied thereunto,
but can do what he pleases without means; and so when we are destitute of
means, to rely on his power, and trust in him: Lastly, to give us example to
work in our ordinary callings the six days, and sanctify the seventh to his
glory.

62. How is the prescrvation herewith considered?
As an effect of his almighty power, and consequent of his creation, who did
not create them so to leave them, but still governs, conserveth, and guides
them to that end wherefore they were decreed and created, viz. for his glory.

63. What learn we hence?
Humble submission of our selves to his almighty hand, and of our will to his
will, who created us of nothing, and ordained us and all things to his glory.

64. What mean you by heaven and earth?
Literally the very heavens and earth the works of his hands, or figuratively
and Metonymice, all things therein contained, Angels, Sun, Moon, Stars,
orbs, and all things, flies, birds, fowls, or creatures in Sea or Land, or
whatsoever comprehended, by likeness of nature, in that notion of heaven and
earth.

65. In what sense?
By heaven, understanding all spiritual, invisible, eternal and heavenly
substances, by earth all corporeal, visible, material, and corruptible
things, so all bodies and souls, Men and Angels, Spirits, and Intelligences,
and Orbs of heaven and earth, Sun, Moon, and Stars, and whatsoever creatures,
in the same contained, whether of heavenly and eternal, or earthly and
corruptible condition.

66. And were all those so excellent creatures created out of nothing?
Yes, and but for his almighty power and grace preserving them, must straight
ways again fall to nothing, so the whole world and all things therein,
founded in grace, are by his grace and goodness to his glory, continually
upheld and preserved.

67. What, are Angels and all Saints so likewise?
They are, and it is their glory to be in his grace, and eternal joy and
comfort to set forth the same, in the certainty of his decree, which has
confirmed that glory of his, so to be in them, and by them showed and set forth
for ever.

What learn we hence?
Both in body and soul, by his grace created, to seek to set forth his glory,
that we so honoring him, with all blessed Saints and Angels, continuing in his
grace, may be honored by him, and possess glory to all eternity.

68. What follows in the Creed?
The second Article, and second part of the same, concerning the second person
in Trinity, the person of God, our Savior and Redeemer.

SECT. 4. The second part of the Creed, concerning Christ.
The Analysis of the second Article of the Creed and concerning Christ, and
therein his name and nature, person, office, and action, severally, and in
order described, his name Jesus, Sa^^our, and so consequ^^^ly Emanuel God and
(...) or God (...) us, or in our nature, whence his divinity shown, perfect
God, and perfect man. The word made flesh, and man, or humanity assumed into
God, in his humanity fit to suffer for sin by his divinity able to bear it,
whereby scene Gods love and mercy to man, yet justice and hate of sin, in Adam
and all his posterity. The heinousness of whose sin, and guilt, in that his
fall, is here described, both in the venomous nature and quality of sin and
disobedience: and extent of the same, reaching to all of us^ and (...) so (...)
blood of that immaculate Lamb, even the Son of God, to cure that malady, and
no other means found sufficient, whence he the expectatation of both Jew and
Gentile, so in the law and her many types shown, or shadowed, and by the
Prophets foretold; and diversely named: As here Christ the Savior, which in a
manner all the rest. The Savior Emanuel, God and man, the Christ, anointed to
his office of King, Priest, and Prophet, for the good of his Church, and right
administration of the same, being Gods only Son, and in all respects our Lord.

I. What learn you in this second part of the Creed?
What we are to believe and confess concerning the second person in Trinity,
the Son of God.

2. What concerning him?
Two things His nature, wherein his Essence, Person.
His office of mediatorship, wherein his Humiliation, Exaltation.



3. Where the first, is his nature described?
In the second Article, And in Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord; where we
find his nature, Son of God, and therein his Essence and person, whereby he is
also Christ the Savior, and our Lord?

4. Where his office of meditatorship?
In the same second, and the following five Articles, where he is named Jesus
the Savior, and Christ so anointed to that office, declared in his humiliation
for us, by incarnation, passion, and descent even to death, and hell, for us
and our sins; as also his exaltation by his resurrection, ascension, and
constitution in glory to advance us to heaven, in the adoption of Sons, to
the inheritance of Saints.

5. What then of him is declared in the second Article?
What 1. His name is, and therein intimated and described, 1. His nature,
Jesus, signifying a Savior, which ought to be Emanuel, so named by the Angel
from God. 2. His office, Christ, the Messiah, anointed and appointed thereunto
by God.
2. He is in nature and person in respect of 1. God his only Son, 2. Us, our
Lord
so we say


Expressly, And in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord.

6. What is your confession concerning his Essence and office in general?
That he is Jesus the Savior, and so Emanuel, that is, God with us,
consequently Christ, the Messiah, anointed of the Lord, and appointed from
everlasting to that office by the Father, being his only Son in nature, by
eternal generation, God of God, Light of light, very God of very God, and of
one substance with the Father, by whom all things were made, and so our Lord,
who came down from heaven for us, and was incarnate, and made man, and
performed the office, of a Redeemer, paying the price of our redemption, and so
brought us to this blessed estate of salvation.

7. What of his Essence in particular?
In respect of his divinity, that he is very God, the only Son of God, the
eternal Son of the Father, equal to the Father, as touching his Godhead in
respect of his humanity, very Man of the substance of his mother, borne in the
world, and inferior to the Father, as touching his Manhood.

8. What of his person?
That he is perfect God and perfect Man, both natures combined in the unity of
his person.

9. How can that be?
As the reasonable soul and body, two different natures make one Man, so God
and Man one Christ.

10. Are the two natures then consounded?
No, they remain perfect, without confusion of substance, that God should be
made Man, or Man God, but joined in the unity of the person, that assumed the
Manhood into God.

11. But it was said in Scripture, God was made Man?
It is true, and the Word was made flesh by assuming the Manhood to it self,
not by turning the Godhead into Manhood, or any third nature, or Essence, but
by that most near union of assuming it into one person.

12. Was there not such a union spoken of before in the persons of the Godhead?
No, for there the three persons were united by an essential union, in the
nature of the Godhead, only distinguished by personal propriety, and manner of
existence, here the two natures in this person, are essentially distinguished
in their being, and no way confounded, but remaining perfect, only joined, and
most nearly combined in the person of the Mediator, which is Christ.

13. What need was it that the Mediator, or Christ, should be God and Man?
1. That in his humanity he might suffer and bear the weight of our guilt and
punishment, to make satisfaction to the offended Majesty of God, in exact
justice, man sinning, by man expiation to be made.

2. Divinity, sustaining the humanity, that it might be most able to perform
it, and acceptable in the performance, and so outweighing the sins of the whole
world, in the worth and merit thereof, and consequently able to advance all to
his glory.

14 Why was it thus?
To show the great glory and goodness of God, and how he is most just, and yet
merciful.

15. How appears that?
In that being so holy, and pure, and so hating sin, that he punished it in the
Angels, and just, that he cannot but punish sin in whomsoever he finds it,
his holiness requiring it, since his purity and goodness, as he is holy,
cannot behold or abide it, much less approve it, yet so merciful, that he
sends his own Son out of the bosom of his love and mercy to bear the
burden of that guilt, which in justice must be punished, but the delinquents
not able to bear the heft thereof, or satisfy so the same.

16. But does God so hate sin?
As nothing more, it being most necessary to his holy nature, and most to his
dishonor by disobedience, and as it were a denying or despising of his Majesty.

17. Are there not yet degrees in sin?
No doubt, and the most heinous sin against the Holy Ghost, as a perverse,
obstinate, and continued denial of the truth of God, even to his face, and in
despite of the Spirit of grace, leading to desperation, or final impenitency.

18. But Adams sin was not so?
No, not in regard of the intention, or malice of the act; or extention of
infidelity, to final impenitency, or deficiency of grace, and despair, yet in
other spects, if not greater, yet large and exceeding great.

19. How was Adams sin so great?
Though only a taste of the forbidden fruit, yet in that a fearful
disobedience and transgression, both in the great

Intention of the guilt.

Extention, to all mankind.

20. It seems a small offense, the taste only of an Apple forbidden.
But in that very sense, as so small a matter, and many other ways, the guilt
and offense, so much more horrible and deformed, and whereby Adam grew
presently most woefully ashamed and confounded, as appeared by his hiding, and
flying from the presence of God.

21. How appears this greatness of his sin?
These many ways: as generally in all sin and sins:

1. By the greatness of the Majesty forbidding it, infinite, so an infinite
offense.

2. His great authority, Lord and giver of all good, so, heinous the offense to
neglect his authority and goodness.

3. The graces and excellencies, so lately before by Adam received, and now
this offense, in neglect and contempt of them all.

Specially in Adam:

1. This matter a small matter to be performed, to forbear an apple, the
offense so much the more, for he that will not do a small matter, how will he
perform a greater?

2. His will being so free, that he might have performed it, the fault so much
the more foul, in that he did not, which so easily, fully, and perfectly he
might.

3. He had but one commandment, he could have no less, unless none; and not
to keep one, and so easy a one, how should he keep more, or what should he
do less, this the more offense.

4. His estate so excellent, and nothing wanting in that excellency, next and
near to Angels. Yet to forget God, be unfaithful, or unthankful, proud and
disobedient, or all, so much more shame, and near to the sin of Angels,
which so much more heinous their sin, as high their excellency and condition
before, and so in eternity, from an incredible height fell to eternity, to an
extreme depth, and despair, and well might Adam, in this respect of his late
excellency and high estate, be by this his foul guilt and forgetfulness,
miserably ashamed and confounded.

22. Was it indeed so heinous?
Yes, yet this is not all neither; for besides that, that disobedience is the
sum of neglect, despite and contempt of the divine Majesty, thereby in the
prime manner of exerucsubg authority, as Lord or Creator neglected, despised
and contemned by the poor creature, a worm, or dust, the work of his hands,
and that ought to exhibit all honor and service: yet more, this disobedience
of his was not only for himself, or to his own prejudice, but in prejudice,
and to the ruin of all his posterity, as in his person, and loins included,
and so a defection most miserable, as of so many, and by a parent to be
considered, most injurious and lamentable.

23. How can that be?
As in him then one person, all the whole nature of man, and generation of
mankind, was so in him, it suffered shipwreck of grace, and received
pollution of guilt.

24. What is the effect in us?
We in him, and by him, deprived of that original justice wherein he was
created after the image of God, in righteousness and true holiness, lost that
image, and do inherit what he purchased by disobedience, original sin.

25. Wherein is it seen?
In the want of original justice, weakness of nature so defaced, pronenesse
to all ill, by which means that original guilt further buddeth out in us,
into an actual transgression.

26. But is that original sin punishable in us?
Yes, as we were in Adam, and with him capable of loss, to liable to
punishment, as attainder of blood in families, so ours in his, which foulness
is further manifested, and thereby also aggravated, by thence springing many
actual sins.

27. But could no ransom serve, but the Son of God?
No: neither Angels, nor any earthly treasures, not heaven and earth,
sufficient to satisfy the infinite offended Majesty of God, but only the Son
of God, and his precious blood, as 1 Pet. 18. not with corruptible things, as
gold or silver, but with the precious blood of Christ, as a Lamb undefiled,
and without spot, etc.

28. Does sin deserve so ill?
Yes, the infinite curse of the Law, judgment in this world, and eternal
damnation in the world to come, both against Adam and us.

29. Was hence then the need of the Mediator Christ so powerful, God and man?
Yes, and so promised to him, and the Fathers, apprehended by hope, performed
to us, apprehended by faith, to the purging of sin, and salvation of all the
elect.

30. How proposed to be considered?
As a Savior of his people, or the expectation of all, a light to lighten the
Gentiles, and to be the glory of his people Israel.

31. How their glory?
As from them descended, of their race, yet in whom all the nations of the
earth should be blessed: and so

1. Promised by God to Adam, and the Fathers and Patriarchs.

2. Expected by all holy men.

3. Spoken of by the mouth of all the holy Prophers, which have been since the
world began.

32. How promised by God?
1. To Adam in Paradise, immediately after his fall, the seed of the woman,
etc. 2. To Noah, as appears by his blessing, the God of Sem. 3. To Abraham,
that in his seed all Nations, etc. 4. To Isaac, with the feale of the Covenant,
circumcision. 5. To Jacob and Judah, as appears by the blessing Genesis 49. 10.
And so consequently to David, the Lord swear in his holinsse, not to fail
David, and of the fruit of the body, etc.

33. How expected by holy men?
From even Adam himself, whose first son, through wicked Cain, his wife almost
in that expectation, hoped (...), even the Lord, or Messiah, according to the
promise: So Abraham longed to see his days, Isaac in Moriah, the sight of God,
Jacob wrestling with God, hoped a blessing, and Savior, and all the Fathers,
as David the Lord to my Lord, etc.

34. How by the Prophets?
From Moses, who set down Gods promise to Adam, received the Tables, walked
with God, and saw the Angel in the bush in the Mount, which was Christ, and
prophesied more of Shilo to be sent, even all the Prophets witness, that from
Genesis to the Revelation, is but the Genesis of the Revelation of Christ,
shadowed under many types, and veiled in the Old, but unveiled in the New
Testaments.

55. How so?
All or most of the legal Types, and ceremonies with the Sacrifices in the
Law, shadows of Christ, the Tabernacle and Temple it self, representing his
coming, and Kingdom, life, actions, and glory; Elias also, of the forerunner,
Melchisedec, Joshua, and Solomon, the types of Christ, every Prophet speaking
of the Messiah, and his coming, or actions; Esaias, that a Virgin shall
conceive, and so to us a child borne, and a Son given, yea and his passions
and sufferings, in whose stripes we are healed; so also his actions, miracles,
preaching, healing the sick, halte, blind, lame, riding to Jerusalem, parting
his garments, and what not, birth, place, stock, lineage, institution, flight,
return, all foretold from Moses to Esaias, and from Esaias to Malachy, who lastly
shows the Angel of the Covenant, that Moses saw their books and writings
full of him, his acts and sufferings, actions and passions, foretold and
described.

36. How called by them?
Sometimes Emanuel, God with us, signifying his nature, The mighty God,
Councellor, etc. Esaias, The mighty one, the Redeemer, The holy one, the holy of
Israel, The Messiah, or anointed, the Christ.


37. How here styled in this place?
Jesus a Savior, wherein comprehended the name Emanuel, as salvation is only
from the Lord.

38. Why called Christ?
As anointed by God, and so signifies the name Messiah in the Hebrew, and
Christ in the Greek, appointed to that office, and anointed with the oil of
gladness, above his fellows, Psalm. 45.

39 With what oil anointed?
As there expressed of gladness, glad to do the will of his Father, so the
Spirit of God in most abundant measure, understood by that oil wherewith he
was endued, whence the Spirit of the Lord upon me, applied to him, by it
apparently testified the Mediator and Savior, and in the power thereof,
executing that office.

40. Why should he be so anointed?
As Kings, Prophets, and Priests were anointed with material oil, by Gods
institution, to show their due and legimate calling to those offices; so our
Savior with that Spiritual oil, to that more Divine office, in it
comprehending the other.

41. What then contained in the office of Christ, or Mediator?
His office of King to govern, his office of Priest, to make an atonement for
sin, his office of Prophet to teach and instruct in his Church.

42. Wherein consists his Kingly office?
In being head of his Church, and so having redeemed it, governing and
protecting it, appointing his law and ordinances, in conservation of the estate
thereof, till he shall deliver it, and all dominion to God the Father, of whom
he received it.

43. Wherein is his Priestly office seen?
In his atonement made for his people, so offering, that one full and perfect
proprietary sacrifice, which though but once offered, so perfect, there needs
no other, as all other sacrifices were but shadows of this, and in the virtue
and merit of this, has satisfied sufficiently, for the sins of the whole
world, and is a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec.

44. But are all the sins in the world thereby forgiven?
No, for though the price and atonement be of sufficiency in value, yet the
efficiency pertains only to those, according to his ordinance, that by the
hand of faith take and apprehend it, to take benefit, and make use of the same.

45. How explain you this?
As in general pardon of the Prince, or other, if granted, which is of
sufficiency to save the condemned, if it be not taken out, and pleaded, or used
to his benefit, the party may suffer for the neglect: so if this satisfaction
and atonement for sin, be made by Christ, be not taken, and beneficially
applied by faith, in the ministry of the Church, the soul that neglects it
may perish.

46. Wherein is his prophetique office?
In his instruction of his Church in all things necessary to salvation, as he
did with his own blessed words, by his own self, being conversant in the
flesh, and after by the doctrine of the Apostles and Evangelists, enlightened
the same, and ever since by those holy Bishops, Fathers, and Pastors, that to
succeeding times he appointed and left in his stead, to teach and instruct in
his Church.

47. How is he said Gods only Son?
By excellency, as the first of all his brethren, Gods only Son, by eternal
generation, in whom are many sons else, made sons by his means, by virtue of
adoption, he only and no other a son by nature.

48. How is he our Lord?
Both as he is Gods Son, who is Lord of all. As he has power given him by the
Father. As he has purchased us at a price, his blood. As he continually
instructs, helps, governs, and defends us.

And as we have yielded our souls, given our names to him, and among so many
millions of Saints, hope in his name, and seek for his light, and his
salvation.

49. What follows?
The third Article of the Creed, concerning his Incarnation, the first degree
of his humiliation, in the execution of his office of mediation.

SECT. 5. The third Article; Which was conceived, etc. Concerning Christ's
Incarnation.
The Analysis of the third Article, and some of the others following, whereof
of his incarnation, and so his conception, and nativity, whereby as it is said
God was made man, and taking our nature was borne of Virgin, the mystery
whereof is expended to the wonder of the Jew, and amazement of the Gentiles,
yet proved to both by their own tenets and principles, with the necessity on
both his and our parts, that it should be so to restore us not only to the
former estate in Adam, but a far and more blessed, and glorious in Christ,
where the resemblances and similitudes: Or rather dissimilitudes, but
proportionable difference and like respects on both sides, are at large recyted
and compared together, and thence flowing, as by humanity attained to the full
satisfaction of Gods justice, even in an exact and eminent degree: and
therefore also is the Genealogy of Christ, as the true Messiah, so exactly and
punctually described by two of the Evangelists, and the knots and difficulties
of the same; with some objections made against it solved, and unloosed, with
the good uses we may, or might to make thereof observed.

1. What is set forth in the execution of his office of Mediation?
His humiliation in three degrees, Incarnation, Passion, Death and descent to
the grave and hell.

His exaltation in four other degrees, Resurrection, Ascension, Session at the
right hand of God, Commission, to be Judge over quick and dead.

2. How is his Incarnation here set forth?
In these words, Conceived of the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary.

What note you hence?

Two parts, his Conception by the holy Ghost; his Nativity, borne of the Virgin
Mary.

3. What mean you by Jncarnation?
His inanition of himself, and as it were debasing of himself in respect of
his majesty of divinity, thereby to put on humanity.

4. Express this more fully.
Christ taking of our flesh and humanity on him, whereby he who according to
his divinity, being the eternal Son of God, in the bosom and palace of his
Father, in all happiness and glory, yet of his love to us wretched and
miserable, and to make us happy, humbled himself, to be found in the form of a
servant, and to take our nature on him, so performed in his conception and
nativity.

5. Was God then conceived or borne?
No: but that person in Trinity which was God equal to the Father, took our
nature on him, or the man Christ, that was so conceived and borne, into that
one person with him, by which personal union, we use and are allowed to say,
the Son of God crucified, and Mary the mother of God, and the like, by a (...),
by which figure, either natures proprieties are often attributed to the other,
and both jointly, or severally to the person.

6. How in Scripture used?
Even so also hence we find it said,

1. God was made man.

2. The Word was made flesh, Ioh. 1.

3. The Son of God crucified, Heb. 6. 6.

4. The Son of man with the Father in heaven, and that came from the Father,
Ioh. 3. 13.

5. And the like phrases, which express the manhood of Christ, taken into God,
and so made one person, all these things are so most true, in the unity of the
person.

7. How his conception?
By the holy Ghost, as the Angel said, The holy Ghost shall come on thee, and
the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee, so that Holy One the Son of
the Most High, also, and called Emanuel.

8. How his nativitie?
Borne of the Virgin Mary, of whom he took flesh, and so the Son of God
became man, or took our flesh and nature, or form of man, and of a servant,
and borne in the world, or made man of his mother, became the son of Man.

9. But this is hard to be understood, much more to be believed?
Yet faith sees more then reason, and beyond it, and as much as the eye of
reason transcendeth the eye of the sense, so much, or far more, the eye of
faith pierces above reason, and we know nothing is impossible with God.

10. How is it proved?
Not only by holy Scriptures abundantly, but to the very satisfaction of
reason, or Philosophy, were it to either Jew or Gentile, if they look to their
own Philosophy, traditions, or doctrine.

11. How to them both?
If they find a God of nature, above nature, as he that said, O ens entium
misere mihi: they must yield him to be above the rules and law of nature, that
took her law and rules from him, and so he can do what pleases him, above,
beyond, and besides the ordinary course of things.

12. How for the Jew?
His Prophets will show him, a Virgin shall conceive; and if he do yet doubt,
let him show how Aarons dry rod budded, the Sea ran back, or Sun stood still,
and diverse other wonders in the Law, and I will straight (even in the same)
show him this, the mighty power and finger of God.

13. It is then wonderful?
Yes, the wonderful work of God, ordained and prepared of old, and wherein
diverse wonders seemed to concur, to this admirable effect, where you may
find, the Ancient of days a Child: God made man: a Virgin a mother, all which
the Lords doing, and mavelous in our eyes.

14. Wherein the most admirablenesse of this wonder?
Not so much that a Virgin should conceive and bear a son, though against the
law of Nature, and rules of Philosophy, to the astonishment of the wisest, and
admiration of Saints and Angels.

As that 1. the most high God should be so abased.

2. Ancient of days become young.

3. Infinite God, put on that finite form of man.

4. He whom heavens cannot contain, contained in the Virgins womb.

5. He that gives food and raiment to all, naked and destitute of all.

6. The Eternal made mortal.

7. Governor of all things, form of a servant.

8. Fountain of life, become the object of death; though so to overcome
eternal death, which wisdom and love of God, let Angels admire, and men
adore.

15. Why so borne of a Virgin?
As a token or emblem of the purity of his nature, that took our nature on
him.

16. Why yet in marriage?
Chiefly to honor that estate, which in it self honorable, and instituted by
God himself in Paradise, hereby more honored, that the Savior borne in it,
though not of it, but of a more excellent root: secondly, to stop the mouth of
obloquy, in regard of the evil world, and froward and malicious Jews.

17. What other observations noted, or reasons urged?
Diverse fitting correspondencies between the manner of our first parents fall,
and this manner of the reparation thereof, and between this second and the
first Adam.

18. Which are they?
1. In regard of the woman that was the cause and instrument. 2. Man that fell,
and manner of the fall, and reparation thereof.
19. How of the woman?
1. As by woman, the means and procurement as instrument of the fall, so by a
woman the means of the reparation came into the world.

2. She offered fruit to the first Adam, whereby we were all accursed; so this
bare the fruit, the second Adam, in whom all nations blessed, and all
generations call her blessed.

3. That in the state of virginity (yet marriage) occasioned the fall, so this
in marriage, yet state of virginity, brought him that redeemed us, and restored
all.

20. How in respect of the man?
1. As the first Adam, of earth, fell, so the second Adam from heaven, repaired
the loss, restored the fall.

2. The first Adam was without mother, unless his mother earth; so the second
Adam without father in the world, though both else sons of God.

3. The first Adam had woman brought forth out of his side, besides the course
of nature, so the second Adam brought forth by woman, besides and beyond the
ordinary law of nature: so the first Adam by the first Eve, though named mother
of living, lost life from all his posterity, and got by their defections,
death; this second Eve, by the second Adam, brings in his perfection, life to
all, so truly becoming what the other in name only, Mother of the living, and
of the Lord of life.

21. How in respect of the manner of fall and rising?
In the fall it self, and manner of the restoring, or reparation thereof, may
be observed,

1. The fall universal, the grace general, restoring to all sufficient for
all, though effectual only in the Elect.

2. The fall by man, and by man came salvation.

3. The fall out of Paradise and heaven from God, restored into Paradise and
heaven to God, so, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, spoken to the
thief.

4. The fall by Satan, sower of ill; health from God, the Fountain of good.

5. The disloyalty of Adam in all parts amended and satisfied by the obedience
of Christ.

22. As how?
As Adam unfaithful lost all, Christ's faithful, Of those thou gave me, I
have not lost one, Savior of all.

Adam brake one Commandment, and so all; Christ fulfilled all written of him;
and all righteousness.

Adams many offenses of 1. disobedience to the Commandment, and in that many
sins.

2. Disloyalty, hearing with patience the Devil traduce Gods truth.

3. Envy of any above him, to the contempt of God, as if aspiring to the same
state, and to sit in the same Chair of Dignity with him.

4. Falsheartednesse, consenting to the Devil, the enemy of God, so thinking
better of him then God.

5. Treachery, taking part thereby with the Devil, Gods enemy.

6. Pride to aspire above his degree, and in knowledge, if not else to be
equal with God.

7. Malecontentednesse, not content with the estate and good things God had
given him.

8. Ingratefulnesse, the root of all evil, to hear the Devils blasphemy,
against God and his truth, and not offended, yea consenting, and so committing
blasphemy in heart, not being thankful for so great benefits as that estate,
life, and Paradise, were, and yielded, but so forgetting God, and all
goodness, matter enough to lade him with the curse, and pack him out of
Paradise; all which yet restored and satisfied for by the second Adam, Christ.

23. In what manner?
1. Not only by his main acts of obedience, even to the very death, in which
all righteousness.

2. Loyalty to his Father, and to do his Fathers will.

3. Love and submission to him, and his will and Commandments.

4. Repulse of the Devil, and his temptations.

5. Humility, even in the greatest degree, and beyond compare.

6. Contentedness in his humility, sufferings and reproach.

7. Thankfulness, honor and praise given to his Father, for all, and in all
things, in most abundant manner and measure, counterpoising Adams fall, and all
our frailty, but much more in infinite measure surmounting it; as he the second
person in Trinity, and descending from heaven, performed this, who was
infinite, as God, and so made infinite satisfaction, and restored by it, not
only Adam, but his posterity, and in token thereof, carried the poor penitent
thief on the cross, with him into Paradise.

24. Are we so then pardoned in his person and justice?
Yes, as in one Adam all sinned, by one Christ are all made alive; and as the
offense by one to condemnation, so much more the grace abounded to
justification, and in his stripes we are healed.

25. But how is the law satisfied?
Man sinned, and man must dye, man offended, and the Man Christ made full and
superabundant satisfaction.

26. But the soul that sins must dye?
It is true, Anima quae peccat morietur, by one Adam sin came into the world,
and had dominion over all, and in that one Adam and his person we all sinned,
and were deprived of grace, all since offenses but branches of that radical
and original transgression; so that person Christ, in his loins in the flesh,
did make satisfaction for his and all our guilt, and being without sin in the
sanctifying of Gods Spirit, as the first fruits hallowed, was an oblation for
all our sins, the branches or buds of that first sin, whose root thus cut off
in Christ, the branches must needs dye, unless again replanted by the hellish
power of Satan, and falling from grace.

27. But is this exact and true justice?
Yea, we may see it, an eye for eye, and tooth for tooth, life for life,
infinite satisfaction for an infinite offense, that it may well be, not only in
vigore, but rigore Juris, true and exact justice, and though some seem to
remit it, a rigore Juris, wherein the soul that sins, (not a Damon for
Pitheas) not a friend for a friend, but the soul it self that sins is to
dye, and show that in vigore juris, full satisfaction is made, and the debt
paid, and we all cleared; yet if we consider that one person that sinned, and
we all in his loins, the foundation of guilt, and that one person that makes
satisfaction, and we all his members, and in him (if ever elect or saved) we
may so exact justice truly to the uttermost mite, and superabundant
satisfaction made both in rigore as well as vigore juris, and praise and admire
with all Saints and Angels, the wisdom, goodness, and mercy of God.

28. Why is the humanity and genealogy of Christ so particularly set down and
recorded?
To show he is truly the Messiah, and promised seed, according to the
Scriptures, viz. of the seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of Juda, and house or
lineage of David.

29. How appears it?
Plainly in the Scriptures, and his genealogy recorded by the Evangelists
Matthew and Luke.

30. But do not these genealogies differ?
They may, yet both true according to diverse direct lines, as we see in the
lines of Nathan and Solomon, as after five, or ten, or many descents, the
children intermarrying, several direct lines came from the same party to the
same on both sides.

31. But diverse fathers are named there of Joseph?
Yet both right, the one the natural father, the other the legal father,
whose the issue accounted when the younger brother was to take the elder
brothers wife, to raise up seed to his brother.

32. But the Genealogy is of Joseph, not Mary, whose Son Christ was in the
flesh?
But he took a wife of his own Tribe, and family, according to the Law; and
the Evangelists and Angel, Luke 3. show, and call him as her son the son of
David,

33. Yet was not Mary said of the Tribe of Levi?
These two Tribes of Juda and Levi were so nearly linked, as placed at
Jerusalem, and about the offices of the Temple, and so many Intermarriages, so
the more occasioned, had passed, that it was sure enough, and not hard to show
their descent, from either Tribe.

34. How can you show that?
By all histories of the times, and Scripture, where it is apparent, the Kingly
family of Juda, and Priestly of Levi much intermixed, and so the very
government was with the priest, not only in regard of their high and sacred
office, but of their blood, by many Intermarrriages intermingled, and lines
there, of Nathan and Solomon, compared with the history of the governors, do
show.

35. Why then was Christ especially named of the lineage of David?
As the Kingly line, fitting the Son of the King of Kings, and in regard of the
promise and prophesies.

36. He is then also acknowledged of Levi?
And not unfitly, as he was to offer that eternal sacrifice, and is a Priest
for ever, after the order of Melchisedec, who was also both King of Salem, and
Priest of the most high God.

37. How were his Disciples called his brethren?
The phrase and custom of the Jews was so, to call the near kinsmen or
acquaintance, and he also calls them so in his love, saying, go tell my
brethren; and some of them were his nearest kinsmen, according to the flesh,
and so Abram said to Lot his kinsman, we are brethren.

38. How or which Disciples were his nearest kinsmen?
Anna the wife of Ioachim (the Father and Mother of the Virgin Mary, both of
the Tribe of Judah, according to Damascene, she of the Tribe of Levi, according
to Epiphanius, and both by diverse lines truly said) had by two other husbands,
two other Mary's, by Cleophas, Mary wife of Alephus, mother of James Alpheides,
and Simon Cananaeus, by Salome: the other Mary, wife of Zebedeus, mother of
James, and more especially, called the brother of the Lord; and John the
Evangelist, whom the Lord, as it is said, so loved: Thus his cousin germans
and called in the common phrase his brethren.

39. How was this James more especially called the brother of the Lord?
Because he was so like him, as testifies Egesippus, who lived next to the
Apostles times, that those who were sent to take him, were feign to send Judas
before them to show which he was, and to distinguish them one from the other,
and so he came, and by that token of the kiss, betrayed him.

40. What learn we hence?
Many duties, especicially, As

1. Reverent admiration with all Saints, Angels, of this divine unspeakeable
mystery.

2. Humiliation of our selves before God in remembrance of his admirable
humility.

3. Gracious magnanimity, and lifting up our hearts to God and heaven, in
remembrance of our hereby acquired in him, best and truest nobility.

4. Joyful commemoration of this his wondrous favor and mercy to our
consolation.

5. Thankful expression of praise both in word and deed, life and actions, for
this his admired mystery and means of our redemption.

41. What follows in the Creed?
The other parts of his humiliation in his passions and sufferings, death,
burial, and descent to the grave and hell, in the following four and five
Articles.

SECT. 6. The second degree of Christ's humiliation, in the fourth Article.
The Analysis of the fourth Article. In his passion, and the maine parts
thereof. His sufferings and obedience to the Law, and thereby to death for us,
that by our transgressions of it had so deserved, and by whose death and
performance of it, or obedience, both active and passive, we are freed, if we
study and strive with our best endeavors to perform the same, whence our
chiefest comfort arises. As by whose stripes we are healed. The many degrees
and process of whose sufferings, and continual travels, labors, and
contumely, that he throughout his whole life, and especially at his death, a
little before it, for our sakes endured and under-went, are here in order
described, as also the most bitter potion, or cup of his Fathers wrath, his
bloody passions, with all those remarkable ciroumstanstances, agony, betraying
unjust judgment, crowning with thorns, buffetting, reviling, and lastly
crucified that night, shameful and ignom nious death, wherein how much more
excellent his soul, so much more sensible of misery and exquisite his torments
of both soul and body though death, by his death destroyed, and by his burial
our graves as it were opened, and our rest or sleep there? sanctified, and so
we learn to sorrow for sin, that caused such his hitter sorrow and sufferings,
yet comforted in his death, that destroyed death, and opened to us the gate of
glory.

1. What is the fourth Article?
He suffered under P. Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried.

2. What is hereby expressed?
The manner of his many sufferings he suffered in his life at his death. His
humiliation to death, burial, under Ponce Pilate dead and buried.

3. What is therein briefly then to be observed?
The second degree of his humiliation, and therein two things especially.

1. Intimated, his perfect obedience to the whole Law, in undertaking the
performance, and curse for us.

2. Literally laid down, his sufferings.

4. What obedience?
Perfect and absolute obedience, which all ought to perform, hoc fac and
vives, or else cursed every one that continues not in all these Laws, to do
them.

5. How is this part of his humiliation for us?
In that he not only descended from heaven, and was incarnate for us,
conceived and borne, and so fitted in the form of a servant, to perform these
things for us, but was also actually obedient to the Law, performing it, and
all righteousness, whereby man fulfilled the Law, and which is more, suffered
the penalty due for our delinquencies, and by it was made sin for us, that we
might be the righteousness of God in him.

6. How did he fulfill the Law?
In performing what was required and written, both in the Law and the Prophets.
Math. 5. 17.

7. How in the Law?
1. All the whole Ceremonial Law concerned either the service and honor of
God: the types of him and his sacrifice, Math. 15. 17. us to perform, and so
himself, as Luke 2. 21. circumcised and offering gifts, Lepers, as every one
of us, Luke 1. 2. etc. Math. 26.

2. Moral Law, in most exquisite love to God, and his neighbor, all mankind,
his brethren, for whom he laid down his life, and what greater love?

3. Judicial, did wrong no man, nay even required not his own, but gave to
Caesar what was Caesar's, and to God the things, etc. and over and above,
himself for others good.

8. How in the Prophets?
What ever was written by them, in exposition of these Laws, or of him, and
signified in types, to be performed by him, so he performed all righteousness,
Math. 3.

9. Were we bound to the performance?
Yes, of the whole Moral Law, and so much of the residue, as were branches
thereof, seen in the other, and pertaining to the service of God, or justice
to our neighbor.

10. But are we now freed?
From the curse and servility thereof, not from the duties and performance; for
we are freed from the curse or bondage, and fear, to be in love, with joy, a
people studious of good works.

11. But has not Christ performed it for us?
Yes, if we strive to show our selves obedient and willing to do all
righteousness, and so it is, Romans 8. 4 he has fulfilled the Law for us, but
with this limitation, if we walk not after the flesh, but the spirit; that is,
who are willing to be righteous, and keep the Law, though not for our
weakness able.

12. How of them that strive not to keep it?
He has done nothing for them, for they walk not after the Spirit; so if they
be sons of Beliall, without grace, not seeking to walk godly, or securely
thinking, or presuming, Christ has done all for them, and therefore they seek
to do nothing to their cost, they will find Christ has nothing for such
graceless and secure ones, but has done these things only for his faithful
ones.

13. The doctrine then of faith destroys not good works?
No, but confirms the godly to go on more cheerfully in good works, since
there is is a reward for such godly; and though the worthiness of them and
acceptablenesse be of the power of faith, and in Christ; yet as God is thereby
more glorified, so by them a more abundant reward, when the ungodly, or they
that want them shall find none, or only the miserable reward of iniquity.

14. We are then bound to do them?
Yes, but to look for the perfection and sweetning of them to our souls, and
assurance from him, that they are made worthy and acceptable by faith, and his
most preceious blood.

15. What comfort herein?
That there is help laid on one that is mighty and able to perform, and so if
we be willing, though not able to perform all righteousness, he has done it
for us, yea, and borne all our transgressions.

16. How is that?
In that second part of fulfilling the Law, his sufferings for sin, and bearing
the punishment both in body and soul, due to all our offenses.

17. What were his sufferings?
Of two sorts,

1. Generally all those miseries in the flesh sustained for our sakes, even in
his infancy, childehood, and before his manifestation to Israel.

2. Especially those grievous ones suffered, 1. after his manifestation, 2.
immediately before and at his death.

18. Which of the former sort?
1. In his infancy the common miseries in his infancy (which as the rest)
considered in regard of his excellency of person, so much more eminently
perspicuous.

2. Persecution raised by Herod, so soon as born, in pretense of worship,
seeking his blood, and slaying so many infants, not sparing his own child,
that it was said and verified, better be Herod's hog then his child.

3. Flight from his massacre, even in his swaddling clouts, feign to take
sanctuary in Egypt, such his exile into Egypt and in his return, feign to take
Galilee, for a poor refuge, for fear of further danger, and so consequently
suffering many things to his greatest derogation, in the process of his age,
both by the Devil, and his agents and instruments, wicked men.

19. What else especially?
1. His want and poverty in a high measure.

2. Fasting and temptation in the Wilderness.

3. Labors in preaching, and teaching ungrateful ones, as well as the

4. Counsels and practices against his Doctrine and person.

5. Violence offered even publicly, often before that his final
apprehension, and time of his suffering and death.

20. How his want and poverty?
1. Seen at his birth, his parents so poor, had no room in the Inn, so born
in a cave near it, where the poor lodged, called (...), the Manger or Stall,
(so antiquity delivers) the place shown, diverse writers in primitive times
recording it, in great want and poverty.

2. In his education, far from pomp or plenty, in the estate of his humble
and poor parents at Nazareth.

3. Afterward with his Disciples, poor Fishers, to the rich and proud
Pharisees, and John's Disciples, as he professes, that the Foxes have holes,
and Birds nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his head.

21. How in his fastings and temptations?
As his use was in great abstinency, so else in the Wilderness, when led out
thither by the spirit to be tempted, and so fasted forty days; and in that
extremity, endured both bitterness of want, and assaults of Satan, in the
discomfortablenesse of hunger and thirst, and want of company, in the vastity
and solitude of the Wilderness, so on all sides encompassed with misery, if
possibly to have been by sorrow or subtilty overcome, but the end, he the
vanquisher, and at last Angels to his blessed comfort, after hellish and
grievous temptations, came and ministered unto him.

22. How in his labors and pains?
Continually going about, doing good, as his very enemies confessed, frequent
and fervent in prayer and preaching, visiting and healing the sick, the blind
and lame, clensing the Lepers, raising the dead, disputing, reproving, and
confuting the gaine-sayings of the stubborn Pharisees, Saduces, and Scorners,
whipping the profane persons out of the Temple, and though instructing the
weak powerfully, overthrowing the insolent impostors, and deniers, or
despisers of the truth.

23. How by practices and counsels against him and his Doctrine?
By his suffering and bearing the vile and standerous speeches of those that
called him glutton, and drunkard, friend of Publicans and sinners, deceiver,
impostor, and said he had a Devil, and cast out Devils by Beelzebub:
Excommunications and revilings of the Pharisees, Scribes, and Herodians, and
all the curses they could give, when he blessed, and blessed of God.

The Pharisees and others, their practices, in their counsels, to entrap him in
his speeches, and seek his life, at least to overthrow and disgrace his
doctrine.

24. In what manner?
Their Disciples, and Herodians, cunningly asking him questions, if lawful to
pay tribute to Caesar, that if he affirm it, the people might hate or stone
him; if deny it, the Roman Governors might take his life: other questions of
the Law, and the like, with malicious intent to hurt and entangle him: and
other whiles condemning him as an Heretic, sending officers to apprehend him,
taht were overcome by his Doctrine; and excommunicating those that followed
him, and pronouncing them accursed, etc.

25. What open violence?
1. So much, that though the Rulers were moved, diverse with his works, and did
esteem and honor him, they durst not profess it, for fear of others of the
Jews and Pharisees, and Herodians, Ioh. 9. 22. they took up stones to kill
him, Ioh. 7. 19. and 8. 59.

2. They led him to the side of a hill, to throw him down headlong, but he
passing through the midst, escaped, Luke 4. 29. his time was not yet come,
determined of the Father, and more, and greater torments and sufferings were by
him to be sustained.

26. Which were those?
Those grievous ones near his passion, when apprehending the heavy wrath of
God, due to sin, and the heavy burden that lay on all mankind, as it were
wrestling with him,

1. Not only prayer, Father if it be possible, etc. and thrice iteration of it
in bitter heavineste of spirit.

2. And wresting from him; but even in deadly anguish, of that fearful Agony,
in body and soul, and sweat of drops of blood.

And lastly, his life in that terrible and fearful manner, by crucifying,
being made a sacrifice for sin, when his body torn, and his soul tormented
under his fathers displeasure, he cried Eli, Eli, etc. that he was a man indeed
of sorrow, when he so bare our infirmities, Esaias 53. for what sorrow was ever
like his, Ier. Lament.

27. What considerable in his crucifying?
The unjust execution, and manner of it, the means of it, Gods determinate
counsel, for our good: the malice of the Jews: consequently his death and
burtall.

How the unjust execution and manner of it?
1. As it was before, Pilate, a Roman and Heathen and by himself confessed,
unjust Judge, as

2. Who acknowledging him guiltless, and acquitted him indeed, and justice,
yet at the Jews importunity, for respect of persons, and partial favor,
condemned him.

3. By the malice of the Jews procured.

28. What means here seen?
1. Seen to men, the unjust Judge, his partiality: malice of the Jews, their
malicious accusations, and false witness, when all fail: prayers and threats,
if thou let him escape thou art not Caesar's friend.

2. Seen to God, man's redemption hereby redeemed: his determinate counsel,
this means to be thus made, this sacrifice offered, and Christ thus to suffer
for many, Drink this cup, etc.

29. This was the greatest of his sufferings?
Yes, for thus he suffered under Pontius Pilate, and was crucified: wherein

1. His crowning with thorns, 2. reviling, mocking, and spitting on, 3.
buffetting, etc. 4. false accusers, and accusations, 5. Purple robes, in scorn,
seem but sparks to the ensuing flame.

30. Wherein shown?
When both in body and soul, tormented, pierced through with sorrows, and
pressed to death, temporal, and his soul even feeling the misery of the
eternal.

31. How mean you that?
In his body,

1. Carrying the Cross till he fainted under it. 2. Nailed to the Cross, the
most iguominious death. 3. Veins and limbs rent, with cruel torments of all
parts. 4. Pains of death, body and soul parting. 5. To comfort him, gall and
vinegar to drink, in increase of sorrow and scorn. 6. Lastly, side pierced,
and heart blood let out, as hands and feet, before pierced and wounded.
In his soul,

1. Suffering with his body the separation from the body, torments of ignominy
and shame, but much more the

2. Separation from God, and heaven, by guilt of our offenses, by the anger of
God against finne, pressing him on all parts, that he cried out, Eli, Eli, etc.

Did God forsake him?
No, but the heaviness of the wrath and curse, pressing on him so sore, in the
grievousnesse of the anguish, made him insensible of the comfort, so though the
divinity never parted from him, yet in the parting of body and soul, and
grievous torments, he felt not the comfort, though by the assistance of it he
was more then conqueror.

32. But how could he in that excellency of soul feel such torment, or not
feel the comfort?
By how much more excellent in soul and spirit, by so much more sensible of
the wrath of the offended Majesty of God, as all best souls best know, and
feel it; when the unwise does not consider, and the fool does not understand
it; but his as the most excellent, so most pressed with it, especially
considering the weight of the sins of the whole world, infinite in weight,
number, and measure, as against the Infinite Majesty, under which his soul now
groaning, made a sacrifice for sin, as most excellent, most exquisitely felt the
sorrows of death, even beyond all the Martyrs, and sufferings in the whole
world, and so might well be robbed of comfort, when plunged into that gulf of
misery, when yet by that deep anguish, and dignity of his person, with
assistance of the Deity, that never left him, he conquered and brake open the
gates and power of sin, death, and hell.

33. What were the consequents?
His death and burial, wherein by his death he destroyed death, and by his
burial he fulfilled the curse to the utmost mite, to dye and return to earth;
yet thereby sanctifying both death, and the grave, to a gate of life, and way
toward glory.

34. How did his death destroy death?
By fulfilling the Law, and punishment, not only to the full, but beyond all
debt, by the dignity of his person, and so death having seized on him, that
knew no sin, had exceeded his commission, and the law given, that the soul
that sins shall dye; and by this means lost both his sting, the power of
the Law now satisfied, for them that are in Christ, and his authority, having
beyond his authority swallowed him that knew no sin, and must render him
again, and with him many others, in respect of whom death it self was now
swallowed up into victory.

35. What memorable occurrents at his death?
1. The Sun darkened, to show Light of Truth eclipsed, and Son of God that
suffered, as Dionysius Areopagita, then in Athens, perceiving it, is reported
to say, Aut Dens naturae patitur, aut mundi machina dissoloetur.

2. Veil of the Temple rent, as a token of opening a way for the Gentiles, to
come to the Church and Temple of God.

3. Graves opened, as a token of death destroyed by the power of his death.

4. Dead bodies of Saints arose, and appeared to many in the holy City, as an
emblem or testimony of the resurrection in his power begun, in so much that
the Centurion, and they that stood by, confessed, Verily, this was the Son of
God.

36. Why is his burial also remembered?
To show prophesies in all points fulfilled, he made his grave with the rich,
so an honorable man, Joseph of Arimathea, having begged his body, laid it in a
new Sepulcher, in the garden, and not only a Consummatum est before his death,
but in and after his death, of all things: and more fully to express the
mystery, as to dye with Christ to sin, so to be buried with him in baptism,
that we may rise and live with him in glory.

37 What then learn we hence?
Many and excellent duties.

As 1. sorrow for sin, that caused our Saviors so great sufferings, especially
he being our dearest

Friend, or Spouse.

Lord, and Savior.

The Son of God.

2. A holy comfort in him, that death and danger is passed, and overcome, if we
be but truly his, and in him, for then he has fulfilled the Law for us, and
freed us both from curse and punishment.

3. Constant patience in all tribulations, both because our blessed Savior
endured greater, and that thereby we are freed from eternal death and anguish,
which as but gentle corrections, may be esteemed; for what should the condemned
person, if life be again granted, and full pardon given, care to endure a
small stroke, a moments grief else? and such is our case.

4. Mortification of our earthly members, so to dye with Christ, that we may
live with him: for else 1. we do but as much as in us lies, crucify again
the Lord of life, and worse then the Jews: 2. we have no part in him: we do
not deny our selves, but him, and shake hands with sin, the world and the
devil, in contempt of him.

5. Joy in any sufferings, especially for the truth, thereby more confirmed
his, as honored to be worthy to suffer for him that suffered so great things
for us.

6. Thereby boldness and resolution in any combat, or terror of conscience,
since the greatest enemies of all are conquered by his death, and death it
self destroyed.

7. Courage, even in the agony and pangs of death, since death is conquered,
the sting taken away, the power abated, and Law satisfied, yet death and the
grave sanctified for a gate to life, and way to glory, sweetened by his taking
it on him, and in that he went before us that way to glory.

38. What follows?
The fifth Article, or as some make it, a part of the others only, He
descended into hell, the lowest and last step of the humiliation of Christ.

SECT. 7. The 5. Article, He descended into Hell.
The exposition of the 5. Article of Christ's descent into hell, and diverse
interpretations of the same, and acceptations of the words, both figuratively
and literally, by several authors, and expositions thereof, insisted on, and
how far forth severally, according to the analogy of which only confidence,
faith to be allowed of, and approved, whereof the exposition containing the
bitter torments and even pains suffered in his soul, as the second also his
descent, to manifest his glory preferred: but the third of Lymbus, and 4, 5,
and 6. as improper, or less pertinent, rejected, but the true and Catholic
sense, and meaning of this Article explained, and demonstrated which how it was
in some Creeds omitted, and diverse objections against the truth of it shown,
answered, and refused, as more captious then solid, which sort some taken out
of Luke 23. 4. and that saying of our Savior to the thief, that this day thou
shall be with me in Paradise, and thirdly from his consummatum est, then also
on the Cross uttered. As fourthly from the want of it in some Creeds, and by
negative divinity, for that not expressly mentioned in the Evangelists, though
on the contrary firmly proved by them, and from diverse other places confirmed,
and so as generally in the Church in all times, and by all persons and Orthodox
Writers, remembered and taught, received and believed, and lastly some of their
arguments retorted on themselves: and other scisenatiques and Heretics, or
misbeleevers, but shown, more strengthening and confirming our present
assertion, with the use to be made of the same.

1. What is the last degree of Christ's humiliation?
His descent into Hell, expressed in these words, He descended into Hell; which
some annex to the former, as included in them; others to the following words,
as a preparation to the consideration of his resurrection from the dead; some
repute it a distinct Article.

2. How is it then interpreted?
After diverse manners, and so consequently as diversely understood, so variously
referred.

3. Whence grows this difference?
From the diverse significations and interpretations of this word (...) used in
the Hebrew, and more Eastern Churches, as (...) in the Greek Church.

4. What is the Hebrew (...)
It signifies either the Grave or Hell, and so diverse times either way
accepted and used.

5. What is the Greek (...)?
By it also signified the Grave and Hell, and no less the estate of the
departed, indifferently whether good or bad, to joy or torment.

6. How many several interpretations are there then?
Six, at the least deduced from this ground, or difference.

7. Which are they?
The first figuratively understood, for the torments of soul, and in his soul
suffered, at, in, and before his death, the heavy anger of God against our
sins, which caused his agony and bloody sweat, and crying out, Eli, Eli, etc.
even as it were the pains of hell, being depraved of that solace which he was
wont to find in God; as learned Doctor Field speaks, l. 5. de Eccles. c. 18.

8. Which the second?
Literally understood of the place of the damned, whither he is said to
descend, not to suffer any torments, (for consummatum est was said before, and
the work finished of redemption, and he assured the penitent thief, This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise,) but to triumph over the Devil, and Hell,
conquered, and for manifestation of his glory there, and to the disobedient
spirits, to their greater torments and confusion, 1 Pet. 3. 19.

9. Which the third?
Understood the lower parts, or some places near hell, but not the hell of the
damned, where the Patriarchs or Saints before were supposed to abide, not
having full sight and fruition of God.

10. Which the fourth?
Literally by (...) or (...), understanding the grave, to which his body
descended.

11. Which is the fifth?
Figuratively thereby understood, in the phrase of the Greek, the estate of
the dead.

12. Which the sixth?
Figuratively also, to signify his stay in that state, or the grave, three
days, as it were the duration or permanency thereof.

13. Which is the most approved interpretation?
The first and second, as most consonant to the analogy of faith, and
expressed, or allowed in the doctrine of our Church; the others either
exploded, or impertinent.

14. How the first approved?
For that it is most assuredly true that our Savior felt most extreme
torments in his soul, that even the pains of hell, after a sort, gat hold
upon him, as the Psalmist and Prophet David speaks, when he sweat drops of
blood, and that there needed an Angel from heaven to comfort him, as Luc. 22.
34. and after cried, Eli, Eli, etc. by the dismal apprehension of the heavy
wrath of God, and sorrows endless, due to us, and lying so heavy on his
soul; which may further be illustrated, and proved by these reasons following.

15. Which be they?
That such and so great sorrows did seize on his soul appears in that,

1. That with only consideration of them, he was so troubled, that he
confessed, My soul is heavy even unto the death, and prayed those three
times, with that fervency, Father if it be possible, etc. Mat. 26. 28. etc.

2. His apprehension of the sorrows, caused these drops, bloody sweat, and
agony, and so terrible grief and trouble of soul, that needed the Angel from
heaven, Luke 22. 42. etc.

3. The fear of death, so terrible, was so apprehended, that it wrested those
prayers, and supplications from him, with strong cryings and tears, to him that
was able to save from death, whereby he was heard in that he feared, Heb. 5.
7. which shows the greatness of the trouble of his soul.

4. So wonderful was that fear he was surprised withal when he suffered,
that he cried, Eli, Eli, etc. and a second time, and gave up the ghost, that
offering for sin.

5. As he was more powerful then all the Martyrs, so he suffered more then
all, if all were put together, from righteous Abel to this day.

6. His soul being an offering for sin, and souls having sinned, and all the
faithful in him, and their sins in his soul, to be expiated, and everlasting
death due, heavy indeed, and grievous pains, must needs take hold on him, by
which we delivered in his power, though with extreme pains and sufferings.

16. But what is the end thereof?
That howsoever insupportable by men and Angels, or unutterable, yet thereby
perfectly redeemed both body and soul, by passions both of body and soul in
the power of his divinity, that never left him, not even in that agony, passion
and death, when he seemed to be overcome, whereby yet he became conqueror.

17. This interpretation then of his descent into hell, is approved of?
Yes, though perabolically interpreting it, yet as agreeable to Scriptures, and
the analogy of faith.

18. How the second interpretation?
Literally true also, as consorting with the plain text of Scripture, words of
the Creed, and testimony of Fathers, and expounded by our Church, so in regard
of his triumph over hell, and Satan, and manifestation of his glory there, and
to them, to their greater terror, torments, and confusion, as Saint Peter
seems to intimate, saying, in the spirit, he went and preached to the
spirits in prison, which were disobedient in the days of Noah, 1 Pet. 3. 19.

19. How of the third?
Exploded by our Church and holy Scriptures, as that acknowledge no third
place, or state of souls departed, but Heaven or Paradise, the place of joy,
and hell the state of the damned.

20. How the fourth?
As less pertinent, or proper, since thereby is only signified, what was
before expressed, by he was buried, and so a tautology of burial, as to say,
He was buried, and descended to the grave, in effect, but he was buried, and he
was buried.

21. How the fifth?
A like impertinent interpretation, and inferring A tautologie of death before
expressed, in that he was dead; for what difference between he was dead, and
descended into the state of the dead.

22. How the sixth?
Little other then the former, for being in that state, it imports some stay,
and how long that was, is declared in the words following, The third day he
rose again from the dead.

23. What then Catholiquely understood by his descent?
Either the grievous torments that he suffered in his righteous soul, beyond
compare, or that he descended or stooped so low in his humility, and
exinanition of himself, to manifest his love extended to mankind, and glory
now asserted, and assumed to the very gates, and into the dungeon of hell, to
the souls and spirits there desolate, and deserted of the grace of God, or out
of his gracious presence, there plunged in unspeakable grief and torments, by
their wretched and wicked fall from God, or prevarication against God, and his
Christ; which though never so great joy, to Saints, Angels, and souls of the
Just, only served to them to increase their torments; and so after his victory
on the Cross over sin and death, this representing a triumph over hell, and
all that wicked rabble, or all that is accounted evil, and that hold of sin
and hell, or the Prince of hell, the Devil.

24. But as is said in the story of Dives, there is a great space set, that
none can go from heaven to hell, or return thence to heaven, Luke 16.
It is true of any other, but the Son of God, he only excepted, and yet they
also there, saw and spoke to one another, but indeed there is so great a gulf
between them, and their estates, of despair, and other ugly hellish terror,
and grief, they can never come one at the other, or to the joy and comfort, or
other estate one of the other, such endless distance is there between their
several habitations, and conditions, the one enjoying eternal bliss, by the
other quite forfeited, and utterly desperate of all remedy, and within
himself, as well as before God, judged and condemned; or this one having
unrecoverably lost all grace, and time of grace, but the other made so good use
of it (and by grace, and in the day of grace, momentae unde pendit eternitas,
improved both) that eternally and invincibly impossible to be cast out, and
possessed of glory, which is the joy of the elect, sum of all bliss, and so
the one, of all things receiving joy and comfort, as delighted in, and pleased
with the will of God, the other in all things tormented, that if in heaven (as
Satan came before God, and among the children of God, Job 1.) yet no comfort
in, or joy from the glory of that place, but rather grief and torment, to be,
or be accounted no more worthy of it, having forfeited it, and the price of it,
the time, graces, and what else once granted them, for the gain, and obtaining
that pearl, or treasure, and the very joy of the Saints, a corrasive to them,
so this such a gulf they can never pass, and though see and speak, can never
come one at the other; yet as these might see and speak, as it were at
enterview one to another, and God is every where, much more may Christ who is
God, how he please, descend to show his victorious conquest, and triumph there,
and so truly diverse ways to be understood, he descended into hell.

25. But this phrase was left out in some Creeds?
It is true, so it was in the Symbol of the Church of Rome, and diverse of the
Eastern parts, as appears by the Smyrnian, Sardian, Toletan, Ephesine,
Constantinopolitan, Chalcedon Councels, and other ancient confessions, but in
some of them, as the Roman, since added, is, and may be well thus interpreted,

Whether Literally, for his descent in triumph, and manifestation of his glory.
Figuratively, and parabolically, for the pains of hell, sustained in soul at,
and before his passion, under the heavy wrath of God, and curse due to us in
body and soul, Ruf. in Exposit. symb. and Jerome. Epist. 41. part. 1.


26. But there are many and maine objections used against this his descent into
hell?
Many, but not so maine, or indeed of any consequence, to evince what they
would, or subject so plain an Article of the faith, so universally received,
and so fully confirmed by holy Scripture.

27. They may be easily solved then?
They are, and more pregnant places, and proofs by far, produced to the
contrary, and in confirmation of the truth of the position, evidently showing
them, but in a manner falacies, or captious, and sophistical argumentations.

28. But many have infisted on them?
Yes, and no point of doctrine almost, never so sound, but has had many
impugners, no conceit so foolish but has had many maintainers and upholders.

29. It may be profitable to hear them?
Yes related, and resolved, since not once, but so often stirred and agitated,
by uncircumspect and simple persons, that have erred by them, so to receive and
have more full solution, and to insist more firmly in the truth, clear
foundation, and though else it might seem Camarinam movere, to stir up the
stink of some old heresy, yet in this respect needful to satisfy and recall
the erring judgments of any missed by partiality, or misinterpretation against
the current and generally received doctrine of the Church and holy Scripture,
and such only left to err, that are either

1. Lazy, and will not seek to know the truth, and full satisfaction.

2. Wilful, and bent to follow any by-way, whatever evident proof and reason,
able to satisfy any judicious, evince the contrary, of which overweening and
wilful spirits, every age affording too much plenty, and ours superabounding,
to the sowing and planting, or replanting of many an ancient and later heresy.

30. May we hear some of the principal objections then?
It is objected out of that, Luke 23. 4. etc. Father into thy hands I commend
my spirit, that therefore he was not in hell; but as a bare conceit scarce
worth an answer, as falling of it self; for as by Gods hand, his power and
protection meant, what place is free, or out of the hand of God? the Psalmist
teaches us, as Psalm. 139. 8. If I ascend to heaven, thou art there; if I go
down to hell, thou art there also; if I take the wings of the morning, and
fly to the uttermost parts of the earth, there also shall thy right hand hold
me: So our blessed Savior in the words of the same Psalmist, commends his
Spirit into his Fathers hand, or protection, which he was also assured of,
whether in Heaven, and Paradise, and hell.

31. How secondly?
It is objected out of that saying, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise,
spoken to the thief on the Cross, that therefore he was not in hell: But the
answer most plain, both that of Saint Augustine, that he fills all places,
Heaven, Paradise, and hell, and no place free from his presence, as before, and
so, as he was God, with him in Paradise, or Heaven, in regard of his divinity,
as in his Epistle, 57. ad Dardanum.

Secondly, his Soul and Spirit might both ascend into Paradise, as was
convenient, and the same day to hell also, for the manifestation of his glory,
or descending first, and ascending after, Ephesians. 4. 9. as we see the excellent
quick motions of the mind, and soul, and thought, from one side of the earth,
and one end of heaven to another in a moment, such the quick motions of souls
and Angels, hindered by no earthly, or corporeal and bodily impediments: thus
doubly answered, in regard both of the divinity and humanity of our Savior.

32. How else thirdly?
Thirdly, objected from that saying of our Savior on the Cross, Consummatum
est, it is finished, ergo, not in hell, and answered most true, not to suffer
any pains, or farther there to perfect the mystery and merit of our
redemption, which was fully perfected on the Cross, whose passions there of
infinite value, as before expressed; and this argument were good against
Flaccus Illyricus, and such as supposed he went to suffer, not against us, or
that interpretation that shows his descent, only for manifestation of his
glory, or the like respects.

33. How else opposed?
Fourthly, this particle (say they) is wanting in diverse the ancient Creeds or
Symbols of the faith, ergo, etc. answered: so is communion of Saints, yet a
most Catholic Article, and no argument to say it is left out, or not related;
therefore it is not so, all truths that are not reported were no truth; but it
is as the former both by Scripture and authority, proved and approved; and
besides in many, or most of the Symbols, and Fathers expositions of them: As

1. In Athanasius Creed, joined to Cyprians works.

2. Ruffinus Exposition of it, and citing the Psalm. 16. 10.

3. Chrysostom his Creed and Exposition of it.

4. Saint Augustine his Creed and Exposition, where comparison and sign of
Jonah explained.

5. Ignatius the like.

6. Ireneus, though not in his Creed, in his other writings: So all the current
of the Fathers, besides the Councels recited before.

34. What else opposed?
Fifthly, the Evangelists (say they) have no story of it, ergo; the same in
effect with the former, if good, what heresy in some part, or other not so
established, as the Sadduces, or any might build on such foundation, as Moses
makes no mention of creation of Angels, ergo, there are none, but this
reasoning is exploded by all judicious, as without reason; and the contrary yet
here is plainly evinced by holy Scriptures, in as many or more places and more
pregnant far, then produced against us,

35. Which are those?
Psalm. 16. 10. the Psalmists prophecy expounded by Peter in the 2. Acts 27.
whereas it were both parts, body and soul there mentioned, soul in hell,
flesh in hope, raised by the soul, in power of the Godhead, so the Holy One
never to be left to see corruption: what more plain, even by text of holy
writ, and Scriptures self expounding holy Scriptures, the Apostle, the
Prophets words and meaning, what David Prophence, Peter Didactice, and to the
point, as Elenctice of the contrary opinions; where the resurrection showed
how, the soul from hell, the flesh or body from the grave, where it did rest
in blessed hope, and raised thence within three days, and never saw corruption,
and for that (...) signifies the grave in other places, as well as hell, it is
confessed both. But Saint Peter makes it plain how it is to be understood
here, and though we need no further proof, this one and so clear and plain,
yet we may see more for further declaration or illustration.

36. How else proved?
2. Ephesians. 4. 9. in that he ascended, what is but that he descended first to
the lower parts of the earth, and what is by it to be understood but hell for
the grave, not in the lower parts, but near the superficios of the earth, and
the body cannot be said to descend, but to be laid there, only the soul
active and able to descend or ascend, and the body in the power of the soul,
when it was united again, as in the resurrection out of the grave, and after
in that higher exaltation and ascension.

37. Be there any further proofs?
Yes diverse, as thirdly, Romans 10. 6. Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend
to heaven, or who shall descend or go down to the deep, the Abyss, to bring
Christ from the dead, or hell, not grave, for that is not Abyss, or without
bottom, being as before shown, but near the superficies of the earth, or
what so fit to be opposed as is there to heaven, but hell, as the meaning is
plain, no fitter understanding of it, and the devils themselves Luke 8. 31. so
take it, and hell by them expressed, in that word the deep, or abyss,
desiring Christ not to be put out thence into the abyss.

38. How else proved?
4. By that of our Savior, as Jonah was three days and three nights in the
Whales belly, so the Son of man three days in the heart of the earth, but the
grave, near the superficies, ut ante declaratum, and the gulf of hell so
fitly compared, alluding to that of Jonah, his confession, he was in the belly
of hell, in the seas, and at the bottom of the mountains, and by this
expressed what farthest from heaven, and what farther removed then hell.

39. Is it any farther demonstrated?
5. Yes, and most plainly and evidently again by Peter, 1. Epist. 3. 18.
where that his saying of Christ, who mortified in the flesh, but quickened in
the spirit, by it went and preached to the spirits in prison, that were
sometimes disobedient, when the long suffering of God waited for them in the
days of Noah, etc. So plainly applied, such his descent into hell, to
manifest his power and his glory, and convince their disobedience, both in
Noah's time, and all like disobedience, and neglect of Gods forbearance, and
long suffering, that nothing more clear, or any other, or more fit, and plain
understanding thereof can be, and thus most clearly evinced.

40. Is not this passage otherwise interpreted?
Though Saint Augustine, and others following him, interpret it of the
disobedient men, in the days of Noah, preached unto by Christ, in his Spirit,
so directing Noah; yet this interpretation of Damascenes and ours is the more
literal, and agreeing with this Article, and as agreeable also with the
Analogy of faith: And where are diverse senses all agreeable with the Analogy of
faith, (the Spirit of God well knowing all that ever could be thence deduced,
and so as good intending the same) it may be lawful for us to use either, and
especially this, as more literal, and with fewest or no figures in it; there
being in that other of Saint Augustines diverse farther fetched locutions or
figures, as of the prison, and spirits disobedient, for men, and Christ's Spirit
for his whole self, or the deity taken, and his preaching for that by his
Prophets and holy men, as Noah: whiles this of ours is more directly to the
letter of the Creed, but granting that were the more literal (though it be
not) or prime intention, yet a liberty may be used, to the Churches
edification, in such a case, and the sense well admitted, the Article being so
plain also for it, and agreeing fully with it, though else we need not desire
this neither, it being without it, so fully by the former proofs demonstrated.

41. Yet if said, to what end did he descend, or what needed his descent, how
is it to be answered?
Though curious questions, and such as this, seeking into Gods secret
determinations, need no answer, but reproof, it being our duties to rest in
Gods revealed will, without presumptuous seeking into his secret counsels, as
many graceless ones use to do to their own perdition, such curious devisers,
thereby giving evidence of want of grace, by their immodest seeking, and
presumption; yet because this being used for an argument to overthrow all, is
well and sufficiently with warrant, as before of holy Scripture, for
confirmation of this truth, and retorted to the overthrow of the opposers
error, it may have a full and plenary answer and solution.

42. How show you this?
As indeed if no end why, or no need of it, they conclude no descent; so
whereas to good end, and great good occasions, then great and good need of such
descent to hell, and consequently, that he descended. The reasons why many
alleged by many, principally these:

1. As some say, to bind the devil, and power of darkness; but if nescio, or
non plene intelligo, be set here, it matters not.

2. To fetch souls thence, dixere patres, but non audeo dicere.

3. To suffer, as Flaccus Illyricus, indignam Christo, whose consummatum est,
had abundantly on the cross, finished all satisfactory sufferings, and
overcome the bitterness of them.

4. To triumph, or in triumph, even when at lowest, to manifest his glory, and
power there, by holy men is believed.

5. To convince the disobedient in the days of Noah, as Saint Peter shows,
ante, or any the like since, condemned by their own conscience, and convicted
by testimony of his presence, such his preaching there to be understood.

6. To convince the gainesayers, and to condemn the unfaithful then alive,
denying herein the mighty power of God, and his word of truth, able to do all
things, especially what promised, as in the sign of the Prophet Jonah; they
look for signs, but no sign shall be given, but that of the, etc. So here
spoken, as it were, Come ye despisers and wonder, etc.

7. Comfort of faithful, and assurance of salvation, in the very Son of God,
to whom heaven open and grave sanctified, hell vanquished, with all her power
of sin and death; so no power against them with whom Christ is, si Deus
nobiscum, quis contra nos, and he is Emanuell, God with us,

43. Are those the reasons then?
They are, and thus is our assurance sealed, he went to the dead, yet alive,
to the damned, yet blessed, to hell, yet reigns in heaven, since impossible
that he should be holden of either grave or hell.

for the Grave opened and sanctified. Death swallowed in victory. Pains
thereof loosed. Hell it self vanquished, the power thereof subdued, and
triumphed over, and he that sanctified the grave, by his presence, opened hell
by his power, which he vanquished in the gates, or strength of it, thought else
impregnable, and made it the gate and way of life by his resurrection, opened
and entered heaven by his ascension.


44. What to be learned hence?
Our duty of religious care and thankfulness, that in the meditation and
remembrance

1. Of his extreme passions and torments in soul suffered for us: 1. It may
be an Antidote against sin, that caused such sufferings, and so sore displeased
God. 2. A motive to hearty sorrow and repentance for sin committed, so great
anger and punishment.

2. His descent may make us by contemplation of his great humiliation for us,
to humble our selves, that coming even to the gates of hell often, by our
deep humiliation, repentance and sorrow, out of those deepes, calling unto the
Lord, he may hear us, from his holy heaven; and by the merit, and in the
virtue of Christ's descent, save us from the eternal prison.

45. What follows?
The fifth Article, or that part of it that concerns the exaltation of our
Savior, and first degree thereof, his resurrection, in these words, The third
day he rose again from the dead.

SECT. 8. The exaltation of Christ in the five, six, and seventh Articles.
A farther Analysis of the five, six, and seventh Articles, of the Creed, and
first of the resurrection, and time and types thereof, as well as prophesies,
and other observations concerning the same, wherein farther the efficiency and
mighty power by which it was wrought and performed, and diverse Types as of
Adam, Enoch, Eliah, and diverse others, are shown and remembered, with some
necessary lessons to be thence learned, and uses to be made of the same. The
second degree of his exaltation in his ascension, wherein the order and manner
of it, prophesies concerning reasons and end of it observed, together with the
time, and diverse apparitions of his before the time, and reasons of them, and
no less diverse types thereof, as Enoch, Moses, and Eliah, prefiguring the
excellency of it as wherein his triumph over death was most apparently seen
and shown when he gave gifts to men, even his holy Spirit and graces and the
use to be made and fruit hence to us arising, the the third degree of his
exaltation, in his session at Gods right hand in glory with the manner or figure
of that speech declared, and how it is to be understood, with the distinction
of it from the former, and how great is that excellency of that his estate of
glory and majesty, and what we are to learn from the same.

1. What is the exaltation of Christ?
As his humiliation was his descent from his glory, and humbling himself, even
to death and hell, for our sins, and to our salvation, so this exaltation is
his raising himself in the power of his divinity, from death, and hell, to
life and the height of glory, for our happiness and justification.

2. What herein considerable?
That as by diverse degrees, he humbled himself, from glory to the depth of
humility, so here, by diverse degrees from the lowest humility, he ascended
again to the highest state of glory, and as he came from heaven to earth, so
now he ascended from earth to the highest heaven.

3. In what degrees seen?
In his resurrection, as in this fifth Article, the third day he rose again
from the dead.

In his ascension and session in glory, in the sixth Article, he ascended, etc.

In his return to judgment, with power and great glory, in the seventh
Article, from thence he shall come, etc.

4. What to be considered in the Resurrection?
1. The time, the third day. 2. The action, he rose again from the dead.
Why the third day?
In Remembrance, and regard of the Trinity, in whose power he arose.
Convenience of the time. Foretelling and Prophecy. Type of it, Jonah.


5. How convenience of the time?
Only then and no sooner, that it might appear he was truly and fully dead,
he had fulfilled the law and curse.

2. Later, lest his Disciples faith might fail, or comfort too long be
deprived, and their hope to be turned into despair.

6. How the Prophesies?
Both of Hos. 6. 2. After two days, etc. and the third day he shall rise,
Jonah 1. 17. and 2. 2. utged, the 1 Cor. 15. 4. etc. Christ himself, Matthew.
the 17. 12. 23. The Son of man shall be slain, and rise again the third day,
and Matthew. 20. 10. Mark 10. 34 Joh. 2. 19.

7. How the type of Jonah?
As is declared Matthew. 12. 40. as Jonah was three days and three nights in the
Whales belly, so must the Son of man be in the heart of the earth.

8. What more considerable in the time?
That it was

1. The first day of the week, the Lords day, our new Sabbath, the Christians
rest, the day whereon the creationbegun, and the day of the second creation, so
by Christ perfected, our redemption.

2. Morning early, the first time of the day, so day of grace here begun, and
true light arise in it, and enlighten it.

3. Extraordinary light of the world, as before the Sun rising, to show the new
Sun of righteousness, with his preventing graces, rises so for the
illustration of the new world, in that true light.

4. The first Month with the Jews, as a beginning of the new year of joy, and
eternal Jubilee of all Saints.

5. Spring of the year, so the spring of the new world, as the day spring from
on high, so the worlds new birth and spring, in restoring peace and redemption.

6. Time of the Passover, when to fulfill the Passover, the true Pascall
Lamb was offered, the ceremonies so to cease, all shadows abolished, the
truth it self appearing.

7. Finally, he rested the Jews Sabbath, to the fulfilling, but end thereof,
at his death, that brought new life to the Christian Church, and Sabbath, by
his Resurrection.

What note you in that action, his Resurrection?
The efficiency, in the power of divinity, whereby according to the decree and
will of God, his soul reassumed the body, and raised it out of the grave.

The effect in him, his body raised from death to life, the first fruits of
them that believe.

The effect in us, spiritually, our raising from the death of sin to the new
life of grace.

Corporeally, our assurance and earnest of our resurrection at the last, to the
strengthening of our hope, and confirming of our faith.

The effect in Types thereof, for our farther comfort and instruction.

9. What was the efficiency?
The great power of the divinity united to his humanity, and by that to us as
his members, to the raising of him the first fruits, and us at last, that
though it suffered him to sleep that three days death in his passion, did not
leave his body in the grave, nor suffered that Holy One to see corruption, and
in the same virtue, by his merits, after our sleep of death, will at last
raise us out of the dust.

10. How the effect?
In both his humanity, and by him over ours, in the mighty power of the
divinity, and raised him first, and so will us at the last.

11. What Types thereof?
Not only Jonas by those three days in the Whales belly, representing the
time of our Saviors stay in the grave and bosom of the earth, but Isaac,
after a sort, at his birth, in the deadness of Sarahs womb, and Abrams age,
received from death; and more at his binding for the sacrifice on Mount Moriah,
restored to life, and a figure of this only Son of God, and Son also of
Abraham, Christ here offered in sacrifice on the Cross, and thus restored to
life.

12. What other Types were there?
Both Adam himself, Enoch, Elias, and diverse other types of him, and Emblemes
herein of him and of the resurrection.

13. How was Adam?
Though in him we all dye, yet whiles he was in the state of perfection, see
we in him a type of Christ, the second Adam, and the resurrection, who in a
dead sleep had the woman taken out of his side, his spouse named Eva, the
mother of the living, as Christ in this dead sleep had out of his side,
sending forth water and blood, the Church his spouse, taken as it were out of
those wounds, by his death, who is the mother indeed of the living.

14. How was Enoch?
As one that walked with God, and so taken from men, was no more seen, but
raised so to life, from state of that mortality.

15. How Eliah?
In that manner taken away from men and mortality, by the chariot of God
translated to heaven, to have this part in the resurrection of the just, and be
an evident type of Christ, and emblem of the same.

16. How any others?
The three in the Old Testament raised to life, the widows son of Sarepta,
the Shunamites son, and the man raised by the Prophets body.

The three in the New Testament, Lazarus, the widows son of Naim, Jairus
daughter, all as it were to show us the power of God in them, and so many
emblemes of Christ's resurrection, who was so the seventh of them that were
raised, or tenth of them all that were types and emblemes of him and his
resurrection, as a perfect number, as from whom they received all the
holiness, virtues, and power of the resurrection, which they were ordained to
foreshew, as figures of the same.

17. What learn we hence?
Our duties, as of mortifying our earthly members, in remembrance of his death,
so a rising from the death of sin, in the remembrance and power of his
resurrection, who dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification,
who will so raise our souls in this life, as both bodies and souls after
death at last, and also many other comforts hence arising.

18. Which are they?
1. Both the strengthening and confirmation of our faith, in the comfortable
remembrance of Christ's resurrection already performed, and so many other Saints
of our own nature of flesh and blood, with him, or emblemes of him.

4. Erection of our eye of hope, to the state whereunto he our eldest brother
is entered, and has already received and invested diverse in life, and the
resurrection of the just.

3. Comfortable walking in this veil of misery, where we must one day meet
with death, in regard of our assurance in him of a joyful resurrection.

19. What fruit hereof?
Fourefold: 1. heavenly mind, set on heavenly not earthly things.

2. Holy life, newborn babes, pure, innocent, and harmless.

3. Joy in the graces and Spirit of God, and in heavenly, not corruptible
things.

4. Growth and increase in holiness, as branches of the true Vine, Christ, etc.

20. What follows?
In the sixth Article the second degree of his exaltation, in his ascension to
heaven, in these words, He ascended into heaven.

21. What herein to be considered?
1. The matter, action, ascension, termini, from earth to heaven.

2. The manner in the presence of many witnesses, with the time and types
thereof, and analogies to be observed.

22. What analogies herein?
An analogy or correspondency of it, both to the descension, as he came down
to earth from heaven, the bosom of his father and height of glory, by his
incarnation; so here he ascended from earth to heaven to his father, and his
right hand, in Majesty by his glorious ascension.

The types thereof, Moses, Enoch, and Elias, of whom hereafter.

23. What the ascension, or action?
His glorious ascending to heaven, in the sight and presence of many witnesses,
as it were foretold, accordingly performed.

24. How foretold?
Both by the Prophet David, thou art ascended up on high, have led captivity
captive, and given gifts to men.

By himself, Joh. 14. 2. I go to prepare a place, etc. Joh. 20. 17. I ascend
to my Father, and your Father, to my God and your God.

By the types of it in the old Testament, Enoch, Moses, and Elias.

25. Why in sight and presence of many witnesses?
To their comfort and our confirmation, that as his resurrection manifested to
the women, the Disciples one after another, and sometimes two or three, and
then more together, even till more then 500. at once, so many times during his
abode on earth; so his ascension, as every part of his actions for us, and so
our faith might be confirmed in the mouth of many witnesses, and so indeed were
by both Prophets, Martyrs, and others.

26. Whence ascended he?
From earth to heaven, from top of Mount Olivet by Jerusalem, as it were from
the earth to the heavenly Jerusalem, City of the great King, from the Church
here to the Church above.

27. To what end?
To prepare a place for us, as he taught his Disciples.

To elevate our hearts to heaven and heavenly things.

To show the way to us, and all that are his.

To manifest his power and glory to mortal eyes and hearts, according to their
capacity; that abundantly more is apparent, in the highest degree to the
blessed Saints and Angels in heaven.

28. In what manner ascended he?
In an admirable and wonderful manner, as appeared by the Angels words, then
appearing to his Disciples, and those present, testifying of him, and saying,
ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven, This Jesus whom ye saw
ascend, shall so come as, etc. Acts 1. 11.

29. When was that?
Forty days after his resurrection, during which time he was conversant on
earth, directing and comforting his Disciples, and strengthening them.

30 Why were those forty days interim?
For many good reasons, and gracious comfort, and instruction to his Church.

As 1. assurance of his resurrection, in that space conversing, though after a
more divine manner, and appearing so often, and to so many.

2. Confirmation of the verity of his humanity, offering himself to be seen,
and touched, and felt, yea and eating with them, though he needed no
sustenance, yet as to Thomas, herein descending to them, to confirm their
weak, though ravished and admiring faith.

3. Strengthening his Disciples, opening their hearts, and so comforting,
instructing, and confirming them against all occurrences, and times of fiery
trials, and persecutions.

29. Did he not also appear at other times, and to others?
Yes, but after a more ravishing, strange, and transcendent manner, so to
diverse holy men.

As to Saint Paul, on the way to Damascus, but with such glory and splendour,
that he was both amazed and stricken blind, but converted.

To Saint Stephen, full of faith, and of the holy Ghost, even from heaven, and
in his majesty, at the time of his martyrdom, and very dissolution.

To Saint John in Pathmos, on the Lords day, in a heavenly vision, to the
illustration of his understanding, in writing that prophecy of the Revelation.
And to many Saints else, to whom the Lord in grace, yet with manifestation of
some part of his glory, appeared.

30. Who were types of this his ascension?
Enoch, who walking with God, was taken away, and no more seen: Moses, who
ascending to mount Nebo, was taken from men: and Eliah, who went up to God in
that fiery charet, and in the sight of Elisha ascended up to heaven.

31. What analogy of their ascension to this?
As types to the antitypes usually have, so those both to Christ and his
ascension.

1. As Enoch, the 7. from Adam, a holy and sabbaticall member, and generation
of the just, walked with God, and was so translated.

2. So Christ, the 7. of those that were ever til then raised to life, of that
line, the Holy and Just One, Prince of peace, and author of our rest, and
endless Sabbath, having walked with God, now thus ascended.

32. How Moses?
As that great Lawgiver, and who in the wilderness after forty days fast,
received the Law from God, on mount Sinai, and delivered the curses on mount
Ebal, and blessings on mount Geresin, Deuteronomy. 27. 12. at last ascending mount
Nebo, though buried by God, thus translated and taken from men, was from the
earth and tents of Israel ascended. So Christ, the Lawgiver, and confirmer of
a better Law, and covenant of grace, after 40. days fast, in the wilderness,
having vanquished Satan, and on mount Sion manifested his Majesty, after forty
days conversing with men, after his ascending Mount Calvary, and death,
burial, and resurrection to life, thus from Mount Olivet ascended up to heaven.

3^. How Eliah?
As the greatest Prophet that ever arose in that state and the Church of the
Jews, as who raised the dead to life, opened and shut heaven at his prayer,
without dying, was translated, and ascended up to God, in the power of the
Spirit, in that strange manner and convoy, the fiery Charets and horsemen of
Israel: So Christ the great Prophet, and Messiah, raising the dead in soul and
body, to life eternal, having the key of David, and opening and shutting
heaven by those siery trials at his passion, opening the gate of life, and
entering thereby at his resurrection, thus triumphed in his ascension.

34. Was this so manifested?
It might seem so even by himself in his transfiguration, where those types
thereof, Moses and Eliah, met with him the Antitype, on Mount Tabor, as it were
in a divine conference about the same.

35. What was the event of it?
In that triumph ascending, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.

36. What gifts?
Gifts and graces of his holy Spirit, yea and the pouring forth of that Spirit
in his Church most abundantly, or as he speaks, the sending of the Comforter,
the holy Ghost, the Spirit of truth, for the direction, guiding, and comfort of
his Church to the worlds end.

37. What learn we hence?
In duty of humble thankfulness and praises often to ascend,

1. In our contemplation to those high Palaces, that so with preparation of
soul, in this life, we may ascend to those high Courts hereafter, whither he
is gone before.

2. In affection and hearty desire and longing after them, by our preparation
of will and wishes to be there with Christ, whither he ascended, and is in
glory, Cupio dissolvi; etc.

3. Gracious steps of life and conversation, to ascend up to his holy hill of
sanctification, as preparing heart and hand, soul and body, to ascend to
Christ at last, and partake with him in sanctity here, as in glory hereafter,
and therefore did he send the holy Spirit, or Comforter.

38. What fruit hereby?
Cheerful ability to go forward, both in our Christian callings and duties of
Religion, by his comfort, guidance, and instruction, always remembering that he
is ascended and gone before to prepare a place.

That we ought to prepare our selves to be received.

That we are strangers and Pilgrims here.

That we have a high and more enduring City.

That therefore we elevate our minds and hearts, and eyes and hands toward that
place, where our hope and help is, and thither ascended into glory.

39. What follows?
The third degree of his exaltation, his session at the right hand of God, in
Majesty and glory, expressed in these words, He sits at the right hand of
God, the Father Almighty.

40. What is meant thereby?
His consistency for ever, and plenitude of Majesty and glory there with the
Father in the heavens.

41. What in the words to be considered?
The figure, or manner of the speech.

The meaning of the phrase.

42. What the manner, or figure?
The expression of this, or the like divine matters and mysteries, according to
our humane capacity.

As by sitting, understanding consistency, being, and remaining so for ever.

As by the right hand of God, understanding his high power and Majesty.

43. Is this frequent?
Yes, concerning God especially, where (...), causa, for humane weakness sake,
the eyes, arms, hands, fingers, and feet of God are often mentioned, and the
like figures and Metaphors used, when we are not with the Heretics,
Anthropmorphites, to think God has them so really in humane figure, but to
signify his greatness, past finding out, or goodness and benefits to us by
them.

44. How to be conceived then?
1. By his eyes, his providence over us and all things.

2. By his mouth, his word and divine revelation.

3. By his arms, outstretched and mighty hand, his strength, power, and mighty
deliverances.

4. By the works of his hand and fingers, acts of his power, and by him
ordered, and ordained.

5. By his feet and goings, his mavelous proceedings, and the like: and so
here as aforesaid, by sitting stability for ever, by his right hand, or at his
right hand of Majesty and glory, to be conceived; so Bathsheba at Salomons
right hand, 1 Kings 2. 19. and the Queen at the Kings right hand, in the 45.
Psa. understood placed in the greatest honor, glory, and Majesty.

45. What is the full meaning of the phrase?
As in other places expressed, Christ being sitting or standing, his
consistency for ever, at the right hand of God, in the power and glory of the
divine Majesty.

46. Was not this meant by ascending to heaven?
No, for it is a distinct thing from it, for

That The ascension is in order before it. The ascension may be without it. The
ascension of Christ, was to this end.


47. How understand you this?
It is evident, the ascension was in time and order, before said session and
glory, and ascension to heaven may be without it, as we see in Saints and
Angels, who do and shall ascend, and though have fullness, and an unspeakable
measure of glory, yet not in so high degree, and Christ's ascension was to that
end, to have that high degree, above all, as the complement of all glory and
majesty.

48. But was not Christ in that glory, and at the right hand of the Father set
from all eternity?
1. In respect of his divinity he was so before all worlds, and from all
eternity, and to that can be no accession, or addition of glory.

2. In respect of his divinity united to his humanity, so that it was from that
time forth only so considered and manifested.

3. In respect of his humanity, it was from that time, and in that order so
exalted.

49. How is this elsewhere expressed in Scriptures?
By these speeches and prophesies, or prophetique phrases.

1. His exaltation, far above all heavens, Ephesians. 4. 10. To a name above all
names, that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, both of things in heaven
and in earth, Philip. 2. 9. 10.

2. All power given both in heaven and in earth, Matthew. 28. 18.

3. Let all Angels worship him, Heb. 1. 6. so Psalm. 97. 7. worship him all ye
gods.

4. I have set my King upon, etc. Ask of me, and I shall give, etc. Psalm. 2.
etc.

5. Sit at my right hand till I make thy enemies thy footstool, Psalm. 110. 1.

6. All his enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25. And the like places and
phrases, showing his majesty and glory.

50. What analogy in this to his humiliation?
To the lowest degree, as this the highest step of glory, from the deepes of
grave and hell, to heaven; so from the lowest misery in them, to the highest
glory in heaven.

51. What learn we hence?
His great power, able to defend, and glory in majesty, to the comfort and
consolation of his Church, and so our duties of

Honor to his Majesty.

Praise to his excellent name.

Joy in the excellency of his glory.

Obedience to his mighty power, with the Father, and Holy Spirit, in the
guidance and government of his Church.

52. In what respect?
As he is the head of the Church, powerful and able to defend all that are
his, against all powers of sin, death, and hell, and Satan, and all worldly
opposition, and in that honored above all, and constituted over all, both men
and Angels.

53. What follows?
His further manifestation of his glory, in his second coming, his coming to
judgment, the fourth degree, or part of his exaltation, expressed in the
seventh Article, From thence he shall come again to judge both the quick and
the dead.

SECT. 9. The 7. Article, Christ's coming to judgment.
The seventh Article, showing the fourth part of Christ's exaltation in his
coming to judgment, and Analysis thereof, where the time, the end of the
world, and other circumstances and reasons such his last coming to judgment
are to be considered as the antecedents, and terror of the same, with the
extreme strangeness of many accidents then happening. The righteous process
and manner of executing it in all evidence and equity, yet with all authority
and the event and consequences, the final sentence and distinction of the
sheep and goats, or good and bad, the one to life, the other to death eternal,
to the full manifestation of Gods mercy and justice, which began before to be
shown, is there more perfited and published, so what duties. to be learned,
and use of comforts to be raised from the same.

1. What is comprised in this seventh Article?
The fourth part or degree of Christ's exaltation, his commission and coming to
judgment, in power and great glory.

2. How is this part of his exaltation?
As the farther manifestation of his glory, and exercising his power and
authority, and answering in convenient analogy to a part of his humiliation.

3. Jn what respect?
Whereas he was once judged himself, by men, under an unjust Judge, with
unrighteous judgment, and without any guilt condemned, now to the
rectification of justice, he being appointed Judge of all Judges, and justicer
to all men, by ministering true judgment, shall rectify all their obliquities,
and all the just, however with him oppressed by injustice, with him and by him
be justified, and cleared, and the wicked, however long suffered, or justified
wrongfully on earth, now most justly condemned; and so now he that was judged
unjustly, constituted a most just Judge, over both quick and dead.

4. What herein to be considered?
The end of the world when this shall be.

The second coming of Christ, or coming again for this end.

The last or universal judgment of both the quick and the dead.

5. How the end of the world?
As the most fit time, and so expressed in both the Nycene and other Creeds, at
the last, or at the end of the world he shall come again, etc. And the
Scriptures, The Angels reapers, etc. Mat. 24. and cap. 25. At the last the end,
etc. 1 Cor. 15.

6. Why the end of the world?
That iniquity may be full, all come together to judgment, the greatest
concourse to the manifestation of althings to their greatest glory or shame,
glory or majesty of the Judge, honor of his Saints, confusion of all his
enemies.

7. How shall Christ be Judge?
As appointed of the Father, from whom he receives all power, and all
authority.

8. But he professes he comes not to judge the world?
That is spoken of his first coming, when he came in humility to lay down
his life, an offering for sin, and save those that are his, and was himself,
though wrongfully, judged, he being then as the heir in minority, and before
his entrance to his kingdom, but once constituted in the throne, he shall
execute justice and judgment.

9. Does not the Father then?
Yes, the Father executes it by the Son, and in the virtue, sanctity, and
efficacy of the holy Spirit, yet by the man Christ most respectively.

10. Why so?
1. For the visible execution thereof, in the sight of all creatures, both
wicked and goldly, and as well men as Angels.

2. For the greater terror, shame, and confusion of all his enemies, that in
his humility, in that form, despised him, and therein the wisdom of God.

3. For the greater comfort of all his servants, and for whose sakes he put on
that form of humility.

11. Whence shall he come?
From thence he shall come again, from the heavens, in the power and majesty,
and by the appointment so of God the Father.

12. How shall he come?
In the clouds of heaven, in that majesty and manner as the Angels told the
Disciples he shall come again, as you have seen him go, Matthew. 22. 30. Acts
1.

13. What shall he do?
Judge both the quick and the dead, execute justice, and minister true
judgment to all people so divided, either

Before judgment, especially distinguished by quick that are to be changed;
and dead, that are to be raised.

Or after judgment, especially to be distinguished by good, that are saved and
justified; bad, that are cursed and condemned.

14. What herein considered?
The Antecedents, Process, Consequents,
of it.

15. What the antecedents?
The Signs going before it: Gathering of all flesh to it.


16. What signs?
Recorded in Scripture, remembered by our. Savior, for preparation of our
hearts, to consider it, and the terriblenesse thereof, Matthew. 24. and Luke 21.

As 1. the Sun to be darkened.

2. The Moon turned into blood.

3. The Stars to fall from heaven.

4. The powers of heaven to shake.

5. The Sea to rore horribly.

6. The earth to quake, and as it were all the elements moved and troubled, as
feeling their dissolution at hand.

7. Men's hearts to fail for fear.

8. And men, or the ungoldly to be at their wits end. Though the godly may with
more boldness look up, as knowing their salvation at hand, and their Redeemer
near, before whom shall go a consuming fire, to lick up his enemies, and
consume the world, that shall be skrent as a scroule, but purify them,
changing their corruption into incorruption.

17. How the gathering of all flesh?
At the last trumpe, by the voice of the Archangell, and power of God, all
flesh, and all people shall hear the voice, and come together, and be
assembled at that great Sessions or Assizes of the whole world.

Both the quick that shall then be changed in a moment, answerable to a
dissolution by death, and their corruption done away.

And the dead raised, and all graves opened, and yield their dead: Seas and
monsters, beasts and birds, whom they have enguft, or devoured, and so all
flesh appear before the tribunal seat of Christ, expecting the judgment and
sentence.

18. How shall that be?
The process thereof, in all righteousness and equity, all books opened,
both the book of

1. Law, written to those under the Law.

Nature, to the Gentiles.

2. Conscience, accusing or excusing, as in the second to the Romans, etc.

3. Angels, good and bad, testifying their knowledge.

4. God, 1. of remembrance, above all things, wherein all things recorded. 2.
Oflife, wherein the Saints names are written.

What will the event be?
All things made manifest, saving what God will have holden, and so the secrets
of all hearts disclosed, the truth appearing, mercy to the vessels of grace,
and justice to them that loved not, nor exercised, nor fought mercy.

19. In what manner?
After opening of all books, and due

Examination of all things.

Testifying of all witnesses.

Accusations heard, and confessed, or cleared.

Ponderation of all causes, to the approbation of the justice and mercy used, a
most just sentence of the righteous Judge, that shall be approved so by all
consciences, both good and bad, guilty, and absolved.

20. In what form?
Of a Venite maledicti, to all the blessed, for their eternal happiness and
salvation.

Jte maledicti, to the wicked, to their eternal misery, woe and condemnation.

21. What is the sum of it?
A blessing of the godly, without end or measure; curse to the wicked, without
redress, and pains as endless and easelesse, as remediless.

22. What the consequents?
Execution of that final sentence, in the power and authority of that most
just Judge, and therein the distinction of the

Good from the bad.

Sheep from Goats.

Wheat from chafe.

Gold from dross.

Conducting the godly to glory.

Casting down the devil into hell.

Confirmation of eternity to both, in joy or torment.

23. How the distinction?
In the mighty power of God, according to his sentence, by the ministry of the
Angels, and powers of heaven.

24. How the conducting to glory?
By the same power and ministry of the good Angels, with joy to the heavenly
Palaces of the great King, as the place of all felicity.

25. How of the wicked?
In the same power, but by the hands of those wicked and infernal spirits,
executing Gods judgment, and heavy anger against sinners, so tumbling them
headlong into hell, into that dungeon of eternal misery and confusion, where
is weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth, the worm that never dies, and
fire that never goes out, death gnawing on them, always dying, never put out
of that pain, but so eternally miserable.

26. Js this the end?
Yes, this is the end of the judgment, though of the joys or torments no end,
eternity being confirmed to both, and by this means, the equity of sentence of
that most just Judge, eternally manifested, rendering to every one according to
his works.

26. Are then the works considered?
Yes, and they that have done well go to life everlasting, and those that have
done evil, into everlasting fire.

27. Is life then for the works given?
No, but rendered according to the works, whereby the faith, virtue, and graces
of the godly, given by God, were approved to the eye of God, and the world, and
now seen by it, that verily there is a reward for the righteous, there is a
God that judges the earth.

28. How is his mercy then seen?
In giving those graces, that faith, that apprehends the Savior Christ, and
charity that so covers and satisfies all defects, so in mercy imputes that
righteousness, that now in justice, according to his goodness, brings their
absolution, whiles the wicked wanting these, are taken in the works of their
own hands, and condemned.

29. The wicked are then judged and condemned for their works?
Yes, and that in justice, as without mercy, who neither loved, sought, nor
exercised mercy; but the godly in justice also, but according to their works,
testifying their faith, so not for their works, nor yet without works, as they
are via Regni, non causa regnandi, as before was declared.

30. Is there no other judgment?
Yes, there is a particular judgment for every one, at the day and hour of
death, wherein as the world leaves us, so judgment finds us, and the soul
then separated from the body, receives particular sentence of mercy, or
condemnation, but at the last day both men and Angels beholding body and soul
joined together, shall publicly, in the sight of all, to the manifestation of
Gods justice to all, receive the sentence, to their farther joy or grief, and
to the consummation thereof, which is the general judgment?

31. What learn we hence?
Diverse good duties, befitting Christians, and their Christian conversation.

1. As vigilance in our callings, as expecting the Lords coming, to call us to
account for our works.

2. Care of keeping a good conscience, which is an only comfort and assurance
of our souls in Christ, when all books, and so that book withal, are opened.

3. Avoiding rash judgment, and censure of others, leaving the judgment to
the Lord, who shall justly judge both us and them.

4. Judging our selves in time, and condemning what is ill, that we may so by
penitence avoid the judgment and condemnation of the Lord.

5. Raising and rousing up our selves to all good works, especially prayers
and praises to God, for all his gifts and graces, in the joyful expectation of
his coming, and reward.

32. What profit hence?
1. Our chiefest and best comfort, that in all afflictions there shall be an
end, and for all good sufferings a reward.

2. Joy in all good actions, that shall then receive the crown of praise and
blessedness.

3. Preparation of our souls for heaven, in expectation of the Lords coming,
and our rendering our account.

33. It is then good to remember judgment?
An only means to avoid sin, by often remembrance, as of God, and heaven, and
hell, so of this judgment, and the account to be made, and if it were
possible, as it were, to have always the trumpet of God, and voice of the
Archangell sounding in our ears his Surgite mortui, venite ad judicium.

34. What follows?
The eighth Article of the Creed, concerning the third person in the Trinity,
our belief in God the Holy Ghost.

SECT. 10. The eighth Article, and third part of the Creed: Concerning the Holy
Ghost.
The Analysis of the eighth Article, how we beeleve in the holy Ghost, and
what concerning his essence, God, person and name, the holy Spirit, and why so
called: As also the manner of his existence and order in the Trinity, his
personal ppoprieties, actions, and operations to him attributed for the
guidance and good of the Church, and so how comfort is particularly ascribed to
him, and he called the Comforter: his gifts and graces how distinguished and
distributed among the members of the Church for the good of the same: how also
to be retained, or said to be revised or quen^^ed (...) us, and what sin
against the holy Ghost is, and how unpardonable. So what chiefly hence to be
learned for our use and comfort.

1. What is the third person in Trinity?
God the Holy Ghost, called the holy Spirit of God.

2. How prosesse you your belief in him?
In these words, I believe in the Holy Ghost.

3. What therein to be considered?
The action or duty to believe in, or put my trust and confidence in him, as
was before declared.

The object, in respect of his essence, God; person, the holy Spirit, the third
person in Trinity.

4. What concerning his essence?
That he is one God in unity of essence with the Father and the Son, who with
the Father and the Son together, is worshipped, and glorified, who spoke by the
holy Prophets, as is explained in the Nicene Creed, so very one God with them,
working in unity with them, as was before declared, only distinguished in the
propriety of person.

5. What considerable in his person?
The name, and reason thereof.

The manner of existence in the Trinity.

The order, action, and propriety of person.

6. Whence the name of spirit?
From that similitude to other spirits, and spiritual natures, the fountain,
as it were, and beginning of diverse hidden, secret, and invisible motions and
actions.

7. How many sorts of spirits?
Some causes and substances, the principal, other only effects and accidents.

So there are spirits, Heavenly ones, Increate, so both Essentially, we say God
is a Spirit. Personally, the spirit of God.
Created Angels, good and bad. Souls of men, all causes in one sort or other,
and producers of admirable effects.

Earthly ones, as Spirits, in the arteries of the body. Wind, and motion of
the Air, are moved, and diverse meteors:

So called of their secret and imperceptible beginnings and motion.

8. What else spirits?
The effects of the former spirit, both

Good motions, as the spirit of fortitude, gentleness, understanding, and
other gifts of Gods Spirit.

Evil motions, spirit of anger, giddiness, cavillation, contentions, etc.

9. What then meant by the name Spirit?
In general, any hidden nature, secretly with force stirring or moving any
thing, and as we see sometimes, the effects of the same.

10. How is the Spirit of God so called?
Of his secret and hidden original and proceeding, as well as actions and
operations, in the hearts of the faithful.

How in particular?
1. Of his spiritual nature, incorporeall and invisible spiration, and secret
proceeding from the Father and Son.

2. Equality with Father and Son, so as God a Spirit.

3. Spiration, and secret operation of graces in the Church.

11. How called Gods Spirit?
As proceeding from the Father and the Son, their holy power and virtue.

12. How called holy Spirit?
1. Of his original, the holy Father and the Son.

2. Being himself Holy God, and Holy One of Israel.

3. Operations, Sanctifying the Church. Working all holy motions in the heart
of the faithful.


13. How is his manner of existence in the Trinity?
As in blessed Athanasius Creed expressed, not made or created, nor begotten,
but proceeding, by internal spiration, from the Father, his love to the Son,
and from the Son his love to the Father, eternal with them, and from both the
love proceeding to the comfort and conservation of all things, this good and
loving Spirit of God.

14. What is his order in the Trinity?
Though in the Trinity, in essence, power, or eternity, none be before or after
other, none greater or less then another, but all three persons, coeternall
and coequall; yet in order the Father is first, from eternity producing the
Son, the Son second from eternity begotten, in that eternal generation; and
the holy Ghost the third in order, as eternally proceeding from both.

15. What is his personal propriety?
Proceeding from them, and so distinguished from both, for the holy Spirit
only is proceeding, and not either Father or Son, as the Son only begotten,
and not the Father, nor Spirit, though all the three indifferently and equally
named, and said to be God and Lord, uncreate, invisible, and all other the like
attributes.

16. What are the actions of the Spirit?
Especially attributed to him, as to his office and person, the comfort,
renewing, sanctification and conservation of all things, by and in Scriptures
testified, as Job 38. 4. The Spirit of the Lord has made me, and the breath of
the Almighty has given me life. So Genesis 1. The Spirit of the Lord moved on the
waters, and God breathed into man a living soul. Exodus 31. 3. I have filled
him with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, etc. Psalm. 51. 11. Take not thy holy
Spirit from me: and verse 12. Stablish me with thy free Spirit. Psalm. 104. 30.
If thousend forth thy Spirit, they are created, so thou renewest the face of
the earth, Esa. 11. 2. The Spirit of the Lord is upon him, the Spirit of
wisdom, etc. and Esa. 61. 10. The Spirt of the Lord is upon me, as recited,
Luke 4. 18. and so most abundantly in the New Testament.

17. How there shown?
As the gifts and graces of God, by that Spirit are said bestowed upon the
Church, and faithful in Christ, 1 Cor. 12. and plentifully else. As 2. Tim. 3.
16. Scriptures by inspiration of the holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1. 12. Holy men, moved
by the Spirit of God. Romans 8. 15. By that Spirit to cry Abba Father: and Romans
8. 16. The Spirit witnesses with our spirit, that sons, etc. John 3. 3. Except
regenerate of water and the holy Ghost, not see the kingdom of God. Mat. 3.
11. Where Christ is said, Baptizing with the holy Ghost, and being baptized,
the holy Ghost visibly descended, etc. As also in the Acts, and many like
places.

18. How is comfort attributed?
As he is called the Comforter; and sanctification attributed as the holy
Spirit or sanctifier; also teaching, illumination, and the like, John 14. 26.
and 15. 26. and 16. 7. etc. where the holy Spirit the Comforter shall teach
them all things and lead them into all truth, and bring all things to their
remembrance, and show them all things to come.

19. But are not these things from the Father also?
Yes, from the Father in the Son, but by the dispensation of the holy Spirit,
and attributed more particularly to him as the Comforter, in respect of their
end, the comfort and sanctification of the Church, by all saving graces, when
else in respect of the power and original it is true, Opera Trinitatis ad
extra, sunt indivisa, All three persons jointly produce these holy actions.

20. What is the holy Ghost then in brief?
The third person in Trinity, proceeding from the Father and Son, distinct in
person, but one in essence, and coequall with them in substance, eternity,
majesty, and glory.

21. What his office?
To effect the works of God in his creatures, and to bestow his gifts on them,
and especially to sanctify the elect to eternal life.

22. What are those gifts?
Diverse, according to the good working of that holy Spirit, as well in regard
of diversity of times, and other occasions and circumstances, as persons.

23. How in regard of the persons?
Either particular, to the elect, as the adoption and confirmation thereof, in
sanctification, and other saving graces to salvation.

Or common to others also, as knowledge, power to do excellent things, yea
with show of some sanctification, as members of the visible Church, though else
reprobates found at last, as seen in very Judas, and diverse others.

24. How in regard of the times, or other circumstances?
Some ordinary, in the Church at all times, and common to all the faithful, as
saving graces, illumination, holiness, sanctification.

Others extraordinary, as in primitive times, and else, as it were in
stablishing and confirmation of the faith, then new planted, or preached, as
the gifts of healing, miracles, tongues, and such like.

25. How is the Spirit given?
From the Father and the Son, Joh. 14. 26. or from the Father by the Son,
John 15. 26.

26. How is the name of the Spirit of God taken?
For the Spirit himself, illuminating, comforting, and sanctifying the
faithful, and sometimes for the gifts of the same Spirit, shed into the hearts
of those vessels of grace.

27. Is it necessary to have the holy Ghost?
Yes, for except we be borne again of water and the Spirit, we cannot
inherit the kingdom of God, Ioh. 3. 5. and that Spirit bears us witness we
are the children of God, and in him only we cry Abba, Father, Romans 8. 15. and
without that Spirit flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor.
15. 50.

28. By what means is the holy Ghost attained?
The ordinary means, the ministry of the word, use of the Sacraments, frequent
and fervent prayer: Extraordinary, the good occasions offered at the pleasure
of God.

29. How is that holy Spirit retained?
By the same means that attained, with meditation, and godly care not to
offend that good Spirit, or neglect his graces.

30. Can the Spirit of God be taken away?
The Spirit of adoption and regeneration is never wholly taken away from the
elect, though the operation sometimes eclipsed, to the eye, and some gifts
taken from them, Joh. 6. 37. but from the reprobate, even that they seemed to
have, concerning faith and regeneration, is taken away utterly, Matthew. 13. 12.
and 29. Luke 8. 18.

31. How may we be assured of the presence of Gods Spirit dwelling in us?
By the good and holy effects of the same in our soul, life, and conversation,
as

1. Our knowledge, faith, hope, charity, and other graces. 2. Careful study of
godliness and innocence. 3. Love of God, and hatred of sin. 4. Comfort in holy
actions, and delight in Gods house and children. 5. Separating our selves and
affections from the world, and placing them on God.
32. How is Gods Spirit said to be quenched in us?
1. By neglect and carelessness in holy duties, and exercises.

2. Contempt of the graces and good motions offered, which is a despite to that
Spirit of grace.

3. Ungodly and wicked actions.

33. What is the sin against the holy Ghost?
In general, as he is God, all sins against the majesty of God: in particular,
and properly, in regard of his person, and office, as he is the sanctifier and
illuminating Spirit, so those heinous and stubborn sins against the open and
plain truth, and testimony of conscience, of purposed malice, wittingly and
willingly, against, and in despite of that good and mild Spirit.

34. How said to be unpardonable?
As commonly hardness of heart, and final impenitency, is joined with them,
and even so it is as a judgment laid on those sins, said that we should not
even pray for them.

35. What learn we hence?
Many good duties concerning our sanctification, and his graces, as to

Believe the holy Scriptures, even by his inspiration, as the way to God, and
take heed of neglect.

Keep our bodies and souls holy and pure, as Temples of the holy Ghost, and
not to defile them.

Use all our gifts to the honor of God, for of him we have received them, the
graces of his Spirit, and not abuse them to vanity.

Submit our selves to the government of Gods Spirit, and not be proud or
stubborn, and so despise that Spirit of grace.

Seek increase in graces daily, and confirmation, and not to quench the
Spirit, or fall away.

36. What profit hereof?
The joy and comfort of our Spirit, called joy in the holy Ghost, by his
blessed operation, making application of all Christ's merits and mercies, to our
souls, adorned with his graces, giving us assurance thereof, by his power, in
holiness and newness of life, or sanctification, the earnest penny of
glorification.

36. What follows?
The fourth and last part of the Creed, in those four last Articles,
concerning the Church of God, and his graces bestowed on the same, in these
words, The holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, forgiveness of
sins, resurrection of the body, and life everlasting.

Amen.
SECT. 11. The 9. Article, concerning the Catholic Church.
The analysis of the 9. and following: and here first of the Catholic Church,
and how we profess our belief concerning the same: so how here is a Church or
company of the faithful separated from the world, and united in God, and
Christ their head, and so gathered or called, thence named Ecclesia, being but
one universal or Catholic one, though consisting of many particular
branches, so comprehending all times, places, and persons, whence our Church
one with that of the Jews, and our faith the same with Abraham's, being all one
in Christ the head and substance of the covenant how said to be visible or
invisible, militant or triumphant: how also Catholic and holy, and the notes
of the true Church described, whereby from all other companies, or not so
rightly named Churches, distinguished by the true preaching of the word, and
right and due administration of the Sacraments, and for the Notes of
universality, autiquity, visibility, succession, consent, and the like, if
without holiness, no perfect marks, since so to be found in many false
Synagogues, and so what may be said of the Church of Rome, and her holiness
and Religion, and some other opposites or enemies to the same. And of the
promise of the holy Spirits presence in the Church to the end Of the world. Of
the communion of Saints, what it is, and between whom, both between Saints
themselves, and them and Christ, and so with God, whence all happiness, peace
and unity, influence of grace and effects or fruits of holiness, all Saints in
heaven and earth by their union in Christ to God combined so in the Comfort and
fruition of this faith enjoying that glorious (...) name, and calling and happy
assurance and privilege of the Saints, being many good uses to be made of the
same three last Articles, containing three great privileges of the Church:

1. What does the last part of the Creed concern?
The Church of God, and therein considered either the body of it, called the
holy Catholic Church, and united in the communion of Saints.

Or the privileges and graces indulged on the same.

1. The forgiveness of sins. 2. The resurrection of body. 3. The life
everlasting.
2. What herein to be then considered?
The Action, as how we believe Object, as aforesaid, the
Church, and her privileges.

3. What of the action?
That here we say not believe in, that is put trust, and confidence therein,
but only believe the same, that is, that there is a holy Catholic Church of
God, so elected, called, and sanctified, where of Christ the Lord and head,
that it is united into that communion of Saints, his members united among
themselves, and to their head Christ, and that in the same, and no where else
to be fought or found salvation, and so those privileges consequently, that
there is truly forgiveness of sins, the blessed hope of resurrection, and
assurance of life everlasting.

4. What difference to be noted herein?
That to believe in God, or on him, as the highest degree of faith, is only
proper to God, and so we can put our trust or confidence in him, and no other;
but to believe the holy Catholic Church, and the other points of faith, is in
a second degree, and though with the same certainty and assent to the truth,
yet not with that confidence or trust in them, for their power, or any thing
else, which were to make idols of them, and set them up in the place of God.

5. What of the object the Church?
For the body and substance of the same, these positions.

1. That there is a Church.

2. What that Church is, and the

Name,

Nature,

Parts,

Proprieties, and

Notes of the same.

3. What union is in it, viz. a communion of Saints.

6. How show you that there is a Church?
It is evident to the eye of Nature and Reason, as well as Faith, even to
natural men, that see the Church, and company of the faithful, separated from
them and their profane conversation, and reason even testifying to the sense,
the causes of this separation, the honor and service of God, the supreme good,
with expectation of reward, which faith most clearly sets forth, the glory
of God, and salvation of souls in the same.

7. How does faith see it so clearly?
In all the Scriptures, even from the time of Adam in Paradise, and Noah in the
Ark, and Abraham the father of the faithful, to these days, though in narrow
bounds of one House, Arc or family, in the flourishing estate of the Jews, in
one people, or Commonwealth, yet still a true Church, and company of faithful
believers, and servants of God; but now since by Gods mercies in Christ, most
flourishing, spread over the face of the whole earth, as we both see at this
day, and read in the histories of the Old and New Testament.

8. What Church or Churches?
One and the same, though distinguished in times

1. In the Old Testament, in Adam, Noah, and Abraham's households, and chief of
their families; in Israel, and all his sons, the state of the Jews.

2. In the New Testament, among The Nations of the Jews, Many 1. Apostles. 2.
Disciples. 3. Believers.


All Nations else, the Churches to the very ends of the earth, and so far as as
we are dispersed.

As those of Corinth, Ephesus, Rome, etc. Achaia, Macedonia, Antioch, etc.
Asia, the 7. Churches, in Rev. 1. Which all together make up the Catholic
Church.


9. What signifies, or whence this name Church, Ecclesia?
Of (...), the calling together, as out of the world into the Lords house and
company; so (...) signifying in Greek, the Lords house, whence name of our
Church, and (...), his congregation.

10. What is the Church then?
That company of Saints elected of God to eternal life, called and gathered
together out of all mankind, by the preaching of the word, saved by the
Messiah Christ, and in his faith preserved, defended, and sanctified here, to
be glorified in heaven; and out of the Church there is no salvation.

11. Js there but one Church?
But one true Church, whereof Christ Jesus is the head, yet of which Catholic
Church all particular Churches professing the true faith, are parts, and all
faithful persons members; and all Synagogues, though they call themselves
Churches, if they want that head, or the true faith, do falsely challenge that
title, as the harlot may of an honest woman, but are indeed but Synagogues of
Satan.

12. How hear we then of many Churches, even in the Scriptures, and Apostles
writings?
As the particular Churches in several Countries, part or members of this one
universal Church, in that and many other respects, so distinguished and
divided.

13. In what respects?
Most usually in regard of the

1. Time, the Church of the 1. Jews, and 2. Christans.

2. Extent, universal Church, Catholic Particular Church, etc.

3. Apparent to men, visible on earth in the professors.

Invisible to men.

4. Places, Heaven, among the Saints and Angels.

Earth, among men.

5. Exercises in it, Militant in grace.

Triumphant in glory.

As other distinctions also, in regard of the circumstances, may be of this one
and the same Church.

14. How could the Jews Church and the Christians be one?
As both were united in Christ the head, profession of the true faith, and so
elected, called, and ordained of God.

15. How could Christ be the head, or his faith in the Church of the Jews?
As the Fathers and Patriarchs, and all holy men before Christ, trusted in the
Messiah Christ, that was to come, and in that faith walked with God, and
attained heaven, as all Saints since in the faith of the Messiah already come;
so all of one faith, and under one head.

16. Is our faith then the same with Abraham's?
The very same in substance, only diversified by the distinction of time, and
respect of the same Messiah, only exhibitum, or exhibendum, as already shown,
or to be exhibited, their faith farther off, and in hope, our more plainly, and
fully informed, all shadows and vailes removed, the substance presented.

17. But faith is of things not seen?
And so are the mysteries of this faith, even in the very Messiah, though seen
with mortal eye, yet much more unseene, not only for his divinity, but divine
actions, office, and doctrine also, only apprehensible by the eye of faith.

18. What are the particular Churches?
Members of the Univerall Church, of which Christ is the head, planted by the
ministry of good men, in the power of God, and his word, in all parts of the
world, and in all times preserved by his grace, in one part or other; so all
those famous Churches of Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphilia, of Rome, Ephesus,
Corinth, Greece, and generally in Europe, Asia, Africa, and now America also,
and that were in all times, as well of the Fathers and Patriarchs, even Adam,
Noah, Abraham, Moses, the Jews and to our times, make up this one Catholic
Church of God, or to go further, even all men and Angels, elected and saved.

19. How express you the Church visible or invisible?
The invisible company of Saints, elected of God to eternal life, only known
to God, and not to be discerned of men, therefore called invisible; whereas all
professors of the faith, living in the Church, and seen in that society,
charity binds us to acknowledge, as the outward signs and profession show, to
be the Church, and which we call the visible Church.

20. Is the visible Church perfect?
Nothing less: for as she is in the unclean world, she must needs be
corrupted with that air, and in her are vessels of honor and dishonor, and
so as in regard of both, she is called a Net, Mat. 13. 47. yet in regard of
the better part, also called the Kingdom of Heaven.

21. How those other distinctions of the Church?
As in respect of place, Heaven, where Saints and Angels, and earth, where men
are members of it; so in regard of their exercises on earth, the Church
militant, yet in her spiritual warfare, and under the cross, but aspiring
toward heaven, the triumphant part, thither already aspired, having past the
troubles of the world, in joy and felicity, both together, when complete and
united, make up the Catholic Church.

22. How said Catholic?
In regard of universality of times, places, and persons, as well as Catholic
doctrine of truth, therein propounded.

23. How holy?
In regard of the holiness there to be found in the Head, Christ the Lord,
imparting holiness to the members.

Holy Father, electing it.

Holy Ghost sanctifying it.

Holy Faith professed in it.

Holy Scriptures taught in it.

Sacraments, and Ceremonies, Prayers and actions used and exercised in it.

Life, and conversation of the Members, in comparison of the rest of the world.

24. What are notes of the true Church?
The true preaching of the word of God, and right use and administration of the
Sacraments, which cannot be well exercised, but under a godly discipline, and
joined with holy life and conversation.

25. How is this proved?
For that thereby the Church is called together and distinguished from all other
companies whatsoever, the word being the means, the Sacraments the signs and
seals of the covenant of grace.

26. How the word and preaching of it?
For that by it is the Calling together Building up Badge, or cognizance of
Gods true Prophets and servants to know them.
of the Church.

Testimony of the truth, most sure and firm, so as no other doctrine
whatsoever.

27. How show you this?
For that by this the faithful are called to be Saints, so Romans 1. 7. and the
Church is built upon the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ being
the head corner stone, and by this the Lord adds to the Church those that
should be saved, Acts 2. 47. so of the contrary, if not this, it is not the
Church.

28. How appears that?
Because if it be not by Gods word called, it is not Ecclesia Dei, but rather
the Synagogue of Satan, as appears by any company assembled by any other
means, as if assembled by the

Talmude, a Synagogue of Christ's enemies, the Jews.

Alcaron, an assembly of Turks, his enemies.

Very Word, if corrupted with false Interpreters, or Glosses, a sect of
Heretics, and so all heretics enemies of him and unity: but the word truly
preached, and set forth, the only cognizance of his true Prophets and Servants,
as testified in holy Scriptures.

29. How testified in them?
In the prophet Esaias 8. and 20. If they speak not according to this word, it
is because the truth is not in them. So Saint Matthew 15. 7. O hypocrites,
Jsaiah prophesied well of you, In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines traditions of men. And John 2. 10. If any come to you and bring not
this doctrine, receive him not: as if he should say, This is the note or token
to know him by. And Gal. 1. 8. Though we, or an Angel from heaven, preach
otherwise then this doctrine, let him be accursed. So this firm and true
testimony, as no doctrine else whatsoever.

30. How the Sacraments?
As instituted for seals of grace, so also in their right use and
administration, the cognizance of the Church, and badge of all true believers,
as was spoken

1. To the Fathes, This shall be a sign, Exodus 12. 2. 5.

2. Of the Fathers, They all eat of the same spiritual meat, and drink of the
same spiritual drink, the Rock that followed them: And all baptized in the
cloud, and in the sea, to Moses, 1 Cor. 10. 2.

3. Of the Church since, and to the Disciples, Go teach all Nations, and
baptize, etc. and, Do this in remembrance of me. So it is most apparent they
are the true notes and signs, as most essential of the true Church.

31. What say you by those marks, of universality, antiquity, visibility,
succession, consent, and the like?
Though these are not to be neglected, as insisted on by Vincentius Lyrinensis,
and many holy and good men, yet we must know that the former are more
essential and sure, these by themselves alone more uncertain, extraneous, and
as may be found failing and accidental.

32. What use of these?
If joined with the former, they serve for the better illustration of the
truth, without them no assurance; so we thereby may see the worth of the
former, and the weakness of these, as may easily be demonstrated.

33. How demonstrated?
For that without contradiction

The true Church has existed without them.

The Synagogue of Satan, even defections from God and his Church, may enjoy
them.

And that not only in singular, but in general, all of them, if exempted from
holiness, or the former notes.

34. How make you that to appear?
First, that the true Church may be without them, is clear,

1. In primitive times, without that universality or antiquity.

2. Adams sons, and Noah's family, most of them worst, and Christ times, and the
Apostles, fewest good, and scarce any visibility, much less universality or
antiquity.

3. All first times, all such successions troubled by the persecution of
Saints, both by the Giants, and sons of men, in the first ages of the world,
against the sons of God, and the Jews Church, as well as by the tyrants in the
first times of the Christians Church, and when more consenting against the
truth, then with, or striving for the same?

35. How found in the false Synagogues?
Where ever God had his Church, the devil his chapel by, instituted by Adams
disobedience in Paradise, so what more ancient then defection from God? In
Angels first, the companies that fell, Ecclesia malignantium; in Adam then, and
all Adams sons that perish, what more universal then that contagion? what more
constant succession then that of sin in mankind? and the devil a most
vigilant Bishop in his Diocese, and as ready substitutes, his wicked agents
and instruments, what more visibility then of his kingdom and Church? and what
more evident consent, then of Simeon and Levi, brethren in evil? and of Herod
and Pilate against Christ, as of all wicked ones against the Church of God?

36. How more particularly?
The Temples of Idols and Heathen religion, we may see what antiquity,
universality, visibility, succession, and consent, even from the first times,
and Adams disobedience, they can show, when Giants, sons of men, before the
Flood, builders of Babell after, and all Heathens then, and still, the greatest
part of the world, in blindness and idolatry, bondslaves of Satan, and for all
sects and heresies, as of Mahumetans, Nestorians, Arrians, and such dens of
wild beasts, and nests of unclean birds, we may see how great a pretense they
may make to these notes, without holiness, or the former.

37. What shall we say then of these Notes?
That if they be joined with holiness, and the former, then we may make very
good use of them, to distinguish and know the Church more plainly, for alone
they may fail us.

38. What say you of the Church of Rome?
As of a particular Church, and by these marks to be examined, how a member of
the universal Church.

39. But is not there holiness without antiquity?
If there were, it were not to be denied, but that it were a true, and sound
Church of God; but as it is, we deny it not, to be a Church, a true Church, or
truly a Church, a particular one, as that it is an unsound, or much corrupted
one, can they themselves when put closely to it, scarce or hardly deny.

40. But the faith and holiness of that Church is commended in Scriptures, and
said to be famous, throughout the world?
It is true of the Primitive times, thereof, but we now speak of the present,
and late bred corruptions, and defections of the same.

41. Where is the true Church then?
Where the truth and purity of Religion is restored, according to Gods word,
and his truth, and the corruptions purged, and done away, as in our, and other
the best reformed Churches.

42. Have not some in pretense of this been too violent, to purge or expunge
things necessary?
If any have, or seek to do so, they stand or fall to their own Judge, we as
private men, must not be their Judges, or Judges of these things, we are to
leave them to their superiors whom God appoi eth.

43. Can the Church of Rome then, or any particular Church fall from God?
It is apparent, for that the Lords Spirit is not tied to any place, for then
not only Jerusalem his City, but the famous Churches of Asia, long since
collapsed, had yet stood and flourished, and many others now under Mahumetan
and Turkish servitude, or quite decayed.

44. How then did God promise his Spirit to his Church, to be with it to the
end of the world?
To be present, to lead it into all truth, wheresoever it is, even in all
places of the world, but as the wind blows where it lists, so his Spirit
to the faithful every where, ^ut for their infidelity, sometimes pulls one
down, and sets up another, even casts off the natural branches, for
unbeleefe, and grafteth in others, all according to his good will and pleasure.

45 What learn you else concerning this Church?
That as it is the Church of God, a holy Church and Catholic, in regard of
all times, places, and persons of all sexes, and degrees, peoples and nations
whatsoever, whereof it consists, consenting in the truth of the Catholic
doctrine, of the Prophets and Apostles, so it is also, and in unity of Spirit
in the communion of Saints.

46. What in this communion of Saints considered?
The union, in that it is a communion.

The persons who are Saints.

How is their union?

1. in the unity of faith, the doctrine of salvation.

2. The head, which is Christ.

3. The body which is his Church, they members.

4. The Spirit which is the bond of peace among them.

2. In the participation of the Sacraments, tokens of this union and communion.

3. Bond of charity, and love between themselves and Christ their head, and by
him also with God.

47. What is that communion then?
That holy and sweet fellowship which all the members of the Church have one
with another, and with Christ their head, and so with God, whereby all good is
communicated to them from above; and consequently in mutual charity one unto
another.

48. Between whom is this communion considered?
Between the Saints and Christ their head, and so with God; themselves one with
another, so the Saints both in heaven and earth.

49. How with Christ, and God?
As the excellent Means whereby reconciled to God, and at peace with him.
Grace, of partaking of Christ's righteousness, being one with him by faith.
Assurance of my hope, of all good things in him and by him attained, for that
he so feels my wants, hears my prayers, is ready to relieve my misery.


50. What fruit and profit of this?
All happiness, and goodness thereby acquired?

As peace with God, peace of conscience, peace in the soul.

Influence of all graces from Christ our head.

Effects of holiness and righteousness from him.

Glorious inheritance, title, estate and hope of all Saints, and all comforts
in him.

51. How exemplified?
By the spiritual building, Christ the foundation, and head cornerstone, and
we the building.

By the peaceful Olive, Christ, and we the branches ingrafted.

By the Vine Christ, and we the pruned branches.

By the head Christ and we the members.

By the Bridegroom Christ, and we the spouse, and such similies of his
imparting his goodness, righteousness and graces to us.

52. How of the Saints among themselves?
As members of one body, branches of that Vine and Olive, stones of that
spiritual building, all for the good one of another, bringing forth much good
fruit, to the honor of God.

53. How between us and Saints in heaven?
In mutual sympathy, as branches of one vine, consent in the praises of God,
prayers one for another, though not one to another; and all best duties,
however unknown to us now, will be manifest hereafter, they being our fellow
servants, and brethren, that assuredly wish our good and happiness, and in the
resurrection to be partakers with us in glory.

54. How among the Saints on earth?
Though plainly and evidently in

1. The unity in Faith, the doctrine of truth professed. Hope of blessedness.
Spirit and bond of peace.


2. Union with the Head, and participation of the Sacraments, yet most
essentially in the union in charity and works of mercy.

By helping one another.

By releeving and comforting the weak.

By bearing one another infirmities, and doing all good, temporal to the
body, spiritual, prayer, instruction, and the like to the soul, to the
comfort of the Saints and Church of God.

55. Why called Saints?
Both By the general calling of God to grace. Out of charity to the Church of
God in all. The visible members presumed faithful. In hope of the inheritance
of Saints, and desire that it may be given to all. For that the best part are
indeed Saints of God.


What comfort in this faith?
Most heavenly to consider

That 1. Christ himself in this sympathy, feeling our wants, hears and
knows our prayers.

2. Even Saints in heaven desire our good, and pray for it.

3. How mean soever in worldly eyes, yet if Saints of that high and holy
fellowship, wherewith no compare, as joined so to the King of Kings, etc.

4. All Saints their prayers, devotions, fastings are heard, and made, and done
for us, and our good, as all Christ's actions and merits applied.

5. That hereby is more content, and true riches, then in all worldly
possessions; as all good enjoying of heavenly and earthly good, coming of this
communion.

56. What learn we hence?
Many good duties, and how to behave our selves, in and toward the Church of
God, and communion of Saints.

As 1. To honor and reverently esteem of this holy society.

2. To desire the good of it, as a faithful member of the same.

3. To be of holy conversation, as beseems a Saint, and a Christian.

4. To come out of the world, leaving Egypt and Sodom, to be admitted into
this Canaan, the House and Church of God.

5. To be in unity with my self, God, and his Saints, in the bond of the
peace, of a good conscience, love, and charity.

6. To seek sit company of Saints, and so to delight in Gods house, the Saints
on earth, and such as excel in virtue.

7. Conversing with Saints on earth, by holy conversation; and those in heaven,
by heavenly contemplation, to aspire to a more strait union with that holy
congregation.

8. To do good to all, especially to those that be of the household of faith,
as having a fellowfeeling and compassion to all Gods Children.

9. To exercise our selves in fit and holy actions, beseeming Gods house, and
that holy company.

10. To have comfort in all things, and sufferings, both in respect of the
Saints and their fellow-sufferings, but chiefly Christ; his fellow-feeling of
our infirmities, to help and relieve us.

57. What follows?
The last three Articles of the Creed, concerning the privileges given, and
belonging to this holy Society, remission of sins, resurrection of the body,
and life everlasting.

SECT. 12. The 10. 11. and 12. Articles of the Creed, concerning the
Privileges of the Church.
and first forgiveness of sins by washing us in Christ's blood, covering of
our sins, and imputation of his righteousness to those that are his, and
none others, we being not able to satisfy for our own, but needing God
powerfully, the Church ministerially, to forgive them where faith in Christ is
required, the condition whence the use of much comfort, and consequently the
blessed hope of resurrection, the second privilege manner, certainty, and
reason whereof are here observed, taken from Gods justice, equity, and mercy. As
also farther illustrated by diverse examples and similitudes presenting to us a
show of the resurrection, so -- the order of it, and excellent estate therein
more amply expressed, in respect of the godly, and what good duties to be hence
learned, and what good uses to be made of the same Whence also consequently our
joyful hope of life everlasting. The last Articls where life of jointly of
soul and body raised and united in joy unspeakable and endless in heaven, is
by that to be understood which is also called the union With God, and fruition
of the glorious Godhead, and blessedness eternal, which is the life of Angels,
though the means or cause of it, as Christ, or the word, sometimes
figuratively called life, and life eternal: or as it may be inchoate herein in
the kingdom of grace, as consummato in glory: whereas the contrary and estate
of the damned not properly a life, but death, or ever dying life, and so not
mentioned in the Creed, where only the comfort of the godly intended: the use
they make, and duty they ought o learn, in seeking, striving for it, in
assuranc^ of which their blessed faith and hope, they say Amen.

1. What is contained in these three last Articles?
Three privileges granted to the Church, and not elsewhere to be found, or
attained, each Article one, viz.

10. Forgiveness of sins. 11. Resurrection of body. 12. Life everlasting.
2. What is forgiveness of sins?
Gods passing by our sins, without calling them to his remembrance, to shame or
punish us for them, but on the contrariwise, imputing righteousness to us, and
accounting and allowing us just.

3. Wherein consists it?
In these two things, the

Covering or cancelling, and discharging of sin.

Imputation and gift of justice.

4. How is the covering or discharging of sin?
In taking away both the spot and stain of guilt, and consequently the
removing all punishment.

5. How is it done?
By washing our souls in Christ's blood, purging them by his merits, and
drowning them in the sea of his infinite love and mercy, and as we are in
Christ, he beholds no stain in us, he sees no iniquity in Jacob, and the
cause of sin removed, punishment the effect, and death eternal, the due to
sin, must needs be done away.

6. How the imputation of Christ's justice, and his merits?
As in him our sins done away, so in him is justice given, by putting on him
and his robes of righteousness, as we are in him part of that holy society,
the communion of Saints, and members of the true Catholic Church.

7. To whom is then forgiveness of sins?
Only to the true members of the Catholic Church, for so to them that are in
Christ, thence is no condemnation, because they are of that body, and in him,
in whom God is well pleased, and so to all others who are not in him, what can
be expected but condemnation?

8. Can we not satisfy for our own sins?
How can we satisfy for sin, that without him, and his grace, are not able to
think a good thought, and when our best works, in comparison of true
holiness, are but as poluted and filthy clouts before him, and when we have
done the most we can, it is but our duty, yea when the best we can, we are but
unprofitable servants, where is then our merit of our selves, or ability to
satisfy for our misdeeds?

9. Who forgiveth sin?
Only God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, who having power to make the Law,
have power to forgive the offense.

10. How is the Church said, or men, to forgive sins?
The Church ministerially, and that diverse ways, from God, as by

The ministry of the word, procuring it, by offering and ordering the doctrine
of repentance, and forgiveness of sin, and converting sinners to God.

The exercising the power of the keys, by Gods order and commission, for the
benefit of the Church, to humble the soul.

The applying the same to the penitent, and so in the power of Gods commission,
to give and pronounce absolution, to the benefit and comfort of the soul
desiring the same.

11. How the keys? or power of them exercised?
In foro 1. Exteriori, in facie Ecclesiae, more publicly in the sight of the
Church, to the reforming of offenses, and removing of scandals. 2. Interiori
conscientiae, more privately, to the comfort of the soul, and quieting the
conscience of the humble penitent.


12. How men? how do they forgive?
Only partially, in regard of some part of some offenses, concerning them, but
God forgiveth to the truly penitent totally, in respect of all parts of both
guilt and punishment, and fully whatsoever, either the Church holily intends,
or men neglect, or wilfully refuse to forgive, if he please.

13. How stands this with Gods justice?
As in justice even to the utmost satisfied in the sufferings of Christ, and in
mercy, as he gave and accepts him, and in his merits for us.

14. What is then required to forgiveness of sins?
A lively faith in Christ, whereby we apprehend him, and his merits, and
perfections, thereby applied and made ours, whence comes true repentance,
forsaking sin, and cleaving steadfastly to God.

15. What certainty of it?
Gods gracious promises in Christ, effectually applied, and sealed to the
soul, by the ministry of the Church, in the holy use of his Word and
Sacraments.

16. What learn we hence?
In this life, seeking this privilege in the Church

1. To make our calling and election sure in Christ.

2. To become truly a member of his, so to have our sins forgiven.

3. Obtain peace of conscience, thus, and both with God and men.

4. To disclaim our own merits, so in humbleness crave and have Christ's
justice.

5. To try our faith by our repentance, and so by our assurance of
forgiveness, and thus seeking, we shall surely attain it, both from God and
his Church, and have peace with God and men.

17. What follows of this?
Resurrection of body, as a consequent of forgiveness of sins, for as death
entered by sin, so sin also taken away, the punishment also to be removed,
which being of the body in part, shall also in that part be dissolved at the
last, and the body raised.

18. But how, and when shall it be?
By the mighty power of God, and in his word, by the voice of his Angel, and
sound of his trumpet, at the end of the world.

19. How can this be?
Though worms have eaten it, or Seas or grave turned it to rottenness, or
wild beasts or fishes devoured it, yet when he says, Come again ye children
of men, no graves, rottenness, or corruption can keep them from his presence,
whose word can again restore them, as at first created them out of nothing.

20. How is this further confirmed?
Even by the rules of reason, at least, from the justice, equity, and mercies
of God in Christ.

21. How in reason?
As they in the soul pleased, or offended God, so to be made the object of his
justice, or mercy; for as he is God of Abraham, and God of the living, of all
Abraham, and not a part only, his soul, as else illustrated by diverse
examples and similitudes.

22. How in the justice of God?
As the body with the soul offended the divine Majesty, so with it to be
called to account, and since no such justice yet seen performed, that it
should hereafter be at the last.

23. How in equity?
As both soul and body served God, and did honor him, and in Christ accepted
of him, so both to rise to be honored, which comes toward his mercy, and as
he is Father of both in Adam and Christ.

24. How his mercies in Christ?
As promised to all faithful, and for his promise sake, both body and soul to
be blessed, else but a part of blessing, and God and Christ's servants, but in
part his, or part of his servants raised, but as his blessing perfect, and
promise without failing, or repentance, so full and perfect restoring, and
blessedness both in body and soul.

25. How farther illustrated?
By examples and similitudes of the resurrection.

26. What examples?
Not only Christ himself, in whose form we shall rise, which also gives a
taste, as a first fruits assurance, and testimony of our Resurrection, and
shows Gods power and good will to our nature, but also of diverse others, as
the widow of Sarepta, and Shunamites son, by Eliah and Elisha raised to life,
the man by the Prophets bones, and those three raised by Christ, Dorcas by
Peter, and Eutiches by Saint Paul, all farther testimonies and tokens of the
very bodies resurrection.

27. What other similitudes?
Of the day, succeeding night, spring after winter, even flies and Bees, the
Rigndove, beast Myoxus, and Phoenix from death usually reviving to life again,
seeds cast into the earth, there dying, yet quickened again, Saint Paul's
instance of the Resurrection.

28. What hence gathered?
That as when we see some herbs bud in the spring, we know so others may, so
when we see some bodies raised, we may know by their example, others may also;
or when we see some excellent Artist show some excellent works, by it we know
he can do more if he please: so when we see God raised some, and gave life,
and clothed the souls with the bodies, he can do so by all the rest, when he
sees his time, and when he please.

29. With what bodies then shall we rise?
With the same we live here, as holy Job says, and Saint Paul, with our own
bodies, yet made glorified incorruptible and spiritual
bodies.

30. How glorified?
As fitted to that mansion they shall possess in the heavens.

31. How incorruptible?
By doing away all corruptions and imperfections, which may tend toward death,
or offense to the soul, so a comfort, whatever imperfection, weakness, or
deformity, there, all such imperfection and defect shall be done away, and the
glorious soul, as a glorified one, so shall have a perfect and incorruptible
body, to praise God with eternally.

32. How said a spiritual body?
Not that it is turned to a spirit, but in regard of the excellent qualities it
shall be then endued with in comparison of this body of frailty and earth that
we now possess; and as it shall be comformable to these spiritual exercises
of the soul, then to be used, and sympathizing with that spirit, subject in
all things without reluctance to the Spirit of God.

33. How the Resurrection effected?
By the Father, in the Son, and virtue of the Holy Ghost, whereby all shall
be raised, and brought to judgment.

34. Of whom this resurrection meant?
Of the godly, hereby princially intended, the symboll of whose faith is here
expressed, but of all here intimated, of the just to mercy, the others
condemnation, hence consequently gathered.

35. What learn we hence?
Good duties, in preparation of our selves for a joyful resurrection.

As 1. not to live like Epicures, or such as expect no resurrection, but in
days of grace, as preparing for a life in glory.

2. To consider how, though death impair us, there shall be a resurrection to
renew us.

3. To serve God with all our members, bodies and souls also, that all may be
partakers of a joyful resurrection of the just to glory.

4. To be comforted against death, in this hope, and joyfully express the
same, in all things.

36. What comforts to be hence raised?
In that as we may find, hough we live a thousand years, yet we must dye, in
the first Adams fall, so now though a thousand, or thousands in the dust, yet
in the second Adam we shall be raised in his form, and power, so

1. To bear all weakness, sickness, deformity, even death it self, with
patience, since Christ will raise all that are his, in power and beauty, to
glory.

2. To bear the parting with our nearest friends patiently, in remembrance of
this resurrection and meeting again in joy, in body and soul at the
resurrection.

3. To bear the very parting and laying down of this body of dust, with that
moderation and comfort, beseeming a Christian, and servant of him, that will at
last, reward all our service done to him, either in body or soul, with a
merciful, and just reward.

37. What follows hence?
As a consequent of this resurrection, life everlasting, for as forgiveness of
sins, argues taking a way the punishment, death, and so a resurrection; no
less, it, and the resurrection import the position of life everlasting.

38. What is your hope then?
Of a joyful resurrection to life everlasting, both in body and soul, to be
consummate with God, and all Saints in the heavens.

39. What herein to be considered?
The life of body and soul, eternity of the same.

The sum and consummation of all happiness, in such joys, that no eye has
seen, or ear heard, or could enter into the heart of man; prepared for the
Saints, and to endure to eternity.

40. What is life?
The act of living, not so much consisting in the continuance, as exercising
the faculties of life, and enjoying the goodness.

41. How mean you that?
For that long continuance, as a hundred, or a thousand years without
knowledge, the light of life, or action, the exercise of life, or doing good,
and the best acts of the soul, is but as it were, a long sickness, and
lethargy of the soul, or deficiencie of life, wanting the fruit and comfort of
the the same.

42. How does the soul live?
By her own being, but from God, author of that being, and original
fountain of life, living of himself, and undependently, and so giving all
things else their life and being.

43. How does the body live?
By virtue of the soul, and her union with it, and so by the power, and
operation of the same.

44. What is eternity?
A duration, and continuance, or enduring without beginning, or end, or both.

45. How explain you this?
Eternity or such enduring is considered,

First, either simply, and absolutely, without beginning or end, and so only
God absolutely, eternal, and inhabiting eternity.

2. In part, as the Schools speak, either a part ante without beginning, but
having end, so Gods decrees from eternity, either without beginning, but ending
in his works, or a part post, having beginning, but without end, so the
eternity of Angels, and souls that by creation had beginning, but by Gods
grace, and goodness continuing them, shall never have end; this is also called
eviternity, and thus all eternity is contra distinguished to time.

46. In what manner?
As eternity absolute, has neither beginning, nor end, so God eternal.

Eviternity, has beginning but no end; so Angels and Souls.

Time, has both beginning and end, so this world, and all temporal things,
and thus all continuance is usually distinguished.

47. What is eternal life then?
The fullness of joy, and comforts of life, in the presence of God, that shall
never have end.

48. How more largely?
The union of body and soul, as the resurrection of the just, to that end to
be united unto God, and have the fruition of the glorious God head,
enlightening, and inhabiting those that are his, for ever, so making them to
dwell with him, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and life for evermore.

49. How is this else called?
Happiness, and blessedness eternal, as therein enjoying the fruits and
comforts of that everlasting life.

50. Js this also the life of Angels?
It is, whose only blessedness and chief delight, is in contemplation, and
fruition of the glory, beauty, and majesty of God, then which there can be no
greater joy or happiness.

51. How so?
Because in him is all goodness, even in the fountain, all goodness else,
but a few dispersed sparks of that eternal light, or a drop of that Ocean,
wherein only is plenitude, to the satisfying of all desires of what goodness
soever.

52. How is eternal life else taken?
Sometimes in the Scripture, for the means and beginning of this, in the
kingdom of Grace, as it is said to Christ, to whom shall we go, thou have the
words of eternal life, and this is eternal life, to know thee, and whom thou
have sent, Jesus Christ.

53. How is this eternal life?
As it is the union of the soul to God, by grace, though imperfectly, yet
receiving the comforts of life, from him, by the influence of his holy Spirit,
bringing joy and unspeakable blessings, and peace to the same.

54. How manifold is eternal life then?
Twofold, either inchoate, in this life, in the kingdom of grace.

Or consummate, as aforesaid, in the kingdom of glory.

And this is also twofold, or in two degrees.

55. Which are they?
1. Either in that part only, the soul, as that is united to God, and
enjoying happiness with him, when the souls of the just depart hence in the
Lord.

2. Or in body and soul, most fully, as shall be after the general
resurrection, and so principally here intended.

56. What the parts of this life, and blessedness?
The divine and blessed living of the soul and body, when joined together in
the presence of God, and union with him, enjoying the fullness of all that is
called goodness, as both joy and pleasure, riches, health, liberty, honor,
glory; and all these absolute and entire, not mixed with any grief, or any
other inconvenience, as worldly things, but perfect, according to the
perfection and excellence of the person, place, and giver.

57. And how this estate expressed else in holy Scripture?
By many comfortable phrases and figures, expressing the joy, honor, glory,
comforts or blessings there, as said to be, and remain

With God, and in God, in the Lord.

In the hand of God, in his presence.

In heaven, in eternal rest and peace.

In Paradise, in Abraham's bosom.

In joy and blessedness, and as here, in life everlasting.

57. But is not life everlasting to the wicked?
No, for their estate is not properly a life, as wanting all joy, comforts, and
fruits of life, but a death or continual dying, in pain and torments, and so
if at any time said to live, it is with addition of everlasting torments, or to
live in everlasting chains of darkness, with the Devil and his Angels, or
the like, whereby signifying an eternal dying life, or living death, and in
that respect most properly termed everlasting death.

58. Why is not this their estate expressed also in the Creed?
Because this is here intended as a symboll of their faith, so penned for the
comfort of the just, and to remember them of their hope, and happiness, and
stir them up to godliness, leaving the others to the hand of God, whose
estate yet may hence be plainly gathered, and also is in St. Athanasius Creed,
and some others, more fully expressed.

59. What learn we hence?
Many good duties, as in our Christian calling so to order our lives and
conversation, as always having an eye to this blessed hope.

Remembering this end, without end.

Breaking off sin betimes, since no unclean thing may enter here.

Striving to enter the strait gate of virtue, leadign to eternity, leaving the
broad way of the world.

Taking joy in things that shall yield everlasting joy.

Desiring, praying longing for it, etc.

60. Why is Amen added?
To show the certainty, assurance, and confidence we have, as well as our own
consent to this faith.

61. What signifies it?
Verily, certainly, or undoubtedly, or as it is else usually rendered, So be it.

62. What mean you then by it?
That we do believe and confess,

Not only in word, professing, but from the very heart.

Not wavering, but certainly, without doubting.

Not as though it were in our own power, but craving help, and strengthening
of our faith from the hand of God.

63. But how should Amen be added, since it is no prayer?
1. Either as the last Article signifies those privileges of the Church,
whereunto all faithful souls aspire, and so in that aspiration say Amen.

2. Or as we generally confess the certainty of it, and our submission of
soul, to this faith, and the will and truth of God.

3. Or in particular, we intimate our prayers for this, or some other thing,
for our own good, and the Church of God.

64. For what things?
For faith, as Lord give us true faith.

For increase of our faith, as Lord increase our faith.

For help and comfort, Lord help our unbeleefe.

For defense, Lord defend us, and all professors of this faith.

Or the like holy aspiration to heaven, and heavenly things, in the meditation
and confession of this faith.

65. But do not they abuse it that make a prayer of it?
Yes, in that ignorance, and much more, all infidell-like, and deboished
Christians, that take the words in their mouths, and never conceive it in
their hearts nor express it in life, by obedience, and so most fearfully
abuse, and take Gods name in vain, to their condemnation.

66. Why the gesture of standing, used by all, at this confession?
1. To difference it from prayers, where at we kneel.

2. To show uniforme gestures with the Ministers, as unity in consent.

3. To show our readiness, to stand constant, yea and die in the constant
profession of this faith.

4. To signify the posture of Soldiers, as ready to fight in defense of this
faith, and our Lord; and so soldiers with their swords drawn, and standing,
signified as much, as Primitive times, and Histories relate.

67. What learn we hence?
To stand in the truth, profession and defense of this faith, even to death,
that the Lord may give unto us the Crown of life; which he grant to us for his
mercies sake in Christ, to whom be glory ever, Amen.

SECT. 13. Quest. 6. Concerning the sum of the Creed.
Not so much a prayer, as acclamation in zealous expression of their
confidence, The sum of the Creed, or substance thereof, Epitomized, and
application of our Christian faith to the three Persens in Trinity, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and under the third part, or Article, concerning the Holy
Ghost, the rest of the Articles shown, comprehended, with a most plain and
familiar expression of the same.

1. What learn you chiefly in these Articles?
I learn this one thing faith, or to believe in God, distinctly explicated in
three parts, according to the number of the three Persons in Trinity.

2. What the first?
First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has created me, and all the
world.

3. What note you in it?
The application of my faith to the first Person in Trinity the Father,
described by His Essence, God. Person, Father. Attribute, Almighty. Action of
creation, the Creation. Object thereof, the world. Application thereof, to my
self.


My Creator, as Thomas said, my Lord, and my God, who created me, and all the
world.

4. Which the second?
Secondly, in God the Son, who redeemed me, and all mankind.

5. What note you in this?
The application of my faith, to the second Person in Trinity, the Son
described.

By His essence, God. Person the Son. Action, redemption, the Redeemer. Extent,
in sufficiency, to all mankind. in efficiency, to all the Elect.
Application to me also, my Savior and Redeemer.


What more chiefly observed in the Mediator Christ?
His name Jesus, a Savior, Christ anointed.

His nature, God and Man, so Gods Son, our Lord.

His office, of Savior, or Messiah.

Mediator to God, making atonement for men.

Redeemer of men, the redemption performed by his humiliation, in his
incarnation, sufferings, death.

By his exaltation, in his resurrection, ascension, session, with coming to
judgment.

6. How more especially his office of mediation seen?
Apparently executed, in His Kingly office, governing Priestly office; offering
that sacrifice his body, and making atonement for Prophetic office instructing
his Church.

7. Which the third part?
Thirdly, in God the holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the elect people
of God.

8. What note you in this?
The application of my faith to the third Person in Trinity, the holy Ghost
described By His essence, God. Person, the Holy Ghost. Action, the sanctifier,
and sanctification. Object, the Elect, or Saints of God. Extent, all of them.
Application to my self, as he sanctifies both me, and all the elect people of
God.


9. But what is that which follows in the Creed concerning the Church of God?
Intended to be comprehended in this Article concerning the Holy Ghost, as by
the virtue and efficacy of his holy Spirit, all the merits and benefits of
Christ's office and sufferings, and the merits of God, are applied to the
Church, and Saints, called the elect people of God.

10. How are they called then?
The Church of God by the merits of Christ redeemed, and by the operation of
this Spirit, collected, united and made A holy Church by his sanctification.
Catholic Church by his every where diffused graces. Communion of Saints in
his uniting power, knitting them to the head Christ and God; among themselves,
in unity of faith, Christians, Spirit, at peace with God, themselves, all
others.


Charity helping one another, participation of the Sacraments, signs and
seals of this communion, whereby called Saints, and whence the blessings and
benefits, or the privileges of this holy company do spring, which are to be
found in this Noah's Arc, the Church, and no where else.

11. Which are they?
The forgiveness of sins, by the application of Christ's merits to our souls
in this life.

The resurrection of bodies, after this life, in the virtue and power of his
resurrection, our sins being forgiven.

The life everlasting, the consequent of this resurrection, to enjoy glory in
eternity, with him, and in him, by his grace.

12. Why is all this attributed to the Holy Ghost?
Because by him is the dispensation of Gods graces to his Church.

13. Is it not then to Christ?
Yes, and to the Father too, for these three are one, and their works, are
jointly exercised together, for the good of the Church, though distinguished in
the order, and manner of the execution of them, according to the propriety of
the persons in the Trinity.

14. How then attributed to the Father?
As to the fountain, from whence all goodness, mercy, and graces do proceed,
and flow.

15. How to the Son?
As to the means, whereby derived to the Church, the powerful and valuable
price of our redemption, whereby all good is conferred on the Church.

16. How to the Holy Ghost?
As to whom the dispensation of all his goodness, and grace, is committed, to
the perfection and complement of this work of God, in sanctification, the
earnest penny of glorification.

17. This then is the sum of our faith?
Yes, concerning both God, and his Church, and so the whole substance of the
Creed.

18. What follows?
The third part of the Catechism concerning the Law, or the Will, and
Comandements of God.

The third part of the Catechism, concerning the Commandments.
SECT. 1. QUEST. 7. Wherein the transition.
The transition to the Commandments, or third part of the Catechism in the
seventh, and following question, where first the number, name and title of
them, as the written Law of God, whence the difference of Laws and especially
those of the Jews, the once whole Church of God are showed, and handled, with
many notes of particular distinction among themselves, as of the moral Law
from the judicial Law that was more peculiar to the Commonwealth and state of
the Jews, and of them both from the ceremonial, with the reason and manner,
time, and and, or change, and other respects of the same: of Christian
ceremonies, and their use: and of the Moral Law: more in particular how it is
perpetual, and in effect and force, both before the promulgation of it in that
form at Mount Sinai, as well as since, and how far in force still with us
Christians, who though we are freed from the curse bare letter and slavish
fear are yet bound to the duties and effect thereof by the Law of Grace that
so agree, Christ being the scope and end of both how and why it was written in
the two Tables, and that twice, and how divided.

1. YOu said that your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise that you should
keep Gods Commandments?
Yes, in that third part of the vow, and promise in Baptism, whence we come to
consider in this third place, the Commandments of God.

2. Tell me how many there be?
Ten.

3. How appears that?
By the prescript word of God himself, and his servant Moses, by whom they are
named the ten Commandments, the ten words, or decalogue, signifying as much.

4. What do they contain?
The whole Will or Law of God, or duty of man.

5. What Law?
The moral Law, binding the soul and conscience to the performance of such
duties, as are perpetual, and so this Law, above all others perpetual.

6. What other differences of Laws are there?
1. Both Laws humane, politic, and municipall, of diverse forms, according to
the customs and manners of diverse peoples, and Countries.

2. Divine, or given by God himself, of diverse sorts.

Which are they?
Not only that Law of nature, written by God himself, in the heart of all
creatures, but also other positive, and written Laws, both the Law of works,
do this and live, to the first Adam, and all his posterity.

Of Grace, believe and have life, by the second Adam to all Saints.

7. How was the first Law of works promulgated?
By God himself in Paradise, to Adam, only abstain, or eat not of the
forbidden tree.

By God himself, to the Jews upon mount Sinai, the moral Law, or ten
Commandments.

8. What was the event?
Both brake the Law, and none was able to keep it wholly, whence was need of
the Messiah, the promised seed, who should satisfy for their misdeeds, and
breach of the Law of works, by their taking hold of the Covenant and Law of
Grace.

9. How was that showed?
In the promises to Adam, thy seed shall break the Serpents head, or power of
Sin and the Devil, and to all the Fathers consequently, made of Christ, as
likewise by those many sacrifices, and types, and shadows of the Messiah, and
his offering sacrifice, as well as those other Laws of the Jews, to the talsing
notice of, and punishing of sin, and offenses, thus entered into the world by
Adams offense, and hence that other division of the law springs.

10. What division?
Of the Jews Law, which was thence accordingly divided into

The moral Law.

The ceremonial Law.

The judicial Law.

11. Why are we to take notice of the Jews, or their Laws?
As they were the true Israelites, the Church of God, to whom both the Law, and
Testimonies, the Arc and Temple of God, and all tokens of his grace, and
favor were committed; yea all the privileges that belong to the whole Church
once appropriated to that holy, elect, and chosen people, as from whom, the
Messiah, according to the flesh, should spring, to be the joy and light of all
Nations, and in whom, all Adams posterity should be blessed.

12. Was the whole Church straightened in so narrow limits, as one little people?
It seems so, to the good providence of God, as once in one Adam, and since in
one Arc, only eight persons, the whole Church, yet cursed Cha^ also, among
them, and then one Abraham's family, and one people of the Jews, and among
them, many unbeleevers, to show the few number of the truly faithful; and now
though all Nations admitted, yet but one Church, a little flock, guided also
by one rule, and Law, the Covenant of Grace.

13. What were those Laws then of that Church of God, among the Jews?
1. The moral Law, binding to performance of all good duties, toward God and
man,

2. The ceremonial, setting forth the sacrifices for sins, in the breaches
of the former, and directions in Gods house, and service.

3. Judicial, deciding controversies, about political and temporal matters,
and inflicting punishments upon offenders against the same, or the former,
which punishments of offenses, or sacrifices for sin, the greater part of
these latter Laws, had been of no use, if the moral Law could have been
performed, and breaches thereof, whether by ignorance, uncharity and
contentions, or else, could have been avoided.

14. How long were these Laws to continue?
The judicial Law, so long as the State or Commonwealth of the Jews, as
fitted to their state, manner, or customs; the ceremonial Law, during the
time of that their Temple, or Tabernacle, whose ceremonies, and sacrifices as
types, and shadows, were referted to the substance, and ended in Christ, and
the revelation of the Messiah, who opened the second Tabernacle, his Church,
but the moral Law binding to the duty of virtue, and godliness abides, and
stands fast for ever.

15. How then was it said a Law of the Jews?
As they were then accepted, and were indeed the true Church of God, for as
considering

1. The letter, it was delivered to them as Gods own, and peculiar people,
having such privileges, as no other people ever had, and but the same, or such
as the Church has now.

2. The substance, it was delivered to the Church in general, (then in them)
and so to all people, who must serve God in holiness, and righteousness, and
so stands firm in that point for ever.

16. What the difference between the judicial, and moral Law?
1. The judicial was chiefly in foro exteriori judiciae, the moral, in foro
interiori conscientiae, exercised and appointed.

2. Judicial was founded on the moral, to certify the outward breaches of
the same.

3. Judicial was fitted to diverse manners, and customs of the people, the
moral to the heart and soul of all people, in obedience to God.

4. Judicial is more particular, and the moral more general, and diverse such
other respects, from these flowing, for difference may be seen.

17. Why should the judicial so soon end?
1. Because the Commonwealth of the Jews, to which it was particularly
referred, and to whose customs appropriated, is ended.

2. The ceremonial, to which it was also tied, and allied, as concerning
manumission in the year of Jubilee, and the like, is also vanished.

3. Diversity of manners, and customs in other peoples, and propensity to
particular vices, and diversified by diverse respects, do often require diverse,
and other Laws, and punishments.

18. But are we no more then tied to obey, or respect it, then any other
strange Law whatsoever?
Though we be not tied to the observation of it, as abrogated, yet we may
therein see, and respect the equity and excellency of it, and wisdom of the
Lawgiver, above all other laws whatsoever; and though we leave it in the very
letter, or circumstances, yet in the substance, we observe it, in the obedience
to the moral law, out of which it seems taken, and we may judge other laws
of most equity, and excellency, that come nearest unto it, only such variation
of due circumstances observed.

19. What the difference between the Ceremonial and Moral Law?
1. In that the Moral Law was about in ward obedience, and duties of the
soul, the Ceremonial about outward service and ceremonies.

2. The moral, delivered by God himself, the ceremonial and judicial, only
by Moses instructed of God.

3. The moral first given, the other in consequence, depending from some parts
of that.

4. The moral law neglected, made worse then infidels, that did by nature the
things of the Law, when the ceremonial, only a confusion in order among Gods
people.

5. The moral broken, was a heinous sin always reputed, the ceremonial not
so, as in the wilderness, Circumcision, except with perverseness, as in
Zipporah, Uzzahs presumption, and Aarons sons to offer strange fire, in
alteration of the ceremony.

6. The moral, without cost, the ceremonial not without great cost, and
chargeably performed.

7. The moral law laid in the Arc, in regard of the perpetuity thereof,
signified; the ceremonial not so.

20. Why was the ceremonial to end?
1. Because the first Temple, unto which fitted, was to take end, by succession
of a second, in stead thereof.

2. Because the sacrifices, the shadows of Christ's one eternal sacrifice,
were in him the substance to end.

3. Because the other ceremonies, types of him, or some divine actions of his,
had in his exhibition ended their typical signification.

4. Because sacraments of theirs, were now to give place to the new, so the
laws concerning these, this must needs be antiquated and ended.

21. How learn we that ceremonies should end?
1. By Christ's entrance, a new High Priest, after the order of Melchisedee, and
so Aaron and his, with their types, to end.

2. By the renting of the veil of the Temple at Christ's death, showing as it
were their dissolution, and those former reasons, urged excellently by the
author to the Hebrews, Heb. 7. etc.

22. And are all ceremonies then ended?
All that have relation to Christ, to come, are now vanished, and out of use,
because the thing they shadowed and signified to come, is now exhibited, so no
further use of them.

23. How do Christians use ceremonies then?
Not any of this sort, but of another, for ornament and decency, in the service
of God, not so much in imitation of these, as founded upon the moral law, in
exhibition of external worship to God, and sanctification of the Sabbath, in
decent manner, and by the institution, doctrine, and example of Christ, and his
Apostles, who did both write how some things should be, and promised to set
other things in decent order, when they come.

24. How is the moral law perpetual?
Though given only to the Jews, yet as they Gods people, so in general by
them, to the whose Church, and though in the letter of the Commandments they

1. Are expressly to that their state, and time of the Jews.

2. Yet in effect to all Gods servants, before that time, that acknowledged the
force and truth, both generally, of the whole moral law, and particularly of
every Commandment, to all since, who according to the same direct their ways
in righteousness, and walk not according to the flesh, but the spirit, in
newness of life, and obedience to this law of God.

25. How was the law in effect before?
In general, not only Gods people, Noah, Abraham, and the holy men, but the
law of nature, in the heathen, written in their hearts, made them do and
acknowledge the works of the Law, Romans 2.

26. How in particular the Commandments?
For the first Table, the service of God, his honor, and sacrifices, and
Sabbaths, recorded before the Flood, and no idolatry recorded, or found till
long after, yea most of the heathen gods, and greatest too, even after Moses
time; and for the second Table, moral duties, and honest dealings, none can
deny, in Noah's and Abraham's families, yea and in diverse governments, footsteps
thereof, as in the Assyrian monarchy, and other kingdoms.

27. How the first Commandment?
To Abraham, God says, I am God alsufficient, stand before me, and be upright,
Genesis 17. 1. so by Adam, Enoch, Noah, and those other Patriarchs, it appears
they had no other God but him.

28 How the second Commandment?
In that Jacob purged his house of Idols, when he built Gods Altar in Bethel,
Genesis 35. 2. thereby acknowledging the abomination of them.

29. How the third Commandment?
The true use of Gods name by their prayers, and so, just oath by the true God,
as Abraham to Abimelech, Genesis 21. 23. and Jacob to Laban, Genesis 31. 53. and
others the like.

30. How the fourth Commandment?
By God in Paradise, and no doubt by Adam, and holy men afterward, either
punctually, or equivalently.

31. How the fifth Commandment?
By all the godly Sons of holy Fathers, and Patriarchs, honoring and obeying
their Fathers and Superiors in all reverence and humility.

32. How the sixth Commandment?
Seen a spectacle in abhorred Cain, confessing the crime of murder, and guilt
of conscience for it, so condemned, and detested of all.

33. How the seventh Commandment?
Seen in Joseph, flying his Mistress temptations, and the rest of Jacobs
sons, taking to heart the shame done to their sister Dianah, Genesis 34.

34. How the eight Commandment?
Acknowledged by Jacob to Laban, if any had stolen, let them die, Genesis 31. 30.
and by his sons to Pharaohs Steward, or Joseph's, if any had stolen the cup,
to be his bondmen Genesis 44. 5.

35. How the ninth Commandment?
In Abraham, Genesis 20. and Isaac, Genesis 26. reproved by Abimelec, for telling a
lie, or false testimony, and Jacob feared to be found or counted a liar, or
deceiver in counterfeiting Esau.

36. How the tenth Commandment?
In the uprightness of heart required in Abraham, Genesis 17. 1. and seen in him,
and Enoch, who walked with God, Lot, Melchisedec, and all the just.

37. How is this Law in effect with us?
As we are exhorted to these duties still, and to show our faith, by obedience
to them, willingly and readily, according to them, to undergo our duty and
service to God, in holiness, and uprightness to the world, in godly
conversation.

38. How is it then said, we are not under the Law, but under Grace?
This, and the like sayings, that we are freed from the Law, and that Christ
has freed us, Romans 7. Gal. 8. 18. and 4. 1. etc. and other places are to be
understood

1. Either absolutely of the ceremonial Law, which is abrogated, and vanished
in Christ, as in that to the Gal. and Heb. especially appears.

2. Respectively of the moral, as it should be conceived to be unable to
justify, and has need of Christ to be the end of it for its perfection.

To be performed by Christ for us, who striving to the uttermost, are never
able to perform it but only in him.

To be made more easy for us by Gods grace in Christ, and his Spirit, making
us to do those things in love to him, which were required under a strict
command before, and so we released or freed from the curse of the Law, and
condemnation borne by Christ for us.

The slavish fear of the threats that should else terrify us.

The tyrannical seizing on us, or commanding us, who have now a better Law,
the Covenant of Grace.

39. To what use does the Law then remain?
1. For a rule to square our lives by in godliness, yet without fearfulness
in love.

2. For a Schoolmasters to bring us to Christ, showing how much need we have
of him.

3. For a Schoolmasters in Christ to bring us to true humiliation, knowing how
much we want true godliness, and so to seek increase of graces in Christ.

40. What the difference between the Law of works, and of Grace, or the Law
and the Gospel?
1. In that the Law is known by the light of nature, and the Gospel a mystery
to nature, 1 Timothy 3. 6. and that Angels so desire to behold unveiled, 1 Pet.
1. 12.

2. Shows only what is to be done, the Gospel how do it in Christ, in faith
and love.

3. Is full of threats to urge us, the Gospel of sweet promises, to allure us
to perform it.

4. It is a Schoolmasters to show us Christ, and our need of him, or bringing
us to him, the Gospel admits and engrafteth us into him for our comfort.

41. How do the Law and Gospel agree?
1. In their Author God, that first gave the Law; and since his Son to
fulfill it, and in him the Gospel of peace.

2. In their end, Christ, that is pointed at in the one, in presence in the
other, and perfection of both.

3. In their threatenings against sin, and upbraiding the disobedient, and
unfaithful.

4. In their promises to the observers, and lovers of the Law, by striving to
do it, eternal life.

5. In their consent in the setting forth of Gods glory, faith, hope, and all
graces, without any contradiction, as from one fountain, his Spirit.

6. In their constant, and continual provocations to godliness.

7. In their Ministers, the Priests and Levites, and servants of God, that are
to be without blemish, called watchmen.

To live unblameably.

To set forth the Truth and Law of God.

To live of their service, and of the Altar, and whose lips are to preserve
knowledge, the people to seek the Law at their mouths, they to set it forth,
and the truth, both by their life and doctrine.

42. How was the Law written or delivered?
Delivered by the mouth, and written by the finger of God, to show the
holiness, and perfection of the same.

43. Wherein written?
Both in the hearts of men, as their duty to show it natural, as also moral,
and so perpetual.

Both in the Tables of stone, and that twice by him, to show it doctrinall, as
well as natural and moral, and so to be read for instruction, and preserved
to perpetuity, to all generations.

44. How twice written?
In the first Tables, broken by Moses, representing the frail hearts of flesh,
in which it was written, corrupted by their own inventions, as the Israelites
were, when Moses so brake them, by their own Idolatry, and abominations.

In the other two Tables prepared again by Moses, to show the confirmation of
them to perpetuity, and being restored and so laid up in the Arc of the
Testimony, and sanctum sanctorum, to be preserved, and fulfilled in Christ.

45. Why written in two Tables?
To show the distinction of the duties in them contained, to God in the first,
to men in the second Table, the perfection of their number, also pointing at
the perfection both of the Lawgiver, and Law, and so the ten Commandments.

SECT. 2. Quest. 8. Concerning the Commandments, and first of the Preface, etc.
The several prefaces to the Commandments, three of them: as first of the
child, answ: to the 8. quest: wherein the authentical unchangeablenesse,
author, and authority, God, speaking and saying. Autograph in Exodus and the
Tables, and other circumstances thereof expended, and why it is called Moses
Law. and the words doubled of speaking and saying: so Moses preface secondly
analyzed, thirdly, the preface of God himself, being both a reason, and to
this first and all the other Commandments, wherein to be observed the author,
and so his authority, his name, by himself uttered, to show his awful
majesty, his Attributes, calling, his Almighty power, as well as mercy and
goodness to mind, and so his actions of saving, and deliverances from Egypt,
and the house of bondage literally by the Jews, and Spiritually by us to be
understood. Whence his honor, fear and reverence, with our duty and
obedience, are powerful enforced. Of the true and right understanding the Law,
and how we ought to be affected in soul and spirit toward it, being of so
divine and spiritual A sense, sablimate above and beyond the bare letter, and
so diverse prime, necessary, in number five, propounded for the better and more
spiritual meaning, understanding, and interpretation of the same, with the
exposition of the same, as else the contraction of them to a less or fewer
number, and some other less prime rules pertaining more to the comparison of
the Commandments, and Tables so referred to the beginning of the second Table.

1. YOu signified ten Commandments, which are they?
The same which God spoke in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus saying, I am the
Lord thy God, etc.

2. What observe you here?
A twofold Preface, and then the Commandments.

3. What threefold preface?
Of Moses, intimated in his 20. Chapter, where he says, God spoke all these
words, saying.

Of God, immediately prefixed to the Commandment, I am the Lord, etc.

4. What is in that first preface?
The authentical substance and sum of it, being the very same that was 1. Both
Written 1. by God, In fleshly Tables, the heart. In the first Tables,
resembling the broken pitchers, men hearts. In the second Tables, restored and
preserved in the Arc.
2. By his Spirit, in the hearts of the faithful, willingly to do them.
2. Spoken by God himself, upon Mount Sinai, in terrible manner, out of the
cloud and fire, recorded by his servant Moses. 3. Delivered so to the
Israelites, in that majesticke and glorious manner. 4. Authorized by God, so
writing, speaking and commanding them, saying, I am, etc.


5. How collect you this?
As plainly expressed in that first place, where

1. The appearance, authentical, the very same, (...).

2. Author, God, thus diverse ways divulging it.

3. (...), he spoke it above all other Scriptures, with an (...).

4. Autogragh, the Tables with the finger of God written, and it recorded in
that 20. Chapter of Exodus, and also Deuteronomy. 5.

3. Authority establishing, commanding it, and saying.

6. How is it said, the same?
As it was not only the same in substance and effect but the very same in
words, which was both spoken by God himself, and written in the Tables, and
that two several times; laid up in the Arc, and recorded for public
testification by Moses also, to teach the people, and so the very letter, and
words, by how much more dignified, the more and above all others, to be
received and esteemed.

7. How did God speak it?
Not only by his Prophets and servants, and dictate of his Spirit, as other
Scriptures, so also holy and sanctified, but this with his own voice, in
audience of Israel, to their terror, in power and great glory, that they were
amazed, and fled again, and with so much the more fear and reverence to be
received.

8. How is the 20. Chapter of Exodus urged?
As the duplicate probation, from testimony of holy Scripture also, where it is
recorded, with all the circumstances, of the preparation, and delivery of the
same.

9. What circumstances?
There, in that 20. Chapter, and the precedent Chapter set forth.

As 1. the preparation, after the manner of those times, with great purifying,
washing, and cleansing the bodies, and thereby signified the souls purity
required, to receiving that holy Law, and so teaching us what preparation for
it, etc.

2. Charge, not to presume beyond certain marks and bounds set, on pain of
death, to signify these bounds of the Law transgrest, much more meriting death.

3. The Lords 1. descending with great terror, the trumpet sounding, earth
quaking, lightning flying abroad, that Moses trembled, and the people fled for
fear, to show and signify, how awful regard to be had thereof.

Secondly, the Lords speaking with so great power and majesty, that people also
feared so exceedingly, that they prayed Moses thence forward to speak to them,
lest hearing Gods voice they should die.

Thirdly, the Lords writing the Laws with his own finger, in the Tables of
stone, showing their stony-heartednesse, and that nothing but Gods finger was
able to imprint them there; all for the more reverence, and that we be not
negligent of his most holy laws.

10. How is it called the law of Moses?
As by him recorded, yea and the Tables by him received from the Lord, and so
of him noted, these circumstances also there,

1. His fasting forty days at the receiving thereof, to show with what
penitence, abstinence, and humility it ought to be received by us, and as
Christ also, to the promulgation of that better law, fasted also forty days.

2. His zeal for Gods honor, against the peoples idolatry, in so much that he
brake the Tables, as they their faith to God.

3. His glorious aspect, and face shining so, at receiving of the Law, that the
people were not able to behold him, to signify the honor of his ministry from
God, and the blindness of the Jews that had not power neither to look the
Law, or Moses in the face, to see the end of the Law, and look upon the
Messiah as they ought, unless the Lord take away the veil of blindness from
their eyes and heart.

11. Why are the words double so of speaking and saying?
To signify and show not only the speaking or pronouncing was from God, to
dignifie the words, but saying, as establishing with authority, and commanding,
thereby requiring awful obedience to the same.

12. Which is Moses preface?
Intimated in the former, and almost in the same words expressed, thus, God
spoke all these words, saying, Exodus 20. 1.

13. What to be observed?
For the most part, as in the former preface, so here to be noted,

The author, God, (...)

(...), He spoke, and said.

(...), the Law written, wherein the universality all, and not only part
thereof: regularity, reduced to words, these words, spoken, heard, written and
recorded.

The authority, whereby as spoken, for declaration, established for
confirmation, saying, I am, etc.

14. Which is the third preface?
Gods own, as immediately prefixed to that first Commandment, and so by some
called a reason of the Command, and in these words, I am the Lord thy God,
which brought thee out of the land of, etc.

15. Is it then a reason, or preface?
It may well be both; a preface, taken from the reason of enforcing their
obedience, and so it is a

Preface, as it is prefixed to the Commandment.

Reason, in respect of the obedience urged.

16. Is it a preface to the first only, or all the Commandments?
To the first primarily, as either immediately prefixed, or as the first
Commandment is the chief, and ground of all the rest.

To the residue, of good consequence, as respecting them also, and enforcing
obedience to them all.

17. What observe you in that preface?
The Lords name, the author, and so the authority, I am, etc.

Attribute, requiring reverence, Lord thy God.

Actions of deliverance, enforcing duty and obedience, Which brought, etc.

18. What is his name?
(...) Jehovah, rendered, the Lord, I am the Lord, taking it for his name, and
thereby manifesting himself to the Fathers, in his mighty power, essence, and
majesty, and in that veneration held with the Jews, that in latter times they
forbearing to speak or pronounce it, they lost the true and genuine
pronunciation, and spoke and read Adonai, or Lord, for it, so it was called
Ineffabile, and Tetragrammaton, as written with those four letters, the
principal, and Matres Lectionis, as it were, whereof the Jews writ many rare
and excellent observations, though in abstruse divinity, and so by them (...)
the name, is understood of this most high and holy name.

19. What noted you in it?
These things especially, and usually.

1. The original (...) whence (...) also, that other name of God, or essence,
as original of all being.

2. Letters, first of aspiration, doubled in it, as from whom all life and
breathing derived, and proceeding. Secondly, of it, the formatives of the
tenses, as comprehending all time, past, present, and future, showing his
eternity.

3. Signification, in the highest degree, substance, essence, or being, as
(...), or super substantia, as it is said to the first and last, who was, and
is, and is to come; yet semper eidem, the same.

4. Manifestation of it to Moses, and the Fathers, for a blessing and comfort,
and so is it to all them that are his, and that may know him, and call upon his
name.

20. What learn we hence?
His great authority, and awful reverence to his most holy name, and majesty.

21. What Attributes?
Of Thy God, or strength, Thy deliverer, or defense,


So appropriating his goodness in mercy, and deliverance to his people Israel.

22. But is not God also his name?
It is: but as Jehovah (...) is more peculiarly assumed to himself, in
testification of his Majesty, and particular revelation of himself to Abraham,
Moses, and the Fathers; so more especially accounted his; and God betokening
his goodness, or (...) signifying his strength, and virtue, thus comparative, in
respect of that name, referred to his Attributes, though otherwise usually
accepted for his name.

23. How are his attributes else shown?
By his appropriating, or entituling himself to Israel, or Israel to himself,
calling himself thy God, O Israel, and who brought the deliverance, whereby he
is not only said, the Lord, or God, but their Lord, and their God, their
deliverer and defendor, and as David speaks, the lifter up of their head.

24. What learn we hence?
By that near bond that we are obliged unto him, so loving and good a God,
that calls himself ours, what should be our intimate affection, duty and
allegiance, and how we should be his.

25. But how does this concern us?
As Israel was the true people of God, the natural vine, and we the branches
ingrafted in the same, and so all true believers are in Christ, the Israel of
God, as well as what was literally spoken of them, is typically, of the whole
Church to be understood, as is hereafter showed.

26. What the actions here?
Of deliverance from a most wretched estate, and slavery, into liberty, and
peace, from all oppressors, and oppression, to worship and serve him so.

From Egypt, and her proud King, Pharaoh.

From Egypt, and tyrannical oppressors, the Egyptians.

From Egypt and constrained Taske-masters, of their own Nation.

From Egypt, and that house of bondage, temporally and corporally of the
bodies, spiritually of the souls, in danger of Idolatry, and other
abominations abounding there.

27. How is this understood?
Literally of the Israelites, so indeed delivered, by the hand of Moses, in the
mighty power of God, and mystically of all true Israelites, in Spirit, having
many and mighty deliverances, from all enemies, spiritual and temporal, by
the hand of God, and in Christ.

28. Who are the true Israelites in spirit?
All the faithful engrafted into Christ, and so the seed of Abraham, who as
many deliverances in body, so more especially in soul, are delivered by Christ
out of

The spiritual Egypt, or Sodom of this world, and her Prince the Devil.
wickedness, and vanity, and from her 1. Tyranny of sin, death and hell. 2.
Oppressors, and 3. Taske-masters. 1. Of the Egyptians, all external Agents. 2.
Of the own blood, evil lusts, fighting against the Spirit.

House of bondage, whether the Flesh, and body of death, house of clay, that
depresseth the Sipirit. World wherein all wicked Agents, and Instruments under
the Devil, their Prince, threaten both spiritual and corporal, and endanger
us, both in temporal and eternal bondage of sin and her punishments.



29. What hence enforced?
As honor to this Lord, and love to our God, so all duties of love, and
thankfulness, for these blessings and deliverances, and in especial
obedience in all those respects to his Laws.

As if Lord, his honor and fear.

As if God, his greatness and power.

As if our God, and deliverer, love and duty, require our best respect,
reverence, and obedience to his Laws, that do so ensue.

30. What else learn we from hence?
Gods mercy, singularly manifested in thus dealing with us, and those that are
his, to win us to grace, and obedience, and our duty in following his example,
by all means to seek how to procure our own and others good, to his glory.

32. How his so especial mercy?
In that, in delivery of his Law, and Commandments there, he does not only
show what is good, or his will, and pleasing to him, which is a favor and
mercy; or command it barely, which he may do with all authority, in equity;
but much more seeks by all means to allure us by his mercies, favors, and
promises of life, and goodness, and putting us, (who are too forgetful) in
mind of his many blessings, and deliverances.

33. What our duty hence?
For Ministers, and all others, to seek by all means to bring themselves, and
many to God; setting forth, and calling to mind, his manifold mercies and
graces.

His goodness, enforcing love of him.

His power and authority requiring obedience.

His excellencies, winning honor, and admiration.

His works, requiring reverent consideration.

His Law, our meditation, and best attention.

His deliverances, binding us to all best duties of joy, thanks, praises, and
the like, and that so what justice requires of duty may be performed toward
him, if possible, with all sincere affection and good will.

34. For what profit, or to what end should we do this?
That by often and continual meditations in his Law, we may know what the
good and perfect will of God is, who will so make it easy to us, and us to
understand wisdom secretly, and the excellent and wonderful things of his
Law.

35 How should we best understand his Law?
By seeking to know it in the internal meaning, not so much according to the
letter, as in the intention and illumination of the Spirt, for the letter
seems sometimes dead, but the spirit gives life, and as it is said, holy
David's Psalms ought to be sung with his spirit, or with the spirit and
understanding, to be rightly used; and so Saint Paul's writings to be read with
his spirit, to be truly understood: so much more this holy writing, the Law by
Gods Spirit that endited it.

36. What rules or instructions have you for the better understanding of it?
There are certain brief rules and directions given for the right and true
understanding of it, or to guide the soul into due and orderly meditation of
the things therein contained, and may serve both Ministers in their
interpretation, and others in conceiving the true sense and interpretation, or
meaning thereof; and where these come short of attaining this, it is to be
further sought for by prayer, in humility, as from more special and internal
illumination of Gods Spirit, which can only bring the best knowledge of these
things, and contentation to the soul.

37. Explain this farther.
As required David's spirit rightly to understand David's Psalms, and Saint
Paul's spirit, or the Spirit of God, rightly to conceive of Saint Paul's
writings, or holy Scriptures; so for the spiritual and true understanding of
the Law, not only according to the letter, the letter killing, or dead, but
the spirit giving life, in the spiritual sense, intending or comprehending all
goodness, here are further directions for such spiritual meaning required;
and as in law this one word, the whole law and duty of man comprehended, so in
one word here, not seldom to be seen, in one virtue, all the branches, in one
sin, all the kinds, or what ever near of kin comprised, and therewith all
signs, means, occasions, and provocations to it, so spiritually to be
understood, and by and with the virtue commanded, and by and with the vice
prohibited, as well as by any virtue commanded, the opposite vice, and all his
sequel discommended, forbidden, and by the vice or sin forbidden, the opposite
virtue, and all of kin commanded, and commended, to be embraced by our selves,
and all others, in the Communion of Saints, so there are such rules to this
purpose given, for the right understanding, and interpreting the Law, whether
to our conscience, or the use and understanding of all others.

38. What rules are those?
Five principal, that concern the right and true understanding thereof, to
which some others secondary may be added for illustration.

Which are those five?
1. That where any duty, or virtue is commanded, the opposite vice is
forbidden: and e converso.

2. Where any virtue or vice is commanded or forbidden, there all of the same
kind are commanded or forbidden with it.

3. Where any virtue or vice is so touched, all signs, means, instruments,
occasions, and circumstances of it, are with it intended.

4. Not only the outward actions, but the whole man, body and soul, words,
thoughts, and actions, are hereby comprised.

5. As we are a communion of Saints not only, to our selves, but to all in our
society, to the uttermost of our power, to further it, these things are
required and enjoined.

39. Why is it thus to be understood?
Because as the Law is spiritual, and willing the sanctification of the whole
man, and whole society of mankind, and according to the direction of the
Spirit, the author, giving life to the same, diffusing it self to all, and to
the good of all, in the amplest manner, and so after the wisdom and meaning
of that good Spirit that gave it, penetrating, and understanding all things, to
be understood and interpreted, it being, that without this the bare letter
kills, or is dead, but the Spirit in the true, full, and spiritual meaning
and intention, gives life.

40. How explain you the first rule?
The first, where any duty or virtue is commanded, there the contrary vice is
forbidden, and where the vice forbidden, there the opposite duty is inferred,
or commanded; whence do grow in every Commandment,

1. An affirmative part, commanding the duty. 2. A negative part, forbidding
the vice.
And hence that distinction of sins into sins of

1. Omission, in omitting a good duty. 2. Commission, by committing of ill, or
vice.
41. How the second Rule?
Under any particular vice, all of that kind are forbidden, and under any
virtue, all of that kind commanded; even in the extremest degree, so virtue
required and commanded in the highest degree according to the rules of charity,
and portion of grace, and vice in any degree forbidden, whence unadvised anger
is accounted murder, and seeing a woman, to lust after her, adultery, Matthew.
22. 37. and so under those names forbidden.

42. What of the third Rule?
Where any virtue, or duties commanded, or vice forbidden; there also, all
means, allurements, signs, and tokens of the same, are likewise commanded, or
forbidden, that so the graces of God may be sought for, and shine forth to the
glory of God, and good example of all men, Matthew. 5. 16. and vices avoided, and
even all appearance and show of evil, 1 These. 5. 22.

43. What the fourth Rule?
That the effect of the Commandment concerns not only the outward actions
of the body, but the very inward dispositions of the mind, for governing of
the same. Reasons of this are,

1. The Law of God is perfect, and so requires perfect obedience, both inward
and outward, even of the whole man.

2. The Law of God is spiritual, requiring not only outward obedience in
word, and deed, but inward also in soul and spirit, in mind and heart, where
virtues are to be planted, and corruptions rooted out.

3. Our Savior thus teaches to expound the Law, Matthew. 5. 21, 22, 27. so
also, the first of John 3. 15. etc. and diverse other places.

44. What the fifth Rule?
As we are of the communion of Saints, virtues are to be procured, and vices to
be avoided, not only in our selves, but also in others, to our power, whereby
we are to instruct, admonish, comfort, and encourage others in good, to the
edification of the Church, and salvation of their souls, and reprove, dissuade,
and if possible, reclaim the evil, so having no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. nor accessory to the offenses of
others, 1 Timothy 5. 22.

45. May not these five Rules be contracted to a less number?
Yes, perhaps reasonably well to three, as thus,

1. That where any virtue commanded, the opposite vice forbidden, and e
converso.

2. That where any virtue so commanded, or vice prohibited, all of kin to them,
together with all signs, means and occasions, or circumstances with them to
be understood, and that not only for the outward actions, but whole man, body
and soul.

3. Where either prohibition or command is, it extends not only to our selves,
but as we are a communion of Saints to the good of others to our power, to care
for, help and further them, the neglect of which, is but in effect with Cain,
to expostulate with God, Am I my brothers keeper? whom we else kill, whether by
murder, ill example, or not saving him, if what in our power we do not when
he is like to perish.

And how were they five rules then before?
By dividing this second rule, and in it under every virtue and vice,

1. Observing the species and kinds in the breadth, making that the second
rule.

2. The means, occasions, signs, and circumstances for the third rule.

3. The extent to the whole man, body and soul, intensive for the fourth rule,
and so are five, as aforesaid.

46. What are the other secondary rules?
Some that are directed rather to the understanding of the difference of the
natures, and qualities of the offenses, or the differences of the Tables,
rather then the true understanding of the sense, immediately, and
interpretation or meaning of the Commandment, as the former rules did, such
are these,

1. That every negative Commandment binds always, and at all times; every
affirmative only always, but not so precisely to all and every particle of
time.

2. That the Commandments of the first Table are to be kept for themselves
absolutely, those of the second, for the first.

3. That though every sin deserves death eternal, yet there is an imparity
of sins, and one offense may be greater then another in many respects.

4. That the sins against the first Table, simply and in themselves
considered, are more heinous, then those of the second, though such
aggravation, or respects else of extreme malice, presumption, infirmity, or the
like, may ever balance or much alter the same.

5. That there is so near a tie, and relation between the Commandments, that
whosoever fails in one, is guilty of all, as a breach of the whole Law, in
breaking that royal Law of charity, and offending God the author of them all,
in contempt of his Majesty, which five last rules as secondary, and more
concerning the difference of sins among themselves compared, and arising from
the difference of the Tables, more shall be said of them at the beginning of
the second Table.

47. What follows here then next to be considered?
The first Commandment of the first Table, immediately following the Preface
in these words, Thou shall have no other Gods, but me.

SECT. 3. The first Commandment.
The division of the two Tables, and how many Commandments comprised in the
first Table, and diverse opinions concerning the same, and four Commandments
proved properly to be in the first Table; the first Commandment, and full
Analysis of it amply expounding the duties and opposite abuses therein
literally, or else intimated, or expressed, what it is to have the Lord for our
God, and the opposite Atheism, or having no God, what also to have him alone,
and the opposite Polytheisme, and Idolatry of diverse sorts, both among the
Heathens, and other carnal professors, and false Christians, making Religion
but a cloak for their villainy, or mask for their sin, and folly; what it is
to love, know, and honor God, with the opposite thereof, ignorance, errors,
and prophanenes of all sorts, springing from ignorance, nothing rightly styled
the mother of devotion, other malignant sins, bordering on prophanenes: And the
love of God, if with all the mind, heart, soul, and strength, seen in diverse
good Christians: virtues and duties that with their opposites, are here
described: as in knowledge, believing, (...) and (...), fear and rejoicing in
him humility and mecknesse, patience, and constancy, with perseverance, and
without murmuring, obedience, and thankefulfulnesse, with a zeal of his glory
and holy and godly life, the branches, and fruits of his love the very
groundworke of all the rest of the Commandments.

1. What is contained in the first Table?
By all confessed, our duty toward God, as in the second our duty toward our
neighbor.

2. How many Commandments are there in the first Table?
Though by some controverted, yet as may most plainly appear, both by the
words of command, as well as the substance of the matter, four Commandments.

3. What difference then is there of opinions?
Some distinguishing the first Table into three, the second into seven
Commandments, as Saint Augustine sometimes did, the Lutherans, and Church of
Rome do; others as we, and generally all the Fathers, the Jews themselves, and
the matter it self shows, properly dividing the first Table into four, the
second into six Commandments.

4. What reasons had they for the first?
Saint Augustine, as it seems, in holy, and reverend respect to the Trinity,
and that sacred number three, so in that comprising the Commandments,
pertaining to the honor of the Trinity, as in that other sacred number seven,
the rest of the Commandments comprehending the duties to men in this
septimana, or week of the world, the others insisting in his steps, and for
private reasons of their own, and in defense, or at least respect of Images.

5. What pretense for leaving out a Commandment?
As in the first Commandment including the second, and proposing the second,
but an exposition of the first; so by the first Commandment, understanding all
Atheism, Idolatry, both internal, and external forbidden, and true worship
commanded, and the second Commandment an explication of the former, concerning
that part chiefly, external Idolatry and worship, and so are feign to divide
concupisence in the last Commandment, according to the several objects of
lust, or covetousness, and make two Commandments out of one; so to supply the
defect of this second Commandment, thus lost or imbezled.

6. How prove you rather four Commandments in the first Table?
1. By the four words of absolute command, set down, as in the 1.
Commandment, Thou shall have none, etc.

2. Thou shall not make, etc.

3. Thou shall not take, etc.

4. Remember that thou sanctify, etc.

2. By the things therein commanded, viz.

Who is to be worshipped, the Lord Jehovah, in the first Commandment.

How his solemn worship, his own prescript, not Idolatrously, second
Commandment.

How far in our lives to honor him, to glorify his name, third Commandment.

When to worship him solemnly, on his Sabbath, fourth Commandment.

7. What the first Commandment?
Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

8. What Commandment is it?
A negative Commandment, under it, according to the first rule, comprehending
an affirmative, so to have no other or strange gods, but Jehovah for our God,
and him alone.

9. What the negative part?
In the prohibition of these five things, as forbidding

1. All Atheism, having no God. 2. All Polytheisme, having many gods. 3. All
Idolatry, having strange gods, or idols. 4. All Ignorance, no knowledge of the
true God in the mind. 5. All Profaneness, no honor or expression of it in
the life.
10. What the affirmative part?
In these three things commanded.

1. To have Jehovah for our God. 2. To have him alone for our Lord and God. 3.
To honor, and love him by all means, in soul and mind, as we ought, or as
agreeable to our duty, and his Majesty, or in these five parts, 1. To have
Jehovah, and 2. Him alone. 3. To Abhor Idols. 4. Seek to know him, faith. 5.
Seek to honor him, love and duty.

11. How are the positive and opposite parts seen, or opposed?
To 1. To have Jehovah for our God, 2. Have him alone, 3. Honor and love him,
opposite to 1. Atheism having no God. 2. both 1. Polytheisme, many gods. 2.
Idolatry, idols, and strange gods.
3. both 1. Ignorance, not knowing, or loving him. 2. Profaneness, not
honoring him.



12 How is this further demonstrated?
1. As to have Jehovah opposite to having no God.

2. As to have him alone, so not many gods.

3. As to have no other god, or strange gods, so no idols.

4. And if we have him, need must it be if in mind to know and love him.

5. And so as internal love, external honor opposite to Ignorance and
Profaneness.

13. What is it to have the Lord for our God?
1. To set him up in our hearts, who is Jehovah the Lord.

2. To set our hearts on him, to honor, love, and fear him as the Lord.

3. To set and apply our whole selves to his worship.

14. What the opposite of this?
Atheism, the not having the Lord, and in effect, having no God.

15. How many sorts of Atheism?
1. Either open Atheism, as of ungratious reprobates.

2. Or secret heart Atheism in any,

1. Doubting and questioning the divine Majejesty, and his truth, by whom they
are and subsist.

2. Conceiving otherwise of God then we ought, either of his Essence, or
Persons, as Infidels, or Heretics.

3. Denying him by profane life.

16. What is it to have him alone?
Setting him only, and him alone in our hearts, and his honor before our
eyes, denying both our selves, and all other things that shall offer to put him
out of our hearts, or obscure his honor.

17. What opposite to this?
1. Both Polytheisme, having many or any other gods with him, or besides him,
to his dishonor.

2. Idolatry, setting up other gods, Idols or vanities in our hearts, to
worship them in his stead.

18. What Polytheisme?
With God to join any other, as those that

1. Either made two Gods, one the beginning of all good, the other of all ill.

2. With God joined Baal, as the Idolatrous Israelites.

3. Joined with God Angels or other Powers. Intelligences, or the like.

Nature, fate, or such dreams of the old Philosophers, or Heathen, whereby in
effect Atheism, and denying him, and his truth, without the true God, setting
up many gods, as the Gentiles in general, their many gods recorded in the
Scriptures, Dagon, Ashteroth, Moloch, Bell and the Dragon, etc.

In the Heathen Stories, their Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, and where majores and
minores dii, more in number then the Nations, or the Cities and Countries.

The Egyptians in particular, gods of all sorts of things, Sun, and Moon,
and Stars, Serpents, Fowls, Fishes, Beasts, and men, as Osiris ibis etc.

19. What Idolatry?
All setting up of Idols, whether in the heart, or Temples to worship them,
and so of two sorts,

1. In the heart, internally set on them.

2. In the Temples externally to worship them, against which especially is the
second Commandment.

20. Is there no other Idolatry?
Yes, all falling away from the Lord, and trusting in, or seeking to the
creature, in neglect of him, is before him accounted Idolatry, so to trust in,
or set our heart upon this world with worldlings.

Upon uncertain riches, whence covetousness.

Upon Idolatry, pleasures of the Epicures.

Upon glutony, and drunkenness with the voluptuous, pride and vanities of
life, long life, and the like, to the forgetting of God, and trampling his
Commandments under foot, is to set up Idols, and setting our hearts upon these
Idolls', and fancies of our hearts set up above him in our esteem.

21. Who then as thus Idolatrous?
Both the Covetous worldings, Idolatrising to his god Mamon. Epicures, making
their belly their god. Ambitious, that on aspiring to high places, set all
their devotion. Proud, that honor Lucifer for their god. Cockering parents,
(that as Eli did) above God, set their love or dotage on their children, and
generally all sinners that leave God, to serve sin, etc. or put their trust in
creatures, leaving the Creator, whether wholly, or in part, total or partial
Idolatry.


22. Who are they?
Such as against God trust in Princes, or any child of man.

In the arm of flesh and blood.

In force of united Nations.

In their wit, and policy.

In Ships, or Castles or Munitions.

In great persons their favorites.

In horses and chariots, yea Men, Angels or Devils, and fly to any other
helps, forgetting and neglecting God, cannot be said free from Idolatry, not
David numbering his people, nor Achitophel with his plots, or Haman with his
policy, more then Nebuchadnezzar with his arm of flesh, and great Babell.

23. Who do idolatrize to Men, Angels, or the Devils?
Those who trust in, or fly

1. To men, and their help above God.

2. To Angels or Saints to invocate them, besides or contrary to Gods will and
commandment.

3. To Witches, and Wizards to help them, where God leaves them.

4. Evil and wicked arts, and means, that God hates and condemns, as
leaving him, his providence and goodness.

24. What is it to love and honor God?
Not only to have him, or him alone in our hearts, in exculsion of other vain
gods, but also to exhibit our duties, and devotions to him, best expressed in
those terms of his honor, and love; the exhibition of honor to him, as our
Lord' and Master. Of love as to our good God, and Father.

25. What is opposite to this?
Both Ignorance, next door to Atheism, sowing error, and bringing forth Sin
and Idolatry, opposite to his love, neither seeking to know or love him.
Profaneness, near kin also to Atheism, or a kind of Atheism in the living,
and therein expressing it in lewdness, and denying God by the life and deeds,
opposite to his honor, which is set forth by a godly life.


26. How many sorts of ignorance?
1. Either purae negationis, in such as cannot understand the truth, natural
corruption or blindness, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Romans 3. 11.

2. Pravae dispositionis, affected ignorance, wanting knowledge. Either

3. Carelessely, a careless ignorance.

4. Stubbornely, refusing it, a perverse ignorance.

27. What the fruit thereof?
Error, and so Atheism, Idolatry, and all kind of sin, and foolishness,
Whiles the fool says in his heart there is no God, and so show little love,
trust, or confidence in him, and consequently poor service, or honor of him,
but much wickedness, abomination and profaneness.

28. But may not a small measure of knowledge, be pleasing unto God?
Yes, if it be joined with a desire to have more, and study to serve him
according to the same, and not an affected, careless or stubborn ignorance.

29. But often seen the more knowledge, the less grace?
The more is the malice of the Devil seen, the fault not being the knowledge
by which God is most honored, but in abuse of the gift, as good things may be
abused, yea optimi corruption pessima, and so much the more lamentable, if lost
or abused; but it is the Devils policy, and he will take most pains so to
pervert and corrupt the best things, yea assail even the Saints, and their
best grace, that did not leave our Savior unattempted, but such as in seeming
knowledge fall away, show indeed, that they knew nothing, as they ought to
know, 2 Cor. 8.

30. But ignorance is the mother of devotion?
Yea, of blind devotion, but truest devotion will hearken to the voice of
wisdom, to be guided thereby.

31. How is ignorance the mother of profaneness?
As by not knowing, caring or remembering there is a God, men rush into ill, as
a horse into the battle, or upon destruction, without all fear, or
understanding, or as profane Esau, hated of God, preferred a mess of pottage,
and earthly things, through ignorance, before heavenly blessings.

32. How profaneness seen?
In 1. Brutish living, and that also without all practice of devotion, prayer,
or other godly Meditation, Exercises,

with an irkesomenesse of godliness, and all good duties.
2. Securely living in open and notorious sin, or courses, as without fear or
care, grace or shame, without God before their eyes. 3. Prostituting themselves
to sin, as slaves to Satan, and children of Belial, tumbling both themselves
and their associates headlong into hell, of such we ought to beware, destruction
and unhappiness being in their ways, and the way of peace have they not
known, and no fear of God before their eyes; this the fruit of their
ignorance.


33. Is this the greatest sin against this Commandment?
It might seem so by the ugliness of it, but there are sins also of a
higher nature, and degree, and monstrous in the perverseness against
knowledge, and conscience, such as sin against the Holy Ghost, and sacrilege
in respect of the heart, though alias,

ressectu Oris, Operis,
and actionum ad extra,

They may be referred to the third Commandment, and so as other compounded
sins may be found in other, or diverse Commandments.

34. How are we to love God?
With all our heart, with all our mind, with all our soul, and with all our
strength.

35. How is the love of God seen?
By adhering to him so with all our mind, seen in knowing believing in
remembering
him.

With all Our heart in trusting hoping fearing and rejoicing
in him. soul, in humility, and submission patience and obedience gratitude,
and thankfulness
to him. Strength, to the uttermost of body and soul, in all good duties, to
his honor.


36. How in general is the love of God considered?
1. For the measure,

1. Simply without measure, and as before with all heart, mind, soul, and
strength, comparate.

2. Comparate above all things else, Matthew. 10. 37. Luke 14 26.

2. The manner absolutely, and first our friends in the Lord.

Secondly, our foes for the Lord.

Hence rising zeal of Gods glory, opposite to this,

1. Either in the defect, want of the love of God, with all our hearts, above
all things. Hatred of God, and his graces, increased by sin.

2. Disorder, loving our selves above God, and his Commandments: the world in
the riches, pleasures, pride, and other carnal things.

37. What are we to consider in the knowledge of God?
The matter, God and his truth and goodness revealed.

The measure, according to our calling, means, time allotted.

The manner, spiritual and holy knowledge, in humility, and effectual to
grace and salvation.

Opposite to this in the excess, curiosity, wise above sobriety.

The defect, 1. exceedingly, ignorance, simply, affected.

2. In a sort, a small measure of knowledge, too little for the quantity: and

3. For the quantity, a literal or speculative knowledge, without care or
conscience of godliness, or the power thereof.

38. What in believing to be considered?
In general, faith in God, and assent to the word of God.

In special, to the threatenings of the Law, and promises of the Gospel; and
for the

Quantity, with full understanding, consent, and assent.

Quality, lively, and working by charity.

Opposite to this, in excess, credulity, to even vanity, without Gods word.

In defect, in understanding, by ignorance.

Consent by doubting.

Assent, by wavering, In Quantity, (...), Quality, idle and dead faith:


And that either legally, infidelity, working carnal security.

Or evangelically, counterfeit faith, of hypocrites, heretics, etc.

39. What in remembering God to be considered?
The laying up, and treasuring in our minds the things concerning God, and
secondly, often calling such things to mind, especially his mercies and
judgments: opposite to which, if we forget him, his holy word, mercies, or
judgments, or so partially, or slenderly remembering them, without, care,
conscience, or obedience.

40. What is assiance or trust?
Adhering to God, and depending on him in all our needs, whether we have means
or not, as who can help without, above means.

Opposite to which, if On the contrary in Excess, we tempt God. Defect, we
carke and care, or use unlawful means, leaving God.
In disorder, we trust in instruments and means, as wealth, world, men, many,
mighty, wizards, or devils.


41. What hope?
A kind of trust, with faith fixed on God, and his goodness, expecting from
him deliverance from ill, and exhibition of good things, whether for this
present life, or the life to come, opposite to which in excess, is
presumption, in defect, is despair, and so as we ought to trust and hope in
him, and him alone, are we to take heed we presume not, nor despair, or in
participation of both, with Epicures grow careless, and without hope.

42. What is his fear?
An awful and son-like fear, which though the object be Gods anger against
sin, yet is more loath to offend him, so good a God, and merciful, then for
the danger of punishment, effect of his anger; opposite to which is carnal
security, senselessness, and despair.

43. What is rejoicing in God?
Delighting in him, as the supreme good, in his word, his mercies and promises,
and the heavenly and inestimable comfort we receive by them; with joy in the
prosperity of his house, his Church, his servants, and honor, which fills
the heart with more content, then any carnal and worldly things, Psalm. 4.
opposite to which are miserable delights of sinful, worldly, carnal, and
voluptuous men.

44. What is humility and submission to God?
A removing of all conceit of our own worthiness, and humble acknowledgement
of our own vileness in nature, and defect of sin, and desert of
punishments, together with consideration of Gods mercies and bounties to us,
whereby to be cast down before him, that he may raise us up. Opposite to
which, a high conceit of our own selves, our worth, and merits, to the robbing
him of his honor, and praise, and our forgetfulness of duty.

45. What is patience?
An humble subjection of our selves to the cross or hand of God, in his
chastisements and trials, which must needs be for our good, and so found to
be as his children by Our Meekly Cheerfully and comfortably Constantly
Enduring and entertaining them.

Opposite to which, rashness and senselessness, in excess, in defect,
impatience, murmuring, fainting, and despair, or seeking issue by unlawful
means, whiles we will endure much for the world, nothing for God.

46. What obedience?
The submitting our wills to the will of God, and that only rightly, if
voluntarily, not forced, totally, not by fits, or in part, sincerely, without
hypocrisy, and continually to the end.

Opposite to which either

Disobedience to him by sins of omission and commission, and that by
negligence or contempt.

Obedience to men, or other things, more then God, yea to sin, the flesh, the
world, and the devil, Gods enemies.

Disorder, in the manner, not voluntarily, or totally, sincerely, or
continually.

47. What gratitude or thankfulness?
A testification both by word and deed of a thankful mind, for all his
benefits, in all estates, whether prosperity or adversity, acknowledging him,
and him alone, the author of all good things. Opposite to which is
unthankfulness, and not acknowledging this; or ascribing it to our own power,
wit, worth, work, fortune, idols, or instruments, or means, forgetting the
prime fountain.

48. How to love God with all our strength?
With all powers of body and soul, and so in the whole man, to exercise all
these good duties, to his honor.

49. How his honor set forth?
Both by word and deed, internally in the soul, and externally in the body,
and whose life and conversation, to express and advance the praise and glory
of God, and so to avoid all profaneness which is especially to his dishonor.

Hence springs 1. Internally, zeal of Gods glory. 2. Externally, holy life,
and behavior.


50. What is the zeal of Gods glory?
A servent desire of the advancement thereof, both in our selves and others,
and cheerfully using of the means thereof, together with removing all
impediments of the same, proceeding from sincere affection, guided by knowledge
and discretion, seen in the moderation, in respect of all circumstances, and
especially of the time, and seasonablenesse.

50. What opposite to this?
Either want of zeal, in luke warmness, Apoc. 3. 15. coldness, Zeph. 1. 12.

Or corrupt zeal, mixed with

Maliciousness, bitter zeal.

Covetousness, Ambition, Vainglory, Hypocrisy,
Pharisaically.

Ignorance, blide zeal.

Indiscretion, preposterous zeal, and without all moderation, as in factious
Schismatiques, exceeding the proportion of the cause, compass of their
calling, and with much rankour commonly, and unseasonablenesse.

51. How holy life and behavior?
In outward signs of honor, and deeds, expressing this inward affection of
the soul, seen as in all the Commandments,

By our setting forth his worship, as in the second Commandment.

Glorifying his name, as in the third Commandment.

Sanctifying of the Sabbath, as in the fourth Commandment.

Obedience to these, and all the rest, and so avoiding all profaneness, to
his glory, and others good example.

52. Does this extend then to all the Commandments?
Yes, and this Commandment is set therefore in the first place, as a ground or
foundation of all the rest, both of the first and second Table, as establishing
the duty we owe, and especially inwardly in soul and affection to God, and so
the reasons in the preface drawn from equity, as he is our Lord and God, and
his authority as Lord, and deliverer, equally pertaining to this, and the
residue of the Commandments; to this at least primarily, to the others from
this dependantly.

53. What follows?
The second Commandment, concerning the external worship of God.

SECT. 4. The second Commandment.
The Analysis of the second Commandment, with all the duties, and opposite
abuses, whether implicitly, or expressly forbidden or commanded, here
particularly expressed, and in all the branches thereof more fully hereafter
explained. Where first in general all false worship, and unity and uniformity
in the true worship thereby intended, the civil use of images allowed, but
vanity and wickedness in Idolatry to be detested, and condemned; so as no
Image of the true Deity can be made All Images of false duities, Heathen gods,
Sun, Moan, Stars, and host of Heaven, Saint, or Angel, are forbidden to be
made where any danger may be of worshipping them, or appearance of evil,
humane inventions, and will worship, therefore to be avoided as a kind of
Idolatry, though comely and decent ceremonies in the worship and service of God
to be allowed of and approved. The substance of true worship being prayer and
praises, hearing and handling the word, sacrifices and Sacraments, where first
of prayer and the parts of it, the order and manner and other circumstances of
the same, as the time, place and persons, so of hearing and handling the word.
True use of the same, all of the Sacraments,(...) and all external worship to
be performed in the Church of of God, in all de^nt order and uniformity, the
reasons of Commandment enforcing the duties from Gods blessing an punishments,
assuredly promised to attend on those that neglect or observe the Commandments.

1. Which the second Commandment?
Thou shall not make to thy self, etc. What contained therein?

1. The Commandment, Thou shall not, etc.

2. The explication of the same, in the explication of the idols, to the
likeness of any thing in heaven, earth, or under the earth, all forbidden.
Idolatrous worship, bowing down to them.

3. The reason from his

Justice, a jealous God, and will punish, etc.

Mercy, promised to thousands, etc.

2. What manner of Commandment is it?
A negative, inferring the affirmative opposite, viz. not to make any idol, so
to worship it, and commit idolatry, but to worship the true God only according
to his will.

3. What the negative part?
Whereby we are forbidden all idolatry, and in that all will worship and
superstition, as both 1. The making of images of God, or any thing else
in Heaven. Earth, water, etc. for divine worship.
2. The worshipping The image it self. Or God in the image, or by it.
3. Corrupting Gods worship by Our will worship. Superstitions. Our own
fancies.



4. What the affirmative part?
To worship God, and him alone, as he ought to be worshipped. So these three
things, viz.

1. The matter, his true worship, in the parts, duties, and circumstances.

2. The object of him, and him alone, not idols, or our own fancies.

3. The manner of it, according to his will, revealed in his word, and that is
in Spirit, and Truth,
as He is a Spirit, and His Word, the Truth.


5. How are these parts positive, and other parts seen opposite, or opposed?
1. As the true worship is opposite to idolatry, or making any image, to
worship it.

2. As the true God, or opposite to idols, and all vanity and vain conceits,
and fancies of men.

3. The true manner, in the truth and uprightness of heart, opposite to all
will worship, gross and false manner of worship and superstition.

6. How farther explained?
In that if we intend his true worship, the parts and duties of it, both
outwardly in the body, and inwardly in the soul, will be far from that
gross and absurd idolatry here described, the object of it the true God, has
no affinity with those dumb idols, the Creator with those abominations of his
deformed creatures, and stupid gods, or creatures of his blockish idolatrous
creatures; the manner and means, in spirit, and spiritual manner, true heart,
and truth of heart, informed by his blessed word, as far as may be distant
from such idolatrous superstitions, gross or false and fantastical
will worship.

7. What is to be considered in the worship of God?
That the worship of God is set forth in regard of The 1. Substance of the same
Interne, in the heart, in the first Commandment. Externe, manner and
ceremomonies, partly in the 2. 3. and 4. Commandments, in the several
respects.
2. Circumstance of 1. Place commanded, as 1. Mount Morijah, to Abraham. 2. The
Tabernacle, ere the Temple builded. 3. The Temple afterward. 4. Synagogues for
the dispersed Jews. 5. Every place on good occasions, or with looking toward,
and remembrance of Sion, and the Temple. 6. Christians Churches, etc.
2. Time, the Sabbath, as in the fourth Commandment.



8. What is the scope of this Commandment?
The external and public worship of God, to be decently set forth to his
honor in his Church, and all idolatry and false worship banished.

9. What profit thereof?
Both Unity in the Mind, and Affection,
of all true worshippers. Unformity in the True worship, And Church
of God.


10. What is first here forbidden?
The making of any images to worship them.

11. Are all images forbidden?
It is plain they are not, but such as are made for idolatry; as not only
images of the Cherubins and Palme-trees in the Sanctuary, but of diverse things
else, are read, and so with us images, and statues, by painting, graving, and
other Arts expressed, may lawfully be had and kept for civil uses.

Of memorial of men, and their virtues, or actions, as monuments of antiquity.

Of ornament of houses, and also palaces and buildings, emblemes of diverse best
matters.

In representation of Virtues and vices. Histories, actions. Triumphs, etc.


Of instruction, as of all kinds of beasts, birds, fishes, and creeping
things, to know them, and the like civil uses, so they be not abused to
vanity or idolatry.

12. What images are here named?
Of any thing in heaven, or earth, or under the earth, to worship them, or to
commit idolatry with, or by them.

13. What explication follows of them?
Of 1. Those in heaven, understood either Of God himself, Or his glorious
creatures Angels, Saints, Host of heaven, Sun, Moon, etc.

2. Those in earth, water, etc.


14. Why are we to make no image of God?
Because both 1. it is impossible to make any image of the Holy One of Israel,
Esaias 40. 25.

2. It is expressly forbidden, Deuteronomy. 4. 15.

3. It is scandalous to his Majesty, to think any such image could be like him,
as to turn the glory of Israel, and incomprehensible God, to the similitude of
corrupt man, or as the Psalmist said, of a Calfe that eats hay, and with us
it might be scandalous to any without, as Jews, Turks, or Heathens, to turn
them from the truth, or confirm them in their impiety to suffer any such
abominations.

15. Is there no Image to be made, or representation of the Trinity?
At full it can never be, as who could ever without presumption, or presume
without guilt to portrait that Ancient of Days, who though heard speak from
heaven, was never seen, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. to prevent all occasions of Idolatry, but
for the humanity of the Son, and visible signs wherein the holy Spirit
presented themselves to be seen of mortal eyes, neither has it been ever
questioned, or to be doubted, the lawfulness of portraying, or for good uses
of representing, or reserving their portraitures.

16. May there be any lawful use of them?
Of remembrance, and holy memorising their blessed actions, and benefits we
receive by them, if as by the brazen Serpent, and Gideons Ephod, there be not
farther occasions ministered to ignorance of Idolatry.

17. What of Images, of Saints and Angels?
That they may lawfully be made, no doubt, but too often found for want of
better instruction, to ready an occasion of offense, few can deny, though the
fault of the person, not the matter.

18. What of the Sun, Moon, and host of heaven?
All Images for Idolatry made, as were those of the superstitious Gentiles, so
forbidden, in the like sort on the earth, of Men, Beasts, Fishes, Birds,
creeping things, or else creatures which are under the earth, of fishes in the
Seas, Monsters, or Devils, to the great dishonor of the Creator, worshipped,
and to men an occasion of falling, hereby utterly condemned.

19. Why are they so particularly here remembered?
In regard of the heathen, among whom Gods people were to pass, and especially
the Egyptians, from whom they so lately parted, with minds looking back to the
onions, and fleshpots of Egypt, were infected so deeply with these
abominations, that they worshipped Images of all such things, as Of Sun, Moon
and Stars, Orus. Phoebus, Diana, and the Queen of heaven, the Star of their God
Rempham. Fire, the Persians God. Osyris in form of a Bull. Anubis a Dog, Venus
a Cat. Dagon of a Fish, the Crocodile, and Ibis, wild beasts, and all manner
of creatures, and so with all manner of abomination, even to lust and murder,
sacrificing humane blood, yea and their sons and daughters to Devils.


20. Is this the reason, they were so expressly and strictly forbidden?
Yes, because the people were too prone to rush headlong into such
superstitions of the heathen, as appeared by their looking back to Egypt,
making the Calfe, and after by their many fallings to Idolatry, with Baall, and
other gods of the Nations, and which more, the very brazen Serpent, Gedeons
Ephod, and the like remembrances of holy things, were occasion of Idolatrising,
and falling away, insomuch that they went a whoring after them, Judge. 8. 27.
and 2 Kings 18. 4.

21. The Image may not then be worshipped?
No, for so it is an Idol at full, and plain Idolatry so gross, as that of
the blind heathen.

22. But may not God be worshipped in or by the Image?
If it were so, it seems the worshippers of Baal might be justified, who
pretended the Lord, in that their false worship, so much reproved and mocked by
the true Prophets.

23. Why this so strictly urged?
That even all show and appearance of evil, and occasion of Idolatry, to
subvert weak souls, may be taken away, yea that those that are without the
Church, as Jews, Turks, and Heathens, might not receive hurt, or the Church
scandal; but they so the better, and sooner converted to Christianity.

24. What other corrupt worship is forbidden?
All profaned, and profane service of God, by setting up own fantasies in any
kind of willworship, whereby our will is advanced, and Gods will neglected,
which is most displeasing to him, and accounted but Idolatry.

25. What sorts of it?
1. When either inventions and fantasies of our own brains, others setting
forth, are set up for Gods service, besides or contrary to his will.

2. When we rest in the outward, and bodily service, and act only.

3. When we serve God without repentance, as if it were with unwashen hands in
profaneness, and profanation of his service.

26. What mean you by humane inventions?
All superstitious and idolatrous rites and ceremonies, borrowed of Turks,
Jews, or Heathen, and obtruded upon Gods people, for a part of his service; to
the burden of the Church, and trouble or hurt of Gods service, or Christian
souls.

27. May not ceremonies then be used?
Yes, no doubt, for they are so prescribed by the Apostle, for order, decency
and edification, which rules, what rites or ceremonies soever transcend, border
upon burden of the conscience, and superstition.

28. What think you of them that allow of no external rites, or ceremonies in
Gods worship?
As fallen into a nice superstition, and on the contrary side, idolatrizing the
idol and fancy of their own brains against Gods prescript word, as not
tending to edification, since without decency, contrary to good order, and in
contempt of authority.

29. How many sorts of erring therein?
Either in this nice superstition, to the ruin of all good order and
government, as it is too commonly seen by the sequel.

Or in that gross superstition in receiving all things without order, and
discretion, borrowed from whomsoever, Jew, or Heathen, and trusting thereto, or
in the act doing, and resting therein, whether imposed to the burden of the
conscience; or Gods service, so by a load of ceremonies; or voluntarily
undertaken without warrant of Gods word, or other sufficient authority in
general or particular.

30. To whom belongs it to determine hereof?
To the ordinary and lawful Pastors and governors of the Church, proceeding
only according to the rule of Gods holy word.

31. What is resting in the out ward act and service only?
When the bare actions of coming to Church, praying, receiving the Sacraments,
as it were without soul of inward devotion of soul, are presented to God, at
the bare saying the Pater noster, Creed, or Commandments, and such like
things, without setting the heart about them, which in effect, is bare Idol
service, idolatrising or offering Idols in Gods Temple, and to him in stead of
true worship, and which is before God but as Cains sacrifice, or the Jews
imperfect offering, which the Prophet told them, was no more accepted of God,
then if they cut off a dogs neck, o^ offered man's blood, rather an
abomination, then devout action.

32. What is it impenitently to go about Christian duties?
To offer Idol service also, as not performing any true service, so seeming,
with unwashen hands to profane Gods Altars, in offering what is abomination to
him, as what he requires not, Esaias 1. 12. or what makes him more angry by
such presumption, and the Devil thereby honored more then he, by worshipping
as it were, his Idol, and defacing Gods Image, the soul bringing in it the
hateful character of the Beast, into Gods house, coming without penitence.

33. What are then the holy duties in the true worship commanded?
The substance of the true worship of God in

1. The old Testament by God prescribed, intending to prayer, the word,
sacrifices and sacraments.

2. The new by Christ, the devotions of prayer also, hearing, and handling of
his holy word, right use of Sacraments.

34. What in prayer to be considered?
The parts or kinds of it. order or direction in it.


35. What parts?
The universal parts, and comprehension of all sors of prayer, whether

1. In humility, confession of our selves, of our wants, and miseries, Gods
greatness, excellency and bounty.

2. In necessity, petition of what we want, desiring to be supplied from his
mercy, and bounty.

3. In charity, intercession for others.

4. Thankfulness, offering praise, and thanksgiving for blessings.

36. What is confession?
A fit exordium to all prayers, confessing both the great majesty, mercy, and
bounty, and other sovereign excellencies of God, the fountain of all
goodness, to erect our minds to him, of whose fullness, we hope to receive
grace.

The great vileness, misery, and unworthiness of our selves that come before
him.

The great want and misery we sustain in our souls, or bodies, for which we
desire his mercy and goodness, whence our petitions.

37. What Petition?
Our humble request, in what respect soever to receive any grace, or gift from
him, the (...) and giver of all goodness, wherein to be heard and accepted,
required faith, fervency, constancy.


38. What intercession?
That sympathyzing effect of charity, whereby we not only desire our own, but
others good, yea and pray for others, as earnestly as for our selves, and for
our selves only, as it may be also, for the good of others, and glory of God,
with assurance, that thus we may only hope to be heard, and no further can our
prayers be effectual for our selves, then our charity fervent in desiring the
good of others.

39. What is thankesgiving?
The true token of a religious mind, and most effectual kind of prayer, by
praises, and acknowledging the giver, and former blessings, pulling down new
graces, which God can never withhold from such as be thankful, which
perfectly expresses the former devotions and prayers were not vain, but holy
and gracious.

40. What opposite vices?
Neglect, and carelessenesse, remissness, and arrogancy in prayer, security,
coldness, hypocrisy, uncharity, and unthankefulnesse.

41. What order and directions in prayer?
To consider, 1. to whom 2. in what manner 3. for what things 4. the
circumstances of time, place and persons.
to pray.

42. To whom?
To God, the true and living God, and to him alone, and not to any Saints,
Angels, or other subordinate means, man's idol, or creatures, to exhibit this
sacred and divine worship.

42. In what manner?
In the name of Christ the only Mediator. aid of Gods Spirit, helping our
infirmities, Romans 8. 26. and so with faith and understanding, in spirit and
truth, according to his will,
presented. preparation of soul, in all humility and reverence. Attention of
heart. Intention of mind. Circumcised lips, and heart in godly meditation to
speak to Gods honor, opposite to which precipitancy, rashness, and offering
the sacrifice of fools, calves of the lips, without the heart, and as without
holiness, without acceptance.



43. For what things?
For good things, and that may be, for 1. our own and others good, 2. glory of
God.

Opposite, to desire unlawful and ill things from God the fountain of all
goodness, or good things to abuse them, to our own and others hurt, and his
dishonor.

44. What circumstances?
For time, all times especially Sabbath, and solemn feasts, his public
service and worship.

For places, all places, on all occasions, especially his House and Temple,
dedicated to his worship, and this exercise, the house of prayer, in which a
blessing attending.

For persons, all persons, public and private, especially the Ministers, and
for all persons, praying and making intercession, and giving of thanks for all
men, and especially for Princes and magistrates, and those of the household of
faith, of Gods house, the Church.

45. What concerning the hearing and handling the word?
As a prime part of his worship for the edification of the people, and training
them to his worship, wherein the office of teacher, hearers to be considered.

46. What the teacher?
The Pastor or Minister to be endued with sufficiency of gifts, and
willingness to teach (...), and so sent of God, ought to do his office in

His explication of Scriptures according to the analogy of faith, and right
dividing of the word of God.

His application to the hearers best use and instruction, by doctrine,
confutation, exhortation, reproof, or consolation; and for such Ministers fit
educatiion in Schools, for preparation and provision to be had for maintenance
in their charge: opposite to this, the unable, unwilling, and dumb, idle, and
idol Ministers, making merchandise of the word, and intruded to the
destruction of many, by simony and sacrilege, that like Judas betray Christ,
part his garments among them, and pull on their heads the guilt of murdering
souls.

47. What of the hearers?
Their duty and diligence required

Before hearing,

1. Preparation of affections and souls, etc. 2. Coming to, and presence at
holy exercises. 3. Removing all impediments.
In hearing, attention, alacrity, meekness, and desire to learn.

After hearing, meditation, and conscience, careful and conscronable practice.
Opposite to which, absenting themselves, and unpreparednesse to hear, drowzy,
dease cares, and unprofitable hearing, forgetfulness, and unfruitfulnesse,
without cart or conscience of good duties, afterward, which are prophanations
of Gods worship.

48. What of the Sacraments?
The careful, holy, conscienable, and religious administration, use and
receiving of them, to be performed on all parts, both by the Minister and
people* opposite to which, the negligent, profane, and superficial or
irreligious use, or rather abuse of them, and the like, of all other holy rites
and ceremonies, whose due use may promote, neglect, abuse, or contempt does
hurt and impair the true worship of God.

49. What say you of fasts and feasts?
(...), and if well used, yielding Further^nce to the true worship of God.

The one, holy Fast, preparing us to true (...) humiliation, penitence, and
contrition.

The (...), holy Feasts, preparing us to sing praise to God, in voice of joy,
and thanksgiving, opposite to which is irreligious fasting or feesting of
profane and vain persons.

50. To whom (...) worship do^cted?
To God, an^ him alone, as that inward honor expressed in the first
Commandment, so all outward worship set forth in this; opposite to which is to
direct is to idols, or idolatrize in it, not doing it carefully and religiously.

51. How is it then to be done?
In all uprightness and singleness of heart, as done to him that is (...),
and tryer of the reins, and inward parts, and without all hypocrisy, which
he sees, and hates, and so consequently in spirit and truth, inwardly in the
soul, so in spirit, as he is a spirit, and sees our spirits: after a
spiritual manner, the best. So in truth as he is true, and the truth: his
word, the truth teaches us, and outwardly in all good order, decent manner,
and convenient rites and ceremonies, fitting his worship.

52. How is that best seen?
If all things be done in

1. Order, not confufedly, for God is the author of order, and not confusion.

2. Decency, that is well pleasing to the eyes of God and men, and springing
from good order.

3. Humility, and reverence, for that is best beseeming his Saints and
congregation.

4. Uniformity, for that betokens unity, and God is the author of all peace
and unity, as who makes brethren to be of one mind in a house, and by these
it will show it self to all, to be done.

1. In the fear of God.

2. For the honor of his name.

3. Tending to the edification of his people, as it is 1. accompanied with 1.
Love to our neighbor. 2. Zeal of Gods glory.


2. Performed without show of 1. Hypocrisy, vainglory. 2. Affecting
singularity: or 3. Idolatry, or appearance of evil: opposite to all which is
disorder, confusion, unreverence, uncharity, pharisaicall pride, hypocrisy,
and singularity, inclining all to will worship, superstition, and idolatry.


53. Whence are the reasons of this Commandment? Drawn from Gods
1. Justice, jealousy, Punishing the delinquents. Hating their delinquency.


2. Mercy, and truth, Prospering the faithful, and their service. Loving them
and their fidelity.


53. How this punishment set forth?
In visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children, to the third and
fourth generation.

54. Shall the children bear the fathers iniquity?
No, but the soul only that sins, shall dye: but here it is meant of
wicked children, treading in the steps of the fathers, as commonly they do,
because they were no better taught, so it is a double punishment to have wicked
children, and to be punished in, and with their children, as their children
with them.

55. How are they said to hate God?
As they continue, or neglect this honor, then which, if they did their worst,
in hate, they could do no more, to displease him, as he is jealous of his
honor, which he only requires for all his blessings, and will not give it,
or part with it to any other, and for which he hates them and their doings.

56. Why is the Lord said to hate them, or jealous?
Because as adultery is a most heinous sin, causing jealousy, and the
adulterer and murderer most worthy hate of God and men, the Lord in detestation
of that unnatural sin of idolatry, expresses it as a kind of adultery, to
go a whoring after idols, and consequently his hate by their punishments, that
so hate and contemn him, by adulterating his worship, and committing
spiritual fornication with idols and devils.

57. How are his blessings to the faithful described?
By his showing mercy unto thousands, in them that love him, and keep his
Commandments, extended to the bodies and souls of his service.

58. Why said to thousands?
To show the abundance of his mercy and goodness; who though his jealousy
burn like fire, and justice punish to the third and fourth generation, yet his
mercy is greater, his goodness is above it, yea his mercy is over all his
works, reaching to thousands, and endures for ever.

59. But we see the righteous often troubled?
Yea, but it may be in mercy too, as a chastisement of the child he loves, so
the cross brings forth patience, and other graces, yea sometimes more
profitable far then prosperity, and God knows what is best for his, for

Removing of worldly confidence.

Confirming them to himself.

Renewing and perfecting grace in them.

60. How are they said to love him?
In opposition to those haters and contemners of God, whom God so also hates
and abhors, these showing their love by their fidelity and obedience to his
Commandments, whom God also therefore loves, showing them mercies to them and
their seed, and giving them his graces, and plentifully rewarding their love,
and obedience.

61. To what end these reasons?
That since thou can give him no more for all his blessings, then thy love
and obedience, and thou ought to give him no less, for else thou give him
nothing, that his judgments and jealousy may terrify thee, or love and mercy
may allure thee, and so bring thee to this duty, for thy good, and his honor.

62. What follows?
The third Commandment, concerning the honoring of Gods most holy name.

SECT. 5. The third Commandment.
The Analysis of the third Commandment declaring the several parts, duties
and opposite abuses therein forbidden or commanded with the reasons of the
same. What Gods name, and how diversely to be understood, and how honored or
dishonored in his name or tytles, attributes, holy word and religion, as well as
works of creation gubernation, povidence, bl^ssings an^ judgments, (...)
thelike in g^nerall, and in pa^ticular his dishonor by blasphemy against God
in any sort whatsoever as well as all from of evil and prophanenes, also
cursing and banning, swearing vainly and lewdly in presumptuous and execrable
impiety: the false prophets in that matter not so wicked but as it were with us
acknowledge it to belong to God or the Church to denounce or send cursing, or
blessing, or we only to bless God, and men in his name. The Abuses of swearing
and vain, or rash oaths in common swearers, and the heinousness thereof, with
the folly and vanity, or rather blasphemy and impiety of such hel-hounds, or
hellish and damned swearers, and swearing worse then the Heathen or Pagans, and
more like Atheists, then Christians, and so such also the odiousness of
perjury, the opposite whereof the true and lawful use of oaths and swearing,
for just and godly ends whereby the way of promissory oaths or vows and their
nature, sorts, and holy use in the Church toward God, especially and be fore
him, if among men: the reasons of this Command ement, from the Lords mighty
power and majesty, intimated as well the most fearful commination and
judgment so expressly there threatened.

1. Which is the third Commandment?
Thou shall not take the name of etc. What contained in these words?

The Commandment, thou shall not take the name of etc.

The commination against the breach or neglect, for the Lord will not hold him,
etc.

2. What manner of Commandment?
A negative, inferring and enforcing his opposite affirmative, viz. not to
dishonor or vainly abuse Gods most holy Name, but to honor it, and use all
the holy means for the sanctifying of the same throughout all our whole life.

3. What is the negative part?
In the forbidding all abuse of the most holy Name of God, whether it be

1. By blasphemy against him, his holy word, holy things. 2. Cursing and
banning. 3. By filthy swearing, whether 1. Falsely. 2. Deceitfully. 3. Rashly.
4. Cunningly. 5. Or in any vain manner and protestation.
4. Foolish vowing, and impossible, unlawful vows. 5. Or just vows
neglected, or not performed.
4. What the affirmative part?
The sanctifying of his name, and setting forth of his honor with all our
heart, and expressed in our words, and writings, life, and works, both by
glorifying him, his holy name, and word.

By blessing and praising him.

By religious and godly swearing, by him, in his truth, and to his glory.

By holy and just vows, and performance of them.

5. How the parts opposite, or opposed seen?
As we see glorifying his name, opposite to blasphemy. Blessing opposite to
cursing. Religious and godly swearing, opposite to rash, vain, and profane
oaths. Holy and just vows, opposite to unlawful ones, and performance to the
breach of them.


6. What is understood by Gods name?
Either himself, or his Attributes, which are himself, and whereby he is
renowned, as his Justice, Mercy, Power, Glory, goodness, etc.
his Titles, as Jehovah, Jah, Lord, God, I am, etc. The means whereby he is
made known to his Church, his holy Word, Ordinances, Religion, and
even all his creatures in all his works.



As those of his Creation, his creatures, heaven and earth. Characters of his
power and glory. Gubernation, and providence, blessings, and judgments.


7. How is his name, signifying himself, or his Attributes abused?
By unreverent, and ungodly thoughts, unholy, and unreverent speeches, unholy
and profane life.

8. How honored and well used?
In our hearts, by thinking and conceiving of them reverently, acknowledging,
believing, and remembering him, and them effectually.

In our mouths, confessing and speaking of them, and him, holy and reverently.

In our lives, conformable to that holy profession.

9. How is his name, as it signifies his glory abused?
By our pride, or vain glory, neglect or unthankfulness; as also by idle, and
unsavory speeches of him, or dissembling, suppressing, denying or oppugning
his truth, and by our sins to his dishonor.

10. How contrariwise herein to be honored?
By our desire of his glory, speech to his praise, and deeds to his honor,
bringing forth good fruits to his glory, and good example of others, whereby he
glorified in us, and by others.

11. How dishonored in his Titles?
By neglect of them, unreverent and careless use of them, in any wicked,
light, or ridiculous sort, or manner.

By superstitious use of them to charms, exorcismes, ungodliness.

By hypocrisy, taking his name and profession on us in vain.

12. How honored by them?
By our taking them in, and to our hearts, using them in our speech, words, and
writings, and professing them in godly life, with all reverence, holiness and
humility, as in serious, in most religious, and godly manner.

13. How is his word abused?
In our neglect, or contempt of it.

In our unprofitablenesse, and vain use of it.

In our evil use to confute truth, and confirm errors. scoffs or jests,
charms or enchantments.


In our disobedience, impenitency, and profaneness, notwithstanding our
profession of it.

14. How well used?
1. By our study, care, and meditation in it, Psalm. 1. 2. Words, ministering
grace to the hearers, seasoned with the power, and efficacy of it. 3.
Obedience, and deeds, conformable to the same.
15. How in his Ordinances honored, or dishonored?
By our due observation to his honor, or neglect, or contempt of them, whereby
we dishonor him.

16. How in his Religion honored, or dishonored?
By upright, and inoffensive conversation, answerable to our profession, to his
honor, by hypocrisy, dissolute and profane life of carnal gospellers, his
dishonor in the scandal of Religion.

17. How honored in his works of Creation?
By holy meditation, and mentioning of them to his glory, and our instruction,
and by pure and sanctified use of them, by the word, and prayer, to our
comfort, refreshing, and blessing.

18. How dishonored in them?
By our neglect, and carelessenesse to consider them, profane and irreligious
use, or abuse of them to sin and shame, presumptuous use in unthankefulnesse,
or superstitious use invanity, idolatry, witchcraft or the like.

19. How honored, or dishonored in his works of gubernation, his blessing or
judgments?
First honored in the reverent, and thankful receiving, and regard of all
his blessings, whether to our selves, or others in joy, thankfulness and
praises; dishonored in the neglect thereof. Secondly for his judgments of
punishments honored by our patient bearing them, humiliation and magnifying
his justice, and condoling with others, dishonored by our carelessness,
incorrigiblenesse, impatience, or murmuring under his hand; and chastisements,
or mockings, scoffing, scorning, or rejoicing at others afflictions. Thirdly,
for his judgments, in his particular providence over our estates and fortunes,
by lots or such like determinations, honored in the lawful use for deciding
controversies, elections, and the like, and submission to his judgment in the
same; dishonored by abusing and abusive lots, to casting of fortunes, and such
other trifling; and so abused, and unlawful games and idle haunting the same.

20. What mean you then by taking Gods name in vain?
The dishonor and abuse thereof in general by all, or any of the means and
usages aforesaid, according to the several acceptations of the same.

In particular by blasphemy, cursing, filthy swearing, rash and foolish vows.

22. What is blasphemy?
It is in general, as the word signifies, evil and hurtful speaking,

1. Against man, to the damnifying of his good name, disparaging and disgracing
him, so sometimes used.

2. Against God, to the derogation of his Majesty, and so the false acrusation
of Naboth went, he had blasphemed God and the King, but for evil speaking
against God, and holy things, most usually, and especially accepted.

22. How is blasphemy against God?
Whatsoever derogatorily spoken, uttered or done, either against his Person,
Power, and Majesty, Attributes, Name and Word.
As Pharaoh, Exodus 3. Who is the Lord, that I should, etc. Sennacharib, 2 Kings
^9. Who is God of Israel In contempt, the Jews that said of Christ, and God,
let God save him, is he will have him and he saved others himself he cannot;
of the Gospel, in despite calling it, Avangelion, and Jesus, Jeshu, etc. as
lastly, in some sort propahnenesse, whereby the name of God, and Religion, the
truth and Christianity is blasphemed, Romans 2. 24. the name of God thus
blasphemed among the Gentiles, and David's adultery, 2 Samuel 12. so causing the
enemies of God to blaspheme.

23. How is this to be understood?
As that all manner of evil examples, profaneness, show of evil, and
idolatry, may be occasion of blasphemy to the enemies of God, and so all evil
Christians, accessory to the blasphemy of others, and causers of it, so in
effect, blasphemers.

24. What opposite duty?
The glorifying of him, and honoring of his holy name, and his word, by all
means possible, so yielding him, the honor due unto his name.

25. What abuse by cursing and banning?
A malicious sin, the fruit of a heart full of gall and bitterness, and so
compared to an arrow shot upright that shall fall down upon the cursers head,
as he well deserves.

26. May we not curse then?
No not at all, unless God bid ourse, as he said, Curse ye Meroz, and so
utterly to take heed of cursing maliciously, as many will with desperate
speeches and acclamations, showing a heart fraught with gall.

Cursing vainly, as many do, on slight or no cause, calling for vengeance and
plague, murren and pestilence.

Cursing customarily as too many also will do by swearing and cursing,
bewraying their folly, and execrable impiety.

27. Why should we not curse?
1. Because it is the assured note of a wicked person, as in the Psalms, Their
throat is an open sepulcher, the poison of aspes is under their lips, their
mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.

2. Because it is noted the fruit and gal, and bitterness, as Romans 3. 11. water
of a corrupt fountain, Ja. 3.

3. Because it is forbidden to all Gods people, bless and curse not, bless
your persecutors, bless I say, and curse not, Romans 12. 14.

4. Because it is a presumptuous sin, to wrest the office out of Gods hand,
and to whose justice belong plagues and punishments, and so to enter upon Gods
tribunal.

5. It is here forbidden, as all profanation of Gods name, and honor, and we
never read of any good man without Gods command, durst enter upon it, or do
it; nay Michael when he strove with the devil, durst not curse him, Jud. 9.

Nor Balaam, though hired by Balaac, durst curse without Gods commission, Number.
23. and lastly, curses are threatened with the curse of God that it shall not
depart from the house where the curser or swearer dwells, so it is an arrow,
shot upward that will hit him that shot it, falling down heavy, with Gods
curse on his head, and we see not only Gods Law, and Commandments, all good
men and Angels, as Michael, but even false Prophets, as Balaam shall stand up
in judgment, to condemn this cursing and cursed generation.

28. How is it that cursings and excommunications are found in the Scriptures,
and in the Church?
By Gods particular appointment, and conclusion, who is absolute Lord of both
blessing and cursing, and so we find that Moses set forth the curses on mount
Geresin.

That David cursed his and Gods enemies from God.

That Elisha cursed the rebellious children: and the Church from God, and for
his glory used her excommunications, and execrations by Christ's peculiar
commission, and upon which no private person, or any private authority may
enter.

29. What opposite duty?
Blessing and praising him and his holy name, yea and blessing all others, even
enemies and persecutors, according to that, bless and curse not, Romans 12. 14.

How bless we God?
By praising him for his blessings, and sounding forth his goodness, with the
voice of joy and thanksgiving.

30. How bless we men?
From him, and for his goodness and graces, showed in, and by them, and so
blessing is said to be either generally required of all in gracious speech, and
godly salutations, Genesis 47. 7. 10. Romans 16. 16. Matthew. 5. 44 47.

Or particularly performed by superiors, as from God and in his stead,
Parents, Genesis 27. 27. Minister, Numb. 6. 23. Magistrates, 2 Samuel 6. 18. 1 Kings
8. 55.

31. What abuse by swearing?
The profanation of Gods name, and injury to his holiness and truth, which as
with falsehood in our own speech, and injury and wrong to our neighbor, is
forbidden in the ninth Commandment, as derogation to Gods truth and Majesty,
and profanation of his name is here forbidden.

32. How is this abuse of swearing?
Such vain profanation of Gods name used in oaths, either taken falsely,
deceitfully, rashly and negligently, commonly; by creatures, or false gods, in
vain protestations, and foolishly undertaken, to the disparagement of truth,
and Gods glory.

33. How many sorts of oaths be there?
Two sorts, Ascertory, commonly so understood. Promissory, in which are vows.


What false swearing?
The taking of Gods name impiously in our mouths, to swear to a thing we know
to be false, or know not to be true, both which are false swearing; so the
false witnesses against Naboth, and Christ.

How swearing deceitfully?
When sweating to what we know false, or if it happen true what we think
false, and with a purpose to deceive others thereby, or not to perform the
same, all which sorts are accounted perjury.

34. What is rash swearing?
Swearing unadvisedly, in heat and choler, or any other passion, without
consideration of the matter, circumstances, manner or possibility of
performance.

35. What common swearing?
An accumulated sin, aggravating the offense of rash swearing, by drawing
wickedness with cart ropes of vanity to a custom, and so nothing more odious
to God then the customary and common swearer, who is commonly a vain and
profane person.

36. Whence the heynousnesse thereof?
1. For the multitude of oaths, reaching to heaven, to pull down vengeance.

2. For the continual neglect and contempt of God, indignity offered to God,
to call him to witness in every lewd and trifling matter.

3. For the contempt of truth, as many must needs be false and lewd.

4. For the small conscience of telling or facing a lie, ordinarily seen in
ordinary and common swearers.

37. What other vain swearing?
In derogation of Gods Majesty, calling any creature to witness, or using
light and foolish protestations, savouring of folly, impiety and vanity, and to
the mocking of oaths, and making them and the truth suspect.

38. How may that be?
In swearing by creatures, as light, fire, air, etc. bread, drink, welking,
etc.

By ridiculous toys, by laking, by cock, by my fay, etc.

By Popish Saints, or the like, by Saint Mary, Saint Anne, Saint Loyes, by the
Mass, by the rood, etc.

By Heathen gods, or idols, as by Hercules, Apollo, etc. Medius Fidius, etc.

By parts of Christ body, as nails, wounds, blood, heart, and so Gods heart,
wounds, etc. many times not without cursing, and raving most blasphemously.

39. What the solly or vanity of them?
1. In that they are childish and foolish to attribute the knowing truth to
such things. 2. Beastly and abominable to set up the creatures, in the place of
the Creator. 3. Divilish and detestable, to rob God of his honor, and shame
the truth. 4. Blasphemous, to tear Christ in pieces with such execrable
oaths, and vain mouths. 5. Heathenish at least, and idolatrous, and nothing
savouring of true Christianity.
40. How comes it to be so foolish or damnable?
Because it is not only in derogation to the Majesty of God, to set up
creatures, or other foolish things to be sworn by, but a depraving of his
worship, it being a part of his worship to swear reverently by him, as Jacob
is noted in that he swear by the fear of his father Isaac, and so we are
commanded to swear by him, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Esaias 65. 16. and 45. 23. besides they
may be noted for fools, to call dumb things to witness truth that knows
nothing.

Stupid as B^als Priests, to call to them that cannot hear.

Children, that like to children, prate to such babies of clouts.

Profane persons commonly, as the ordinary and common swearer also.

41. What is the odiousness of perjury?
An abomination even with the heathen of whom notable stories are recorded both
in the love of fidelity, and hate of perjury out of morality, much more among
Christians, to be respected, since else by perjury, both God is made patron of
a lie, the Devils property who is a liar, and the father of lies.

God is called to witness a lie, which he hates, then which what greater
indignity?

The perjured person prays against himself, wishing himself plagued and
damned, then which what greater madness or impiety?

The bane of all societies, and hellish confusion must be set on foot, if it be
suffered.

42. How so?
If oath be taken or suffered falsely, it must follow, That Kings would be
tyrants. Subjects prove traitors. Magistrates wolves. Pastors devourers.
Neighbors, and neighboring Nations to cut throats one of another, without
conscience of amity, league of sidelity, and impunity granted to all impiety.
Plainly to be seen.

43. What is the opposite hereof?
The right and lawful use of an oath, whereby the Lords name is sanctified,
used as himself commanded in swearing by him, and him alone, Esaias 65. 16. Jer.
12 6.

44. What is the right and lawful use?
To swear in truth, righteousness and judgment, Jer. 4. 2.

1. So in Truth, To that which is true, Truly, Ex animi sententia.


2. Righteousness, as lawfully required of God, or Magistrate, or is on just
ground, and in lawful manner, and good occasion.

3. Judgment, duly weighing, and discerning the necessity of the oath,
together with the conditions and circumstances of the persons, matter, and
especially the end.

45. What the end?
The manifestation or confirmation of a hidden and doubtful truth, necessary
so to be cleared.

The ending of controversies, and satisfaction of our neighbor, and justice.

The clearing of our innocence, or duty discharged.

The glory of God, for truth and right to take place, as commonly wanting these
ends and conditions, it must needs be ill: and so all swearing: as if it be
either,

1. Of no necessity.

2. Or first to no end, but either rashly, vainly, of foolish custom etc.

Secondly, an ill end.

As 1. in bravery to glory in their shame, and

2. Blasphemously to rap out oaths to garnish their speech, with such hellish
eloquence.

3. To falsify the truth, and to deceive by perjury.

46. What are vows?
A kind of oaths, or promissory oaths, which as made to men, are only
called oaths, but to God are properly named vows, and bind to the
performance of some thing promised and vowed.

47. What required in promissory oaths?
That they be of things Lawful and honest, In our power, and possible, That we
mean to perform, That we do also perform, for otherwise


1. If lawful and possible, and not performed, we are perjured.

2. If impossible, the oath does not bind.

3. If unlawful, it does not only not bind us, but we are bound to break
it, else we add sin to sin.

What other conditions required in vows?
That it be voluntary, not forced, or hypocritical.

That it be to this good end, The glory of God. The good of our neighbors and
brethren. of ones own soul.



48. Of what sorts are vows?
Either common to all Christians, as the vows in baptism, etc.

Or proper to some only, either required on some condition, in regard of their
place and degree: or voluntary, etc. undertaken of diverse things lawful or
indifferent.

49. What common errors in oaths and vows?
1. To swear for malice, hire, favor, falsely or foolishly. 2. To vow evil
and hurtful things, as murder, etc. 3. Or vow, and not mean to perform, at
least not perform.
To perform by halves, and not fairly, but with delay or diminution, and
doubling, as Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5.

50. What is the heinousness of the guilt and ofsence hereby?
The subverting, or at least sleighting the truth.

The mocking of God, destroying sidelity.

The bringing in Atheism, by polluting the name of God, and his honor, in
consequent worse then Jews, Turks, or Heathens, that in their manner have
been zealous of these things.

51. What the general duty affirmed?
The glorifying of God, especially in our speech, and right use of the tongue,
wherein we exceed all other creatures on earth, yet proceeding also from the
heart, and budding forth into holy life, and godly conversation.

52. How especially scene?
In our taking care, and making a conscience of

1. Speaking the truth from the heart.

2. Speaking reverently of the great and fearful name of the Lord, and so on
any occasion to remember it.

3. Using the same religiously, in our speech and communication.

4. The vow in Baptism, and so of leading a godly and Christian life.

53. What is else here intimated?
All possible reverence and honor, with all carfulness to be exhibited, as
the condemning of all neglect thereof, in any degree, and so all foolish, idle,
and trifling speeches, on no occasion, as O good God, O Lord, O Jesus, etc
which though seeming good, yet as without the heart, and idly uttered,
without affection toward God, or ground for them, accounted dallying with the
name of God, and an offense; or prayers, and such like devotions, as to say,
Our Father which art in heaven, etc. or I believe in God the Father; never
thinking of him whose holy name we utterwith our unadvised lips, what it is,
but to take his name in vain, or mock God; and how much more with rash and
beastly, and so much more to be abhorred, of customary oaths, or curses,
hereby condemned.

54. What reasons of this Commandment?
A two fold reason, noted

1. Implicit, from the name of the Lord thy God. 2. Expressed in the
Commination, for the Lord will not, etc.
55. What the implicit reason?
For that the Lord is

Lord of heaven and earth, death and life, yea hell and all, and can hurl thee
headlong thither, for thy abuse, and so thou should not dare.

Thy Lord and God, from whom all good, so what ingratitude is it, in the vile
swearer, curser, blasphemer, to abuse his holy name.

Such a Lord, as the Devil and all the powers of hell cannot dishonor, but he
will turn all to his glory, though their confusion that oppose it, as seen in
Pharaoh, Herod, Sennacherib, and all Tyrants; and who art thou in his hand,
that art so hellishly disposed, that thou carest not to despite and despise
God, and blaspheme, though thou go to hell, with shame and confusion.

56. What the commination?
That they shall not be held guiltless, but so guilty, and bear the
insupportable burden of their sins, that will press their souls to hell,
as the most fearful estate, curse, and punishment, so signified, and so too
plainly seen in such blasphemies, who commonly are as it were

1. Given over to a reprobate sense, in lying, filthy talk, drinking, and
profaneness, and vanity, with this abuse of Gods name.

2. Insensible of their sins, by Gods just judgment in neglect of all holy
duties of prayer and Gods honor, with scorning and mocking at his Sabbaths, or
any reproof, though most just.

3. Set down in Gods book for damned persons, even condemned already, bearing
that palpable mark of profaneness, like Cains mark, in their foreheads,
that he that has an eye to see, may see them stand guilty, and the sentence
that they may read in their conscience, of heavy condemnation, even written in
their foreheads, that every one may read it, to their shame, who shamed not to
dishonor Gods holy name.

57. Whence this so fearful commination?
More fully to manifest the Lords fierce anger, and jealousy, as against
idolaters, and those that profane his worship, accounted to hate him, in the
second Commandment, so here against all other profane wretches that shall
abuse his most holy name, and any other way derogate from his glory, which he
is most jealous of, and will not give away, or part with to any other, much
less lose it, with contempt, he chiefly standing on, and above all things
highly prizing his honor.

58. But what follows?
The fourth Commandment, in a fourth respect also, in regard of the due
celebration of his Sabbaths, aiming at the setting forth of his honor.

SECT. 6. The fourth Commandment.
The Analysis of the 4. Commanaement, showing the parts and duties therein
commanded, and abuses opposite so prohibited, whether intimated or more fully
expressed, where first the duty of sanctification of that day of rest, called
the Sabbath, and of thh Christian Sabbath, or Lords day, with the reasons of
the difference and alteration thereof, but perpetual necessity of the
substance, and duties of the same, and our Christians Sabbath or Lords day
proved to be established by many reasons, and arguments, as by the Lords owe^
doings, the Apostles preaching and doctrine, or constitutions as received from
the Lord himself to be understood, as well as the practice of the Church
directed by his Spirit according to his promise, and who oppose it but
troublesome and unquiet spirits, or fanatic and fantastic Schismatics, too
commonly to be sound: So of the rest, and right use and observation thereof on
the Lords day in holy duties, and works of piety and charity, or of necessity
on truly urgent, not every frivolous occasion. The factious schismatics
overnicenesse here, as well as others loose profaneness deserving worthily to
be taxed, that on both sides disturb the peace, good order and peace of the
Church, the one of them profanely with negligence and contempt the other
sedititiously with malice, and disdain, to avoid both which extrenes, and
keeps an even and equal course between them, we are carefully to distinguish
between the morality and ceremony in this Commandment how far forth in the
substance of it, for the moral duty to Godward perpetually, to be observed,
and how for the ceremony and legal observances, many of them interwoven with
the said duty with which to the Iowes-ward in that Churches nonage as it were
before Christ's appearance in the flesh. It was burdened, but as now freed of
them it ought to be discharged, and so in that particular for the time among
many others with them, respecting the creation, the greatest benefit ever till
then manifested to be remembered by, and in it now altered, and the duty yet
unchanged to the remembrance of a greater, our redemption in that change of the
ceremony, not duty by us now principally respected; and thus as we see by the
Churches authority and power with sufficient warrant from holy Scriptures,
ordered and established, whose power in that point to change it, and wisdom in
so well ordering it, guided by Gods own president, and direction of his blessed
Spirit is here amply demonstrated, and to be justified against the malevolent
oblatrations or detractations and calumnies of any factious humorist and
separatist whatsoever; and thus the substance of the duty in the morality of
the Commandment, remaining entire to all holy intents and purposes, the only
the illegal shadow removed, is by them into a more divine respect and better
for us Christians, as more suting with our Church, altered or changed, and
diverse objections against it of no great moment, the truth well weighed, are
hereby and withal answered, as especially the Iudaizing faction, and fancies
confuted, and so next for the due observing and sanctification of it, we are to
take notice of the rest, and holy exercises commanded, and others permitted for
recreation and comfort of our weakness, nature, not to make a riotous revell,
or drunken Bacchanalia of that day, as neither otherwise to profane it by
ordinary worldly labors, or other Jewish superstitions or vain unlawful and
wicked exercises of any sort spending that so set apart, and sanctified time to
remember that rest, and sit our selves to the same by removing the impediments,
using the helps, studious to fit our selves to both private and publiqus duties
of the day, as well Minister as people: the opposite which is here farther
deciphered, and in diverse points particularized, or especially the more common
and enormous offenses. The use and reason of other Sabbath, or holy days,
ordained and appointed by the Church, as well in the times of the Old, as New
Testament, as in particular many both feasting and fasting days, set apart for
divine worship, the farther explication of the Commandment in the permission
command of the six days for labor, and works of our vocations, whereby the
Sabbath may be the better sanctified, which as most necessary, is sostrictly
urged for the honor of God the general good, and besides other reasons, even
the very example of God himself, so resting on it, and blessing and
sanctifying it.

1. What is the fourth Commandment?
Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shall thou labor,
etc.

2. What contained herein?
The Commandment in these words, Remember, etc.

The explication and illustration of the duty, Six days, etc.

The reasons of the duty and Commandment taken both from the Creators own
example, and actions, as well as the creatures profit, necessity, and duty, But
the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy Lord, etc.

3. What is the order of this Commandment to the rest?
A fourth duty, as fourth in place, appointing and establishing the time
allotted to his public service and worship, his honor being the maine scope
of the first Table:

And as it is to be set up in our hearts, the intent of the first Commandment.

And as his outward worship, rightly performed the intent of the second.

The glorifying of his name in all things, the intent of the third.

The rightly observing of his Sabbaths, the appointed times of his worship, the
intent of this fourth Commandment.

4. What manner of Commandment?
An affirmative, inferring and enforcing his opposite negative, viz. to
remember to sanctify the Lords Sabbath, and not negligently to let it pass,
or profane the same.

5. What the affirmative part?
1. Our duty to sanctify the Sabbath, by setting a rest apart; sanctifying the
rest by holy exercises.

2. Our duty to be mindful and careful of it, so to remember to sanctify it
by preparing our selves, using all good means, removing impediments.

6. What the negative part?
The forbidding of the profanation of it, by not setting apart a rest,
misspending it in any superstition, idleness, vanities, sin, etc.

The passing it over in forgetfulness, by unpreparednesse, neglect or contempt.

7. How the parts and duties opposite, seen opposed?
The sanctifying, opposite to the profanation of the Sabbath, and holy
exercises, to the misspending it in ill actions.

The minding it, opposite to forgetfulness and drowsinesse therein, as the
preparing the soul to that holy and fit celebration thereof, opposite to
neglect, contempt, or unpreparednesse.

8. What is the duty of sanctification of the Sabbath?
The setting apart a day of rest, and exercising our selves therein in such
holy duties as the Lord requires.

9. What day is so to be set apart?
The seventh day, so he appoints, and allows the six days for our labor,
whereby we with more cheerfulness and readiness may sanctify his Sabbath the
seventh.

11. How is it that our Sabbath differs from the Jews Sabbath?
For diverse reasons, as to show, that the old Law has given place to the new,
and so the Jews Sabbath to this of Christians.

That the ceremonies are vanished, and what was ceremonial in this vanished as
the time altered, though the morality remain.

That the Son of Man indeed is Lord of the Sabbath, and so has power to
alter it.

11. How prove you this Commandment to be merall, and perpetual?
For that it is ranked there among the rest of the Commandments that are
moral, and to endure as well as from the necessity of it, no less to us, and
to the worlds end for Gods honor, then it was to the Jews, and all the holy
Patriarchs, and Fathers from the beginning; and therefore vain and impious is
their assertion, that as a ceremony, would have it passed and vanished, or
account it needless, or a burden, whereas it is indeed to all good Christians
comfort, and the especial honor of God.

12. What necessity of a Sabbath?
For diverse and weighty reasons, such as these,

1. That the faith and obedience of men may hereby be exercised more
particularly in setting themselves apart from worldly business, what haste
soever, and dedicate themselves, and this time holy to the Lord.

2. That concord and unity, Doctrine and Gods service may be maintained, which
without this means would hardly be effected, but confusion would follow, every
one let loose to his own will or fantasy, as commonly so many heads, so many
opinions.

3. That love and charity, and all graces were increased by public teaching
the duties required, and reproving the vices as it is done by Gods word
preached, then whereby the good and virtuous encouraged, the vicious shamed.

4. That Gods service and public worship may be thus upheld, that else were
like to decay, if men left to private devotions had not such public meetings,
some forgetting, others nelecting all duty, and most that did not, ignorantly
or superstitiously performing the same.

5. That more acceptable service to God performed, when prayer, and holy duties
so publickely exercised by all, as many brands making a great flame, so the
prayers of many with greater fervency ascending up to God, and every good
servant of his more enflamed by joining with others in these holy duties.

6. That it may be for rest to the very servants and cattle, that else groaning
under their yoke may be too much grieved by unmercifull minded masters,
without relaxation.

7. That it may be a difference between Gods servants, and the heathen that
know not God, by such sanctifying the Sabbath, and so be a sign to us of that
eternal Sabbath, and rest in Heaven, wherein as we are taught we may meditate,
how with Saints and Angels, we all do enjoy Sabbath days recreations, of
singing hymns and Hallelujahs, as we shall the praises of God for evermore.

13. But is not a Christians Sabbath every day?
Yes, in spiritual rest from sin, and private satisfaction of the soul in
practicing of holy duties sitting a godly life, not to forget thereby, or
neglect the public service of God on his appointed Sabbath, whichevere to
dishonor God most of all, and bringing in confusion and i^ religion.

14. But since the Jews Sabbath altered, may not any Christian make or set out
what day he please for Sabbath?
Nothing less, for it were not only temerity, and presumption, to break the
Lord and his Churches institution, as may be showed, but the high way to
Atheism, and Irreligion, when if every one might set out what Sabbath he
pleased, one setting out one day, and another, another, there would be no day
in effect kept holy, and so not only no order, and uniformity, but even no
unity or charity, and likely much uncharity, jangling and dissension, and
consequently irreligion.

15. How then is our Sabbath to be showed or proved, or established, instead of
the Jews Sabbath?
Most firmly against all obstreper^as clamors of gainsayers,

1. By the Lords own approving and sanctifying it, who is the Lord of the
Sabbath.

2. By the Apostles doctrine, and continual practice, and keeping the same.

3. By the whole Churches, and all holy men's uniforme, practice, and consent
ever since.

16. How by the Lords own doings?
Most plainly by his

1. Naming, or giving his name to it in holy Scripture, as Apocal. 1. 10.
called the Lords day, (...), that as the Lords supper, the Lords people, and
his Church, or the like, so his day.

2. Sanctifying it by and with his

First, resurrection thereon, and finishing the work of our redemption, and
resting on the new Sabbath, as God the Father, the creation, on the former.

Secondly, presence, and diverse appearances to the Apostles on the same day, at
their holiest and Sabbath days exercises: as

I. To the women, and the Disciples, and Mary Magdalen at the first. II. In the
morning, John 20. and to Simon. III. And to the Disciples in the way to Emaus,
Luke 24. 34. IV. And to the Disciples, and Thomas with them, John. 20. V. And
at other times, and to Saint John in Pathmos, inspiring him this day. etc.
3. Resting the Jews Sabbath, as it were finishing it by his Resurrection, and
other appearings, and as it were hereby appointing and approving this new
Sabbath, to his honor, as Lord of the Sabbath.

17. How by the Apostles doctrine and practice?
Most evidently,

1. By their meetings that first day of the week, when Christ arose, and
appeared to Simon and Mary Magdalen, and the Disciples, and after Thomas and
others with them, Luke 24. and John 20. etc.

2. Continual practice of it, and preaching, and ministering the Sacraments
that day, Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 1.

3. Constitution of it in the Churches, as 1 Cor. 16. 1. is set down: where
both

First the day, first day of the week, named and appointed.

Secondly, every first day, so appointed.

Thirdly, instituted both there, and in the Churches of Galatia.

Fourthly, instituted and there taught for the Churches instruction generally,
as we see at Troas, and other places also.

Fifthly, the duties of the Sabbath, or Lords day, plainly exercised then,
gathering together the congregation, and gathering for the poor.

4. Constant observation, continued, forty years after performed by Saint John
in Pathmos, in holy meditations, as sitting especially that day, had his
illumination and holy inspiration from God, to the instruction of the Church by
prophetical revelation, when Christ's farther presence, apparition, and blessed
illumination of him, and the Church by him, seems further confirmation of that
holy institution and Sabbaths sanctification, as Estote imitatores mei, sicut
ego Christi.

18. How farther confirmed?
By the continual and continued practice of it, ever since proved by all
Ecclesiastical histories ever since, without any interruption to these days,
and so by

The primitive times, and Church.

Holy men, that lived and succeeded next to the Apostles times, the learned
and wisest ever since; and so consequently, as from thence, both at, and to
this day, and none found to oppose, unless some idle, turbulent, and fanaticke
spirits, wanting learning, judgment and discretion, that who sees not this,
must be wilfully blind.

19. The Sabbath then is certain and fixed?
The seventh day, at the consummation of the work of the Creation, the Jews
Sabbath till Christ, and his consummation of the ceremony of it, a new Sabbath
now by him consecrated at the consummation of the work of redemption, so to
remain to the worlds final consummation; as the first to Christ from the
creation, so this from Christ to the end, and final consummation of all
things, to continue after with a new and third Sabbath perpetual in the new
Jerusalem, in the Heavens.

20. What use or end of these renewed Sabbaths?
To consider, and magnify the name, and glory of God, more and more expressed,
and made known to men,

1. As in the first Sabbath remembered his works of creation, mighty acts and
glory.

2. In the second Sabbath or Lords day, both all that, and further the works
of his mercy and redemption in the worlds restoration.

3. In the third Sabbath, both all them, and further his excellent justice, and
glory, most amply, more then ever demonstrated to all creatures, over all the
world, and for evermore.

21. How sum you up these collections?
For full illustration, or confirmation of the doctrine of the Christian
Sabbath, or Lords day, may be considered,

1. How estote imitatores mei sicut ego Christi, implies a command from Christ
of what the Apostles teach and practice.

2. How Christ promised the Comforter, who should instruct them in all truth,
and bring all things to their remembrance, etc.

3. How Christ's example, and apparitions evincing the same, or show the ground
for the following doctrine and practice.

4. How the Apostles doctrine, and establishing the Lords day by power delegate
from him.

5. How dies Dominicus, Rev. 1. 1. shows that prime and primitive
appellation, (as well as doctrine and practice) more to confirm it his, and
not only Domini, as Mal. 3. 1. or Amos 5. 18. or Jo. 8. 56. but Dominicus,
also, all which, besides the authority of primitive times, Fathers and
Counsels, (though the Churches instruction might be enough to any devout
Christian) do more dignifie the Lords day, as raising it to the highest degree
of sacred and Apostolical, or divine institution, and what was then so
ordained, has been since by continual and constant practice of all
succeeding ages, and all good Laws, Ecclesiastical and Civil, confirmed,
never by any unless such as were publicly noted, or branded for schism,
spoken against, or oppugned, also further if not this instituted so primarily,
it may seem, that there was no Sabbath, or Lords day for a while in the
Church, or but the Jews Sabbath, which were to leave the Church too naked, of
so holy and necessary a point of Christianity.

22. But the Apostles sometimes used the Jews Sabbath?
Yes, and for diverse good reasons, both to instruct them in the same.

To draw them to Christ and his Church.

To confess a Sabbath, and the like, and so they refused not the Heathen
Temples, or their assemblies, as at Ephesus, Athens, or Feasts, or Schools, as
in the School of Tyrannus, but took all good occasions to instruct them; and
of this it came to pass, that both the Lords day, and Jews Sabbath, were by
many kept and observed from their use and example a good while after in
primitive times.

23. What other arguments or reasons of convenience are brought for our
Christian Sabbath, or Lords day?
As upon this day many excellent things were, and greatest benefits that ever
happened to mankind, or the people of God, so in his new Sabbath, to remember
them, and praise him for the same, as on this day,

1. The worlds creation began, Elements framed, Angels created. 2. This day,
Christ's resurrection, the worlds new creation, or restoration. 3. This day,
manna first fell, and the Israelites passed through the red sea. 4. This day
Christ baptized, turned water into wine, and fed five thousand miraculously. 5.
This day, Araon and his sons consecrated, etc. 6. This day, Christ often
appeared to his Disciples, and others after his resurrection. 7. This day, the
holy Ghost descended, and Saint John in Pathmos enlightened. 8. This day, Christ
we hope at last shall come to judgment to begin the perpetual Sabbath, after
the night of this Sabbath ended.
24. What course then to be used and held for the due sanctification of the
Sabbath, and rightly to understand or interpret the fourth Commandment?
Rightly and duly to remember and consider how the Christians Sabbath, or Lords
day, though not literally commanded for the whole ceremony and circumstance, or
punctually in all things to be observed; yet is virtually intimated, and for
the morality and substance of it, exemplarily propounded to us there in the
fourth Commandment, without which heed taking, and observation, or right
understanding and moderation, any may be apt and ready to fall into Thomas
Brabornes, and others judaizing errors concerning the same, however otherwise,
we cannot stand too much, or be too careful for the due and orderly
observation and sanctification of the same, if there be but prudent and
Christian discretion to moderate the heat and exorbitancy of selfe-conceited
and inconsiderate blind zeal, and prejudicate opinion, by partially addicted
fancy and affections.

25. This way then is spoken against?
It is by the unlearned vulgars some, or factiously minded, too ready and prone
on their weak and ill grounds, or mistakings to fall into judaizing errors, or
by the plausible pretense of the sanctity of it, and the men that broached it,
to deceive themselves, and seduce others, so that he that shall deliver the
plain truth in this point, shall find himself on a double disadvantage, as
one well observes, by the preconceived, and prejudicate opinion of the
vulgars, and weak people, that have their persons in admiration, as well as
their piety and religious zeal that hold the contrary.

That hold the strict observance of that day in their fashion (as it is by some
made) a prime character of a good Christian, to distinguish him from a carnal
worldling (so as it were) to know the state of Religion by it, which stands or
falls, as they conceive, as it is either way determined, where needs we see a
wary foot in delivering the truth to strike an equal course between an
overnice strictness, and a prophanelicence, the one letting loose, the other
ensnaring men's consciences, one shutting up the Kingdom of Heaven, making the
way thither narrower then it is, the other by making it broader then they
ought, enlarging the mouth of hell; but the truth well and warily delivered,
will give the soberly religious no cause to complain, nor encourage the
profane in any licentiousness, medium tenuere beati, happy are they that
find it, and blessed are they that tread that way, and strive to go it.

26. Whence arises this Doctrine?
The mistake in general of these men, is that they press the precept, promise
and threats made to the Jews concerning their Sabbath point blanke, and
directly on us, and the Lords day, whereas indeed they concern us and it, only
indirectly, and cannot without fetching a compass, be applied to the Sunday,
as our Sunday succeeds in the place of that, in respect of the morality, (not
ceremony;) but hence, as in a prime case of conscience, so many scruples are
raised, and traditions broached by them of the beginning and end of the
Sabbath, the duties of the day, works of our callings, recreations, and the
like, without any difference almost made between the Jews Sabbath, laden with
ceremonies and it, which those that least love ceremonies, have steadfastly with
it taken upon trust, that thence so many needless contestations have been
raised about them, but the truth appearing, these doubts of theirs will easily
be dissolved.

27. What course then particularly best to be held, or taken herein?
Rightly to consider of, and distinguish these two things, viz.

1. For the morality of that Law, and of the Sabbath, how far that extends,
as well as the ceremony in it, and so the power of changing that first day,
thence accrewing.

2. What was the first institution and authority establishing this second, or
substituting it, being the Cardines Controversiarum, whereon depend most of the
doubts ventilated, and things chiefly agitated and discorded on in the
curiosities of these present times about this point, and so in the compass of
which, we shall meet with most, or the most principal objections here usually
cast in the way against the Sunday, our Christian Sabbath, or Lords day.

28. How for the morality of it?
The morality in the Law observed as it is ordinarily to be seen by the eye of
nature and reason, the common rule of humane actions, may be considered as it
is,

1. Either primary, and evidently seen and acknowledged by the light, and in
the Law of nature, or right use of reason, re ipsa, of it self, straight ways
appearing, as God to be honored, no man to be wronged, to do as we would be
done to, not to kill and steal, etc.

2. Or secondary, though not so plainly seen, by nature, especially corrupted
nature, or nature at large, and at first sight, yet by nature rightly informed,
either

Common humanity, discipline, and Philosophy, and after due circumspection of
the circumstances, or by Gods word, grace, and divine revelation, and then
straight consented to, and confirmed by reason, as well as diverse other
consequent good rules succeeding those more general notions, and primary clear
dictates of reason; so we may hence collect, for the morality absolutely at
first, appearing to the eye of nature and reason, that God is to be worshipped,
and that a time is to be set apart for it, is so moral, that nature concludes
it, as soon as it blunders on it, or but once conceives there is a God, and
this is the prime morality of the Commandment: and secondly, that the seventh
day is to be set apart, and the time determined to the seventh day, or that it
is to be rested on, or so religiously sanctified, is only to be known by Gods
precept and word, and so by nature or reason directed by discipline, or better
informed by grace, and Gods revelation of his will, which nature yields, by
reason is to be obeyed, and best approved, and so the second, third, and tenth
Commandment as well as this, may for the substance of them seem to be
referred to this rank, that nature only directed by discipline, on farther
circumspection, and better consideration of the circumstance, or divine
revelation, and grace, is able to discern, and so moral, non tam ratione
naturae, quam disciplinae, or rather non tam ratione naturae, aut disciplinae
communis, quam divine revelationis; and thus this Commandment participates of
both those sorts, of morality, or of morality in both these respects, and the
later by some rather called the positive, then simply moral part of it, as so
scarcely by nature, or reason discernable: yet farther there is found a
ceremonial relish, or tincture, and respect in this seventh or Sabbath, and
the strict observance thereof, for the time to the Jewish Church enjoined, and
with it to expire.

29. How show you the ceremony?
As the ceremonial Law is properly an appendant of the first Table, regulating
the external service and worship of God, as that of the Jews relate to the
Jews Church, and the judicial law chiefly pertaining to the second Table,
regulating that externally to civil society, or withal enforcing the
observance of the former, as Moses judicialls, with the Jews, and so both of
them, so far as Mosaicall, with the Jews policy, and Church, antiquated and
dissolved, or saving so far, as reducible to the moral, to expire; now that
there is a ceremony mixed with the morality in it, is confessed by the Fathers,
and all ancients, and soundest modern Divines, and Churches, which may be
seen in the respects, as it was ordained, either

A remembrance of things past.

A shadow of things to come, and expected.

A shadow and show, or signification of good things present, and enjoyed,
relate also to the Messiah, and promise of him, and rest and deliverance by
him. Paedagogy of the Jews, and to them a sign of distinction from others.
Temple and service there, in their rest in Canaan.

Or showing also the nonage of the law, looking toward grace, and subjection
of that Church, as the heir under age, so in the servitude of that Church,
over-rated with ceremonies, and teaching them to bow their stiff necks, to the
service of God, inuring them to it by legal strict observances.

And lastly, shadowing the rest of Christians, and of the law under the
Gospel, made easy by grace. So here begun in grace, and perfected in glory.
Eternal with God in the heavens.

So whereas ceremonies are either

Chiefly shadowing things to come, as here principally the Messiah: or,

For signification of some present duty, and holy memorial.

For order and decency, reconciling gravity, and authority, as well as
attention to the divine celebrations and actions.

Though some of the later may reflect on us Christians, with the morality of
the Commandment, yet all the chief respects in the ceremony serving the
Jewish Church, and Synagogue, and shadowing Christ to come, he being come,
they with that Church are vanished.

30. Show it more particularly.
This Commandment and their Sabbath, though moral in the substance, was, as
many other things, in the moral worship of God, over-rated with many legal
and strict observances, to the very letter, inducing a ceremonial respect, and
shadowing good things to come, whiles it and the Jews Church lasted, which the
Jews could hardly bear, (yet made more hard in many respects, by their own
traditions, as seen in the Talmude, and witnessed by our Saviors words) who
doing good deeds on it, disliked by them, reproved their blindness, and
intimating the alteration, (if not then beginning it) showed he came to do
good, and dissolve those hard knots, and burdens, and make the Sabbath more
profitable and pleasant, as convenient both to Gods honor and man's comfort,
and that the pedagogy, servitude, and nonage of their Law, Temple, Sabbath, and
other such legal ceremonies, vanished, he would ordain a new Testament,
Church, law, Sabbath, and Sacraments of Christians, and he the Lord of the
Sabbath, thus ordering it, and as it were beginning first, by himself, she
wing and honoring the day, by his glorious resurrection, and other
apparitions, as Saint Augustine speaks, after by his holy Spirit perfected
it, in his holy Apostles, and Churches doctrine, and ordinances, as we see it
established, where is conserved the morality of it, in the worship of God, and
time destined to his service, (even according to that in the Commandment
determined, with the resting, and sanctifying that rest, (though) not so
literally, legally, and burdensomly, as then to them, ceremonially enjoined)
yet as religiously, and with respect to the morality of the rest as it
concerned both them and us, both the rest of the ox, cattle, and servant, for
their comfort and refreshing, and our rest, for our fitter dedication of our
selves to such holy action, as the service of God, then to be performed, and
attending it with more alacrity, that are all by us observed, as by the Lord
and his Church, or by the Lord in his Church ordained, he himself so declaring
and demonstrating the day also, as Saint Augustine speaks, Epist. ad Januar.
119. 9 and 13. by his glorious resurrection, and honoring it by his many
apparitions in Pathmos, and else, to his servant John, (that calls it his
day,) as well as his other Disciples, or having finished the Jews Sabbath, by
that his rest, in his grave, on that day, (and withal their Passover, and
Sacraments) by his glorious resurrection, designing our new Sabbath, and day of
it, by it, as the same Father speaks, (Sermon. 15. de verbis Ap.) consecrating
as it were the Lords day to us, and promising us there with an everlasting day
in the heavens, and so continuing, (as we may collect) or commending to us in
it such convenient ceremonies, as respect that his joyful remembrance, our
deliverance by him, our rest begun here in grace, and to be perfected in
glory, with him in the heavens, or the like, fitting us Christians for decency,
order, and the beauty of holiness, though all ceremonial shadows of him to
come, and legal pedagoy, and servitude ended; and thus ensued the change of
the day, not the law, of the ceremony and shadow, not the substance or
morality; of the strictness, servitude, and unpleasantnesse, not the duty or
profitablenesse of the Commandment by him that was Lord, even of the Sabbath,
and of the Commandment.

31. But how say you by him changed, for that is still by some controverted?
1. As he finished the ceremony, and by his appearance, actions, and presence,
took away the shadows, and unprofitable rudiments that were no longer to
endure, then to the revealing of the Messiah expected, and by them shadowed, so
the substance come, they unusefull, and vanish; and

Secondly, as by his power, his Apostles and Church, so ordered and ordained,
and by his holy Spirit instructed, practiced it, and that even whiles the
solemn funerals, as one well speaks, of the Jewish Church, Sabbath, and
ceremonies, were in performing, that is between our Saviors resurrection, and
the destruction of the Temple, as well as afterward, to all succeeding ages,
which may suffice us; whereas else indeed the sum of all may be, for that
point of the change, if that neither

I. Christ's 1. precept granted, since not expressly to be found. Though we have
as much in effect by his former teaching, he was Lord of the Sabbath, and so
his example, and

2. Practice of sanctifying it in his resurrection and other apparitions on
that day, and such election and declaration of it, with motives and
instructions thence arising to his Church and Disciples.

3. Denomination of it, the Lords day, by his servant John, as aforesaid, may
serve.

II. Nor the Apostles precept, so expressly to be found, for the sanctifying it
in all points as required, though we have their

First, observation of it by the Lords example.

Second, selecting it for pious actions.

Third, so ordaining it, in diverse Churches.

Fourth, practice, and therein tacit precept.

Fifth, Tradition, having so left it to the

Sixth, Church, and constitution, in some Fathers and Doctors opinions.

Seventh, denomination of it, the Lords day.

III. Nor Churches, and primitive times, Ancientest 1. Practice, without
control from thence derived. 2. Tradition, received for Apostolical. 3.
Constitutions, very ancient, even as those first times. 4. Canons, thence
successively ensuing, and consent of all Ecclesiastical Histories, Writers and
fathers, that all confess it so delivered and received, can prevail to
satisfy contentious spirits, which do abundantly satisfy all moderate men;
they should yet be persuaded the Churches power so granted by the Lord, with
the assistance of his Spirit, promised to guide them into all truth and direct
them, might suffice to ordain whatsoever necessary for Gods honor, as this
is, and setting things in order, as they cannot but confess done in all other
things.


32. Such as do question this, make as little scruple to question the Churches
power, and disobey it?
Which they should not do, especially, if they well consider that spoken to
the Apostles by Christ, and in them to the Church, Who receives you, receives
me, and who despises you, despises me, and not so only, but him that sent
me; and as reverent Hooker, to this point, has it, is it a small offense to
despise the Church of God, or disobey the Laws and Ordinances of the Church?
says Solomon, My son keep thy fathers commandment, and forget not thy
mothers instruction, bind them always about thy heart; it does notstand with
the duty we owe the heavenly Father, to disobey the Ordinance of the Church our
mother, and let us not say or think we keep the Commandments of the one,
when we break the Law of the other, for unless we observe both, we obey
neither; and which is more, the Laws thus made, and ordained by the Church, God
himself does in such sort authorize, that to despise them, is to despise him
in them; so then, for the power, Christ giving them such power, and his Spirit,
and promising assistance to the worlds end, and they executing his will, and
exercising that power, as we see the Apostles did, and used to do, ordered,
and gave rules for it, saying, let all things be done decently and in order,
with the like instructions, as they also promised by themselves to see done,
the Apostle saying, Other things will I set in order when I come, as most
likely by the consequent practice of it, this was then done, and that power
never dying, but that Spirit continuing and directing them in all truth to the
worlds end, they, and their successors had full power to ordain (as no doubt
they did) these, and the like things, and this by all good Christians to be
obeyed.

33. How far then is the Churches order to be obeyed?
As we heard before, and however by diverse minced, and controverted, limited,
curtalled and contracted, yet God and Christ binding us to it, and the decree
in things so primarily pertaining to the honor of God as this is, without
contradiction to be accounted of Apostolic and sacred authority, and as we
hear simply and absolutely, in spiritualibus, so in ordine ad spiritualia, no
doubt but deservedly to be reverenced, and obeyed by all good Christians, in
all necessary circumstances, and all reasonable and indifferent things, and
this day, and manner of sanctifying it in every respect, primarily and directly
subject to the Churches authority; nor need they question this, since the Jews
Church had power in such things, and circumstances of the divine worship, not
particularly determined by God himself, or his servant Moses in the Law, as
seen in sundry very material rites and observances, as the appointment of
hours for the daily sacrifice, building of their Synagogues throughout the
land, to hear Gods word, and pray in, diverse feasts, as of Purim, dedication,
and the like, which Christ's Church no way inferior to theirs, rather superior
in the measure of grace, and presence of his Spirit, should not be abridged of
in all reason, or to prescribe and ordain laws for things tending to her
better edification, and in things undetermined as this is, in that
circumstance, and the rather to be granted for this determination of the time,
as well at least, as of the place, manner of prayer, and forms of it, and
celebrating the Sacraments, and diverse other, as prime and remarkable
circumstances of the divine worship; and the place assuredly, as material as
the time to be determined or assigned, nor should our brethren that are gone
from us, (in place, and no less in opinion) as far as the breadth of the
Atlantique ocean, or that staying at, home, yet hold a wood perhaps, or barn,
or parlour, for places good enough for their divine worship, since Christ, not
assigned Churches particularly, they should, I say, not complain of the time
not set out by Christ, since neither was the place set out by him, nor of the
time assigned by the Church, if Christ not assigned it, since so well ordered,
and they will arrogate more liberty in many things, and authority to
themselves, but rather as the Temple so fitly translate to our Churches (which
they cannot well deny, though they hug that poor device of their new meeting
places) be as well content with the Sabbath translate to our Sunday, by the
same authority.

34. If this be granted in the Churches power, why may they not now alter it,
or then have appointed any other day then the seventh?
It is well and sufficiently answered by the greatest, and learned of our
Divines, as well as those of the Church of Rome.

That absolute, or absoluta authoritate, the Church had power from God, and his
Christ, they might or may do it.

That congrue or congrua dispensatione, conveniently now they may not, for many
ill consequents that would thence ensue, or that might follow, as we know how
odious and dangerous such innovations are in meaner places, and matters, so
especially in Kingdoms, and great Estates, or Religion, which too much
affected, would make the government ridiculous, and whereby all matters by
giddy heads shall quickly so be questioned, as we see the strange presumption
of some men, that on such grounds (uncertain ones) are too ready to innovate,
and readier to despise and deprave all things they fancy not, and arrogate
authority to themselves, to chop and change all things whatsoever their fancy
serves them to call into question, and would be glad to have fellows, (so to
go blameless as they would think) especially if they could but tax the
Church, or times of such inconstancy that might well be wished by them, more to
countenance their lenity, and in the end, nothing shall be left out of their
inconstant queres, and that shall not by their fancy or fury be disturbed or
perverted, and in this point, in such inconstancy and diversity, we may well
expect diverse appointing or approving diverse days, as their fancy serves
them, shall in effect, no day be duly as it ought observed, therefore when the
Church has once pitched on the day, and decreed it, moved by so many great and
good reasons, as aforesaid; and more on the seventh day in seconding Gods own
appointment, in a holy imitation of his precept, and admiring his wisdom, as
many other things of the like nature were likewise done, not presuming to be
above him, or wiser then their Maker, or Master in their choice (as to pick
out any other number) nor to settle on any other number, or day, then that (in
imitation of the former) by our blessed Lord and Savior himself, so picked
out and sanctified, so many ways acknowledged, being thus that seventh day,
our Christian Sabbath, now so long and quietly settled in the Church, it
remains no more now safe to alter it, and show such lenity, nor well
indifferent, having been already so solemnly chosen, concluded on, and decreed
on, though absoluta potestate, they may, or with more show of reason they might
have done it; yet thus, limitata dispensatione, and congrue they may not, with
which we may well stop the mouth of inconstant curiosity, and hold our selves
relgiously and christianly resolved.

35. This is then your resolution?
It is, and of all the gravest Divines, modern or ancient, keeping the
morality of the Commandment, and letting the ceremony pass, or so much of it
as not concerns us, and had a rollish of the legal pedagogie and servitude;
so whereas the moral law was written in the tables of our hearts in more
plain characters at the creation, but by the fall was so defaced that we now
want discipline in most things, or divine revelation to instruct us; yet thus
far even depraved nature straight sees the morality of this Commandment,
that as God is to be worshipped, so a time, as well as place is due unto it;
but then, that it should be on the seventh day, only divine revelation, or
Gods instruction can show us, wherefore as not else known, God adds that
reason from the creation, which now by his will revealed, is the secondarily
moral and positive part of the Commandment, with the sanctification of it,
and the rest so far as serves to the sanctification of it, and the rest of it
involved in ceremony, with the particularity of that seventh examplar'd by the
creation, the greatest benefit then to be remembered, and God praised for it,
though a greater, our restoration by Christ, in expectation, and promised, and
now chiefly to be remembered on it, and the no small cause, or reason of the
change which thus follows on the former reasons, for that when God had so
portion'd it, nature informed by grace, cannot but acknowledge God the wisest,
and his wisdom best, and so follow his choice of the seventh rather then any
other number, and Christ's honoring, and so demonstrating this seventh by his
blessed actions, performance of that our restoration, resurrection, preaching,
and apparitions on it, even showed his election, and confirmed the change,
which his Church by such directions of him, and his holy Spirit, steadfastly
embraced, so the first seventh with the strictness, pedagogie, and servitude
under legal ceremonies, as the ceremonial part of it expiring, the moral
part remaining: that second seventh our Christian Sabbath, was so chosen and
decreed in imitation of the former, as many things else corresponding in the
Christians and Jews policy, conveniently enough, acknowledging Gods
instruction by pattern, where express precept not found, or plain and
punctually existent, which so now decreed, many offenses in the breach of it,
for Gods precept is wrapped up in the precept of the Church, which if broken,
both Gods fourth Commandment, and his precept to obey the Church, and i
withal the Churches precept and power are with t, in breach of the Sunday,
despised, broken and contemned.

36. It seems then as strict, if not stricter, and heavier then the Jews
Sabbath?
In the offense, as heavy at least, though in the performance easier, as the
burden of ceremonies vanished, with which it was overrated, and that strictly
to the letter, that even no works might be done as they interpreted it, and
the rest, as scrupulously burdened by their traditions, whereas now the rest is
fitted to the service and sanctification of the day, more then to the ceremony,
and the works more spiritual in praises, that then in sacrifices, and for the
scrupulosity of other works, even good works, by them as they by our Savior
reproved, we are so allowed works of,

1. Necessity of our selves. 2. Charity, or mercy, for the necessity of our
poor brother. 3. Piety, in the sanctification of it, for God, or works of
Necessity for our selves, though not of our callings, but fitting us to the
better sanctification of the day.

Mercy and charity, for the necessity of our poor brethren, fitting the day,
and our devotion, as honoring God with our substance.

Piety, proper to the day for God, and sanctification of it to God, as
honoring him with our selves and souls, and with all such laudable
recreations, allowed by the Church and Christian Magistrates as may make it, a
joyful feast (not sorrowful fast, which is not the nature of it) or a
festival of rejoicing before the Lord, wherein to be seen a Christian
liberty, from the legal servitude, and burden of the ceremonies, as well as
the threats and curse laid on it, and other traditions, (like those of, Touch
not, taste not, handle not) not to kindle fires, dress meat, and many more
like, cumbring it, but now removed, besides allowance of more comfort, in
gracious manner to celebrate it, as a joyful and solemn festival, to the
Lord, and so a liberty of grace, to more alacrity in piety, not out of
licentiousness to profaneness, though moderate recreations, approved in the
eye, and judgment of the Church and State, to avoid some else worse
inconveniences are allowed, that yet shall not hinder the duties of the day
required; of which more hereafter. And whereas some object, why then is the
Epiphona or prayer for enclining our hearts to the keeping of it, added to the
end of it, as well as of the other Commandments, if it be not punctually in
all respects as they to be understood? The answer is plain, from that before
taught, that it is so added, for that part of it, that it agrees in with them,
for the morality of it, so far as that extends, which is, as it is now by the
Church enjoined, it being as we see in all points so fully by the Church
delivered, demonstrated, and explained, how far it is moral, and how and in
what manner it is in force, and by us to be observed. Nor boots it them to say,
Why was the time so punctually commanded, and determined, more then the place,
(both circumstances being equally material to the worship) if not wholly
moral, in the Commandment, and so, precisely and punctually to be observed;
for that it appears the time was present, and in their power to observe it,
and so determined, (besides that, that it was a sign to difference them from
other nations, then appointed) whereas the place that was to be appointed, was
not yet attained unto, as appears by that so often repeated in the Law, When
you shall come to the place which the Lord your God shall choose, to put his
name there, viz. the Temple at Jerusalem, in Canaan, they being then in the
wilderness, or at most, the plains of Moab: but had the Temple as well as the
Sabbath been there expressly mentioned, and determined, yet both Temple and
Sabbath being in effect for that particular but types and shadows of better
things to come, with other ceremonies of servitude, and legal observances,
then and there to be performed, were to expire in the Messiah, so far as they
were types and shadows, and so have already had their solemn funerals and
obsequies, as dead and buried, and new in their rooms substituted; but as the
appointing other feasts and Sabbaths, both by God himself, as well as the
Jews Church, besides this seventh the Lords Sabbath, and other houses of
prayer, their Synagogues, besides the Temple, even whiles the Temple stood, as
well as since, were held no breach of the Commandments, concerning them,
rather enlargement, and illustration of either, in making the worship and
duties more public and general, or for satisfaction and recompense of the
neglects in the due observation, visiting, and sanctification of them, that was
required; so the Christian Sabbath, and Churches, thus substituted, and
succeeding the former, and in place of them, might well be accounted no
breach, but enlargement of the Commandments, with the dispensation and
illustration of Gods graces, in more ample manner and measure, showed and
bestowed on the whole world, the duties made more public, and illustrations,
and the morality more illustrated by it.

37. How show you this?
Clearly and plainly enough, both in the Temple, where for a particular one, or
a few Synagogues besides, now so great a multitude of Christian Churches over
the whole world, are seen, with Gods solemn worship in them, most religiously
promoted; and in this particular of the Sabbath, where the creation, and only
temporal deliverances, were by it remembered, though spiritual ones, that were
hoped, shadowed in it; now the spiritual ones that are performed in it, and by
it remembered; and that great work of redemption, so graciously promised, and
performed on this day, (the new and Christan Sabbath) consummate, and shown to
the world, in the glorious resurrection of our blessed Savior, and the coming
of the holy Ghost, and thereby as demonstrated and honored, as it were
universally published, and both duty and morality of it, more illustriously
declared. And thus we see how the strict observances, servitude, and legal
types, do not concern us, or our Sabbath, nor in all respects, and
circumstances to be pressed on us, as some prone to Judaizing, have done; yet,
though not the ceremony, the morality to us fully extended, and the
Commandment, though not literally and punctually in all points by us to be
observed, nor our Christians Sabbath so in it expressed, yet expressly included,
for the substance, and all due observance, virtually intended; whence what is
done, is so done, and on so good grounds, by the Church, that were it to do
again, the order and change of what is therein changed, the Church could well
do no other then as is therein already established; so little reason have our
Novellists in their clamours raised against it, and study of contradiction: and
thus much of the scruples cast in the way concerning the same; it follows how
we Christianly ought to celebrate it, and conceive of it in the rest, and true
sanctification of it.

38. How is it ordained a Sabbath, or rest?
Not only for the servants and cattle, though for their sakes also ordained,
but much more for the rest of the soul, to be thereby fitted for spiritual
exercises of the day.

39. How the rest?
1. From sin, the best Sabbath and spiritual rest of the soul, else in
vain to rest with the body, and the soul busied in sin, or vanity.

2. From perturbations of mind, better to attend the Lords business, and that
days duties.

3. From ordinary works, both we our selves, and all that are ours.

Whether of

Special times, as sowing, reaping, etc.

Or special callings, etc.

Or general import for the Commonwealth, that may be done other times.

4. And from all disturbance of this, as Fayres, Markets, Courts, etc.

5. From worldly speeches, words, and works, better to attend heavenly things,
and Gods service.

40. How the sanctification of this rest?
By holy duties, such as besit the Lords day to be exercised, and our duties
thereon employed.

41. What duties are they?
The chiefest, best, and holiest that can be done on earth, so best beseeming
that day, viz. pertaining to

I. Gods honor immediately, 1. Prayer, or speaking to God, etc. All such holy
and common service. 2. Reading and preaching, and hearing it, which is Gods
speaking to us. 3. Singing Psalms, and thanksgiving. 4. Administration and
receiving the Sacraments. 5. Holy meditations, conference, etc.
II. Men, and so Gods honor, secondarily works of
1. Mercy, to releeve the poor.

2. Peace, charity and love, to visit the sick, comfort the distressed, and to
make peace. etc.

3. Necessity, as of wars, or in

First, helping the ox or ass from perishing, much more a soul, or
Christian, in any deep necessity, or

Secondly, casualty, as of fire, and helping out of danger; a woman in
travail, and the Lord healing the sick, etc. which are accounted sit Sabbath
days works, and duties, and not only permitted, but even commanded to be
done, and so as the Priests must labor in sacrifice, the Ministers greatest
task, this days exercise.

42. Are there not other works of necessity?
Yes, but permitted only for avoiding inconveniences, as necessary works that
cannot be shunned, for natures necessity, as dressing food, setting things in
order, and such household business, which not to do with decency, were to
offend, in the Jews or Jewish superstition, not considering the Sabbath was
made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.

43. How are they then permitted?
For the better and more careful celebration of the Sabbath, with more decency
and convenience, and so a Sabbath days journey.

44. How is that?
Not for any worldly occasion at all allowed, but for the performing of any the
foresaid duties; so to go to Church, or about any such godly works, and
without disturbance of the greatest, or best duties, or as may best further
them, and the service and honor of God.

45. May not the poor then be suffered to work for necessity?
Nothing less, for all are bound, and they also must as labor the 6. days,
in the seventh rest, in obedience expecting his blessing on their honest
labors, which shall thereby be either sufficient for their content, or his
mercy will stir up charity, for their farther relief.

46. Js the whole Sabbath to be spent in such holy exercises?
Yes, to our weak ability, the best we may, especially the principal times
allotted to Gods public service and duties, by the Church enjoined, not to be
neglected, and for the resting in godly sort, as may beseem Christians, and
the Lords day, so in godly meditations, singing Psalms, and other good
exercises.

47. But this may seem burdensome, and make the Lords day grievous?
It may be to the raw and unexercised Christian, but to the best it will be
most comfort, the holiest and best spending of that day, and most glad will
they be of ability to perform both the best exercises, and most of them, as
coming nearest Saints and Angels, doing Gods will, and the best things with
willingness and alacrity.

48. But is no relaxation of such exercises, or recreation allowed?
Yes, we have liberty to refresh and cheer our selves with those things that
may comfort our weak nature, and make us more able or disposed to celebrate the
day as a festival, and day of joy unto the Lord, for so it is, and the
Prophets express it so, and as we have flesh about us as well as spirit, and a
body of dust, the Lord who knows this our weakness, appoints the best
things of the earth if we serve him for our comfort; as in Paradise, so on his
Sabbath, even to our bodily delight as the comfort of the soul, so far forth
as it may help, not hinder the hallowing of the day, and express a holy, not
heathenish feast, or drunken Bacchanalia on this day.

49. How is that to be understood?
As that we may use to our comforts, both the creatures by eating and drinking,
to make it a festival day.

Music, and godly singing, or mirth to make it a joyful day.

Other such like delights, and recreations to refresh our spirits in honest
manner, whereby to be more cheerful, able to spend the allotted, and best
parts of the time in those holy duties appointed, and so those delights to be a
means to further these duties; and without all excess, scurrility and
profaneness, which else may prove both an abuse of them, and the Sabbath.

50. What is the opposite part or vice hereunto opposed?
The not setting apart a rest, or the pollution, abuse and profanation of that
rest, and day of the Sabbath.

51. How not setting apart a day of rest?
Either in setting out none at all in effect, or by not resting from sinning,
perturbation of the soul, ordinary works, or worldly thoughts as they ought
to do; or in stealing a part from God by their allotting unnecessarily,

1. Early mornings works to hinder the due observation.

2. Part of the day, or sometimes chief part of the day to other occasions.

3. Latter businesses even to be set in hand before the Sabbath ended, as too
frequent instances may be given in worldings hying to fayres and markets before
the Sabbath ended, Carriers, Millers, Shopkeepers, Alehouses, Tavernes, and
others, no necessity urging, but filthy lucre, stealing a part, if not wholly
profaning the Lords day, against which, many good Laws have by good Princes
been enacted, though too often, the more the shame, slenderly executed.

52. How to be remedied?
If good Laws well enacted, were by good Magistrates carefully executed, as we
read in some Counsels decreed the goods to be forfeited, as Concilio
Dingulonencsis, Canon 13. and by Leo and Authemius, the persons to be
proscribed, whereby they were out of the laws, and Princes protection, and the
goods forfeited.

53. How is the farther abuse, and profanation?
By abusing that rest, and day of Sabbath to any evil end, as superstition in
Jewish abstinency, from necessary things to be done, for the better
sanctification thereof.

Any Idolatrous fashion.

Idleness, only, and in doing no good, which is worse then bodily labor, and
this Sabbatum Asinorum, or of beasts.

Vanity or profane sports, which hinder holy duties and sanctification, worse
also then honest labor, this only Sabbatum tituli, bare name of Sabbath.

Sin, as to gluttony, exccesse, drunkenness, and the like, spending the best
day in the worst exercises, or wasting idly on the Sabbath what gotten the
week, which is Sabbatum Satanae, the Devils holyday, and they his slaves that
use it.

54. How is the heynousnesse of this sin intimated?
1. By Gods strict penal law enacted against it, the offenders to dye the
death, Exodus 31. 15.

2. By that laws execution on him that gathered but sticks, Number. 15. 32.

3. By Gods sending the people into captivity for it, that the land might keep
her Sabbath that they his people had broken, Jerem. 25.

4. Gods providence to have it observed, that the day before only, no other,
sent and allowed double Manna, Exodus 26.

5. And lastly, God and all good men's execrations of it, and Prophets
exclamations against it, as Nehemiah also threatening the Merchants, Nehemiah 13.

55. How is it then generally or commonly profaned?
1. Either by labors and journying, that are not of necessity, and might be
avoided.

2. By idle resting and sitting at home, or other absence from public duties.

3. By sinful and vain spending the time allotted to holy duties in wicked
manner.

4. By suffering others, especially those under the authority of Master or
Magistrate to offend therein.

56. What is the issue generally hereof?
By neglecting Gods ordinance, and herein honor, both good order overturned.

Good duties of all sorts neglected.

Magistrates and Superiors with God contemned.

Inferiors by profaneness come to misery.

Gods blessings alienated, etc. and his judgments assuredly appropriated to
the offenders.

57. What is the second part of the duty in sanctifying the Sabbath.
To remember it, or mindefully with care and conscience to prepare for it, and
set about it.

1. Seen in removing impediments.

2. Using all good helps.

3. Convenient preparation to both the public and private duties, to be
performed by both, 1. Ministers, 2. People in the celebrating, and being
present at the celebration of divine Service, and public worship of God in
his Church, performing the divine offices or officiating there, with helping
and assistance in the same.

58. What is it to remember?
To take special note of this Commandment as begun in Paradise, sanctified by
God, and now renewed in Christ, etc.

To take special note of the duty enjoined, sanctify the time, the Sabbath,
ourselves to be prepared:

And so remember all the days of the week so to labor, that we may rest, and
sanctify this.

The day before as a parasceve or half holyday, begin to prepare ourselves to
the sanctification of this.

The last Sabbath how we profited, what we learned, and how to improve it in
this.

59. What impediments to be removed?
Of works and labor, that would importune us to neglect it; worldly cares and
distractions, and specially sin and vanity, with sleepy drowsinesse of
devotion, and idleness, persuading us to absent our selves from holy duties,
and stay at home.

60. What helps to be used?
Holy meditations of the benefit, institution, and command of the Sabbath, and
blessings attending the same, as well as reading, conference, etc.

61. What preparations else?
Fitting our bodies to the outward rest, and presenting our selves and those
that belong to us, at the Church; as our minds to the holy actions, and present
devotions; in such preparation yielding our presence, both of body and mind,
even to all both public and private duties of the Sabbath.

62. What private duties?
Those preparations going before, and good exercises and actions following the
public duties, as also the ordinary means of sanctification, private prayer,
reading, and meditation.

Works of charity and mercy,

Outward, alms, visiting the sick, etc. peacemaking.

Inward, to the soul, instruction, reproof, exhortation, comfort, counsel,
etc.

63. What public?
The ordinary duties of the Sabbath, in the public worship and service of
God, at the Church, and in that great congregation.

64. What of the Minister?
As the chief actor in this days sanctification, public prayer, and calling
upon God, in the behalf of the congregation.

Reading, and preaching the word, and catechizing.

Administration of the Sacraments.

65. What of the people?
Their yielding their presence in the holy assembly, and both

Coming duly.

Staying to the end.

Behaving themselves religiously, being present in hearing the word.

Praying, and using the Sacraments.

Doing all other convenient works of sanctification, as in their assisting the
Minister and congregation, collections for the poor, etc.

66. What the opposite offenses?
In general, all carelessness, and contempt; remissness, and negligence;
forgetfulness, and sloth; drowsinesse, and sleeping, or sleepiness; in any
of the persons, in any of these foresaid devotions, and private or public
duties, arguing unpreparednesse, and backwardness in rendering to God the
honor due to his name, or sanctification fitting to his Sabbath.

67 How more in particular?
I. In the Ministers, carelessness, negligence, absence, or idleness, etc. II.
In the People,
1. Absence from Church, in carelessness, negligence, contempt, obstinacy, or
any pretense, or cause whatsoever, arguing unwillingnesse, or unpreparednesse.

2. Departure, without necessary cause.

3. Irreligious behavior in the Church and worship of God.

4. Other negligence, or vanities, before or after.

68. What else may be said to offend thus?
I. Those who are mindful of the Sabbath to profane it: as

1. Who provide not to be free that day.

2. Who provide business against that day.

3. Pass over extraordinary businesses or journeyes to it.

4. Make bold with God, to borrow part, if not all, to their own use, which
wisdom is not from above, but from the devil.

II. Observe it but for fashion sake.

III. Observe the outward rest only.

IV. Are dainty Sabbath keepers, or rather prophaners.

V. Account putting on gay clothes, costly fare, or other excess, that days
work.

VI. Absent themselves from public duties, or think on private, which may
be done every day sufficiently.

VII. Are weary of it, and wish it gone.

VIII. Unwillingly perform the duties of it, and the like, as Separatists,
Recusants, and Nonconformists.

69. What say you then of other holidayes appointed?
To be understood as a second sort of Sabbath, and even by the Lords example,
and institution warranted, as also by holy men practiced from all antiquity, as
is apparent in the Old Testament.

How were such Sabbaths?
The very Passover, and Penticost, feast of Weeks, and Tabernacles, by God
himself, besides his ordinary Sabbaths, and so likewise the feast of Purim,
and Dedication, and like deliverances and blessings, with peculiar Festivals,
as on other great occasions, solemn Feasts also, and holy assemblies, which
were in effect extraordinary Sabbaths, of the which some holy, and festival
with joy, as the other holy, but fasting days.

70. What use of these our holy days?
For the honor of God, and remembrance of some extraordinary and great
blessings, on that time conferred on his Church, as in those feasts remembering
our blessed Savior, whether his Nativity, Circumcision, Incarnation, or some
holy mystery; and likewise the Saints days, those vessels of grace, Gods
especial and extraordinary instruments, for the illustration of his Church,
whom we so remember, and praise him for the same.

71. But how does this agree with the Commandment, that appoints the six
days for labor?
Very well, for if part of the seventh upon necessity may be taken to our use,
as aforesaid, much more part of the six for his honor, who is to be honored
all our days, in some convenient sort; as Daniel three times a day praying,
and David seven times a day, to teach us some week days exercise, which
commonly can never countervaile our negligence on the Sabbath, if no other duty
did bind us to this daily sacrifice.

72. What rules for weekly or daily devotion?
Such as any good man may propose to himself, remembering Gods blessings and
benefits bestowed on him, as especially to use

1. Prayer, morning and evening.

2. Blessings, and thanksgivings before and after meat, and receiving the
creatures.

3. To give thanks at all times for benefits, blessings or deliverances
received.

4. To pray often, and more instantly, as our necessities may require.

5. Tolet no day pass without some reading, or divine meditation.

6. To take benefit of week day Sermons, if opportunity be fitly offered, and
may be without palpable wandering, Pharisaicall pride, and show of hypocrisy,
or neglect of our calling.

73. What further warrant have we for holy days, or fasting days?
As that example of God himself, and holy men in the Old Testament, so since,

1. Primitive times, institution and practice, most of them.

2. Authority of the Church, commanding and constituting.

3. The benefits themselves, and mercies of God therein, requiring a thankful
remembrance.

4. All the former reasons, and authorities together, with our own
necessities, and sometimes urgent and extraordinary occasions, as before
enforcing some ordinary fasting days, sometimes also extraordinary fasting,
and festival days.

74. Are these to be observed as strictly as the Sabbath?
There is no reason for that; for though sometimes celebrated with
extraordinary joy or solemnity, yet as secondary Sabbaths, assuredly in a
second degree, and also among them degrees may be observed, yet all of them in
some measure, for holy and festival days, and to the honor of God, as the
mystery or memorial do require, and so these may be Sabbaths dedicated to the
Lord in memory of his blessings, but this peculiarly the Sabbath of the Lord.

75. What was that farther explication of this Commandment?
In the permission or injunction of labor the six days.

In the duplication of the Commandment, and

1. Naming the Sabbath the seventh day, and again enjoining it.

2. Amplifying it, by forbidding all servile work, both of ones self, and all
that pertain to us.

76. How is the permission of the six days to labor?
Not only a bare permission, but even an injunction to work in the same
commanding mood, that the Commandment it self is, and that both to avoid
idleness, hateful to God, and nurse of vices, and also thereby the better to
sanctify the Sabbath.

As 1. rest after labor is sweeter.

2. We better prepared by vicissitude and change, may

3. More cheerfully entertain it.

4. More sensible of it, and thankful for it.

5. Better abled for it, and fitter to rest.

Provision being made for the rest and sanctification by the weeks labor, and
Gods blessing; and so the Commandment again repeated.

77. Why is the Commandment then doubled?
1. For ratification of the stability of it, as first not only commanded, but
to be remembered, and here again redoubled.

2. For specification of the very day, the seventh, and so determined, and by
no humane ordinance, but only by divine to be altered, and so in the Hebrew
(...), in the Greek, the seventh day not only a seventh, the Sabbath ordained,
and in it farther, the prohibition of all work in amplification of the command.

78. Wherein the amplification chiefly?
1. In that the six days are allotted, commanded, and by Gods example also
established for labor and works, that the seventh may be a Sabbath, a holy
and festival day of rest.

2. In that all work is thereon forbidden, not only to the Master or
Magistrate, but even

1. To the son and daughter, and servant. 2. To the cattle, Ox, Ass, etc. 3.
Nay the very stranger, whatsoever with us in company.
79. Why so?
That it may be the better sanctified by all.

That the cattle, and servant may rest with us.

That the stranger draw us not away by evil example from God, nor we accessory
to others offenses.

80. Why this so strictly urged?
1. Because Parents and Masters being in Gods stead, are to see inferiors
trained up in godliness.

2. As the head receives comfort in the good of the other members, so should
the superiors from these.

3. It is a sin and shame for Parents to bring up children not servants of God,
but vassalls of the Devil, and firebrands of hell; or masters of such servants.

4. What blessing can be expected from their labors, if they sanctify not the
Sabbath with us.

5. What comfort can it be for Parents or Masters to see their sons or servants
come to wretchedness or misery, or miscarry, as they cannot choose in neglect
of Gods service, and their duty, nay what corrasive to their conscience, by
suffering it, to be accessory to their wickedness, and how shall they be
taught, if not brought to Church to learn their duties.

81. What then the end of the Sabbath?
1. For the sanctification of Gods name in holy and public duties.

2. For the rest of even the servant and cattle.

3. For the type of the spiritual rest, both from sin by the Messiah, and
perpetually in the Heavens.

82. What reasons of this duty urged here?
Diverse, both 1. Interlaced, and intimated by the 1. Antiquity and excellency
thereof. 2. Equity and justice of it. 3. Propriety of it, to God belonging.
Expressed by the 1. Reduplication of the Commandment. 2. Example of God
himself. 3. His blessing annexed.



83. What are the reasons intimated?
1. The antiquity and excellency of that day, and duty instituted by God
himself in Paradise, in time of man's innocence, sanctified first with his own
example, intimated in the serious remembrance, and reiteration of the command,
as well as in the example of God.

Secondly, the equity and justice of it, that having allowed six days to us,
he may well require the 7. with our best duty and care to sanctify it.

Thirdly the propriety the Lord has to it, it being his day or Sabbath, not
only made by him, as all the rest, but the day of his rest besides.

84. What reasons expressed?
1. The often reduplication of the command, as both the day to be remembered,
rested upon, sanctified, and no servile work done not by any person thereon.

2. The example of God, not only working the six days, to appoint that our
exercise, but also resting and sanctifying this for our instruction, and to
persuade us.

3. His blessing annexed, who both rested and sanctified, and for that use
blessed it; so the holy use of it shall procure us a blessing in the
blessedness thereof, both to our labors in this, to our comfort, and rest
hereafter, to eternal happiness.

What more learn you from the sanctifying the Sabbath day?
With it may be noted the setting apart to holy uses other things, whereby the
sanctification of the day may be better performed and observed, and thereby as
it were depending upon the sanctification of the same.

Which are they?
With the sanctification of the time may be well understood to be inferred the
sanctifying.

1. Place or places for Gods service, such as his Altars in the most ancient
times, the Tabernacle, Temple and Synagogue of the Jews, afterward and since
our Churches and Christian Temples throughout the world set apart for such holy
meetings, and actions principally on that day.

2. Persons, as of the first borne, and eldest of the families for Priests to
attend Gods service, before the Law, and since by Christ appointed the
Evangelicall Priests and Ministers of the Gospel, who all were principally to
attend that day and service.

3. Maintenance of those persons, and this ordinance, tithe offerings, and the
like consecrated, and set apart to this use and maintenance of them that attend
his service, and consequently maintenance of his honor upon earth, whose
morality, and so perpetuity of institution may abundantly be showed, both
before, under, and since the Law, under the Gospel.

4. Other things consecrate and set apart to holy uses, and performance of Gods
service, especially on this day, both which the Fathers in the Jews Church,
and now since in ours, abundantly to be showed, as both the sacrifices, Arc,
Cherubins, Shewbread, Candlestick, and ornaments of the Temple, and such
things for practice of devotion, ornament, order or decency, in our Christian
Churches appointed.

And Lastly, the very bringers, offerers of the sacrifices themselves, and
those that join with the Priests in performance of the holy duty, the Saints
on earth, and such as excel in virtue, or the communion of Saints, a people
holy and acceptable to the Lord, and no less with the holy actions, practices
and performance of those known duties in Gods service and worship on that day
of rest, such as hearing, praying, preaching, or the like, and their coming
and presence at them, the rites, orders, ceremonies used in the performance of
that duty of public sanctification of the day, all of them included,
sanctified with it, they with the day, and the day the better by them.

But these things are not to be found perpetual, and at all times in the
Church?
Yes, the most essential of them, and for the others, as the infancy or growth
of the Church did obtain to more maturity and perfection, whereby Gods
appointment, and for the more accomplished and orderly performance of his
service in their due time, left to the wise governors discretion instituted.

What difference between Gods sanctifying the Sabbath and ours?
His sanctifying it authoritative, have full power to constitute, and ordain
the setting apart of it to holy uses; our sanctifying of it either imitative,
so appointed to follow him our pattern in the setting of it apart to such holy
use, or obedientialiter and executive in performance of those holy services,
and duty therein by him commanded.

This duty it seems of sanctifying, it is vehemently and often here pressed and
urged?
Yes, as principally enforced, and so five times at least therein urged in
memento, both of the prevention of the neglect, preparation to the duty, being
by the neglect of it, many other good duties are neglected, which by it might
and ought to be learned, and by the practice of it, all other good duties are
practiced or renewed, and recalled to mind by hearing the word then read and
preached.

Mandate in the first words of the precept expressed.

Redoubled mandate, in the next words of the explication of the precept, but
the seventh, etc.

Example of God himself, working the sixth, resting the seventh day.

Reasons annexed of his so blessing this day, other days with it and by it.

So sanctifying it to the holy use of his worship and service in it appointed,
so it is the whole scope of the Commandment from the first words of the
memento remember to do it, to the last words, the reasons rendered why so
respectively commanded.

What follows?
The fifth Commandment, and first of the second Table, as next to our duty to
God, expressing our duty to superiors.

SECT. 7. The fifth Commandment.
The order of the fifth commandment, first of the second Table, and reasons of
it, with diverse necessary rules for the better understanding or conceiving of
the rest of the Commandment, and differences of the two Tables, as first of
the affirmative and negative Commandments, or parts of them compared.
Secondly, of the ground of the duties of both Tables. Thirdly, of sins of
diverse degrees and imparity of offenses. Fourthly, of sins of the first and
second Table, and Analysis of the same: with the reason why the Commandments
of the first Table have reasons annexed, and not they of the second, but this
called the first Commandment, with promise, as nighest them, and concerning
those in whom is Gods image of authority. The Analysis of this fifth
Commandment, with the parts or duties, and opposite abuses therein intimated,
or expressed who are to be accounted fathers, in what respects, and what manner
they are so, and how diversely thereby distinguished, with their general duties
whereby to be worthy of honor, hereby (...) ^^timatca, of (...) ^eriours and
inferiors, in gifts of mind, or years, in nobility, and gentry, in wealth,
and such external matters, the gifts of, fortune, in and good actions,
government and authority, or private; as Masters of families, and their charge,
Parents and children, and other the like Superiors and inferiors in the
common and usual oeconomioall or politic societies, as of Tutors, or
Guardians and Pupills, husband and wife, their mutual duties, Masters and
servants, Governors in Colleges, Schools, and any like societies, or
mysteries, so of the Prelates, and people, or Preachers, and their
congregatiens, Kings and Princes, or Sovereigns, and their subjects, as under
them the Magistrates, and other the Kings Officers and the comm^^ people with
their several duties, and neglects thereof or enormities, and vices, opposite
illustrated, and explained, where also in general the duty of obedience in all
lawful commands in all singleness of heart, and not with muttering and
murmuring, or other despitefull repirings, and so in the duries in either side,
even all the virtues in a manner comprehended the reasons of the Commandment,
and promise of blessing in long life how to be understood, and indeed when
given of God, though else a shorter life here, so appointed by God, no less to
be accounted a blessing, and as well as the lands possession, the good gift of
the Lord.

1. What is the fifth Commandment?
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land, etc.

2. What is the order of it?
The first of the second Table, as next to the honor of God, importing our
duty to superiors for good orders sake, and better observation of the rest by
their command, as also this, and all the Commandments of the second Table to
be observed for the honor of God principally, and in respect of the first
Table, according to the rules aforesaid, manifesting the difference of the
second Tables, and Commandments among themselves, and the dependancy of this.

3. What rules were they?
1. That every negative Commandment binds always, and at all times, every
affirmative only always, but not so precisely to all, and every particle of
time.

2. That the Commandments of the first Table are to be kept for themselves
absolutely, those of the second for the first.

3. That though every sin deserves death eternally, yet there is, and may be
imparity of sins in many respects.

4. That the sins against the first Table, simply and in themselves
considered, are more heinous then those against the second, though such
aggravation or respects else of extreme malice, presumption or infirmity, or
the like, may over balance, or much alter the same.

5. There is so near a tie and relation between the Commandments, that
whosoever fails in one, is guilty of all.

As that it is indeed a breach of the whole Law.

An offense against the royal Law of charity, the intent and sum of all.

An offense against God the author of them all.

A contempt of his Majesty and command.

4. What the meaning of the first rule?
That the negative commandment, or negative part of the Commandment is at all
times, and every particle of time to be observed, as not to deny God, or set up
any false gods, abuse his holy name, profane the Sabbath, dishonor parents,
commit murder, adultery, stealth, or other offense forbidden, at anytime; but
all time, and every, and the least particle of time must be free from offense,
or the commandment is broken, and in it the whole Law; though the affirmative
part, or duty commanded, is broken, as honoring God, or Parents, observing the
Sabbath, or doing good actions, cannot be performed at all times, and every
particle of time, but at set and determinate times, and occasions; and that
with some remission and relaxation, as seen in sanctifying the Sabbath,
because of our weak nature requiring respitation; so that as the School
phrase is, the affirmative is semper, but non ad semper, the negative both
semper and ad semper; that is, no minutes permission of the offense, though
some minutes relaxation of the duty may be, necessity requiring.

5. How the second rule explained?
That the Commandments of the first Table are merely and absolutely to be
observed for themselves, and the love and honor of God, in them commanded, and
who does observe them but for fashion sake, or worldly respects, beforemen, and
to please others, for fear of punishment, or shame, or the like, do mainly
err, and offend, and are guilty of sin, though the action be performed; but
the Commandments of the second Table are to be observed for conscience of the
first Table, commending the love of God to us, and the love of our neighbor
for Gods sake, whose image we are, and who do observe the Laws of the second
Table for the praise of men, more then the love of God, or of morality only,
and to be like dealt with again, and friendly to those deal friendly with
them, as Publicans and sinners do the like; though the action be done, are
far from the performance or duty of the Commandment required to be done, for
the love of God.

6. How the third rule explained?
That though eternal death be the wages of sin, as an offense against the
infinite Majesty of God, yet imparity of sins may be, and one offense greater
then another, in many respects: as

1. Some less offenses against the neighbor then others, as lying, then
adultery and murder, and so the smaller offenses compared with bloody and
crying sins; as Peter's denial, or Eutiches sleeping, with David's adultery, or
Noah's drunkenness, with Cains murder.

2. Sins against the second Table, and against the creature, less in regard of
the object, then those against the first, being immediately against Gods
infinite Majesty.

3. Sins also of infirmity, and ignorance, and the like, though not the less
able to damn us, yet less accounted then those of malice, and contempt or
presumptuous sins, so all those other sins in comparison of those perverse,
heinous, and stubborn sins, against the holy Ghost, whereby the difference and
degrees of sin and offenses is apparent.

7. How is the fourth rule to be understood?
That though the sins against the first Table, simply and absolutely in
themselves considered, as immediately against the infinite Majesty of God, are
more heinous then the sins against the second Table, where the offense is but
against the finite creature immediately, though secondarily against the divine
Majesty contemned, yet such may the aggravation be on the one side, by extreme
malice, perverseness, presumption, supine negligence, and the like, and the
extenuation on the other side, by infirmity, ignorance, fear, or other humane
passion, or frailty, that may quite alter and weigh down, or over balance the
former respect; that as in the same first Tables offenses, compared among
themselves, there is no comparison of Sarahs infidelity, when she laughed, and
for which she was reproved, with Lots wives looking back, Achans sacrilege, or
the gainsaying of Korah; so neither in the second Tables offenses, compared
with the first, or first with the second; that infidelity of Sarahs, or
Eutiches sleeping at Paul's Sermon, both of infirmity, though against God, or
such like negligence on the Sabbath, to be thought equal to Cains murder,
David's adultery, backed with murder, or such other crying sins of oppression
and blood; though against men only immediately, since so aggravated by
perverseness, malice, and presumption, or security, as well as secondarily,
also redounding to the dishonor of God, and contempt of the divine Majesty.

8. How the fifth rule explained?
That there is so near a tie and relation between the Commandments, all of
them having one rule, the love of God; one end, the honor of God; one author
of them all, God; and one authority commanding all, and so binding to every one
of them in particular, as to all of them, and the whole Law in general saying,
thou shall observe all these Laws, to do them; and Cursed is he who walks
not in all these Laws, to do them; that one of them not performed, the whole
Law is broken; and the disobedience manifest, requiring punishment, as the
guilt also showing it self,

1. Against the Author of them all.

2. Against the authority of his command.

3. Against the royal Law of love.

4 In contempt of that divine Majesty, so that though there are degrees of
offenses, and some are to be more earnestly and carefully avoided, as more
heinous ones, yet simply none are to be chosen, as inter mala culpae omnino
non datur electio.

9. What is the sum of the second Table?
To love thy neighbor as thy self, Levit. 19. 18 Math. 22. 39. Rom 13. 8.

10. What is thereby expressed?
The duty, love, which in the first place God, in the next place respectively
the neighbor.

The object, the neighbor, as near to us, of the same flesh and blood, viz.
all mankind.

The manner, as thy self, both in regard of the love,

First, natural, whereby thou desire the preservation of thy life, goods,
etc.

Secondly, spiritual, whereby thou desire thy souls good, and salvation,
and expressed either

I. To superiors, in the 5. Commandment here expressed.

II. To allmen, by not only not hurting, or wishing, but even not consenting
to the hurt of his

1. Person, by murder, 6. Commandment. 2. Second self, wife, by adultery, 7.
Commandment. 3. Goods, by stealth, 8. Commandment. 4. Good name, by lying, 9.
Commandment.
Or 11. even without consent, by any concupiseence whatsoever, in the 10.
Commandment, the first motions of sin forbidden.

11. Why have all the Commandments of the first Table their reason, annexed,
and so not the second?
1. To show how especial care ought to be had of the honor of God, whence all
other duties depend.

2. To show that the first Table, the foundation of the second, and the duties
therein contained, thence depending.

3. To show our backwardness in the honor of God, and ingratitude, needing
such spurs, and remembrances, as more prone to wrong God then men; the
Creator, and giver of all good, then the creature; though too mischievous and
malicious to all; but in imitation of the first Table, this first Commandment
of the second, and this only, has a reason, or promise annexed.

12. Why has this only the promise?
Because as from the first Table the second and the duties thereof depend, and
from the first Commandment of the first Table, the rest of the Commandments
there, so from this 1. Commandment of the second Table, concerning duties to
superiors, the rest of the Commandments do also seem to depend, in regard
of the due observation of them, by their authority and command, and also in the
superiors does more especially shine the image of Divinity, so as next to the
first Table in place, and first of the second, graced also with a reason, or
promise.

13. How is the image of the divine Majesty more particularly expressed in
superiors?
1. As in the King, represented majesty, power, and sovereign authority.

2. As in the Magistrates, the image of his government, and justice.

3. As in the ancient in years, image of that Ancient of days, in eternity.

4. As in the Parents, image of his goodness, our Father and Creator.

5. As in the Tutors, Ministers, and Teachers, bearing the image of his divine
Majesty, wisdom and knowledge, whose honor in his image is thus attended
with the promise, in this first Commandment, with promise, the first of the
second Table.

14. What is therein contained?
1. The Commandment, Honor thy father and mother. 2. The promise, That thy
days may be long, etc.
What manner of Commandment is it?
An affirmative, and thereby inferring his opposite negative, viz. commanding
to exhibit all love, honor, and obedience to our superiors, and to avoid all
unreverence, disobedience, and dishonor of them.

15. What is the affirmative part?
Commanding respect of

Inferiors, their exhibition of 1. Honor and reverence, 2. Duty, and
obedience, 3. Love, humility, with the signs 4. Thereof, to be exhibited to
all superiors.


Superiors to be worthy of that honor by their 1. Gravity and good example,
2. Mercy, and bounty, 3. Justice, moderation, and 4. Benevolence to all
inferiors.


16. What the negative part?
Forbidding, in respect of

Superiors, their offenses, in showing themselves unworthy of honor and
respect by their Insolent carriage toward inferiors. Light, Dissolute,
Unmercifull Unjust
behavior in their places.


Inferiors, their despising, unreverence, disobedience, and dishonor of
superiors, by any Undutiful Vnreverent Despitefull
words, behavior, actions,
toward them.

17. How are the opposite or opposed parts seen or intimated here?
The honor, reverence, love, and obedience, required of inferiors, expressed
in this word Honor; to which opposed, dishonor, unreverence, despising, or
disobedience, as the gravity, good example, mercy, justice, moderation, and
beneficence, intimated in this word Father; which shows what superiors are
required to be, else not fathers; opposite to which are insolent, light,
dissolute, unmercifull, and unjust carriage and behavior, whereby they seem
to leave and lose the name of father.

18. Who are then accordingly accounted Fathers?
1. The Prince, who is parens, or pater patriae; so Abimelech the name of the
King of the Philistims, King father.

2. Magistrates, patres conscripti, so Senators, Counselors of Estate,
Fathers of the State, and Fathers of the King, as Joseph to Pharaoh, Genesis 45. 8.

4. Superiors, in

First, knowledge, and science, Iubal father of them that play on the Organs,
Iabal father of them that make Tents, Genesis 4.

Secondly, holiness, as Elisha called so by the King of Israel, Shall I smite,
father? 2 King. 6. 21.

Thirdly, by instruction, oversight, and government, as Elisha said of Eliah,
My father, my father, 1 King. 1. 12.

Fourthly, in estate or riches, Job 31. 18.

5. Ancient in years, fathers by age.

6. Spiritual Pastors, Ministers, and Teachers, Fathers in Christ.

7. Masters of families, and servants, Patres familias.

8. Natural and legal parents, as fathers, mothers, fathers in law, mothers
in law, also Godfathers and Godmothers, Benefactors, and who in any the like
respect, guardians, or have delegated power, or tuition and government over us;
as children and inferiors to be understood, by all these several respects
and bonds of nature, law, or other contract.

19. In what manner are they so Fathers?
By the law of 1. Of Nature, natural parents, father in law, etc. 2. Nations,
1. Kings, and Sovereigns. 2. Magistrates, Senators, Counselors of State. 3.
Judges, and Officers of justice. 4. Spiritual Pastors, and Fathers in Christ.
3. Contract, Masters of Families, Guardians, Tutors, and such other
superiors, for our instruction or aid, etc. by our selves or others appointed
or desired.


How may these superiors be distinguished?
Into superiors In 1. Gifts 1 Received from God, whether Inward of the mind,
as in Arts, wisdom, Learning, virtue, or the like.
Outward; as in Age, the ancient. Degree of Birth, nobility, or gentry. School
or church dignity. Wealth, the rich or potent


2 Bestowed on us, as Benefactors, Guardians, and helpers.
2. Authority, governors of Family, Schools, Corporation, Church, Commonwealth
in governm oeconomic. scholasticall co^federacy, ecclesiastic, political.



What the general duties of superiors, that they may worthily be accounted so?
Wisdom and gravity, together with good example, good deeds.

20. What the general duties of inferiors?
To exhibit honor

Inwardly, in reverent estimation of their worth, and wisdom, place and
authority.

Outwardly, both in the

1. Sign of reverence, whether

Rising up to them.

Going to meet them.

Bowing the knee.

Uncovering the head.

Standing before them.

Giving them the precedence.

Silence when they speak.

Words of reverence.

2. Deed; as occasion is offered to minister unto them.

21. What the opposite vices in general?
1. In superiors neglecting inferiors, lightly or foolishly. 2. Inferiors
neglecting or despising their superiors, unreverently, undutifully.
22. What the duties in particular of superiors, in inward gifts of mind?
In humility to acknowledge them received from God; and thence willing to
employ them to his glory, and the good of others; opposite to which is
insolence, and abuse of them.

23. What of inferiors herein?
In thankfulness, acknowleding reverence and respecting them as the gracious
instruments of God for our good, and in modesty even to account our equals
rather superiors or betters, then any way to deny, deprave, or disdain their
good gifts.

24. What the duties of the ancient?
To be sober and grave, ready to instruct the younger sort, both by their
wisdom and good example, as patterns and presidents of good, and no ways of
lewdness, or evil.

25. What the duties of youngers?
To reverence them as fathers, learn and imitate their good examples, and no
wise to despise the aged, contemn their counsel or direction.

26. What duties of those dignified by nobility, gentry, or other degrees of
eminency?
By magnanimity, magnificence, and other heroical and divine virtues, to
remember the giver of all good, and use the same to his honor, the good of the
Church and Commonwealth, thereby showing themselves worthy of that honor, who
otherwise shall seem but bubbles of honor, and a shame or disgrace to their
degree.

27. What the duty there, of inferiors?
To reverence, respect, honor them, according to their worthiness, places,
and degrees; readily exhibiting the signs thereof, and no way to presume
against them, or neglect them.

28. What the duty of the wealthy?
To remember the giver, and that they are but stewards, and shall be called to
account, to use their riches as instruments of liberality and bounty, to the
help and relief, as well as protection of the poor and helpless, and not to
niggardliness and avarice, or oppression and cruelty.

29. What duties of inferiors?
The reverent esteem, and welwishing to them, and their estate, as the
blessings of God, and instruments of their good, and not to disdain, presume
or murmr against them, or God.

29. What requiredin Benefactors.
In that act of bounty or charity to give willingly, cheerfully, freely and
discreetly, bis dat qui cito, and not grudgingly, or for his own profit; so not
given, or without discretion, so cast away, or with delay; so qui sero dat, diu
noluit, tardius beneficium, perdit gratiam, and the like exprobation, or
casting in the teeth of a good turn.

30. What duty of the receivers of a benefit?
Thankfully to acknowledge, and remember it with testification, both by word
and deed, if occasion be offered, as well as prayer: opposite to which,
forgetfulness of a good turn, or requiting evil for good.

31. What the opposite or negative part of all the former?
Easily collected from the premises, and partly expressed in them, a neglect of
those good duties in any respect by any of the parties, or in stead thereof,
the return and exercise of the contrary to them.

32. Who are those other superiors in authority?
Governors, 1. Of families, as Parents over children. Husband, over wife and
family. Master over servants and apprentices.
2. Of Schools or Universities, or other Corporations, Master, Guardians and
Presidents.
3. Of Church, as Bishops, Pastors, and Minister. 4. Of Commonwealth, the
Prince our Sovereign, and all Magistrates.


33. How the order of these?
First, Oeconomicall duties, as that the first government in the world.

Secondly, instruction in Virtue and Religion, so Scholasticall and
Ecclesiastical government, to which, subordinate, and general confederacies,
and Corporations mixed between private, and public governments or societies.

Thirdly political duties of all sorts, in all kinds of governments in the
world, whether Monarchy, Aristocracie, Democracie, where there are commanders
and subjects to command.

34. What duty of Parents?
The love and care of them, love, or (...) naturalis, the fountain of the
other, whence unnatural parents that bring forth children, and not care for
them, the care being seen in due providing for life, naturally by

1. Nourishing them, and 2. Bringing them up. 3. Training them up in honest
calling. 4. Directing them in all matters of moment. 5. Helping and storing for
them as God gives means.
For life spiritual, by godly education, instruction, chastisement, their
prayers for them, and blessings; and the opposite hereof, to be without
natural affection.

To train them up in idleness and vanity.

To be neglective of providing for them, or their education or instruction
natural or spiritual things, or to curse, and not bless them.

35. What the duty of children?
To answer their parents care and love, with love and duty.

To reverence and obey them, Matthew. 21. 30. Ephesians. 6. 1.

To stand in awe of them, and submit to their instruction, correction.

To preserve their parents goods, and help them if need require.

To show themselves thankful, as the Storke to her parents.

So a (...), if need or age require, to help them with goods, service, relief.

To love and reverence them that be near and dear unto them, for their sakes.

Opposite to which, is to neglect these duties, not to love them, but to hate,
revile, scorn, strike, or deride them.

To be ashamed of parents, contemn, and despise them.

To be disobedient and unkind.

To refuse, or despise their instruction, correction; and to these heads, or
some of them, may be referred the duties of Tutors and Guardians toward
Pupills, and their Pupills toward them, that as they succeed parents in
government, to succeed in fatherly love and care, and consequently Pupills to
show dutiful respects and love to them, as good children to such their parents.

36. What the duties of husbands and wives?
In general mutual love, benevolence, and conjugall fidelity; in particular
of the husband as head, to guide, direct, and instruct, protect, cherish and
defend, provide things needful; and govern in loving sort, giving honor also
to her, as the weaker vessel.

The wife as in subjection to her husband, to acknowledge him her head,
reverencing, fearing, and obeying him, being amiable and gracious, seeking to
please and cherish him, be his assistant in the house, and all duties of a good
wife, and huswife: opposite to which is neglect of these duties, and so his
being his wives underling, contrary to the law of nature, and ordinance of God;
his hating, striking, or wronging her, denying things needful in his power; or
being too uxorious in in fond doting, too imperious in rigor toward her: As
on her part, her usurping dominion, using unreverence, unquietness, causing
trouble, and grief to him, or being a cross, and not a help to him, or idle
at home, or gadding abroad.

37. What the duty of Masters?
To govern those under them with equity and moderation, accounting them as
children under us, or brethren in Christ, and fellow servants, in respect of
our Master in heaven; so commanding things lawful, honest, possible, and
proportionable to their service, paying their wages, and wishing and procuring
their good both in body and soul, by instruction, and else; while with us, and
after esteeming them as our poor friends: opposite to which, is our neglect of
them, being too hard, or tyrannizing over them, commanding things unlawful,
unpossible, or too remiss in not correcting, or not cockering them, or
suffering them in idleness, not restraining and reproving them.

38. What servants duties?
To love and reverence their Masters, so to tender their credit, and welfare,
submit themselves to their commands, corrections; and to be diligent, faithful
and true, thrifty and careful to please their masters in all lawful things:
opposite to which, neglect and disobedience, murmuring and answering again,
idleness and unfaithful, wastefull and not careful of their credit or
displeasure.

39. What the duties of other governors in Schools or other societies?
As they have the place of Fathers and Superiors, to have a fathely love and
care over them, and their welfare: opposite to which, to neglect them, or
tyrannize over them, and abuse their authority.

40. What of the governed?
To demean themselves with that reverence, humility and respect, as may become
dutiful children to such fathers, not neglective of their places, or despising
their authority, to the disturbance of good order, and bringing in impiety, and
hellish confusion.

41. What duties of Ministers, and Ecclesiastical Fathers?
To be blameless, and so behave themselves in their place, that it may be to
the edification of the Church, both by their

1. Preaching in season, and out of season. 2. Their governing of the Church of
God committed to them, and their private families. 3. Living, and good example.
Opposite to which, their inability, and insufficiency, impiety, idleness, and
neglect of their charge, or other irreligiousnesse, profaneness, or faults in
preaching, governing, or living unworthy their place or calling.

42. What duty of the people toward them?
Love, reverence, and submission to their Ministry, and charge, that they may
perform their duty with cheerfulness, not with grief, and so allowing
liberal maintenance, and their dues, as those Elders that do their duty well,
are worthy of double honor: opposite to which, hate, neglect, mocking, or
despising them, resisting, disobeying, or abusing them, denying, or diminishing
their dues, with a mocking and a lying unto God, Gal. 6. 6. or taking away, and
withdrawing them, which is sacrilege, or robbery and spoiling of God, Mal. 3.
10.

43. What duty of Kings or Sovereigns?
In that high place, and representation of Gods supreme authority, the
commendable exercise,

1. Of that Sovereign power, in

1. making good Laws.

2. Seeing them executed.

3. Creating Magistrates.

4. Containing them in their duty.

5. Mixing mercy with justice.

6. Lawful pardons.

7. Waging war, or concluding peace.

8. Admitting, or considering of high appeals, godly to the glory of God,
justisie to the good of the Commonwealth.

II. Virtues of 1. Piety, in all their actions. 2. Justice. in all their
actions. 3. Clemency, in all their actions. 4. Bounty, in all their actions. 5.
Wisdom, in all their actions. 6. Fortitude, temperance, humility, and general
all virtues to the good example of his subjects, as Regis ad exemplum, etc.
opposite to which, is negligence, and remissness in these duties, bordering
upon idleness, or rigor, degenerating into cruelty and tyranny.


44. What subjects duties?
Honor, obedience, loyalty and service, both with body and goods, attended
with love of their person, desire of their welfare, and prayer for their
prosperity: opposite to which, neglect, and contempt, to speak evil, or to
curse him, denying duty or service, disloyalty, and disobedience, bordering
upon rebellion, and treason.

45. What duties of Magistrates?
The conscionable execution of the Laws, as justice and their office require,
to the glory of God, whose authority they have.

The honor of their Prince, in whose place they stand.

The good of the Commonwealth, and showing themselves in their places, men of
courage, fearing God, faithful, and hating rewards and covetonsnesse, wise and
prudent, and unpartially just, without respect of persons: opposite to which,
unconscionable, and unjust, unfaithful and irreligious, indisereet, respecting
persons, or covetous, and given to bribery and extortion.

46. What the peoples duties?
Obedience and reverence to them as in the Princes stead, as he is in Gods,
whose Deputy and Vicegerents they are for the punishment of vice, and
maintenance of Religion and virtue; so submitting to their authority for
conscience sake, thankfully to yield them both honor and love, together with
their fees, and dues for the maintenance of them, the common peace, and good
order: opposite to which, neglect of this duty, or denying the same, bordering
on sedition or rebellion.

47. What is then the general duty of governors, or superiors in authority?
1. The well governing of inferiors in the Lord, and in piety and justice, not
seeking themselves, but the glory of God, good of others.

2. Rewarding, and encouraging the good, correcting the offenders with

1. Discretion, and without partiality or passion, seeking the good of the 1.
party, if he be corrigible, 2. Christian society, that 1. evil be taken away,
2. dishonor of God prevented, 3. others may fear.

2. Moderation, that neither too remiss, or indulgent, severe or cruel in the
punishments.

The opposite thereof, ill governing, and not encouraging the good, or
correcting offenders accordingly.

48. What general duties of inferiors, and subjects to authority?
Love and awe of it, obedience and submission, both to the command and
correction, with testisication of gratitude to God for his ordinance, and the
powers ordained of him both by word and deed, service both with body and goods,
if occasion require: opposite to which, contempt, disobedience, ingratitude,
resisting the power, and sedition.

49. What the general duty of all?
Honor, and love to Superiors, love and benevolence to inferiors.

50. What in general forbidden to all?
Irreverence toward any our betters, or superiors, and churlish and careless
behavior in them toward those that be of a low degree, whereby they leave to
be, or appear either loving good fathers, or good or dutiful children.

51. But what if it be an evil Prince or Tyrant?
Yet you must not break Gods commandment, but obey for conscience sake, and
pray for his conversion.

52. What if an unnatural and evil or cruel father?
Yet you must not be disobedient to break the Commandment, that another is
not good, is no privilege for thee to be evil.

53. What of an evil husband, or lewd wife?
More need of observation of ones duty, and Gods commands, that the evil party
may the better be reclaimed by the others good example.

54. What if an evil Minister, or other notorious wicked person?
Yet thou must not be evil, and disobey God, because another is not good, but
expect his amendment, and do thy duty, for thou must not curse father or
mother, or the ruler, no not in heart, for the fowls of the air will reveal,
and God revenge it, much less commit open impiety, to the disobedience and
contempt of him, or any authority.

55. But what if they command evil?
Here only thou art free, for if it be against Gods Law and command, then you
must obey God, and not men, for his authority is greater then theirs, for
whiles they command good, his authority stengthneth theirs; but here, it not
only leaves them, but oppresses them and thee, if thou obey to do evil, and
who shall deliver thee from the revenging hand of God?

56. May here be too much submission, or obedience to Superiors?
Yes, if contrary to Gods Law, or honor; as for example,

1. In obedience to do evil.

2. Idolatry, ascribing too much to them, as that to Herod, vox Dei, etc, Acts
12.

3. In making them absolute patterns in good or ill, even to their sins,
where as we ought rather to imitate Christ.

4. In preposterous and absurd observance to great persons, when in the very
act of the honor of God, some neglect it, and rise to honor them, who ought
rather to be kneeling with them, then part stakes with God, and take this
honor with him or from him.

5. Too submisse prostration to them, or bordering upon adoration, which even
the Angels forbad to Daniel and John, with a take heed thou do it not, which
divine adoration, indeed, some heathen Emperors required, and Christians were
martyred for not performing the same.

57. What may we think of evil Princes or Superiors?
As the eldest sons of Satan, and like those wicked Kings of Israel, that
caused many to sin by their evil example and command, have good reason to
share deeply in his inheritance, hell and punishment.

58. What of eye-service, fraudulent and deceitful Obedience?
As of mockers of God, who knows the heart, and sees the actions; stealers
from men, and murderers of their own souls by this deceit.

59. What of cursers, or mockers of Superiors?
Never found to escape fearful judgments, as the Law, Exodus 21. 17. and 28.
not to curse, and the curser to dye, and mocking Cham accursed; so wayward
youth that in heart mock, or despise good counsel, or admonition of Parents,
Masters or Ministers, God sees it, who says of such, the eye that mocketh, or
despises instruction, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, Prove. 30.
17. the Devil and his night birds; so the mocking children against Elisha,
torn by Bears, 2 King. 2. the mocking Ephraimites against Jephta, slain 42000.
Jud. 12. and so 1 Samuel 11. mocking Nahash, and Ammonites that would have the
Israelites right eyes put out, slain and scattered, and the mocking Jews at
Christ, and his Apostles, a fearful ruin, and desolation; so fear to mock
any good man, or other, much more such whom we ought to reverence in regard of
their place, or function.

60. What virtues in general or particular here commanded?
In general to all,

I. Piety, root of goodness, and Justice,

1. Universal inclination to all virtues.

2. Particular, disiributive in administratione praemiorum and paenarum, proper
to Superiors.

II. Commutative, in negociatione, proper to all inferiors, and so

1. To Superiors wisdom or providence, and prudence, fortitude; Temperance,
and in sum, all virtues, as examples or emblemes to inferiors.

2. Inferiors, many or most at least of all the others that concern not
superiors particularly; so that here might be a catalogue of all moral
virtues, either to make Superiors fit to govern. Worthy of honor, and their
place. Examples to others.


Or inferiors dutiful to them, whereby fitted to obedience, they may be
afterward fit to govern, as imperare non satis perit qui parere non didicit:
whence

1. In Superiors required, Justice, Temperance Prudence, Charity, Clemency,
Liberality, Meeknes, Gentleness, Piety, Gravity, Sobriety, Constancy, and
almost what not virtue, so to show themselves truly fathers and honorable, for
the good example of others.

2. Inferiors requisite also, Humility, Obedience, Reverence, Love, Meekness,
Goodness, Piety, Modesty, Justice, Temperance, Patience, Constancy, Prudence,
etc. and all sorts of virtues, virtuously to be inclined, and ready to yield
all due honor to Superiors, as well as more to honor them in following and
imitating their virtues, and godly example.

61. What is the reason of this Commandment?
The promise of blessing, of long life, if God please not to prevent it with a
better blessing of eternal life.

62. How is this to be understood?
As that either the Parents blessing shall prolong the childrens days from God.

Or that the days shall be prolonged, for the phrase seems to bear both, that
they may prolong thy days, or that thy days may be prolonged in that land.

63. How is long life a blessing, since many days commonly evil and
troublesome?
As Gods gift, and sanctified in the good use, to his honor, and so an
entrance to a long life, even for ever, and ever.

64. But we see disobedient and evil children, sometimes live long, and the
virtuous dye in prime of their age?
Yet, this may very well be seen verified of them, and it is often verified,

1. As they are seen often to live long who obey the counsels of the wise,
whereas the disobedient by this means, and scorning good counsel, come to
evil and untimely ends by their lewd courses.

2. As it is always verified in respect of their good life, which is only to
be accounted a life, and a long life as in grace and Gods house, where one day
is better then a thousand, and a sinners life is nothing, nor nothing worth, if
he live a hundred years, Eccl. 8. 12.

3. As it is most surely verified in the life to come, and land of the living,
where it is made up to more then full measure, in and with God, and also
happiness so taken sooner from baseness, to glory, as from beggary, and the
dust, to the place of honor, as if from the dunghill, or Princes gate to be
honored and advanced; and who may esteem Enoch less blessed then others,
though living some fewer years, since taken up to God, or the just, as taken
from the evil to come, Esaias 57. 1.

65. But it seems contrary, when evil and unruly children live long?
It may seem so indeed, but is not, since their life is no life, or nothing
but vanity, Eccl. 8. 12. or but a death, and they dead even whiles alive, 1 Timothy 5. 6. and such life will be but sorrow here, and hereafter, since only
Solomon, miserae, been acta juventa senectae.

66. Why is long life proposed the promise or blessing?
Because it is most sweet, and desired, and so a most forcible reason to all,
and especially to flesh and blood, who desire by all means to live long, to
procure the observation of this Commandment.

67. So it might be to all the Commandments?
And so it may be understood as the high way to the observation of all the rest
by obedience to Superiors, who command the rest to be observed, and yet
particularly, and primarily belonging to this.

68. How mean you that?
1. As children that honor their Parents, or relieve them in need, in some
sort prolong their lives, that else bring their heads sooner with sorrow to the
grave, as Jacob said, Genesis 42. 38. seen particularly, herein worthy of this
recompense.

2. As the way to honor, is to give honor, and (...) before honor goes
humility: so it is sit that they which give honor to parents, should live
long, and have honor rendered to them again, as likewise the just judgment of
God may be, and is often seen over the disobedient in the contrary.

69. How so?
1. In that either such vipers as did kill by not relieving and obeying, or
dishonouring their paents that gave them life, should not live long, or

2. If they live, should have a generation, or race of such vipers following
them, that should dishonor and shame them, and so never come to honor that
trod not this way to honor.

70. Why said the land that the Lord God gives?
To put us in mind, that not only the life, or long life, and prosperity, but
even the land, and all things we possess in this life are the gifts of the
Lord, so to mind us of our duty, and in whose love to perform our best
endeavors for the observation of this, and the rest of all the Commandments,
which as was before shown, are never well observed, no not though the action
be performed, unless it proceed from this fountain, the love and honor of
God.

71. What follows?
The sixth Commandment, a duty generally to all, though in them particularly
respecting the good of our neighbors life and person not to murder.

SECT. 8. The sixth Commandment.
The order and Analysis of the sixth Commandment withal the several duties,
and abuses, opposite intimated, or expressed, amply deciphered, and so first
murder in all kinds, and branches thereof, and the several degrees of it
prohibited, foul shedding of blood, the maine sin, the degrees of it, thence
participating their malice, as from Cain and the Devil, first murderers of
bodies and souls: so unjust anger and rages, with the fruits thereof in envy,
revenge, and the like, also hatred, a confirmed or inveterate anger, and
implacablenesse, malice, and uncharitableness, with the several branches
thereof against friends or foes, Neighbors or others, with the opposite duties
here remembered and explained, the farther degrees of murder in the tongue, by
railing, reviling, scoffing, tale-bearing, slanderers, and also in quarrelling
and contentions, violence, and wrongs, fighting, poisoning, sorcery, and
self-murder, with the unnaturalness of that sins, and with the haynousnesse
the occasions of it, where also special remedies and performances against the
same, and the temptations, especially of Satan, the fact of Lucretia examined
and disavowed the several sorts self-murder. and other by the circumstances of
persons, manner, and punishments to the same, due, and belonging, used to be
inflicted, and the violence thereby more to be observed in all the kinds of it,
soul-murder and sorts thereof, with the opposite duties, and some of the
Commandment observed,

1. Which is the sixth Commandment, or second of the second Table?
Thou shall do no murder, or thou shall not kill.

2. What is the order of this?
Next to that duty of obedience in the fifth Commandment the high way to the
observation of all the rest; this general duty of doing good to all,
especially respecting the preservation of the life and welfare of our
neighbors so dear to us all, as we see in the last pressed Commandment,
proposed as a most forcible reason, and so as of a thing of dearest price, care
thereof here first taken that we do not murder.

3. What manner of Commandment?
A negative inferring his opposite affirmative, viz. thou shall not only do no
murder, or any thing prejudicial to the life, or health, or person of thy
neighbor, or seek his blood, but by all means wish well unto him, and seek
the good and preservation of his health, life, and welfare.

4. What the negative part, and what here forbidden?
All murder, or injury and hurt to life, offered in thought, word, or deed, by
plotting, wishing, counsel or practice, against ones 1. neighbor, 2. own
self,
and that either outwardly in body, or inwardly in soul.


What the affirmative part, or here commanded?
All preservation or saving of life, or benefit to it afforded, whether by
welwishing, counsel, or helping hand, and so in heart, word, or deed, afforded
to ones neighbor, or self, in respect of body, or soul.

5. How the opposite parts herein seen, or opposed?
As by murder, all hurt and injury to life, all kinds of it, and means of
procuring thereof to ones own or neighbors body or soul, are to be
understood: and as to murder, and destroying of life, is opposed the saving of
life, and the preservation of the same.

And as to hurt and injury offered unto it, the benefit and help in any kind,
or by any means, whether thought, word, or deed, for the saving ones own, or
neighbors life, of soul or body.

6. What things in particular then understood forbidden?
Murder in the full extent in all the kinds, means and occasions thereof, with
the being accessory or consenting to the same, or any kind thereof, and so

1. Anger a short madness.

2. Hatred, a continued and inveterate anger.

3. Malice, offering to show it self with despite, and all uncharitableness
that are inward murders committed in the soul, and often occasions of
external quarrels, contentions and murder it self.

4. Reviling, quarrelling, brawling, slandering and backbiting, are murders by
the ill and lewd tongue, set on the fire of hell, setting on foot, and often
causing further murders.

5. Contentions, fighting, offering wrong, doing violence, and taking away
life, murders committed in act, etc. all which are forbidden here, as being
murders of the 1. heart and thought, 2. tongue and word, 3. hand and deed the
third sort.

7. What is murder in the foulest sense?
The barbarous and actual taking, or making away of ones own, or neighbors
life, and unjust shedding of blood.

8. What is the hoynousnesse of it?
A most inhumane, and barbarous fact, and most to be abhorred, as most opposite
to the goodness of God, the giver and preserver of life, as is also showed in
the severe punishment, blood for blood.

9. What is to be thought of the former branches thereof?
As participating of the foulness, and abomination thereof, and tending
thereunto, to be abhorred of men, and be accounted actual murder before God,
as who sees the heart, and often accepts or accounts the will for the deed.

10. Whence flows it?
Usually from the heart, and showing it self in the tongue, is acted in the
deed, and by the suggestion of the devil, who was the first murderer, or a
murderer from the beginning, a murderer of souls, as his eldest sons in
other murder, Cain the murderer of his innocent brother.

11. Which are the steps to actual murder?
1. Those cruel and poisonous passions in heart of unjust anger, hatred,
malice, and the like, as the second in

2. Raylings, revilings, quarrellings, and the other abuses of the tongue to
uncharity, and thirdly,

3. The open wrong, violence and contentious actions, whence murder produced,
either fully in foulest degree, or at least, even in the very least degree to
uncharity, and thereby the murder of the soul, whose life in grace, and in God
is love.

12. Why say you unjust anger?
To distinguish it from holy and just anger, which is also called godly zeal,
used to be against sins, as Moses for the Israelites Idolatry.

Because God is offended, and for his honor, as zeal of his glory.

Seen reconciled after repentance, herein seen arising fromlove, the love of
God by desire of his glory.

Love of our neighbor, and guided by love, with desire of his amendment, etc.

12. How is unjust anger known?
1. By the groundless unadvisednesse thereof, often on no just cause, but
rashness, and sometimes so habituated, that not only ira, but iracundia, given
over to hasty anger.

2. Extent, 1. in fury immoderate, so a short madness orrage.

2. In continuance, growing inveterate to hatred or malice.

13. What the fruit of this anger?
Envy and despitefulnesse, or desire and purpose of revenge, often breaking out
into more bitter flames of evil words, and worsedeeds.

14. What the opposite duty required?
Both holy and just anger against sin, and for Gods glory, and else long
suffering, mildness and goodness, by being,

1. Slow to anger. 2. Ready to forgive. 3. Ready to 1. pass by an offense. 2.
Forget it, and 3. Requite good for evil to the offenders, by 1. Helping, or 2.
Praying for them.


15. What is hatred?
An inveterate anger, or uncharitableness, conceived against our neighbor,
his person, or else,

1. Whether for evil received, or supposed, suspected or doubted.

2. For no cause but want of love.

3. Evil thou have done to him in unjustice, and so fear requital.

4. His goodness and justice most unjustly, as Abel hated by Cain for being
good, and Aristides not loved or favored for his being just.

16. What the fruits?
The same with the fruits of anger, or a more eager desire of revenge, and
other further mischief so budding into open hostility, enmity and
implacablenesse.

17. What the opposite duty required or commanded?
The hatred of the sin but love, and good esteem of thy neighbors virtues
and person, and with readiness to cover, and pass by offenses, and requite
good for evil, or to be reconciled.

18. What is malice?
A kind of violent hatred, more obvious to the sense, and ready to show it
self in action, or as it were hatred of the heart, showing it self more
openly with the bitter sting of desire of revenge, or other open and further
mischief, which whiles it is smothered, is accounted hatred when it begins
to work malice, and so the fruits or effects of inhumanity and churlishness,
and opposite duties of humanity, and courtesy may be better understood by those
of hatred, in some sort amplyfied, or extended more to the sight, and outward
appearance.

19. What is uncharitableness?
Generally the want of love in any degree, and showing it self on any
occasions against all sorts of persons, whether in prosperity or adversity.

Whether friends or foes.

Whether neighbors or strangers, or under our command.

20. How against those in prosperity and adversity?
Against those in prosperity, by 1. Envy against Superiors, as Pompey against
Caesar. 2. Emulation against equals, as Caesar against Pompey. 3. Disdain of
inferiors, as Haman set against Mordecai.


Against those in a dversity, by

1. Contempt in poverty.

2. Hardheartednesse in want.

3. Rejoyeing in others harms, or ill, called (...), Prove. 24. 17. Job 31. 29.
Psalm. 35. 19.

21. What opposite duty required?
Rather to wish others good, and congratulate their welfare, by rejoicing with
them that rejoice in prosperity, or pity, mercy and compassion, ready to
mourn with them that mourn, and help them in any calamity.

22. How against friends or foes?
1. Against friends, by

1. Feigned friendship, worse then open hostility, seen in slattery, treachery,
and the like.

2. Dissolving friendship, and setting friends at variance.

II. Against foes, by enmity, hostility, grudge and implacablenesse, and mind
to do mischief.

23. What duties on the other side required?
Christian, sincere, and constant friendship, or pacification among friends,
and charity and desire of reconciliation, to and with others.

24. How against neighbors, strangers, or underlings?
1. Against neighbors, by discord, contentions, and janglings, or unquiet and
harsh behavior.

2. Against strangers, by inhospitality and incivility.

3. Against those under our command and power, by cruelty and rigor, in
offering injuries, revenge, or harm, and unmercifulness, even to the dumb
beasts; for a good man is merciful even to the life of his beast.

25. What opposite duties required?
Peace and concord, peaceablenesse, hospitality, and civility, gentleness and
clemency.

26. What outward signs of uncharitableness, anger, hatred, or rankor?
1. The eyes cast down, or awry.

2. The countenance, distorted, or estranged.

3. The gestures, proud or disdainful.

4. The voice, loud speaking, or angerly, as tus^,

Racha, etc. Math. 5. 22. opposite to which, the signs of good will, in
courteous and mild behavior.

27. What farther degrees of murder?
In the tongue, and malicious words, either in

I. Presence, and to the face, or not secretly, as by

1. Brawling and scolding, or loud clamours.

2. Reviling and railing, noted by superiors against inferiors, with menacing.

By inferiors against superiors, murmuring.

3. Scoffing, and scorning, mocking and taunting, cursing and blaspheming, etc.

II. Absence, and behind ones back, tale-bearing, slandering, and calumny: to
which add those that are accessory to this ill, which as the sharp darts of
the devil, wound three at once, the soul of him that is telling, hearing,
wounded by the slander. And which as an untruth, is condemned in the ninth
Commandment, as a murderer of the good name, and reputation dear as life here.

28. What is the opposite duty here required?
A peaceable, temperate, and quiet tongue, speaking good, and not evil, or
words that may do hurt.

29. How are these sins branded, or the heynousnesse noted?
As the hater of his brother, a manslayer accounted, John 3. 15.

The tongue and heart set on fire of hell, James 3.

The sure token of reprobates, to have their throat an open sepulcher, poison
of Aspes under their lips, and their mouths full of cursing and bitterness,
Romans 3. 13.

30. What farther degrees of murder?
In quarrelling and contention.

In fighting and challenging.

In offering violence and wrong.

In taking away life of ones self, or ones neighbor: or the accessory or
assistant to any of these.

31. How quarrel and contention?
As a breach of charity and peace, and the high way to open murder and
bloodshed; and the like may be said of fighting, and chalenging, in time of
peace, to the danger of life, if not destroying thereof, or loss of life or
member.

32. What punishment?
Life for life, blood for blood, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand,
by the law of Moses, and Talion law, or Lex talionis.

33. What opposite duty?
A peaceable mind and hand, ready to do the actions tending to humanity and
concord.

34. What of offering violence and wrong?
As the forerunners, and occasions of shedding of blood, or destroying life,
whether by

1. Indignity or disgrace offered.

2. Hurting and wounding the body of our neighbor.

3. Grinding the faces of the poor, and oppression.

4. Using any means to impair the neighbors health, as by

Witchcraft, poisons, deceit.

Withholding help or relief, in our power; so Apothecaries, or unskilful
Physicians, and false drugs, or that use deceit in things medicinable, or
sustenance, to the adulterating of good things, and destruction of life and
health.

35. What opposite duty?
Just and conscionable dealing in all the aforesaid respects, and person, or
any other, for the conservation of life, or health, and detecting all deceit,
and preventing violence against the same.

36. What utmost degree of murder?
Taking away of life by violence, or else, of ones self, or other.

37 What of self murder?
A most unnatural sin, and most dangerous, as unless sin against the holy
Ghost, more monstrous then any others, and scarce having hope of repentance,
after so immediate temptations of the devil, to so horrible an act, as laying
violent hands on ones self, yielded unto, and as dying in Satan's work, and to
be feared in Satan's hands; only Gods boundless mercy, that inter pontem and
fontem, as fate inter calicem and labra, may show it self, but in all
probability and humane sense, a most dangerous, damnable, and desperate case.

38. What may be occasions of so horrible a sin so to be avoided?
1. Either pride in a high degree, and loath to stoop to others, or bear lower
fail then used, or will agree with so high a mind.

2. Some crying sins, as murder, adultery, perjury, usury, that tormenting
the conscience, drives to despair, and so divellish a design.

3. Apostasy from God, or the truth, or carnal security, blinding the eyes of
the soul, slipping from God, and into the power of Satan, and his temptations.

4. Poverty, disgraces, or other heavy crosses, overwhelming the soul, that
forgetting to lay hold on Gods mercy, the devil is ready to drive to this
desperate execution.

5. Melancholy, and such mists of mind, with any, or sometimes many, of the
foresaid things, and the devil like a roaring lion, always ready seeking whom
he may devour, taking occasion of all occasions, and our weakness, there
laying his strong battery of temptations, if we leaving God he give us over to
our selves, too weak for such a potent, inveterate, and malicious adversary.

39. What special remedy, or preservative in such danger?
Avoiding of sins, repentance of sins, to labor for patience in adversity,
and crosses, humility of soul; and by prayer to commit our selves and souls
into the hand of God.

But what if Satan, and his temptations, be too busy and present?
To remember he is a liar, and an adversary, and so that he suggesteth neither
truth nor good, for if he press the threatenings of the law, and grievousnesse
of notorious sins, yet the mercy of God is greater; if he urge thou art a
reprobate, yet he is a liar, and God is true and good, giving mercy to every
penetent sinner; if he say thou art unworthy, yet Christ in whom thou art, or
may be, if thou but desire it, is most worthy and beloved, and thy full
redemption and price; if he tempt thee to despair, or murder, that is a
denial of God, and his truth; if he bid thee so end thy forrowes, he is a
liar, for it is to god from temporal, to eternal sorrow; if he say thou must
commend thy soul to God, and die so, he is a liar, and if it were good, he
would not tell thee so, for it is to die in murder, and going from God, and a
murder of soul and body, and that everlastingly: so only fly to Gods mercy,
and leave sin, and Satan, and if thou pray for this, he cannot come nigh unto
thee, nor hurt thee.

40. But some as Lucretia have been commended for it for preservation of
chastity or virtue?
It may be so by heathens that know not God, but not by Christians, who know
Gods Law, and the damnablenesse of the crime, and so Saint Augustine shows
this Lucretia's vice in this, though by the heathens commended for a virtue,
whose chastity was to be admired, but selfe-murder to be discommended, lib. de
Civitate Dei.

41. What sorts of selfe-murder?
Either 1. Body and life natural, by 1. Omission, and neglecting of the means
of life, for niggardliness, or starving through idleness, or not using other
lawful means of preserving the same. 2. Commission of ill in prejudice thereof
by 1. Sins of drunkenness, whoredom, or excess, imparing health. 2. Thrusting
ones self in danger therewith, quarrelling etc. and 3. Contriving their own
death, 1. Indirectly, by committing some capital crime worthy death. 2. Being
their own butchers, and murderers


2. Soul, by 1. Omission in the neglecting the means of salvation, etc. 2.
Commission in 1. Making no conscience of sin, but sinning against conscience,
and knowledge. 2. Persisting in sin without grace or repentance.




4. What opposite duty required?
Seeking all ordinary and honest means of preservation of life, and health by
moderate recreations of body or mind, physic and avoiding dangers or sins,
so distempering both body and soul, and finally for the souls health, seeking
the means of salvation, flying sin, and praying and practicing repentance.

43. What in other murder else to be considered?
The person, as well as the matter, manner and punishment.

44. What of the persons?
The 1. Murderer, whether 1. Principal, or 2. Accessory.
2. Murdered, whether 1. Stranger, or near of kin. 2. Private person or
public. 3. Offender, or innocent person,
whereby the guilt is diversely distinguished, and so accepted, extenuate or
increased.



45. How the principal or accessory?
I. The principal, as prime agent, the deepest in offense. II. The accessory,
also murderers, if abettors, or counselors, whether 1. Superiors, by 1.
Unjust command. 2. Wrongful sentence. 3. Not punishing murder, but co^niving
at one to the perpetration of other.
2. Any others, by 1. Consent and abetting. 2. Counsel or hiring. 3. False
testimon. 4. Treachery, etc.


46. What the other respects?
As 1. the parricide, or murderer of father, brother, or near kin, more
abominable then the ordinary homicide. Secondly, the regicide, or murderer of
superiors, or them in authority, as of servants their Masters, or wives of
husbands, or private persons of public, accounted treason or petty treason in
the lowest degree, more abominable then common murder. Thirdly, the murder of
an innocent person more then of an offender, and proscribed, or condemned
person, who is yet to be put to death by the person, and manner appointed by
law, and not at randon by any person, which were murder, but done according to
law, is not only not evil, but good and just.

47. How is it said to be good and just?
As warranted both by divine and humane law, when blood requiring blood, God
commanding that who sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, and
who so blasphemeth, or obey not the Father, Deuteronomy. 21. 8. 19. 20. or the voice
of the Priest, Dent. 17. 12. the Sabbath breaker adulterer, ravisher, and
diverse other in Gods Law, and such exorbitant offenses by humane laws
commanded to be punished by death, and so the Magistrate bears the sword not
for naught, Romans 13. 4.

48. All taking away life is not then here forbidden?
No, for hence are exempted and excepted all those persons, and in all those
cases where the Lord himself

1. Gives the sword

Of justice, as the Magistrate, who bears it not for naught.

In lawful battle, as the soldier for their Prince or Country.

In just defense, as of ones self against thieves, robbers, or other necessity.

2. Offers another, as manslaughter, by mere chance, and not of any malice,
or anger, for whom God provideth refuge of sanctuary, Exodus 21. 13. Deuteronomy. 19. 4.

49. How of Moses, Phinees, and the like?
Of special instinct, and commission from God, in extraordinary manner, and if
private men, yet of heroical or divine zeal; but Christians must follow
ordinary rules, and examples, not special exceptions or imitations of
extraordinary actions.

50. What else of the matter or manner?
Murder, or the taking away the life, the greatest wrong that can be done to
man, and defacing of Gods image, is either in respect of The 1. Means
perpetrated, 1. Directly, by force and violence. 2. Indirectly, by Poison,
Witchcraft, or the like.

2. Manner, and motion 1. Ones own accord, and that of 1. Maliceprepensed. 2.
Blind zeal. 3. Heat and choler 4. Drunkenness, or other passion
2. Another, as 1. Commanded 2. Counseled 3. Hired, etc.
to do it.



51. What the punishment?
Blood for blood usually, and in some fearful manner also, according to the
aggravation of the offense; so that who spilleth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be spilt, it being a crying sin, as Cains murder, Abels blood crying to
heaven for revenge, Gods judgment showing it self many times in extraordinary
manner revealing the murderer, and presenting him to be punished, as by the
dead body, sometimes the blood, or the murderers own conscience.

52. Why so severe punishment?
Because it is even 1. A destruction of the little world, the Microcosme of man.

2. Defacing of Gods image, betwixt which and clipping the Kings coin, wherein
is his image, (yet death for it) there is no comparison.

3. An encroaching upon Gods office, whose only right to call men when he
please, out of the world 4. The greatest sin against man that can be, unless
murder of his soul, which also is punished, like as this, blood for blood,
soul for soul; so the blood of souls is required at their hands, and lies
heavy in their heads that destroy them.

53. How is soul murder understood?
Either in respect of the life

I. Natural, an unjust grieving and vexing of a man's soul.

II. Spiritual, by first, omission of duties of

1. Governors, Ministers, Masters, to whom belongs the guiding, care, and

2. Instruction of others, for their souls health, and salvation.

Second, commission, in being cause of sin and offense, as by provocation,
counsel, evil example, etc.

54. What duties opposite required?
Both preservation of life, and preventing, so much as possible, all means of
hurt, both in ones self, and others, with helping, and not hindering our own
and others salvation, but furthering the same by Instruction, admonition,
exhortation, reproof.

Consolation, and any other pious means, as well as good example.

55. What the sum of all?
The preservation of life, both of body and soul, and avoiding of all hurt, or
hindrance of the same, with that crying sin of murder.

56. What follows?
The seventh Commandment, third of the second Table, importing the
preservation of the chastity.

SECT. 9. The seventh Commandment.
the order, and analysis of the seventh Commandment, showing the several
parts and duties, and their branches, whether intimated or expressed, and first
of chastity body and soul, and opposite unchastity in the several sorts and
branches or degrees of each of them, whence the latitude of the Commandment in
all these respects more evidently to be seen and observed where, the means
also of preserving chastity in our selves and others, and the opposite offenses
touched, the degrees in this sin from the heart, and all outward signs and
appearances of evil, the messengers of the soul, and means with, and by the
senses to the farther degrees of this sin in actual adultery, and
fornication, where pride in attire, gadding abroad, dancing, and such like
lascivious, and wanton actions, behavior and gestures, by diverse Writers are
sharply censured, and reproved, as the means, and occasions of much other
filthiness, and further mischief, and so the foulness, heynousnesse of
adultery farther set forth, and demonstrated by the vile effects, punishments,
and the like circumstances of the action, as well as laws, and execution of
them duly cared for, and seen to by the Lawmakers themselves, with great
severity, and others by their example, prosecuting and persecuting the crime
with the greatest detestation, and to that purpose the sentences of the
Scriptures, and Fathers; as on the other side, the excellent praise and
commendation of chastity. And lastly, the means to be taken and used for
avoiding so crying and heinous crimes, the godly entering into the holy estate
of matrimony, and what godly caution and circumspection therein to be used: so
lastly of Sodomy, Incest, and such unnatural sins, and what generally here
commanded, and intended.

1. What is the seventh Commandment?
Thou shall not commit adultery.

2. What is the order of it?
Next to the forbidding of murder, as the next greatest offense, and in his
nature so foul, as deserves death, according to the law of God, and sundry
Nations, and so placed here, before theft, and next to murder.

3. What manner of Commandment?
A negative, inferring his opposite affirmative, viz. thou shall not commit any
act of uncleanness, but preserve thy body and soul in temperance, soberness,
and chastity.

4. What the negative part?
The prohibition of all unchastity, or uncleannes of body and soul, and of all
signs, or tokens, means or provocations of the same, or being accessory
thereunto.

5. What in these branches then more expressly forbidden?
1. All outward actions of uncleanness, adultery, fornication, incest, etc. 2.
All filthy' and obscene speeches, books, pictures, etc. 3. All incontinent
thoughts, and lusts of heart. 4. All occasions of uncleanness, as surfeiting,
drunkenness. 5. All accessorinesse to any filthiness in this kind, etc.
6. What the affirmative part?
Commanding chastity of body and soul, and all 1. Signs and tokens, 2. Means
and occasions preservation of the same, both in our selves and others.


7. What in these branches more expressly to be understood?
1. Both temperance, soberness, and chastity in outward actions of the body,
and to keep that a Temple of the holy Ghost.

2. Honesty and modesty in speeches, and expressions of the mind.

3. Continency, sobriety, and chastity of mind and soul.

4. All good means of preservation of this virtue, by temperance, fasting,
labor, prayer, etc.

5. Labor and well wishing to the preservation of others chastity and virtue.

8. How are the parts here seen opposite or opposed?
Evidently and plainly, as

1. Chastity commanded; opposite to uncleanness forbidden.

2. Modest speeches; opposite to obscene and filthy, forbidden.

3. Continency of mind, opposite to incontinency, and lusts of heart.

4. Means of preservation of this virtue in our selves, opposite to the means
and occasions of falling.

5. Labor to preserve, or procure it in others, opposite to the being
accessory to others uncleannes.

9. What is chastity?
The preservation, or study to preserve body and soul in purity, and from all
pollutions of uncleanness, and concupiscence of the flesh, and so

Both inward of the soul,

External of the body,

Total of both body and soul.

10. What is inward chastity, or that of the soul?
The purity of the soul from all 1. Motions, 2. Passions,
of lusts, and unlawful concupiscence.

11. What is the opposite, or unchastity of the soul?
Inward concupiscence, or adultery of the heart, Matthew. 5. 25.

1. Whether before the consent of will, forbidden more expressly in the tenth
Commandment.

2. Joined with consent of will, and that either

1. Sudden flames, or motions of lust.

2. Inveterate lusts, and burning in unclean flames of letchery.

12. What outward chastity?
The possessing of the vessels of our bodies in holiness and honor, both
continency of

1. The eyes from beholding vanity, and objects of lust.

2. The ears from hearing, or harkening after unclean and filthy talk.

3. The tongue from filthy and ribauld speeches.

4. The whole body and fact from all uncleanness, and unchaste and wanton
pleasures.

13. What the opposite unchastity?
All outward pollutions of the body, or any part thereof, by uncleanness, as
adultery of the eyes, wandering after evil, and said full of adultery,

Active, with wanton glances, to entangle others.

Passive, beholding others so entangled.

1. Of the ears open to filthy communication.

2. Of the tongue polluted with ribauld and lewd speeches.

3. Of the fact of all uncleanness, and lasciviousness.

14. How mean you that uncleanness of the fact?
The acts of adultery, fornication, incest, or the like pollutions, committed
either

1. Against sobriety, without a partner, inselfe polution, whether

Sleeping,

Waking,

2. Honesty, with a partner, and

I. Without consent, so forced, or ravished; rape, which, as an act of

Violence against the 6. Commandment.

Brutish uncleanness, against this, and punished with death.

II. With consent, and that either

First, natural, of the male with the female, and between persons

1. Too near of kin, incest.

2. Single or unmarried, fornication.

And if first, only with one, she a concubine;

Secondly, with diverse, she a whore, and he a whoremonger.

3. Married, and that either

To diverse, polygamy.

With unmarried, single adultery.

With another married person, double adultery.

Secondly, unnatural, against natural use, and monstrous, as

Of the same sex, Buggery, or Sodomy.

Of diverse kinds, man with beasts, bestiality.

With spirits, Incubi. Succubi.


15. How is chastity usually set forth?
1. In single life, continency, the gift of God, to which belongs chaste
widowhood.

2. Marriage,

Conjugall fidelity.

Moderate and modest use of the marriage bed.

Abstinency, on occasion of

Absence.

Fasting, and prayer.

Times of separation, etc. as childbed, or any other sickness.

16. What the opposite of this?
1. Both incontinency in single life, or widowhood.

2. Breach of wedlock.

3. Using the marriage bed,

First, immoderately, and lustfully.

Secondly, immodestly, without shamefastness, or honesty.

Thirdly, unseasonably, at forhidden times.

17. What means of preserving chastity to be observed?
I. Either general,

1. Prayer for continency, as the gift of God. 2. Keeping company with sober
and chaste persons.
II. Special preservatives and remedies, 1. Sobriety, and moderation of
delights. 2. Temperance in diet. 3. Diligence and painfulnesse in our callings.
4. Vigilance over our affections. 5. Modesty in eyes and countenance. Speech,
and behavior. Attire, and gesture. 6. Marriage it self, the lawful remedy,
if the other means fail, provided, that such as have not the gift of
continency may marry, and keep themselves undefiled members of Christ's body.


18. What opposite to this?
I. Both frequenting the company of unchaste, drunken, effeminate and wanton
persons, places suspected and infamed.

II. Intemperance in gluttony, drunkenness, and the like.

III. Idleness and slothfulness.

IIII. Immodest,

1. Eyes, beholding unchaste, or beautiful and wanton persons, obscene
pictures, reading lewd books or plays.

2. Countenance impudent and harlots forhead

3. Speech, gesture, and gate, wanton mincing and dancing.

4. Attire, proud and excessive.

V. Unlawful marriages, vows, divorces, either expressly, and ipso facto,
adultery, or the occasions and means of it.

19. What signs of chastity to be noted?
Sobriety, modesty, and shamefaltnesse, keeping good and chaste company, and
avoiding suspicious show of evil, which are both means and signs of
chastity, and so doubly worth the regard, as on the contrary, wantonness,
immodesty, impudency, haunting unchaste company, suspected places, and at
suspected times, both signs and means of unchastity.

20. What duty of procuring, or preserving others chastity?
The general care thereof in all, as occasion serves, and especially,

For parents to provide for their childrens honest bringing up, behavior and
marriage.

For Magistrates to provide good laws, and due execution with severe
punishments, to repress uncleanness.

21. What the opposite hereof?
To be accessory or procurers of others unchastity, as bawds, the devils
instruments to bring naughty packs together; those that counsel, consent,
hire, or allure to uncleanness, or prostitute them, whose chastity they ought,
or promised to protect, and so Parents, Magistrates, or others that connive at
such offense, deny or forbid the remedy, marriage, or execute not due
punishment against the offenders.

22. What are the degrees in this sin?
1. In this order the first means, motives, and all occasions of this sin, by
gluttony, drunkenness, intemperance, or other means whatsoever.

2. Motions of the heart, whether with, or without consent of the will; so who
sees a woman to lust, has committed adultery, Mat. 5. 28.

3. Outward appearance of evil in adulterous, and unchaste eye, and
countenance, tongue, gesture, attire, etc.

4. Fornication, and the act of uncleanness in any sort.

5. Adultery, and other the monstrous and unnatural sins, whose punishments
ordinarily by divine and humane laws is death, and sometimes with more
infamous aggravations thereof.

23 How account you of the first degree?
As the high way to the foulest of the rest, and therefore he that would avoid
crying and great sins, ought to make conscience of the smallest, as occasions
draw on the action, and gluttony and drunkenness marshall in chambering and
wantonness, the heart is made the shop and store house of sin, and the eyes
the lewd shop windows to let it in, or set it to sale; evil words corrupt
good manners; light and vain apparel, curious ornaments, frizeled hair, and
the like, signs of looseness, and immodesty, as idleness the way to
wantonness, and that to impudency, which at last brings forth fornication,
and adultery, or other gross and crying sins.

24. What of pride in atire, dancing and gadding abroad?
As appearances of evil, and fruits of the flesh, if not open defiance, and
enmity with God, and so noted always as pride the forerunner of shame, wanton
dancing of all good men condemned as an extreme folly, and enticement to
lewdness, if not used with rare moderation, as for the dancing in armor in
the Pirrichian dances, or men, or women by themselves for exercise, or joy of
some great good hap, or victory, as Miriam as David before the Arc, excellent
and commended by all, but for lascivious and amorous dances, men and women
confusedly together, with wanton gestures, kissings, and dalliance, the fuel
of lust; and as Herodias daughters dancing cost Saint John Baptists head, so
this many a headless soul, and for gadding abroad, the token of the wanton
and idle widows, 1 Timothy 5. 12. and of the harlot, and those of loose
behavior, Prove. 7. 9. and cost Dinah her honesty, and the Sichemites their
ruin.

25. Some speak very bitter words against dancing?
Very true, and so to be understood of wanton and dissolute dancing, and at
unfit times, or in too impudent and foolish manner, with mimique, and even zany
gestures and fashions, as loosely as lewdly performed, the very fellows to
kindle the flames of lust, and impudency, and such indeed was the gravity of
the Romans at sometimes, and some other Nations, that they highly detested, or
were displeased with such lightness, and folly, as Demosthenes before his
Athenians, reproached Philip of Macedon, and his Courtiers for common dancers,
such as having filled their bellies with meat, and heads with wine, fell
scurriloussy and loosely a dancing: and Salust of Sempronia said, she was to
fine a singer and dancer to be honorable withal; and Cioero in his Apology
for Murena, challenged also for dancing, not minding to excuse it of him,
puts it of, or slatly denies it, with a concession, nemo saltat sobrius,
and Plutarch in the virtues of women, puts it, that she ought to be no
dauncer.

26. But do not the Fathers and Doctors say as much?
Yes, for Saint Basil says, thou caprest and leapest with thy feet in dances,
(unwise as thou art) when thou should rather bend thy knees in prayer to thy
Creator; but what gain is got thereby? surely this, that virgins return
robbed of their virginity, married wives of the truth to their husbands, all
less chaste then they went, and more dishonest then they should, though less
perhaps then they would, as if not in act, which peradventure may be, yet
stained in thought, which cannot be eschewed.

1. So Saint Chrysostom says to the maids and wives that dance at marriages
and so pollute their sex in such lascivious daunces, the devil bears a part,
as dancing with them.

2. Saint Ambrose, that it is better to dig and delve on holy days then to
dance, and where banquets are concluded with dancing, there chastity is
commonly but in an evil case.

3. Vives in his instruction to a Christian woman has not a little to this
purpose, who holds it for a strange vanity, and says he, certain Asians
seeing the Spaniards dance, ran away for fear, thinking them lunaticke,
nothing resembling lunacy and frenzy, more then that foolish gesture of
dancing, the strange shakings and motions of the body at the noise of a beaten
sheeps skin, and ridiculous, to mark the grave behavior, measurable march,
pomp and ostentation of women dauncers, and the great care they have to
perform wisely so foolish an action, that it is very likely at that time all
their wit is distilled from their head into their feet, for that there it is
then more requisite and needful then in their brains, as says Lodovicus
Vives.

27. How is this to be understood?
Of the immoderate, foolish and inordinate use, or rather abuse of them, too
commonly seen, the froth and fume of wine and excesses, and nurse of
lewdness, and laciviousnesse, or worse, if worse may be, as sometimes
quarrels, rappes, murders, and the like, have been occasioned by them, as
among others, Herodias dancing daughters cunning herein, cost Saint John
Baptists head, when especially consorted with drunkenness, as too often may be
observed, what good effects to be expected, since as Saint Augustine notes,
Sermon. 231. de vitanda ebrietate, as by too much rain, the earth is dissolved
into dirt, and made unfit for tillage, so by excessive drunkenness, our bodies
are made altogether unfit for the spiritual tillage, and can bring forth no
fruits of holiness, but rather like bogs and marshes, are fit to breed nothing
but serpents, frogs and vermin, all manner of abominable sins, and loathsome
wickedness, and this a prime companion of dancing, or at least dancing an
usual dependant on wine and belly cheer.

28. Is no dancing then to be allowed?
Surely as before was showed, it ought to be with great caution, or sparingly,
and singular moderation, for fear of inconvenience thence arising, and so
proving but an incentive to lust and folly.

29. What in the next degrees?
All kind of incontinency from the heart as it were budding forth by any
outward shows of words, habit, attire or gesture, forwarded and expressed, and
by such midwives brought to the full birth, and produced into act in all the
species, and kinds thereof.

30. Which are the kinds?
As were before remembered, or according to the Schoolmen and summists of these
six sorts, viz.

1. Fornication among the unmarried or single.

2. Adultery, where one, or both married.

3. Incest, with any of affinity, or consanguinity, within the degrees
forbidden.

4. Deflowring of virgins called Stuprum.

5. Rape, or ravishing, which is against the will, and with violence.

6. Unnatural lust.

1. Inordinate of sexes, sodomy.

2. With beasts, beastiallity.

3. With spirits, Incubi, Succubi, and to which may be referred all other
nocturnall and selfe-pollutions, arising especially of riot, intemperance and
excess.

31. But are not Stuprum and Rape also fornication?
They are, but in a higher or worse degree, according to the quality of the
person wronged, as a virgin, or else, and so diversity of punishment or
satisfaction by diverse laws appointed, or with violence, and so rape
punishable with death, both by Gods Law and others, to avoid more dangerous
consequences.

32. What of fornication?
As next to adultery in foulness before God, and lightly who falls to the
one, makes small conscience of the other, and the whore compared to a dog
before God, when neither the hire of a whore, nor price of a dog might be
brought or offered in the Temple, Deuteronomy. 23. 18. and many ways, the odiousness
thereof appearing.

33. How is the detestablenesse thereof shown?
1. Because of the indignity hereof offered to Christ in it, whose members the
Christian hereby made the members of a harlot, 1 Cor. 6. 15.

2. The wronging of the good Spirit of God, dispossessed of his House, and
Temple, the body and soul of a Christian, 1 Cor. 6. 19. the holy Spirit
expelled, and lust brought in.

3. The greatest wrong that can be to the body and soul, and others also, as
every sin else without the body, this is the body fighting against the soul,
and cutting it off from God, divorcing it from Christ, and from Gods Spirit,
dissolving the Covenant of God, and Idolatry compared with it, or unto it.

33. What say you then of Adultery?
As a most heinous sin before God, and men, and odious to all, most severely
appointed to be punished by death, so both the adulterer, with the married
wife, or betrothed maid, with the adulteress, both to dye, Deuteronomy. 22. 22.

34. How is it adultery accounted with the maid?
Because she is betrothed, and thence forth reputed wife, and that full
adultery, which is so farther distinguished to be either

I. Adultery single, where one party only is married, and that

1. Properly so called, if the woman be married or betrothed, for so it is
fully adultery, and he an adulterer, and she an adulteress.

2. Improperly, if the man only be married, so called improperly adultery,
since she but a concubine.

II. Adultery double, when by married man, with woman married or betrothed.

35. How compared with fornication?
Far greater for that in simple fornication, seen by the Law of God the truest
estimation of things,

1. It was punished with pecuniary mulct, as the dowry of virgins, but adultery
with death.

2. Notwithstanding the fact so permitted that the persons might marry, and
were so commanded if the virgins father did consent, but adulterous persons
sentenced to suffer death, and since forbidden ever to marry together for
diverse reasons, and respects,

1. Both to themselves so polluted.

2. Others, whose lives might be endangered by such permission.

That by such evil examples, others might be drawn on to mischief.

3. It was offense only, or chiefly to themselves, though both in body and soul
and against God, and the congregation, but adultery also against others in the
highest degree, and so most severely taken notice of, and punished, as shall be
showed, and thereby the heynousnesse thereof more evidently appearing.

36. How so heinous a sin, that so severely punished?
1. As a breach of a most sacred covenant made before God, yea and with God
accounted; so the lewd woman said to forget the covenant of her God, Prove. 2.
17.

2. The greatest disgrace to a family that may be, when the mother a where, the
children bastards, and a family instead of a chaste household, and Church of God
made a brothell house, or stews, loathsome to God, and all good men.

3. An intolerable wrong to the husband so abused, in that he nourishes,
brings up, and provideth for the bastardly brood of lewd knaves, as for his
own, hereby robbed of his estate, and so adultery joined with theft, and much
greater in many respects.

37. How is it greater or worse then theft?
As the abused husband,

1. Is prevented and defrauded of his greatest worldly comfort, the love of his
wife, and her fidelity.

2. Defrauded and wronged in his greatest worldly treasure, the bastards
suggested in stead of gennine, and true begotten children.

3. Is continually robbed and wronged in his estate, as every bit of bread, the
adultresse or her brats do eat a continual theft, and she since she so cut
herself from him, and her bastardly issue continual thieves.

4. Sometimes, as continually, so wholly robbed of his estate, and his
inheritance transferred to the bastardly breed of some lewd varlot, and harlot.

5. And lastly with him sometimes, others robbed; as the inheritance, and
estate, that ought to descend to them, thus carried to others that worst and
least deserve any good; and hence the severity of diverse laws both divine and
humane, that show the odiousness and deterstation of it among all Nations by
the punishments,

39. What punishments?
By the Law,

1. Of God, death, as aforesaid, Deuteronomy. 22. 22.

2. Solon, lawful instantly to kill those taken in adultery.

3. Certain Indians adjudging the adultresse to cut the adulterers throat, and
some kinsman of hers.

4. Nebuchadnezar broiling them on a gridiron.

5. Zaleucus among the Locrians, to have their eyes put out.

6. Egyptians the adulterous nose cut off, and the adulterer to have a thousand
stripes

7. Turks though allowing many wives, yet adultery punished with death usually.

40. How many instances of the execution of such laws?
If there were not yet the laws and sentence of them, and the law makers
sufficiently show the foulness of the evil, but both execution of them
according to the letter, are abundantly showed in stories, and even beyond the
letter of them, approved of by Magistrates, and such as had the power of
interpretation, and execution of them, and some others.

41. How show you that?
1. Zaleucus, whose own son and heir of his kingdom, taken in adultery,
and the subjects praying release of the punishment, the father caused one of
his sons eyes, and one of his own to be put out in execution of the Law.

2. In Alexander, approving the act of the noble Theban Lady, Timoclea that
slew her adulterous ravisher.

3. In the Romans, that punished the adultetry, and ravishing of the Lady
Paulina with destruction of the Priests and Temple of Isis, by whose means it
was done.

5. In the famous strumpet, and adulterous Messalina, lastly executed by the
good Emperor Claudius command.

6. In the law Julia executed long time duly, and adulterers, both of noble
blood, and else, without difference put to death, as testified by all Writers,
and Tacitus with them.

7. In the Emperor first Valentinians time, many noble women of great
parentage, for adulery put to death, as testifies Ammianus Marcellinus.

8. In Andreas King of Hungaria, whose Queen having betrayed a noble Lady, wife
of Baudebam to her brothers rape, and being slain by him, who with his bloody
sword, carring her heart to the King, had his act approved and retained his
honor.

8. In Philip the fair, King of France, that spared not his own daughters
adultresses, or their Paramours.

9. In Laws the eleventh, that never made show of anger, or offense for his
sisters death, slain by her husband Seneschall of Normandy with her adulterer
in bed together.

10. In Gonzaga Duke of Ferrara, that caused his treacherous and adulterous
Captain, first to marry the party wronged, (and whose husband he had slain to
marry her) and then hanged him.

11. In the rape of Lucretia, where for Tarquinius adultery, the Kings and
their race banished, and whole form of government changed, and many like
stories, or as pregnant of the odiousness of adultery, and punishments
attending, inflicted both by the hand of God and men.

42. Recite some of them?
1. Such as King Osbrights adultery, and rape of the Lord Bruers wife, the
bringing in of the Danes in revenge of it, and subversion of his estate and
kingdom, with many others, and the ruin of all England.

2. Such as Paris and Helens adultery, the ruin of Troy, and firebrand of
almost all Asia and Greece.

3. Such as Valentinians the third, his adultery with Petronius Maximus wife,
that cost his life, besides the sacking of Rome, and destruction of the Roman
Empire, with the death of many thousands, bringing in Gensericus King of the
Vandalls, and all miseries that follow war and desolation.

4. Such as David's adultery, punished with many plagues and crosses in
himself, and his Kingdom, and with lewd children.

5. Such as the Benjamites adultery, with the Levites wife, or concubine, the
rooting out of that tribe, and fearful dissolution, Judge. 20.

7. Such as the Israelites adultery with the Midianitish women, causing the
plague, wherein 24000. slain, and the Mideanites, and their whorish wives and
women utter destruction by Gods command, all of them, saving the unpolluted
virvins.

42. In this sufficiently declared the odiousness of this soul and crying sin?
If it be not, you have it at least charactered fully in the book of God, and
writings of other holy men that describe it in the proper colors, with the
punishment and vengeance due, and belonging,

1. As whoremongers, and adulterers, God will judge, Heb. 13. 4.

2 Such shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9.

3. Adultery is a fire that devoureth to destruction, Job 31. 12.

4. Saint Basil says, adultery is the hook of the devil, whereby he draws
us to destruction.

5. Gregory, it is a furnace, whose mouth gluttony, flame pride, sparkles
filthy words, smoke infamy, ashes poverty and shame.

It is noted of it, it wounds body and soul, goods, and good name,
posterity, and all that belong to us, to death.

43. How is it to be showed?
As it wounds a man, or he wounds himself,

1. In his body, as well as soul by it, and fornication polluted, 1 Cor. 6. 13.

2. In his soul polluted, and dishonored, Prove. 6 31.

3. In his wife wronged, despised, Mal. 2. 14.

4. In his children impoverished, punished, or bastardized, threatened, and seen
in David, and his posterity, 1 Samuel 12. 10. and Prove. 6. 25.

5. In his goods and estate commonly wasted, Job 31. 12.

6. In understanding and judgment, Prove. 6. 32.

7. Name, and to his dishonor, Prove. 6. 33. and so it wounds every way, even
to death, that it is true of this in an eminent degree, lust having conceived,
brings forth sin, and sin perfected, brings forth death.

44. But what say you then of chastity in the other side?
As much by all to be honored and admired, and no less seen blessed by God,
then by all commended.

45. How show you this?
In that it is remembered, as of humility to be the root, continence the
girdle, temperance the nurse, so chastity the crown of all virtues; and all
Saints and souls of the just that shall be taken up to Sion, and the new
Jerusalem in the emblem of this, as with the title of Virgins, and crown of
chastity, in token of their holy desires, as redeemed from men, the corruptions
and pollutions of the world, are so only said worthy to accompany, and follow
the Lamb; and the blessing of Joseph that mirror of chastity on earth, do
abundantly testify.

46. How in Joseph?
In that, for his sake the Lord knowing, and thereby testifying his innocence,
many received blessings,

1. As his Masters house, that prospered in all that was under his hand.

2. As the keeper of the prison, that committed all to his charge, seeing it so
to prosper.

3. As Pharaoh and his whole house, and servants that so honored him.

4. As the whole land of Egypt preserved by him, and his wisdom God blessing
him.

5. As his father also, and whole family preserved from fury of the famine, and
destruction by his hand, and God working by him.

6. And so good to the whole Church of God then comprised in them, being
faithful Abraham's family.

47. How then was Polygamy being but a kinds of pollution, allowed to the Jews?
1. As a peculiar privilege of that people only then in expectation of the
Messiah, and blessing of many children.

2. As a dispensation of the Law, and for the hardness of their hearts more
truly alleged.

3. As a connivencie to the hardness of their hearts, rather then full
allowance, by such tolleration, or making it lawful; and yet where many wives
allowed, the same law for adultery in full force, and with death to be punished.

48. What can be said then more in detestation and of the heinousness of those
crying sins?
There needs no more for full manifestation thereof, unless we say with S.
Gregory, lib. 31. Mor. or Tho. secunda, secundae q. 153. art. 5. that the
sequel, or eight infernal daughters that follow them, may seem to make them
show more detestable, which are reckoned to be

1. Blindness of mind. 2. Precipitancie. 3. Inconsideration. 4. Inconstancy.
5. Self-love. 6. Love of this world. 7. Fear of the future. 8. And hate of
God.
Which though the offspring of all, or many other sins, more often, and
especially from this spring, for as says Navar sum. do Luxuria, cap. 23. sect.
113. Hoc vitium inclinando mentem, ad delectationem veneroru^, quae est omnium
vehementissima, occupat partem animae inferiorem, in appetendo and
procurandoilla, and rursus rapit ad idem superiorem sibi valde cognatam, quasi
vim inferendo, ut non permittat illi, circa ult. ad alium debet finem intendere
nec media ad ille illum deligere, at impellet ad se, mundumque hunc, minis
amandum, futurumque horrendum, tandemque ad deum ultorem, odio habendum, quo
fit, ut eo longius ab hoc vitio excaecante, abesse debeam contemplationi
addicti, literis dediti gubernatores, duces, and judices, quo Lucidiori
prudentia sapientia, consilio circumspectione and constantia indigent, tam ad
prefigendas sines, and scopos, quem ad diligendum media, quibus cos assequantur.

49. What is the best course to be taken to avoid so horrible a sin?
Surely, even 1. To avoid even the first motions or occasions, and so less
endangered to fall into the enormousnesse thereof.

2. To make conscience of the least sins, so more easily to avoid more crying
sins, a good course in all sins, and all degrees of them.

3. To avoid the causes of sin, especially, and apply all lawful remedies.

50. Which are they in this sin?
Remembered before under the names of occasions or means of falling, opposite
to the means of preserving chastity, and may be thus marshalled, as the causes
of this sin, with their remedies in this order,

As

1. Natural corruption. 2. Excess and riot. 3. Idleness and ease. 4. Soft
apparel and delicacie. 5. Unstaidnesse of mind. 6. Wandering senses. 7. Evil
occasions of all sorts, and especially evil company.
To which may and ought to be opposed as remedies, 1. Prayer. 2. Abstinencie.
3. Honest labors. 4. Temperance. 5. Sobriety and modesty. 6. Restraint of
senses. 7. Shunning of occasions, and especially evil company.


51. Explane it further?
Natural corruption, that brings forth sin, and that death, Ja. 1. 15.
continually abides and buddeth forth in us, which is to be restrained by
grace, sought for, and obtained by prayer, Ja. 1. 5. Secondly, excess and riot
is the shop of lust, against which, abstinencie is to be opposed; for else as
Gregory Nazian. says, who pampereth his belly, and would overcome the spirit
of fornication, is like him that would quench a flame with oil, and so Prove.
23. 33. Thirdly, idleness is the opportunity that Satan and lust desires to
enter by: opposite to which, honest labor in a calling that cutteth the throat
of that fiend, otia si tollas periere, etc.

Fourthly, soft apparel, minstralsey, and delicacie, are the bellows that
blow the fire, and nurse of idleness and lust, as temperance of chastity, and
all virtues.

Fifthly, unstaid, and wandering thoughts, usher in looseness, and wontonnesse,
that sobriety, modesty, and staidness of mind seek to expel.

Sixthly, eyes wandering, and ears open to evil whisperings of lust and Satan,
are the windows to let in sin, that such fit restraint of the senses should
avoid; and lastly, shunning evil company, is to avoid many especial, and
pregnant occasions, or causes of much evil.

52 What say you then of marriage?
A remedy also, and so appointed, that they that have not the gift of
continency, may marry, and so keep themselves und efiled members of Christ's
body, and which ought to be done in the Lord, and with an especial care of
diverse circumstances and things therein.

53. What special care to be had then in marriage?
Principally to observe as near as can be, and have respect unto,

I. The equality of the parties in 1. Religion, 2 Cor. 6. 14. and 1 Cor. 7. 39.
2. Age. 3. Parentage. 4. Condition, and the like things.
II. The ends for which marriage ordained, 1. Avoiding incontinencie. 2.
Mutual help, comfort, and society, spiritual, temporal. 3. Increase of a
faithful and blessed seed in the Church.
III. The nearness of degrees or impediments, by law prohibited to shun
them. IV. The consent of Parents, Deuteronomy 7. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 38. Parties themselves,
and their mutual love, and affection, as Genesis 24. 27, etc.

Opposite to which, as in general to marriage, the forbidding or ungodly
restraint thereof, unlawful divorces and marriages, so in particular, the
neglect of these cautions in the contracting of marriage it self, which is
intended to be a furtherance to godliness, honesty and chastity; but in the
neglect, may prove but a gap to incontinencie, and evil of all sorts, as well
as adultery or fornication.

54. What to be said of incest?
As a detestable offense, and the heynousnesse gathered by the punishment
death, Levit. 20. 10. and the odiousness since forbidden; also seen in the
dishonor of blood, and holy societies, as well as the breach of Gods
Commandments, and so the Apostle reproves it as a sin scarce heard of among
the Gentiles to take the fathers wife, 1 Cor. 5. 1.

55. What of sodomy, and the like?
As a most abominable, unnatural, monstrous, and bestiall offenses, even if
possible not to be named among Christians, and if perpetrate, though death
appointed, no punishment grievous enough for the sin, and so Sodom and
Gomorah, as well as some other places recorded in Histories, have been and
remain spectacles of the divine vengance.

56. What is then here in general commanded?
The avoiding of all uncleanness in body or soul, and our best labor and
study for the preservation of chastity, and procuring thereof, both in our
selves and others.

57. What follows?
The eight Commandment concerning the preservation of our neighbors goods and
not diminishing the same by stealth or robbery.

SECT. 10. The eight Commandment.
The order and analysis of the eight Commandment, showing the parts and
duties, as well as opposite offenses therein intimated, or expressed, whether
in respect of our own goods not well and lawfully gotten, or others unjustly
sought or detained where first of theft and robbery, felony, Piracy, and other
rapines of wars, and else also by the poors, and of necessity, thought thereby
in guilt extended, yet for for public peace and tranquillity sake severely
punished: other sorts of robbers and thieves, with diverse degree and
distinctions of them in respect of the persons themselves, the manner or matter
of their theft, so of incendiaries oppression, and the great and rich men's
theft and robberies, by subverting Justice, and grinding the face of the poor,
so by usurers and engrossers, covetous landlords, and Brokers, Extortioners,
and such like vermin, the ruin of the poor, and bane of the Common wealth.
Such theft also practiced in buying and selling, or bartering and trading, by
the buyers and his cunning or subtilty, as likewise by the seller, and his
diverse deoeits; so in borrowing and lending, alenations, and other bargains,
persons, and promises of trust, guardians, and the contracts of hire and
recompenee, where is to be considered The difference of lawful and honest, and
other unlawful trades and negotiations, so many kinds of theft, and so
sacriledges a theft from God, and stealing or cunning pur^oining of things
dedicate to sacred uses. Other sorts of theft by prodigality, covetousnes,
unmercifulness, all injustice: the contrary whereof is thence inferred, hereby
to be commanded a^ restitution, mercy, charity, justice, and equity, with true
and fair dealing in all matters, especially buying and selling, trading and
merchandising, or other lawful trades and callings, whereof the due use of our
goods, and of parsimony, frugality, libarality, and the works of charity. The
sum of all.

1. Which the eight Commandment?
Thou shall not steal.

2. What is the order of it?
Next to the wrong of the neighbor in his life, and person, or second self,
wife and posterity in this third place, all wrong in his estate and goods, or
outward fortunes forbidden.

3. What manner of Commandment?
A negative, inferring his opposite affirmative, viz. not to steal, or any way
injure, or impair his estate, but rather labor, and seek to preserve the
same, and if need require, even to afford him part of our own.

4. What the negative part?
Forbidding all wrong about goods, as in regard of

I. Our neighbor, to 1. Steal, cosen, or defraud him of his goods. 2.
Injure, wrong or hurt his estate. 3. Impair or hinder, or not help him
herein. 4. Be accessory to others wrong of him. 5. Detaining our own goods
from doing him good if necessity require.
II. Of ourselves in the 1. Getting of our goods unlawfully. 2. Keeping or
detaining them unjustly. 3. Being accessory to any injustice of others for
their or our benefit. 4. Unlawfully using our goods to our own, or others
detriment or mischief. 5. Prodigal expending them to the hurt of posterity.

5. What the affirmative part?
Commanding the doing all right in goods and worldly estate as in regard of our
neighbor, to

1. Wish well to his estate, and any way preserve or tender it. 2. Restore any
defrauded goods. 3. Recompense any injury. 4. Detect and wrong against it. 5.
Impart even our own to him in necessity.
In regard of ourselves, to 1. Get our goods lawfully. 2. Keep and retain
them justly. 3. Preserve them by honest industry. 4. Use them lawfully, to our
own good, others benefit. 5. Dispend them frugally, not vainly.


6 How are the opposite parts seen or opposed?
Evidently,

As the unjust actions of stealth, cousenage, fraud, injury, impairing, or
hurting our neighbors estate, or consenting to the same, are opposite to the
restoring, preserving, and fairly helping, tendering or benefiting thereof.

As the unlawful, and unjust getting, keeping, using, hording, or spending our
own goods, is opposite to the just and honest getting, keeping, using, laying
out, and disposing of the same.

7. How is unjust getting our own goods, accounted theft?
As it cannot be but with injury and wrong to others, which is the sum of
theft.

8. What are the principal and most noted things here forbidden?
1. All stealing, and violently taking away anything openly, secretly.

2. All oppression and tyranny in the mighty.

3. All deceit, and cousenage in buying, selling, and barganing.

4. All unlawful trades, or ways in getting or seeking gain.

5. All prodigality, whereby men rob themselves and posterity.

6. All covetousness, whereby many are wronged.

7. All unmercifulness whereby the poor are robbed of their dues in charity,
of which parts the four foremost concern, the unlawful getting of our own
goods, or stealing our neighbors, the three last, the unjust use of our own.

9. What understand you by stealing?
In general, all offenses against this Commandme^t; in particular, that act of
purloyning, whether secretly so called theft, or more openly, or with force,
called robbery, which names yet are used often promiscuously, and also all
cousenage, wrong and deceit called theft, as well as oppression, force and
tyranny robbery.

10. What the plainest meaning of theft or robbery?
The direct and plainest breach of this Commandment in all unjust taking any
thing by thieves and robbers, whether by Sea, as Pirates and Piracie.

By Land, as fellonies, and felony, breaking houses, burglary, robbing on the
high way.

And to which may be referred all accessory to the same, by consent, counsel,
provocations, help and assistance.

And also receivers of thieves, things stolen, and harbourers of them,
pertakers in the booty, of whom it is said, if no receivers, there would be no
thieves or robbers.

11. What is to be said of wars and such rapines?
If the war be not just, but of malice, unsatiable desire of reign and
revenge, rather then defense of right, it is but open robbery with a strong
hand; as the arch Pirat Diomedes told great Alexander, his disturbance of the
world was but robbery, though said he, I doing the like, with small force am
called a thief, but thou with greater art saluted Emperor.

12. What to be thought of poor that steal for necessity?
Though it extenuate, it does not extinguish the sin, it may be less then
covetous and cruel oppression that goes unpunished while they dye for it,
though less offenders, yet neither ought they to do it, but rather dye with
Lazarus at cruel Dives gate, or feet, and go to heaven, then by the sin
venture going to hell.

13. Why are they then so severely punished?
For the common peace sake, when if such were suffered, or milder dealt with
(since this scarce serves to repress them) scarce any should possess life or
goods without continual fear and danger, though as Gods Law only commanded
double, or four or five fold restitution, it might be wished some other course
could be taken by digging at Mines, plantation of Colonies, or the like, in
those of whom any hope of amendment, rather then loss of life, for so small
matters as often happens.

14. Who are usually the offenders herein?
The idle that had rather be hanged then work, and so prone to pilfering and
stealing to maintain their idleness.

The dissolute that will rob to maintain their riot, though they oftentimes
pay for it so dear, and come to so shameful ends, which to prevent, honest
employments and constraint to work, and restraint of lewd riotous places, are
to be urged and followed by the Magistrate, or in neglect he is accessory to
their evil.

15. Is not restitution satisfaction for this offense?
No, it is a step only toward it; for Non remittitur peccatum misi
restituitur oblatum, if possible to be performed; but the sin yet further
remains to be expiate between God and the conscience, for the stain of the
soul, as the other do, for restitution of the wrong, and to the like
restitution also are bound all other robbers, and oppressors whatsoever.

16. What other sorts of robbers?
All such as by dispoyling others of their goods, intend either

I. The neighbors harm only, as Incendiaries, firing houses, etc. Venefici,
who spoil the goods by poison, witchcraft, charms, etc.

II. Or their own profit also, as 1. Great thieves by oppression and pretense
of usurpation, and war, extortion and crafty contract.

2 Less thieves, by pilfering, pillage, and other meaner rapine and stealth.

17. What other distinction of them?
Either in regard of

I. The persons that steal, as domestical, by wife, children, servants,
family, idle and careless, negligent, and wastefull. External, all others.

II. The manner by fraud, and more secretly done, properly called theft: force
and more openly robbery, and yet both either more manifest seen, as taken with
the manner in the act with the thing stolen; confested or not to be denied,
less manifest.

III. The matter, as of first persons,

1. Sold as Joseph. 2. Stolen, as beggars steal young children. 3. Married
without consent of Parents, or governors, as maids or young heirs. 4.
Prodition by treachery. 5. Suppositions, and stealth by changlings, bastards.
Secondly, things, either

I. Civil and public; so Peculatus robbing the Commonwealth.

II. Sacred, so sacrilege, whether in first gifts and vows not performed.

Secondly, tenths, or tithes, and Church dues detained.

Thirdly, Church livings, 1. mangled by corrupt Patrons. 2. Alienated by
improper impropriations. 3. Devoured by Court Harpies, or Country Cormorants.

III. Common, first immovable, land, landmarkes, inheritances.

Secondly, moveable, living fowls, fishes, plants, with fruits, beasts, etc.
without life, money by thieves or cu^pu^ses, stuff and apparel; writings
imbezled depraved.

18. What say you of Incendiaries, Witches, etc.
That being the instruments of the devil, of abominable malice and mischief,
so death their deserved due, by Laws divine and humane, as who does it of
mere malice, and so much worse then the poor thief that robs for need,
and equal to, if not beyond the covetous thief that robs or oppresses for
gain.

19. What say you of oppression?
A far stretching and mighty sin, or a sin of the mighty that need not
steal, and so a pestilent and malicious sin, as well as a foul and crying
offense, and monster with many heads.

20. How say you so?
As it is a sin of the great ones, and such as should be heads, or guides and
governors of the people, and so according to their several places branched
into many heads, and so this many headed monster seen,

1. In Kings and Princes, that tyrannically exact upon their poor subjects, as
Rehoboam, 1. King. 12.

2. In Officers of the Kings and Princes; that extort more then their Lords
will, due or command, to enrich themselves, and so usually infamous.

3. In Nobles and great persons that abuse their power that should protect
others to the wrong of the poor, and meaner persons.

4. In rich men, that taking advantage of the time, and necessity of such as
want, do grind the faces of the poor by unjust power.

5. In Judges, and Ministers of justice, whose hands open to receive bribes,
pervert judgment and justice, to the wrong of the poor, of whom Isaiah 1. 23.
The Princes are rebellious and companions of thieves.

6. In unconscionable Lawyers, and pilling Officers that should be advocates of
justice, but common adversaries of God and men, Esaias 1. 24. and the like
oppression of the poor also, and Commonwealth to be seen in the other
persons oftentimes of meaner rank and quality.

21. In what sort?
The wrong and oppression of such men, as

1. Hoord up corn to make a searcity, and raise the prices, and so pinch the
weretched, and grind the faces of the poor.

2. Ingrosse commodities, and forestall markets for their own private gain to
the wrong of others, and undoing of the poor.

3. Take pledges of the poor, which they cannot spare or not duly restore
them, Exodus 22. and Deuteronomy. 24. 6.

4. Take advantage of the pledge, and forfeiture of morgage though to the
undoing of the poor brother.

5. Deny or diminish the laborers hire, a crying sin to the ears of the
Lord in the anguish of his soul, Deuteronomy. 24. 14. James 5. 4.

6. Borrowing, and pay not again, or faining themselves bankerupts, to cheat
others, and enrich themselves; often so rob the poor, live by deceit, and
others goods, and to these oppressors may be also referred, Usurers,
Extortioners, Brokers, and other biting Cormorants, and griping Landlords.

22. How is this to be seen?
In the wrong and oppression of the needy and poor brother,

1. By selling corn, or other things upon trust to him that has not ready
money in his need, at a price without reason, which is a biting usury, and most
pinching the poor.

2. By letting the land at higher racked rents then the poor tenant with sweat
of his brows can well live on; a kind of biting usury, which whiles the
usurer objecteth to the landlord, as the landlord to him his usury, each
convincing, and condemning other, both should amend their extortions.

3. By letting money to hire (generally condemned) at least at higher rates
then Law permits, or even to the beggering of the borrower, vile usury and
extortion.

4. By taking money in excessive measure for brocage, and for procuring money,
and more for the continuing, and like unlawful conditions, as foulest usury,
and perhaps higher rates, and other cousening circumventions to devour the
borrower, as accessory to usury, and a biting oppression.

5. By laying out money, and feeding the unthrift with money, of set purpose to
circumvent him, and gain his estate, by eating usury and extortion.

6. Having wronged the neighbor in any measure, and having notice, refusing to
restore the loss, or recompense the wrong, whether wittingly or unwillingly
done, which is also oppression; and to which may be referred

7. Unjust going to law to vex and disquiet the neighbor without cause, and
rob him of his peace as well as right, or drive him to go to law if he will
have his right, both which are of one stamp, and most unjust dealing and
oppression.

23. What is deceit or fraud in buying or selling?
Plain stealing, or cousenage, and though secret, yet direct theft, and unjust
acquiring of goods, or defrauding our neighbor of his, as well by such deceits
which may be in buying or selling, or the like contracts, as by strong hand of
open oppression, or plain robbery.

34. How is it found or practiced?
In the ordinary buying or selling, usually in the seller,

1. By false weights and measures, an abomination to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 25. 14.

2. By mixture of baser things with better, and sophisticating wares to deceive
the buyer.

3. By stretching the things sold by measure, and making things sold by weight
heavier, though to their spoil and corruption.

4. By setting a fair gloss upon things to make them show better then they
be, and by false lights and such sleights to cosen the buyer.

5. By extolling things beyond the truth, by lying speeches, not fitting honest
men, so lying and stealing going together.

6. By lying in the prices, and dissembling even with oaths, gross and foul
dissimulation.

6. By combining by factions to enhance prices, and make things dearer by
engrossing commodities, or other cousening devises fetched from hell, or the
father of lies for a poor and base gain, but dear loss to themselves, when
offering to deceive others, they deceive themselves, and their own souls of
eternal life.

25. What other fraud in buying and selling?
In the buyer, also in the buying, in

I. Buying of him that has no right to sell, as stolen goods.

II. Words, unworthily despising or dispraising the ware, Prove. 20. 14.
offering much less then he knows it worth.

III. Price, taking advantage of the sellers need, or paying less or bad money.

IV. Offering to buy what may be fold, that

1. Cannot, as first graces of God, symony, Acts 8. 18.

Secondly, Remission of sins, etc. Thirdly, Holy orders, etc.

2. Ought not to be sold, as first presentations to benefices, called also
symony.

Secondly, injustice, at the corrupted Judges hand.

Thirdly, false testimony, to perverting justice, which are apparent theft, and
the sellers or officers to sell those things thieves, as well as they that sell
stolen goods, or which are not their own.

26. What other deceit, or fraud in contracts?
As well as in buying and selling commodities, or trading by wholesale, or
retale, deceit may be.

1. In borrowing or lending money, or other things.

2. In alienation for a time, ever, of goods or lands.

3. In promises, and trust in depositaries, seoffes entrust, executors,
guardians, and other overseers.

4. In hire for labor, or like recompense, wherein fraud and cousenage is but
a kind of theft, in not performance of the things covenanted, or in right due,
and demanded, wherein are to be respected and required,

1. In words, truth. 2. Promises, faithfulness. 3. In deeds, justice.
Else men first deal deceitfully, whose highest degree cousenage.

2. Use lying, unfaithfulness, injustice.

27. How for borrowing and lending?
First, for the borrower, to

1. Restore first the principal, if money at the day entire with thanks or
recompense, else in bankrupts theft, in others it is wrong. Secondly, thing
borrowed safe, and not impaired, else recompensed, or wrong done.

2. Save the surety harmless, or a deceit.

Secondly, for the surety to give his word for thrifty and honest persons, else
if for unthrifty and dishonest, accessory to their ill.

Thirdly, for the lender to respect the borrower his good, more then his own,
else if for his own profit, or unjust or unconscionable gain, usury or
extortion, and so theft, if not oppression, which rather robbery.

28. How for alienation for a time, or for ever?
Required in the seller that it be in our power, and on a just ground, and
performed duly, or a theft and cousenage; and for the buyer, that he give a
valuable and honest consideration, and use no kind of circumvention of him
that sells, nor wish his detriment, or it is fraud, and robbery, palliate
only with the name of bargain.

29. What in other promises or persons of trust required?
1. In depositaries to keep safe or restore and make good the things committed
to their trust, or it is fraud and theft.

2. In seoffes in trust, executors and overseers, faithful to discharge that
trust in them reposed, or they commit theft, or accessory to it.

3. Guardians to provide for the orphans and pupills good, not to make a prey
of them; or their estates, which if they do, they show themselves wolves, and
thieves, rather then guardians that should be in stead of parents to their
pupils, and so generally in all promises, contracts and undertakings to
perform them, or it is a fraud, and as diminution of a due, a theft.

30. How of contracts of hire and recompense?
For the hirer to give an equal hire, stipend, or recompense, and not delay
especially the poor man's wages, or it is a miserable and wretched theft.

For the hired require an honest and reasonable reward, deal faithfully,
diligently, or it is extortion with fraud and theft; and to this referred fees
and dues of Lawyers, Physicians, Surgeon, Schoolmasters, Tradesmen, and
Artizans that set price upon their labors, and industry, wherein required
conscionablenesse, diligence, and fidelity, or it bordereth on fraud and
robbery.

31. What say you then of unlawful trades, or gain, or which you call so?
As all public offices in Church and Commonwealth, and other private callings,

As of husbandry, and all other arts to the same belonging, exercised in the
Country, as else in the Cities chiefly the others.

As of all arts and sciences generally, both liberal of the higher sort, the
faculties of Divinity, Law, and Physic.

Of the lower sort, and preparitives or servants to those former, called the
seven liberal sciences

More illiberall and mechanical of making diverse useful things, whereof even
whole Towns do oftentimes consist.

Of buying and selling and retailing of them, and most things else, whereof the
rest of the trades in Cities and Sea-townes are seen most to consist, whence
navigation also, and consequently merchandise are accounted lawful, and honest
trades and callings; so opposite to these lawful callings, are

I. Either no calling; as first common beggars, or rogues, secondly superfluous
gentlemen that having nothing to maintain them, refuse to work, or live in
any calling.

II. Bad callings, as who maintain themselves by first unlawful professions,
harlots, bawdes, witches, juglers, etc. Secondly, gaming, as gamesters, keeping
of gaming houses, ribauldry, and lewd exercises, with drunkenness, etc. as
unlawful gains a sin and theft before God, and man.

32. How is their unlawfulness shown?
In that they are either

1. Simply and absolutely evil and wicked, as the stews, bawdes and whoring,
thieves, and such lewdness, witchcraft, etc.

2. Or foully abused, as judiciary Astrology, Palmestry, next door to
witchcraft, and fortune telling, juggling, and common lotterers, which is a
kind of cousenage, and the devil therein sought to, rather then Gods
providence only.

3. Unprofitable to Church and Commonwealth, and serving only to pride and
vanity, as making painting for women's faces, monstrous attires, uncivil and
immodest apparel, and the like blasons of sin, as also these superfluous
gentlemen beggars, rogues, and vagabonds, the spaune of idleness, bane of
virtue and goodness, to which unlawful trades may be added sacrilege.

33. What is sacrilege?
A robbing of God, Mal. 3. 8. or the ungodly and perfiduous taking away of
things dedicate to God, and his service for the maintenance thereof, and
converting them to other private uses, so profaning them, whereby Gods
Kingdom and honor so much as in them lies, is pulled down, and the kingdom
and power of Satan advanced, tending to the overthrow of all virtue and
godliness, and ruin of Church and Commonwealth.

34. How is it then tolerated?
By the subtilty of Satan, and his wicked instruments that dare even to oppose,
and dispute with God in this kind about the authority and lawfulness of his
acts, and the establishing thereof from all antiquity, compared with their
wretch d doings contrary to the same in disparagement of his sacred truth, and
ordinances, whom whiles God suffers in this their malice it must needs be to
their greater damnation, this being so heinous and crying a sin, and so the
opposition and defiance of the Majesty of God, the pulling down of his honor
and Kingdom, blood and destruction of souls for want of his honor duly
promoted, by this means defaced, and they so deprived of better instruction.

35. What are the branches of this sin?
The talling away of any things consecrated to God, and especially the
diminution of tithes, and imbezling Church Patrimony, by taking away all, or
the greatest part, where there might be sufficient to maintain good and
ablemen for Gods service, and meat in Gods house, Mal. 3. 9. now searce the
seraps left, to the starving of the Minister, that must so needs be some silly
unsufficient person to discharge so great an office as to stand between God and
the people, and so consequently the souls starved and perlshing for want of
spiritual food and direction.

36. What other sorts before remembered?
Prodigality, covetousness and unmercifulness, most seen in the unlawful and
undue use of our own estate, robbing our selves and others of those parts
there of, which do of due and right to them appertain.

37. How is prodigality a theft?
As by profuse, riotous and vain expense, we spend not only our own, but
even more then our own, and so rob our posterity, and bring wife and children,
heirs and family to beggary, and so rob himself, and his of all necessary
sustenance and rellese, exposed to cold, famine, and poverty, his unthrifty
theft and prodigality, hereby proving worse then an infidel 1 Timothy 5. 8.

37. How is covetousness theft?
As a theft of heart, and diverse ways robbing God and men of their dues, and so

I. The covetous heart seen to God, and desiring the neighbors goods and
estate.

II. The covetous hand oppressing, and cousening his brother and neighbor.

III. Covetous desires set upon the world, leaving God and godliness, so the
covetous man's

1. Mind and soul serves mammon and robs God of his service, ye cannot
serve God and mammon, Matthew. 6. 24.

2. Soul adoreth the wedge, or purse of gold, so Iolatry.

3. Eye robs himself, and others of necessary things, and so he not only
robs God, his neighbor and brother, but his own soul also of necessary
things for this life, and finally of eternal happiness, so well esteemed a
great theft and root of all evil, since who thus loves the world, the love of
God is not in him, 1 John 2. 15.

38. How unmercifulness theft?
As a branch of covetousness, extending it self, in not extending charity to
the poor, so robbing them of their dues in charity, and Christ in them, Matthew.
25. as Christ himself acknowledges, and miserable the theft, from God and the
Church, the poor and Christ in the benummedneffe of soul, dealing falsely with
God the giver of all goodness, and Christ's poor members; and for this Dives
in hell, whom we read not to have robbed others, but only not to have given to
poor Lazarus, and therefore frying in hell flames when Lazarus was comforted,
whom he robbed of his due in charity, and consequently of life, by not
relief, and thus a wretched thief, and which may be gathered, who are so hard
hearted to the poor, will not stick if occasion be offered to rob God, and
others also, in another, or any other sort, and thus unmercifulness theft.

39. What is on the contrary here commanded?
Partly intimated already, and else easily to be gathered from the premises,
the duties opposite to the said forbidden vices, or the extirpation of the
vices aforesaid, and so the

1. Restitution of things unjustly taken, or recompense of wrong.

2. Justice, and equity in the mighty.

3. Fair dealing in buying, selling and contracts.

4. Lawful trades, and means of getting goods and preserving the same.

5. Due use of our goods, with persimony and frugality.

6. Liberality and bounty, where honest occasions require.

7. Mercy and charity where need and necessity, and so a general justice or
disposition to this honesty, equity and humanity.

40. How restitution to be made?
Of all other men's goods, either unlawfully gotten, or that may not be lawfully
detained; whether found, received by contract, or committed in trust, and so in
trust, and so to restore that to the party whose due, or who damnified by
detaining it to the full value, or recompense at least, so much or near as
able.

So soon as may be, or so soon as we seek forgiveness at their hands, of
the wrong, or at Gods hands of the sin, whose opposite is persisting in wrong
and robbery.

41. How equity and justice commanded?
Both in general, general justice, and inclination to equity, in all; and
especially in the more potent, as more able, and so more apt to oppression; in
opposition to all acts of injustice, and robbery, committed by might and
tyranny of Rulers, in seeking gain, or respect; or of the rich by cruelty and
unmercifulness, oppressing the poor.

42. How fair dealing in buying and selling, and contracts?
As the rule whereby all contracts ought to be squared, in truth of words,
faithfulness in promises, and justice in deeds, uprightly, and without
dissimulation, as before God, whether in

I. Buying or selling, 1. The things that may be bought or sold. 2. Without
fraud or any sinister respect. 3. For honest and due prices, not desiring to
live by other men's losses.


II. Borrowing and lending, without cousenage, usury, extortion, or other
ungracious or unconscionable practices whatsoever; but in charity and love.

III. Things of trust, or hire, with due restitution, and discharge of trust,
and recompense without fraud or delay: opposite to which, all cousenage, and
fraud in buying and selling, borrowing or lending, or other real or verbal
contracts, and bargaining in usual traffic and commerce.

43. What lawful trades, or honest means of gain commanded?
1. All public offices in Church and Commonwealth, supreme of the Prince,
subordinate, all others.

2. Private Trades, Arts, and employments of life, in the sundry vocations,
warranted by the law and word of God, Statutes of the Realm where we live;
opposite to which, to live in no trade, or by lewd and dishonest trade; or
means, in lowdnesse to get a living, or in idleness to eat the sweat of
others brows, hateful to God and men.

44. What sorts of honest getting of things?
Attained to, either

I. Without contract, 1. By succession and inheritance, descended from
ancestors. 2. By our own honest labors, and endeavors. 3. By the gift and
bounty of others.


II. By contract, as by honest bargaining, and purchase.

45. What things required to honest gettings?
I. Both internal virtues of the mind,

1. (...), not setting our hearts upon riches, Psalm. 62. 10. opposite to it,
love of money, root or evil, and all the sins of this Commandment, 1 Timothy 6.
10.

2. Contentedness with our estate and condition, that Gods providence
allotteth us: opposite to which, male contentedness, the root of much
mischief.

3. Moderate desire of things necessary, 1 Timothy 6. 8. without covetousness, or
ambition, hasting to be rich or great, 1 Timothy 5. 8. Prove. 27. 20.

4. A moderate care of such things, without immoderate carking, or improvident
carelessness, 1 Timothy 5. 8. Matthew. 6. 25. Prove. 10. 15.

II. External, honest calling and vocation.

Diligence in that calling: opposite to inordinate walking, or living, and
idleness.

46. How are they to be preserved?
By such honest means as they are to be gotten, to our use, and relief of
others, and to that end defended from fraud, and oppression, or repine, by
wisdom, providence, or any lawful and just means.

47. Is it lawful to go to law, to retain or preserve them, or maintain our
right?
There is no doubt of it, if 1. The cause be just, weighty, and necessary. 2.
If charity be not broken. 3. If it be used as the last refuge, else too many
offend in going to law, 1. For unjust and trifling matters. 2. In stomach and
malice. 3. When other remedies may be had; and this only to molest their
neighbors.



48 How is the due use of our goods?
To our comfort, as the good gifts of God, and also for other relief, and
communicating them liberally, if we have plenty; if little, yet gladly, even
out of that little, to the poor, and those in necessity, Tob. 4. 8. and so
enjoying them our selves,

1. With honest parsimony, saving and sparing them, that they be not wastfully
and unprofitably spent.

2. Frugality, according to our ability, laying them out in needful uses, not
idly or vainly. Opposits to niggardliness, and keeping them from our own
and others needful uses, and so a double theft, as well as covetousness, the
root of it, and prodigality her wastfull adversary.

49. How liberally to be used?
In free communication of our goods, to the benefit of others, on good
occasions, and pious sort; wherein required, that if it be done

1. Justly, giving our own, without wrong to others.

2. Willingly, without constraint, as freely done.

3. Cheerfully, without grudging, or exprobrations, and so truly liberality,
bounty, or munificence, be it much or little, according to our power; opposite
to it, fast-handed avarice, and vain and wastfull prodigality.

50. How is mercy and charity to be shown?
To those in need and necessity, and so, who gives to the poor, lends to
the Lord, Prove. 19. 17 and it shall be paid him again, and who does not,
steals from the poor their dues, for which theft Dives was cast into hell;
and so the works of mercy to the

I. Bodies six, to 1. Visit the sick and needy. 2. Feed the hungry. 3. Give
drink to the thirsty. 4. Cloth the naked. 5. Help the weak. 6. Buty the
dead.
II. Soul six, to 1. Instruct and counsel the ignorant. 2. Chastise, and
reprove the offender. 3. Comfort the distressed. 4. Forgive the penitent. 5.
Bear with the weak. 6. Pray for all.

According to the verses,

Visito,1 poto,2 cibo,3 divestio,4 colligo,5 condo,6
Consule,7 castiga,8 solare,9 remitte,10 for,11 ora.12
Opposite to which all cruelty, hard-heartednesse, unmercifulness, and
uncharitableness.

51. What is the sum of all?
To be true and just in all our dealings, not to covet nor desire other men's
estates, but to learn and labor honestly to get, and lawfully to use our
own, and preserve our neighbors goods, whereby we a void all show and manner
of theft.

52. What follows?
The ninth Commandment, commanding all truth and justice in our words, as well
as our dealings, to the preservation of charity, and good name.

SECT. 11. The ninth Commandment.
The orders and of, Analysis of the ninth Commandment, where the parts and
duties, with the opposite ^es and abuses, as well expressed as intimated, are
further showed and explained, and first of truth, and the brancches thereof,
and opposite falsehood, lying, slander, taletelling, and all false
witnesbearing, whether in public place of judgment, by any sort of persons
whatsoever, as plaintiff or defendant, Judge, or other agent, instrument, or
witness, or otherwise in more private manner compared with the former, in
whispering, and tale bearing, slander, and backbiting, calumny, or other
disparagements, flattery, or such parasiticall or sycophanticall behavior in
any respect or degree tending to the suppressing or subversion of truth or
charity: where farther of jesting and lying, and of all sorts of lies, and
their much used and frequented Asylum of equivocation with the heinousness,
patrons and practisers, or inventers, or defenders of the same, the general
good, use of the speech, and hearing, or care and tongue, in regard of the
truth, and charity to be extended to our selves and others, especially in the
maintenance of a good name, and rules thereunto belonging, or necessarily for
the same.

1. What is the ninth Commandment?
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

2. What is the order of this Commandment to the first?
Next after the care of other greater things, as the neighbors life, body, and
goods, even his name is cared for, and words and lips have a rule prefixed to
direct them, according to the Psalmist, that we may take heed to our words,
that we offend not in our tongues, and so as the leaf of the tree, that God
cares for, shall not fall, the very words of our lips, and thoughts of our
hearts are weighed, as the hairs of our head numbered, and here the words of
our mouth, as in the next Commandment, the thoughts of our heart, have a law
prescribed, to make them holy and acceptable unto the Lord.

3. What manner of Commandment?
A negative, inferring his opposite affirmative, viz. not speak untruth, or
make lies, in uncharitable manner, against our neighbor, but to preserve truth
and charity among all men.

4. What the negative part?
Not to speak or broach untruth in uncharity, to the hurt or infamy of our
neighbor or our own honest estate, credit, or good name.

5. What the affirmative part?
To speak and utter truth in charity, to the good of our neighbor or our own
honest estate, credit, and good name.

6. How are the parts seen opposite or opposed?
As truth opposite to untruth,

Charity to uncharity,

The good to the hurt or infamy of our neighbor, or ones honest estate,
credit, and good name.

7. What manner of vice is it forbidden?
Maledicentia, evil and untrue language, or lying, or abuse of the tongue.

Whose root, an evil heart and thought.

Whose blossom and branches, evil words.

Whose fruit evil deeds, not only infamy, lies, and slander, but sometimes
reaching as far as the breach of the other Commandments, in theft, cousenage,
fraud, oppression, yea mischief of spilling blood, and murder, as well by
being the fuel of fury, in quarrels and contentions, as betraying innocent
blood, so that an evil tongue, the occasion of much evil, and hence said set
on fire of hell, Iam. 3.

8. What manner of duty commanded?
Good and gracious language, or the right use of the tongue, that excellent
instrument of the soul, well used, and occasion of much good both to body and
soul, especially by truth, learning, and instruction.

9. What is truth?
1. In the mind, a conformity of the mind to the truth of things, as they
are, and so to the mind of God, by which they are and were created.

2. In the words, a conformity of the words to the truth in the mind
conceived, and so to the things.

3. In the deed, conformity of actions and deeds to the words and profession of
the truth by the tongue.

4. In the will, a love, desire, and study of truth, which is called veracitas:
opposite to which is lying, and falsehood, and an unconformity of the

Mind to the things as they are, or to the mind of God; and conformity to the
devil, the father of lies.

Words to the mind, or things in truth.

Deeds to the words or mind, in simplicity.

Will to the love or desire of truth, and so a dedication of mind and speech,
deeds and will, to the devil, the enemy of God, and truth, and author of
mischief, whence proceeds and appears commonly the malice of untruth in
uncharity.

10. What are the parts of the vice here forbidden?
In opposition to truth and honesty, or charity, found especially

1. All false witness bearing, and accusation, the maine sin here forbidden.

2. All false slanders, calumniation and backbiting.

3. Tale-bearing, and lending the tongue or ear to hear, tell, or carry false
reports.

4. Flattering and soothing any for subtilty, or advantage.

5. Lying and equivocation, any untruth against knowledge, or conscience, of
our selves or others, in vainglory boasting, depraving, or diminishing truth,
or good name.

11. How false witness bearing?
In testimonies, whether

1. Public, in face of judgment, as of the Judge, Notaries, Lawyers, and
parties themselves, or witnesses.

Out of judgment, but for elections, or like public business.

2. Private, in regard of the authority not appearing, or wanting to sight,
though else public defamation or libell, as else all other private defame, or
lying.

12. How in the Judge to be found?
In false and evil judgment, or proceeding therein,

1. As rash judgment, either

The cause not well understood,

One party only heard, not the other,

Witness of one alone in capital causes.

2. Perverse judgment, when the wicked absolved, and just condemned, as
commonly if he be a taker of bribes, accepter of persons.

3. Being accessory to the offenses of others, by Admitting needless suits,

Protracting suits,

Rash imposing oaths,

Allowing, or setting and admitting of false courses, or witnesses, as in
Naboths case, and Christ's condemnation.

13. What then required of the Judge?
Due proceedings, without respect of persons, or bribes, to the full
examination of the truth, and giving sentence according to Truth, Justice,
Equity,
to the Righting of wrong. Punishment of vice. Maintenance of virtue.


14. How false testimony in the Notaries?
In the Notaries dealing falsely in writing, preserving, reciting of the
Records, thereby corrupting them, and wronging of right, in which they ought to
deal truly and justly.

15. How in Lawyers?
1. By entertaining and promoting evil causes.

2. Animating the followers of evil causes, and contention, as amicos curiae.

3. Using false accusations, and calumniations against the adverse party.

4. Being unfaithful to the helping a bad, or betraying a good cause.

5. Taking of fees ambidexter-wise, on both hands, and betraying the client.

16. What their duty then?
To entertain or promote no cause they know to be evil.

To maintain the good cause with good conscience, truly, faithfully.

How false dealing in the parties?
In going to law for stomach, malice, and contention.

In dealing untruly by

1. Forging false accusations, and calumniations, false Instruments or Deeds.

2. Suborning false witnesses, whose duty were that truth, charity, and right
might take place.

17. How the offense in the Plaintiff or Defendant more in particular?
In the Plaintiff, in 1. All causes, to seek the molestation of his neighbor.

2. Criminal causes,

Calumniari, to urge untrue and uncertain matters, or crimes.

Praevaricari, making only a show of accusation.

Tergiversari, to fly from his accusation.

In the Defendant, to Deny the truth.

Appeal without just cause.

Not submit to judgment lawfully given.

18. How the offense of witnesses?
Either not to give testimony to truth.

Or give false testimony, and that by witnessing what he knows not to be
true, doubts or knows to be false.

19. What their duty then?
1. To give testimony when on just occasion required.

When he sees innocence oppressed, though unrequired.

2. To testify the truth, only, wholly, Pro 14. 25

What other public testimonies?
Out of the place of judgment, by public speeches, (as Orations) writings,
testimonials, for elections, or any other advancement; that only truth and
worthy persons be allowed, not falsehood spread, and unworthy persons promoted.

20. What other private testimonies?
1. In reprehension, or dispraising of virtues, or commendable things, or
extenuation of the same.

2. In extolling or praising vices, and bad things with undue and untrue
testimony, contrary to honesty and charity, and if in presence, is flattery, or
derision, or else reviling and contumely, in absence, growing toward slander
or mocking, howsoever evil and cursed speaking. Opposite to which we ought
constantly on all occasions to praise and acknowledge virtue, and discommend
vice.

21. What is slanders and backbiting?
A false testimony behind ones back, to the wrong of the good name, dear as
life, or credit, and so a kind of murder; and also a blasphemy against men, and
against the truth of God, and his honor.

22. What is the heynousnesse of it?
Not only lying, but evil and cursed speaking, with malice in the heart,
poison in the tongue, and dart in the lips, wounding the speaker, the hearer,
and the party wronged, three at one blow, a sharp rasour of the devils, razing
out a man's name, and worthy to be razed out of the book of life.

23. How is it used?
Either by privy whispering, defamatory libels, and sowing and spreading
public rumors and calumniations in any sort, to the devouring of a man in
his good name and credit, and raising an ill name, so as he that has an ill
name, half hanged, as the proverb is, these may seem the devils hangmen, as
their tongues indeed set on the fire of hell, and the poison of aspes under
their lips, poisoneth that precious ointment of a good name.

24. What tale-bearing?
A kind of slander, usually understood in small matters, for if it be with
foul defamation, it is gross slander, to which are accessory the receivers of
false reports, for as there could not well be thieves if no receivers, so no
tale-carriers, if there were not tale-receivers, giving encouragement to the
same.

25. What is the subject of it?
Commonly detraction, calumny or scorn, and so the soul water of malediction
tends to the wrong of the neighbor, and uncharity, howsoever used or
sprinkled, if in his

1. Presence, by reviling and derision.

2. His absence, by slander in backbiting, etc.

Whisperers, and tale-bearers to his disparagement and disgrace.

26. What the heinousness?
Next to the slanderer and blasphemer, both they that tell and receive tales,
that love to tell and hear lies, thieves to their neighbors good name, and
enemies to truth and charity, and as they blot his good name, theirs to be
blotted out of the Book of life, and they rooted out of Gods City, and holy
Hill, Psalm. 15.

27. What of flatterers?
Next to those long tongued tale-bearers, and raisers of rumors, and false
reports, or sharp tongued slanderers, with poison of aspes under their lips;
these smooth tongued trencher-flies, and parasites, whose words are smoother
then oil, yet very swords, and not far from sycophants, whose words may melt
like butter, yet war in the heart, and oalumny in the libell, all of them
abusing the tongue in lying and untruth, these to flattery and fraud.

28. What is flattery?
A deceitful and false praise, or per fallacem laudem seducionem, a beguiling
by false praise, and so an abuse of the truth, and the flattered person to his
face, as a falsehood and deceitful lie in the flatterers tongue, so with the
flatterers were busy mockers, and commonly used lying and colloguing Gnathos,
and base fellows to smooth up vainglorious Thrasos and Braggadoches of skill
or valor in their vain humor, when what ever the one will boastingly say,
the other will be ready lyingly, and blasphemously to swear.

29. How is it else seen?
Either by 1. Salutation and smoothing with them, we mean to hurt, as Joab,
that saluting slew Abner, 2 Samuel 3. 27.

2. Commendation beyond measure, for our profit or advantage, as to get our
living by this trade of lying, so parasites.

3. Disparaging of any to please others, as whisperers, liars, and tale-bearing
flatterrs.

4. Soothing men in vices, contrary to virtue and honesty, extenuating their
foul sins, and calling their other sins none, or virtues; so if Preachers
sow pillowes under sinners elbowes, and do not plainly show sin and Gods
judgments.

Generally in all belying the truth in any degree, to the soothing of others in
sin, or but dissembled holiness, or show of goodness, whether to insinuate
himself, or suck advantage, as calling the prodigal liberal, the
Machiavil-like politicians, discreet; or even quite opposite, the foolish, wise
and prudent; or the profane, devout, and godly; the base and degenerous,
noble; as sometimes above measure, always fainedly, extolling and deceiving
them with smooth words for sinister ends.

30. What of lying and equivocations?
The direct abuse of truth, and so in some degree of charity, whether against a
man's knowledge, or with doubting of the truth as every lie, or with an intent
to deceive, as equivocation a cunning and subtle couched lie.

31. What sorts of lying or falsehood?
Either in 1. Jest, as the jesting lie, mendacium jocosum, to sport our selves
withal or others, and as always vain, often ill, as tending to others hurt,
or disparagement; so jesters, over witty rake-hells, and travelers, spreaders
of news, and such surrilous wits, not seldom offend.

2. Earnest, as the Officious lie; Officiosum Mendacium. Pernicious lie;
Maliciosum Varnished lie; Fucosum Boasting lie; Ventosum Equivocating lie;
Ingeniosum

32. How the officious lie?
In great necessities used, as by Abraham, saying Sarah was his sister, for
fear, not telling the truth, or all the truth by Isaac so of Rebecca; Jacob
saying he was Esau, by his mother commanded, not to be allowed of, though God
turned it to a good end.

33. What of the pernicious lie?
Wanting all color or excuse, void of all good nesse, and by whomsoever used,
tradesmen, or others, as out of malice, or to the hurt and prejudice of others,
showing them that use it, children of the Devil, the adversary of truth and
charity, and father of lies and deceit.

34. What of the varnishing lie?
A colorable excuse of some fraud, in or toward others, flattery, toward
ourselves, Adams fig tree leaves to hide shame; but such excuses never serve
the turn, but rather make it more odious, Gehazi punished with leprosy, and
Ananias and Saphira with death in their colorable excuse, or varnished lie to
cover their offense.

35. How of the boasting lie?
A vainglorious lie full of windy vanity, cousening our selves most, as
plainly seen of others, though dissembled, and so accompanied with a double
fraud of vainglory and dissimulation.

36. What of equivocation?
A subtle and ingenious lie, and though often used and practiced by her most
subtle masters, professed and patronised or defended; so the illness apparent
by the shame to protect it, though the witinesse may countenance it, as that
and all mental reservations blindefold the truth, pretended to save themselves
from danger; which if it were in a good cause, came near an officious lie,
which is not yet approved of, but in an ill matter, is apparent falsity and
dissimulation, joined with offense.

37. How is it so ill then?
In the falsity, opposite to truth, and to blind the same.

In the end, to smoother the truth, and deceive.

In the manner of it, dissimulation and fraud.

In the author the devil, who equivocating with Adam in paradise, in
counselling him to the making of himself like to the Gods or Angels, but evil
ones, and so usually in his Oracles by equivocations deceiving the simple, and
his servants as Julian,-Valens,-Hildebrand, etc.

By sayings doubtfully to be interpreted diverse ways.

Aio te Eacida Romanos V. D. and many others the like.

And thus taken up upon trust by those that have need of his commodities and
sleights to defend themselves, and his works.

38. What are to be said of parables and similies that are not the very truth?
Though they are not the very and precise truth, according to the bare letter,
yet in the sense and understanding, as well as the intention, they are the
truth, and sometimes an excellent and divine truth, and more effectually
working upon the mind and understanding, then any plain words expressing the
same could do: so they are truth in the reflex, and so are the Riddles,
Parables, Mythologies, in diverse good Moralists, and especially in holy
Scripture.

39. What here commanded then in general?
I. With the avoiding of all the aforesaid vices forbidden, as in particular
may be seen in the premises.

II. With the love and study of truth and charity, 1. In the heart inclining to
it, 2. In the tongue professing it, 3. Deeds practicing it, to the best use in
the preservation of our own or neighbors goods and good name.

40. How found in the heart?
By the inclination we find in us glad and willing,

1. To hear the truth, and hate untruth.

To hear well of our neighbor, and good report to his commendations, and not
ill, or good unwillingly.

2. To judge charitably, not rashly or suspitiously, or determining against him.

3. To interpret things to the best, and not good things ill, or doubtful
things to the worst part.

4. To report only good and profitable things, or necessary, rather silencing,
then blazing the faults of others.

41. How to be found in the speech and tongue?
By the practice, and entertaining of profitable and good speech, such as may
minister grace to the hearers, and honest comfort, whether tending

1. To Gods glory especially.

2. To our own and neighbors good, Spiritual of soul. Temporal, for Honest
delight. Society. Profit.



Opposite to which, vain, hurtful, rotten, evil and dishonest speech, lying,
scurrility, etc.

42. What means to entertain such speech?
Docility, and virtues of urbanity, courtesy, affability, and taciturnity if
need be, to avoid idle, and unprofitable language: opposite to which, are
morosity, inurbanity, rusticity, and counterfeit courtesy, much babbling, and
profitable truth smothered in silence?

43. How found in practice and in deed?
By the constant care and steadfastness in maintaining the truth to our utmost
power and endeavor, and according to the rules of charity, for our own, and
our neighbors credit, and good name.

44. How is our neighbors good name maintained?
By all the means aforesaid, in avoiding all evil speaking or hearing, and
speaking, judging, or interpreting all things to the best, in charity; so a
step to the preservation of our own.

45. What if he be manifestly ill, may we not speak it?
Yes, but

1. In charity, occasioned by justice, or for his admonition and amendment.

2. Or in complaint to God, as David against his enemies.

Before men, to avoid them, as the Prophets and Apostles speak against false
teachers.

3. Not in his disgrace, in malice, or any like evil pretense.

46. How to preserve or procure our own good name?
I. By observing the rules toward others, a step to our own good name.

II. Using the means whereby (though therein unsought) it is to be gotten, 1.
Serving God. 2. Seeking his kingdom, and righteousness. 3. Walking uprightly.
4. Keeping a good conscience, whereby without seeking a good name therein, but
better things, we shall find a good name.


III. By avoiding all

First, hypocrisy and hypocritical behavior.

Secondly, vainglory in 1. Boasting. 2. Seeking praises of men, or flatterers,
by vanity. 3. Censuring others, or 4. Disgracing ironically, and arrogantly
scorning them.


Thirdly, Infamy, by 1. Such vanity. 2. Sins and vices. 3. Opprobrious
speeches. 4. Evil company, etc.


47. How is true testimony to be given of our selves?
1. For the good, if true, with modesty only on good occasion.

Not for boasting or vainglory, but for the good of others to confess it.

If false, not to assume, but with modesty and humility to deny it.

II. Evil,

1. If true, to confess it,

First, to God, to ask forgiveness.

Secondly, to men only, if necessary, for Gods glory, our own or others good.

2. False, constantly to deny it.

Opposite to which, arrogance, counterfelt modesty, to draw more then deserved
commendations, and boasting of evil, to our own shame, and Gods dishonor, or
good we have not, for our own vain glory, gain, or disgrace of others, or
disgrace our selves, to pick thanks, or gratify others: contrary to truth,
candor, and integrity.

48. What follows?
The tenth and last Commandment, concerning the moderation of the very
thoughts of heart to the preservation, if possible, of our selves entirely to
God.

SECT. 12. The tenth Commandment.
The order and reason thereof, and Analysis of the tenth Commandment, showing
the parts and duties as well as opposite vices and abuses thereby intimated or
expressed: of concupiscence and the several sorts and root thereof original
guil whence bud out all actual transgressions, and the degrees of the same
according as found in the several passions and parts of the soul, and in such
other respects distinguished, with the object of the concupiscence, as in the
Commandment expressed, and how evil lusts in the other Commandments
implicit, here more expressly and fully, and fully forbidden: the general
duties and virtues hereby commanded, where in the general inclination to
justice and contentedness in a sort a sort as it were all, or the chief of
all virtues may be seen.

1. What is the tenth Commandment?
Thou shall not cover thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor anything
that is his.

2. What the order of it?
The last making this addition to the rest, even if it were possible, not in
thought to transgress, and to kill the first motions of sin in the heart, the
Cockatrice in the shell; that the budding forth of original sin into actual,
may be smothered, atleast making conscience of the smallest offenses, crying
sins may be avoided.

3. What manner of Commandment?
A negative, inferring his opposite affirmative, viz. all evil and corrupt
affections, understood by concupiscence forbidden; and all good thoughts of
mind, and motions of Gods Spirit in the heart, cheerfully to be entertained,
and hereby commanded.

4. What the negative part?
The prohibition, to show Gods hate of them, and of all evil affections, both
in the

1. Original guilt, hereditary corruption of nature, especially budding out
toward actual transgression.

2. Actual,

Evil thoughts and fantasies.

Evil motions passions and perturbations of the mind.

Evil consent to the said motions, etc. and desire as it were to effect the
same, or wish it done, which is plain concupiscence in the full growth.

5. What the affirmative part?
The hate of that original guilt and corruption of nature, which God hates;
commanded; and thereby with the rooting out of that evil of thought, fantasy,
and motions, or passions and perturbations of mind, a holy entertainment of

Good thoughts and cogitations.

Good motions of Gods Spirit, and truth.

Good resolution to follow the good, and truth chosen and allowed in heart.

6. How the parts opposite, scene opposed?
1. As the cherishing original guilt, into actual concupiscence; opposite to
the hating and rooting out of the same: and that natural inclination to the
guilt, or hereditary corruption; opposite to the inclination to justice, and
Gods love, in the flesh lusting against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh.

2. Actual,

Evil thoughts, opposite to good.

Evil motions, opposite to good motions, etc.

Evil consent, opposite to good resolution, etc.

7. What sorts of concupiscence?
I. The habitual and hereditary

1. Cleaving to our nature, derived from Adam, which is called original sin.

2. Confirmed, by perpetrating actual, and many offenses.

II. Actual, the buds of that original, as proceeding from the same, and more
confirming it; so either producing and confirming other, daughter and mother
either to other, and spreading so largely, all sins and vices seem branches of
the same.

8. What opposite to it?
Original righteousness, lost in Adam, renewed and restored by Christ, in
some measure and degrees of grace here, in full measure hereafter in glory: the
opposition of which grace, or renewed righteousness here in the flesh, to that
guilt, is that continual combat of a Christian, in the subduing of the flesh,
and evil affections, to the spirit, and lusting of the spirit against the
flesh, as the flesh against the spirit, so long as we live, and till fully
reformed to the image of God.

9. Whence comes actual concupiscence?
1. From that original guilt, as the fountain or root, suffered to bud and
grow in us.

2. From other accidents, as occasions of bringing it into action, or adding
fuel to the flame, as from the

1. Motions and suggestions of The devil.

Lewd men, and his instruments.

Our own intemperance.

2. Sense, infected with sin.

3. Fantasy, mind, and memory, etc. corrupted by lewd objects.

10. How shall we then avoid it?
By taking heed to our ways, and carefully observing our evil inclinations,
to reduce and regulate them after Gods will and Commandments, more especially
in our

1. Walking with God by prayer and holy meditations.

2. Going from the company of the world, by retiring and secret examination of
our hearts, ways, and senses, Psalm. 4.

3. Armor of God, to resist the evil one, Ephesians. 5. 6. etc. 2 Cor. 10. 5.

11. What are the degrees hereof?
As they are either

(...), foregoing passions, or as some speak, unformed concupilcence, going
before the act of reason, as in 1. Wanton dreams. 2. Unclean thoughts. 3.
Malicious dreams of hatred, etc. 4. Mind withdrawn, or heart affected by
sudden delight, passion, or bait by the sense, fantasy, memory, or other
seducing occasions presented.


2. (...), full passions, or formed concupiscences, and acts of unreasonable
reason, in deliberate desire, and consent of will, that are either

1. Rolled in the mind, with approbation.

2. Taken delight in by that approbation, though without consent to the
practice of them.

3. Delighted in, even to consent of practice.

4. Desired to be put in practice, and so the very actual breach of other
Commandments, as of false testimony, slander, theft, adultery, etc.

12. How the affections of the heart else distinguished?
Into (...), a versation from some appearing evil, by anger, fear, hate, and
the like.

(...), desiring of some appearing good, as properly this concupiscence, whose
obliquities and defects against honesty, good reason, Gods will, and
depravation by evil judgment, is the breach of this Commandment, for there
may be a good and holy fear, anger, and hatred, as of sin, and concupiscence
of good things, to Gods glory.

13. How evil concupiscence distinguished?
As immoderate, into concupiscence of the objects that are evil, or evilly
desired, as of

1. Pleasure, or lust of the flesh, carnal concupiscence.

2. Profit, lust of the eyes, covetous concupiscence.

3. Honor, pride of life, and ambition, or ambitious concupiscence, 1 John 2
15.

14. Whence comes the evil of them?
As they either

1. Proceed from an evil fountain, as

From original sin.

Evil and depraved nature.

Diabolical temptations.

Intemperance, or the like.

2. Are motions to things,

First, horrible, and evil in nature, as murder, theft, adultery, or other
mischief.

Secondly, hurtful to our selves, and others.

III. Against God and his holiness and honor, though in things appertaining
to out neighbor, here especially remembered.

15. Which are they?
Evil longing after either

House or field, by covetousness.

Wife, by carnal concupiscence.

Servant, Ox or Ass, or any thing else, by any inordinate or carnal desire,
whether in Heart, longing Mind, plotting Will, devising, or Word and thought
wishing
for it.

16. What then in general forbidden here?
All suffering of sin to Bud Live Grow
in the heart, to the prejudice of the soul, harboring it, the neighbor
endangered, to be damnified, and God dishonored by it.

17. Why so precisely forbidden?
As the root of all evil, because from the heart and from within, proceed
evil thoughts, and so adulteries, thefts, fornications, murders,
covetousness, and all wickedness, that defile a man, Mark 7. 22. as our
Savior himself shows, and thereby the leprosy, foulness, and deformity of
the same.

18. But is it not forbidden in the other Commandments?
It may be answered, yes, but withal to be noted

I. How

1. Intimated there, and more implicit in and with the act forbidden.

2. More expressly and plainly here, as of set purpose, to avoid all doubt, and
to assure and remember us of the same.

II. Or else as it is

The first bud here reproved, all, even the unformed lusts, and inordinate
desires, before full consent.

In the full growth, and formed in the will, ready for the act, with and in the
act, there forbidden likewise.

19. What is then here commanded?
The virtues opposite to the former evil concupiscences, and so as the rooting
of them out, the reformation of the soul, in planting and cherishing the
graces: opposite to the same, as before remembered, seen in

1. Not yielding to sin, and temptation of Satan.

2. Resisting evil concupiscence, covetousness, and fleshly desires, that
fight against the soul.

3. Entertaining the good motions of Gods blessed Spirit, and

4. Fostering and cherishing the same by good thoughts and meditations, godly
and Christian resolution.

20. How is this to be effected?
By taking to us the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 5. able to resist all the fiery
temptations of the devil, and seeking the sincere milk of the word, which is
able to make us grow up in faith, unto all righteousness which is in Christ.

21. What are the parts of it?
1. A mortification of sin, and our fleshly members.

2. A regeneration or new birth unto righteousness.

3. A sanctification of the spirit unto God, whence also the works of
sanctification and holiness flow, etc.

22. But this is beyond the Law?
Yes, but not beyond the intent of the Law, which wills absolute
righteousness both in our souls and bodies, or actions and most inward
affections: and is hereby a Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, and when we
are not able to do it, to send us to him that has done it for us, if we show
our love and obedience by our willingness.

23. How may our willingness be seen?
1. By our hate of the things of the flesh.

2. By our delight in the Law of the Lord, Romans 7. 16.

3. By our stirring or striving and moving in holy duties.

4. By our desire to be instructed and directed.

5. By our growing up in godliness, and these are also assigned as tokens of
our new birth, proceeding by degrees in grace, directed by the Law, profiting
and perfected in Christ.

24. What generally commanded here?
Contentedness with our estate, in not covetting our neighbors goods, but
submitting our souls to the good will and pleasure of God and his holy Spirit,
and ordering our selves, with thankfulness, according to the direction of the
same, in which contentedness all virtues seem to shine forth, and to be
comprehended, as

Prudence, justice, temperance, fortitude, constancy, etc. both in general,
and in particular of all virtues, as in their several kinds and branches is
to be seen, as what Christian prudence, and heavenly wisdom shows it
self, where we are graciously contented with Gods providence over us, and
appointment of us in that our estate and condition, to do him such service as
therein required; what justice toward God and men, shines forth in our
readiness, so contentedly to do our duties; what Christian moderation and
temperance to be seen, above all turbulent affections of vainglory, pride, or
covetousness so to submit our selves to Gods will and command; and our
fortitude and constancy so to continue and persevere, as indeed where any
virtue is actually, there habitually are all the rest; virtues and graces go
concatenate, there is such mutual league of love, and tie of affinity between
and among them, as no virtue without prudence to gurde it, justice the soul
and substance of it, in the duty, whether to God or man, our selves or others;
temperance the mediocrity and moderation of it; fortitude the strength of it,
and courage to proceed; constancy the continuance; and so the rest, humility
the ground, continency the girdle, love the comfort, chastity the ornament,
piety the crown of them all; and each adding a luster to other, and where any
deficient, the rest blemished by it, but in this one contentedness all
generally entertained, and every one particularly illustrated by it.

25. What are the fruits hereof?
True blessedness here and hereafter, the promise annexed to the performance
of good duties.

26. What the whole duty man?
To fear God, and keep his Commandments.

27. What the sum of the Commandments?
Love

28. What follows in the Catechism?
The explication of that love, the sum of the Commandments, as it extends
it self to the performance of duties both toward God and men, and so to show
what we learn in them.

SECT. 13. The ninth and next Questions.
Love the sum and substance or root and fountain of the Law, and all good
duties therein comprised, whether to God or man pertaining, so called the
royal law of love, or fulfilling of the law, whose degrees in our duty to God,
to superiors, to equals and inferiors in their several orders and kinds to
be exercised, how to love the neighbor as ones own self, and what by the
Talion law to do as we would be done to, is required, our giving hon^^. to
superiors, love of equals, and all, else shown by hurting none by breach of
any the Commandments, as (...) or (...), incontinency, picking and stealing,
evil speaking, lying, or slandering or coveting other men's goods, and so
consequently to use the honest means whereby to be better able to perform
this, to learn to labor in some lawful calling as God appoints us with
thankfulness, and contentedness.

1. What do you chiefly learn in these Commandments?
Two things, my duty toward God, and my duty toward my neighbor, or the root
and fountain whence these duties do slow, love, extending it self to

God,

Men.

2. How is love the fountain of these duties, or sum of the Law?
1. It is the sum of the Law, as it is the whole scope of all good duties,
and intention of the law, and inward form of that spiritual life, we live by
grace, ready to perform all good duties, and so called the royal law of love.

2. It is the fountain and root of his double duty, as the love of God
produces the zeal of his glory, seeking his honor, and so obedience to all
the Commandments, and thereby performance of duties both to God and men.

3. What is thy duty toward God?
To believe in him.

To fear him, and to love him, with all my heart, mind, soul, strength, as
Luke 10. 27. Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Mat. 22 28. Mark 12. 30. Whence sloweth the
performance of all other services of his, and honor done unto him, as from the
first Commandment all the rest.

4. What mean you by this?
A faith in God, producing his fear in love, and filial observance, the fear
of God the beginning of wisdom, performing obedience and love, in hearty
affection adhering unto him, and trusting in him, with mind unfainedly
seeking, knowing, and remembering him, and soul wholly addicted to his honor
and service, to the utmost strength and power of both bodily and spiritual
faculties, persevering therein, the substance of the first Commandment, and so
performing all parts of his service, in the rest of the Commandments.

5. In what wanner?
1. Both to worship him after his will,

2. Give him thanks, and praise him for his benefits,

3. Put my trust in him in distress,

4. Call upon him in all my needs, as in the second Commandment.

5. Honor his holy name and his word, as in the third Commandment.

6. Serve him truly all the days of my life, and especially his Sabbaths, as
the fourth Commandment.

6. What is love to these duties?
The very foundation of them; for if I do love Cod

With all my heart, sincerely,

With all my mind understandingly,

With all my soul, affectionately,

With all my strength, effectually,

I will assuredly also strive to perform these things, and continue in them all
the days of my life.

7. What is thy duty to thy neighbor?
I. In general,

1. As by our Savior Christ is taught to love him as my self, so read Math.
22. 39. Luke 10. 27. Mark 12. 31. so Lev 19. 18.

2. According to talion Law, to do to all men as we would they should do unto
us, by our Savior taught, Math. 7. 12. Luke 6. 31. so Tob. 4. 15.

II. Special, to

First, superiors, as in the fifth Commandment, to 1. To love, honor, and
succor father, etc. 2. Honor and obey King and his, etc. 3. Submit my self
to, etc. 4. Order my self lowly, etc.


Secondly, all others,

I. In general, being true and just, etc.

II. In particular, as in

6. Commandment, to bear no malice, etc. 7. Commandment, keeping body in,
etc. 8. Commandment, keep hands from picking, etc. 9. Commandment, tongue
from evil, etc. 10. Commandment, not to covet, etc.
8. How is that, to love my neighbor as my self?
To love him as my self, in that true, sincere, and hearty affection, that I
wish well unto my self withal, and not hypocritically, and fainedly, and
coldly, or dissemblingly, but truly, for his good, and unfainedly, for his
souls health.

9. Who can love his neighbor so?
Every good Christian that has but learned what charity and the love of God
is, for if he do not love his brother thus, whom he has seen, neither does
he love God whom he has not seen, but if he say he does, he is a liar, because
the truth of God is not in him, since truth of love is wanting, and God is
love, and the truth, and so he loves us, in truth, and commands us so to
love one another and sees the heart, and by this shows who are his children,
that in truth love him, and their neighbor.

10. But we see none do love other, so much as themselves?
Neither is it so set down, so great a love in the quantity, but as true a
love in the quality; and a second in order, my self the rule, my neighbor as
my self, and both in God and for his love; else all love of my self and
others is vain, that is in any other respect, such as worldly or carnal, and
fleshly love is.

11 How mean you it then?
To love him, even as my self; for

1. The manner, in true and hearty love, though not in that measure and extent
in every respect of it; or,

Quoad qualitatem veritatis, though not quoad quantitatem magnitudinis, so
true, though not so great alone.

Quoad modum, though not gradum, to the utmost degree, that I must care, and
provide for my self.

12. How then shall this love be?
Sicut meipsum, or as my self, both in respect of

1. Quod in meipso, my soul, and his, Gods Image.

2. Ad quod meipsum, for grace here, and glory hereafter.

3. Propter quod meipsum, for Gods glory, and the souls good.

4. In quo meipsum, in God and goodness.

5. Quosque meipsum, to the end, and this, to love him truly, and Christianly
as my self.

13. What will the effect of this be?
That I will then wish no more hurt to him then to mine own soul, loving him
so truly, and sincerely as my self, and for Gods sake, and will wish to
receive from all men, as I would do unto them.

14. How is that to do to all men as I would, etc.
According to the true effect of the Talion law, in love not revenge, but doing
so well by them, that I would not wish better from them; and so wish as well to
them as to my self, or my own soul, which could not be amiss, for who
hates or wishes ill to himself that is but honest, or in his right mind?
and so, love the fulfilling of the law seen in all these particulars.

15. How toward superiors?
By doing to them as I would wish them or others to do by me, if I were a
superior, and in their place, which is the sum and substance of the fifth
Commandment, whereby

1. To love, honor and succor my father and mother.

2. To honor and obey the King and his Ministers.

3. To submit my self to all my governors, etc.

4* To order my self lowly and reverently to all my betters, which is the love
and effects thereof, in honor, and obedience, and submission, and well
ordering my self in duty and humility that I owe, 1. To my natural parents,
father and mother. 2. To political parents, King and Magistrates. 3. To
spiritual parents, Pastors and Ministers. 4. Oeconomicall, and other parents,
superiors or betters, as Masters, Teachers, ancient, rich, or noble persons,
in any degree better, or above my self, and in modesty extended, my very
equals.


16. How toward others?
In general to hurt no body by word nor deed, but to be true and just in all
my dealing; the sum and substance of all the five last Commandments, as not
hurting any body,

I. By word, contrary to the ninth Commandment, by lying, slandering, false
witness, etc.

II. By deeds, by 1. murder, slander, malice, or the like, contrary to the
sixth Commandment.

2. Adultery, fornication, or other uncleanness in tempting others, or
attempting or wronging others chastity, or mine own, contrary to the seventh
Commandment.

3. Stealing, in oppressing, fraud or the like, contrary to the eight
Commandment, and so consequently being true and just in all my dealings in all
these respects, and even not contrary to truth or honesty, to cover or desire
other men's goods, or make any lewd or evil pretenses to the same; so contrary
to the tenth Commandment, as more particularly expressed in the words
following.

17. What is it to bear nomclice or hatred in my
To be free from murder, and all inducements to the same, since who hates his
brother is a manslayer before God, and of malice and hatred sprung contentions,
quarrels, and unquietness, and so consequently blood-sucking, if not
bloodshedding, so this the effect, and substance of the sixth Commandment; on
the contrary, enjoining and commanding love, and the preservation of our
neighbors life and person.

18. What is it to keep my body in temperance, soberness and chastity?
The substance of the seventh Commandment, where these virtues of temperance
in our minds, affections and actions enjoyed; sobriety in our speech,
gestures, attires, actions and behavior, and chastity both of body and soul,
though as most seen in the actions and body; so for good example sake
intimated, and most required, and on the contrary in that Commandment all
adultery, fornication and acts of uncleanness, with all intemperance and
unchastity, and signs or means of the same forbidden.

19. What to keep my hands from picking and stealing?
The plain sense of the eight Commandment forbidding all stealth, whether by
covert fraud, cousenage, or secret purloyning, or overt oppression in robbery
and other unjust and ungodly courses, getting others goods, or increasing our
own; as on the contrary, in that Commandment the preservation of our
neighbors estate, restoring of goods unlawfully gotten, and lawful getting,
and using, yea laying out of our own goods to pious and charitable uses
enjoined; if as we are but stewards, we will not be accounted thieves and
usurpers before God.

20. What by keeping the tongue from evil speaking, lying and slandering?
The substance of the ninth Commandment, where all untruth and uncharity by
untrue and undue testimony, public or private, in place of judgment, or else
by lies, slanders, or false reports to the wrong of the neighbor, and his, or
our own good name, and breach of love and charity are forbidden, and so on the
contrary truth and charity in all these respects, to the preservation of our
own, and neighbors credit enjoined.

21. What is it not to covet or desire other men's goods?
The plain sense and substance of the negative part of the tenth Commandment,
forbidding to covet any thing that is our neighbors, whether in the inmost
thought, or cogitation, and first bud of concupiscence in the soul, or any
farther growth to will or consent to such covetous desire, or wish of the same,
and whence follows the affirmative part of the same Commandment, that I must

1. Learn and labor to do my duty in some state of life, and honest calling.

2. I must be content with my place and calling as appointed by God.

3. I must be thankful to God for the same, and so persevere in honest courses
in obedience to his Commandment.

22. Why are we to learn or labor?
1. That we may avoid idleness mother of no goodness.

2. That we may have sufficient for curselves, and need not covet other men's
goods.

3. That we may be able to help others, and so being ornaments to our
profession, show our works of piety, charity, mercy to the glory of God, and
good of his Church.

4. That we may acknowledge our obedience herein, and duty to God and our
neighbor.

23. How ought we to be content in our estate?
As submitting our selves to Gods providence, and fatherly care over us;
without which nothing comes to pass, not a sparrow falls to the ground,
nor a thought in our heart, much less our lives and actions ordered without
it; and in remembrance of this, not to

I. Grudge or murmr, 1. at our crosses, or misfortunes, since all sent from
God.

2. At others prosperity, no not of the wicked, since Gods pleasure.

3. Against God in these things, etc.

II. Not to repine in any trouble or adversity.

III. Not to torment our selves in vain with carking and caring, as it were
over-peering Gods providence, and out going it, to the manifestation of our
impious and shameful infidelity.

IV. Nor lie down under any crosses in despair, arguing a faithless heart,
etc.

24. How is God said to call us to our estate?
By that his providence over us, from whom all good comes to us, and whose
ordinance or allowance all honest callings are; as the neglect in idleness or
no calling, or transgressing in unlawful arts are from the devil, author of
sin, and all evil, withal to put us in mind to whom to look for a blessing
and to pray as well as to express our thankfulness.

25. How are we to show our thankfulness?
1. In our hearts, by our inward rejoicing, our comforts sent from God, his
blessings and contednesse.

2. In our words, by prayers and praises, expressing these our good thoughts
and motions in our mind.

3. In our works, in a godly and Religious course of life, to the glory of God,
and good example of our brethren.

26. Are we able to perform this?
Never, either of our selves alone, or our own power, or perfectly as we ought
to do, in exact righteousness required, but only in some acceptable measure,
as we are enabled by Gods grace, his special gift in Christ, to whom we are by
the law directed to look, and to call for that his grace and assistance by
prayer, as we are taught in the next place.

27. What follows then?
An introduction to the consideration of prayer in the 11. Question; where we
are taught the right use of the Law, our insufficiency to fulfill it, and the
necessity of prayer.

The fourth part of the Catechism, Concerning Prayer.
SECT. 1. The twelfth Question.
The introduction to the fourth part of the Catechism, concerning prayer, with
the Analysis of the 12. Question, or preface to the doctrine of prayer, wherein
the holiness, excellency, and purity of the Law and Lawgiver, with our
impurity and weakness, are set forth motives to us, looking at the use of the
law to a rule of good life, and a schoolmaster bring us to Christ, to move and
urge us to humility, and that consideration of our inability, more especially
to induce us to seek for a better estate of grace, and more perfection in
Christ, which (...) we have no other means to attain unto, but only prayer we
are hereby to be enfor^^d what true earnest and continual and hearty prayer is
at our hands, and of necessity required; and so the Lords Prayer, as the most
perfect, and absolute pattern or form thereof propounded from the

1.
WHat is here next proposed?

The twelfth Question, concerning prayer; and with it a preface or preamble to
the same, in these words, My good child, know this, etc.

2. What is therein contained?
A preface and question; and in the

I. Preface,

First, intimated

1. The purity, holiness, and excellency of the Law and Lawgiver.

2. The use of the Law, to show Gods purity and holiness, our impurity and
weakness, so to humble us, and direct us to a better law of grace, in Christ,
and prayer.

Secondly, expressed,

1. A necessary caution of consideration of our estate and inability, in that,
My good child know this, etc.

2. Our inabilitie in it self to perform the Law as we ought; Thou art not
able, etc.

3. What ability we may expect, only of grace, and in some measure.

4. Whence to expect that ability from God.

5. What means to obtain it, prayer.

6. The necessity of prayer, We must, etc.

7. What manner of prayer, continual, earnest, diligent.

II. Question,

1. Intimating the Lords prayer, for the most absolute platform of prayer, and
so

2. Expressly requiring the same.

3. How is the purity and excellency of the Lawgiver understood?
By the excellency and beauty of holiness, which is in him originally, thence
into his law and Statutes diffused and derived, that are true and righteous
altogether, and show his love of holiness, integrity, and purity; and hate of
the contrary.

4. How the purity and holiness of the Law seen?
1. Both in regard of the author, so holy, and from whom all impurity removed.

2. And in respect of us, so impure, and argued thereby, and unable to fulfill
the same.

It self, so good that it is 1. Pure, and gives light to the eyes. 2. Holy
and undefiled, converting the soul. 3. More to be desired then gold, yea then
much fine gold. 4. Sweeter then the honey, and honey comb. 5. Precious above
thousands of gold and silver. 6. Instruction to the simple, and wisdom, and
in keeping thereof, great reward, even to everlasting remembrance, etc.


5. How is then called the strength of sin, 1 Cor. 15?
As it meets with our weakness and impurity, that being no way able to
fulfill it, of our selves, shows our guilt, and it is to our ill nature a
stumbling block of offense, and not only showing sin, but making it more
stubborn and outrageous, though it self good and holy, as wholesome meat, and
nourishing, meeting with an ill stomach, is not only not comfortable to it,
but loathsome, and provoking even fainting and vomiting; or as good council
meeting with a lewd disposition, is (though in it self godly) to that depraved
humor but an occasion of rebelling, and rebellious headstrongness, and
scorning, in impatiency and impotency, with spurning against it, and
disobedience.

6. But obedience to the Law is true justice.
Yes, for the man that does those things shall live in them, Levit. 18. 5. Gal.
3. 12. Romans 10. 3. Luke 10. 28.

7. But none may be justified by the Law?
No, yet not because the Law is not perfect, or not able to justify, for the
Law is perfect, holy, just, and good, but because we are not able to justify
it, for the Law is spiritual, but we carnal, Romans 7. 12. etc.

8. Why can none fulfill it?
Because we are all sinners, and deprived of grace, as of the glory and image
of God, Romans 3. 23. yea sin is in the very regenerate, Romans 7. 20.

9. What is the use of the Law?
1. To teach us these things, and the excellency of Law, and Lawgiver.

2. To show us what true righteousness is.

3. To humble us, and show us our weakness and infirmity.

4. To stir us up to better duties, and seek Christ and his power, and grace,
so to bring us to him.

5. To direct us being in him, how to live acceptably, in striving to walk in
the same.

10. How is this use of the Law then branched?
Into the civil and spiritual use thereof, both in respect of reprobate or
righteous.

11. What the civil use?
To show the difference between good and evil, and what the acceptable will
of God is, and to leave all without excuse.

12. What the spiritual use?
To the reprobate, not only to leave them without excuse, but even to

1. Show their sin in the full extent, and so to make them appear more ugly
and deformed, that are by nature void of good.

2. To harden them, that whereas they cannot perform it, take occasion thereby
to bring forth more evil, and so to them the letter kills; and kindling the
heat of sin in them makes it more strong.

13. Why should they be condemned since they are not able to perform it?
We are not to look that we are able, but what we ought to do, not what In 1.
Our corruption we want; but 2. What we received in our creation, that is, what
the Lord gave us, and the Lord requiring but his own, we being not able, the
fault is in our selves.


14. What the use to the children of God?
Twofold,

Either 1. Before they be converted, to humble them, and show them their own
weakness, whereby they may feel the sweetness of Christ in deliverance from
the torments of hell deserved, which unless humbled by the Law, we could never
be sensible of, but feeling it, desire the release, and so a Schoolmaster to
bring us to him. And yet more,

2. After they be in Christ, for a rule of righteousness, and godly obedience
to bridle the affections, while we strive for perfection.

15. What is then further expressed in this preface?
First, the caution, for our more due consideration of these things, and our
weak estate, and inability to perform the duties in the law required, in
those first words, My good child know this that thou art not able to do, etc.

16. How is our inability seen?
In that we are not able as of our selves to think a good thought, much less
to do a good deed, as of our selves, since our depraved nature in Adams fall,
is not only deprived of all goodness, but inclined and prone to all evil.

17. Was no man ever able to perform them?
None, except Adam in his state of innocence, and Christ, who was both God and
Man.

18. How is the estate of man to be considered?
1. In his first creation, and estate of innocence, able to fulfill them, as
them in Gods Image, righteousness, and true holiness.

2. In his fall, and nature as now it is depraved, and deprived of all
goodness, and so not able to fulfill it.

3. In his new birth, and regenerate estate in Christ, yet so not able
perfectly to fulfill the law, but failing in many things, yet in some measure,
yielding acceptable obedience.

19. How was that perfection in Adam seen?
As he was perfectly good, created in the Image of God in righteousness and
true holiness, having his soul endued with divine knowledge, free will and
affections, holy in integrity and innocence.

20. How the depraved nature of man?
As he is corrupted in his powers of body and soul, and his

1. Understanding darkened, full of ignorance and error.

2. His will crooked, and contrary to the will of God.

3. His affections impure, and so bad, that nothing so good but it will loath
or hate it, nothing so bad and vile, but they will wish and seek it.

4. His weakness such, that no power to any good in thought, word or deed.

5. His strength of corruption so great, that it will turn best things into
ill to its self, and good things into occasion of falling, the graces of God
into wantonness.

21. How this more manifested?
In that they in this estate are compared to blind and deal, and worse things,
even filthiness it self; so Job 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of
filthiness? and Romans 7. 18. In me dwells no good thing, and David, There is
none that does good, no not one, they are all corrupt, and become abominable,
destruction and unhappiness is in their ways, and the way of peace they have
not known: yea the unregenerate do nothing but sin, and their best actions and
ways, but sin, and to death.

22. How those in estate of grace?
Yet they cannot perfectly fulfill the law, but fail in many things, as Jam.
3. 2. In many things we offend all; for though there be sincere and sound
obedience from the heart, and guided by Gods Spirit, yet it is but imperfect
obedience; while the corrupt nature in the old man cleaves so near to us, and
is not quite expelled, but hinders many a good work; whence the combat
between the flesh and the spirit, when not the good that we would, but the
evil that we would not is done, Romans 7. 21. and so like Scholars practiced in
Christ's School in these exercises of grace, there will be faults in our doings
easily found, we are not skillful to the full, or masters in the art of
godliness, while we are in via here, only we shall be in patria, when all
imperfection shall be done away.

23. Are none then perfect here?
Not absolutely, but a kind of perfection is attributed to the godly,

1. As perfectio partium, opposed to hypocrisy, so sincere and true
godliness, as in David, Josiah, and others.

2. Though not perfectionem graduum, or an absolute fulfilling of the law, and
all righteousness, without failing in any thing, for this is in no man to be
found of all the sons of Adam, that are only men so rejected,

1. Pelagianisme, that gave perfection to man's natural faculties, and freewill.

2. Semipelagianis^e, that in nature assisted by grace, will suppose free will,
(...) of supererogation.

24. What ability then may we (...)?
Only that which is of grace in Christ, and to that measure that may be
acceptable, though not perfect, since God is pleased so to accept of our best
endeavors.

25. Whence are we to expect it?
From God, the giver of all goodness, and so who is only able to work in us
both the thought, the will and the deed.

26. What means to obtain it?
As here is prescribed, continual and earnest prayer, the effectual means to
obtain grace and all other blessings from the hand of God.

27. Is there such necessity of prayer then?
Yes, as the natural life cannot be preserved without continual food, no more
the spiritual life of the soul in grace, without continual access of Gods
graces and comforts to refresh and nourish it.

28. Is there such need for the faithful also to pray?
Yes both,

I. As continually standing in need of such comfort:

1. To show they are Gods children, and faithful servants.

2. To pay their vows, and duties of praise and thanksgiving.

3. To perform their obedience to him.

29. What manner of prayer required?
As is here expressed continually, earnestl^, and diligent prayer; so said, we
ought at all times to call for grace by diligent prayer, and to this purpose we
are bid pray continually, 1 These. 5. 17.

30. What further intimated in the question following this preface?
That the Lords Prayer is the most excellent platform that we may desire of
prayer, and absolutely in it containing all that we need pray for, and as a
rule for our hearts and words to make request by, so most reverently and
religiously to be respected and used, whence the reproof of any that either

I. Superstitiously neglect 1. It, or slight it. 2. All set forms of prayer.

II. Ignorantly attribute too much to the bare recital of it, so religiously
using it with vain repetitions and babbling.

III. Superstitiously use it to the expiating of sin, by the only often
repeating it, etc.

31. Why is it called the Lords Prayer?
As by him taught to his Disciples, and in them to the whole Church, so
sanctified by his holy lips teaching and commanding it, saying, when you pray,
pray after this manner.

32. Is it then meant in those very words?
No doubt, after so good a Schoolmaster, and in words so well couched in so
holy perfect and absolute manner, and for the substance, comprehending all
things necessary to be desired.

33. What follows?
The express requiring the recital of the same prayer, intimated, so
necessarily to be learned, and religiously used by all good Christians.

SECT. 2. The Lords Prayer.
Hypothesis of the Lords prayer here proposed: the general thesis of prayer
and the nature, definition, excellency, sorts, order and rules of it come to be
considered: So the definition explaned, and parts of prayer and order of them
described, as also the sorts or kinds of prayer among themselves compared and
illustrated, as of vocal and mental, of public and private, ejaculatory, and
others, the difference, and degrees of excelleney all of them excellent, and
useful in their kinds, the holy and religions use of set form of prayer in
the Church of God, and reasons of the same, and how from all antiquity, and by
all godly men used, whence also the Lords prayer by the Lord himself so
propounded to be used, yet none of the others in their due seasons to be
neglected; but most necessary on the diverse occasions of our life, estate, and
callings to be religiously practiced, all of them, and often, as the many and
continual blessings of Almighty God, are powered out upon us or presented to
our eyes, and remembrance, the circumstances of prayer further set down and
declared of kneeling, and the like gestures, the order and rules and conditions
of all true prayer, the wings of prayer, and how made so powerful, and why the
prayers of the wicked prove so uneffectuall and unacceptable, how we may pray,
or more to elevate our minds, and inflame our zeal and affections to this
divine duty of prayer in a due estimate of it, we may consider the rare
excellency of it by the divine Elogies, and other testimonies of holy
scripture concerning it, as likenise the exceed (...) and urgent nesessity
pressing us on inciting us to this duty; and lastly, the admirable force or
surpassing virtue and efficacy of true prayer, which is of faith even to the
obtaining of all our desires, overcomming the greatest powers that are in the
world; the great dignity, urgent necessity, and wondrous efficacy of it here
amply appearing from a survey of the real worth, right use, and rare (...),
both effects of it; to which may be added, these further godly and profitable
directions therein for the right use and practice of the same,

1. REcite the Lords Prayer.
Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed.

2. What is here especially to be observed?
In general, what prayer is, and how regulated.

In special, this prayer the perfection and parts of it.

3. What is prayer?
Oration, quasi oris ratio, the calves of the lips, or rather a devout pouring
forth of the soul before God, in our submission to his Majesty and ordinance,
and so honoring him.

4. What in it to be considered?
The Nature Parts Sorts Rules
of it, whereby the Essence Matter Manner Order
of it declared.

5. What the nature or essence?
As expressed in the definition of it, said to be the immediate worship of God,
by our calling on him in the name of Jesus Christ, with devout pouring forth of
the soul before him, acknowledging his great Majesty and mercies, and our own
misery; so desiring both for our selves and others, supply of our wants and
necessities, from the fullness of his bounty, and giving him praise for the
same: or more briefly thus; a lifting up of the heart to God, in the name of
Jesus Christ, according to his will, in full assurance to be heard and
accepted of him.

6. Why say you an immediate worship of God?
Because that though many other holy actions both at Church and else, are his
worship, as preaching and hearing the word, receiving the Sacraments,
sacrifice, and obedience better then sacrifice, yet none so immediately
honoring him as this, that primarily and totally respects it, as tendering
him in that very act, our duty, and so in the act honoring and worshipping
him; whereas preaching helps but our infirmity, and prepares us to this
duty, sacraments, sacrifice, and obedience, and all other good duties in the
service of God, and his worship, are promoted and made more acceptable by this,
and have as it were their best perfection from hence; and thus this is the
greatest, highest, and holiest duty that can be done by man; and even Kings in
this action, though other great matters required at their hands, do the
greatest matter that ever they can do on earth, and perform the holiest duty,
and most honorable, and strongest for their estate, as whence a blessing on
all other their designs depends; and in this, serving God; in other greatest
matters but themselves, or the people; and consequently David, or Solomon
himself, more honorable on their knees, at this duty, then else in their
greatest royalty.

7. How mean you the rest?
1. By calling on him, the very act of his worship, expressed in invocation, or
lifting up our heart.

2. By pouring forth the soul before him, the true effigies of hearty and
devout prayer, not of the lips only, but of the very soul; and without which
it is not prayer, but only a bare repeating, as of the Creed.

3. In the name of Jesus Christ, the only means and help we have to be either
heard or accepted, the foundation of our faith and confidence.

4. By acknowledging his Majesty, mercies, and our misery, the substance of
confession, that consorteth true prayer, and so prepares it, even accounted a
part of prayer.

5. By desiring for our selves and others, including petition and intercession,
the parts of prayer, intimating our faith and charity, as other parts of
prayer, intimating our humility and piety.

6. According to his will, the rule of all right and true prayer.

7. By supply of necessities from his bounty, what and whence we desire or
expect it.

8. By giving him praise, the last part of prayer, and as consummation of the
former, an effectual new prayer for more blessings.

9. By assurance to be heard, and accepted, the stability of prayer, our faith,
without wavering, without which no prayer can be acceptable.

7. What are the parts then of prayer?
These four,

1. Confession of Gods Majesty and mercy, our wants and misery, humbly.

2. Petition, or craving the things we want, faithfully, under which
deprecation for avoiding ill or danger.

3. Intercession for the good of others, charitably.

4. Thanksgiving or praises for benefits received, and dangers avoided,
according to our bounden duty gratefully.

8. What order of these?
As they are here remembered, and so to be seen in our ordinary Liturgy, and
all other public authorized Liturgies used, and that most conveniently, in
all devout and godly prayer, where first humble confession to God of his
greatness and graces, from the bottom of our hearts, makes us more sensible
of our own weakness, wants, and miseries; which confessed, likewise prepares
us in the second place to pray and desire supply of our wants, from his bounty,
and forgiveness of all defects, from his grace and mercy; and that not only
in faith, for our selves so to be heard for Christ's sake; but in the third
place in charity also for others, by intercession for their good; and lastly,
with praises and thanksgiving for benefits received, whereby more testifying
his honor and our humility, whereby we may appear worthy of more blessings;
and this the ordinary use in all prayers, though sometimes to be seen else,
intermixedly proposed.

9. What sorts of prayer are there?
Chiefly either in regard of the

1. Diversity of the instrument, the Heart Tongue
Mental or Vocal
prayer.

2. Diverse use and exercise of it, Public or Private
prayer.

3. Manner of conceiving it, as With premeditation, set forms of prayer.

Without premeditation, and so

Ejaculatory, or short prayers.

Or of longer continuance.

10. What mental prayer?
All holy aspirations of sanctified souls, silently in the heart and thought,
breathing out and sending up prayer, and praises unto God; so Piorum desideria
preces, and of this their holiness it is said,

Non vox, sed votum, non chordula musica, sed cor;

Non clamans, sed amans, cantat in aure Dei.

And so Deus audit vota and desideria cordium, as Hanna, when she prayed,
though not heard to speak with her lips, yet prevailing with God in her
petitions, 1 Samuel 1. 20. and Moses crying, Exodus 14. 15.

11. What vocal prayer?
The uttering the well conceived and holy vows and prayers of the heart, with
lips and voice; so it may be noted, that though mental prayer may be without
the voice, yet vocal prayer cannot be without the mind; for if it be, it is
not praying, but only speaking the words of prayer, that a Parrat may be
taught to do, as well as his Ave Caesar.

12. Which the more excellent?
Both most excellent in their due use and time, and mental preferred, as it
is, and seen to be the

1. Primary and proper instrument of prayer.

2. Fountain of the other, and perfection of it.

3. Best part of man thus employed in best use.

4. Spiritual exercise of the best part.

5. Directed in spirit to the father of Spirits, and so most sitting to be
offered to that divine Majesty, as also vocal prayer, dignified, in that it is

1. Comprehending both, rightly used.

2. Lending a tongue, and further complement to the former.

3. Profitable for others, and use of edification.

4. Useful to stir up our own and others affection.

5. More publicly setting forth the glory of God, and thus, both excellent
and exceeding useful in their kinds, and either as excelling, so diversely
excelled by other.

13. What public prayer?
That public service and worship of God performed by many Saints jointly
together, in the great Congregation.

14. What private prayer?
The more retired and private use thereof, whether of one alone, or of more
together, yet in a more private manner, as in a private house or family; and to
this sort referred salutations, asking blessing, saying grace, and
thanksgiving, before and after meat.

15. Which the more excellent of private or public prayer?
As before was said of vocal and mental prayer, so may be said of these, both
excellent and right useful in their kinds, and in diverse respects excelling,
and excelled by other, for public prayer more excellent in that it

1. Is a more public honor and worship of God.

2. Is a more general service performed by so many.

3. Is more representing the heavenly Hierarchy, where myriads of Saints and
Angels perpetually praise God.

4. Is more powerful with God, as wherein the united force of many prayers
jointly ascend.

5. Has, and more particularly may expect to receive a greater blessing
promised, as having a more especial promise of blessing annexed to it; whereas
on the other side, private prayer excels, in that

1. It may be used more frequently, at all good occasions.

2. It may be exercised continually, when the mind best disposed.

3. It may be had, when the other often cannot.

4. It is the daily sacrifice, when the other but the Sabbaths exercise, or
sacrifice.

5. It has a blessing also promised, even when two or three are gathered
together, that God will be among them, and never failed any good man, of the
gracious effect; and so the frequency of this, as at all times, on all good
occasions, every day, or hour, or other season, and as a daily sacrifice of a
good Christian, and when our necessities urge, or devotions best enable us, by
such often use, may seem in some sort to countervaile the others greatness.

16. What are ejaculatory prayers?
The continual breathing, or short sighings of a sanctified soul, on any good
occasions breaking out into the praises of God, either by desire, or words
uttered in brief, to show the good desire, motion, or prayer of the soul, and
so many holy and good short speeches and sentences of diverse Saints of God, and
holy Scripture, are used to this purpose, as these of

1. The Publican, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

2. David, first, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Secondly, Lord remember me in thy righteousness; or according to the
innocence that is in me: or any sentence almost of his Psalms.

3. Nehemiah, Remember me O God, of thy goodness, 13. 31.

4. And diverse even set forms are prescribed on sundry occasions, though
generally such ejaculations are reckoned in that sort of prayer, as a sudden
cruption of a pious thought, that is without much premeditation.

17. What other sorts of prayer?
Both those larger prayers of the Saints of God, on any good occasion, though
not without all, yet without much premeditation, speaking to God in the humble
voice of prayer, as Gods Spirit does give utterance; and all set forms of
prayer, whether in private or public, used to the honor of God, and so
indicted for that purpose; of which sort, the prayers of many godly men in all
ages are recorded, for to prompt memory, and help our weakness; even many
Treatises to be found written for that end, and fitted to most particular
occasions and persons; many also even in holy Scripture, and most especially
that divine platform, the Lords Prayer.

18. But do not some despise or disprove these set forms of prayer?
Nothing so good that some will not dislike, nor so bad that some vicious
humor will not fancy; so not to be stood on, what some, but what the best
approve; but that set forms of prayer may be religiously used, is by many
sufficient and good reasons proved, in that

1. Every one, and at all times, when necessary to pray, is not endued with so
great a gift, or ability, and therefore fit to make use of such as these.

2. Even in public place, not only much inequality of prayer, but confusion
for want of uniformity would be found, if there were no public prayers used,
and prescribed.

3. It has been the use of the Church of God from all antiquity.

4. It has been approved of at all times, and by the best and wisest.

5 It is found by experience, the weakness, insufficiency, excursions,
tautologies, and impertinencies, by tedious and idle repetitions, in such, as
so much affecting singularity, would only have such unpremeditated stuff for
Gods public and solemn service.

6. In particular, holy men recorded and approved in Scripture by Gods holy
Spirit, and have so instituted and used it, as

1. Moses used the same form of prayer, when the Arc removed, or stood still,
Numb. 10. 35.

2. Aaron had a set form of blessing the people, with a kind of prayer
prescribed.

3. David many Psalms, set forms of praises, thanksgiving, and prayer. to be
used publicly, as Psalm. 91. for the Sabbath; so did Asaph and others.

4. The Apostles used general and set forms of blessing.

5. Our Savior prescribed this excellent set forms of blessing.

5. Our Savior prescribed this excellent set form of prayer, John also having
taught his Disciples to pray, Luke 11. 1.

6. Lastly, Gods solemn and public service must needs be often very
slenderly and perfunctorily performed, if not more disgraced by the confusion,
turbulency and other deficiencies in that holy action, if it were not thus
godlily cared for, and prevented; what ever some few fanaticke or turbulent
spirits may babble to the contrary, or offer to trouble and disturb the peace
of the Church, and good order, or despise the same.

19. What sorts of prayer chiefly to be used?
Even all sorts, as occasion is offered by every one as they are able; and
though public prayer, the chiefest, as the most public, and solemn worship
of God, and to be performed by all, that a face of a Church of God may appear
upon earth in resemblance of that glorious company in heaven; yet not any of
the other sorts in their due times to be neglected,

1. Not private prayer, because that a daily sacrifice, and may be offered more
often, and so acceptable.

2. Not mental neither, for it is of our best part, and best sacrifice, and
may be oftenest offered of any other.

3. Not vocal, because we should praise God with every member, and especially
our tongue, the glory of man, to the encouragement of others, and stirring up
our own and others affections.

4. Not set forms, because provided to help our weakness that are sometimes
so unprepared, we want so good matter, and words to move us, as they afford.

5. Not other ejaculations that are so holy and good aspirations of the soul,
nor other longer prayers if Gods Spirit be so present, that we are able to have
longer Colloquie and speech with God.

20. But what if we use only some of these?
If we practice only some of these, and not others, we may well want much
comfort of soul, and spiritual strength, that otherwise we might receive, if
we used or practiced to use them.

21. But what if we neglect any of these, or some one only?
So much worse then the former, as the neglect or contempt of any grace or
goodness, is worse then the not having it, or not knowing our defect, which
with ignorance may seem to have some spice, or measure of malice, and so if we
neglect, or use not public prayers, it would argue us schismatic, or
wretchedly profane.

Or use not private prayers without grace, and having only a form of
godliness without the power thereof.

Or use not mental prayers, it may show little devotion or worth in our
prayers.

Or use not vocal prayers, want of charity, coldness, and much imperfection.

Or use not set forms, arguing either presumption on our own strength, or
scorn of others, and their pious industry.

Or use not ejaculations, and such aspirations, arguing a deadness of spirit,
that on many, or any excellent occasions, not once look up ward, when we might
with these sharpe-pointed, and piercing meditations ascend to God, and up to
heaven almost continually, and so likewise in neglect of the former parts of
prayer.

22. How mean you that?
If we neglect, or use not,

1. Confession, arguing a senselessenesse and stupidity of soul, not
considering Gods mercy, or our own misery duly.

2. Petition, showing want of faith, and no less senselessenesse of our great
wants, weakness, and miserable wretchedness.

3. Intercession for others, a great want of charity, and extreme coldness of
devotion, without hope almost to be heard.

4. Thanksgiving, arguing extreme ingratitude, and unworthiness of further
blessings.

23. What good means may be used to stir us up to these duties?
Even prayer it self, to pray that we may pray better, as scribendo disees
scribere, legendo disces legere, and preeando disces prccari, so using this, we
may learn to pray, and weep for that we cannot weep, or be sensible of
these best things, which showing a good desire, can never be far from the
wished effect, also in our minds often to revolve and consider,

1. The great mercies and goodness of God toward us to stir us up to
thankfulness.

2. The great wants and miseries we are in to move us to confession, and prayer
for relief.

3. The great wants our poor brethren are in, to move us to charity and
compassion, so to pray for them.

4. The many dangers we have escaped by the gracious providence of God to move
us to praise him.

5. The many blessings we receive continually to urge us to thanksgiving, that
are continually preserved, fed and nourished, kept and sustained by him, which
only well thought on, might move us effectually to this duty to pray
continually.

24. How, or in what respect?
1. As every minute, day, Sabbath, hour, and year, are new blessings, adding
continuance to our life and being,

2. As every minute, day, and hour, bring new blessings, or minister occasions
to consider of the same, and move us to thanks.

3. As every creature may seem to put us in mind of their and our Creator.

4. As every good creature yielding us comfort may put us in mind of his
goodness, as the sum of his glory, the Heaven his throne and residence, the
day his light, and so every good thing shows some spark of his grace and
goodness.

5. As every blessing a new memorial of his love and bounty to us, so to
remember him the giver of life, heat and comfort, friends, goods, health, and
whatsover we enjoy, to cloth, feed, help or releeve us, and such pious
arguments of praise, might be continually present with us to move us to praise
him, that even while we live on earth we might herein lead an Angels life, and
be better prepared for glory, and capable of it in greater measure, the soul
so adorned having so great a measure of grace,

25. When and where are we to pray?
As often as conveniently we may, and the oftener the better, so with zeal and
discretion, or with the spirit and understanding.

1. Both public on the Sabbath and solemn feast days, in the Temple with
the Saints, in the great congregation.

2. Privately on the week days in the family, with the promise of the
presence of God.

3. Retiredly at any time in the closet, where God that sees in secret, has
also promised to reward openly.

4. Continually on every good occasion, and blessings received and considered,
to remember and bless the giver, and send up some sigh or ejaculation toward
heaven, whence the gifts descend.

5. Ordinarily for all those daily blessings received, as at our

First, uprising, that restored to a new day and light, that might else have
slept an endless night and sleep.

Secondly, at our downelying, that having passed the troubles of that day we
have rest, and in remembrance of our grave, our bed and sleep of death,

Thirdly, at our receiving our meat, sanctifying the same by prayer, and after
giving praise for the same.

6. Extraordinary as any necessities urge, or extraordinary blessings or
dangers present, oftener and more incessantly, so we find, first Daniel three
times a day, Dan 6.

Secondly David seven times a day, and at midnight, and with great earnestness
for the child.

Thirdly, Christ himself three times together at his agony.

7. Whenever we find our selves best disposed to so holy a duty, and not to
quench the Spirit, or neglect his good motions of grace in the heart.

26. What else to be noted for the circumstances of prayer?
1. Such as the time, the Sabbath most especially appointed for his solemn
worship, yet not neglecting other times, but as often as conveniently may be.

2. Such as the place, the Temple especially, thence called the house of
prayer, where many gathered together, like many coals giving the greater heat,
many sticks the greater flame, and many godly men's prayers jointly, more
powerfully ascending to pull down blessings from God, as he signifies,
Ezechiel the 14. by joining Noah, Daniel and Job together, to show powerful
prayer, and not nelecting any other place on good occasion, as the three
children in the Furnace, David on his bed, and Daniel in the Lions den.

3. Such as the persons, the Minister especially in public, but withal the
whole company, and communion of Saints so called, as gathered together in so
holy an exercise, and therein associated with the Saints and Angels in
heaven, that jointly with them, and ever, perform that spiritual and divine
exercise.

4. Such as the ceremonies, such as appointed, or most tending to comeliness,
and edification.

5. Such as the gesture, the most humble and reverent, by the outward position
of the body, signifying the inward reverence and humility of the soul.

27. How is that?
In uniformity with the Church in public, and according to the custom of the
place, and direction of Authority, and so generally kneeling in prayer used
with us as the most humble gesture, according to our Countries guises, though
prostration in the Eastern Countries, and with the Jews, but not simply to
exclude any manner of gesture, in humility presented in private, though in
public required uniformity, most commendable, and kneeling showing most
humility, and so we may find Daniel kneeling, and David saying, Come let us
fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker.

David prostrate before the Lord for the child.

Isaac walking in the fields praying.

The poor Publican standing aloof and praying.

Jonah lying in the Whales belly, praying and heard, and so any gesture not in
convenient in humility, or it not stubbornely opposed to it, or charity, or
uniformity, which thereby loses the praise of humility, and grows scandalous
in the same.

28. What other the rules, or order in prayer?
Direction, 1. To whom to pray, to God alone, not to Saint or Angel.

2. In whose name, in Christ's, the only Mediator, and no other.

3. By whose help the holy Spirit speaking in us, and making us truly cry Abba
Father.

4. For what things, for only good things, not evil.

5. By what rule, according to Gods will.

6. To what end, to Gods glory, the end of all.

7. With what conditions, and virtues to be graced.

29. What virtues required?
Chiefly, 1. Humility, wherein the poor Publican respected, when the proud
Pharisee rejected.

2. Faith, whereby only prayer is made powerful and acceptable.

3. Charity, without which we can never ask a petition shall please God, nor
ever obtain of him more for our selves then in charity, we would desire for
other.

4. Repentance, whereby we putting off our polluted garments of sin, when we
come into the presence of God, whose eyes try the children of men, and who so
hates sin that no impure thing shall come nigh him; for if a King would not
be served by filthy clownes or boores at his table, how much less God in his
Majesty by filthy and polluted carcases of sinners, stinking before him worse
then carrion, and a very sink of corruption?

30. What the conditions then of true prayer?
That it be 1. directed to God alone from such sanctified heart.

2. Found in faith, and directed by charity.

3. Strengthened by confidence grounded on his promise.

4. Accompained with the true sense of Gods infinite mercy and goodness,

Our own need, necessity and misery.

Hearty and earnest desire of Gods glory above all things.

5. Fervent and zealous in the giving him the praise due unto his name, by such
tendering our duty, though for the rest submitting all to his will.

31. What the wings of prayer?
Alms and fasting, that will make it so are more high, and appear more
acceptable before God, or faith and charity, faith whereby lightened and
directed, charity whereby further enlightened and more enflamed.

32. Can the wicked pray or no?
Either they cannot pray, their hearts being hardened, or they do not pray
right, hindered by their sin and ignorance, or if they pray for good things,
not heard, because they ask commonly for evil ends, or if for evil things,
their prayer is turned into sin, so in effect in that estate they are
wretched, and cannot pray, no more then a dead man speak or reason.

33. But do they not seem to pray?
Yes, in words, but far from the nature of true prayer, as Cains sacrifice from
an acceptable one, having blood and war in his heart, and so

1. Esau many cry, with strong cries, and bitter, but never thereby speed of
the blessing, yea though with tears, when yet his heart not turned.

2. Balaam may wish to die the death of the righteous, and that his last end
may be like theirs.

3. Very ungracious persons may have good wishes in their mouths, but never
true prayer, as wishing the thing, but not the gracious means, to come by it
according to Gods will.

34. What differences between wishes and true prayer?
In that wishes 1. are more sudden and inconsiderate, soon ceasing; prayer more
instant, fervent, deliberate.

2. Are without respect of the means, or care of right or wrong, prayer
godlily respecting both.

3. Are for the most part for worldly things, or for better, but after a
worldly fashion; prayer for spiritual things rather, or if for earthly, after
a more heavenly manner.

4. If for spiritual things, are very inconstant and fading; prayer more
zealous and fervent.

5. As transient and soon passing, and as it were a desire but from the teeth
outward, and fitting the mouth of fools.

When prayer is from a godly soul, persevering in humility, and other virtues
in the favor of God, and fitting the lips of the wisest, so even wrestling
with God, and gaining the blessing, or more yet to wing our meditations to the
highest pitch so to inflame our zeal, and rouse up our affections, and kindle
our devotions in and unto the performance of so holy and religious an action,
we may with a learned and modern Divine for close consider the 1. Great
excellency 2. Urgent necessity 3. Wondrous force and efficacy
of this divine duty of prayer.

How appears the excellency of it?
For that it is defined by some to be an holy Coloquy, or Dialogue between God
and a devout soul, yea Saint Chrysostom terms prayer animam animae, the
soul of a Christian soul, for as the soul is most essential part of man, so
is prayer of a Christian, and as the reasonable soul puts a difference
between a man and a brute beast, so does prayer between a true Christian and
a heathen, and Saint Bafil fitly resembles prayer to a chain of gold, where
with the care of God himself is as it were tied to the tongue of man; for
whereas Gods seat is in heaven, whence all grace and goodness distills, and
man's upon earth which is but a sink of sin, and valley of tears, there is no
other chain to link God and man together more closely then this of prayer.

And that this combines them it is plain, as a Christian in the 9. of the Acts
is described by this periphrasis, that he call upon the name of the Lord, so
God himself (in the 65. Psalm) is described by another equivalent unto it,
for he is still the hearer of prayers, O thou that art the hearer of prayers to
thee shall all flesh come. Secondly, we read in 141. Psalm. is called a
sacrifice, and that of incense, Let my prayers come before thee as incense, and
the lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice. The sacrifice of incense
being as well pleasing unto God under the law, and therefore called the sweet
incense in Numb. 4. and there was appointed an altar of gold for it in Exodus
40. and this is moralized in prayer, Rev. 8. where we see an Angel came and
stood at the altar, having a golden censer, and there was given unto him much
incense that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden
Altar which was before the Throne; mark how for the sweet incense of prayer
there was provided a golden censer and a golden Altar, and an Angel to offer
it, what greater honor can a mortal man, who is but dust and ashes, as
Abraham himself acknowledged, attain unto then to be admitted to friendly and
familiar conference even with God himself thus obtained by prayer? And
thirdly, if we compare the Kingdom of Heaven to a Palace or Princely Mansion
house, as our Savior does, John 14. then is Christ himself the only ready way
conducting to this Palace, so he calls himself in the 6. verse of that
Chapter, where he says, Ego sum via etc. I am the way, and as Christ is the
right way that leads to life, so faith (apprehending him) is as it were the
door opening to this way, and so called Acts 14. Ostium fidei, the door of
faith, and as faith is the door, so the word of God, and the knowledge of the
same, is as it were the key that opens this door so named, Luke 11. clavus
scientiae, the key of knowledge, and as knowledge is the key, so is prayer as
it were the ring or hammer wherewith we knock, the very term being used
Matthew. 11. where our Savior exhorting unto prayer, says, pulsate, knock and
it shall be opened; which may teach all Christians to take this hammer of
prayer, and therewith knock, and call upon God that he would be pleased with
the key of knowledge to open the door of faith, that so they may have entrance
by the way of life into the Palace and Paradise of Heaven. This is the
excellency of prayer.

How show you the necessity thereof?
It is such that whereas Darius Dan. 6. made an edict, that no man for the
space of thirty days should make any petition to God or man, save to the King
only, yet the Prophet Daniel chose rather to be cast into the Lions den then to
forbear so long the so necessary exercise of prayer. The simple necessity
whereof will soon appear if you but take notice of

1. Our manifold wants both of outward blessings, and eke of inward graces.

2. Our manifold evils both of sin and punishment.

3 Our manifold miseries flowing both from temptation and tribulation.

4. Our manifold dangers, for what Saint Paul speaks of himself 2 Cor. may be
found true of all Christians, That we are in perils of robbers, in perils of
waters, in perils by our own Countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in
perils in the City, in perils in the wilderness, in perils on the sea, in
perils among false brethren, etc. and since in so many perils, O what need
have they to fall to prayer! The Prophet David in the 36. Psalm, speaking to
God, says, apud te est fons vitae, with thee is the well of life, and if with
the Psalmist we liken Gods mercy to a Well or Fountain, then may prayer be
resembled to a Bucket wherewith the water of this living Fountain must be
drawn up; and as the woman of Samaria in John 4. said to our Savior in
another case, the Well is deep, and thou have nothing to draw with, etc. so may
we truly say of this, the fountain of Gods grace is unsearchable deep, and you
have nothing wherewithal to draw thence the least temporal or spiritual
blessing, save only this bucket of prayer; for what Saint James speaks of
saving wisdom in particular, If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God
in prayer, is undoubtedly true of all good things whatsoever, for they all
descend from the Father of lights, and therefore if we lack any of these, we
must ask them of God in prayer, and coming by faith to God the inexhaustible
Fountain of goodness, use prayer as a conduit pipe to conveigh the sweet and
saving streams thereof unto your souls. And lastly, if Saint John Apoc. 4.
rightly compare this world to the sea, then may we with Saint Chrysostom, nor
less aptly liken prayer (velis and remis) to the sails and oars that shall
waft us through the turbulent sea of this world, and as mariners never leave
plying their sails and oars till they come to the haven where they would be,
no more can we leave plying these our devotions till we come to that haven of
happiness which we expect to arrive at in the heavenly Canaan, and thus the
necessity.

How then more shown the force and efficacy of prayer?
Many excellent things are spoken in Scripture to set forth the power of
prayer, as that it both shuts and opens heaven; for Elizeus was a man subject
to like passions, says James, as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might
not rain, and it rained not on the earth for the space of three years and six
months, and he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, etc. yea prayer
commands the whole host of heaven, for at Josuahs prayer the Sun stood still
in the valley of Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Ajalon; prayer has
staid the fury of fire, and has made iron swim upon the water; prayer has
made the barren womb fruitful, as in Luke 1. Zachary thy prayer is heard,
and thy wise Elizabeth shall conceive and bear a son; prayer cures the
sickness of the body, as James 5. Is any man sick let him call for the Elders
of the Church, and let them pray for him, and the prayer of faith shall save
the sick; and prayer cures the sins of the soul too, as David, the publican,
the thief upon the Cross, and many others, who as soon as they prayed were
pardoned; to pass over a world of instances, the singular power of prayer may
be discovered to the full, if you will ascend but these three degrees, first,
that which subdues all slesh living, viz. death, yields notwithstanding to the
force of prayer, seen in the Shunamites child, Lazarus, the widows son of
Sarepta, the Rulers daughter, and some others, who by the virtue of prayer have
been raised from death, and restored to life. Secondly, the Devil who in Heb.
2. is said to have the power of death, is not withstanding vanquished,
sometimes by the power of prayer, as in Matthew. 17. where our Savior says
expressly, this kind of Devils go not out save by prayer and fasting, not by
fasting alone, for fasting without prayer is but an image of holiness, and
picture of hunger, but it is prayer quickened with fasting that must do it.
Thirdly, and lastly, God himself (who has power over death and the Devil) is
after a sort overcome by prayer else why does he call to Moses Exodus 32. to let
him alone, it seems that the fervent prayer of Moses at that time did not only
vincere but vincire, after a manner bind Gods hands, and so hinder him from
pouring the viols of his wrath upon the people; so in Genesis 32. the Patriarch
Jacob by wrestling prevailed against an Angel, which the Prophet Hosea expounds
of the power of prayer, not to think that his bodily strength could prevail,
but the truth is, as the Prophet speaks, by prayers and tears he had power
over the Angel, and was therefore called Israel, and Saint Paul aluding
thereunto in Romans 15. uses the very phrase, Now I beseech you brethren for the
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit that you strive
together with me in your prayers to God, who was that Angel he would have them
wrestle for, so the word in the original properly signifies with God by
prayers, this the force of prayer which is of faith, as Heb. 9. and 10. and
James 5. may be seen at large, and thus appears the excellent dignity, urgent
necessity and wondrous force and efficacy of true prayer.

What other godly directions have you concerning prayer?
For the manner of it whether privately as very necessary, or publicly, so
most fitting, as by the Church the household of faith, so in the Church the
house of God, who says, My house shall be called the house of prayer, good
reason that it should be

1. Vniversaliter, as concerning all generally by all persons, in all places,
and at all times, on all occasions, but especially in the great congregation.

2. Vnanimiter, with all unanimous consent, in all charity and concord, and so
in the spirit of n^ity, and bond of peace.

3. Vniformiter, by outward action and gesture testifying that inward concord,
and consent of mind, as it were Saints on earth taking pattern from those in
heaven, the blessed Saints and Angels and Elders there all jointly doing the
same thing, all of them together rising, standing, bowing, ^alling to the
earth, casting their Crowns to the ground singing Hallelujahs of glory,
honor, and praise to God, and to the Lamb for evermore, that so his will may
be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.

4. Ferventer, with ardent zeal and affection to the glory of his great name.

5. Frequenter, at all fit times, omitting no opportunity, when either our
necessities require, or Gods blessings invite, every day, hour, minute of time
yielding some new blessing, or it self a blessing in the enjoying a longer
time of grace, and so such imitation.

6. Fideliter, and fidenter, in true says with love unsained, and sure
confidence, reposing our trust in God, without waving or doubting, as Saint
James speaks.

7. Presenter, as knowing, or considering with the Philosopher, the present
time is only ours, and delay breeds danger, and here is no delaying or dallying
with God in this to be used, for true it is, Nescis quid serus vesper ferat,
and qui non est hodie cras minus aptus erat, as true in this.

8. Perseveranter, with all constancy and patienc waiting the Lords seizure,
and never weary of weldoing, remembering the widow importunity prevailing with
the unjust Judge, as much more we with the most good God.

9. Practice, and thus as perseveringly, even to pray continually, not only the
vicissitude of frequent confession in humility, fervent prayer in true faith;
pious intercession in unfaigned charity, and praise and thanksgiving in duty
and gratitude, a forcible kind of prayer to pull down new blessings, each
taking their turns in a constant and continued course, but such gracious speech
of the tongue, seconding the humble desires of the heart, and both seconded by
a godly course of life, best fitting a devout Christian, as the good life of
the Preacher may seem a continual Sermon, so this godly life of a good
Christian in this course may seem a continual prayer, from which directions
how great abundance of holy meditations and helps to devotion, all incentives
to this divine duty will arise may plainly appear.

What follows in special to be considered?
The Lords prayer, as an absolute platform of true prayer; the Preface and
other parts of it.

SECT. 3. Of the Lords Prayer in particular, and the Preface thereof.
and that fitly in the words, or form of the Lords prayer, or any part of its
the Analysis of the same prayer, and first of the Preface of it, how is our
Father, and what sons he has, with the comfort that we have of such his being
our Father more then in any other title or respect, and what use we should make
of it in our well living, hom he is said ours, and in what respect so by us in
our prayers to be named viz. to mind us to pray for the general good of all
our brethren, why it is said in heaven to mind us of our own low estate, and
his excellent Majesty, so to elevate our eyes and souls to his Throne of
glory: Whence we hope for and expect all our helps and supply from him, who
though on earth, and in all places most gloriously there reigning, with our
greatest joy and comfort if we be truly his, why we ought to pray and not
neglect it, how in this Preface the holy Trinity in: m^^ed, or to be understood.

1. IS it fit to pray in the very words of the Lords Prayer?
It is very convenient, and being rightly understood, there cannot be conceived
better; that if all the wise men in the world had consented together, a more
absolute frame could not be contrived nor uttered with humane wisdom, and
therefore well worthy to be used; and if God be pleased with us for his sake,
his words also may well be deemed acceptable, especially when we present our
selves in his merits, and our mind in his words.

2. But may we not alter them?
3. Not in substance, but in circumstance or manner, to express more in
particular our necessities or desires, which there in general are contained.

3. May we not pray the effect of any one petition by it self?
Yes, if our necessities so require, and though in more ample illustration, yet
the same in effect; for if opposite, or besides the matter there expressed in
brief, it cannot be right, or accepted; and so having used our best skill to
express our wants or desires in any particular, we usually close with this as
in the most perfect and assured acceptable form that can be uttered; and more
acceptable how much better understood, for so we pray more truly in his words,
and with his Spirit, wherefore we ought to take the best care we may rightly to
understand the same.

4. What is therein contained?
Three parts: the Preface of confession, Our Father which art in heaven.

The Petitions for our selves and other, six in number, Hallowed be thy name
etc.

The conclusion of praise and thanksgiving, For thine is thy Kingdom, power
and glory, etc.

5. What is contained in the Preface?
I. A confession of Gods great Majesty, mercy and goodness, in that a Father,
our Father, in heaven, his throne of glory.

II. A confession of our own, 1. humility, 2. duty, 3. wants, and 4. hope.

As we are sons, we say our Father; as we are in earth, look up to heaven,
up to the hills from whence comes our help, even to our God in his holy
habitation.

6. Who is here understood, called Father?
1. Either God according to his essence, the Father of lights, and so the whole
Trinity may be understood as Father of spirits, and as the Son is called
Counselor, everlasting Father, and Prince of peace, Isaiah 9. 6.

2. Or first Person in Trinity, in relation to the Son, and Holy Ghost, and
so we pray to the Father in the name of the Son, and by the help of the Holy
Ghost.

7. How is God our Father?
Not only by creation, for so are all creatures also with men and Angels.

But first more particularly, as made sons in Christ his natural Son.

By redemption restored.

By adoption acknowledged.

2. Manifested sons by our education in his house the Church.

Teaching by his word and doctrine.

Correction by his fatherly chastisements.

Sanctification by his holy Spirit.

Inheritance of Sons in his blessing.

8. What Sons has God?
Both 1. generally all creatures by creation.

2. Specially, Princes by participation of honor and authority, children
called of the most High, and Gods: Most especially, and naturally Christ by
eternal generation.

3. Particularly and legally all Christians by adoption in Christ, and though
false, restored to be the Sons of God.

9. What are we put in mind of by this name Father?
1. Of the means whereby we are restored to favor our elder brother Christ.

2. The confidence that we may come with before him, being admitted Sons.

3. The love that he bears to us, whom he accounts so as himself our
Father.

4. The dignity, and what persons we ought to be, so accounted his Sons.

5. The indignity we offer if we be not Sons, or faithful to presume, and so
to be assured our prayer is but sin, and we deserve a curse and not a
blessing.

10. Why call we him Father rather then by any other name?
Because a name as most truly honorable, so most arguing love; for though King
or Judge, or Prince, or the like, seem in common eyes more honorable titles,
yet their truest honor from this, that fathers of the Country and
Commonwealth; and for God, though King of Kings, Lord of Lords, God of Sabbath,
Judge of the world, and such his names seem of more honor, yet full of terror
as Majesty; and we poor creatures more need comfort, and he most honored in
his mercy, and how can those names be such comfort as Father, since he a 1.
King of Kings, we dust and ashes. 2. Lord of Lords, we poor slaves. 3. God of
Sabbath, we poor worms. 4. Judge of all, we poor and miserable sinners.


So what do these great titles but strike a terror into us, that have need of
mercy to comfort us in our deep necessity, and of a Father, not a severe Judge,
our great Warrior of Prince to look upon our misery.

11. How are we then comforted in the name Father?
In that it is a name of love and mercy, and as there is mercy with him he
shall be feared, and so also honorable to him, and to us most comfortable;
according to which name, showing mercy to all his creatures, and most
particularly to us in Christ, so we may consider his fatherly love and
affection,

I. As he is a Father that 1. can deny us his sons nothing that is requisite.

2. Is ready to forgive, and receive the penitent sinner and son, as in the
parable of the prodigal.

3. Is full of compassion in the bowels of his mercy, to his creatures and
sons.

II. As we in Christ, in whom he is well pleased.

III. As we either, 1. ask or pray, asking him blessing.

2. Return, or are penitent, ask forgiveness.

3. Desire his love, favor or mercy.

4. Ask his grace.

12. What else learn we hence?
As Sons to be like him, to have his image in us, Ephesians. 5. 1.

To be holy as he is holy.

To be merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful, Luke 6. 36.

To be perfect as he is perfect, Matthew. 5. 48.

To be humble, and show all filial duty toward him our Father.

13. Why say we our Father?
1. In regard of God who is all our Father.

2. In regard of Christ, in whom he is so particularly made our Father.

3. In regard of the Holy Ghost, by charity speaking in our hearts Abba, and
showing him all our Father.

4. In regard of the Church, in whose words as in general we are taught to
pray being many, but one body.

5. In regard of our faith in that Church in Christ, whereby we have all one
Father.

6. In regard of our charity, as we are to pray for, and to remember all, and
so say our Father.

14. But why may we not as well say my Father?
Though my Father, and my God or Lord in particular confidence in any distress
may be well said of us, as Eli, Eli, etc. yet for a general form of prayer to
be used by all, nothing so fit as our Father, in regard of his mercy, love and
compassion, ready to receive, forgive and releeve us, and our Father especially,

1. As in Christ, in whose name and words we speak, for whose sake are not
else accepted.

2. As in faith and confidence of this, in him, and by his Spirit.

3. As in charity with all men, so in body the Church, and taught to pray for
others, as well as our selves, and that our prayers can never be effectual for
our selves, farther then as in charity, earnest for others.

15. Of what does it then chiefly mind us?
1. Of our Brother, Savior, Redeemer, Judge also,
Christ in whom God is made ours, and we his.

2. Of the strict union with God by Christ, whereby he being ours, whom have we
to fly unto but him?

3. Of the communion of Saints, the family of God, of which we are made a part,
and so to pray for our brethren.

16. What learn we farther hence?
To take heed of all contempt of our brethren, for without that charity to pray
for them, our prayers can never be effectual for our selves, no not holy
neither, nor prayers, but rather a cursing, and no way comfortable, nor a
blessing, since God is not our Father, if we be not in charity, for God is love.

17. Whom are we then to pray for?
Generally for all men, of all estates and conditions whatsoever, even our
enemies, persecutors and slanderers, that God may turn their hearts; and for
Turks, Jews, Infidells and Heretics, that they may be converted to the faith.

1. Especially for Princes, that under God may be the means of his glory by
good government.

2. All good people, and benefactors to us, or the poor Saints on earth.

3. All those to whom in any particular respect, we are bound as Fathers, etc.

4. All those in any necessity, need, danger, distress or sickness.

5. Our selves, and all our brethren, the elect, whom God in his predestinate
counsel has appointed to salvation.

18. Are there not some then we ought not to pray for?
Yes, first the Devil, our and Gods enemies, against whom we are to pray.

2. All known enemies of God, so David against his enemies, viz. as enemies of
God, and whiles so.

And so did the Church against Julian, and such as he and Samuel forbidden to
pray and mourn for Saul, 1 Samuel 16. viz. as enemies of God, or whiles s.

3. The dead not to be prayed for neither, as whose estate is unchangeable of
pains or glory.

19. Why added, which art in heaven?
1. To remember us of his excellent Majesty and power, and glory, as who
dwells in the heavens.

2. To elevate our minds to his Throne of glory.

3. To mind us where we are, and so of our meannesse, and to teach us humility.

20. Why to remember us of his Majesty, Power and Glory?
For our comfort, and that as he is our Father, and so willing to do us good;
so also,

1. In Majesty honorable, wherein our honor to be his Sons.

2. In Power, able to do what ever we desire, or he think fit or please.

3. In Glory, and of the same will impart to us, and do us good, and advance
us for his glory.

21. Why to clevate our minds?
I. That we may alienate our minds from earthly things, to be fitter to pray.

II. That we may not be glewed to the earth, for then we can have no desire or
power to pray.

III. That we may look toward our Fathers house, and our native home, heaven.

IV. That we may consider, 1. who it is, and where he is that we pray unto.

2. What things we ought especially to pray for, heavenly and spiritual things.

3. Whence those best blessings, and indeed all good gifts else descend, from
above from the Father of lights.

22. How to mind us where we are?
To make us in humility to consider our mean estate, and so

1. How we are in a vale of misery, this earth, in a place of necessity.

2. How far from our home, and thence long for heaven, our native soil, and
fathers house.

3. How much we want of perfection so to desire supply of grace.

23. How is he said to be in heaven?
As in his Throne, and Palace of Glory, and whence he is seen especially to
manifest the same both in mercy and judgments.

24 How his glory seen or manifested there?
1. In the inferior heavens, by whose excellent creatures sun, and hoasts
there, as the heavens declare the glory, etc. Psalm. 19.

2. In the third heaven, where is manifest his blessed vision, and fruition to
the Saints and holy Angels.

3. In the heaven of his Church, where manifested to his Saints on earth, and
those that excel in virtue.

25. How else is it manifested thence?
1. As his Almighty power is chiefly seen by his great works, and influence of
goodness thence.

2. As his Al-presence, shadowed in the alcovering heavens universal
architecture.

3. As his al-sufficiency to himself, and all his creatures signified by that
universal covering.

4. As his Al-seeing knowledge by that universal compass of the curtains or
canopie and light of heaven; and so

5. His Omniscence, Omnisufficiencie, Omnipresence and Omnipotence, lively
shadowed, and represented in the heavens; and as his purity and holiness
represented in the purity and brightness of them; and his mercies and
judgments also from thence.

26. How his mercies and judgments manifested thence?
1. In the signs and wonders showed thence to the terror of the inhabitants
of the earth.

2. In the lightning and thunder, storm and tempest, causing fear and
amazement, and often destruction.

3. In the clouds and rain, as in Noah's flood, sometimes bringing and
threatening devastation.

4. In the distinguishing days and nights, times and seasons, by the lights
and revolution of heaven.

5. In the influence of goodness into inferior things, as gracious dewes from
heaven.

27. How is he then by us conceived to be in heaven?
1. In the heaven of sanctified souls by his grace.

2. In the heaven of his Church, by his mercy and goodness.

3. In the heaven of visible heavens by his power and declarations of his glory.

4. In the heaven of superior heavens, his Court and Palace in excellent glory
with his heavenly Courtiers, Saints and Angels.

5. In the heaven of highest heavens, dwelling in inaccessible light and glory.

28. Is he not then on earth?
Not to be thought that he is absent any where, that fills all places by his
powerful presence; in whom we live, and move and have our being; and though
heaven his Throne, yet earth his footstool, and both heaven and earth filled
with his goodness and glory, who both here and in heaven guides and governs
all things.

29. Why say we then so particularly in heaven?
Because that in most eminency, the heaven is his Throne or seat and Palace of
glory; and for our understanding, as earthly Kings his image, have Palaces of
State to show their magnificence, so this heavenly Emperor has that his
celestial Palace, wherein is most perspicuously above all other places
manifested his glorious Majesty.

30. What more learn we hence?
1. The greatness of comfort and considence that we should have in our
heavenly Father.

2. The height of our godly ambition, to be worthy sons of this our heavenly
heavens Father.

3. The fullness of joy and gladness from consideration of the excellencies of
this our heavenly father above all earthly fathers; and this our King above all
other earthly Kings and Emperors.

31. How is this especial comfort, confidence or joy?
As our heavenly Father has heavenly blessings, and inheritance to give us,
and does love his above all earthly fathers love, who love but blindly,
ignorantly and imperfectly, and he eternally, without end or imperfection, he
has all power, and all Kings, but worms, in comparison of him, and like the
dust under his feet, yea Satan and all enemies tremble before him, who is able
to defend his from all adversaries; and this our prayer is our speech to salute
this our Father, who is thereby assuredly known our God and Father, as we more
familiarly admitted into his presence to speak to him, and so often to salute
him in that heavenly language.

32. But if we be his, what need we often pray?
So much the more,

1. To show our duty and love to his honor.

2. To approve our selves thereby in his favor so often and ordinarily, even
here admitted into his presence.

3. To pay our duties that we owe of blessing, praise and thankfulness, the
tribute of our souls.

4. To renew the covenant of grace, and cloth us in Christ's garments, and
justice more fully.

5. To reach out the hand of faith, thereby continually to receive new
blessings.

33. What if we neglect it?
We not only show our selves unworthy of blessings, but to have no faith, and
not to be sons that desire not our fathers honor; nor to receive blessings
from him; for if we will not, 1. Offer our selves in his presence. 2. Speak to
him by confession. 3. Ask him blessing by prayer. 4. Salute him in praises. 5.
Reach out the hand of faith to receive blessings. 6. Ask, or speak for
clothing or meat. Medicines or help.


Cordialls, or other comforts in our fathers hand and gift, shall we not show
our selves most unworthy of any blessings, and worthy to be blotted out of his
favor; in consideration of which we ought often thus to pray as we are taught,
Our Father which art in heaven.

34. What farther expositions may you make hereof?
In consideration how this Preface is applied to the whole Trinity, not only in
general as one God in essence, but in particular intimated according to their
persons, as by

1. Father, remember the first Person in Trinity both to Christ, and all us a
Father.

2. Our representing him, in whom God is made our Father, Christ our Brother,
Mediator, Judge, Savior and redeemer.

3. Which art in heaven, intimating the holy Ghost, inhabiting the Saints, or
Gods presence by his holy Spirit in his holy heaven, both his

1. Saints, and their souls by his graces.

Conscience by sanctification.

2. His Church on earth, by his mercies and consolations.

3. His Church above by his glorious visitation and continual comfort; thus
understanding particularly one God in three Persons, Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, by these words, Our Father which art in heaven.

35. What follows?
After this Preface in the second place, the petitions of the Lords Prayer.

SECT. 4. The three former Petitions of etc.
The Analysis and general distinction of all the six petitions, with the order
of them, and reason of the same, this prayer is so excellent as in it
comprehending the substance of all prayers and all the sorts and parts of them,
the number of the petitions, and quality thereof, the 1. petition for Gods
glory, why fittest so first to be paced. The parts of this petition, what meant
by the name of God expressed in the third Commandment, and what also by
sanctifying his name, and how to be performed by us in all our thoughts, words
and works respectively all of them, and so to be hallowed, or not profaned,
not only in the duty of the third Commandment, so mentioned, but even all of
them so what is either expressed or intimated in this petition is thus sumed up
and declared, the second petition order and Analysis of it, showing the parts
of the same, what meant by Gods Kingdom, and how prayed for that it may come,
as his Kingdom of grace how to be promoted, and his Kingdom of glory to be
complete, and hastened, the Scepter of Gods Kingdom, and officers and
instruments exercised in it according to their places and degrees, as well as
the opposite of it the Kingdom of Satan described so what is either intimated
or expressed in this second Petition here briefly summed up and delivered: the
third petition, with the order and Analysis of it, what the will of God is, and
performance thereof here intended on earth by men, as by Angels in heaven, with
all alacrity, willingness, and constancy: the opposite whereof proceeding from
the world, the flesh, and the Devil, how to train our selves to seek, and our
will to be more pliable to Gods will which is to be sought in his word, and all
both active and passive obedience to be ye elded unto it, so what is either
expressed or intimated in this third petition, is here summed up, and this
briefly delivered,

1. HOw many petitions are there, and how divided?
Six in all, thus distinguished.

I. The three former, concerning heavenly things, for the glory of God, viz. 1.
Hallowed be thy name. 2. Thy kingdom come. 3. Thy will be done, etc.


II. The three latter, part temporal, and part spiritual things, for our
good: 4. Give us this day our daily bread. 5. And forgive us, etc. 6. Lead us
not, etc.


2. Do not all of them concern Gods glory?
Yes, but the first primarily, and immediately, and wholly intend it; the three
latter not so immediately, but of necessary consequence, and secondarily, as
we ought to refer our selves, and all our good, to the glory of God.

3. What learn you from the order of them?
In the first place to propose the glory of God in all our actions, and
prayers, which cannot be without our exceeding good; and then our own good,
but so as directed to the glory of God, and all things shall succeed well with
us, and our prayers be heard; according to that, Seek ye first the kingdom
of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be
ministered unto you.

4. What farther reasons for this?
1. For that God is to be respected absolutely for himself, man for Gods
sake: as first, such the order of the two Tables, the duty to God for himself,
to men for his sake. Secondly, so God reverenced simply for his own, Rulers
for his sake. Thirdly, God if he command as in his own power, is obeyed for
his own, men in his right, and for his sake; whence, they that respect men,
and above God, may be great persons, ashamed and confounded.

2. Gods creation and works, were and are principally for his glory, and so
ought our works, intentions, and prayers to be.

3. The final dissolution and end of all, and judgment, is for his glory, and
so the end of all our actions, and of our duty, should be for his glory.

4. Gods Saints, servants, holy men, and Angels, do all aim at his glory
principally, and so ought we, if ever we hope to be, of that holy company.

5. The very vessels of wrath, and evil Angels, are and shall be to his
glory, the glory of his justice; and so shall we, if we neglect it here.

So this the scope that God prefixeth to his own actions and ours; and all good
creatures do it willingly, and all others shall do it, though unwillingly,
for God will have it done; so dear unto him is his glory.

5. What note you else generally in petitions?
The form or manner of them, they showing all the parts of prayer, as well as
the substance of it,

I. Ingenerall, expressly in the whole frame of the prayer, wherein the

1. Preface is confession. 2. Petition and intercession the body of it. 3.
Praise and thanks giving the conclusion.
II. Particular in each of them; and is either First, expressed, as

1. Petition for our selves,

2. Intercession for others, in the very words of each petition, so uttered
indefinitely, or in the plural number, as they are

Secondly, intimated, else therein a

1. Confession of some due to God, or duty from us, or both: or neglect, too
frequent in us and others.

2. Deprecation against such neglect, or things opposite to the petition.

3. Thanksgiving, and praise, for the performance of our vows, and duty by us
or others, in any measure; as also for graces desired, hoped, or received;
which more in particular will be seen in the handling of each several
petition.

6. What for the number of the petitions?
The equality 1. argues his mercy, that will hear us as much for our good, as
his own glory.

2. Shows our duty, that ought as much to seek his glory, as our own good,
if not more.

3. Reproves us else, and our ingratitude, that can desire more or more
earnestly for our selves, then his glory; since he has granted us to pray
three for his glory, and three for our good, with promise to hear: a shame to
inconsiderate petitioners, that can ask three score for themselves, ere one
for God.

7. How do the three first petitions concern his glory?
As they desire his name, kingdom, and will to be sanctified, promoted, and
performed; and honor so advanced, as in the

1. That his honor in holiness may be promoted, hallowed, etc.

2. That his honor in power may be propagated, Thy Kingdom come.

3. That his honor in obedience may be performed, Thy will be done, etc.

8. What desire you then in that first petition, Hallowed be thy name?
That Gods holy name may be glorified in the holy and reverend use of his
titles, words, and works.

9. Why this petition first placed?
Because none can be truly a subject of Gods kingdom, or do his will, that
does not in the first place propose this the scope of all his actions, and make
principal account of Gods glory.

10. Who err from this?
Whosoever either

1. Propose any thing to themselves before or above Gods glory, as honor,
riches, profit, pleasure.

2. Account such gain godliness, and so are but fleshly minded, puffed up,
and knowing nothing as they ought.

3. Run on in profane courses, to the dishonor of God.

11. What parts of this petition?
Two, the 1. Object, the name of God. 2. Action, sanctifying it.


12. What is meant by the name of God?
As is expressed in the third Commandment, the means whereby he is made
known unto men, or his glory shown in the world, whereby even every thing
that serves, or should serve for his honor, in some sort or other therein,
comprehended; and briefly thus,

I. His titles,

1. Proper, Jehovah, Lord, God, and the like, Father, Son, Holy Ghost.

2. Common, as his attributes, such as glory, honor, mercy, Justice, etc. as
called just, merciful, etc.

II. His Word and Sacraments, Scripture, and all that pertaines to it, to make
it known to men and him in it, the preaching and hearing it, Church, persons,
Saints, Sabbaths, and ceremonies means whereby we know him.

3. His works of creation, heavens that declare the glory of God, etc
Gubernation, and providence, as his mercies, judgments, graces, and whatsoever
any way declare his mighty power, or great goodness on earth, or whatsoever
made known of him in the Books of

1. Scripture, the Law and Gospel, doctrine, and things therein contained, his
titles, names, attributes, graces, and glory.

2. Creatures, where heaven and earth the pages, and every creature character
of his glory, in which read and represented his creation, guiding, governance,
and mighty preservation of them, and so al of them speaking and declaring his
mighty name and power.

13. What is meant by sanctifying?
Either a

1. Purifying and cleansing of things unclean, as Lepers, sinners, unclean
persons, and their sin and uncleanness, or the like.

2. Preferring things poluted and profane, to better and holier use, as the
Temples of Heathens, to Christian use.

3. Promoting things of common use, to a more sanctified use, as Aaron and his
sons consecrated Priests, and water, bread and wine, so consecrated in the
Sacraments.

4. Preserving things hallowed, in that use, as Temples and Oratories, to the
use and exercise they are appointed.

5. Professing and declaring, or showing and setting forth with praise and
honor, hallowed and sanctifying things, and in this sense chiefly understood,
this sanctifying Gods name, as signifying himself and his honor; though as by
it is understood the means of it in our selves and other creatures, it may be
taken in some of the other senses.

4. In what manner?
As his name is sanctified in the holy and sanctified use of any the creatures,
or dedicating our selves to his service, as we may see in

1. Purifying our souls and consciences from evil works.

2. Converting sinners to God.

3. Preserving our bodies and souls in holiness and honor, doing all good
works to the glory of God.

4. But most particularly in speaking and setting forth his honor and glory,
which is the substance and effect of the third Commandment.

5. How is that performed?
1. By doing all things pertaining to his honor, and manifestation thereof.

2. Declining from all things tending to his dishonor.

6. How especially and particularly?
By I. Thinking and meditating graciously of his 1. Holy and great name, and so
of himself in essence, persons. 2. Titles of his honor and renown. 3.
Attributes and actions, as creation, providence, mercy, Justice, etc. 4. Holy
Word and Sacraments, Law and Gospel. 5. Holy Church and Sabbaths, and all
things dedicate to him, and called holy, of his holiness. 6. Creatures, all of
them in heaven and earth.
II. Speaking and discoursing piously and religiously of his 1. Holy and great
name, and so of himself in essence, persons. 2. Titles of his honor and
renown. 3. Attributes and actions, as creation, providence, mercy, Justice,
etc. 4. Holy Word and Sacraments, Law and Gospel. 5. Holy Church and Sabbaths,
and all things dedicate to him, and called holy, of his holiness. 6.
Creatures, all of them in heaven and earth.
III. Doing all the special acts of piety and devotion, as 1. Preaching his
name, words, and doctrine, the Law and Gospel. 2. Hearing and receiving the
same, with reverence. 3. Praying and receiving the Sacraments. 4. Blessing and
praising him. 5. Dedicating our selves and souls to his honor.



7. How else to be hallowed?
By declining all impediments of his honor, because we see his name too often
profaned by all kind of evil and wickedness of men's, or the devils
invention.

As 1. Idolatry, superstition, witchcraft.

2. Ignorance.

3. Ingratitude.

4. Dissimulation, and so by Swearing, Forswearing, Cursing, Blasphemy, etc.


Where we desire that all these things, evil acts, and agents, whether men or
devils, that are against his honor, may be removed; and so his name in all
places, by all, and above all, to be honored, and sanctified.

8. But his name is most holy, and how can it be more hallowed, or profaned?
In it selse it is most holy, and for ever, and so can receive no augmentation
or diminution of honor, but in regard of the manifestation before men, so the
wicked seem to profane it by their pollutions, but indeed come not nighest,
but only pollute themselves, to their own perdition, that remaining holy for
ever; and on the contrary, the godly strive to hallow it more, and so inded
procure their own holiness and honor, and thereby happiness; as God
accepts their good will in setting forth and declaring his honor, as
especially by

1. Declaring and setting forth his power and greatness, justice and truth,
mercy and goodness.

2. Praying to him, and praising of him.

3. Preaching and declaring his will, the Law and Gospel, to all men, whereby
he is most especially honored, even to the ends of the world; and all
dishonor, vices and heresies rooted out.

9. Is this then the sum of the third Commandment only prayed for?
It may be well understood so

1. Principally, that Commandment as where the hallowing of Gods name is
commanded according to the scope and words of this petition, and all
profanation forbidden utterly, as is most plainly apparent.

2. So consequently of all the other Commandments of the first Table, whereby
Gods honor is to be set up in heart, as in the first Commandment; in the
Temple, and in his solemn worship, as in the second Commandment, and
especially on his Sabbath, as in the fourth Commandment, by which means he is
more honored, and his name universally glorified, as also in the

1. Second petition we desire it openly executed and promoted by his power.

2. We desire it may be willingly performed and submitted udto by our will and
best and holiest affections.

10. What the sum of this petition then?
That his name may be honored and sanctified as acknowledged and declared so
amongst all men; and the holiness thereof more famously with all due
observances, by us and all people glorified; whereby

1. We may ascribe all honor to it, whether we speak of his titles.

Behold his creatures.

Meditate of his words and works.

Receive any blessings.

Be conversant in any holy duties, exercises.

2. All impediments of his honor may be removed, and his honor vindicate from
all abuses of unholy and profane persons or Wordlings.

3. He will be pleased so to provide for the preservation of his honor that it
may be so hallowed by all people, and that consequently his Kingdom of grace
may come upon us.

11. What is in the letter here expressed?
Most plainly, by the

1. Petition for our selves.

2. Intercession for others, that God will be pleased to have this duty thus by
us, and by others done, as we pray indefinitely, hallowed be thy name, and used
the Preface our Father, etc. as let thy name be sanctified by all.

12. What farther intimated?
Very apparently also a

I. Confession of a

1. Due to God to have his name hallowed.

2. Duty of our selves, and others to sanctify the same.

3. Defect that it is too often and ordinarily profaned, and so we pray for
reformation.

II. A deprecation against that abuse, and profanation, and that God will be
pleased to vindicate his honor.

III. Profession of praise and thanksgiving for that measure of grace whereby
we are able to desire this.

That hope we have to have it performed by our selves and others.

13. How sum you up all these together?
I. Our confession of a

1. Due, it is sit, O Lord, that thy name should receive the glory, and be
sanctified.

2. Duty of our selves, others: it is just, O Lord, that we should give thee
praise.

3. Defect, it is too manifest, O Lord, that thy name is not honored as it
ought to be, but by us and others, too much dishonored and profaned.

II. Our petition, O Lord, let thy name be hallowed by us.

III. Our intercession, we pray not only for our selves, but, O Lord, let thy
name be hallowed, and sanctified by us all, and thy glory among all Nations.

IV. Deprecation, we beseech thee, to vindicate thy name and honor, and let
not thy name be profaned by the enemy.

V. Our thansgiving for this well disposednesse to his honor that it has
pleased thee, O Lord, to give us this grace.

Our hope, in respect of our selves and others, that thou, O Lord, have
ordained thy name by us, and many others to be hallowed.

14. What the second petition?
That Gods Kingdom may come, the number of true believers increased, the
Kingdom of grace enlarged, and his Kingdom of glory hastened.

15. What the order of it?
That after Gods name sanctified, his glory desired and advanced, his Kingdom
and power of grace is thereby promoted; extolled within us in our heart by
faith, and the working of his good Spirit to the subduing of sin, and all
that is against God, and without us in the world, in which Kingdom, we and all
that are his, may readily obey him, and do his will; both men on earth with
willingness, as Saints and Angels in heaven, with all readiness, joy and
alacrity.

16. What parts of this petition?
Two, the 1. Object, Gods Kingdom. 2. Action, to come.


17. What mean you by his Kingdom?
That mighty power, and infallible providence, seen in guiding, governing, and
directing all things to good end for his glory; and we use to show a threefold
Kingdom of his, as of

I. Power in his universal Kingdom, the world, unto which all creatures are
subject, both men and Angels, yea and Devils; and this Kingdom Gods fold and
field and draw-net, etc. as in the Parables and the parts, both

1. Good and bad sinners and others.

2. Wicked men and tyrants.

3. Who are the tares, dross, chafe, goats, cockle, and the like, etc.

4. As the godly, the sheep, and the like, wheat, gold, etc. and all shall bow
under Gods hand.

II. Grace in his Church militant on earth, of which only the godly are
subjects, as the wheat, gold, sheep that shall be severed from the tares, and
chafe, dross and goats.

3. Glory in the Church triumphant in heaven, in the which Angels, and Saints,
or souls of the just, after the separation, are his subjects.

18. What mean you by the action come?
That his Kingdom may be,

1. Erected where it is not.

2. Continued, and confirmed where it is.

3. Restored where it is decayed.

4. Increased and enlarged by his effusion of his graces more abundantly.

5. Perfected in us, and our translation to felicity.

6. Consummate in all, and in due time complete, to his glory in eternity.

7. Universally ruled and guided according to his good pleasure and will.

19. How make you application particularly of the action to the object?
For the universal Kingdom, that it may be so universally governed, and if it
be his good will, all Turks, Pagans, Infidels, and Heretics, converted or
confounded, all evil men reduced to godliness, tyrants and persecutors tamed,
the Devil and his wicked instruments brideled, that his power may be seen in
all things, and celebrated by all, and his good pleasure performed.

20. What for his Kingdom of grace?
That it may be erected where it is not, both in our hearts by faith and praces
of his Spirit, and in all places of the world where it is not, or where it
never was planted, so among the heathen, and to the ends of the earth, that
they may glorify God with us. 2. That it may be continued and strengthened by
his gracious presence, and blessings, where it is, both within us, in our
hearts, and without us, where ever in the world. 3. That it may be daily
increased, and enlarged by more abundant measure of his graces, and effusion of
his Spirit into our hearts, and upon all flesh to his more honor and praise,
and more and more willing obedience. 4. That it may be restored where ever by
Satan's malice decayed, whether within us by temptations of sin, from the
world, the flesh or the Devil, or without us in any others, or in the vastity
of those decayed, but sometime flourishing Churches, where Gods honor did
formerly stand, and as among the Turks, and Jews at this day, in that wonder
of the world Jerusalem, and her Sion, now under Turkish bondage and slavery,
those famous Churches in Asia, Greece, and Alexandria, now oppressed by savage
Barbarism, and Mehometicall insidelity and tyranny; and where ever else, the
true faith now oppressed or opposed; that God will be graciously pleased to
relieve and restore it.

21. How for the Kingdom of glory?
That as begun in grace, in us and others, by the power and earnest-penny of
his Spirit, and gracious revelations of his presence, that it may be more
perfected by our translation, to that beatificall vision of his glory; and for
as much as it is daily tending to more perfection, in the increase of the
number, and approaching of the determinate consummation, that finally he will,
hastening the marriage of the Lamb, consummate and make complete that number,
and give them full complement of all joy in eternity, that all Saints and
Angels together in fullest happiness and felicity, may set forth, and enjoy
his glory everlastingly.

22. What is the Scepter of this Kingdom of God?
The power of Gods Spirit ruling every where, most perspicuously, and over all
creatures universally, as more particularly, by grace in his Church militant,
and in most excellent glory in his Church triumphant.

23. What instruments does God exercise in it?
Even all creatures generally as instruments of his glory, so shall the very
Devils be, wicked men and tyrants, though unwillingly, and constrained; godly
men more willingly, and with readiness and joy, Saints and Angels most
willingly, cheerfully, and speedily; and more particularly seen by us in this
Kingdom of grace,

1. All good Kings and Magistrates that set forth his honor.

2. All faithful Pastors, Prelates and Teachers, that set forth the true faith.

3. All godly Elders, that govern well, and give good example.

4. All holy Confessors and Saints that have so set forth his glory.

5. All glorious Martyrs, Apostles, Prophets, Patriarchs, and good men that
have done, and do their best endeavors to set forth and witness the truth.

24. What do you then pray for in this respect?
That God will be pleased to enable them with his graces, more readily and
cheerfully to set forth his glory, as that 1. The King and Magistrate may be
Careful and zealous; Prudent and Religious; Just, etc.
2. Pastors and Prelates may be Faithful in their places; Diligent in their
duty; Conscionable and careful of their charge, all others may be godlily
disposed, according to their several offices and duties, and so to praise God
for any his excellencies and graces appearing in them, to the advancement of
his Kingdom.



25. What is opposite to this Kingdom?
The Devil, and all his wicked agents and instruments raised up against God
and his truth, such

1. All evil Princes and Laws. 2. All evil Magistrates, and negligent
Pastors, and slothful. 3. All evil and false Prophets and Idolaters. 4. All
evil blasphemers, and 5. Generally all ungodliness, and vanity.
26. What of these?
That God would be pleased to overthrow, root out, and destroy all such as the
power of the kingdom of Satan, and opposite to his Kingdom.

27. What in sum is there then expressed or intimated in this Petition?
1. The part, expressed, as before showed, the 1. Petition it self, for our
selves, 2. Intercession for others,
let thy Kingdom come, for all our good.

II. The part intimated both a

First confession of a 1. due that Gods Kingdom ought to be advanced.

2. Duty from us and others, that we ought so much as in us lies to advance
that Kingdom.

3. Defect in us and others, too common to be too negligent hereof.

Secondly, deprecation against all oppugners and opposition thereof, whether in
our selves or others.

Thirdly, thanksgiving and praise,

1. For the graces in us or others, tending to the propagation of his Kingdom.

2. For his so gracious government of us, and of all things.

28. How sum you up this in order?
1. Confession of a

1. Due that it is most holy and just that Gods Kingdom should come, and his
power thereof declared.

2. Duty of our selves and others; that, O Lord, it is our duty all of us, to
endeavor the same, and wish and seek by all means to advance it.

3. Defect, that there is even too supine a negligence in us, and others in
this, as well as in many other good duties.

II. Our petition for

1. Gods power to be shown in advancing it.

2. For our own well disposednesse that it may be such, that we may do our
best to promote it, and that his Kingdom may come in us.

III. Our intercession for others, that others may be as well disposed as we
our selves, and that his Kingdom may come in their hearts.

IV. Our deprecation, that God will be pleased to pull down all enemies of his
Kingdom, and all opposition and opposers with their malice and envy.

V. Our thanksgiving, that it has pleased him

1. So graciously to govern all things as he does to a good end.

2. To give us grace to desire the same, and to seek it, as well as many
others.

3. Further to assure our selves and souls of that his Kingdom, so to be
increased, perfected and consummate in his due time, in us and others, to the
glory of his grace and power.

29. What the third petition?
That Gods will may be done as readily by me, and all Gods people upon earth,
as by those blessed Saints and Angels in heaven, where it is to be done with
all joy, courage and alacrity.

30. What is the order of it?
After the desire of sanctifying Gods name, and of the advancement of his
Kingdom, that in that Kingdom his will may be done by us, and all men, whereby
better to be assured, we are his subjects, as well as those willing and ready
Ministers of his Saints and Angels in heaven, that his illustrious Kingdom of
glory.

31. What the parts?
The 1. Object, the will of God. 2. Action, to be done or performed. 3.
Collimation of the action after the sublimed rule of Angels obedience and duty.


32. What is the will of God?
Understood to be either his

1. Secret will, which we are not to search into, but he will see in due time,
and manner performed.

2. His revealed will, which is for us, and other children, which is required
of us to be known, and performed, and so for us, and our instruction, revealed
in his holy Word, Law and Gospel; a most sure and true record written for our
remembrance.

33. What the doing or performance of it?
Our holiness in the

1. Faith, knowing and believing it.

2. Practice of good works and obedience, answerably to be thought on, and
proposed by us to be done, as it is required at our hands by God, and so herein
professed obedience generally to Gods holy will and commandments, and that in
special sense, as not only the actions but the heart, and cogitations
submitted to the performance thereof; and as in the last Commandment the very
inmost cogitations of soul and thought to be reduced to this obedience, and
the love of God; and thither tends that following collimation and direction.

34. How is this that rule of direction or imitation?
In earth as it is in heaven, understood either,

I. Improperly, in

1. Our bodies and members that are earthly, as well as in our souls and
minds that are heavenly.

2. The lower parts and powers of our affections, as well as higher power of
will.

3. Those that are yet uncalled, as well as those that are called, and already
in the heaven of the Churches bosom, and Kingdom of grace.

4. In our own selves, endeavoring as in Christ to perfect the same.

II. Properly in earth by us that dwell in this world, in the midst of many
temptations and provocations to sin, as well as by the inhabitants of heaven,
Saints and Angels, free from all temptations and discouragements.

35. How is it so done?
If as by them usually performed, so we strive to do it, obeying both

1. Voluntarily, which is with all our hearts, willingly, freely, cheerfully,
readily; without hypocrisy, grudging, repining, murmuring, grief or delay.

2. Totally, endeavoring to his whole will for the matter of it, manner of it,
every part of it; so his will and not ours, to the denying of our selves.

3. Continually, so with

Constancy in our good intention.

Perseverance to the end, and thus striving to perfection of obedience, we
yield true and sincere obedience, which though in us imperfect, when thus
regulated by this perfect obedience, and aiming at that perfection of Angels,
though not attaining unto it, is accepted of God, and so to the proportion of
our ability here intended; and this pressing forward here required by desiring
more perfection.

36. How are Angels so obeying?
As they are, and were ever understood to be

1. From the beginning, so continuing and persevering.

2. Winged messengers, with all speed, and diligence doing their duty.

3. Wholly addicted to his service, continually before him.

4. Reverently behaving themselves, hiding their faces for his glory.

5. Joyfully performing it, always singing Hallelujahs to the honor of his
name.

37. What opposite to this doing of Gods will?
I. Both our own wills.

Our seeking our own will, or doing it.

Neglect of Gods will.

Not doing it, or not doing it,

First, with due 1. Diligence, 2. Cheerfulness, 3. Constancy.


Secondly, or not willingly, totally, continually, etc.

38. Who works this opposition?
The Devil, seducing our souls, and corrupting our wills, and other faculties
by his fraud, and collusion.

39. How is our will so ill?
All wholly perverse of it self, and we have no greater enemy to our souls,
then it so corrupted by Adams fall, and continually corrupting us; thence evil
affections, and all mischiefs and wickedness.

40. But do we not sometimes will better things?
Not of ourselves, as not able to think a good thought, but if any goodness
be in us, it is from God, as Philip. 3. 13. who works in us that will and
deed, for if at any time, video meliora proboque deteriorasequor, in moral
things, and much more in divine; where our will is enmity with God desiring
evil and death, or failing in good; and if

1. We would discern truth, we are deceived.

2. If we look at goodness, we faint.

3. If we think of resisting evil, we fail and fall as a bird tied to the
earth, so our souls to this body of dust, we cannot fly toward heaven.

41. What are we to do then or pray for here?
That we may not 1. Desire, 2. Seek, or 3. Follow
our own will which is evil, unholy and corrupt,
but deny the same.

And thereby be prepared to do Gods will, which is holy, just and perfect, as
willing our salvation, and his own glory.

42. How is Gods will known?
I. In Christ manifesting it, the incarnate word.

II. In Scripture, the written word, the

1. Law where his precepts, promises, prohibitions, threatenings, judgments,
etc.

2. Prophets and Apostles writings, expositions of the same.

3. Gospel, the full revelation thereof in Christ.

III. In Ministry of the Word and Sacraments in the Church.

43. Do we desire that God will do his own will?
For the secret part we leave that to him, but for the revealed part we pray
for grace that it may be done by us, and that he will yet therein begin, and
finish such good work by his preventing, continuing, and subsequent graces;
yet our own will so moved, cooperating and working with his holy Spirit, and
direction in that obedience.

44. How is that obedience?
Either active indoing, or passive in suffering his holy will, and both, with

Cheerfulness and alacrity.

Willingness and sincerity.

Constancy and perseverance.

45. How active obedience?
In all holy and godly works and duties; as

1. General obedience, and our inclination to it, and Gods Commandment, both

Absolutely for Gods sake;

In matter and manner as he requires.

Respectively for our own, and our neighbors, and all others good.

2. Of our especial callings.

3. Of piety and charity, etc.

46. How passive obedience?
In hearing with cheerfulness what he pleases to lay on us since he is so
pleased; remembering.

That he is a Father, and wills our good.

That nothing is besides his will, nor can be.

That he has an absolute power over us and all.

That he is faithful, and will give a happy issue.

That he does but chastise, and will turn it to our good and glory, if we with
humility bear it.

47. What is in the letter here expressed?
Our petition for our selves that we may so acceptably do Gods will.

Our intercession for others for the same grace, that Gods will may be, by us
all so godlily and readily performed.

48. What further intimated?
1. A confession of a

1. Due, that Gods will ought to be done readily by all creatures.

2. Duty of all to strive to do it, and to be obedient, readily and willingly.

3. Neglect of it to be lamented.

II. A deprecation against the neglect and disobedience.

III. Thanksgiving and praise for

1. That portion of obedience, we or others are enabled unto.

2. That performance Saints and Angels do.

3. That hope of better obedience by us.

4. The grace we have to desire it and assurance God will hear us.

49. How sum you up this in order?
I. Our humble confession of the

1. Due, and our duty, that, O Lord, it is right and just, that we and all
creatures should be ready to obey thy most holy and just will.

2. Neglect, that it is too manifest we are not so obedient or careful as
becomes us, but unprofitable, and disobedient sons and servants.

II. Our humble petition for

1. Gods power to be more manifested in our weakness.

2. Grace to perform it our selves more readily, constantly and joyfully.

III. Our humble intercession for others with us, that we may all do it, and
they with us receive more power and grace.

IV. Our humble deprecution, that, O Lord, though all our neglects be too
lamentable, and we bewail our disobedience, way wardnesse and untowardnesse,
we pray that all obstacles may be removed in us and others.

V. Our humble thanksgiving for

1. That obedience in any measure by us or others performed, and so fully in
Christ, and by Saints and Angels.

2. That grace in us, whereby we desire it, and bewail the contrary defect.

3. That hope we have of more grace, that it may be more readily and better
done and performed in earth, as it is in the petition, even as willingly as by
Saints in heaven.

50. What follows?
The three latter Petitions, concerning ourselves, and our own particulars or
necessities.

SECT. 5. The three latter Petitions concerning ourselves.
the three latter Petitions considered, and first the order and Analysis of the
fourth observed, the parts of it, and what is to be understood by bread, the
supply of all our both spiritual and corporal necessity, the word of God
especially, and Christ the bread of life in the spiritual sense, as material
bread or food and all other comforts of l^se in the other, the literal sense
to be understood, which named ours, tonote the honest getting and use of it, as
daily to mind us of our present necessity and short life, and give to show it
is of Gods gift and blessing to us, and all, so this day to point out the
present day of life, or eternity in grace or glory, and how both rich and poor
equally need to use this petition, and beg at Gods hand this very daily bread,
and who pray not aright, or offend herein: as also against what we pray, and
what in the letter expressed, or otherwise intimated, here briefly summed up,
and thus explained: the second petition for our selves, or fifth in order, with
the order and Analysis, and parts thereof observed; what meant by forgiveness
and debts, or trespasses, and how we are debtors many ways, and say justly our
trespasses, the condition whereon we ask forgiveness as we forgive others,
and also no forgiveness at Gods hand, so how, and how far men may, and ought
to forgive their brethren, and their trespasses, and who offend against this
diverse ways, how David, Moses, and others did curse, and the Magistrate
punishes; and not forgiveth, and who truly, or as they ought forgive others,
whereby the way is discussed, the power and authority that the Church and
Priest has to forgive sins, both according to the doctrine of the holy
Scriptures, and expositions thereon of the ancient Fathers, and all orthodox
Writers, and so generally of the whole Church of God in all ages, as well as
the present Church of England, with the right understanding of her tenet in
that point, and the good use to be made of it, whereby confession is explaned,
how far forth requisite, and coldly for the most part now used, but the defect
of discipline, and other inconveninces plainly enough to be perceived, issuing
from the same, so the true and genuine use thereof asserted and clearly proved
by many arguments as aforesaid, and more fully by the general practice of the
Church and primitiva times demonstrated, whereby the manner how it was by them
exercised, and so the order of the ancient Church discipline is on this
occasion set forth, and decyphered, and for the present petition here is
farther declared, what herein we ought to do or avoid: so what is here
expressed or intimated thus particularly summed up together and explaned.

1. What are the three latter Petitions?
Concerning us, and our necessities, for things either 1. Temporal, as daily
bread, Give us this day our daily bread. 2. Spiritual, As forgiveness of
sins, etc. Deliverance from temptations.
3. Partly spiritual, and partly temporal, as deliverances from all evil,
ghostly sin, and bodily dangers.


2. What the first of these Petitions?
The fourth of the Lords Prayer, Give us this day, etc. wherein we pray for all
things necessary for this present life, under the name of bread, or daily
bread, and this day.

3. What is the order?
Placed before those that desire spiritual things or blessings, to show,

1. Our exceeding necessity in this life, and so first desire food and raiment,
without which we cannot subsist.

2. Our Fathers mercy, that considers this our need and weakness.

3. Our account and use we ought to make of it, since allowed to ask it, to
use it as a step or degree toward better blessings.

4. What contained or to be confidered in it?
1. The object, bread, and double epithetons of it: 1. Our: and 2. Daily bread.

2. The action, give,) and adjoined circumstance twofold, of the persons, To
us; time, to day.

5. What understood by bread?
1. Either spiritually, bread of life, panis vitae, or coelestis, Angelorum,
Manna, Angels food, Christ, and Gods word and Sacraments, in which respect it
might be well preferred to all the rest of the Petitions, but thus more
improperly.

2. Or temporally, the staff of bread, food, raiment, and all other
necessities, all other comforts of this life, whereby to make bread relish
well, and us to enjoy it.

6. How for the first sense?
Spiritually taken, it may be understood indeed, and that most divinely, for
Gods holy word, which is food of souls, bread of life, and called by such
honorable epithetons, showing the virtue and efficacy to sustain the soul,
according to that of our Savior, Man lives not by bread only, but by every
word that proceeds out of the mouth of God: Secondly, also for Christ
himself, who is the incarnate Word, and Wisdom of the Father: who is the
true bread of life, and food indeed: as thirdly, of the Sacraments of his body
and blood, the spiritual food also of our souls, and so this called panis
coeli, or coelestis, Angelorum, and the like; but not so properly in this place
intended; since this bread in the first and second Petitions desired, where
Gods name and glory and kingdom are prayed for; and whereas in patria we
desire to be satiated with this heavenly Manna, here more properly intended is
the panis via, or viatorum, and that part that concerns the temporal
necessities of this life, intimated also by Today, and daily, and so bread is
said to be either

Panis Nature, of this life. Doctrine, of Gods word. Gratia, Christus in
Sacramentis. Gloriae, Christus in Coelis.


7. How is the word of God bread?
As it does nourish, comfort and strengthen the soul, as material bread does
the body, and so noted in these respects, of our souls

1. Vivification, raising it from death to life.

2. Consolation, comforting it in that life, and against all tribulation.

3. Confirmation in goodness, and against all ill, and assaults of the devil.

4. Delectation with the heavenly taste and sweetness, roborating,
strengthening, and illuminating of the heart in the true faith.

7. How is Christ the bread of life?
As the word of God manifested in the flesh, to the quickening and raising up
of our souls and bodies, so panis hominum, and as the comfort of Saints and
Angels in glory, so panis hominum and Angelorum, etc. and so to be noted this
bread of life, in

I. The Sacraments are to be hol^ly.

1. Prepared for with reverence, reached unto with fear, received by faith.

2. Ruminated with devotion, that it may nourish us in Christ, and make us one
with him.

II. Heaven, does

Satiate, without any defect, to eternity in glory.

Delight, with eternal sweetness maintain life eternally, and so Angels
food, and as the Psalmist said, Man did eat Angels food, panem Angelorum, thus
in grace and glory.

9. What then of other natural or material bread?
As by it we understand the very material food of our bodies, in this life,
with all the necessary appurtenances of quietness and peace, friends, house,
lands, or revenewes, raiment, health, and other blessings to make it sweet and
comfortable to us, as that stay of life, the staff of bread, is, or is
accounted to be, so we must remember that it ought to be

1. Got by our honest labor.

2. Received with moderation and thankfulness, and so only properly our daily
bread.

3. Imparted to others with us, as the poor our bread.

10. But why is all food called bread?
To teach us the

1. Use, we should intend for strengthening us, the property of bread chiefly,
not for vanity or voluptuousness.

2. Moderation, that should be as the holy and abstemious men, that lived with
bread and water only.

3. Blessing, if we have it from God, it shall be sufficient; and having food
and raiment to be content.

11. Why say you Our bread?
To signify both

1. The love of God, that grants it to be ours, by the giving, when else we
have nothing of our own.

2. The manner of having it truly, if Christ be ours, in him both spiritual
and material bread are ours, and in him alone.

3. The honest means of getting it required, our godly labor, and Gods
blessing, and not to feed on others labors, and eat the sweat of others
brows, with the idle person and thief.

4. The charitable use for our selves, and others, so of all our Father we ask
all our bread, or ours in communi, and not my bread alone.

12. Who offend against this?
All they that

1. Have it not of Gods gift, in his love, for it is not theirs, they are but
usurpers of Gods creatures.

2. Have it not in Christ, as in him God, and all things.

3. Have it not by honest means, for they have not so much their own, as
others bread.

4. Have it for themselves alone, that ask for our bread, and keeping it so,
make it but my bread, and mock God in so doing.

5. Think they have a property in it, other then from God, or enough of their
own for themselves; as the Fool in the Gospel; or neglect thus to make it
their own, by the asking, getting, or communicating it to others, whereby in
Gods account, and the reward, it is most of all made their own.

13. Why say we daily bread?
To put us in mind, especially of every days need of bread, and so necessity
to pray for it, and consequently diligence to be used in that duty; else as
panis

1. (...), the heavenly bread of life, (...) by excellence, Christ, the Manna
and food of souls.

2. (...), of (...), the succouring and comforting our weak nature by the
ordinary use of it.

3. (...), of crastinus dies, so to be solicitous, but not too solicitous and
careful, only as becomes Christians, for that ordinary bread, and other
necessaries.

4. Quotidianus, ordinary bread, not exquisite and dainty, being to nourish our
weak, not pamper our wanton nature.

5. Quotidianus, daily, as most useful and necessary, not superfluous, that
may be spared, only in avarice or ambition desired, but to suffice ours or
others daily or present necessity.

14. What mean you in the action by Give?
That it may please God of his bounty to impart the things we need to us, or
the use unto us, and so grant us the sanctified use of them, and his blessing;
and herein to

1. Give and bestow what we want, and have not.

2. Uphold and continue what we have, to us.

3. Maintain it to our use and comfort.

4. Preserve us to and in the sanctified use of it.

5. Bless and make it prosperous to us.

6. Grant us contentedness, and comfort with it.

7. Enable us thereby to his service, and thankfulness, in acknowledgement of
his grace and blessings received; and thus it is truly and indeed given from
God, and given from his hand to us, or into our hands and use.

15. Why say we, Give us?
In respect of the charity whereby we pray both for our selves and others,
desiring the good of all, and as well our brother as our self, and so say,
Give us, as afterward, Forgive us; and Lead us not into temptation, and in
this offend, both the

Forget full, and neglective of this humanity, and common charity.

The covetous, that desire only for themselves.

The uncharitable, that not only not desire, but enviously repine, or
maliciously grudge at others good.

16. Why say we, This day?
As the word This day, or hodie signifies, variously

1. Either this day of eternity, as Psalm. 2. Hodie genuit te, so the eternal
food and bread of life, Christ, may be understood, desired for this day.

2. Or this day of life, all our time, so convenient necessaries, food and
raiment, and with them content this day of our life.

3. Or this present day, now instant, and so most properly bread for the bare
present to be given, for this present, not debar us from depending on God, by
having superabundance, or too much, as the gift of many is, in fullness to
forget God the giver of that abundance, as it were, we desire this day, and
every day, to depend upon thy goodness, for our daily bread.

17. But what need rich men say this, or those that have enough for many days?
Most of all, if they rightly think of it, to thank him for that abundance, as
most bound, and for continuance of that blessing to them, because else

1. It may soon be taken from them.

2. They may be taken from it, as the fool in the Gospel.

3. The use of it may be taken away by Sickness, Weakness, Disquiet.


4. It may be a curse to them, by abusing it, in intemperance, and to their
shame.

5. Troubles and disquiet may be sent, that shall spoil the sweetness of it.

6. Without content, with covetousnes, or other Crosses, that may be present,
if God give not his blessing, all the relish may be taken away, and they seem
poorer in the having, or use, and be poorer in their souls, then they that
want the same utterly, when God either breaks 1. The thing it self. 2. The
strength, virtue, and comfort of it. 3. The strength of them that use it. 4.
The use of it, from them, or curses it unto them, and the like.


18. What is then generally desired hereby?
That God will be pleased graciously to give and prosper unto us his gifts,
and so we ask

1. Our bread, meat, drink, raiment, and ordinary necessaries.

2. Peace, plenty, and tranquillity, to enjoy them, and that plenty.

3. Good governors, to maintain that plenty and peace.

4. Comfort of friends in that tranquillity and victory over our enemies.

5. Seasonable weather, to receive the fruits of our labors.

6. Health and strength of body, with quiet of mind.

7. Good success to our designs, and Gods blessing both to

Second them unto us.

Make all his creatures nourishable unto us.

Sanctify us to the use of them, and them to us.

8. A charitable mind, and disposition in us, and all for the general good
and comfort of all.

9. Contentation, without which we have nothing comfortable.

10. Dependancy upon Gods providence, with confidence daily.

11. Godly disposition to live in Gods fear, by honest courses, to get, and
holily to use his blessings.

12. Virtues of humility, lowliness, thankfulness, etc. without which we can
hardly use this petition rightly.

19. Who pray not aright, or offend in this?
Even all ungodly men that either trespass against men, by unlawful getting
goods; or God, by abusing them after their ungodly lusts, and vanity of mind,
and so the 1. Proud 3. Ambitious 3. Licentious 4. Voluptuous 5. Intemperate
persons that desire not only bread, or with moderaio^, but rather to abuse the^
to their excess of pride, vain glory, ambition, voluptuousness, lewdness and
intemperance.


6. Prodigal, that wastes the daily bread.

7. Covetous, that are for themselves alone.

8. Envious, that repine at others good.

9. Uncharitable, that hate, or love not their brother.

10. Hard hearted, and cruel or disdainful, that scorn, or pity not others.

11. Malecontented, that do enjoy nothing, as not content with any thing.

12. Idle, and sloathfull, oppressors, and thief, deceiver, etc. that get not
their own, but others bread.

13. Unthankful, and they that trust in riches, or the arm of flesh, and
never truly depend upon God, to ask or receive it of his gift, and so in
general we see all ungodly and ungracious men fail in this, as most of the
other petitions.

20. What pray we against?
Against both

1. Extreme poverty, or want of necessaries. 2. Want of quietness, content,
peace, and other comforts of life.


3. Unseasonable weather, 4. Invasion of enemies, 5. Sickness and mortality,
whereby deprived or cannot comfortably enjoy Gods blessings.

6. Idleness, covetousness, 7. Worldly care, 8. Discontent, uncharity,
whereby we get not, or use not our goods lawfully.

9. Too much fullness, whereby in pride or vanity and excess, we forget God,
and all moderation of daily bread, and abuse his blessings and our selves.

21. What in the letter hereof expressed?
1. The petition for our selves, to obtain such our daily bread, and a
blessing upon it.

2. The intercession for others for the same grace and gifts from God to be
granted there with us.

What intimated?
I. A confession of

1. God the giver of all goodness, and so of his continual graces to us, in
giving us, etc.

2. Our duty to beg it daily at his hand.

Our defect and neglect of this duty.

II. A deprecation against all extreme want, and poverty, or other hindrances
of enjoying our daily bread.

III. Thanksgiving and praise for

1. For all benefits and blessings in general or special received.

2. Deliverance from adversities and want.

Hope of being heard, in the continuance and comfortable enjoying, etc.

22. How sum you it up together in order?
I. Our confession of

1. Gods bounty, that O Lord, that every good gift, and every perfect giving
comes down from above, etc. and that thou clothest the Lilies, and feedest
the young Ravens that call upon thee.

2. Next, our duty, the eyes of all things look up, and trust in thee, O Lord,
for thou give them meat in due season, thou openest thy hand, and fillest all
things living with plenteousnesse.

3. Defect, too often, O Lord, we have gone away from thee, and have not
looked up to the hills, from whence comes our help.

II. Petition, Be merciful unto us, O Lord, and give us this day our daily
bread.

III. Intercession, Show us the light of thy countenance, and give thy blessing
unto the people.

IV. Deprecation, defend us, O Lord, from want, and let there be no decay, no
leading into captivity, and no complaining in our streets.

V. Thanksgiving and praise,

1. Happy are the people that be in such a case, yea blessed are the people
that have the Lord for their God.

2. We will also tell of thy mercies, and sing of thy praise without ceasing.

3. In assurance of thy grace, we will trust in thy salvation, yea Jacob shall
rejoice, and Israel shall be right glad.

23. What the second petition for our selves?
The fifth in order, forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive, etc. wherein we
ask forgiveness of all sins, errors and offenses against God or man; as we
are in charity affected, and in repentance humbled, and ready to forgive
others; without which condition of charity and repentance in faith, it is
impossible our sins should be forgiven.

24. What the order of it?
After asking good things, from God, our daily bread, we are hereby put in
mind what is the hindrances of his blessings, our sins, and so taught to
desire the impediments may be removed, whereby his blessings may more freely
descend; for our sins are a separation of our souls from God, and of him,
and of his favor from us, which that it may be removed, and we reconciled, we
pray forgive, etc.

25. What herein contained?
1. The petition, wherein the Action, forgiveness. Object, of our sins.


2. The conditions, as we forgive them, that etc.

26. What meant by forgiveness?
Gods absolute remission of sin, both in guilt and punishment, and blotting it
out of his book, and remembrance, that it never rise up in judgment against
us, to shame or condemn us; with the means whereby we desire it graciously
effected in us; therein considered,

I. The giving of his graces, of

Faith, and

Repentance.

Humility.

Confession.

II. Forgiving the

Guilt of sin, spotting the soul.

Punishment deserved in his anger.

Death temporal, and eternal.

III. Acquitting us by 1. Applying Christ's merits to us. 2. Accounting and
acknowledging us just before him. 3. Renewing our decays by his Spirit, by
sanctification and holiness.


27. What meant by sin or our debts?
Our offenses against God or man, for which we owe satisfaction, and so become
debtors, which debts we are never able to satisfy, and so we pray for
forgiveness of those sins, offenses or debts of ours, being so many and so
grievous, both against God and men.

28. What sorts of these debts are there?
I. Against God, many and infinite ones, in number, and greatness, as 1.
Errors. 2. Ignorances, negligences. 3. All manner of breaches of his Law, both
in thought, word and deed.


II. Against superiors in disobedience.

III. Against equals in love and and charity.

IV. Against inferious in uncharity, and want of mercy.

V. Against our selves, by our intemperance, error and rebellion:

Or we are debtors,

To God, owing love and duty:

To all superious, owing obedience:

To all men, owing justice in love, unicuique suum reddere:

To enemies, to put away anger, and forgive injury:

To our selves, owing abstinency from ill, that hurts the soul, by which we
are to be rightly ordered toward God, our superiors, our neighbors, our
enemies, our selves, and ought to render every one of these their due, or we be
else debtors to God and men, and sinners against God, especially in every of
them; as breakers of his Commandments.

29. Why say we our trespasses?
As most sensible of our own sins, which do in number pass the sands, or
the hairs on our head in number, and are innumerable, as the Psalmist
speaks, and which may be a motive to us, both

1. To forgive others, since we have so many sins to be forgiven at Gods hand.

2. To pray also for the forgiveness of others sins, which we will, if we have
either charity or sense therein, of ours or others misery.

30. Why add we that condition, (...) we forgive, etc.
To teach us, that without charity, as well as says, it is impossible to
please God, or obtain our prayers to be heard, or forgiveness at his hand;
therefore if we ever hope to obtain our prayers, we must be in perfect
charity, and able truly to pray for our enemies, perfecutors and slanderers,
and forgive them that trespass against us.

31. What if we do not forgive them?
We may not exepect forgiveness, nor any other blessing for want of true
charity, for we

1. Are hereby unfit to pray as we ought.

Unfit to receive any blessings.

2. We desire no forgiveness, because we forgive not others.

3. We desire rather a curse, and God will not forgive us, because we forgive
not; and so in effect we pray for our own condemnation.

32. May we not leave this petition then?
Yet nevertheless Christ's sentence remains true, except we forgive, we shall
not be forgiven; and we pull down condemnation upon our souls, or if we
think to pray other prayers, no prayers are accepted without charity, or not
regulated by this; nay our prayers will be turned into sin, and a curse, and
snare to our souls, and but a mocking of God, without this charity.

33. Who then can forgive sins?
God only originally, and totally, but

1. The Church authoritative from him, and ministerialiter.

2. Man also partially, and fraternialiter, for his part, what lies in him.

34. But how can men forgive sin?
That part which pertains to him in the offense, as

1. The want of charity, or breach of brotherly love.

2. The wrong or injury, for which he owes satisfaction.

35. When man has forgiven, is the sin acquitted?
Not except God also forgive, and wash out the offense, in his mercy, for the
least part of sin even against men, is that offense against man, and the
greatest part against God;

1. The blot of the soul.

2. The blemish of Gods Image in the same.

3. The breach of his command, and so contempt of his Majesty, which is the
foulest part, rightly conceived, of all sin, and the poison of it.

35. What if man do not, or will not forgive?
Yet God may to the truly penitent, and he be fully absolved, though man
refuse it, if he be asked forgiveness, since both the offender, and the
offended person are but clay in Gods hand; and they both wholly his, and all
that they have, and he may dispose of them, and theirs absolutely, at his
pleasure; and if they stubbornly refuse to forgive, he both can and will
forgive.

36. What need we ask forgiveness then of men, or give it them?
1. To show our charity, or brotherly love.

2. To maintain love and charity, and emutuall duty.

3. To exercise our piety and faith, and gain peace of conscience.

4. To express, and

5. To signify Our desire to be forgiven at Gods hand. Our obedience to Gods
Commandments, etc.


37. What forgiveness of our brother then required?
To forgive him always the breach of charity,

By forgetting of offenses.

By not seeking revenge.

By not taking opportunity to revenge.

By not bearing malice, etc.

To forgive him sometimes the very offense and debt, or satisfaction, if the
party unable to make satisfaction.

If in that case desire it numbly.

Offer any satisfaction he can in part or in penitence.

38. How is it forgiven, if satisfaction required?
If all malice, and remembrance of injury, be put away, and all desire or
seeking revenge, be laid aside, the chiefest and best part performed, and yet
in many cases, satisfaction may be required lawfully; as where there is
ability, yea and sometimes commanded, if for public testimony of good name,
the truth, or the like, and otherwise though the debt, or satisfaction be
forgiven, and malice not removed, or not done in charity; the best part of
forgiveness is not performed, but happiest he that can forgive both; which
meant of forgiving, forgetting, and being in perfect charity.

39. Who offend against this?
All such as either will

1. Not forget wrongs and injuries.

2. Amplify them beyond measure, or the truth.

3. Not be courteous toward others imperfections or weakness.

4. Not forgive, being humbly and penitently desired.

5. Curse or revile their trespasses.

6. Study revenge, or to hurt them again.

7. Continue in malice, hate, or desire of revenge, and so out of charity.

40. What then of David, Moses, or others, that cursed or punished offenses
severely?
It was done of them, both 1. For the public glory of God. 2. By his
particular command and direction. 3. Not without the spirit of prophecy. 4.
Against the noted and open enemies of God. 5. As public Magistrates.


41. How of the Magistrate that punishes and not forgiveth?
It is to be considered, and so distinguished between a private and public
person; the public in the place of God, and for the good of the
Commonwealth, and therefore set to execute his office, and punish the
offender, and it were cruelty for him, and the place of judgment to acquit the
guilty, as well as punish the innocent, which were to set open the door to all
impiety; though as a private person he may commiserate the person, though not
the offense, and for his private self, forgive that part of the offense,
though punish the person, and so in place of judgment he must execute
justice, and give sentence according to right, and only in some cases after,
upon hope of amendment, may extend mercy, or grant pardon, but not to the
encouragement of any vice or wrong.

42. But who is so faithful and charitable, that can as we ought so truly and
fully forgive?
If we desire truly to forgive and forget wrongs, and only imbecility of the
flesh, striving against the good Spirit of God in us, making us have a sense of
our own weakness; it is a good sign of that Spirit working in us, that will
effect his good work, and that such our desire is accepted, and God will more
perfect it; for it is not said, as we forgive, or meant, either

1. In that measure that God forgiveth us.

2. As a means or cause of merit in us.

3. As a pattern for Gods imitation of our imperfection in forgiving.

4. In that extent God forgiveth totally, etc.

But to testify the truth, and sincerity of our heart, in this desire; and the
charity we be are in our heart unfainedly to our brother; though we cannot
perfectly do what we desire, and that we may consider how gracious before God
even such good desire is, that he preseribeth it here for a condition.

43. How does the Church forgive sins?
As by Gods power and commission given to it, or the power of the keys, in
foro interiori, acquitting the truly penitent, and in foro exteriori, or facie
Ecclesiae, testifying the same; where if men out of hardness of heart will not
forgive, when required, yet God as by himself, by men also, his Ministers,
will both forgive and quiet their conscience, and acquit the guilt, if with
unfeigned repentance desired, as to whom power over all does belong, and who
does and can do it powerfully, as men his servants ministerially, whatever
men, not his servants, recalcitrate, or kick against it; so what in foro
conscientiae, cleared, and in facie Ecclesiae published, as in aede soli, his
Church acquitted, shall in arce poli, his Temple, and throne of justice in
Heaven, be so acknowledged; and we have his Word, and record, and Spirit, and
sonus testimonii for it; as in the 12. Section of the Creed is also more fully
demonstrated.

44. But is not this power of the Priests, and of the Church, controverted, or
denied?
Not unless by Schismatiques, or no better then Novatian heretics, as the
Fathers style them, and so by Arrians, and other heretics, greater matters,
even to the Trinity it self, could be controverted or denied; and none but
such false brethren can deny this; for if we believe Scriptures, credit the
ancient Fathers, or assent to the Church of England, we shall find it a truth
uncontroulably asserted, and undeniable.

45. How show you, or confirm you it?
To begin with the Fathers, that as nearest the Apostles times, best knew the
Scriptures, and meaning of them, delivered from Christ and his Apostles, and so
best expositors of them; says Saint Augustine, Qui confiteri vult, ut inveniat
gratiam, quaerat Sacerdotem scientem, solvere, and ligare, if he will be sure
of pardon, let him seek out a Priest, and make his confession to him; for God
who alone has the prime and original right of forgiving sin, has delegated
the Priests, his Judges here on earth, and given them the power of absolution,
so that they can, in his name, forgive the sins of those that humbly confess
unto them: but as the Scribes said once, Is not this blasphemy? if any
Schismatiques amongst us shall say, Is not this Popery? we may well answer with
holy Job; or bid them take his counsel, cap. 8. v. 8. enquire of the former
generations, ask of the Fathers, and they shall tell thee: the Fathers too
pious to speak blasphemy, too ancient to be suspected of Popery, these may
inform us farther herein.

46. What ancient Fathers else?
With Saint Augustine take Saint Chrysostom in his 5. Hom. on those words of
Esaias, I saw the Lord sitting on a Throne: what is comparable, says he, to that
power of the Priest, to whom Christ said, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall
be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven? heaven waits and expects the Priests sentence, here on earth; for the
Priest sits Judge on Earth, and the Lord follows the servant, and what the
servant binds or looses, Clave non erran^e, that the Lord confirms in heaven;
words most clear, for the formal judiciary absolution of the Priest, nothing
more plain; and Saint Jerome the supposed Patron of that opinion, that holds
the Priests power only declarative; (and so in effect, none at all) speaks yet
home, in his Epistle ad Heliodorum de vita solitaria, saying, God forbid, that
I should speak a word amiss against the Priests, Qui sacro ore Corpus Christi
conficiunt (in the holy Eucharist meant) per quos nos Christiani sumus, (in
baptism) qui claves Regni Coelorum (habentes quodammodo ante diem judici,
judicant (by remitting and retaining of sins) where he that can but construe
Judicant, needs no further Comment of his words; so Saint Grogory the Great,
26. Hom. in Evangel. Apostoli Principatum supremi judici sortiuntur, ut vice
Dei, quibusdam pecea^aretineant, quibusdam relaxent, the Apostles and in them
Priests, are made Gods Vicegerents on earth, in his name to retain, or forgive
sins; (not declarative only, but judicially) animarum judicios siunt, as he
goes on speaking, made judges of the souls of men: casting the obstinate down
to the gates of hell, by the fearful power of excommunication, and lifting
the penitent into heaven, I by the blessed power of absolution; and he no
better then a Novatian, with Saint Ambrose (in Psalm. 38.) that denies it; as
Saint Cyprian, and many other Fathers also show too pious to speak blasphemy,
and too ancient to be suspected of Popery, as a foresaid, and thus the Fathers
enform us.

47. But put all out of doubt, how show you it by Scripture?
If we look to Matthew. 18. 18, and John 20, and 23. there is plainly a power of
remitting sins, first propounded and promised, and after fully performed and
given or granted to the Apostles, and the Priests their successors; or as it
were conferred and confirmed to them by our blessed Savior, saying, Whose
soever sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. which cannot be otherwise
understood; for how ever some would feign expound it of preaching only, (as
those of the Novation strain) or of baptizing, as some others would guess,
yet plain it is, both these they had power to do before; as Matthew. 10. 7. Go
preach, etc. as John 4. 2. the Disciples baptized, etc. but this power most
emphatically here delivered, with a ceremony, after his resurrection, and so
received; where seen, John 20. 22. he breathed on them, as it were infusing
that power, and investing it on them, and them in it, he bad them receive it,
and joyneth to it that commission so amply, saying, Receive ye the holy Ghost,
whose sins ye remit, etc. which word of receiving the power could not be
properly used by him there, if they had been endued with it before, as they
were with power to preach and baptize, though perhaps not in so ample a
measure, enabled to do it; this the genuine sense, and thus the Fathers, and
all best Writers interpret it, the peculiar power given, as Gods deputed Judges
on earth, in his name, to pardon and absolve the humbly penitent of their
sins.

48. Is this the tenet also of our Church?
It is, for so, in the second exhortation before the Communion, the penitents
are exhorted to come to some discreet and learned Minister of Gods word, by his
Ministry to receive comfort, and the benefit of absolution, to the quieting of
their conscience: so likewise in the form of absolution, prescribed by our
Mother the Church, for the visitation of the sick, after confession to the
Priest, he thus absolveth; by the authority committed to me, I absolve thee
from all thy sins, in the name of the Father, etc.

49. But here some may say, at the time of death, indeed, in articulo mortis,
it may be more convenient, though not else?
If so, then it is enough, and as much as we need desire, for a good Christian
will, and ought so to prepare himself, as if every day were the day of his
death, because nescit quando Dominus veniet, and he should by this reason, be
thus often or always prepared, so all the holy Fathers teachus, as our Savior
himself, and from a glimmering of this light, the very heathen could say omne
creed die^ tibi deluxisse supremum, thus then by this rule we should not only
allow it, but the frequent use of it; as perhaps the best Christians best know
the use, comfort and necessity of it, they having (to be feared) but hard and
seared consciences that neglect or despise it, or at least that find no need of
the use, or comfort and benefit in the use of it; being so great a quiet, well
understood to a troubled consience, of which what good Christian is free, and
so good a preparative to our end, and calling hence, of which who is certain,
or who can be too religiously careful, especially since they are so often in
holy Scripture called on for it, and should often remember their end, and the
strict account then to be made of all the things committed to their charge, and
of all that they have done in the flesh, which with the holy Father, that
thought he heard the trumpet of God, and Archangells voice continually sounding
in his ear, that surgite mortui venite ad judicium, often meditated on: this
and the like thoughts and preparations, would, (as to this also) be motives to
much good, and to prevent much evil.

50. But how is the Minister able to discern the spirits, or to do this
sufficiently, not knowing the secrets of the heart, or sins lurking there?
The Priest indeed cannot, nor may not absolve any but the penitent, nor can
know their penitency, but by their outward expression; it is Gods prerogative
to be (...), to know the thoghts and secrets of the heart; the Priests eye
pierces not so far, he only reads the sorrows of our hearts by our words
and outward confession, without which, he cannot give, nor we receive the
benefit of absolution.

51. But is not private or auricular confession, how ever it seem needful
sometimes rooted out of our Church and abolished?
Though not so generally, and peremptorily commanded, or in the Priests power
to enforce or require it, yet it is not rooted quite out neither, nor utterly
abolished, as we see by that second exhortation before the Communion, urging
the penitents to it, and by the form prescribed for the visitation of the
sick, and their absolution after their private or auricular confession; and by
the Canon enjoining the Ministers silence, (on pain of suspension) of such
crimes, so privately by the humble penitent revealed and confessed; in all
which passages, we see it by Law approved; so though the Ministers power of
calling them to it be abridged; the thing it self yet, and use of it, is not
abolished.

52. What differs the Priests power, ministerialiter that you showed before,
and this declarative?
If you mean declarative only, very much, or as much as the Judges, and his
^riers declaration of the same things otherwise ministerialiter, is declarative
too, but not that only, as ministerialiter in respect of God and his Church,
may be authoritative, also, in respect of Gods commission granted to them, to
be Judges of the sins and souls of his people, as aforesaid; as Gods deputed
Judges on earth for those things; and so the Kings Judges as his Ministers of
justice, Ministers in that point to the King and Commonwealth, yet having
authority from him, authoritative proceed and pronounce sentence of the things
in their commission, and ministerially execute his, the Kings judgments
according to his Laws, and have power so to do, and declarative pronounce the
same; and their authority granted, does no way lessen the Kings, which the
exercise mediately, rather does more show and promulge the same; but to say
they had therefore power but declarative because ministerialiter they execute
the Kings authority, or declarative only, and not authorative, because
ministerialiter they do it; whereas they may well stand together (yet each in
their order and degree) were to derogate from their authority and dignity, as
these schismatics do, in the like manner from the Churches office and
authority.

55. This authority then of the Church and Priests in that point is clear
enough?
It is, and though ministerialiter, to the honor of God, and good of his
Church executed, and declarative uttered or published by them, not to be denied
authoritative also, by power and virtue of his commission granted to them, in
whose name they do it, as originally in him, in his own proper right, and only
do, existent, to them only mediately, and by grace derived; and thus by

The Doctrine of the Church of England, according to the true record and rule
of holy Scriptures; and the consent of the Fathers from all antiquity, we are
assured hereof, and taught this truth against all novelties of Schismatickes,
so that if we either

Assent to our mother Church;

Believe the Scriptures; or

Credit the ancient Fathers, as aforesaid, we cannot deny the Priest this
power of the remitting sins, having thus Gods word, and Scriptures sure
record, his Sons promise, and holy Spirits testimony, so many ways to assure
us of it; and since he can in the name of God forgive us our sins, good
reason have we to make our confession to him; for surely God who does nothing
in vain, never gave the Priest this power in vain, but for our benefit, and
expects our doing the best we can to make good use of it, having ordained in
the Priest the power of absolution, that we should use the best means we can
to obtain that blessing, which is our confession to him; nor can we slight
this, but we may quickly and well hear Saint Augustine, Tom. 10. Homil. 49.
applying his speech close to such slieghters, and teaching us a better lesson,
nemo sibi dicat, says he, occulte ago, quia apud Deum ago, etc. let no man
flatter himself, and say, I confess in private to God, and God that knows
my heart, will or shall pardon me, though I never confess at all to the
Priest; ergo sine causa dictum esset, quae solveritis in terra, etc. has God
in vain said, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted? Has he in vain given
that power of the keys to the Priest? Frustramus ergo Dei verbum, by our
wilful neglect, shall we go about to make void the promise of Christ, God
forbid; if we have offended this way, preveniamus judicium Dei, per
confessionem, let us, let us yet, now at last prevent the terrible judgment of
the last day by timely confession of our sins to God, and the Priest, as he
has commanded; who as he has prime and original power of absolution, Esaias
43. 25. and is our high Confessor in the heavens, has not in vain done any
thing, or commanded us to humble our selves in his Church, and to his
substitutes, the Priests, our confessors here on earth; and thus much of the
power of the Church in the dispensing of absolution, requiring our duty of
confession.

54. If this were the doctrine of the ancients, how was it seconded by their
practice?
Accordingly to all intents, both privately to the comfort and absolution of
such humble penitents, and more publicly in reforming the stubborn, or
notorious offenders; and as with all authority thus commanded, with all gravity
by them exercised, and with all humility and dutifulness, by all the sons of
the Church, even to the greatest of them obeyed, as the Ecclesiastical
Histories do plentifully declare, whereby the Churches discipline grew so
religiously admired, that even famous for it to succeeding times, awful fear
and obedience to the sensure, reverence to the action and proceedings, and love
to the person, being so reconciled, by their holiness and integrity, that it
were hard to say whether the power of the keys were more solemnly in those
primitive times exercised, or more reverently and religiously esteemed; which
so in our Lyturgy acknowledged, is the cause that there that discipline is
wished, as so well worthy (and the Church without it, seeming defective) to be
restored, which worthy our consideration more plainly and fully by the practice
of those times, faithfully described, places of their abstenti, and penitents,
at or in the Church, with the degrees and manner of their admission again,
after penance discovered, may be demonstrated.

55. How was that?
Being abstenti, cast out, or excommunicate for any notorious crime, they might
not presume to come into the Church, to the Prayers or Sacraments, but were to
tarry at the Church door, where they might, and must humble themselves, and
pray those that entered to pray for them, and lachrimas legatos mitterent; but
at time assigned after some part of their penance, and sufficient tokens of
their humiliation showed, admitted into the Church, yet went no higher then
with the Catechumeni, till they obtained imposition of hands from the Bishops
and Elders, or Priests, and were so preferred to a higher place; yet then
neither whiles the rest of the time of their abstention or penance lasted
(which thus we see was not precipitated, or negligently hudled over, all done
in a day, and to spare) might not come to partake of the holy mysteries, but
stood (to difference their state from the others) behind the fideles, whiles
they kneeled to receive the Sacrament, thus held off till lastly after full
performance of penance, admitted again to the Sacrament, and whence it seems
that order of standing in the Church, and doing penance (as some print of the
footsteps of that ancient practice) is derived, and yet remaining in our Church.

56. There were many degrees of their remission then?
Yes, and as several stations of theirs, (even more then of the Catecumeni's
admission which were many) e're their full readmission, as turpius ejicitur,
quam non admittitur hospes, so their fall accounted so foul, even below the
state and case of the not yet baptized; for it gave more offense then any
ignorants, or unbeleevers wants of that they never had, such their deserting
the graces obtained; and thence their

1. Station without the Church door, to humble them, and show them their estate.

2. Their station, but with the Catechumeni, till imposition of hands, from the
Bishop, and eldership obtained.

3. Their station behind the sideles, so staying a while ere fully readmitted,
to

4. Their pristine estate and place, if ever so admitted, as some Priests that
fell, were never fully admitted to their former estate, and places, instanced
in Ecclesiastique Stories and writers, in Novatus, Trophimus, and others; and
this course so strictly observed in those times, that even Emperors, as
Theodosius, and others did come, and reenter this way by humble contrition, and
penance when they had foully fallen and offended, this the strict discipline,
and order of those primitive and purest times.

57. What principally observable in this absolution?
1. The Author and prime actor, God originally in his holy heaven, having
supreme authority, Esaias 43. 25.

2. The Instruments, his Church and Priests, or Ministers in it, exercising
that power,

Privately, on private humiliation for offenses, Publicly, on more public
scandals.

3. The manner and order of it, in his Church, and by him prescribed to his
Church and servants,

Declaritive, and

Ministerialiter,

Yet authoritative also, as before declared; where after preaching, and
instruction to inform the conscience, succeed the execution of that office,
and proceedings in the exercising the power of the keys.

68. How many sorts of forgiveness here intimated
1. Both by God, or at his hand, in the first place.

2. And men, either

First, as his Vicegerents in his Church, and auauthorized by him.

Secondl, the parties themselves whether offending or offended, both being
enjoined to forgive, and ask forgiveness, by that manner of the petition, as
they desire forgiveness at Gods hand, whether by himself, or the ministry of
his Church, so we are taught, forgiveness to be differenced, as it is either

Authoritative, originaliter, from God, and by God himself.

Authoritative, ministerialiter, from God in his Church, by the Priest.

Charitative, and fraternaliter, by and among men, mutually, as fellow servants
one of another, but for his sake, and this principally respected here in this
petition.

59. What desire we then herein?
That we may have

1. Knowledge of our sins, and the infinite number, weight, heinousness, etc.

2. That we may have grace to acknowledge them; be humbled for them, ask
forgiveness of them effectually.

3. That we may have justification in remission of sins; imputation of
righteousness.

4. That we may have sanctification in a holy course of life.

5. That we may have charity to be ready to forgive others to testify the
true, and unfeigned desire we have both of their and our good.

60. What opposite to this?
1. All blindness, and hardness of heart, without knowledge.

2. All presumption, and groundless confidence, without grace.

3. All despair and distrust of Gods mercy, without faith.

4. All arrogance and pride of merit, without worth.

5. All hypocrisy, and dissembled sins, without repentance.

6. All open and notorious sins and profaneness without conscience.

7. All desire or study of revenge, and all malice and uncharitableness,
without promise, or hope of obtaining forgiveness for our selves.

61. What in the letter here expressed?
1. The Petition, forgiveness conditionally as we forgive others.

2. The Intercession for others, though with more sense of our own, yet some
sense also of their misery, as we remember for our parts to forgive them.

62. What intimated?
I. Our confession of

1. Gods power to whom it belongs to forgive or punish sin.

2. Our duty to submit and ask forgiveness.

3. Our defects in sinning, and offending against this duty.

4. Our defects in asking forgiveness.

II. Our deprecation against

Sin, unfaithfulness and offenses.

Hardness of heart, uncharity, and not forgiving others.

III. Our thanksgiving, and praise for that

1. Desire of grace and forgiveness in some measure apprehended.

2. Hope of further assurance both to our selves and others, that our sins are
forgiven.

3. Blessedness imputed to them, whose sins are covered, and so of the
Saints.

63. Sum up these together in order?
I. Our confession of

1. Gods almighty power and authority, that to thee, O Lord, it only belongs
to forgive sin and iniquity, and there is mercy with thee, and plenteous
redemption, and therefore shall thou be feared.

2. Our duty, whom have we in heaven but thee, thou shall deliver us from all
our sins.

3. Of neglect, we have gone astray like lost sheep, and have not returned when
thou did call.

II. Our Petition, Lord be merciful, and forgive us our offenses, even as we
forgive our debtors, etc.

III. Our intercession to deliver Israel from all her sins.

Our deprecation, That thou, O Lord, wilt take away all sins of
unfaithfulness; and so against all uncharitableness, etc.

IV. Thanksgiving and praise, for

1. Our selves, that it pleases thee, O Lord, to enlighten our hearts to see
our wretched estate, and this Petition granted.

2. All that grace and forgiveness of sins, in Christ, that our sins covered
in him, and his satisfaction.

3. Our blessed hope herein with all Saints.

4. The Saints in heaven that have fully attained it, and their happiness.

SECT. 6. Of the sixth, and last Petition.
The sixth Petition, by some divided into two Petitions, petitions with the
order, and Analysis and parts of it or them declared; and first of temptations
and their diverse sorts and degree as well as the evil that they tend unto, and
what is meant by the leading into them, Whence Gods preventing and subsequent
graces come to be considered in (...) the several degrees and sorts of all
such temptations, whereby was are defended from them, or not lead into them, so
what we desire or pray against in this petition and what is either in the
letter expressed, or else hereby intmated thus summed up together, and explaned.

1. What the last Petition?
The sixth in number, not to be led into temptation, but delivered from evil,
that the Lord will not suffer us to fall into any temptation of the world, the
flesh or the devil, by sin to be carried away by them, which is to fall from
God, but deliver us from all evil, both of the temptation, sin, death and
damnation.

2. What is to be observed in the order and number of it?
1. That this being the third in number, and so the second for the soul, here
are two petitions for the soul, against one for the body, to teach us a
greater care for the soul.

2. That it is adjoined to the former, to show it is not enough to have sins
pardoned, but we must strive for further mortification, and subduing it in us.

3. That there is a continually warfare, and sin is to be watched against, and
resisted, to make us take the more care.

3. What are the parts of it?
According to some, they are two Petitions, Viz. Lead us not into temptation,
But deliver us from evil,
and in Either 1. Action of the former, Lead us not into, latter, But deliver us.
2. Object of the former, Temptation, latter, Evil,

but, as indeed but one Petition, and therein one thing desired, Deliverance
from evil; as all one thing, not lead us into temptation, and deliver us from
evil, more then the degree only of the sin, or deliverance in the bud, or
grown to more ripeness; yet according to the words, and manner of utterance,
in that diversity, may be distinguished, as respecting the twofold Action,
Object:

Action of 1. Preventing grace, not to lead or defend us from 2. Subsequent
graces, to deliver and free us from
the Object 1. Temptation. 2. All evil.


4. What are temptations?
Of diverse sorts, as whereby

I. God tempts men to try them by

1. Blessings, whether they will praise him, and be thankful, this only
temptation to be prayed for, all others to be prayed against.

2. Proving their faith, and strength of it, as Gone. 22. 1. God did tempt
Abraham.

3. Crosses, if with Jobs wife they will curse him.

4. Suffering other temptations, as of the Devil, and Jobs friends to tempt
him.

II. As whereby man tempts, either

1. God by first murmuring and repining as the Israelites in the wilderness.

Secondly, disobedience, as Corah, Dathan, etc.

Thirdly, requiring signs, as the Jews of Christ.

Fourthly, adventuring on apparent danger without command, or hope of relief.

Fifthly, neglecting the means God does allow, and expecting extraordinary
from him.

2. Man by provocations or allurements to sin; working means to deceive, or
circumvent sin.

3. Himself, by his concupiscence, tempted and entrapped, or allured to sin,
James 1. 14.

III. As whereby the Devil tempts man, as he did Evah in Paradise, Christ in
the Mount, etc. whether by himself or his wicked instruments.

5. What meant by leading into temptation?
Either Gods

1. Withdrawing his grace, and forsaking man, whereby he is unable to stand.

2. Leaving man to himself, whereby he cannot but assuredly fall.

3. Delivering him over to Satan for his punishment, by obduration and
hardness of heart.

By doubt and despair, etc.

By any other, the power of Satan or temptation of his.

6. What is meant by evil here?
Both the evil of 1. Temptations and baits of sin. 2. The author of sin, the
Devil and his malice. 3. Sin and blot of sin, and the guilt. 4. Punishment of
sin, hell and damnation.


7. What meant by preventing grace?
The presence of Gods good Spirit, and not suffering us to fall, or to be
tempted beyond our might, so not the tempting so much as the leading into it,
or desertion in it is prayed against in this place; for temptations may be for
good, and the trial of Gods children, and our patience, constancy, and faith,
but the desertion in it, is the danger, and which is to be feared as a
punishment.

8. How is God to be said to lead us?
As all things are guided by his providence, and not a sparrow falls to the
ground without him; if he suffer us to be tempted so, by either ourselves, men
or Satan.

9. But we pray against some temptations, as well as the leading into them?
Yes, such as be either absolutely evil, as sin and the baits, and lusts
thereof; or in some respect as calamities inflicted by the power and malice of
Satan, or his instruments, as to Job, and the like; so we desire the latter
part of the Petition, to be delivered from evil.

10. What is the subsequent grace desired?
Such defense, and preservation from all evil, not only the beginning of it,
in temptation, but after in the sequel, in the evil that is happened, that
God will send a happy issue to our grief, and speedy deliverance.

II. What are the degrees of evil temptation?
As it is promoted toward sin, by diverse steps, and especially three,

In the Suggestion, by the Devil, or his means.

In the Consent unto it, in the will, so beginning to be sin unto us.

In the Perpetrating of it, so actual sin, or as that consent, is else said
to be threefold, in the Mind, by assenting to it. Will, by delighting in it.
Action, by doing of it.


12. How many sorts of evil temptation?
As many as of sins, that infect, or other calamities and crosses as
miseries, that infest us; especially four,

Of affected height, in ambitious pride.

Of directed shame in earthly covetousness.

Of infectious luxury, in foul voluptuousnes.

Of impetuous calamity, misery and crosses; which last is the best, and often
sent from the immediate hand and providence of God to humble us.

13. What means of help prescribed against sin and temptation?
I. Of prevention, Gods grace with us, to

1. Observe and watch against the Devil, world, flesh, and their temptations.

2. To shut the corporal and spiritual eyes and senses, against the baits of
sin, and temptations of Satan, and take heed especially of most dangerous
sins, as presumption, despair, oblivion, etc.

II. Of defense, taking the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6 13. the

1. Shield of faith. 2. Helmet of salvation. 3. Sword of the Spirit. 4. The
word of God. 5. Breastplate of righteousness, etc.
III. Of deliverance by Christ, and taken hold on by faith, and effectually
applied; proved in true repentance, and humility, whereby rest and peace to the
soul.

14. What is here then desired?
All things that may confirm, and strengthen us in goodness, and to the
resisting, and extinguishing of evil:

1. As Gods graces, both preventing, subsequent, persevering, with us to the
end.

2. A illumination of our spirit, to discern what is good.

3. As steadfastness of ^aith, and that spiritual armor, to resist
temptations and evil.

4. As comfort of his Spirit unto us, in this life by turning evil to good
unto us, in humiliation of us.

In making us more careful.

In estranging our affections from sin.

In privation of power to sin.

In preventing herein eternal death.

5. Patience under the cross, etc.

6. Everlasting life, and blessedness hereafter.

15. What prayed against?
1. Against solicitation to sin in any degree, as evil suggestion, counsel,
consent, delight, etc.

2. Against disertion, and forsaking of God, or his forsaking and leaving us.

3. Against sin it self, and the adjuncts of it, oblivion of God, presumption,
obduration, despair.

4. Against grievous and long afflictions and calamities.

5. Against sudden death, or strange and fearful death, or dangers and trialls.

6. Against everlasting death, and hell, and our arch enemy the Devil.

16. What expressed in the letter?
1. The deprecation against all leading into temptation, or evil.

2. The Petition for deliverance from evil, sin, temptation.

3. The intercession for others, as well as our own deliverance from evil;
defense against temptation.

17. What intimated?
I. A confession of

Gods power, graces and free Spirit, that is able, ready, and willing to aid us.

Our weakness and frailty, ready to be tempted, and overthrown of evil.

Our duty to seek to him for his graces and so decline temptation and evil.

II. A thanksgiving, and praises for

1. His graces we have had experience of.

Assistance in temptations, and giving a happy issue to many of them.

2. Many deliverances of us and others, and that full deliverance the Saints
enjoy.

3. Our hope of full deliverance being freed from sin hereafter in life
everlasting.

18. How sum you it up together in order?
1. Our confession of

Praises to God, that he is only our Lord and Redeemer, powerful and able, and
willing and ready to deliver.

Our weakness, that we poor creatures, subject to many temptations and
calamities.

Our duty therefore, O Lord, we look to the hills, whence our help and
defense.

2. Our Petition, that thou, O Lord, wilt be a Tower of defense, our Castle,
and defendor from temptation, our deliverer from evil.

3. Our intercession to him, to deliver Israel from all her sins.

4. Our deprecation against all the wicked men, and instruments of the Devil,
temptations, etc.

All evil, remove, O Lord, lying lips, and a deceitful tongue, and a heart
that is froward, all ungodliness and wrong, all evil, etc.

5. Our thanksgiving and praises for our selves, that have received many
graces, deliverances, and best things, as faith, etc.

Others with us, and bewayling our unfaithfulness and forgetfulness.

Our blessed hope of Saints that thou give us, and life everlasting promised.

The happiness that thy Saints enjoy in thee, O Lord, eternally.

SECT. 7. The Conclusion.
The conclusion, with the reason and Analysis of the same, wherein is showed
what is to be understood by Kingdom, power and Glory, so in their eminency
excellency here taught to him to be ascribed, and are now and ever shall be
by all creatures most certainly to all eternity to be attributed, which may
teach all Kings Princes and Potentates, as well as all other the aithfull, and
servants of God, how zealously they ought to remember to set forth his glory:
in which conclusion the whole prayer seems epitomized and included in
assurance and confidence of which our zealous and faithful prayers and
praises, as else diversely, and for good respects used, and here explicated, as
added Amen.

1. What is the conclusion added?
For thine is the Kingdom, power and glory, for ever, and ever, Amen; whereby
we acknowledge God both able to do all he will, and willing to do all for
his glory, which only we desire in all the Petitions; and therefore in
assurance to be heard, in our just desires, we say, Amen.

2. Why is it added?
As a very fit conclusion to prayer, in the form of praise and thanksgiving to
him, for so we acknowledge him the only powerful King, worthy to be praised,
and that there is no end of his greatness and honor, and withal intimate our
desire of his honor, and that glory, unto which all things are directed, as to
their end, and it self without end, even for ever and ever; we give thanks for
our and others good in it included, and rejoice in the same, in that hope and
assurance, resting confident of his favor, as our God and King, as well as
Father in Christ, and in that desire of his glory, thus conclude the
thanksgiving and praises again, with prayer saying, So be it.

3. What herein contained?
A most firm reason of our faith and assurance, as well as thankfulness,
drawn from

1. The object or matter ascribed, Kingdom, power and glory.

2. The action, or ascribing it, Thine is the Kingdom, power, and the glory.

3. The circumstance of the eternity of it, for ever and ever; certainty of it,
Amen.

4. How a reason of our faith and assurance?
For that he whom we pray unto, is so great and powerful and glorious a God
and King, as to whom both,

1. All Kingdom Power and Glory, over all, is due, and to be ascribed.

2. It is ascribed by all tongues and hearts, both of men and Angels.

3. It is ever and shall be acknowledged, either by the good to their comfort,
or others to their condemnation.

4. It is so certain, as truth it self, for he has said it that will do it,
who is Yea and Amen.

5. How a reason of our praise and thanksgiving?
Because who is more worthy to receive praise, and thanksgiving, then this our
God, whose Kingdom power and glory, is so established in the heavens, and
whole truth endures for ever in heaven.

6. What meant by Kingdom?
His dominion and government absolute, over and above all, both generally in
the world.

Specially over his Church in grace, glory, as in the second Petition more
amply expressed.

7. What his power?
His Almightinesse, able to do all that he pleases.

That we can desire.

That shall be good and expedient.

Extended over all creatures whatsoever, life and death, heaven and hell, that
has the keys of both time, and eternity, Paradise and hell, and will do as
he please, shuts and no man opens, opens and no man shuts, gives
life or takes, but refers all to his glory.

8. What is that glory?
The scope and end of all things in the manifestation of his power, and
excellency of his Kingdom, proposed.

1. By God himself to all his actions of mercy, justice.

2. To men, that they should seek it.

3. To Angels, and Saints eternally to desire, and do, and sing it.

4. To the Devils, and worst creatures, that though unwillingly in their
misery shall show it, and in his justice be made spectacles of his glory; and
so we see to which end all things are, and shall be referred.

9. Wherein his glory most seen?
1. In his creatures, heaven, and heaven of heavens.

Sun and stars, that he ordained.

Men his Image, etc.

Angels his glorious Courtiers, etc.

2. In his actions of creation, redemption, governance, etc.

Mercies to all that desire them.

Benefits to all creatures, especially Men and Angels.

Wisdom, truth, justice, etc.

3. In his house or Church, in

1. Earth, where his graces, praises, etc.

2. Heaven, where Saints and Angels perpetually his glorious servants, and
delight in setting forth his glory.

10. How the eternity?
In that all other Kingdoms and Empires have their periods and ends, as the
heavens their revolutions, but Gods Kingdom no end, all other power is
limited, Kings nor Tyrants whose breath is in their nostrills, their hearts and
all in Gods hand, can do but what he appoints, nay the very Devil is herein
limited, that else would as a roaring Lion, be a more terrible Dragon, and
destroyer; only Gods power is without limit of time or coertion; bounded only
by his holy and good will and pleasure, and to eternity, and all earthly glory
and beauty is frail and mortal, like that of the lillies, or flower of the
field though in Solomon, and his royalty, and shall have end, yea the heavens,
and Sun and Moon, as they were create, though of long continuance, at last
will perish; They wax old as does a garment, but his glory in the heaven and in
his servants that attend it, are to endure for ever; and so in his presence is
fulnessesse of joy, life and power, kingdom and glory for evermore.

11. How the certainty of it?
In the truth and consistency of this being, who is I am, who was, who is, and
who is to come, blessed for ever, who is true, and the truth, even eternal
truth, and fountain of life and of truth, and so kingdom, power and glory is
truly and for ever his; the Devil did say of the power and glory of the
kingdoms of the world that they were his, and he would give them, but he was a
liar, and that not the truth, but all earthly glory, power, kingdom, and
dominion is from God, and truly his, and heavenly kingdom power and glory more
appropriated to him, and his, as more fitting the Majesty of his glory, and
thus certainly a King powerful and glorious, holy and blessed for ever.

12. How is this ascribed?
By all good inen, Saints and Angels, by the tongues of all creatures in their
kinds, The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows, etc.
So the Sun and Moon, hoasts of heaven, showers and dewes, earth and seas,
and all things praise and magnify him for ever; but most especially all
spirits and souls of the righteous, and all holy and humble men of heart, and
his servants show his glory, and confess that his is Kingdom, power and glory
for ever.

13. What does this teach Princes?
To remember to whom they owe a tribute of praise, who has given them that
high estate, who is absolute King of Glory, and Lord of Hoasts, and their Lord,
as King of Kings, and Lord of all lords; and so to do according to his will,
exalt his honor, follow his Law, which will be their honor and happiness,
when they come to render an account of their stewardship, and Kingdom to him,
that is their Lord Paramount, and King for ever.

14. What to Magistrates?
To remember of whom they and all Kings have that power, and from whom, and to
what end derived unto them, so to use their power so committed to them to his
glory, who gave or sent it them, remembering also their accounts that they must
make of their power and authority to him, that is King of eternal power and
glory.

15. What to any other of high condition?
To remember from whom they have all their glory, and high estate, and so to
use it, as to his glory, and praise him for it, who is the King of glory, and
has ordained all things for and to the same.

16. What to all other the faithful?
To erect, and raise up their minds, and cogitations to heaven, where they
have such a Father, who has all Kingdom and Empire, Power, Majesty and Glory
at his dispose, and in his hand; yea and most eminently in his person for ever;
to whom all earthly Kings and Emperors compared, are but worms, and their
greatest glory, to be his servants and vassalls; in whose service also who most
humble, most honorable; and so to consider the excellent dignity of the Sons
of God, to the despising and contemning of all earthly things as but clay and
dirt and dross in comparison of this.

17. What else learn you out of this conclusion?
The sum of the Lords Prayer, and our desires briefly recollected and
recommended to us in this close and words of the same.

18. How is that observed?
1. The Preface, Our Father which art in heaven, signified in the eternity, and
certainty of his Kingdom, power and glory.

2. The first Petition, his name hallowed by this setting forth his praise, and
excellency of his glory.

3. The second Petition, his Kingdom come, in the acknowledgement here of his
eternal Kingdom.

4. The third Petition, his will be done by his Almighty power, both now and
for ever.

5. The fourth Petition for our good, comprehended in his glory, for which and
to which referred, they ought to be desired, and not else, to the confidence
and assurance of all of them, asked in faith in the last word, Amen.

19. What or whence the ground of our confidence?
Manifested partly in the Preface, and more fully in the conclusion, and so
most amply in both joined together, well considered here included, or as

I. In the Preface, Our Father which art in heaven, his love, mercy and
compassion.

His eternal Majesty and eminency.

II. In the conclusion, our Father, his

1. Kingdom and dominion over all. 2. Power, ruling and governing all. 3.
Glory to it guiding and directing all. 4. Eternity, the happiness of all. 5.
Certainty and truth, that is Amen.
20. How is Amen understood?
Either as a

1. Nowne, the truth it self, and so God and Gods word, who is Yea and Anen.

2. Verb, so his actions that are done in truth, and his fiat or Amen, was the
foundation of all creatures.

3. Adverbe, so it signifies certainly, or without end or doubt, and so are all
his words, and truth and such, and hence our confidence.

21. How is Amen used?
Either for

1. Wishing, as usually in prayer, Amen, fiat.

2. Confirmation, or ratification, as Gal. 1. 20.

3. Usual affirmation, single in speech, Amen, I say, etc.

4. Asseveration doubled, as Amen, Amen, dico vobis, even almost to oath, Jo.
16. 23.

5. Consent as in many prayers, and praises in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 16. etc.
used by the people.

22. How here used?
In any of these present respects as in

1. Our confession of praise, and consent to the praises of God.

2. Our affirmation or asseveration of his glory and our duty.

3. Our wishing and hearty desiring our prayers to be heard.

4. Our ratification of our vows and thanksgiving and confirmation of our
faith.

23. For what may it serve us then?
1. To confirm us in the faith and confidence we should pray with.

2. To comfort us in assurance of the promises of God, and truth of them.

3. To Convince, and

4. To condemn us if as graceless ones we pray unfaithfully. Hypocrites we
pray but dissemblingly.


24. In what may we then be assured or confirmed in this faith and confidence?
1. In God who has commanded us to pray, and offer this sacrifice of praise.

2. In the promises of God, assuring us to be heard, if we pray faithfully.

3. In the testimony of a good conscience, that we pray as we ought, faithfully
and charitably.

4. In the holy Spirit, who witnesses with our spirits, and makes us truly
say Abba Father.

5. In Christ, in whom the promises of God are Yea and Amen, and in whom as we
say Father at first, we may here also most confidently say, Amen.

25. What follows in the Catechism?
The question concerning the sum and substance of the Lords Prayer.

SECT. 8. The thirteenth Question.
The sum of the Lords Prayer, and all the parts thereof, and petitions before
rehearsed, epitomized, and hereby paralelled with the answer to the thirteenth
Question. As else the preface both severally, and other petitions explained. In
the first petition, hallowing Gods name. The second petition. thy Kingdom
come. in all the parts and branches thereof, and 3. Petition, Thy will be done
in earth as it is in Heaven, so likewise explicated as the fourth petition for
our daily bread and ^. Petition, for forgiveness of our sins as we forgive
others, and the 6. Petition, for deliverance from temptation, and all evil, as
those before, with the conclusion, and the whole doctrine in them comprised,
thus epitomized and explaned. An other manner of exposition of the same by some
propounded, wherein the seven deadly sins in the seven Petitions; so by them
numbered, prayed against, and the opposite virtues desired, though rather in
very deed, in every of the petitions are all the said vices and virtues, and
all others whatsoever plainly deprecated or desired:

1. What desire thou of God in this Prayer?
I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, who is etc.

2. What is here in these words contained?
An exposition by way of paraphrase of the Lords Prayer; and so if we mark it,
we may find all the parts and petitions of it delivered and expressed in other
words a little more at large for our better understanding of the sense and
meaning of the same.

3. How then show you the parts, and petitions of it particularly?
1. The Preface of our Father which art in heaven, in these words,

I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father who is the giver of all goodness.

2. The first Petition, Hallowed be thy name; The second Petition, Thy Kingdom
come; The third Petition, Thy will be done, etc. That he will send his grace to
me, and to all people, that we may worship him, hallowing his name.

Serve him, in his Kingdom.

Obey him as we ought, according to his will.

3. The fourth petition, And give us this day our daily bread, in these words,

That he will send us all things necessary both for our souls and bodies.

4. The fifth petition, To forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them, etc.
in this,

That he will be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins.

5. The sixth petition, Not to lead us into temptation, but to deliver us from
evil, in these words:

That it may please him to save and defend us from all dangers ghostly and
bodily; and from all sin and wickedness, from our ghostly enemy, and from
everlasting death.

6. The conclusion, For thine is the Kingdom, power and glory for ever and
ever, Amen, in these words:

And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness in Jesus Christ our
Lord; and therefore I say, Amen. So be it.

4. And how do you more particularly show the full exposition thereof?
By considering the substance, of what is intimated or expressed in the
several parts and petitions aforesaid.

5. How in the Preface?
In the confession, of the great mercy, love and compassion of our Father, as
well as his Majesty and glory in the heavens, whither we are to elevate our
souls and eyes, considering our wants, and miseries here on earth, and so we
say and confess Him

1. Father of mercy and consolation, and fountain of goodness.

Light and Spirits, and so of our spirits.

2. Our father in Jesus Christ, and our loving and merciful God.

3. Who is now and for ever the same, Alpha and Omega, the first and last.

4. In heaven, the Throne of his glory, by his powerful presence, glorious
Majesty.

The Kingdom of his Church by his graces.

The hearts of the faithful by his holy Spirit.

And thus we confess him giver of all goodness, and elevating our eyes and
minds to heaven, say, We have lifted up our eyes unto the hills, from whence
comes our help, and to thee that dwell in the heavens, in majesty, power
and glory, most gracious God, and our loving father which art in heaven.

6. How in the first Petition?
1. In our confession of Gods goodness; Thy name is worthy to receive all
honor, O thou holy one of Israel, and holiest of all holies.

Our duty, and it is fit, O Lord, we should set forth thy praise, and ever be
telling of thy glory, and sanctifying thy name.

Our neglect; yet O Lord, we have not honored thee as we ought, but rather
many ways profaned thy most holy name and word, and other means of our good;
Lord we bewail, and give us grace truly to lament our sins, negligences and
offenses.

2. In our requests, our petition and intercessions, Lord, let thy name be
hallowed by us and all people, more conscionably in our lives and all our
actions, that our tongues may show forth thy praise and wondrous works, and
that we may ever be doing good, and giving of thanks.

3. In our deprecation, O Lord, take evil out of our ways, and remove all
lying lips, and deceitful tongues, and keep us from blasphemy and all cursed
speaking, and whatsoever may polute us, or profane thy holy and sacred Name,
that ought to be sanctified.

4. In our thanksgiving for all graces reeceived; so, O Lord, we remember those
blessings bestowed on our souls, that we do desire thy glory, or in any
measure perform the same.

Others, that, O Lord, many on earth, do with us sanctify thy Name, showing
thy praise, and so consort with those holy Quires in the heaven, that do ever
sing thy honor.

Our blessed hope of continuance for ever in that holy course of sanctifying
thy name, and that confidence of that thy grace.

7. How in the second Petition?
1. In our confession of Gods glory; Thy kingdom, O Lord, is an everlasting
Kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout all ages: and thou, O Lord, art
King for evermore.

Our duty, it is meet, O Lord, that we should desire thy glory, and
advancement of thy Kingdom.

Our neglect: but in stead thereof we have neglected our duty, and in too many
things we lament our misdeeds, rather promoted the kingdom of Satan.

2. In our petition and intercession of us all, that thy kingdom may come both
by us and all people, thy kingdom may be desired and promoted, and that thou will

1. Govern thy universal kingdom to thy glory, and in the same erect, -- 2.
Enlarge and confirm thy kingdom of grace, and thereby also -- 3. Perfect and
hasten thy kingdom of glory, for the good of us and all Saints.
3. In our deprecation, that, O Lord, thou will be pleased to remove all
impediments of thy kingdom in us, and all others, and destroy the kingdom of
Satan and Antichrist.

4. Thanksgiving for the 1. The advancement of thy kingdom, O Lord, both in
thy universal government, and guiding all things to thy glory; and
particularly in thy kingdom of grace, for thy erecting, increasing, and
restoring the kingdom of Christ, and the Gospel. 2. The blessed hope we have
of thy everlasting kingdom of glory in the heavens.


8. How in the third Petition?
1. In our confession of Gods great power and authority, that thy will, O Lord,
is the perfect rule of all right cousnesse and goodness, and so worthy to be
obeyed by all; as for thy wills sake they had a being, and all things are and
were created.

Our duty, that it is just and meet that we and all creatures should obey thy
will, and conform our selves unto it.

In our defects, that we have been too negligent and disobedient children, and
have gone astray from our mothers womb: it is too apparent, and we lament the
same.

2. In our requests and intercession for our selves and others: Lord let thy
secret will be done according to thy good pleasure, and thy revealed will so
likewise, by us and all creatures, with ready, cheerful, and willing
obedience, here on earth as it is in heaven.

3. Deprecation: Remove, O Lord, all obstacles, both of our stubborn and
uncircumcised hearts, and whatsoever is displeasing to thee, either in us or
the world, as all sin and disobedience.

4. Thanksgiving for our selves, and that measure of obedience which we are
enabled unto, and for thy will accomplished in us for our good.

Others in the like sort, that do thy will, or patiently suffer the same, and
that thy Saints do it jo, fully.

Our hope and assurance that it shall be fulfilled by us, and in us, to our
comforts, though less perspicuously here, yet more perfectly hereafter in
heaven.

9. How in the fourth Petition?
1. In our confession of 1. Gods bounty, That thou, O Lord, openest thy hand,
and fillest all things living with good, feedest the hungry, the Lions and
young Ravens that call upon thee, clothest the Lillies, and refreshest all
things with thy goodness.

2. Our duty to look up to thee the spring of all comfort, and fountain of
living waters.

3. Our neglect, that, O Lord, we have been too neglective and undutifull, we
have not herein honored thee, we have fallen from thee, trusted to our
strength, and arm of flesh, and uncertain riches, we bewail our foolishness
and offenses.

II. In our request or petition and intercession for all other our necessities;
Give us this day our daily bread, all necessaries for this life, yea, comfort
both of body and soul, spiritual and temporal food and blessings, with
comfort to eat our bread.

III. Deprecation of evil and famine; O Lord, to keep us from hunger and want,
from plague, pestilence and famine, from battle and murder, and from sudden
death, and all other misery, and ways of the destroyer.

IV. Thankesgiving: 1. For ourselves and others; the peace, plenty and
prosperity we enjoy, our daily food and comforts received both temporal and
spiritual of our souls and bodies.

2. For our hope and assurance of his favor, and continuance of all blessings,
that, O Lord, we, and all that are thine, may be sure we shall want no manner
of thing that is good for body or soul, and we do therefore praise thee, and
will ever sing of thy mercies.

10. How in the fifth Petition?
1. Confession of Gods mercy, That there is mercy with thee, O Lord, and
plenteous redemption, and therefore thou shall be feared, and thou, O Lord,
only, can absolutely forgive sins.

2. Confession of our duty, that we should fly to the shadow of thy wings for
mercy to cover our transgressions, and we ought to forgive our enemies.

3. Our neglects, that 1. O Lord, we have gone astray every way from thee, and
have not hearkened to thy law, and we are miserable sinners.

2. Our neglects, that we have not sought thee, or thy mercies, betimes, we
have not repented as we ought; we lament both our sins and unrepentance.

3. Our neglects, that we have not been merciful as we ought, to be the
better assured and prepared for mercy, etc.

II. In our request and intercession: Lord forgive us our trespasses, our
sins and ignorances, our infirmities and presumptions, our unrepentant and
unmercifull behavior, as we desire that we may have thy graces more freely
hereafter, to perform these things: and so, O Lord, make us to forgive others,
that we may be forgiven.

III. Deprecation: Take from us, O Lord, our hard and stony hearts, and give us
hearts of flesh, that we may obey thee, repent us of our sins, and forgive
others as we hope for forgiveness from thee; remove sin and all obstacles
of mercy or penitence, all unmercifulness and impenitence.

IV. Thanksgiving: 1. For Gods mercies, that thou, O Lord, art so ready to
forgive more then we to ask.

2. For his grace, that he has promised and assured us his mercies in Christ,
and has so forgiven and sealed to us his forgivnes of our many misdeeds

3. For that measure of grace and repentance give us to fly from sin, desire
repentance, show mercy.

4. For our hope and assurance of his mercies, to our selves and others, and
all graces to be continued here, and consummate in glory, where all tears
shall be wiped from our eyes, and in token of full forgiveness, all misery
done away.

9. How in the sixth Petition?
I. In our confession of

1. Gods graces, first preventing, to preserve us from evil, and temptation to
sin.

Subsequent, to defend and keep us in temptations, from contagion of sin, and
to deliver us from evil, or turn it to our good.

2. Our weakness, how apt to fall, unable to resist evil, or do good, how
ready to fail in temptation.

3. Our sufficiency in any measure from thee, O Lord, so O Lord, we confess
our weakness, without thy graces, and that all our sufficiency is from thee.

II. Our request or petition for our selves, and intercession for others,

O Lord, not lead, nor suffer us to fall, or leave us in any temptation whether
of sin or calamity, to despair, or forsake thee; but relieve us with thy
saving graces, and turn the temptations to our good, and give a happy issue.

III. In our deprecation of all evil, included and infolded in the petition,
the chief part of it, Lord remove all evil of temptation, sin, guilt or
punishment; assuage the power and malice of the Devil, and deliver thy chosen,
and Israel from all their sins, and infirmities, and fear of the enemy.

Thanksgiving for all our temporal and spiritual deliverances from all
calamities, sin and temptations to sin, and happy issue given to such
temptations or misfortunes.

Thanksgiving for his graces continually infused, and present with us in our
distresses and miseries, whereby we are enabled to pass through, or bear them.

Thanksgiving for our hope and assurance of such further graces, and the
continuance of them, that, O Lord, thou have been so powerfully present with
us, in all our needs and necessities, and wilt so continue, as having promised
to be with thine to the end; Our fathers trusted in thee, and were delivered,
and thou, O Lord, wilt deliver Israel from all her sins, as thou have
delivered thy Saints, and we will therefore praise thee with joyful lips.

10. How in the conclusion?
In the voice of joy and thanksgiving, ascribing all praise to him, and
magnifying him, and his holy name; showing that he only is worthy of all
honor; and to whom we are so particularly bound for his blessings, and so we,
and all creatures do acknowledge the might of the Majesty of his glory, the
ground of our confidence, whereby we are assured to be heard; drawn from

1. Matter acknowledged his due, all

Kingdom, and dominion.

Power, and might.

Glory and Majesty.

2. Manner, originally, absolutely, and eternally his, and at his dispose.

Circumstances of,

1. Person, thine, O gracious God, and loving Father in Jesus Christ.

2. Time and eternity, they are thine for ever and ever.

3. Certainty, in truth and indeed, as thou art true, and thy word, Yea and
Amen.

And thus in this confidence, we conclude with the ascribing all praise and
honor to him, in the way of thanksgiving for his mercies, and manifestation
thereof, saying, For thine is Kingdom, power, and glory for ever and ever,
Amen.

11. What other exposition of this Prayer can you briefly show?
As some expound these six Petitions, by them to be divided into seven, to be
understood in particular, so many deprecations against the seven deadly sins,
and prayer for the virtues to them opposed, both in the general, and in the
branches.

12. In what manner?
The first Petition, Hallowed be thy name, that all pollution and luxury may be
removed, and chastity and temperance given, that so both our bodies and souls
may be fit and spotless temples of the Holy Ghost; and his holy name neither
in us, or by our words, lives or actions dishonored, or blasphemed.

The second Petition, Thy Kingdom come, that covetousness, and so the
dominion of earthly things, as serving Mammon, may be removed, and
contentedness, peace and poverty of spirit, in humility may be given us,
because, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

The third Petition, Thy will be done, etc. that idleness, and loathing of
goodness removed, and devotion and divine love given us, that inflamed
therewith, we may be willing to perform obedience both in body and soul, and
so Gods will done in earth, as it is in heaven.

The fourth Petition, Give us this day our daily bread, that gluttony and
drunkenness may be removed, and sobriety and temperance given us, that having
moderate necessaries to relieve and comfort us, we may there with be content,
and possess our souls, and the gain of godliness.

The fifth Petition, Forgive us, etc. that all anger and rancour or malice
removed, charity and patience may be given us, that we forgiving others in love
and mercy may be forgiven.

The sixth Petition, Lead us not into temptation, that pride whereby we seem
especially to tempt God, and to be tempted, to leave God in all sin, may be
removed, and humility given us, that not trusting in our own strength, but in
Gods, we may be defended.

The seventh Petition, But deliver us from evil, that envy the malicious root
of mischief, whereby the Devil enoying at Adam, as man his God, (and his
obedience and felicity neglected, sin so entered) may be removed, and love the
fountain, and grace the beginning of all good may be given; whereby we
delivered from evil.

13. How is this exposition approved?
Though well and conveniently used, for the moral application, and tending to
the planting of virtue, and supplanting of vice in all these capital heads,
the seven deadly sins, and their Lernean poison, where with they infect the
soul, yet not so fully accommodate to the textuall explication, whether in the
letter or genuine sense and meaning of the Text.

14. Wherefore say you so?
Because not only one of the same sins, in such several petition, but in
each petition rather, every one of the same seven deadly sins in the general,
and most of them and their branches, are desired to be removed, and the
opposite virtues planted, as may be seen and manifested in particular.

15. How is this seen or shown?
1. As in the first Petition, Hallowed be thy name, all sin is an
unhallowing, or profaning of Gods Image and name, and so prayed to be removed,
and virtue in general planted.

2. As in the second Petition, Thy Kingdom come; all sins are the power and
kingdom of Satan, which we desire removed, and Gods Kingdom in virtues and
graces to be planted.

3. As in the third Petition, Thy will be done, etc. as all virtue and grace in
us, is Gods will, and al sin against it both in general and in particular, we
consequently desire, done or removed.

4. As in the fourth Petition, Give us, etc. as we desire moderation of
contentedness in godliness, which can never be, but in the forsaking of all
sin, and desire of grace and virtue.

5. As in the fifth Petition, Forgive us, etc. we pray expressly against all
sins, and so for obtaining of virtue.

6. As in the sixth Petition, or sixth and seventh Petition, Lead us not, etc. we
desire most expressly not only the avoiding of all sin and wickedness, but
all temptations and provocations, or allurements to it, as the way to it and to
be delivered from all evil, in all the parts and members of the same, and so
for all virtue, grace, and godliness.

16. It seems then spiritual matters are desired in every one of the
Petitions?
It is true, as most worthy our prayer to ask, and the giver to bestow; and as
every Petition, either primarily in the full scope of it, or secondarily, even
for our good, respect the glory of God.

17. And so in every of the Petitions, all virtues desired to be (...), and
sins to be removed?
It is true also, either in the full scope, and direct intention of most of
them, or of necessary consequence, as in the fourth Petition, as the exercise
of one virtue cannot be rightly and truly had and possessed, without the habit
or general inclination to all of them; the virtues are so nearly united and
chained together, and as without planting of the same, and supplanting of vice,
in general, we can never truly aim at the glory of God, which ought to be
the scope of every Petition, as we are taught also by the conclusion; For
thince is Kingdom, power and glory, for ever and ever.

18. Is the conclusion therefore added?
Yes assuredly, and even full as directly for the reason of our desire and
petition, as for the ground of our confidence to be heard, if not more, as
their precedence in order seems to imply:

That primarily for the ground or reason of our desire.

That secondarily in order, or the ground of our confidence, we say, For thine
is the Kingdom, power, etc.

And for certainty of it, add Amen.

19. What follows?
The fifth and last part of the Catechism, concerning the doctrine of the
Sacraments.

PART. 5. Of the SACRAMENTS.
SECT. 1. Of the SACRAMENTS in general. Quest. 14.
the doctrine of the Sacraments, their necessity, use and utility described,
our Sacrament of the Gospil in the new Testament succeeding those of the Jews
under the law in the old testament, and as seals of the new covenant, in
effect the same with them. The covenant and what the substance or matter,
manner and circumstances of it, and how under the Law and the Gospel
distinguished, as also what are the parts, and who the parties, to the
Covenant, and the instruments, or records of it. The two Testaments, where
first considered the Author, penmen, and public Notaries of the old
Testament, with the signing, sealing, and delivery thereof, the witnesses to
the same, and so of the new Testament, likewise the Author, penmen, signing,
sealing, and delivery of it, and witnesses described, the scales of it and the
graces conferred, the Sacraments, the order of whose doctrine is here to be
observed, with number of them, and how two only so primely and especially from
all antiquity acknowledged the definition, parts, and other circumstances of
the true and prime Sacraments observed, and with the others compared both in
general, and in particular matrimony, confirmation, extreme unction or
avealing penance and holy orders by us acknowledged, though not Sacraments for
either. Godly estates (...) course of life, or holy religious actions and
ceremonies in the Church piously to be used, and practiced and so diverse other
holy and religious action: and ceremonies may be observed, though not
Sacraments accounted, but these two in all respects and primarily by all
accounted Saoraments

1.
HOw many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?

Two only, generally necessary to salvation.

2. Why say you generally necessary?
For their general acceptance and use in the Church.

As generally appointed by the Lord himself, for the use and benefit of all.

As generally received, and to be received by all according to his command.

As generally necessary in the respect, except we will run into contempt.

3. How is the necessity then?
A necessity absolute in respect of his command of conveniencie if they may be
had.

A necessity peremptory, under pain of disobedience and contempt if they may
so be had.

A necessity respective in regard of the utility of them, profitable to
salvation.

4. How is the utility of them?
As they are a means of grace in the holy use of them, and seals of it well
used; and as in that respect profitable, so in that profit also, necessary to
salvation, as aforesaid.

5. How are they to be accounted of then?
As Conduits or comfort and graces by them conveyed to the soul.

As seals of grace it self to the hearts of the faithful that receive them
duly.

As seals of the covenant of grace in general to the Church, in particular to
each faithful person, and so coming in place of the old Sacraments.

6. How come they to be so?
As the Covenant of Grace comes in place of the old Law, new Testament
succeeding instead of the old, and to revealing thereof, and the Gospel of
faith, perfecting the Law of works, so these our Sacraments of the Gospel,
instead of the old Sacraments of the old Law, and of the Jews.

7. How succeed they then?
Baptism in the place of Circumcision, and instead of the Paseall Lamb the
Lords Supper, and sorepresenting them.

8. How do they represent the former?
In the virtue and efficacy as well as the intent of their action.

9. How in Baptism seen?
In that Baptism is, as Circumcision was, for admission into the Church; and
as Baptism by washing, Circumcision by cutting off the foreskin, both
intending the purging of the filth and corruption of the flesh.

10. How in the Lords Supper?
As the Lord himself is the true Paschal Lamb, and that former a shadow of
this later; and so in

The 1 Paschal lamb considered, the Nourishment and feeding the body, and seal
of faith to the soul. Memorizing their 1. Passing out of Egypt. 2. Deliverance.

2 Lords Supper, or Paschal Lamb, and Passover Nourishment and food of souls,
and seal of the better covenant. Memorizing our Spiritual delivera^ce. Passage
from Egypt to Canaan; Or Bondage of sin to favor and grace.




11. What mean you by Scales of the Covenant?
External signs exhibited for confirmation of Gods covenant and promises made
unto his people.

12. What is a Covenant?
A promise, or stipulation of parties between themselves of certain agreements
on either hand to be done or performed, which as it is Agreed upon, it is a
covenant, Confirmed, or Recorded, witnessed and sealed, or the like, declared
public instrument, or testament.


13. What required in such covenant?
the Parties to such covenant, or instrument. The conditions, and matter or
agreements between them, Recording and publishing, Ratification and signing,
Sealing and delivery
Of it, with witnesses and testimony of the same.


14. How are these observed in Gods covenant?
All of them, precisely found in the covenant of God with us his people, as well
in the covenant of works, as of grace, comprehended in the old and new
Testaments.

15. Are they two covenants then or one?
One in substance, though two in circumstance; one in matter, though two in
manner of promulgation; and diverse other ceremonies and circumstances, as of
time, Sacraments, Penmen, and the like, so they agree in the main and chief
matter, differ only in the less principal things, in manner and accidents.

16. How do they agree?
1. In the Author, God the author of both. 2. Mediator, Christ the mediator,
one in substance, though then veiled, since revealed; and so Moses his type,
and diverse sacrifices as standing in his stead in that law.
3. In the promises 1. God to be their God. 2. Of grace and remission of
sins. 3. Of blessings in general, and spiritual ones.
4. In the condition on our parts, of Faith and Obedience.
5. In the end, Salvation.


17. How differ they?
1. In the circumstance of the promise of grace, that in the Messiah to be
exhibited, this of the Messiah revealed.

2. Corporal promises, and temporal blessings, concerning the land of Canaan;
figuring a more heavenly inheritance, and land of the living Canaan above.

3. In outward Rites and Types, and sacrifices, and other Sacraments with them,
as these other Sacraments and only Christ, the substance, with us.

4. Clarity, that in many types and shadows of Priesthood and sacrifices
obscure; this in doctrine and substance, Christ and his fulfilling all types,
more evident.

5. Gifts, as now more large graces, and effusion of Gods Spirit upon all flesh
promised.

6. Duration, that till the Messiah, this is to the end of the world, and for
ever, as the Priesthood.

7. Obligation of that to the whole law, Ceremonial, Moral, and Judicial,
this the Moral only, the others vanished.

8. Amplitude, that in the people of the Jews only, this of all people, all
faithful, to the ends of the earth.

9. Priesthood, that of Aaron the type; this of Christ the true high Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedes. And so likewise in the Penmen of it, the
manner and other like circumstances, of which hereafter.

18. How are they then called, as distinguished.
The Law and the Gospel; the covenant of Works, and the covenant of Grace; or
in regard of the Record in which it is registered the Old and New Testament.

19 But had not they the Gospel?
Yes, as the joyful promise of the Messiah, but more obscurely, and in types
shadowed, even in the law it self; but the Law most plainly and expressly
delivered, preached and testified; and in that regard the Law bare the
denomination of both: And so with us, the Gospel and revealing of the Messiah,
most evidently exhibited, in whom all shadows are vanished, and all types
fulfilled, and a great part of the Law abrogated; though the best part, the
moral Law still in force, and with us the Gospel yet, bears now the
denomination of the whole, and so we call it, The new Covenant, or covenant of
Grace.

20. What is intended then by the Covenant of God in general?
That his gracious favor, whereby he has condiscended to stoop so low to the
consideration of mankind, and our poor estate, as to give us his gracious
promise to be our God, and grant us his graces and blessings, on our condition
to be his people, and yield him our faith and obedience.

21. What are the parts then of it, and parties?
The parties to it, God and his people, or servants, the parts of the covenant
are in respect Of God, his gracious promise To be their God, and defend them.
To give them His graces, Mercy and forgivenes.
To send them his blessings
Them, their humble promise of Faith to believe in him. Obedience to his will.
To be his people, and honor him



22. How is this Covenant made known, or extant?
It is made known and revealed unto us from the beginning in the Word of God,
and so extant.

23. What Instrument or Record of it?
The Old and New Testament, so called, as in them the word and promises of God
contained, testified, recorded and exemplified for us, so named the Scripture,
and Bible, or Book of God.

24. How called Instruments?
As legally composed, the Author and other parties, Penmen, signing, sealing,
delivery, and witnesses, all in due form, as by law required.

25. How called Testaments?
As the will of the Testator, who thereby appoints what he will have done
after his death, or departure, by his heirs and executors that possess his
substance.

26. But God cannot die, how is it then his Will or Testament?
Nor Christ, as speaking properly, for though he died according to the flesh,
yet he lives unto eternity, but as departed from earth, and gone into heaven,
or retired into that his holy habitation, and leaving the earth to the sons
of men, thus declares his will, and giving so large legacies, as all earthly
substance and heavenly blessings, requires his Executors and overseers, his
Vicegerents, and other legatories his people to whom it pertains to see his
will performed.

27. Who the Author in the old Testament?
God the promiser or testator, who does covenant with his people to be their
God, and gives them his mercies and blessings, upon their condition or
covenant to keep his commandments.

28. Who the other party?
His people, the people of the Jews, who enter into Covenant with him, to
observe his Laws.

29. Who the Penmen hereof?
God himself, and other public Notaries.

30. How God himself?
Most especially both in writing, and dictating the principal part thereof,
the Autograph of his own hand, the ten Commandments. Dictate, Of his own
mouth. Of his Spirit by the Prophets and other holy Men, all -- Other holy
Scriptures and writings.



31. Who the other public Notaries?
Both Moses his servant, the recorder and publisher of his Law and testimonies;
the Prophets his officers to write out, and interpret the same; as his Temple,
the Court, to lay up and preserve those Records.

32. How were they signed?
By his own hand in the Mount, set to the Commandments the substance of all
other holy Writings, by his mighty hand of power, in miracles, and the Spirit
of prophecy, evidence of the finger of God.

33. How delivered?
To Moses and the Fathers under the cloud, and in the whole old Law;

received also, by faith and hope
of things not seen.

34. How sealed?
By his seal of his Spirit, showing his graces in those tokens, or outward and
visible signs and seals, his Sacraments, that represent his graces, as in
some sort engraven in them.

35. What Sacraments?
Circumcision especially, and the Passover, though there were also diverse
other holy signs and sacrifices.

36. What graces?
In Circumcision, the rooting out and supplaning of sin. The Pascall Lamb, or
the Passover, the nourishment in the Church. Strengthening of the soul.
Deliverance out of danger, and passing from Egypt to Canaan, so from the tent
on earth, to a Temple in heaven, from an earthly to a heavenly Tabernacle.



37. What witnesses?
A cloud of witnesses, all the Prophets and holy men that had been since the
world began, to whom the promise still made or confirmed.

38. Who was the Mediator in that?
Christ one, and the same for ever, though Moses the type of Christ, then seen
in his stead, to stand between God and the people, and making atonement; yet
Christ so in Moses, and to the Fathers in many types and shadows showed, and
to be seen, and Mediator for all flesh, with the Father now eternally.

39. Who the Author in the new Testament?
God the Father also, in Christ the Mediator, promiser and testator of his
mercies and blessings to all his people that observe his Law.

40. Who the other party?
All the faithful, his people on their parts, promising to observe his Laws,
especially that royal Law of love, by which known to be his Disciples; as
which is the sum, and fulfilling of the whole Law.

41. Who the Dictator of it?
God himself, speaking in Christ, and Christ himself dictating both that

Golden rule of Prayer.

Royal Law of Love.

All other necessary ordinances to be observed by his; and confirming of the
old that were to be confirmed.

42. Who the Penmen?
Both Christ himself in the great letters of his most holy life and actions,
and bloody characters on the cross and of his passion, black letters of his
death and burial, as well as glorious and golden letters of his resurrection,
ascension, and sending his Spirit to the comfort of his, and writing his Laws
in the hearts of the faithful, besides other holy Penmen, and public
notaries also.

43. Who were they?
The holy Evangelists, Apostles and Apostolical Writers recording it by the
assistance of one and the same Spirit, the Enditer, who also testifies the
same by continual witnesses, and evidence of power unto salvation to the Elect.

44. How signed?
With his blood on the cross, on Mount Calvarie.

45. How delivered?
To his Church, the Apostles for them, and their successors, to preach and
teach, interpret and keep the same for the use of the faithful to the worlds
end.

46. What witnesses?
Besides a cloud of witnesses then present, and eyewitnesses of it, thousands
else of glorious Martyrs and Confessors throughout all ages, testifying the
invincible truth, with utmost endeavors, and dearest blood, in the power and
evidence of Gods Holy Spirit.

47. How sealed?
By the same Spirit to the hearts and souls of the Elect; in those visible
signs or seals, the Sacraments, representing his graces, as engraven in them,
and presenting or conveighing and confirming the same to their souls.

48. What graces in the Sacraments?
Answerable to their nature the promise in the Covenant, and intent of the
former Sacraments.

In Baptism the Washing of the soul from sin. Admission into the Church. New
birth and life in Christ.
Lords Supper, the Nourishment of us in the Church. Strengthening our souls in
the faith. Feeding on Christ the bread of life, and in remembrance of his death
a mortifying our earthly members by repentance, and a quickening of us in the
Spirit, in him raised from death to life, and by him living.



49. What is this order of this doctrine of the Sacraments to the rest?
After the doctrine of faith and obedience, in the Creed and the Commandments;
and prayer set forth the means of obtaining grace, to obey and please God the
better, come these seals of grace in the last place, that after such teaching
of the former, and apprehension of them by the intellectual powers of the
soul, the goodness of God descending, even to the comfort of sense,
confirms his graces, and promise of them, by the use and acceptance of
visible signs and elements for tokens, and pledges of the same.

50. How is the number so few as two?
Because it pleased the Lord so to appoint it, and it is also sufficient, and
fittest as Being Baptism, our admission into the Church. The Lords Supper our
strengthening and maintenance in the same.


51. How is it that five more have been added?
Not so rightly or properly, but rather against the course and consent of best
authority and antiquity.

52. How say you so?
Because only these two are so especially in Scripture, acknowledged, by our
Savior appointed, and generally received, and by all required to be received;
and these only properly in all respects, the others but improperly, and not by
all required to be received, or acknowledged Sacraments.

53. How appears this?
For that besides Scripture, the ancient Fathers and chief Doctors general
consent, and confess only these two, properly so intended.

As S. Cyprian, lib. 2. Epist. 2. ad Stephanum: Si utroque sacramento nasc
antur, they may be thoroughly sanctified, and Sons of God.

As Saint Augustine de doctrina Christiana, lib. 3. cap 9. pauca promult is
facta facilima, etc. the Lord and his Apostles delivered few for many, easily
to be done, divine to be understood, and pure to be observed, to wit the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper.

As Saint Ambrose, Tertullian, Justine Martyr, and diverse others confessing the
same, and the others not to be so properly Sacraments, nor capable of a
Sacraments true definition in the right sense.

54. What is a Sacrament then?
An outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace given unto us,
ordained by Christ, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a pledge to
assure us thereof.

55. What here to be observed?
1. The matter, outward sensible singe and audible form of words, accedat
verbum, ad elementum and fit sacramentum: Inward spiritual grace represented,
and to be understood.

2. The Author ordained by Christ, for difference from the Sacraments of the
old Law, and those improperly so called, not having his institution.

3. The end of it, in respect of the use and benefit, twofold.

1. As a means whereby we receive grace. 2. As a pledge to assure us thereof.
56. How is it found in the Sacraments?
In the I. True Sacraments expressly, in 1. Baptism, the 1. Matter, Outward
sign, element; And form of words; Inward grace.
2. Author Christ himself, and his institution, Go teach and baptize in the
name of etc. 3. End, means, pledge,
and seal of grace.
2. Lords Supper the 1. Matter, in the outward sign and form of words, grace.
2. Author Christ himself, and his institution. 3. Ends, a means, pledge and
seal of grace.

II. Others not so.


57. How show you it particularly of them?
In Matrimony, Neither Author Christ, but institution of God in Paradise, and
in and by nature, not grace. Matter, no visible sign prescribed, or form of
words, especially by our Savior appointed. End, Not pertaining to all, but
only who have not the gift of continency, may marry. Not means or seal, or
pledge of any grace thereby promised or obtained, but a holy estate of life in
all that godlily enter into it, and necessary for some, but as Durand says, to
speak strictly or properly no Sacrament.



58. What of confirmation?
As says Alexander Hales, par. 4. q. 24. neither did the Lord institute it,
nor his Apostles, but in the Council of Melda ordained.

So for the Author, not Christ, nor his institution. Matter, No visible sign,
or form of words prescribed. End, not a seal, or pledge of grace promised or
appointed, only of good use of comfort, as a holy Ceremony when rightly used,
and not so precisely and properly a Sacrament.


59. What of extreme unction?
It was but temporary, and in use of the gift of miracles and healing, and with
them rather ceased, then continued, as having neither

1. The Author Christ, or his institution, but Apostolical use and tradition
whiles it lasted, or was truly in use.

2. The matter, no prescript form of words, especially by our Savior, though
the Apostles used the ceremony.

3. The end, no such general use and benefit in all times and places, or
promise annexed, as a seal, means, or pledge of grace.

60. How of penance?
Though a most godly duty, and to be performed of all, as repentance, faith,
and obedience are required of all, yet not as a Sacrament, instituted in the
new Law, or by Christ, but a holy duty, and both under the old and new
covenant, equally practiced,

So neither having Author, Christ, or his institution particularly for the
beginning of it. matter, No prescript outward sign, or form of words, from his
ordinance, or inward part.
Or end, instituted for a seal, or pledge, though a means of grace, and so not
so properly a Sacrament as a holy duty.


61. How of Orders, or Ordination?
Though we find both the institution and express form of a sacred
ceremonious action therein, in the new Testament, used by our Savior, and his
Apostles; and form of words, and necessity of perpetuity to the worlds end, for
the good of the whole Church, and that Calvin's institutions, lib. 4. cap. 19.
Sect. 31. and cap. 14. Sect. 20. allow it in some sense to be a Sacrament, and
we cannot well deny it; yet not accounted an ordinary Sacrament, in usum
totius Ecelesiae, to be used by all the members, though for the good of all;
and so not a sacrament as universal, or pertaining to all; but peculiar to one
estate of men, and consequently though a holy ceremony, not reckoned among
these chief, but rather to be referred to those secondarily and less properly
called sacraments.

62. How came these other to be so accounted Sacraments?
1. By means of S. Jerome translation, naming them or some of them so.

2. By means of the Fathers also, calling them so, in a large or less proper
sense.

3. By means of the number of seven, as a sacred number, and much affected by
many Ancients.

63. And is not this sufficient?
No: For this we might have, by this means, not only seven, but many more,
as many other holy actions, ceremonies and other things, have been called
Sacraments,

As 1. Sacramentum Martyrii, by S. Ierom ad Oceanum, Martyrdom.

2. Sacramentum Crucis, by S. Augustine, the Cross a Sacrament.

3. Sacramentum Ligni, the helve of the hatchet that Elisha got the Iron out of
the water with, by Tertullian.

4. Sacramentum Religionis, Religion, and the Military oath, Sacraments called;
besides many other.

64. What shall we then do herein?
To consider the definition, and thereby to find which are truly the
Sacraments; or the chief, and of chief use in the Church, and therefore (...),
so called,

As for the Author, if by men, or their institution, and not Christ's, not
properly Sacraments. Matter, wanting either outward sign of Element, or
action. Prescript form of words and ceremony
Inward grace, propounded, promised, and so sealed.
End, not general, Use, benefit, of promise annexed, pledge, seal, or means
of grace. Or not by all to be in convenient time used, want of any, or
especially many, or all of these, utterly destroy, or abate the true nature of
a true Sacrament, as we saw before in marriage, legal Ceremonies, the brazen
Serpent, the Rock in the wilderness, and such like things, though an outward
sign, and inward graces, in some sort represented, yet without Christ's
institution, not properly Sacraments of the new Covenant; yea, and though by
Christ and his Apostles ordained, but for other uses, as of comfort, or to be
used of some persons only, and the like, or not for a seal of the main grace,
of the covenant, to confirm it, though otherwise perhaps signs of great
graces, not so properly Sacraments, as these two, Baptism, and the Supper of
the Lord, which have all these parts, conditions and prerogatives, both
author, matter, manner, end, and general use and necessity.



65. Must all of necessity then use the true Sacraments?
Yes: And therefore ordained, as the general means and seals of grace, to
all under the covenant, and so appointed, the ordinary pledges of the same,
though God who is above means, can save without means, yet we are to use the
ordinary means by him appointed, and not neglect the same, if it may be had;
for so it were a contempt of God, otherwise we may be held excused: So
generally necessary thus, ordinarily appointed to all, if they may be had;
otherwise not of that simple and absolute necessity, as if without them,
impossible or no salvation.

66. How many and what are the parts of a Sacrament then, set forth in the
definition of them?
Two: the outward and visible sign, and the inward and spiritual grace; where
is to be considered,

1. The Relatum, the outward sign.

2. Corellatum, the inward grace, signed or signified.

3. Relation of the sign, to the thing signified, representing the same, and
presenting it to the soul that receives it by faith.

67. How show you this then more fully?
Sufficiently well, or amply and plainly enough to be seen, in each of the
Sacraments handled particularly.

SECT. 2. Of BAPTISM.
Of Baptism and the several parts. thereof with their resemblance and relation
of the one to the other explicated. and considered the efficacy and virtue of
baptism in the renewing of us by being thereby received into the covenant of
grace, and engrafted into Christ, being so washed in this Laver of
regeneration, and what is required of the person baptized, viz. Repentance and
Faith, whereby is here briefly observed the descriptions of them, and how they
are to be found or considered in the infants that are baptized, reason why
Infants are baptized taken from Christ and his Apostles doings, primitive times
practice, as well as from the succeeding of it to circumcision and the practice
of the Jewish Church in that very point like ours, as it is else so Catholickly
rereceived, Elder persons baptized: who may baptize, and the several sorts of
baptism, with the difference between S. John the Baptist, and Christ's baptism
so by him instituted, ends of baptism, and why not to be iterated, and here
the practice of primitive times in this point declared, and manner of their
ordering of their Churches, fitted as it were to that purpose, to have that and
all other holy actions decently performed: whence the several and distinct
places observed answering to the several sorts of persons and their degrees in
the bosom of the Church, in so comely order from all antiquity to us in the
form and structure of our Church, or from the platform of them very lively
representing to us the times practice, and founders intentions may mind us of
the same, and teach its what order and decency, or other respects of reverence
before God, and to God and all holy and consecrated things to him for his own,
and to them for his sake, were fit to be observed, and by all dutiful sons of
God and the Church, religiously ought to be performed, as by all godly and
religious persons of all ages, and devout Christians have ever been accustomea
and never by any unless godless, profane, or graceless mereticks, and
factious Sectaries detracted or denied, so the degrees of the persons, places,
and things consecrated, as well as their consecration here instanced both in
the Jewish Church and ours, and thence issuing. difference and degrees of the
reverentiall respects to them usually exhibited both by us and them all which
proved from holy Scripture and constant and continued practice of the people of
God, and more illustrated by the dictates of natural justice equity and
reason; and so clearly vindicated from all show of idolatry, or superstition,
but the neglect and contempt hereof by the factious producing miserable and
wretched effects, both to the dishonor of God, and disorder in religion,
Church, State and government wheresoever, and such unreverence used and their
profaneness suffered to pass un^^^* or uncorrected, so the order In ours and
the ancient Christian Church, and why so necessary to be observed hereby.
sufficiently explained, and against all sacrilegious gainsayers, too commonly
palpably found to be such plainly demonstrated, and the name of Altar, toward
which such reverence is used, and even anciently prescribed and enjoined,
whence by such perhaps more despitefully handled, from their calumnies and
aspertions vindicated, and to the true use of it according to the Churches
ancient idiome asserted and restored, and so both Churches, Altar, and other
decent ceremenies in, and about the same in our Church retained, showed in
general consonant to the practice of all approved antiquity, and in particular
of the Greek and Eastern Churches. thus In that point with our co^senting to
be reconciled, And for close to this Sacrament of baptism, certain critical
disquisitions on the name of God so ordinarily used by us in our common
discourses and writing useful as more solemnly in the profession of our
religious duty and observance or other acts of highest consequence, as
especially in the administration of the sacrament of baptism and ceremony
thereof. whence also by the way other like observations on the mystery of
iniquity, and name of Antichrist, the Beast and Whore of Babylon, in such
mystical manner with much anigmaticall obsecurity, by numbers, and else
expressed or rather unveyled and involved, so in the first place, the number of
the heads and horns of the Beast considered, as leaaing way to the number of
the name of Antichrist, being 666. with the illustration thereof from the name
and nature of the Fiend, calling himself Legion, the very power at that time of
that armed Pagan impiety, that did afflict and oppress the Church and Saints
of God; the application whereof may be to to any the like times and occasions
or oppressions, referred and so lastly, concluding with the Nomen
Tetragrammaton, so usually pronounced Jehovah, but corruptly in stead of Jaho,
proved by the Text of the Bible, and other authorities, which might perhaps
more regularly and orderly be by Iahvah, yet all vowels, to come nearest to the
former sound though less rightly so as it is by some intended.

1. What is the outward sign in Baptism?
Water, wherein the person baptized is dipped or sprinkled with, in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, etc.

2. What herein to be noted?
1. The Matter, or Element, Water, used so of old, as is to be seen in

1. The leprous and unclean. 2. Naaman the Syrian.

3. The blind man sent to wash in Siloam, Ioh. 9. 7. 4. John baptizing in
Jordan.

11. The Action: 1. Dipping in Summer, or warmer Countries. 2. Sprinkling in
colder Clymats, or weather. 3. Or for the tenderness and danger of the infant.
4. Form of words prescribed in the name, etc. of which outward sign, and parts
thereof, none ought to be omitted or altered, which would make the Baptism
else, be no Baptism; and, which rightly once performed, ought not to be
iterated.

4. What the inward grace?
The cleansing of the soul from sin, by sprinkling of Christ's blood in the
power of the Trinity whence a death to sin, and a new birth to
righteousness, is wrought in us.

5. Whence is it? Or what reason of this?
Because being by nature borne in sin, and the children of wrath, we are
hereby made the children of grace.

6. What is herein to be considered?
1. The parts resembling one another, the Relata and Corclata.

2. Resembling our representation in the parts;

3. The relation and presentation of the thing signified to the soul.

4. The effect and efficacy, or virtue of the Sacrament, in the death to sin,
new birth to righteousness
And manner and reason thereof explained: For whereas by nature, etc.

7. Which are the parts resembling one another?
The 1. Water, representing the blood of Christ. 2. Sprinkling thereof on the
body, the washing the soul. 3. Action of the Priest, The operation of Gods
Spirit, Blessing the action.
4. Form of words prescribed Power of the Word, and virtue, of the Holy
Trinity, promised.



8 How distinguished into Relata and Corelata?
The 1. Water, 2. Sprinkling, 3. Action, 4. Words
The outward part of Relata to the Blood of Christ Washing the soul. Operation
of the Spirit. Power of God,
to the inward part, or corelata.

9. Which the Relation?
The representation that the parts have between themselves one to another, as
water to the blood of Christ; the washing the body, to the cleansing the soul;
the action of the Priest, and words prescribed, to the operation of Gods Spirit
and power in the grace and blessing proposed and promised.

10. How the presentation of it to the soul?
In those outward Emblemes, as seals, showing the grace by faith, throughout
the whole life, apprehended and exercised by the power and operation of Gods
Spirit, making it profitable to the soul.

11. What the effect, or efficacy and virtue thereof?
1. The death to sin, being baptized into the death of Christ, and the soul
so washed in his blood, made clean, and dying unto sin, that is, crucified in
us, as we unto it.

2 The new birth unto righteousness, as being baptized and buried with Christ
in his death, we are also raised up in him to newness of life, and
sanctification.

12. What is intended herein?
1. Our mortification of sin, and the old man, in all the corrupt lusts of the
flesh.

2. Our vivification in the Spirit, or of the new man, Christ in us, by the
power of his grace and Spirit, that so brings forth in us,

Our justification by The merit of his death, Imputation of his righteousness.


Sanctification by Our new birth raised up in him. Our new life, going forward
by grace, in holiness of living.


13. How is this explained?
By the opposition of our former estate to this, as we were Born in sin, and
the children of wrath by nature in old Adam. Dead in sin, dying to grace,
Damnati antequam nati, and having the image Of God o^literate, and blotted out
of of our souls. The devil imprinted therein, being
without all Grace, Justification, or, Sanctification.



And being in this case, have by the mercy of God this favor showed us, to
have the means offered of faith, and the seal and pledge, the Sacrament,
whereby we are made children of grace, Renewed, Justified, Sancti^ied,
in Christ by his Spirit to God.

14. How is this Renewing wrought?
By the power of the Spirit of God, and grace, which is given, whereof the
Sacrament is the pledge and seal, and also the ordinary means whereby
conveyed unto us, and we receive it, as many as have the power given, to become
the sons of God, which is seen by the effect Of a 1. New life, 2. New
creature, 3. New birth, 4. Newness of affections, and 5. Souls, as newborn
babes desiring the sincere milk of the word, having put off the old man, and
all carnal affections of sin.


15. But who is so renewed?
Every one that is born of water and the holy Ghost, which is the regeneration
herein expressed; whereby the s^ing of sin is plucked out, both in regard of
the sin and punishment, though sin it self not quite extinguished; which is
never quite abolished, till death; but broken so, that it reigns not, only
remains as a rebellious head, or poisonous root, to exercise our faith and
graces whiles we live here.

16. But is this done in us by the very act of Baptism or of the Baptizer?
No: For there is also required a right disposition of the person in faith, and
within the covenant of grace, and then it does convey grace, confirm the
heart, seal the covenant, purging the conscience, and so effectual to the
faithful: otherwise, as in those that came to John's baptism, they may remain
a generation of vipers, whiles they keep themselves out of the covenant by
their malice, impiety, and hypocrisy, whereby they mock God, though they take
the sign of the covenant on them: and so much the rather mockers, as taking
the sign, and neglecting the grace.

17. What is then required in persons to be baptized?
Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and faith, whereby they believe the
promises made to them in that Sacrament.

18 What is Repentance?
A turning from sin, and a returning to God, wherein many steps or degrees to
be considered,

19. Which are they?
In the 1. Turning from sin, a Knowledge of sin, one step by faith. Sense or
feeling of sin, two steps in grace. Horror of sin, for the ugliness before
God. Shame of sin, for the filthiness in it self. Sorrow and grief of sin,
for the displeasing of God thereby. Resolution to forsake it, and lead a new
life.
2. Returning to God, by 1. Forsaking sin. 2. Taking a new course, and leading
a new life. 3. Constancy in that intended course. 4. Perseverance, which only
attaineth the promise, and crown our blessing.



19. What is the fruit of Repentance?
A continual renewing of the force and efficacy of baptism to the soul,
which though it self may not be iterated, yet it is thus continually
refreshed, and the virtue thereof renewed in us; and so is both effectual in
the receiving baptism, and ever after, both in The 1. Knowing and
acknowledging of sin, the bar of grace, whereby to obtain forgiveness at
Gods hand, and have the bar moved. 2. Sorrowing for, and forsaking of Sin,
whereby to obtain grace in the power and virtue of the Sacrament. 3. New
intended course of leading a new life, in obtaining some degree or measure of
sanctification, either of which is sometimes called repentance, and in all
three together, the perfection thereof, and are else styled Confession,
Contrition, Reformation.



20. What is Faith?
My assurance in respect of God, of the Truth of his promises, Stability of
them in Christ. The head and corner stone.
my self, of the Application of them to me. Forgiveness of my sins.



21. What is the seat of Faith?
The heart: For in the heart the man believes to justification, Romans 10. 14.
And so Christ dwells in the heart by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17.

22. What is the ground of faith?
The word and promise of God, giving assurance to the soul, because he is true
that promised.

23. What is the object of faith?
Things not seen, but apprehended by the soul for the truths sake of him that
promised, as forgiveness of sins, salvation, and everlasting life.

24. How is use to be made of it?
By application to my self of these things, that for his Son and promise
sake, I shall be assured of salvation, and my sins forgiven; and so blessed,
as whose unrighteousness forgiven, and whose sin covered.

25. What condition required?
Repentance or confession and forsaking sin, Prove. 28. 13. and so faith
beginning repentance, is also perfected by repentance, and wrought, and working
together, are either for the perfection of other, and the graces are thereby
seen, whereof the Sacraments are the seals.

26. How do we then need them?
As the necessary conditions, whereby applied and where with the virtue and
efficacy of the Sacrament is transfused into the soul, that is not else
sufficiently well disposed to the receiving thereof without them.

27. Why are Infants then baptized when by reason of their tender age they
cannot perform them?
Yes, they do perform them in such convenient sort as is required, and
stands them sufficiently instead in that their tender age.

28. In what manner?
By their sureties, who promise and vow them, both in their names, which when
they come to age themselves are bound to perform,

29. But is that sufficient?
It is, as may be shown, and confirmed by sundry good and valuable reasons,
taken from

Both 1. Circumcision, the forerunner of it. 2. The institution, and action of
Christ himself. 3. The doctrine of the Apostles. 4. The practice of them, and
primitive times. 5. Reason it self, and the intent of the covenant.


What is the ground of the reasons?
Because, as the Covenant was made, not only with Abraham, but with him and his
seed, so the seal pertains to whomsoever the Covenant does, and the children
being so within the Covenant of grace, the s^ale pertains also unto them,
especially this that succeeds circumcision.

30. How as it succeeds circumcision?
Because, that being with them the admission into the Church, and seal of the
Covenant (as this is to us) and the foretunner of this, was commanded the eight
day, and for the same reason, this may be administered to an Infant, being in
the same state and condition with us, as theirs with them in every respect.

31. How in respect of the institution?
Because Christ commanding them to teach, and baptize all Nations, as Abraham
and his seed, and sons together before, so the fathers and their children, now
to be received into the new Covenant, and not the fathers alone, but the
children with, and in the estate, persons, and condition of the father, as
whiles they are in minority, they are accounted a part of him, and so where
whole households baptized, and Christ commanded the little children to be
brought unto him, gave them his blessing, and reproved them that would have
kept them from him.

32. How by the doctrine of the Apostles?
Because as Christ receiving them, and testifying that theirs is the Kingdom
of heaven, the Apostles also teach, as Saint Peter treating of Baptism, and
remission of sins by Christ, Acts 2. 39. shows the promise is made to them,
and their children, and Saint Paul that in, and to believing parents the
children are sanctified, 1 Cor. 7. 14. that were else unclean, but now are
holy, and what is this but within the covenant, and capable of that seal of
grace especially, as also the practice was?

33. How the practice of them?
That whole households baptized, as the household of Stephanus and Lydia baptized
by Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 16. and the Jailer, all that belonged to him, Acts 16.
33. and so has been the practice since, of al times of receiving children to
Baptism, especially of believing and faithful parents.

34. What reason for it?
Because there is so near a relation between the parent and children, that
what the estate of the parent is, such is the estate of the child reputed to
be, till it come to years of discretion; nay it is taken for a very part, or
limb of the parent, and so according to reason, and the words, and intent of
the Covenant, within compass of it, and capable of the seal.

35. But they want actual faith and repentance?
Though in their single persons they do, yet as in the persons of their
fathers, and godfathers that represent them, they may be said to have it; and
so in all respects capable of the seal; as also we see an estate assured in
Law to the father and child, by some ceremony used, and the child capable of
it, though not yet capable of understanding to know what is done.

36. How is it added that when they come to are, they are bound to perform?
Because though in infancy, before they knew or could do good or evil, their
parents, estate and condition was reckoned theirs, yet come to years of
discretion actually required of them, as distinct persons of themselves, and
now in the estate of them, Ezeck. 18. 20. that every ones sins on his own
head, and required every one to live by his own faith, and if allowed in
nonage a beneficial hand to receive a benefit or blessing, must also find,
being come to age, an officious hand to perform a duly or condition.

37. When is this chiefly shown or declared?
At confirmation, when the godfathers having seen the child in the rudiments
of Religion well instructed from that particular engagement at the font (with
the parents in some sort) may seem discharged thenceforth, only in common
duties of Christianity obliged: as the child is then publicly by profession
of his own faith, with the duties thereof charged, the others exonerated;
answerable to which was that order of the Jews, to have the child at thirteen
years of age, for Bar-mitzuah into their number, communion and Synagogue as it
were admitted; and thenceforth to answer for, and charged with his own sins,
as the father was before; whence the father with great joy, then, calling ten
men for witnesses of the child's instruction, and sufficiency in the knowledge
of their Law, Rites, and Religion, with praising God for it, and praying for
his continuance, and proficiencie therein, desires such his admission, and
himself to be discharged, this in all chiefest respects, thus nearly suiting
with our confirmation, as aforesaid, as it is appointed to be used.

38 Is this the generally received doctrine?
Yes, and confirmed by all ancient Fathers, and never opposed, unless by the
Anabaptists, and giddy-headed Sectaries, that are commonly content with
nothing, that is not new ^angled, and of their own broaching and invention.

38. How in such as are of years converted?
Then, as in whole Nations conversions, all they of discretion bound to make
actual profession of their faith, so all such were demanded their faith, and
how they believed, and making profession of their faith, I believe in God, etc.
and also their repentance, and desire of Baptism, they were admitted and
baptized, and whose children, if they had any under age, were baptized with
them, or which they had after in their infancy.

39. Who may baptize?
Those that had the commission, the Apostles and their successors, to whom it
was said, Go teach, and baptize, etc.

40. How of others that do it?
Understood a presumption, to go against, or beyond our Saviors commission.

41. How many sorts of Baptism?
According to the parts of it, so distinguished into the 1. External Baptism
in the water, the symbol of the other. 2. Internal of the soul, and that
twofold, In the blood of Christ to remission of sins. Of the Spirit to the
souls renovation by his graces.



And others make a fourefold Baptism.

Either Fluminis that of the water, Matthew. 3. so John Baptist. Flaminis that of
the Spirit, so Christ's Baptism. Sanguinis of Martyrdom 10. Mark 38. Luminis,
sine doctrinae, Acts 18. 35. and 19. 4


Whereby the Baptism understood, the doctrine of John: The two first, properly
so called, the latter figuratively, as also the Baptism of the Fathers, in the
cloud and in the sea, 1 Cor. 10. 2.

43. What difference between Christ's and John's Baptism?
The same in substance, and the end or effect, admission into Gods favor and
grace, and to repentance, and newness of life to the faith of Christ that was
to come, but differing in the circumstances,

1. Of the time, as that before Christ exhibited, or that he had fulfilled all
things, this in the full complement of grace.

2. Of the manner of John's Baptism into Christ's to come, and preparing the way
by repentance, this of Christ's into his death as already come.

3. Of the Ministry of John, the forerunner, this in the plenitude of the
power of the Messiah.

4. Of the reference that the first had to the complement in Christ's person,
performance and baptism.

And so he said, I indeed baptize you with water, but there is one among you
that baptiseth with the holy Ghost, and with fire.

44. Does not John hereby then more distinguish them?
No, not in respect of the substance, but only the circumstance of his
Ministry, compared with the fullness and power of Christ, in which his was to
have complement, and receive efficacy from the person and office of Christ, so
his was inchoatively, Christ's absolutely, the true baptism.

45. How did they differ from the legal oblations?
Many ways, but chiefly in that those legal oblations were no admission into
the Church, as this nor seals or means of grace, but only ceremonial
clensings, of ceremonial uncleanness of the body, and outward testification
of it, whereas this is of the very actual and natural filth, and corruption
of the soul, and they might, and were often to be iterated, this as a seal of
our admission, only once administered, and they all abolished in Christ, in whom
this is founded.

46. What are the ends of Baptism?
1. The chief end the

1. Sealing of the Covenant of grace, and so the solemn testification of our
clensing by Christ's blood.

Justification, and Regeneration in newness of life.

II. The other less principal ends, as to be

1. A testification of our duty^, obedience and thankfulness.

2. A sign and symbol of our admission into the Church and Covenant, and so
in that respect not to be iterated.

3. A note of discerning us, and the members of the Church from all others.

4. A token of unity in the Church.

5. A means of gathering the Church together, and confirmation of our faith.

6. A memorial of the afflictions we must undergo in this worlds sea by the
cross.

7. An occasion also to remember our deliverance from the deluge of sin here,
as in a Noah's Ark, where though immergimur; non submergimur, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

47. Why ought not baptism to be iterated?
Because as once borne, so once newborn, and admitted into the Church and
Covenant, and though often comforted, and continually nourished and confirmed
in the Church, by the use of the other Sacrament yet this admission only once
to be used.

48. How of those that fall out of the Church?
They are renewed by repentance, wherein the force and efficacy of Baptism is
stirred up in them; and though again admitted by penitence into the visible
company of the faithful, the Church or Congregation, not understood a second
time admitted into the Covenant of grace, nor Baptism to be iterated, but the
virtue and efficacy thereof, shown by repentance, and acknowledged in that
readmission; and so we are but once borne, or newborn in the Church, though
often raised, restored, fed, and comforted; as seen especially in the often use
of the other Sacrament.

49. How has this been used and practiced in the Church?
In effect as it is now, from the very primitive times, and all antiquity, or
indeed more strictly, the doctrine of penitence, where we find, even the
Church it self so ordered and disposed, as fittest for the practice of this
godly discipline, as may be seen in the Ancryan Council, Anno 163. Can. 2. 3
4. 5 6. 7. etc Where several and distinct places observed in the Church, for
the penitents, Catechumeni, audientes, fideles, and sacerdotes, or Cleri^i, as
also the Centuriatores Mag^eb. (though no great friends to good order) are
driven to confess and note in their Cent. 3. c. 6. p. 124. in the Canons of
Gregory Bishop of Neo-Caesaria (scholar of Origin) by them cited, and the
distinct places five of them there remembered.

50. Which are they?
1. The (...), the Church porch, or near the Church door, where the penitents
humbled themselves under l^gatos lachrymas mitterent, and desired the
faithful, as they entered, to pray for them.

2. (...), the auditory within the Church, where the audientes, and behind them
the penitentes, such as were admitted a^ manuum impositionem, as it were the
first degree after penance performed.

3. (...), where the Catechumeni might hear lectionem and tractatum, and see
some rites, and place where the fideles did communicate, but not the mysteries
themselves, but were before that dismissed.

4. (...), where the fideles were allowed a more eminent place, and penitents
behind them, (after imposition of hands obtained) where they might behold and
desire the mysteries, but not yet participate, and therefore stood whiles the
fideles kneeled, to distinguish them, and signify their estate.

5. (...), by which understood, all the upper part of the Church, viz. the
whole Chauncell and Quire, where the holy mysteries celebrated, and the
communion participated, by the fideles, or faithful and believers, and
penitents when so admitted and called (...), in respect of these, for that
after penance fully performed, they were at last there again being reconciled)
received to the Sacrament.

Who before had stayed 1. At the Church door, and 2. In Auditorio, ut supra,
and 3. In (...), and gradatim ascendendo, 4. Huc admissi, and so Origin after
his fall, Extra fores, with the penitents, and diverse worthy men, as holy
Natolius, who prayed them that entered the Church, in token of his contrition,
Calcate me tanquam salem insipidum; Philip the first Christian Emperor, not
admitted but by degrees, having stood, Loco penitentium, as Theodosius ejected,
and feign to do so, Theodor. lib. 5. c. 17. and some even Priests, after lapse
and penance, no further admitted but to Communio Laicorum, which was distinct
from Communio Sacerdotum. So Trophimus a Priest, and Novatus, as Eusebius. 6. 4.
and 3. Cyprian 4. Ep. 2. the strict discipline of those primitive and purest
times.


51. Were there then so diverse degrees in the Church?
Yes, as we see many degrees ^'re admit^ance to the Sacrament of baptism and
the Eucharist; and more and greater probation evidently, e're into holy orders.

52. In what manner?
Recorded in Histories, the Churches Monuments, and holy Fathers, thus
distinguished in their Classes.

1. The Educati, in their Schools, where the Catechistae frequented for
education of youth, and teaching converts near the Churches.

2. Audientes, admitted to hear the expounding, and Homilies in the Church,
where even heretics, heathen, or any might come to be instructed.

3. Catechumeni, who taking a liking to Christian Religion, and intending to be
baptized, had a place more honorable then the ordinary Audientes, assigned; and
might see more then they, as the place of the Fideles communion, and Adyta
barred from strangers; the ceremony of whose admission, was, Signum crucis in
front, as Saint Augustine teaches, Catechumeni non renati per sacrum baptisma,
sol^m in u^e^o Ecclesiae, per signum crucis concepti, Lib 2. and 4. de Symbolo
ad Catech. So he faith, Credo and signat se, signo crucis.

4. Competentes, who sufficiently instructed, and desiring ba^tisme, had
therefore given their ^ames to the Bishop, who so taught it, might say the
Creed, but not the Lords prayer, quia nondum renati per baptis nec filii
dicendi; the ceremony of whose admission to baptism, was thus, On Ashwednesdav
in Sack^loth and Ashes (unde dies cinerum dictus) beginning with the Fast and
prayer, forty days before Easter, Iejuniis and orationibus expi^ti. On
Palme-Sunday instructed in Baptisterio, (then only used ordinarily, but at that
time of the year) on Easter Eve, so commanded, they did publicly say the
Creed, and professin^ that faith, were baptized, semel vel^ter intincti, ut in
nomine 3. personarum, in earum, vel unius Dei memoriam, and so then with
baptism signo crucis muniti, (being of ^^ll age) received also confirm^tion.

5. Int^ncti, Neophyti, or Tyrones, so baptized, they might learn and say the
Lords prayer, and not before, and were publicly to rehea^se it on
Low-Easter-Sunday, and using whit^ garments, till that Dominica in albis
(thence so called) were then admitted to see and partake of the holy mysteries.

6. Fideles, they were thence forward accounted, and of these only, and no^ of
the Intincti, Neophyti, Catechumeni, or others, might any be, to holy orders,
and (not without great exploration of their virtues) to be Deacons, Priests or
Bishops admitted.

53. Was this order so strictly then observed?
Yes a^^u^edly, and as for the Abstenti, o^ Excammunicati poenitentes, ordinary
Audientes, Competentes, and Cat^chumeni, the former excluded the Church, those
last might not come near, or see the most sacred mysteries which were
celebrated,

In Sacrario, or Secretorio, as some mean it, the innermost or uppermost part
of the Church, and severed from the rest, resembling as it were, the Sanctum
Sanctorum of the Jews, that was resembled by the Adyta of the Gentiles.

Not in Auditorio, or the body of the Church; as some have dreamed, though
there too, be, tribunal Ecclesiae, the Pew and P^lpit, unde Evangelii praecept
a leguntur, Cypr. lib. 4. Ep. 5. This most apparent out of all Authors,
Councels, and Fathers, that mention the Sacrarium, Secretorium, Presbyterium,
and Cancellos, within which they were most religiously and solemnly celebrated,
and with such retirement for their majesty and holiness reserved, that not
lawful for many of the former sorts so much as to see them, as before related,
and as we find in Numeritius the Emperor, repulsed by Bishop Babylas, who but
desired, per transenna^ in mysteria Christianorum inspicere, prohibited,
contaminatis oculis ea spectare, denied with eyes de^iled with Idols, to behold
the divine mysteries: and if the Catechumeni saw (casu aliquo secreta) by any
chance, those mysteries, (not the Table only) they were straight to be
baptized, without staying (the ordinary time) till Easter, as writes
Albaspinus, lib. 2. observat. c. 2.

54. But some have transgressed anciently against those both Orders and Decorum
in the Church.
And as anciently corrected by the godly Bishops, Councels, and their Canons
confirming these things, and therein lively depainting the manners of
Heretics and Schismati^k^s of both their and our times, as learned Tertullian
describing mores haereticoru^ and schismaticoru^, with their confusion of all
things, as nearly touches those with us that deal so confusedly, neglecting
such good order, and all antiquity, making so little difference, or having no
better respect to sacred things, as if the holy Table, and reading Pew,
Chancell and lower end of the Church, Altar and Belfrey, were scarce worthy to
be distinguished; the end or cunning of those that thus turn out all good
order and distinction, as our late Schismatickes and Puritans, that orders and
degrees taken away, they may hand over head, suddenly leap or step over all to
the highest place; a quick way of preferment: or at least to have all
rowly-powly, hail-fellow well met, and sit cheek by jowle (like mother Zebedees
sons) with Christ in his Kingdom, their knees being too stiff to kneel at
the communion, or neck and back to bow toward the holy Altar, or almost to any
in authority, rather ready to kick against and countermand all or any
authority, or as if all equals at least, and all places, persons, houses of
equal holiness, degree and respect, and no difference, or no order or degree;
no Altar, or consecration; no house, place or person; holier or more to be so
respected or regarded one then other; but as Christians I hope all Priests
since a Royal Priesthood, and then all Kings too perhaps, as the Lords
anointed; so this a short cut, a quick way indeed, but to Anarchy and
confusion, and that to endless trouble: for if it might be allowed, as some
migh^ily affect and desire it, we should shortly have no Church, but a
meetingplace; and consequently no Bishop (a prime policy of theirs,) and if no
Altar, no Church, no consecration, and so no Priest, no Deacon, (a happy day
for Lecturers only but hence to be doubted) nor Fideles nor Catechumeni ^ or
other rank of Christians to be found.

55. Whence may we gather such order and degrees, and thence arising different
respects to be, or to be warranted in the holy places, persons or things?
From all approved authority and practice of antiquity, with Church and
Fathers, best Interpreters of holy Scriptures, and their meaning, as well as
from Gods own order, words, and the holy Scriptures themselves, even totidem
and expressis terminis, diverse where, if we observe them; and that both before,
since, and under the Law, testified as under the Law particularly seen in the
Courts of the Lords house, and s^verall attendants in their stations, the
sacrifici^s and others, with the Altars and sacrifices the^^ to be noted, the
Sanctum, and Sanctum Sanctorum, atrium populi, and sacerdotum, the outer and
innermost Courts, without and within the vesle, the Altar of incense, and other
sacrifices; with the Oracle, and such other types of holy and holiest things;
so a distinction of holiness in the persons, Exodus 29. Levit. 8. Numb. 8. in
their garments, Exodus 28. and 29. in their sacrifices, Levit. c. 1. c. 2. and
3. in the ornaments, Exodus 26. and 27. in the other furniture of the Temple,
some holy, most holy others, Exodus 30. 10. 29. 36. and Gershoms charge holier
then Meraryes, Coath's then Gershoms, and that of Aarons family then eithers,
the whole camp holy, and therefore no unclean person must be in this, Numb.
5. the Tabernacle holier then the Camp, and therefore the Levites alone must
pitch round about that, Numb. 1. 50. 53. the Sanctuary holier then the
Tabernacle, and therefore the Priests only must enter there, Levit. 21. 6. 22.
and into the Tabernacle without washing, but not into this, or within the
veil, Exodus 30. 20. 21. and 40. 30. the Oracle holier then all, and therefore
none but Aaron, the holiest of all to approach there, and that our once a
year, and not without Lotions, propitiatory vestments, sprinkling, and a cloud
of incense, Heb. 9. 3. 7. etc. as Solomon's Temple also showed the like
distinction and degrees in the same things, according to that of Gods own
platform in the Mount, nor were these degrees or distances before the Law
given, unobserved, for Jacob notes Bethel for a fearful place, for the
holiness and presence of God manifested to him in vision, and by that
appearing of Angels, whence flowed the consecration of it, and holy Abraham
coming near Mount Morijah, where he was to offer, makes such difference, and
distinction of the persons, places and things, I and the lad, says he, will
go yonder, the sacrificer and sacrifice to the Altar, showing the Court of the
Priests; but stay you here, designing as it were the Court of the people, and
to Moses, was it spoken from God, Exodus 3. 5. Come not nigher, put off thy
shoes, for the place, etc. as if he should say, it is holy there, by my
presence, being so near, put off ^hy shoes therefore, but come not nigher,
though thy shoes be off, it is holier here, the best respects are little
enough for the place where thou art, and too little for the place where thus
am, being ignis in rubo, Deus in carne, Christus in virgin; come now to his
Church, you must not tread on that ground with thy shoes on, nor on this,
though thy shoes be off, thy shoos are too unclean for that place, and thy
bare feet, not clean enough for this, as a learned Divine of our Church, well
notes on the place.

56. And how since the Law was it observed?
In like manner such reverentiall distance and degrees, as we may not think
Gods honor less, or his holiness and presence more alienated from his
Church, since his sending his Son in the flesh, then before, rather more
illustriously to all intents there manifested in that house, and Church of his,
where the very Pascall Lamb was sacrificed in truth and substance, by himself
then, where only in types and shadows by another, viz. Aaron, and his sons
in the Temple, especially since we see and hear that Evangelicall Prophet
among many others, so triumphantly proclaiming it, Esaias 60 1. 3. 13. etc.
concerning Christ, and his Church, and in him and it verified; Arise, shine,
thy light is come, the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, the Gentiles shall
come to thy light, Kings to the brightness o^ thy rising, thy gates shall be
open, the glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, etc. they shall call thee the
City of the Lord, the Sion of the Holy One of Israel; thy walls shall be
salvation, and thy gates praise, the Lord shall be thy everlasting light, and
thy God thy glory; all spoken of the glory of the Church in the abundant
access of the Gentiles, and great blessing by the presence of the Messiah, and
graces of God powered out, and appearing on her, as throughout all the Chapter
is plentifully declar^^, so the converted Ge^^iles, with the Jew^s, fallin ^
down in the Church, shall all worship acknowledging Gods presence, and the
beauty of ^olinesse, most effe^t^^lly and powerfully there, yea even to
admiration, in most joyful and glorious manner, or more ample m^^ner and
measure then ever before shown, as now manifested in subst^nce, what before by
(...) types shadowed, and according to the practice of the people of God, have
the Gentiles received to grace, and engrafted into Christ, followed their
steps, kept their reverentiall distances and degrees, not presuming with
p^arisaicall arrogance, but in humil^y and lowly manner in those consecrated
and holy places, taught ^o tender their devo^ions, for so testify all
pri^itive times, before ever that sauciness and f^iniliarity of faith, that
would bring in confusion, and ^hrust all things out of order among
Schisma^ickes and factious persons grew to be fanc^d or i^ fashion.

57. They intend perha^s with more freedo^e, and bo^^ly to come and perform
those acts of divine worship there?
And well may they, so they do it, with more humility t^ught in the Publica^,
where no less the proud deportment of the Pha^isee was withal pointed at, and
reproved, and we may note, that as well, as, O come, let us sing unto the Lord,
a venite exultemus, be to be found to invite us to diligence, and alac^ity with
boldness in the action, so there is also a venite adoremus, Let us worship and
fall down before the Lord our Maker; let us bow down, yea fall down before
him, and fall low on our knees before his footstool, to teach us ^umility,
and show our duty; for he that requires a diligent servant, desires also a
dutiful one, and he that loves a du^ifull and diligent servant, loa^hs a
malapert and saucie one, and who can be too lowly in his presence: look to
Da^ia, and other holy men's deportment before him, and if we humble our selves
so to Kings, or our fellow servants here on earth as is fitting, and by Gods
word approved; with what humility should we that are but dust and ashes appear^
before him there? or how can we too much express lowliness, that he so
loves, for he regarded the lowliness of his (...), whom therefore all
generations do now call blessed, leaving the proud and mighty in the
^maginations of their own hearts? exalted the humble and meek, yea still
scorning the proud, gives grace to the hum^le, and hears their prayers when
they call upon him.

58. How grows yet this distinction of holiness and degrees of it, in such
manner in the holy places or things?
As the presence of the Lord may be understood to be there, and his graces
dispensed by, or in the same, but not in the same degree in all of them,
whereby though one be holy and the other, yet not one so holy as the other, as
was in effect spoken to Moses from God to this purpose: the place where thou
stand, and hear me speak is holy, but this ^olier from whence I speak;
that too clean for thy shoes, this for thy bare feet, therefore come not
^igher; thus where God was more then ordinary, he required respects more then
ordinary, thy shoos are too unclean for that place, and thy bare feet (though
they are permitted there) are not clean enough for this; so the reason of this
distinction, hence to be gathered, not any inherent essential preeminence of
the place or thing, but relative, arising from some peculiar dispensation of
his presence, beneficence and graces there, or in them; whence came the
distinctions in diverse degrees (according to the degrees of such dispensation
of graces observed) and several consecrations of holy things, places, and
persons, in, or under the Law, and before, and of our Churches since, and all
parts of them, and other things, according to the same respects that are moral
and unchangeable for the substance of them (the types now vanished) under the
Gospel; and indeed, for the excellency and eminency of their use in divine
worship worthy to be reverenced and so distinguished, as from all antiquity we
have received them; and thus for holy places have we the Churchyard as
consecrated ground in a first degree, the Church it self, Chancell and holy
Table, in their order, in higher and different degrees of reve^entiall respects
ever acknowledged, till the fu^y or frenzy of Novelists disturbed it, and
answerable to this in other matters observed.

59. In what other matters?
Both times, persons and things, consecrate to the service of God, and
sanctified to that holy use; some elected by himself, and our Savior, others
by him in his Church, and the Ministry thereof appointed, as in the persons
especially to be seen, where those that are before him, ministering in the
higher degrees, and as it were taken up nigher to himself in their sacred
office, participating of double honor and respect, are set over others, whence
a prelation of the chief Elders in the Church, with power to ordain and
govern others; and the Angels of the golden ^andlesticks for the honor of his
house are mentioned, and the Spirit of God dignifying, and principally
directing his speeches unto them; thus Bishops set over the Priests, and to
ordain them, and the Deacons, the Priests over the Deacons, and other
inferiors in that house and service, and they and all overseers in their
order, and to whom the care and custody of hallowed things, and House, and
Temple of God, and even the care and cure of souls, dispensation of the holy
Mysteries, and chiefest treasures of Gods House for the good of his people,
according to their several orders and places, (as God is not the Author of
confusion, but of order) are delegate, and committed to their charge; the
continual practice both modern and ancient, yea ever, and of all times in
Gods Church.

60. How further prove you, or show you that?
To pass by the oldest times, and before the Law, where the ancienst of the
family, the Patriarchs and eldest brothers, as the Priesthood then went by
primogeniture, were Priests of the most high God, and high above others in that
office, as Melchisedec (supposed Sem) super-eminent over all the Priests of his
age, so a type of Christ, and resembling him) even above Abraham, whom he
blessed; for without all controversy, says the Apostle, the less was blessed
of the greater, though he a Priest, great Patriarch, and sacrificer also; look
we under the Law, and at the giving of it, and behold M^ses a type of our
redemption, delivering Israel out of Egypt, and Joshua a type of our salvation,
bringing Israel into Canaan, (the son of man being to effect both by the power
of the Son of God must yet both put off their shoos, Exodus 3. 5. and Joshua 5.
15. and keep their distances, as there are degrees within and without the
Temple (where the Psalms of degrees were sung without, and Altar and Oracle
ascended to within the Sanctuary) and in respect of their persons, and their
very offices then, and after, to which they were, or were to be admitted,
neither of them having power to execute the Priesthood when that was spoken to
them; Moses not the first borne, nor extraordinarily called then (though he
were afterward) and Joshua though the first borne, altogether then suspended
by the separation of Levi to that office; so though Moses before his
consecration, or Joshua may be there before the Lord, and in that distance, but
with their shoes off, because the place where they stand is holy; was it said
yet, the place where I am (signifies he there to Moses) is holier, come not
nigher; Moses after his consecration is searce holy enough to be here, though
so dignified with the sight, presence, and (^ill his face shone again, and
needed ^veile) with his speech, and talking with God; but when indeed designed
after wards by God to the employment of a Priest, that was before ruler of the
people, Moses and Aaron among his Priests, Psalm. 99. and Exodus 40. and other
places, whereas a chief one, and type of Christ, he has such Priestly
authority from God, (and is commanded to do the Acts of consecration) to show
a more neernesse of person, he has a more neernesse of place in the Mount, in
the Tabernacle, in the sanctuary, given him; so there is a difference of place,
of persons, of offices, distinction and degrees in all of them; Aaron with
Nadab, Abihu, and the 70. Elders, (all being Priests by inheritance or
destination) may ascend up the mount, (so may not the people) but not so high
upon the mount as Moses, who alone shall come near unto the Lord, Exodus 19.
and cap. 24. 1. 2. Different places and degrees of the Priests and people,
Laity and Clergy, Moses and the rest of them too: for they may come into the
Tabernacle, these only into the Sanctuary, but not without washing, and Moses
only near the Lord, yet, and to the Oracle; as who has the Mandate so often
interated and reduplicate, of ordering all things there, Exodus 40. and the
consecration of them.

61. And how pertaines this to us?
As these types of Christ, so Christ himself, in the election of his Apostles
(to whom no others durst join themselves) and his 70. Disciples (resembling
the Jews Sanhedrim or 70. Elders) above the rest preferred, and the Apostles
authority from Christ received, of ordering Bishops, and Priests, or ^lders in
the Churches; and consequently their successive holy and orderly proceedings in
this point, from primitive and purest times to this our present age, continued
according to that first propoanded platform and distinction of degrees, in
holy places, persons and things, do all show this; and both Latin and Greek,
and Eastern Churches, will be abundant witnesses, and bear testimony of this
truth to the worlds end, whiles even at the highest place, the holy Table,
there were degrees, that in a higher esteem, and higher degree of
consecration, that was nearer, and that in the highest, that was nearest the
Altar, and none out of orders to come there, at the communion; whence the
distinction of the communion Sacerdotum and Laicorum, of the communion of the
Clergy and Laity, though not different in substance, but in place; (as the
Grecians to this very day, have their Tables enclosed with great mystery from
the people) and so anciently by degrees separated and distinguished, the
inferior degrees, communicating within the first, the higher alone, within the
second; in the Chancell the rest; the Priests only at the Altar. This the
ancient manner, and hence the several respects, and reverence used in diverse
degrees toward them.

62. Wherefore should that reverence be used?
As natural justice and equity requires, that we measure out, and yield a
different respect of honor to men according as the Kings favor, more or less
shin^s and reflects on them, and gives them advancement; ^eene in Joseph and
Mordccai, and which we use: so with Gods own people, and all ancients, we
here, noting the degrees, do use diversitity of reverentiall respects toward
the more sacred things, and whiles rendering to some, a civil, to others a
religious reverence, or cultus reverentiae, as is fitting, but to God only a
divine worship, we are as far as those holy men and servants of God that did
the same from all idolatry and superstition; and as David and Daniel did,
worship toward the holy Temple, the Priests toward the ^racle, Ark, and
Mercy-seat; all Israel in the wilderness, toward the Mount, the cloud, and
pillar of Fire, the Tabernacle, the Oracle and Altar, but before God, and to
him only, and were never accused of Idolatry or superstition therein, but were
further from it, and more hating it, then any other nation whatsoever, though
they used such bowing and worshipping. It is our case, and so that reverence of
ours, as we conceive also of the adgeniculation of the ancients, the treble
prostration of the Grecians before or toward the holy Table, is to the only
true God, there most graciously showing his presence, and dispensing his favor
and goodness, in most apparent and abundant measure unto us; where, not the
Altar, but the Lord toward his Altar, in that humiliation or pulverization,
nihileitatis nost^a, is worshipped. And since God is by his Graces, Word and
Sacraments, so powerfully in his Church above all other places and Christ in
the Sacrament (by all confessed) so really present, and that only there to be
consecrated, though elsewhere to be distributed, good reason for that so
especial dispensation of his favor and presence there, that even that place
should have preeminence above the rest, whence virtue and efficacy by such
gracious dispensation, is to the rest derived: the very word it self chief
instrument of our salvation, not operative but by graces thence flowing and
derived, or there sealed and confirmed; and that may we plainly see, to the
dignifying the place, and raising the respects and reverence toward it, (and
no less kindling our affections for better performance of our devotions in i)
a peculiar and special dispensation of that his merciful and gracious
presence there, above all other places; and extraordinary residence, by his own
self, as well as by his Ministers and Angels in Bethel presigured; and for
such who stick at this, or doubting of these things, deny the respects, for
that God, or such his graces are not there so corporally seen, I might as well
^sk them, why at the other places and parts of the divine service, or else in
the Church, where no more then here is, grossly and corporally seen, they
should more bow, kneel, or be uncovered, then in any other places without the
Churches; yet there also all good Christians, remembering God and his graces so
to them dispensed, would use some reverence, in token of thankfulness and
praise for the same.

63. And so we are commanded to pray and worship in all places, and God will be
worshipped every where.
Most true: whence among us the Gentiles now as well as at Jerusalem, God is
worshipped, but as in all places, so more especially in this, by his especial
command, whose house is now made a house of prayer to all Nations and Japhet
come ^o dwell in the ten^s of Sem, according to old Noah's prophetic blessing,
the Tabernacles of our God being spread over the face of the whole earth, the
Gentiles now received to grace; but here also, though every place be fit and
requisite to pray and worship in, most respectively this: his house is holy, as
dedicate to that use; his presence makes it so, his promise seals it, and the
communication of his graces show it so. And as where the Judge sits, is the
judgment seat; so where he is, and so peculiarly rests, it becomes a Sanctuary
and Mercy-seat, his presence makes it so, and we may be confident of it (for he
promised it that is Truth) that as Moses, though he might meet with God in
other places then the Sanctuary, yet sure he met him there: So we, that may
chance to find him in other places, are assured to find^ him here, and most
respectively where he has promised to be most powerfully and really present;
and therefore we are not to neglect or diminish the due respect to that place;
which if we do, what is it but so far forth to contemn it, whom the Council
of Gangra held accursed, and 1^00. years ago at least condemned? how ever
such undutifull disrespects and peevishness, fancied by the distempered zeal
of these latest and worst times.

64. Could any be so presumptuous to contemn it?
Some factious Sectaries, it seems, have done little less, whiles aiming at a
parity (...) Churchmen, they have sided for a parity in the Church and for a
parity in the Church offices and Churches, have risen to a parity of all places
in the Church, and with the Church: so growing bolder, and affirming, the
Temple of God is the world, and to build were to confine him, as said John Hus,
and others. And then you take too much upon you, said some with the rebels,
Numb. 16. 3. seeing all persons are holy, and to what purpose is this waste (on
Churches) said others with the traitor, Matthew. 26. 8. seeing all places are
holy. And then as they are a Royal Priesthood, 1. Pet. 2. 9. all Priests I
hope, (and what need orders then, and many other things,) and since a Priestly
Kingdom in Moses, Exodus 19. 6. much more in Christ all Kings too; and then, I
trow, without control, to do what they will. And thus lastly, no difference
between him that sacrifices, and him that sacrifices not: Pulpit and Pew,
Belfrey and holy Table, or poors Box and the Altar, with such men. But what is,
if this be not, to despise the Church of God, 1. Cor. 11. 12. or make it to
be despised; or in it to make the holy Table, offerings, and Altar
contemptible, Mal. 1. 7. or draw on neglect and contempt, and withdraw all due
respects from it? Yet this the virulency and poison of these novell men, the
factionists, and fruits of their profane (how ever they account it pure and
precise) doctrine; but from which the slovenlinesse of Gods service, ^astinesse
of their Church, ruins of Gods house, and out ragious rapines, with
profanation of hallowed things, by the hideous sacrileges of this last age,
and not without strange confusion and disorder of all things, both in Church
and Commonwealth, may to the praise of such patriots (as they would seem
forsooth, and Judas a holy thief too) or to the shame and infamy of such
parents and patrons, boast of their beginning, and God kno^es increase into
many places, to the decrease of godliness and Christianity, and bringing in
rude barbarism, Atheism, and profaneness, (all order rooted out) in stead of
religion, piety and devotion.

65. How then be shown the best order and degrees in these things, from
primitive and purest times derived?
As we see by authority established in the manner as from them, of those best
times received in the Church, in the 1. Lower parts thereof, the (...), (...),
where, the degreees under the Fideles having their distinct places and stations,
were admitted. 2. Higher parts and the Chancell, intra Cancellos, the higher
degrees, where also the 1. Presbyterium spatio inferiori, and ibiin 1. circuitu
ejusdem, 1. Episcopi Cathedra eminentiori loco si Episcopalis. 2. Aliorum etiam
Presbyterorum ^edes, and Exedrae. 3. Diaconorum subsellia.
2. Me^io, Laici, Fideles, ad participandum sacra mysteria admissi.
2. Sacrarium in superiori part, ubi altar, seu mensa Domin^, the holy Table,
or Altar, and near it the Secretorium, a retiring place, as it were behind or
near the Altar, for the Priest or Bishop till the second service, or
celebration of the divine mysteries, as the Diaconicon, or Vestry on oneside,
or not far off, being not for such Vestry-men and lay Elders as have lately
lately got into it (or the possession of it,) but for a repository, for laying
up the Vasa, and Vestimenta sacra, sub custodia Diaconi, of the Deacon, Clerk,
or Sexton, who was subsacrista; and into the Sacrarium, none but Priests might
enter or officiate there, Non nisi Presbyterio a^t Sacerdotes, Council. Consta^.
6. c. 69. and Cyprian lib. 1. Ep. 9. intra septa Altaris, nemo Laicus
ingrediatur, etc. Council Nicen. 2. c. 4. and the Emperor himself, post
oblationem, having off^red, must depart out of it, Theod. lib. 5. c. 18. and
sometimes in service, that place, and the Altar drawn with curtains, may be
collected out of St. Chrysostom.



66. Why were these things thus observed?
For the more reverence of the same as was fit, and Majesty of those divine
mysteries, o^ ^wfull regard they had of the holy things, and that ought not to
be profaned, or un^everently handled, wh^nce the most gracious effects of
pi^ty and devotion, breeding obedience and good affection to God and his house,
his oracles and laws, and consequently to Princes, and Magistrates did ensue,
with good order and decorum thence flowing through all parts both of the Church
and commonwealth; for which reason a so, next to Gods honor, the Fathers and
Councels were so serious in promoting the reverence and good order here, which
might well teach more reverentiall rerespects, and religious observance to the
holy places and things, then ou^ unlimitedly irregular Schisma^^ckes, and
vulgar Libertines, by their leading and incensing, will easily yield or be
brought to by the Churches, or almost by any superiors command, be induced to
exhibit; being once obst^nately set, and by such their ringleaders, no less
un^everently then disobediently and frowa^dly informed.

67. But is not thereby too much reverence used, or too much magnisicence
brought into Churches?
No godly or wise man would ever think so, but rather fear all were too little
he could use or present there, and that has been usually a conceit, but of
the very prophanest or cavil of the factious, for who else would think too
much reverence and humility could be used to Godward? or too reverent respect
or regard could be had of such holy things, or too great care had, or cost
bestowed on them, especially so appointed by the gravest, worthiest, and wisest
men of the Christian world; for did God create so many good and glorious things
as we see, to be served himself with only the worst and basest? a conce^t too
strongly savouring of Atheism and impiety, and indeed never thought so by any
(wise men that would be supposed) till these last and worst days, abounding
with iniquity, and so now by the very worst men and seum of the people, to whom
that heathen, and sacrilegious Tyrants words, as well as actions perhaps, well
arriding their humors and palats, in templis quid facit aurum? would very
likely be most pleasing and acceptable, who robbing them of their riches and
ornaments, made that his pretense.

68. But the word Altar has offended some?
Mightily no doubt displeased them, that for hate of Altars could be content to
hunt Churches, and all good order in them out of all antiquity, and Primitive
times, and so i^ they could out of the Christian world; which yet they can
never do, (they may only show their good will) for with the first dawing of
Christian Religion, when the poor persecuted Christians were feign to use any
houses, lower rooms, or upper chambers, as they could be gotten, yet sacred to
that purpose, and some times Caverns under ground, as some think, feign to use
lights in them, whence as well as for other reasons, lights became retained in
the Church to testify they were successors of those poor Primative
persecuted Christians, yet still that order was observed, and though sacred,
accordingly had in veneration; and the holy mysteries most religiously
celebrated, with the duties belonging performed in all respects, to the
greatest degree of reverence, pertaining to the action, and things, as well as
magnificence, that the angustialoci, straitness of the place, time, or their
poverty and pressure would permit; which also from the Apostles own hands, and
their successors consequently delivered, and in Churches by them consecrated,
were even in the first times in fair and decent sort performed; and when they
had gotten root to spread by Gods gracious permission and his planting, and
watering this garden of his with his own, and his dearest Saints and servants
hands, so great bounty was freely and liberally soon profferred, professed and
showed in their more public and stately Churches: insomuch that by Saint
Chrysostomes testimony in his Homily, an Christus sit Deus, it was even to
wonder, what Nations and multitudes converted to Christianity, and the faith
propagated, and Churches over all the world, so far as Persia, India and
Britain (worthy our noting) among Mores, Scythians, Indians, and remotest
Is^es and Nations immediately after Christ, and his Apostles times erected,
which howsoever afterward by persecutions often oppressed and overthrown,
when they got but respiration from their troubles, or any more Halcyon days,
they still with all alacrity restored to the pristine and ancient state and
fashion; and so their smallest Oratories and Churches, or very Chambers,
Caverns or Crypte if any where, resembled as much as their smalnesse would
permit the order and fashion of the more stately and succeeding buildings,
which were conformed to them, as now we may see our Chapels, though never so
little, as much as their smalnesse will suffer, conformed to the greater, and
those to the Churches, as all of them do, or of right ought, so much as they
can, conform to the mother Churches and Cathedrals, the pattern in all
chiefest points of our religious devotions, and descending nearest patern'd to
Primitive times.

69. How show you Altars so ancient, or in them?
Even by all the ancient Histories, Councels and Fathers, as some of them
before rehearsed, and so Saint Chrysostom, lib. 2. and 6. de sacerdotio
describes, quae apud altar siunt, and fieri debent, and says he, locus
altarivioinus, in illus honorem qui immolatur, Angelor, choris plenus est; so
Saint Ambrose, in Psalm. 38. and alibi, remembers the Altar and sacrifice, as
lib. 5. Ep. 33. pro quibus (sc. populo) Ego quotidie instauro sac^isicium; so
Saint in Psalm. 33. and in orat. Psalm. 39. and de Civit. Dei, lib. 17. cap. 20.
and lib. 10. cap. 20. and lib. 22. cap. 8. and cap. 10. and lib. 8. cap. 27.
where abundant mention of Altars, Christian Altars, and their sacrifice, and
though memoria Martyris celebratur, sacri^icium offertur, and sacri^icium
immolatur uni Deo, where also sacrisicium ipsum, corpus est Christi, and summum
and verissimum sacri^icium, sacri^icium Christianorum; so we need not so much
to fear the name of Altar, since we have sacrifice so often mentioned, or
sacrifice of Christians if but well weighed and rightly understood, so frequent
in the holy Fathers, and famous and ancient Counces to be found, as Council,
Constant 6. cap. 69. Conc. Gangren. cap. 7. 8. Council. Nicen. cap. 14 Council.
Carth. 3. cap. 34. and 4. 79. Conc. Brac. cap. 34. and 39. and many others.

70. D th our Church allow of altars then?
Yes, with Orthodox Antiquity, though it dis^low of the abuses crept in with
some novelists of later times, for so not only antiquity, but with it our late
and soundest Orthodox Writers and Laws have spoken consonantly of them, and
with as great reverence; for as Saint August. for the dedication of the Church,
used to say hodie confecrationem altaris celebramus, Ser. de temp. 253. and
255. Saint Nissen calling it altar immaculatum, and sanctum; and Saint Chrysostom.
showing it was veited from the peoples eyes for the more reverence; as Hom. 61.
ad Pop. Antioch. and else Hom. 3. in. Epist. dum vides fublata vela, cogita
Coelumip ^u^ su^sum reserari, angelos quae descendere, as also, Altar sanctum,
sacro-sanctum, and Immaculatum, every where occuring in the Fathers; so both
many soundest late Writers, and E^. 6. in his writ to the Bishop styles it
sacro-sanctum Altar, and the Statutes of those times speak in that tone; and
whereas St. Chrysast. in Orat. an Christus sit Deus, says semper in Altari,
manner solet, Christ^ Crux, and beatus Rhenanus, in Apolog. Tertul. out of
Tertulli^^ and Lactantius, shows Christians had no other Images in their
Churches, but signum Crucis^super Altar, and that orientem versus; so have we
seen the Altar that stood in former Princes times, continued in Queen
Elizabeth's time, with the cross upon it, and so confessed by even the
adversary in so. Orthodox Princes reigns and times.

71. But these things are thought by some to favor too much of Gentilisme, and
Pagan or Romish superstition?
And so shall all things else with such Sectaries and factious persons, that
are not of their own devising or idols of their own framing and fancy,
scorning all antiquity, but doting on any Genevian novelty; and all shall be
Gentilisme that is not Genevated; or superstitious with them where God is not
rudely and slovenly served; though we may note the Gentiles as well as the
Christians had their platformes from even Solomon's Temple, and manner of the
Jews worship that was commanded by God, as we may see in their Temples so
conformed; that as the Jew had his Sanctum Sanctorum, Temple porch, and Courts,
and the Altars to them belonging. Gentiles had their (...), Temples, and Adita
with the Altars, and highest relics esteemed, and idols in the in most of
them, and no marvel, when as says (...) sent their presents, and to visit it;
and great Alexander and Titus so much honored it, and the Queen of the South
came with so great a train and magnificence to Solomon at the building of in,
that the same and admiration of it must needs be far dispersed, and sure enough
intimated when so admired, whence it came to pass in the conversion of Nations
to Christianity, that both their Temples and the Jewish Synagogues, were with
more convenience and greater case converted also to Christian Churches.


72. Was this if so ancient, a^ universal also?
No less general then ancient, and to be seen in all the Greek and Eastern,
as well as the Latin and west Churches, which last yet, might well if we were
moderate, serve our turn, we being a part of the western Church, and to be
ordered by her directions, but all did here in agree, as we may perceive by the
names before remembered, received most of them from the Greeks and their
Councels, and embraced by both the Latins and Churches of Asia; as Ge^ebrard
also, de ritibus Gracorum, shows their Churches in like manner divided into
these five parts,

1. The (...), ascensus sacer, the highest part of the Quire, or sacrarum,
above the steps ^o the Altar, where the Altar it self, and where none but
Priests might come.

2. The (...), that other part of the Quire or Chancel, locus clero, and
cantoribus deputatus, called else it seems, (...), both these in the Chancel,
intra Cancellos.

3. The (...), Pulpit-place, and Pew (tribunal Ecclesiae) in or near the
midst, where Sermons preached, and Epistles and Gospels (and divine Service)
read to the people.

4. The (...), the body of the Church, where the people had their places and
stations, but distinct and diversely as before.

5. The (...), or place for baptism, and penitents, so the baptisterium, near
the Church door, as the penitents without, till admitted to that lowest place
first, and after higher by degrees, as aforesaid.

73. Was there no other, or greater difference?
Either none, or of no great moment, nor unless perhaps such as this, where
the (...) might be taken by some, for both the Altar it self, and Altar-place
also, as Altar sometimes might be, with the Latins, so intra Altar, for
intra septa Altaris; other like acceptations were of the word sacrarium, taken
both for the Altar-place, and secretorium, or diaconicon, and Vestry by, as
seret^rium sometimes for the sacrarium, but properly to distinguish them, by

The Cancel^i or intra Cancellos, was understood the whole Quire or Chancell.

The Presbyterium, the lower part of it, where the seats for the Quire,
Priests, Bishops and Deacons on the sides, and the lay admitted to communicate
in the midst.

The Sacrarium the higher part, and place where the holy Table or Altar stood,
enclosed from the rest, and commonly ascended to by steps.

The Secretorium, a retyring place near unto it.

The Diaconicon, the Vestry adjoining also, as before showed, where the
vestimenta, and vasa sacra, holy vessels and vestments were to be laid up, and
kept under the custody of a Deacon, or Levite, which may seem also called
Sacrarium, as well as the Altar-place, as Council. Agathen. c. 14. and Ambrose
de offic. lib. c. 56. do sound, Levita eligatur, qui sacrarium custodiat; and
lastly, worthy especially to be noted, how (...) and Altar, were generally by
the Ancients appropriated to the Altars of the true God, and so ordinarily used
by them, as Ara and (...) to the stools, Altars and stadles of the Idols, or
heathen gods for their service and sacrifices by learned Writers observed.

74. How is the consideration of these things pertinent to our purpose?
As we may hereby consider the ancient usage of the Church, in the
administration of the Sacraments, and admission of Converts to Baptism, and
Penitents into the Church, and participation of the other Sacrament, in
primitive times, especially, and even when whole Nations were converted to
Christianity, and baptized: As this also a preparation by the description of
the holy Table, or Altar-place of it, ceremonies and reverence used at it, to
the doctrine of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, coming next to be handled.

Yet once more ere we pass this Sacrament, what is meant by these words used
in the ceremony, In the name of the Father, etc.

By the Name of God, as all Divines teach, is understood not only that Nomen
ineffabile and Tetragrammaton ((...)) as written with four letters, and by
some corruptly pronounced Jehovah* instead of Jaha, or J^hu, and usually read
Adonai by the Hebrews themselves, and others by their directions, but all
other the glorious titles, attributes, and holy means whatsoever, whereby any
no^^^^s of the divine Majesty are imparted, and the knowledge of God in any
sort derived unto us, and so by them, as far as humane frailty will permit,
God himself made known unto men. And as his attributes of Mercy, Justice
Goodness, and the like, seeming accidental attributes, are yet ^o essential,
they are his very essence, and God himself, Nullum accidens in Deum cadit, and
quicquid in Deo est, essentia est; so much more his Name and Titles, taken for
God himself, all of them together sparkling like rays from that their center
of theirs, the divine Majesty, which they would express to our knowledge: thus
God himself meant by his name, and by the Hebrews ((...)) Shem, the name is
ordinarily accepted for God himself absolutely, as the chief means of our
knowledge of him, which yet has a twofold consideration, as what is either
passive received, or active set forth byus; which knowledge passive received,
or in the receiving, may perhaps properly pertain to the third Commandment,
and exposition of the name of God there, as the same passive in the setting
forth and acknowledgement of it, may pertain to this place, and perhaps both
to the first Petition of the Lords prayer, wherein we desire Gods Name may be
hallowed, which we may well interpret by all holy means of receiving this
knowledge of him, as well as setting it forth, and acknowledging of it to his
glory, and in this last sense, here properly understood, that the person is
baptized in the Name, that is in the 1. Power and authority, 2. Confession and
acknowledgement 3. Honor and praise, 4. Love and fear


Of the divine Majesty of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, the great
and glorious mystery of the Trinity, so revealed as in ((...)) Shem the name
and that saving Name, Jesus, Emmanuel, and other names of God, the same and
other mysteries are no less emphatically then sweetly shadowed, and included.

In what manner?
Thus, the name expressing the divine Majesty, or all means of the knowledge
of ^t thereby expressed, and all saving health springing from that knowledge:
or as Nomen est nota rei, and the Son the Character of his Fathers glory, how
fitly may the Son the Savior Jesus, the center of the Trinity, and of our
salvation, the Father saving by the Son, actuating it by the holy Spirit, to
whom committed the dispensation of Faith, and treasury of all graces, here
shadowed under this Name, for the name above all names: for if ((...)) Shaddai,
the Epitheton of the Father, may seem to import the fountain of his
all-sufficiencie and power, as it does, right so may ((...)) Shem the name
above all names, at which every knee should bow, imply the character of the
brightness of his Fathers glory, as it imports also the Word, the Wisdom,
the Way, the Truth, the Light, the Life of all saving health and knowledge;
whence all saving health derived, and as sweetly suiting with the rest, and
sympathizing with his nature ((...)) Shekina shadowing unto us the
overshadowing power and goodness of that holy and blessed Spirit, the
dispenser of all divine graces; and so all of them together, the Trinity of the
persons in the unity of the divine Majesty, whereby shown as opera Trinitatis
ad extra, so essentia ad intra, bein indivisa the Unity in Trinity, and Trinity
in Unity mysteriously included in the Name above all names, that saving Name
Jesus, with the revelation of which Name, the whole Trinity was also revealed
in that Emanuel, to all mankind; and which so great a mystery, as desired to
be looked into by Angels; but hidden from all former ages, was with him and in
him, manifested to the world: And no wonder if so great mysteries should be in
that great and glorious Name involved, when in the very name of Antichrist and
character of the Beast, so deep mysteries are found included: For, as great is
the mystery of godlines^e, deep Gods counsels, and secret his judgments, past
finding out; so we may observe, great are the depths of Satan, strong the
delusions of the Devil, and as hideous as intricate, the mystery of iniquity.

How is that mystery or name of the Beast, and Antichrist meant or explained?
The Devil is usually termed Gods Ape: so where God planteth his Church, he
will strive to erect his Chapel hard by: And as God will set up his Christ
upon his holy Hill of Sion, so he striveth to set up Antichrist not only in
his own Chapel, but in the Church of God, as much as he can poluted by him;
and whereas Christ has his true Prophets and true wonders wrought by them in
the power of God: so Antichrist working by the power of the Beast, has his
false prophets working lying wonders in the power of the Beast and Dragon, and
delusions of the Devil, and thus as Christ to Antichrist, Gods truth to Satan's
delusions, and Gods counsels to the depths of Satan, we may behold who the
mystery of iniquity working by Antichrist, and the power of the Beast, are
opposed to the mystery of godliness wrought by God, and in Christ revealed: as
Contra^ia juxta se posita magis elucescunt, God advancing his Christ, the truth
and godliness in his Church, the Devil that Beast of the field, in Paradise
the old red Dragon for his bloody designs, and falling Angel for his pride,
striving to set up Antichrist, and all spiritual wickedness, even in the high
places, as high as Tribunal Ecclesia, the very pulpits if his false prophets
can get into them to sow their seeds of Heresy, Atheisine, and profaneness,
and for his name literally it is plainly understood of his opposition to God
and his Christ, but for his name so mystically expressed by numbers, or rather
inveyled in them that have busied so many thousands searching eyes, industrious
wits, and judicious heads to pry into them to find out the mystery, it may
well be said, hie labor hoc opus est, yet since Gods Spirit bids him that
has wit to count the name, i^ being as the name of a man, or mankind, and
dies diem docet, let us look back to the times and holy Text, praying for
wisdom from him, and his holy direction, as an Ariadnes clew to guide us in
the Maeandrine ways of this Labyri^th of so dark and doubtful obscurity. And
as we read of Aristotle, if he did Calamum in mentem intingere, how much need
have we here narrowly to pry herein to the mind of the holy Apostle, the
Penman or Writer and meaning of the blessed Spirit, the E^diter of those
revelations and visions, well weighing the time, place, person, posture, and
other circumstances there, that the Writer either in body or mind, or both,
beheld who stood on the sea sand when he then saw the Beast rising out of the
sea, the people or Gentiles and Nations so raging, as Psalm the second being
the fourth beast in Daniel, or Pagan Roman Empire, that so cruelly both in his
own Western Babylon, and the holy City, shed the blood of the Saints, who
there described by his numbers in his 7 heads and 10 horns, may well lead us to
the other name described also by numbers in Antichrist, to usher in the Whore
of Babylon into that chamber of the Western Empire, where the Church of God was
now with the beginning of that Empire begun to be planted; by the way to note,
that as Gentilisme and Paganism are all one thing the one only in mere
heathen, the other in the ruder skirts of the larger Christian territories, out
of the dregs of which were strained the puddles of schism and heresy, in which
Antichrist began first to move in the Apostles time, so the beast Antichrist
and the whore of Babylon, are in effect all one thing, the power of the Dragon,
the Devil and his malice only diversifide by the objects it works on us,
the Beast corrupting the Sat and Policy, and perverting it into tyranny,
cruelty, and impiety against God and Man, as Antichrist spoiling the Church,
and corrupting our Religion, by perverting the doctrine of faith and manners,
and all holy discipline, as the whore of Babylon, or confusion, corrupting Gods
holy service and worship, by bringing in false, strange, idolatrous and
will worship into Gods House, contrary to Christ's own, his Apostles and
Churches holy institution, by such as going a whoring after their own
inventions, and the Idols of their own peevish fancies, and profane noveltie,
so usher her in with her cup of abominations, or wine of the fury of her
fornication by will worship, and such false and strange worship, making them
drunk, or mad, that with corruption of doctrine and discipline, faith and
manners, Gods worship and religion, all things might rush into Anarchy and
confusion, if not ruin and combustion, which all seem notably described in
numbers, and else by S. John, as it were there before him, plainly though
prophetically beholding the same.

Declare it further in what manner.
As leading to the rest, the number first, the seven heads of the Beast,
signifying not only seven hills, or principalities, but more properly also
mountains of vice, and powers of darkness, or of the Prince that rules in
the air, the seven capital and deadly sins, and pride the foremost, crowned
with gold, of a varice and rose buds of voluptuous pleasures, are thus by the
beast advanced in the sight of the world, whose ten horns of rude armed
impiety, pushing against the Saints and City of God, may well signify or
point at not only the ten first and primitive persecutions, but through times
revolutions, all of that nature: as for a time, or times, or half a time, more
or less, God suffers his Church to be so afflicted, and more, especially to
be considered in ten, a perfect and complete number, the complete ripeness of
sin and impiety in that Belua; and as an indefinite number ten, being
understood for many, as sex ce^ta pro infinito numero, the often assaults of
his beluine horns and fury: but most fitly as ten the ground and foundation of
all great and round numbers, all being but multiplied tens to hundreds,
thousands, millions, to what grand sum or number soever in men or moneys, the
power of war or Empire, all seeming comprehended in this root or radical
number ten, whereof all greater numbers are constructed, and thus ten she wing
the greatest martial or other strength of horns to push with, the Belua more
graced with number and force then wisdom could ever have. And thus numbers
and mul^itudes showing his nature, whether in numero numeranti ordinati, and
ordinarily as marshalling his strength, and numbering his forces, of what kind
soever, or in numero numerato and Cardinali, as his men and M^lites, the corpus
and cardo, as the pecunia nervus belli; all this showing the Belua more in
number then goodness, and multitude then godliness, force then wisdom,
delighted and exalted, which leads us directly to the consideration of the
numerous and martially numbered name of Antiohrist, set up by him and his rude
Pagan force of armed impiety, that so both externally and internally, by force
of f^aud, piety and religion might be extirpate by them, with his tail of
Schism and Heresy, and false Prophets sweeping down the stars of heaven,
with his Dragons tail, the Saints of God in his Church; and if possible,
making the faith of the elect to fail: where now how well Antichrist
sympathizeth in name and nature with him, as his adopted heir the man of
sin, and child of perdition, we may observe, as nomen est nota rei, and forma
dat nomen and esse, the very Fiend that possessed the man, and then the swine,
and after animated the beast and his false Prophets also, informs Antichrist,
and giving him his name, as he confessed to Christ his name was Legion: For
(said he) we are many. So whether men or Devils, or Men-Divels, here are many
also in Antichrist, numbered by 666. the front of a legion, by the Beast, or
Dragon, or Devil, shed the blood of the Saints in the holy City, and even in
the Church, corrupted both faith and doctrine, Gods worship and religion, and
brought in the Whore of Babylon, as before mentioned: for the name Legion
noting the then Pagan Roman Militia, the power of that Beast and Empire, most
plainly read in that name so martially numbered 666. the chief head or heads
and fronts showing themselves of that number in the Legion, whilst of 6000.
the whole body of it consisting besides some few troops of horse and others for
Wings and Scouts, with their Velites and Triarii to gu^rd their carriages and
provisions, the Decur^ons being 600. Centurions 60. and K^liarches 6. in whom
rested the whole power and command, show that number in the front or head of
the Legion, whose power committed those outrages in the Church, as well as a
wed the world; in like manner as the Assyrian, Babylon, Grecian, and Egyptian
Militia and Arms had done before them, but now numbered by legions, whiles
Saint John beheld the rude multitudes more swaying by number then by wisdom,
then reigning and raging in the world, and afflicting the Church, how appliable
to all A^tichristian practices, oppressions, and oppositions, when and
wheresoever that man of sin, that first began to move in the Apostles times
by Schism and Heresy, the dregs of Gentilisme, the nurse of later
paganism, shall get head in the power of the Beast, among the beasts of the
people, against the Saints and Church of God, to be so high advanced, there to
defile and profane it by his own presence, and bringing in the whore of
Babylon, or confusion, with the Cup of abominations, of false, strange, and will
worship, unreverence and profane novelties, the idols of fancy, and innovating
whorish inventions, of those that run after strange Gods and Religions, where
rude armed impiety by barbarous force more then gracious wisdom and
godliness by good counsel can prevail, I leave to be considered by the
wisest and most judicious. So retur ning from this mystery of iniquity, to that
divine mystery of the name of God.

But why said you before, that Nomen Tetragrammaton was corruptly pronounced
Jehovah?

It is most evident, though it have so long escaped the most curions
inquisition of so many thousands, nay, Myriades, or millions of searching eyes
and wits, that have long sought after it; for whether the Jews by their
superstitious silence, lost the true sound, or by their supercilious envy
concealed it from us the Gentiles, and so at last perhaps lost it, as they did
their ancient Music and Meeter of David's Psalms in their captivity; or
propter peccatum, as they confess; yet what the true sound is easily to be
discerned by them and us, may thus plainly appear, for that it is truly to be
pronounced Jaho, or Jahu, trisyllabum, is thus proved by their own writings,
and strangers.

First, we may find in ancient Greek Copies and Poems yet extant, that name
rendered (I^^) Jao, wanting the letter h, or aspiration, whereby to write as we
may Jahoh.

But more then this in the Bible it self, where that name is fixed to the end
of any proper names, they may most plainly perceive it there, as in Isaiahu,
Jeremiahu, Eliahu, and the like.

Thirdly, where it is prefixed to proper names, as in Jehoram, Jehoiada,
Jehoshap at, and the like, it is plain, where we know by the Grammar Rules,
Camets, by increase of syllables, is turned into Shevah, which yet is not so
little an e, as is now sounded, but rather French i, Feminine, sounding our
less^ a, or broader as old Gramarian^ testify; as in Solomon, Rehoboam, and
many other like words expressly found.

Fourthly, in the contracted name Jah, it is evident the two last letters are
cut off, or left out, as usual with them; and seen in many like words, and
especial^y in the Conjugations Lamed He, and Lamed Aleph is most frequent,
where Aleph and He with their ending vowels are commonly cu^ off: much more
might be added for confirmation, but this may suffice; but for the word
Jehovah, it is only the vowels of Adonai used to be read, for it is
preposterously added to the letters of that name. So ending with this
Sacrament, come we now to the Lords Supper.

SECT. 3. Of the LORDS SUPPER.
The Lords Supper why instituted, and how a memorial of Christ, and his death
and that his sacrifices, with the Analogy or resemblance, and that relation ^t
has to the same, and to the Pascal Lamb, and all those other legal
saccrifices so often used, all of them having relation to Christ being the
perfection of them, the benefit of whose sacri^ice, and perpetual memory
thereof, with thankfulness, (...) prime reasons, though other ends also
proposed; the institution how it differs from baptism many ways, and how it
self in diverse respects called by diverse names, the parts of it, the outward
signs, ceremonies, and actions by the Lord prescribed, and observed, the other
circumstances to the same belonging also propounded to be considered, the near
resemblance and fit relation of the outward sign and inward, or of our
receiving the elements of bread and wine, and other holy actions and ceremonies
to the receiving of the body and blood of Christ by faith and our nourishing
and strengthening by the same, the manner of Christ's presence in the blessed
Sacrament, as ineffable, rather to be reverently admired and thankfully
confessed then curiously to be disputed of, or contentiously to be enquired
after, as the Fathers teached, therein acknowled^ing a most divine Mystery yet
neither transubstantiation (...) Consubstantiation thereby to be conceived, but
the Mystery rather more divinely to be understood, and accordingly by the
ancient ^tiled, the figure of it, and speeches of the Church and holy
Scriptures, concerning it, and the worthy receiving thereof: So the comforts
and benefits in the religious receiving and using it, and in the grases, virtue
and effects thereof come to be christianly meditated on, and remembered and
hereby reasons urged why kneeling at receving the holy Communion, and other the
like reverent gesturet and postures of the body are in the Church, and at such
holy actions to be used, with the difference and distinction of all such
religious and ceremonious, as well as civil reverence from the divine worship
a^ also reasons for it why w^ Christians do usually worship, and have our
Churches so placed, looking toward the East, as it were thereby causing it.

1. Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained?
For a continual remembrance of the sacrifice, of the death of Christ, and the
benefits we receive thereby.

2. What is hereby intimated.
The end wherefore it was ordained: viz. First, The memorial of the

I. Thing it self.

1. The Pasehall Lamb, now offered indeed, Christ.

The death of the Lamb of God.

The sacrifice, by his death immolate.

II. The benefits we receive thereby.

Secondly, The perpetuity of this memorial; to be continued in the Church till
his coming aagain, at the end of the world; as in the institution, Do this in
remembrance, etc. and, To remember the Lords death, till he come, 1 Cor. 11. ^6.

3. How is it a memorial of Christ?
In that, as bread and wine are prepared by many strokes of affliction, and
labor, for the comfort of the body, so was the bread of life, and living
water, or wine of his blood, for comforting the heart, prepared for us, and our
souls.

4. How seen in this bread of life, Christ?
As bread is prepared, by 1. Threshing. 2. Grinding. 3. Baking. 4. Breaking. 5.
Dividing, to be eaten.
So Christ was,

1. Threshed with many strokes of anguish and affliction of body and soul.

2. Ground in the mill of much sorrows.

3. Baked in the fiery oven of Gods anger against sin, Mal. 4.

4. Broken for our sakes, that we might be made whole, and fed with this bread
of life.

5. How in this wine of his blood?
As wine is prepared, by 1. Cutting down. 2. Casting into the 3. Wine Press.
4. Trodden with the 5. Feet. 6. Powered to be drunk and used.
So Christ was

Cut down for us.

Cast into and trodden in The wine press of his Fathers wrath for us.

Trodden under the feet of the contumelious Jews and others.

Powered out his soul and blood for our sakes, like water shed on the earth,
that we might receive the comfort.

6. How receive we the comfort?
As in the creatures of bread and wine, though we have them in abundance, the
comfort only is by Gods blessing; so in this bread and wine, though the signs
or symboles of it be had, it is the grace of God that gives the true comfort;
sanctifying them, and applying them indeed, in the nourishment of the soul, to
whom we must look up for a blessing in the use of the Sacrament.

7. How was he the Paschall Lamb?
As by whose blood on our door-posts, the destroyer cannot hurt us, and hereby
we delivered, have power to pass out of the Egypt of this world, into the
land of Canaan in heaven.

8. How or why mind we his death?
As he was threshed, and trodden down to death, for us, that deserved it; his
body broken, and blood shed, and soul powered out for ours, that ought to have
been so eternally: the punishment of our sins was so heavy on him, that he was
bowed down to the grave, whereby in his stripes, we are healed, and so with
thankfulness, are to remember his death.

9. How was there in his death a sacrifice?
As his body and soul was made an offering for sin, propitiatory by the worth
of it, for the sins of the whole world; as more worthy then the whole world,
and all creatures; being in the Person of the Son, and Creator, God and man;
and so in this one sacrifice, of which all other sacrifices were but shadows
and types, they all had their end, and this was the end and substance of all;
both the Lamb slain, every morning and evening, for a daily and continual
Oblation; the Paschall Lamb, the Scapegoat, the many other sacrifices, and
blood shed for propitiation, figuring Christ's blood, that was to be shed, the
price and redemption of all our blood herein, and hereby in the Sacrament
remembered.

10. What was the use of those often sacrifices?
1. To expiate, and do away sin, and so commanded.

2. To sanctify those that were unclean, or infected with leprosy, defiled
by any other uncleanness, Legal or Ceremonial.

3. To prosper weighty attempts, as Saul when he was to fight with the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 13. 8.

11. Is Christ's sacrifice effectual to this?
Yes, more fully and abundantly in every respect. For,

By it sin is fully expiated; his blood cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1. 6.

By it we are sanctified thorowout, both in souls and bodies, prayers, and all
our actions, and other things sanctified to us in him.

By it all things made prosperous, and a blessing to both soul and body, in
life and death, through him.

12. But how was he a sacrifice?
As his cross was the Altar, whereon offered, suffered.


As himself, the Priest, that made the Oblation,

As his humane nature, the Creature offered, of that infinite worth, as united
to his Divine Nature.

As his precious blood, the blood shed in the offering, that ought to have
purifying power, in blood.

As the fat fuming up, the sweet perfume of his merits; by which sacrifice thus
offered, he obtained eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 7. 27. and 9. 12.

13. What the benefits we remember herein?
The sealing and confirmation of his Covenant and graces.

The strengthening of our faith.

The c^mfort and nourishing of our souls.

The union with Christ and God.

The communion with all Saints, the whole Church. Of which more hereafter.

14. How said you the perpetuity of memorial noted?
As it is the continual remembrance of his death, so in the institution
commanded; and worthy by all good Christians to be used, and remembered, as the
most beneficial action that ever was done for mankind, worthy to be remembered
everlastingly, that makes him live to eternity.

15. But does not Baptism represent this also?
Yes, but not so fully and powerfully as this Sacrament, it being in that a
secondary end to show that; by our washing, remembering it on the by, but in
this Sacrament, the full end, scope, and intention of it.

16. What prescribe you then for the end of this Sacrament?
The 1. chief end, the confirmation and seal of faith and graces unto us;
whereby the testification of the union with God and Christ, communion with the
Saints.

2. Other ends also to be con^esired:

1. As testification of our obedience, and says used.

2. As solemn thanksgiving, and praising God therein, so called an
encharisticall sacrifice.

3. As confession and celebration of the memorial of Christ's sacrifice.

4. As bond of love, among the visible members of Christ's Church, so called
(...), or festum charitatis.

5. As means of more solemn celebrating the public meetings, and drawing
them together, so called (...).

6. As public note of distinction to the Church and faithful, from all
others, as also the other Sacrament.

7. As recordation of the many benefits of Christ's sacrifice, called to mind,
and continually renewed in our remembrance.

17. How is it then said before, the end only a memorial?
Because in the memorial of Christ's death and sacrifice, all the rest, both
chief and other ends, for which it is either instituted, or so often so used,
may seem after a sort to be included.

18. How does it agree with baptism?
In the chief end, the sealing of grace, and of the Covenant in general, and
diverse other particular ends, as the testifying our faith, obedience,
thankfulness, the note of distinguishing between the faithful and others, as
well as after a sort also, remembrance of Christ's death by our being washed in
his blood.

19. How differs it from Baptism?
Very much in many things, as in 1. The ceremony and external rites, and
action and elements.

2. The signification of them, and manner of it in Baptism, a washing in
Christ's blood; the other a feeding on him, and so a communion and participation
of Christ and his merits.

3. The proper ends, baptism to admit us, regenerate, renew us.

The Lords Supper to nourish, strengthen, conserve us in the Church.

4. The order of them, Baptism first, the Supper after, and not otherwise.

5. The person using baptism, all regenerate, even children, the Lords Supper,
only those that can acknowledge, and remember the benefits and reason of it.

6 The manner of use, of baptism with faith and repentance, the Lords Supper
besides them, with confession also, commemoration, thanksgiving, had so only of
those in years.

7. The usurpation of them, baptism but once, as once admitted into the
Covenant, though often renewed by repentance never iterated; the Lords Supper
the oftener used, the better, for continual nourishing of us, and
commemorations of Christ's death, and benefits received thereby.

20. How is it called?
Both Coena Domini, the Supper of the Lord, of the time and occasion when
instituted. Mensa Domini of the benefit of nourishment and food, 1 Cor. 10. 20.
(...), of the meeting together of the Church for celebration thereof. Communio,
of the union with Christ, the communion of Sai^ts, members by it, and
communication and participation of the faithful. (...), of thanksgiving, and
commemoration of Christ's blessings. Sacrificium, by the Ancients, but (...), by
praise and thanks, not (...), as propitiatory. Missa, of he late Romish
Church, either of the division of the rest of the company, and this left for
the chief the receivers, or of the al^es and oblations thither sent, or as
some define of the sacrifice, and elevation, as (...) signifies a sign, or
ensign, or elevation, (...) the sacrifice or that token and action, of, and in
the sacrifice, called (...) or the elevation.


21. Is it then a sacrifice?
Nothing less, yet the commemoration of that sacrifice by Christ once offered;
and so a holy mystery and sign of that gracio^s redemption of all the Elect,
continually to be remembered with the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, as
is more fully expressed in the parts, the sign, and thing signified.

22. What is the outward part or sign?
Bread and wine, which the Lord commanded to be received.

23. What note you in this?
1. The matter or elements bread and wine, 1. Bread etc. 2. The Author, the
Lord commanding, 2. By the Lord. 3. The action the institution, consecration,
communicating, receiving, 3. Commanded to be received.

24. What for the outward ceremony?
The bread and wine, the elements appointed.

The breaking and pouring out prepared to be used.

The blessing and consecration in words prescribed.

The distribution and delivery, receiving and using in the action of the
Priest, Communicant.

25. Is all this prescribed?
Yes, for is we observe it, we find it all that

1. At the end after Supper, whence the Lords Supper. 2. Christ took bread,
and likewise the cup. 3. He gave thanks, -- the consecration. 4. He brake it,
5. He distributed and gave it, and so f^r the cup taken and given. 6. He said
take, Eat this is my body. Drink ye all of this, this is the blood of the New
Testament, etc.
7. He commanded the Celebration so do this. Often use and continual, as often
as ye do it in remembrance of me, and so as the Apostle expounds it, to
remember the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. 26.

26. Why are these things observed?
As principally setting before our eyes the efficacy and virtue, use, and end
of the Sacrament.

1. As taking of bread, as the Lord took his Son and gave him for a
sacrifice, as Abraham commanded to offer Isaac, type of Christ his only Son.

2. As breaking and pouring out, as Christ's body broken, and blood poured out.

3. As giving thanks, and consecration, whence called (...).

4. As distributing, as he and his graces distributed, whence a communication
and communion.

5. As taking it, apprehension of Christ, and his merits by faith.

6. As eating, virtually application to the soul.

7. As drinking the refreshing of the languishing soul in the fountain of
grace.

8. As universal words, all of you to signify the universality of his graces
to all.

9. As form of words, uniformly set down in the four Evangelists for unity
and uniformity of faith, doctrine, manners.

10. As prescription of it to all, and at all times, or often, do this as often,
etc. -- and so --

11. As the continuance of it in the often celebration.

27. What of the other circumstances?
As less material, and not so primarily noting the efficacy, use or end, not
so much insisted on, and so left to the Churches order and discretion:

1. As the time, supper time, altered to morning prayer time, as the morning
sacrifice, in the morn of the new Church, which in the even of the old.

2. As the place, in an upper Chamber now the Church, yet the highest room on
earth.

3. As the persons, Disciples only, yet then the whole Church in ^ommunis, now
all the faithful.

4. As the gesture, sitting or lying down, now kneeling, as of most reverence
and humility, best fitting the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.

5. As the leavened bread, water mixed, or the like, not principally intended,
nor treated of, or commanded.

So left to the Churches determination, with whom power was left to set things
in order, as the Apostle said, Other things will I set in order when I come.

28. Why bread and wine appointed?
1. Because of the fit and near resemblance between them, and Christ's precious
body and blood, food and refreshing of the soul.

2. Because of the imitation of Melchisedec's holy action, the type hereof, and
the long continued use and order among them.

^. Because of the common, yet excellent use of them.

29. How that fit and near resemblance?
1. In the preparation aforesaid, of threshing, grinding, breaking of the
bread, treading, pouring out of the wine, as Christ's body and blood, or indeed
body and soul, prepared for an offering for sin.

2. In the special using, by taking inwardly, and digesting them for
nourishment, and refreshing of the body; so these to the soul inwardly
received, and appropriated by faith.

3. In the virtue of preservation of the hungry and famished from death, so our
souls from death also.

Of strengthening, and making glad the heart, as Psalm. 104. 4. so this bread of
life, or staff of bread, stays, strengthens the spiritual life, and
makes glad the heart and soul of the faithful, even comforted thereby to
eternity.

30. How in imitation of Melchisedec?
As he was a type of the Messiah, and brought out bread and wine to Abraham,
Cen. 14. 18. and this continuing in use among the Jews (as their traditions
testify) both to bless and consecrate their bread and wine, especially at the
Passover, and at the end of the feast; such a like distribution of a p^^t of
the bread hi^ under a napking, and a cup of wine at the end of the feast; this
ou^ Savio^^ as a Priest ^or ever after the o^der of Mel^hijede^ in continuance
of that rite begun from him at the end of the Passover, when now to vanish,
and be abolished thus c^useth it to stand for a perp^tua^l r^mem^rance of the
perfect Pas^eover, and his eterna^^ Priesthood.

31. How ^or the common and ordinary use?
As being ordi^ary and at h^^^, yet of most excellent use, the ^ustent^tion and
comfort of life; so this Sacrament easy to be com^ by, and no burde^som^
ceremony, no^ costly, yet of most excellent use and comfort ^o the very soul,
and as easy to be come by so often to be used.

32. What the inward part or thing signifi^d?
The body and blou^ of Christ, ve^ily and indeed taken and received of the
faithful in the Lo^ds Supper.

33. What herein observed?
The matter, body and blood of Christ.

The action, take ^and received by the faithful.

The Analogy, and rese^blance of the parts.

The manner the^eof verily and indeed, wherein chiefly the force of the
relation.

4. What are the relata and correlat^?
The Bread and Wine, cons^cration and blessing, breaking, pouring forth, giving
and distributing, nourishing and strengthening the body; Relate unto, and
signifying, the Body and Blood of Christ, his holine^e and ve^tue, his
suffering and shedding his blood, his taking and receiving by faith, nourishing
and refreshing of the soul.

35. What the Relation and Analogy?
The similitude of the things, and representation of one by the other, founded
after a sort on the similitude of the things themselves in nature; but
absolutely obtaining the force of the Sacramental signifying, from the
institution, and by grace.

36. How is the taking and receiving of them then?
Verily and indeed; but after a spirtuall and divine manner, not so grossly
and corporally, or carnally to be understood, as poor sense, or reason should
think or presume to define, under the compass of their shallow apprehension:
which their presuming has moved and stirred up strange mists in this divine
speculation; that ought only mysteriously to be looked on, and admired with
the eye of faith, not curiously to be pried into by silly eye of sense, or
humane reason.

37. Why say we so?
Because, as there are arcana Dei and Religionis, that ought not to be pried
into, and (...), that cannot be told, and mysteries in the Trinity and faith,
that even mortal heart cannot comprehend, nor is it fitting or needful for us
to know, much less curiously enquire after: so especially in this mystery,
where Christ is verily and indeed present, yet after such an ineffable manner,
the tongue cannot utter, nor reason well comprehend, yet faith may plainly see;
because he has said it who is the Truth, and we must believe, though for our
weakness not able sufficiently to conceive or comprehend.

38. Why cannot we comprehend them?
Because we are finite, and the counsels, and ways or thoughts of God, that
he will have concealed to exercise our humility: not like us, or our thoughts,
or ways; bu^ as his wisdom, in the depth of his counsels, infinite in
himself, though to usward, and in part, so much as necessary for us to know,
finite and revealed, proportionable to our understanding and apprehension: so
what is not revealed, it is holy modesty, and sobriety, not curiously to
enquire after, as in this and many other things.

39. But some have devised how, in this and the like.
Yet without Gods especial grace, or command and illumination, it may well
seem but lost labor, and vain: for when many have devised diverse ways of his
presence, here, or in the midst among his Disciples, when the doors were shut,
he to whom all power is given, can have other means to show his presence and
power, then their poor thoughts or inventions can devise: And for this, if it
had been expedient for us to know, he would have showed it; it may then suffice
us, that since he has said it, he is present, and how he is present, we
shall find by his graces here, and perfectly in glory, when we shall know as
we are known, and all our imperfections done away.

40. What are we to do then?
With the Disciples, to receive him, believe and enjoy his blessed presence and
grace, making no question with those Capernaits, as to say, Master how came
thou hither? considering also, the Bethshemites were blessed by the presence of
the Arc, but cursed and plagued when they began curiously to pry into it, 1
Kings 6. And curious questions little avail to godliness, especially in such
things as this, where silence and admiration is the best eloquence to express
such mystery: and here godly meditation safer then Socraticall disputation,
when commonly discourse of controversy does abate devotion, which ought rather
to be kindled by pious and godly meditation.

41. Is this sufficient then, or best for us?
It is: For we may consider, if humane reason waver in things sensible, how
much more in divine, so far above sense, and from sense removed? The creation
of Angels being above humane sense or capacity, Moses is therefore said, not to
have mentioned it; so in this mystery much more, the manner of Christ's
presence, and how he comes, uttered only, as Pythagoras Scholars were
silent, and assured it was so, if he said it, though else they did not
perceive it; much more the authority of Christ should be with us; because he
said it, and so let us honor him in this mystery, praise him for his mercies,
receive his graces, believe his promises, and be thankful for his presence and
blessings; and here those things we comprehend, we may admire, and what we
cannot, we should more admire, and if word or heart be wanting, to express or
conceive, let not faith be wanting to relieve; because he is truth, and the
Sun remains a sp^endent body, though Bat^ or Owls eyes cannot endure it, or
our eyes look into this truth.

42. But are we not to believe as the ancient Fathers did?
Yes, as the holy and most ancient ever have done, as the Disciples, who
believed, not que^tioning how, and enjoyed his grace and presence; and the like
by the most ancient Fathers confessed, we are to acknowledge, as

1. With Dionysius the Areopagite, that it is a most divine mystery,

2. Justine Martyr, that not common bread or drink.

3. T^rtullian, that it was made Christ's body.

4. Origin, that we eat and drink the body and blood of Christ, and so the
Lord enters under our roof.

5. Cyprian, that as in the person of Christ, the Humanity was seen, but the
Divinity hid: so in the visible Sacrament, or divine essence communicated.

6. Hillary, of the verity of the body and blood of Christ, there is no place
of doubt.

7. Ambrose, that, more excellent food then Ma^^a.

8. Jerome, the Lord both maker of the feast and food.

9. St. Augustine, that in this sacrifice, the Lord bo^^ Priest himself and
sacrifice.

And so of others, with whom we consent in the Orthodox interpretation, and
confess and admire he greatness and divinesse of the mystery, and with
reverence embrace what in some respect we are not able to conceive, of the
mysterious Majesty of the same.

43. How are we then to believe?
That by the faithful receivers verily and indeed is the body and blood of
Christ received, and so duly and in faith received, as Christ said it, it is
his body and blood, and with it himself and his merits, are applied to the
soul, to make it a holy Tabernacle, fit for his presence, which yet as it is
spiritual food, is understood in a spiritual manner and self, fit^ing the
same mystery, and not destro^ing the nature or parts of the Sacrament; but such
his presence, but the soul and faith are spiritual things: so is ^e
spiritually and after a divine and in^ffable manner present to it, and
nourishing and sustaining the sa^^. But is not this he confession of Con, or
Transu^stantiation? No: For neither with the (...), do we say it is cum
Christo, or Christus cum pa^e, in or sub pane, this with Christ, or Christ
within or under it: Nor with the M (...), turned into his body, but with Christ
himself, as Christus is panis vitae, so this Bread is his body, and the Cup
his blood, and so say his Apostles: but in the Sacramental locution, and
phrase of a Sacrament, where, the sign shows the thing signi^ed, and by
virtue and efficacy of his power and inst^tution, ^oth are divinely present by
the operation of his Spirit and grace, and so found expressed in holy Scripture
as also expounded in the same, where he is not only figuratively called the
Vine, the Shepherd, etc, but more mysteriously also to be understood, as here
in the Sacrament, and so expounded in other places.

44. How expressed, or so expounded?
In that whereas Baptism is called, Absolutio peccatorum, the w^shing of sin.

The Laver of R^generation, Titus 3. 5. 21. and saves us, 1 Pet. 3. 21. being
the Sacrament or sign of it only.

So ^ircumcision, called the Covenant, Genesis 17. 10. but the sign or Sacrament
of it, verse. 11. proxime sequenti.

So the Lamb is the Passover, Exodus 12. 11. but called the Remembrance of it,
verse. 14. and the sign of it, Exodus 13. 9. and so Matthew. 26. 26. and in the
other Evangelists it is called, Christ's body and his blood, and 1 Cor. 10. 16.
the Communion of his body, and Communion of his blood and yet bread; and
partakers they of that one bread: in which sense also said, Christ was the
Rock, and spiritual meat and drink, and the Rock said to be Christ, 1 Cor.
10. 3. 4. So Christ our Passover, 1 Cor. 5. 7. and the Lamb, 1 John 29. and in
the Revelation, and the like^; wherein, though we acknowledge Gods powerful
and gracious presence in it, and the weakness of our apprehension, or reason,
to sound the depth of this mystery, and manner of his coming, as we doubt not
of his presence, and true and very receiving, neither hold we it needful for
weak reason curiously to enquire further, nor need we seek to the Ubiquitaries
doctrine, or other Comments of humane invention for props of our faith, or this
holy confession.

45. How do we then apprehend the mystery?
As it is delivered, and to be apprehended spiritually, and by faith, and so
mysteries are offered, not to questioners, but to believers: yet herein, if
with Solomon we admire, or say, How is it credible God should thus dwell with
men? 1 King 8. 27. let us remember what the Angel Gabriel said, The power of
the most highest, and of the holy Ghost, has overshadowed it. Here is his
power and word, to search further, or beyond it, were teme^ity, and not to
believe it, infidelity; but to believe and acknowledge it, life eternal.

46. How may we reverently call or esteem it?
As the Fathers have in their godly zeal declared, described and called it,

As a great, inestimable, divine, most noble Sacrament; a pure, venerable,
eternal praiseworthy Mystery.

A Mystery of peace and piety, holy of holies, blessing, and hidden Manna; and
such reverent Titles as their holy zeal and devotions moved them unto: And if
any way seeming hyperbolical, we may well think and know, nothing too high to
show it, or words too divine for this holy mystery, if well and graciously
interpreted or understood.

47. What figures of this Sacrament?
1. The Paschall Lamb principally, whose forerunner it was, 1 Cor. 5. 7.

2. The bread and wine that M^lchisedec brought ^ut when he blessed Abraham,
Genesis 14. 18. and he a type of Christ.

3. The Shewbread, always before God, lawful for none to eat but the
Priests: this those only that are godly, and so a Royal Priesthood.

4 The Cake baked in ashes, in virtue of which Elias walked forty days and
forty nights, and came to Mount Horeb, where he saw God, as we hereby
strengthened, and brought to see God.

5. The Manna, Angels food, for the excellent properties, and only ceasing the
Sabbath; and this in use with us till the eternal Sabbath.

6. The Ark, containing holy things, made of pu^est shining Cedar, Shittim
wo^d; this of the flesh of the Son of God, and bringing holiness, and
graces, and blessings with it.

7. Elizeus meal, 1 King. 4. that sweetened the pot, and took away bitterness
and death: so this bringing life.

48. ^ow is Christ generally in holy Scripture said to be received?
1. In his person, as by Zacheus entertaining him, to whom he said, This day is
salvation come into thy house.

2. In the poor, received or entertained in charity, when it will be
acknowledged what ye did to these the little ones, ye did to me.

3. In his M^ssengers: Who receive you, receive me and who receive me, receive
him that sent me: as who receive a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall have
a Prophets reward.

4. In his doctrine, and by faith, so Joh. 1. 12. To such as receive him, he
gave power to become the sons of God.

5. In the Sacraments of the old Law, shadows and types of the new.

6. In Baptism: he that is baptized into Christ, has put o^ Christ, Gal. 3.
17.

7. In the L^rds Supper most divinely, as in this Sacrament exhibited, and most
effectually, as verily and indeed by application of his g^aces and presence,
powerfully to the soul; that whereas the old Sacraments were types and
shadows; the Doctrine, the Articles or conveyance; the Messengers, the
nectaries and servants; Baptism the seal of a new life and beginning in
Christ; this of the comforts and nourishing in him, as continually feasted with
his graces, and enjoying his presence.

49. What are the benefits whereof we are made partakers hereby?
The strengthening and refreshing our souls, by the body and blood of Christ,
as our bodies are by the bread and wine.

50. What is here expressed?
The analogy of these spiritual comforts to the soul and spiritual life;
correspondent, though in a divine manner to those corporal comforts of the
body, by those excellent means and instruments.

In what manner?
In the 1. Receiving and using, 2. Blessing and graces, 3. Effect and virtue
of it.

51. How seen in the receiving and using?
In that first, as the bread and wine are received by the hand of the body,
eaten and digested by the mouth and stomach, are made the nourishment of the
body: 2. So the body and blood of Christ, received by the hand of faith, fed on
by the mouth, digested by the heart, is made nourishment and strength to the
soul.

52. How in the blessing and graces?
In that as the bodily life is continually fed, nourished and refreshed by
these corporal substances, so the spiritual life of grace is sustained,
continued, and confirmed in us by the heavenly Manna, food of souls, Christ
thus received: as he has commanded, and as the blessing of God sanctifies the
corporal food, no less this bread of life to the nourishment and refreshing
of the soul.

53. How in the effect and virtue?
As we are hereby made one with Christ, and he one with us, and we all in him
at one with God, and so said to be,

1. Flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, As the corporal food united to
our bodies; This spiritual uniting our souls to him and in him.

2. One blood in him and of him, the second Adam all the elect; as one blood in
the first Adam, all mankind, one by transfusion of nature with sin; this other
by transfusion of power, and grace in righteousness.

54. How is this expressed here?
As many grains of corn make one loaf, and many grapes one cup of wine; so
we are al^ one bread in Christ, and one cup or wine acceptable in Christ, 1
Cor. 10. 17. and all the faithful in all ages, becoming one body, and of one
blood in Christ, where ever diversely dispersed over the whole world, in him
receive all graces, as he is heir of all; and thus we have union with Christ,
and in him with God, the fountain, life and bliss.

Communion with all Saints in heaven and earth.

55. How is this nourishment seen in the soul?
As it is increased in strength of the spiritual life, and more furnished with
graces, for as man lives not by bread only, but by the word proceeding from
the mouth of God, this is most apparently seen in the soul, strengthened and
confirmed in the faith grounded on his truth, thereby as all things have their
being, gathering strength to live unto eternity in the mighty power of the same
that sustaineth all things, and so thirsting to drink of the fountain of
living waters, is thus nourished and refreshed of God: so comes next in place
to be considered with what reverence we should come and approach to the holy
Table, and receiving the Sacrament.

56. Why should kneeling at receiving the blessed Sacrament, or bowing toward
the holy Table be used?
The very naming of them, the blessed Sacrament, and holy Table, might seem
sufficiently to answer this Question, as indeed by any that but rightly
conceived the due worth of the Sacrament, with the benefit and blessing, or so
reverently esteemed the holy mysteries as they ought, and with dutifulness to
God in all humility at the receiving and else, remembered to render thanks for
the same, it would never be questioned (or so questioned as it is by some, with
intention to deny or decline it) they would rather think no humility too low,
reverence too much, or devotion too great, that could be offered to God, or
shown at the receiving and remembrance of so great a blessing, and in so great
a presence, not the like of it again on earth, as where the greatest
Potentates and might Kings and Emperors may be glad to yield their humblest
reverence, with the rest of Gods Saints and Servants; but to content any modest
minded man, and not engaged to fancy or faction, it might suffice, that the
Church who has, and ever had delegate power, as we see in the Apostles, and
from them derived to their successors, to see things in order where they come,
and commanded things to be done decently and in order, and so from antiquity
have established it, and had the warrant, and approbation of Gods holy Spirit
in the Church, with promise of his gracious presence, to be with them to the
worlds end, to guide them into all truth (the promises of God being Yea and
Amen, in Christ) has so ordained and commanded it, which command of his, and
guidance of that holy Spirit, as from the mouth of God himself, is by all
godly men, and dutiful sons of the Church to be esteemed; though here and in
the like cases, perhaps nothing will suffice, or satisfy some curious
questionists, and fancifull or furious factionists of our times, with a spirit
of con^radiction, bent wholly to sedition, wrangling and dissension.

57. But is not this bordering too near on Idolatry or superstition, and
tending to diminish the Creators honor?
It would never be dreamed on but by such men as nothing almost can please,
that is not of their own coinage, crotchets of their own devising, or an idol
of their own fancies setting up, and then iudeed, such, (and such only) shall
have all the applause, or even extreme and unreasonable adoration among them,
and their poor seduced and deluded Sectaries; and here it might as well be said
of honoring the King (who is Gods Image that it were to diminish Gods honor,
or that reverence before the chair of Estate to be diminishing the Kings
honor, or observance to the Peers, on whom his favor shines, a disgrace to
the Prince as this, when indeed it is a more honoring of either by that
distinguishing, and respect to others in their due place and degree, and by the
degrees the dignity of each more seen and declared, and the reverence done to
the one, redounding in some measure to the other, as if not more enhau^sed, yet
more expressed by it, and as the house for the owners, so these for Gods sake
respected, though as the things different, so the reverence exhibited to each
his due, as showed in the last Section before, there being a Cultus reverentiae
or R^ligiosa observantia, as well as divina adoratio a civil respect,
religious reverence, and divine worship, and so some things may have a civil
respect, others a religious observance, God only a divine worship; and the holy
things in reference to him, and for his sake are reverenced so far forth as
they are, which is far from insinuating their derivation of Gods honor upon
any besides God, which were damnable Idolatry (and God divert it:) for as the
infinitude of his nature cannot be comprehended under the same kind of being,
so neither to be comprehended or dispersed under the same kind of worship with
a creature, when yet notwithstanding by such reverentiall respects to holy
things in their degrees, the Church may seem to show, as one learnedly
observes, by what natural and rational proportions, she rose (and we may with
her) by way of supereminencie, as the Schools speak, from a relative respect
of divine things, to an absolute respect of the divine Essence, and from a just
valuation of man, to a right estimate of God, and this a religious, holy and
good use of that reverence used according to the several distance and
difference of degrees in it.

58. Does the Church of God so allow it?
Yes, and ever has, as Damas speaks of the like (...), may we say of some part
of the reverence used, whiles divine worship only directed to God, and for
whose sake yet the respect and reverence that we yield to the holy things, is
to them extended, and if all Isreael and the Priests, as before noted, without
touch or stain of Idolatry, could or might and did worship (as well as David
and Daniel toward the holy Temple) toward the mount, the cloud, the pillar of
fire, the Tabernacle, the Arc, Oracle, and Mercy-seat (where yet were Images
of Cherubims and Palmetrees, Exodus 37. 7. and 1 King. 6. 23. 32.) how much more
we before God in his Church, and to him toward his holy Table, his Altar,
Mercy-seat, and mysteries there tokens of his graces and presence, and where he
has no less mercifully promised, then powerfully performed his promise, and
manifested such his goodness, and gracious presence, yet firmly looking at
him, so graciously promising and performing, or his promises and graces in the
things showed and performed? not the bare things, nor boots it to cavil, or
say thus the Heathen or any Idolaters might palliate their Idolatry, it is
far otherwise with them (besides the difference of the worship before noted)
who terminate their worship even divine in the thing on their Altars, or under
the thing show a false god, Wherein it is terminated, as Dagon, Molec, Anubis,
Osyris, Jupiter, or a creature or Devil, as some Heathens and Indians, yea
sometimes such wicked men, and caitiffes, (As a noble Christian Lady, told a
heathen tyrant, and persecutor, worse then the wretches that did, or commanded
sacrifice to them, as she asked him, if he would willingly be counted so
beastly blind, bad or blockish, as Vul^an, Plutus, Mercury, Stercutius, nay
Mars himself, or his wife, as Venus or Flora, so infamous for lewdness,
thieves and stales of theft, or strumpets;) thus the case far different, though
even in the best things, we may note the Devil as it were, Gods Ape, and
hereby perhaps in his divelish policy, seeking to disparage, and disgrace what
were good, by such his apish imitation, which yet are, and ever shall continue
holy, and his devices frustrate, soon as discovered.

59. Why do we worship generally toward the East?
Not as having it from the Gentiles or Persians, adoring the Sun rising, but
according to the position of our Churches, and that originally from antiquity
derived, as placed opposite to the sight of the Jewish Temple and Synagogues,
that looking to the west, or Sunset, were so to end, and had their Sunset, as
this Son of righteousness, our Saviors rising, or his setting in the flesh,
with that their Temple, but brighter rising again by his glorious resurrection
and ascension, so ours looking to that Son-rising, and to the East, toward the
face of Christ, as he was exalted on that Altar of his cross, looking from
Mount Calvary West, and as the Temple stood, (which was to vanish) from the
Temple, or with the sight and posi^ion of it, a looking westward toward us,
and our Church, and so we and our Churches, on the opposite part, as it were
over all the world looking East, and toward him in his rising, and that
Temples declining; whence we thus with antiquity, as well as authority
commanding it, and good reason, and Religion so enjoining, ordinarily do our
devotions, as it is fit, according to such prescript, and the voice of the
Turtle that is heard in our land, the voice of Christ, and his Church the
Spirit, and the Bride, who thus say come, and whom we ought to hear, and not
the voice of Babell, or confusion of tongues that would pervert all things, the
voice of Schism and Sedition, whence flow disorder, and dissension, kindling
the flames of contention and rebellion, or sowing the seeds of discord, Anarchy
and confusion.

60. This may then serve for answer to them also, that ask why we worship
toward the upper parts of the Church and Altar?
It may, from such position and site of our Churches, or if it content them
not, we may thus farther return and retort it, against them that urge at it or
against it, by so questioning it, why do they rather use reverence to God at
the Church then any other place, but because of his more presential appearance,
or gracious presence, as themselves confess there, then any other place
esteemed so within the Church for the same reason, as more excellent tokens of
his graces, and gracious pres^nce there in those places, then any where else
exhibited, do we so tender there our humblest reverence and devotions to him,
memorising thereby his graces and goodness that we acknowledge there
represented to our eyes and minds, o^ eyes of our mind, and devoutest
consideration in these places and things, which how can we fitly remember, or
acknowledge, but in the most dutiful and submisse manner and gesture, and with
such reverenciall respects, in token of our duty, thankfulness and humility.

61. What follows?
What preparation is required of us for the due receiving of so great a
mystery, and the graces of it, set forth in the last question and answer of the
Catechism.

SECT. IV. Of our preparation to the Lords Supper.
The preparation we ar^ to make before receiving by a due and conscionable
examination of our selves and our faith charity and repentance with convenient
motives and consideration to stir us up, and invit^ us to the same, taken the
types excellency and other the wonderful graces and effects of it, as well in
holy Scriptures testimony, as else by the secret working and speaking of Gods
secret spirit to our souls and ^^nsciences manifested and revealed, whence also
we may find many and excellent Elogia or enc^mions of the same and the
comforts we receive thereby and learn what we and our souls, or we in soul
ought to say think^ and t^stifie of the blessed ^aorament, if we be indeed
worthy Receiver^ ^ So as our Preparation by repentance, the examination of the
truth of it in our loathing and dotesting of sin and lon^ing desire after
Christ and his righteousness, our preparation by faith in examining the truth,
evidence, ground, and fruit of it the excellency of this excellency of this
faith seen in the operations of all parts of both body and soul work by love
toward God and charity toward men enflamed with good and holy desires and
zealous of good allions Whereby worthy receivers or so much deficient as
falling short or deficient in this to be accounted and so all possible means
before and reverent gesture behavior and holy Meditations at the time o^
^eceiving. to be used as after receiving, a due, serious, and thankful
recognition of this benefit and Gods mercies and blessings in Christ with
pray^rs and pious meditations to be used, and all opposi^e vanity and
profaneness avoided.

1. What is required of them that come to the Lords Supper?
A due preparation and to be rightly disposed, both before, at, and after the
receiving of the same.

2. What is this preparation?
To examine themselves whether they repent them truly of their former sins,
steadfastly purposing to lead a new life, have a lively faith in Gods mercy
through Jesus Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death, and be in
charity with all men.

3. What herein to be observed?
The due examination of themselves, and

First of their repentance, both in regard of their whole life and sins,
Past, and present, to repent them truly of those sins. To come, to prevent
them by steadfastly purposing to lead a new life.


Secondly, of their faith, wherein to be noted, the Ground of it, Gods mercy
and promises. Means of it, in and through Christ. Fruit of it, referred to
Christ, and This mystery, a thankful remembrance of it, and of his death.


His members so to forgive as we desire to be forgiven in him, and be in
perfect peace and charity with all men.

4. Why is this preparation and examination required?
Because otherwise eating and drinking unworthily, the unprepared persons eat
and drink their own damnation, not considering the Lords body, by their
presumption, 1 Cor. 11. 28. And so making the power of it, that should be
salvation, to their perdition: So he that came unprepared to the feast, without
his wedding garment, was for that presumption cast out into utter darkness,
Matthew. 21. 12. which may teach us to be prepared when we come to this feast
and Supper of the Lamb.

5. What may move us to this preparation?
The consideration and due weighing with our selves,

1. Our great unworthiness of so great a blessing, thus near to approach to
the Lord of glory.

2. The great presence we are to approach unto, even the highest estate of the
world, the honorable company of Saints.

3. That highest place, the Church and presence of God, and the Lamb, that we
are to come before, and so near, to be thus received; and how shall we appear
in our filthy nakedness, orragged and polluted clothes of sin?

4. The great favor of God thus inviting us to this feast, taking us home to
him, tying us so near in bonds of love.

5. The great and inestimable benefit we receive hereby, as Christ himself,
his graces, union with God, communion with all Saints, and confirmation in this
happy estate.

6. What other motives or consideration to be used?
Such godly and pious meditations as the very mystery it self, and every part
of it considered apart, may present unto us, to stir up devotion, and a desire
of the same in the soul: as of

1. The types and figures of it, and the like.

2. The excellency of it, compared with other feasts.

3. The wonderful graces and effects of it.

4. The Sentences of Scripture and Fathers concerning it.

5. The necessity of it, whereby the soul may be inflamed with more earnest
desire of it, and desire to be prepared and adorned in fitting sort, for the
receiving it worthily, as a Bride for her Bridegroom Christ, or the guest
having on a wedding garment.

7. How for the types and figures of it?
By remembering the types aforesaid, and such like other figures representing
the divine manner and majesty of the mystery, as well as the antiquity and
eternity of the blessing, intended and prepared for the godly, as it is

1. The feast of the marriage of the Lamb, the feast of our Passover, and feast
of our Souls. 2. The wedding dinner in the Gsopell. 3. The supper of the Lamb,
in the Revelation. 4. The banquet of the great King. 5. Figured,
1. In the Passover, 2. The Cakes Abraham set before the Angels. 3. The bread
and wine by Melchised^c set before Abraham. 4. The Shewbread in the Temple
before the Lord. 5. The Cakes that Elias did eat, walking in the strength of
them forty days, to mount Horeb. 6. The meal and oil of the widow of
Sarepta, that did not waste in the famine. 7. The Manna, Tree of life, Rock,
and such other things, representing the sweet^esse, comfort and eternity of it.

8 How the Excellency compared with other Feasts?
In that the feasts of the world commonly

1. Are profane and sensual, this heavenly and spiritual, sanctified and
ordained for the health of the soul.

2. Have variety and vanity, this only one dish; but of that perfection and
divine relish, in that unity, yielding infinite pleasure, and all saciety.

3. Have or use little speech of death, but all of earthly pleasures; in this,
like the Philosophers banquet, here is a deaths head to teach temperance, the
memorial of Christ's death and passion, but cause of our salvation proposed.

Store of meats bring diseases to the body, and destruction to the soul; in
this the soul refreshed with the grace of Christ bringing salvation.

The great excess opens the way to hell; in this holy feast, Christ sets
open the ready way to heaven.

9. How the graces else, and effects considered?
In a wonderful measure manifested in it, and so worthy to be admired, loved
and desired; since as he is wonderful, holy, Esaias 9. 11. so is this mystery:
and as was said by Manna, Man-^u, what is this? so may we say truly, with
admiration of his mercy and love, what is this?

1. That the Son of God should be thus given, bread of life, and Manna to his
people.

2. That he that dwells in heaven, among Quires of Angels, should thus be
food to the sons of men?

3. That the Lord of Majesty should thus make his Mansion on earth, and among
the tents of his servants.

4. That he should be thus received whom the heavens cannot contain for his
glory?

5. That this meat should thus comfort the soul, purge the conscience, and
cure our leprosy of nature.

6. That he does nourish us with his own body after so divine a manner.

7. That the heavenly effect is such, that the meat is not converted into our
nature, but we changed by it, into a more divine nature.

10. What other effects and graces remembered?
In that herein is the most comfortable work under heaven for our good; wherein
especially remarkable,

1. That whereas other meats receive life of the body, this gives life to the
soul.

2. That whereas other meats are changed into our substance, this changes us
into it, and a more heavenly substance.

3. It does change the mortality of our nature, into immortality of life and
glory.

4. It cannot therefore be, that our bodies should remain in the sepulcher,
since refreshed and nourished by Christ's body.

5. It is so a pledge of our resurrection and ascension with Christ into glory.

6. As bodily food renews and comfort natural heat and strength, so this
the heat of the soul.

7. As the forbidden fruit corrupted soul and body, so this, by the blessing
of God, sanctifies both.

8. Hereby not only spiritual diseases, that cause death; but death it self
expelled, and put to flight.

9 Hereby all sins cleansed, virtues increased, and the soul made fertile
with spiritual graces.

10. Hereby we are deified, as we may speak, made divine like God, reformed to
his image in grace here, in glory hereafter; which are by some referred to
twelve heads.

11. Which are they?
In that his holy remedy, cure of sickness, comfort in health, ease in
infirmity; and mystery is 1. To quicken us in death, or deadness of heart. 2.
To set at liberty in the spiritual bondage of sin. 3. To inflame us with a
kind of heat of devotion. 4. To give patience in adversity and trouble. 5. To
nourish us in health and prosperity. 6. To restore us in sickness, or
extremity. 7. To unite us to God in peace and charity. 8. To Communicate his
graces to us in necessity. 9. To make us whole, if weak and lame. 10. To
preserve us being made whole. 11. To strengthen us in all our life. 12. To
conduct us to glory in our death.


And according to this is Saint Bernards meditation on the same.

12. How is that?
That this heavenly Manna, and divine mystery,

1. Is physic to the body. 2. Way to the traveller. 3. Strength to the weak.
4. Joy to the whole. 5. Refuge to the poor. 6. Counsel to the rich. 7. Help
to them in danger. 8. Heavenly comfort to the departing soul.
According to that which says a reverend modern Divine.

1. If that I am sick, here I may cure me. 2. If whole, here I may keep me. 3.
If living, here I may comfort me. 4. If dead in sin, here I may raise me. 5. If
I desire to burn with the love of God, here I may inflame me. 6. If I am cold
in devotion, here I may warm me. 7. If blind, here I may enlighten me. 8. If
spotted, here I may cleanse me. 9. I will not fly from God, as Adam did, since
here I shall find grace to strengthen me.
13. What sentences of holy Scripture concerning it?
For our comforts, we may remember: That,

1. To Adam was said, that day thou eatest of that tree, thou shall die; but of
this here, to us, eat and live for ever, Joh. 6. 58.

2. Of mount Sinai it was said, he that touches the hill, Exodus 19. shall die;
but who comes to this hill, and feast, described, Esa. 25. 6. shall live.

3. In Sampsons Riddle, De forte dulcedo, and out of this Lion of the Tribe of
Juda, the sweetness of this heavenly Manna, in the Eucharist.

4. Jacob said, surely God is in this place, though I was not ware of it, Genesis
28. 16. so may we say, God is here, though we see him not.

5. David says, Memoriam fecit mirabilium suorum, Psalm. 111. true of this holy
mystery, his memorial, and, Tues magnus, faciens mirabilia, Psalm. 86. 9.

6. Abraham weaning Isaac, made a feast, Genesis 21. 8. Christ to weane us from
the love of the world, makes us this heavenly feast.

7. To Zacheus was said, This day is salvation come unto thy house, Luke 19.
this is said to our souls, by Christ's coming.

8 Adam cast out of Paradise, must eat the bread of carfulness; man received
to grace in Christ, does thus eat the bread of life, Angels food.

9. The Spouse in the Canticles, says, Cant. 5. 1 I have gathered my myrrh
with my spice, I have eaten my honey-combe with my honey, I have drunk my wine
with my milk, eat, O my friends, drink, etc. so speaks Christ to our souls
in the Eucharist.

10. Christ teaches this salutation, Peace be to this house, Luke 10. 5. he
says so to us, in this; and if we open to him, he promises to sup and rest
with us, Rev. 3. 21.

14. What should the soul say in this respect?
It may well answer in the words of the Spouse.

1. Ecce Sponsus, as the wise Virgins, Mat. 25. 6. and go forth to meet him.

2. Ecce Ancilla Domini, with the blessed Virgin, Luke 1. 18.

3. Dic verbum, and vivet anima, with the Centurion, Matthew. 8 29.

4. Lift up your heads ye gates, and be you lift up you everlasting doors, and
the king of glory shall come in, Psalm 24.

5. Taste and see how gracious the Lord is, etc. Psalm. 34. 7.

6. Give us Lord this water of life, with the woman of Samaria, John 4.

7. As the Heart longs for the water-brookes, etc. Psalm. 42.

15. What other comfortable sayings of the Fathers of this?
In that reverent style they use of it, as aforesaid, and as St. Chrysostom
says, it is a miracle of mysteries. Saint Cyprian, a joyful solemnity. Thomas
Aquinas, a precious banquet, admirable, wholesome and full of all sweetness;
as by the ancient Christians (...), feast of charity, and so generally, a
great, divine, venerable, inestimable, and most noble mystery.

16. What is our necessity of it, or how discovered?
By considering, 1. Our want and nakedness without it, and what need of
refreshing we have in our earthly journey.

2. What comfort it brings with it, bringing Christ and his graces into our
houses.

3. What is our work, our land, our people, as was demanded of Jonah, Jon. 1. 9.

4. Whither our journey tends in this our pilgrimage of life.

5. Heaven our home and haven, and this the only or chief viand, we can have
for our refreshing on the way.

17. How may we be confirmed, or farther enflamed with the love and desire of
this holy mystery?
By serious considering, and ruminating with thy self, these or the like holy
meditations, of the necessity, greatness, worthiness of this divine, and
heavenly Sacrament, or thy duty in the same, and blessedness by it. As,

1. How it is Manna, Angels food, Bread of life, the Seal of the Covenant,
Pledge of Grace, etc. Marriage feast.

2. How in regard of it, all earthly honors and substance are vain: And
hereby peace is come to thy soul, and salvation.

3. How whilst thou do communicate, thou art a temple of the holy Ghost, and
thy soul a house of prayer.

4. How by it thou art become a living and new sepulcher for thy Saviors body,
or which more, his graces to reside in.

5. How he is thus taken down from the Cross by thee, and lodged in this new
Sepulcher, in thy garden.

6. How hereby, myrrh and pure spices, shall flow and distill into that
Garden, thy Soul.

7. How it is the heavenly viand of the soul, and only best refection in thy
journey toward heaven, and eternity.

8. How hereby thou may be cured of thy sickness of sin, blindness, issue of
blood, lamenesse, or other infirmity.

9. How thou art bid to this feast, bring but faith and have it, and all
blessings; Pray, Lord increase my faith.

10. How, if Napkins, brought from the body of the Apostles, wrought cures, and
miracles; how much more, this body of the Lord, in thee, and to thy soul?

11. How Christ in his conception, took our nature, and we in this spiritual
reception, and conception of him, partake of his Divine nature.

12. How as we receive him, here, in this state of grace, he will, hereafter,
receive us in glory.

17. How is our preparation by repentance.
The examination of the truth of our repentance, by the consideration of the
time past, and former sins. Present, weaknesses and infirmities. To come, our
purpose of amendment, by leaving our former courses, and study to amend our
present imperfections by our striving and seeking to procure, and 1. Have a
sense of feeling, and so a knowledge, and an acknowledgement of sin.

2. To have a loathing, leaving and forsaking of the same.

3. To have a resolution, and firm prosecution of it, and a new course of
l^fe, and holy living, as was before declared in the Sacrament of Baptism; and
the Godfathers vow and promise at the Font.

18. How is a son^e of sin wrought in us?
By grace given of God, obtained by prayer, and consideration of the will of
God, which is our holiness; and so we may proceed thence

1. To the knowledge of sin, which is looking into the glass of the Law,
wherein is seen, God ^ purity. Our sanctity required. Our sin, and so ugly
deformity.

2. To the acknowledgement of that hateful monster sin, thereby to obtain
remission and forgiveness, and deliverance from the same.

19. How is the lo^thing of sin best wrought in us?
By considering,

1. The ugliness and deformity thereof in Gods sight.

2. The ugliness and deformity of our souls thereby made abominable in Gods
sight, and like the Devil.

3. The loss wosustaine thereby, as the blotting out the image of God in our
^oules.

4. The impurity of sin, and the soul defiled by sin made a cage of unclean
birds.

5. The ^ate of God against sin, whose eyes can behold no evil.

6. The loathing wherewith God loatheth a sinner, and his actions that are so
contra^y to his pure nature, polluted and unclean.

7. The end of sin, shame, misery and confusion, which may well move ^s to the
leaving, loathing, hating, and forsaking the same as so ^oule a monster, that
God much hates.

20. How may that godly resolution be best wrought and confirmed in us?
By considering,

1. The promises of God to the penitent and godly persons.

2. The goodness of God requiring it.

3. The mercy of God alluring us to him.

4. The examples of mercy in sinners, received to grace to their comfort, and
felicity, as of Mary Magdel^ne: penitent thief: David, Peter, etc.

5. The judgments of God against impenitent sinners denounced.

6. All the actions and works of God, as i^ were persuading us to a new
obedience.

7. The unprofitablenesse, shortness, and contemptiblenesse, yea endless
shame of sin.

8. The fruits of conversion to God, holiness and honor, joy, comfort and
peace hereby, and here obtained, endless glory and eternity of reward
hereafter in the love, favor and presence of God, which may move us to a
constant resolution, yea prosecution of so happy a new a course intended, and
perseve^ance to the end.

21. How is the preparation by faith?
By examining the truth, and lively operation thereof, to the saving and
adoring the soul by

1. The ground thereof, the Rock Christ. 2. The steadfastness there of without
wavering. 3. The fruits and ^ff^cts thereof in our repentance begun and
perfected.
Love to God in praise and thankfulness.

Love to men in charity and forgiveness.

22. What is faith?
The evidence and assurance of things not seen, but hoped for; and so in
particular of the mercies and promises of God made to us in Christ, expressed
in his word, and confirmed in the Sacrament the seal of grace, the ground
whereof is Christ the rock, and head corner stone, on which the Church is
built, and whence it is so firm that the gates of hell shall not be able to
prevail against it; and as the Apostle says, Neither height nor depth,
principalities nor powers, life nor death, things present nor things to come,
is able to remove us from it, or the love of God, the fruit and effect of the
same.

23. How is repentance the fruit of it?
As that is indeed the root and beginning of all goodness in us, and also
yielding at last perfection to the same, as the fear of God the beginning of
wisdom is founded in faith, the doctrine of salvation, apprehended by faith,
mercy and graces received by faith, repentance so begun, continued and
perfected by the working of faith, and so also the fulfilling of the Law begun
in faith of God, for whose sake we love our neighbor, and in the same faith
yield him, our Lord, his honor and obedience; thus faith forms in us all
virtues and graces, as the same testify the truth of our faith.

24. How is this excellency of faith seen?
Excellently described in ninth and tenth to the Hebrews, where shown to be
the root and foundation of all the excellent graces of God, as the power of God
in all holy men and Saints on earth, the ornament of the soul, and to us even
all in all for godliness; so by

1. The eye of faith, 1. The Fathers saw the promises afar off. 2. We see God,
and 3. Look up toward heaven.


2. The hand of faith, we apprehend Christ and his mercy and merits, and apply
them to the soul, and are ready and prompt to all good works.

3. The heart of faith we believe and conceive Christ; lay hold on the promises.

4. The tongue of faith, we praise God, and make a godly confession.

5. The feet of faith, Enoch walked with God, and we come to his holy Temple,
and walk the ways of righteousness, and by this faith as by a hand receive
Christ in the Sacrament, and a mouth feeding on him, and a stomach or digestive
faculty taking him to our souls, we are nourished by him, and turned by his
power into one substance, body, flesh and blood with him, made flesh of his
flesh, bone of his bones, and in him acceptable to God.

25. How is this faith seen working by love?
In our yielding all honor and praise to God with thanks for his benefits and
obedience to his will and Commandments.

In our yielding due respect to our neighbor according to the will of God in
perfect charity and peace with all men.

26. How then in respect of God?
In general. To yield all honor, love, obedience and duty, as it is expressed
in the Commandments, and first Table especially.

In particular. In respect had to this Sacrament and the receiving thereof,

1. To have an humble and thankful heart.

2. To have holy remembrance of this so great benefit and blessing.

3. To have reverent commemoration thereof, with mouth and lips, ready to set
forth the praises, and goodness of God, with thanksgiving for the same.

27. How in respect of men?
To be rightly disposed in charity toward them,

Both generally. As it is the will of God, and commanded in the Law and Gospel.

And particularly. In regard of this holy action, where is so especially
required,

1. Forgiveness. We desire forgiveness, as in the Lords Prayer.

2. And here. And perfect peace with all men. As we desire to be at peace with
God, and to have union with him, and communion with the Saints, whereof this
Sacrament is a token and symbol, received to the soul.

28. How if we sinde not our selves so well prepared?
We are not to leave the Sacrament, but rather labor to be better prepared,
which if we desire, will assuredly be effected; for we had not that grace to
desire so well without Gods Spirit, and Sanctorum desideria Preces, God
accepts the good, even in the desire, and gives more grace for that secret
prayer; and we may use the means and motives before remembered.

29. How if we feel our selves heavy, and lumpish, even to so good desire?
To be sorry for it, and God will give grace, for godly sorrow, for any sin;
and it self is an earnest, or token of grace, and by stirring up such cinders
of grace, it may grow to a great flame, by Gods secret assistance; for we that
have received all our life time so many and great blessings, why should we be
unthankful, (which is a shame) or idle, or desp^ire of more.

30. Bus were we not better refrain in this case?
Though to come not well prepared, is an offense, yet to stay away is no less;
for it may seem a provoking of God, to anger, by such neglect; as staying in
sin, and staying a way from this holy Mystery, appointed for a means and seal
of grace; So this is the maze, or labyrinth, sin bringethus into; danger in
coming, and more danger in staying from the Lords Table.

31. What may we do then?
If any holy desire in our hearts, rather come, because this is a gate of
mercy, or Jacobs ladder, whereon Angels and graces descend; and we may here
find mercy; the woman that touched the Hemme of Christ's garment, was healed
for her faiths sake, much more if thou touch the Lord himself; having a grame
of faith, which is seen in thy holy desire, for though God hears not
sinners; and their sacrifice, and prayer is an abomination; it is understood
not so much of the sinner, as the resolute in sin, and delighter the ein; for
the thief was heard, and the Publicane justified, both sinners; bu^repenting,
and both received.

32. But may not the Minister put any back?
Yes: upon any notorious offense, or scandal, till public satisfaction
given; as it is not sit to give holy things to dogs, or cast pearls before
swine; yea, and sometimes at the discretion of the Minister, when upon his
knowledge, it may be for the benefit of the party, by his better preparedness,
and humiliation.

33. Who can be said well or sufficiently prepared?
Though none can be sufficiently prepared, conformably to the great dignity of
the mystery in it self, and our unworthiness considered, did we prepare our
selves all our lives; yet if we come, as before is showed, with faith and
repentance, judging our selves, and confessing our unworthiness, but with
purpose of amendment in due reverence; this is as God requires, and by him
accounted coming worthily; for as in our alms, is required, according to that
which as a man has, nor that he has not; so in this preparing, doing as much
as we can, is thereby accounted wanting nothing.

34. What reverence required in coming?
1. Both internal, of the mind, humbled and exercised in holy thoughts, and
devotions, on the knees of our hearts.

2. And external, of the body, for testification thereof, as one to be done,
the other not to be left undone, for who can too humbly, or reverently receive
so great, and holy a blessing, and divine mystery.

35. Why such preparation or reverence required?
The more to humble, and fit us, to receive so high a blessing, as we may
consider,

1. If so many purifications, and cleansings by the Law appointed, in them that
did approach the temple.

2. If such preparations and purifications before the receiving of the Law,
Exodus 19.

3. If Moses must put off his shoes, approaching the Angel in the bush, Exodus
2.

4. If David and Solomon made such preparation for the material temple,

5. If David in the Tabernacle, Solomon in the Temple, on their knees and faces
before the Lord,

6. The 24 Elders, their crowns to the ground, as bowed before the Mercy seat
and the Lamb, with what preparation let us think, what manner of persons we
ought to be, and with what reverence and humility ought we to approach his
presence, or ^he throne of grace.

36. What are we to do at the receeiving?
We are to consider the benefit and present mystery, wonder with reverence,
touch it with the hand of faith, appreh^nd it with the heart, and so receive
the outward sign, contemplate the inward grace, and thou may

So 1. Remember the Author, his action and holy institution. Holy company
present, when first administered. His offering and passion then presently at
hand.
2. Conceive Thy self invited now, to that holy feast. Thy invitation to the
Table of Angels in heaven. Thy preservatio^ in the strength of this, to
eternity.
3. Consider Heavenly graces presented with this Manna, Angels food. Christ,
peace and salvation come to our souls. Our union with Christ and God, and
communion with the Saints.



36. What is to be done after receiving?
1. We ought to give thanks to Christ for his benefits blessings, and graces;
This benefit, and his presence therein: His coming thus under our roo^, and
bringing peace and salvation to us.

2. We o^g^t to beseech him, Never to depart from us: To be more powerfully
present wi^h us: To continue with us to the end, and take us wholly to h^mselfe.

3. Remember to resign our selves wholly to him that has thus taken
possession of our souls. Be more and more careful to please him: Fly from
what shall be displeasing to him, or desiling to our sovles.

4. Meditate on the covenant of God, whereof this a seal; Renewing thy
covenant of obedience in this Sacrament: The holiness of obedience thou have
promised. As holiness becomes the House of God for ever, and such is the
Christians soul, a house or temple of the holy Ghost; and therefore to fly
sin and vice, and practice new and better obedience all the days of our life.

37. How may this holy course be continued?
By earnest and hearty prayer, the beginning, obtaining and conservation of all
graces to the soul, together with the meditation of this so great a blessing;
and herein, as Christ's gracious presence, so in him Gods divine presence, both
graciously here, and his eye and aid powerfully with us present every where:
then which, if we ju^tlv consider it, there can be no greater motive to pull us
back from sin, and confirm us in goodness; and so if it were possible,
always, but however, often to remember, that he, who is thus graciously
present in this divine mystery, and Sacrament, is most powerfully always
present, and vigilant over us in his Majesty; yea, behold thus and all our
actions.

38. How if we want of this so exact preparation, or the degrees of such
perfection?
We are to bewail our wants, seek for more supplement of graces from him, who
gives ^reely, and reprocheth no man; and so strive still for more perfection.

39. But what of careless, negligent, and profane contemners or presumers?
Of such it will be verified, They eat and drink their own damnation, not
considering or caring for the Lords body, and coming but as Hogs and swine,
these best things are to them an occasion of falling, and they will be plagued
for their presumption, as making the Table of the Lord, and feast of salvation,
a table of condemnation, by their profanesse; against which carelessness and
contempt, God has threatened severe judgment, and casting out of his presence,
to be punished in utter darkness, with the Devil and his Angels for ever.
From which fearful doom he in his mercy deliver us.

SECT. V. An Appendix concerning the sum and use of the Catechism.
An Appendix showing the sum and use of the Catechism to be the foundation of
our profession of Christianity in the laying thereby the grounds of religion,
specified In those rites of Our faith and good works the Creed and
Command^nents and the rule and doctrine of Prayer, and the Sacraments all taken
out of holy Scripture. and the express word of God whose books are in this
order remembered the Chief of which as the Canon ^aith and rule of all godly
obedience are received the others for good example and that History admitted
and read though not so generally approved as many Pseud^graphe were by the
Church utterly rejected but the true worth of the Canonical proved by the most
evident testimonies of Gods Spirit the Churches and Fathers, as well Arguments
drawn from the things themselves, as the antiquity miraculous, preservation
matter handled, confession of the very heathens of their excellency consent of
themselves and with truth commonly wanting in other Writers, and the like all
o^ them testifying to the ^^nscience the excellency. of the same, and more
commending the hearing, reading, and meditating of them to the t^uly devout and
godly Christian to the eternal comfort of his soul which is more effectually
wrought, also from the same word of God by his own ordinance, of the right
dividing, p^^aching and expounding the same here explained; whence the duty of
hearers also touched who are the better prepared thereunto by the grounds of
Religion thus said in the Catechism, and Gods blessing to be prayed for the
seconding the same.

1. What is the sum of all?
As says the wise man, the Preacher, to fear God and keep his commandments:
this is the whole duty of man, Eccles. 12. ult.

2. What the sum of the Catechism?
The very same, being the explication of that du^y of ours to God,

1. By fearing him, according to that holy rule of faith, expressed in the
Creed.

2. By keeping his Commandments, in doing as in the Law appointed; praying as
he has taught us; Receiving the Sacraments, holy mysteries and pledges of his
love, seals of grace, as he has instituted and ordained.

3. What the use of it?
To conform us outwardly and inwardly, in soul and body, or whole course of
life and conversation, to that we make profession of, the name and calling of a
Christian.

4. How does it this?
By laying these maine grounds and foundation of religion, which howsoever they
may seem few and little, as comprised in so small a book as the Catechism,
are yet the substance of many large volumes, and the best learning in the
world; as all that we should, or need to believe by faith, do in all duty,
pray for from God, or desire in the covenant of grace, whereby fitted to serve
God, and else to behave our selves outwardly and inwardly, according to that
our most holy profession.

5. How is that?
As we are taught hereby fitted and furnished

Both in wardly, with faith, knowledge and graces, and all such things which a
Christian ought to know and believe for his souls health, and to confirm us
in the truth: And outwardly to the acts of a Christian life, being hereby
enabled to make profession of our hope, and render account of our faith, in
some measure to reprove or convince the gainsayers. And to other acts mentioned
and in ended in the Title and beginning of the Catechism.

6. Which are they?
To be thought sufficiently prepared and fit,

1. To be confirmed of the Bishop, so receiving such confirmation and
approbation.

2. To be admitted to receive the holy communion: To be surety for others at
baptism, as able to teach them to answer for themselves.

3. To have their own surety released, as they enabled to stand for others
sureties.

4. To hear Sermons and Scriptures read or expounded more profitably: And

5. To read holy Scriptures more comfortably themselves: And

6. To understand it better, being thus grounded in these principles of
Religion, taken out of holy Scripture, as being the chiefest and most
substantial parts of the same, that primarily concern our blessed estate and
salvation.

7. How the Creed?
Concerning 1. God the Father, I believe, etc. I believe, Lord help my, etc.
You believe in the Father, believe in me also, I and the Father are one, Luke
14. 1. etc. Ps. The eyes of all things, etc. Genesis 1. 1. In the beginning, etc.
2. God the Son, the whole doctrine of the Evangelists and Apostles in every
point, expressed in the Gospel. 3. God the holy Ghost, Joh. 14. 15. Joh. 15.
26. and Joh. 16. 7. and 16. 13. Ioh. 20. 22. Luke 24. 49. Acts 2. etc.


As, concerning the Church,

Matthew 16. 16, 17, 18, etc. Jo. 17. 15, 16, 17. Act. 2. 47. Holy cath. Church.
Commun. of Saints.

Mat. 16, 19. Luk 18. 13. and 15. 10, 11. and 24. 47. Joh. 20. 23. Act. 2. 38.
forgiveness of sins. Joh. 5. 28 and 6. 40 and 11. 25. Luke 14. 14.
resurrection of the body, and life, etc. with many places of holy Scripture
more.

8. How the rest?
Concerning The Commandme^ts Exodus 20. 1. God spoke, etc. Deuteronomy. 5. 6. I am the
Lord, etc.
The Lords Prayer Mat. 69. When ye pray say, etc. Luke ^1. 1. Our Father, etc.
The Sacraments Baptis. Mat. 28. 19 Mar. 16. 15
Acts 2. 41. Act. 10. 47
L. Sup. Mat. 26. 26. Mar. 14. Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 25.



9. What is the word of God?
The will, or especially the promises and merc^es of God revealed,

1. In the flesh, Christ, the incarnate word, and truth, and showed both in the
creation of the world, and redemption of mankind.

2. In the characters of the voice, the books of holy Scriptures, the written
word of God, contained in the Bible, or Book of God, in the old and new
Testament, so called, and the Books thereof.

10. Which, or how many are they?
The Canonical Books of the old Testament, so called by the Hebrews, the 24.

Genesis 2 Samuel. Proverbes. Exodus 2 Kings Ecclesiastes. Levit. 2 Chronicles. Song
of Solomon. Numb. Ezra Isaiah Deuter. Nehem. Jeremie, with Lament. Josua.
Hester. Ezechiel. Judges. Job Daniel. Ruth. Psalms The 12. small Prophets

The new Testament all of them, 21. or by dividing of the Epistles, 27. viz.
Gospels 4. Acts 1. The Epistles of Saint Paul 14. Peter 2. James 1. John 3.
Jude 1.
Revelation 1.


Apocry phall Esdras Tobit Judith Hester Relics of wisdom of Solomon Ecclus.
or wisdom of Syrach Jeremy, or Baruch, and Daniel Maccabees.


11. How called the word of God?
As manifesting the will and covenant of God with mankind. As the most
ancient, so most divine of all writings whatsoever; ^avouring of more then
humane wisdom, as by divine revelation, and inspiration, written and so
directed, and aiming at Gods honor, as no other writings in the world the
like, or comparable with them.

12. What are the Canonical books?
The chief parts of holy Scriptures, undoubtedly by all acknowledged, and
received as the very word of God, the rule, and Canon of faith, by which only
most firmly proved, and so thence styled Canonical.

13. What of the Apocryphal?
As not so generally received, or approved of in the Church, but as the name
sounds, not so manifest, and yet though not so properly Canonical, and of so
prime authority, yet of holy and necessary use, and annexed to the former, as
full of good instructions, and histories, declaring Gods wonderful providence
over his people.

14. What difference herein?
Very much in opinion, and errors of men dissenting,

1. Some denying diverse parts, of the very Canonical books of the old and new
Testament.

2. Some Canonizing the Apocryphal, of equal authority with the former, as
the Papists.

3. Some Obtruding diverse other books for the word of God, never approved of
the Church, in any respect but rather composed by Heretics.

15. Who of the first sort?
I. Some receiving only the five books of Moses, as the Sadduces.

Some the new Testament, as the Manichees, and Marcion.

Some the Gospel of Saint Mark, as Cerinthus,

II. Some Rejecting.

1. The Psalms, as the Nicholaytans, and Anabaptists.

2. The Book of Job, as some Rabbis.

The Book of Daniel, as Porphyrius.

3. The Gospel of Saint Luke, as Cerdon.

Of Saint John, as the Alogi.

4. Works of Saint Paul as the Ebonites.

16. Who of the second sort?
The Papists, which account the Apocryphal writing of that authority to be
rules of faith, and proof thereof, and so Canonical.

17. Who of the third sort?
Diverse Heretics, and pseudo-Christians, that have obtruded many such books
to the world, and for additions to scripture that were either manifestly false,
and blasphemous, or no ways approved such. As,

1. A third and fourth of Esdras, and appendix to Job.

2. A third and fourth of Macchabees, and Preface to the Lamentations.

3. Microgenesis, and the book of Enoch.

4. The Gospel of Saint Thomas, and Matthias, and Acts of Saint Peter.

5. ^vangelium Eternum full of blasphemies, found An^ ^120. And many more the
like, as i^ Sixtus Senensis, to be seen.

18. How are the former books proved to be the word of God and Canonical.
By tr^w and undoubted.

I. Testimony of the

1. Church in all ages, with reverence embracing and receiving them.

Most worthy men, and Fathers writing of them, as especially Saint Jerome.

2. Epist. ad, Paulum, Tom. 3. Letam, Tom. 1.
showing both the number order, and reading them with profit.

3. Spirit of God speaking in them with a kind of Divine Majesty and
authority, convincing the conscience, and converting the sou^e as no other
writings whatsoever.

II. Arguments drawn from the things there handled, the matter and manner of
handling, beyond all other ordinary writings, in any respects, so representing
a kind of Divinity, in them, with power and authority, over the soul.

19. What Argument especially?
1. From the antiquity of them before all other writings, and so well as
taught, and inspired of God.

2. From the instruments that writ them, most holy men, of all ages and so
moved by the Spirit of God.

3. From the miraculous preservation, among so many casualties as by the very
finger of God.

4. From the miracles confirming their doctrine, and authority as from the hand
of God.

5. From the Prophesies contained in them, that could not be but from God.

6. From the matters handled, holy and virtuous, or religious and savouring of
God.

7. From the Heathen, and their admiration, and testimonies of them, confessing
them, even from God.

8. From the drift of Scripture, to give glory to God.

9. From the admirable consent of holy Scriptures, though in so sundry ages
written, as having one spirit, and truth of God.

10. From the conscience, even in the power and evidence of the truth, and
grace of God therein, confessing the same.

20. How the antiquity?
As the first and most ancient writings simply and absolutely, that were in the
world, and so delivering the things, of most antiquity, the Creation, and the
flood and Covenant of God, in the works of Moses, of all which other Scriptures
following, seem but a commentary, and illustration of the same, Orphes Linius,
and the most ancient Poets, and Philosophers, having their learning, and
knowledge of God, and other things from him, and the Grecians their letters,
and their learning from Cadamus, as he from the Phenicians, and He^rews, So
Moses more ancient then Orpheus, Linus, Amphion, Homer, or the very heathen
Gods; See Tacian. Oration. adversus Gentes; Clement. Alexandrinus, etc.

21. How the instruments?
Such holy men as are endowed with the Spirit of God, and prophecy, as Moses
and the Prophets were; who could never have written as they did, and of such
things, without Gods Spirit, to declare it unto them.

22. How the miraculous preservations?
An evidence of the hand of God; as writing, so preserving them, that though
among so many enemies, and so many casualties, as so ancient, though most other
very ancient records perished; yet these even to a letter, against any
corruption of heretic, or other persecutour persevered; and that when other
writings, if not perished, yet depraved, these so singularly kept out of all
their malice, or that it durst not touch them, such malice refrained, as it
were, by the hand of heaven.

23. How by the miracles?
As the miracles wrought by Moses, a man so familiar with God, and so the
Prophets, Christ the Messiah of the Lord, and his Apostles, most plainly show,
the doctrine, and that power from God.

24. How in the Prophesies?
As that of Moses, more admirable then prophecy the revelation of the
creation, together with the Messiah's foretelling Noah's, Abraham's, Isac's,
and Jacobs prophetical blessings, and other prophesies of the Messiah, Isreal's
captivities in Egypt and Babylon: Josiah and Cyrus acts fore^old, absolutely
declare the finger and Spirit of God, guiding the pen and hand of man.

25. How by the matter handled?
As treating of God and his goodness, faith and religion, repentance and
newness or holiness of life, dehorting from vice, and persuading to virtue,
when other writers commonly treat of ridiculous, profane and scurrilous, and
if not lewd, nothing so good and holy things, what argues it, but so grave and
holy writings pr^ceed from that holy fountain, and the Spirit of God.

26. What of the Heathens testimonies, or confession?
As a confession of the adversary, a confirmation of the truth, or making much
for it.

1. As that of Trebellius Pollio, saying, Indeed Moses was the only man
familiar with God.

2. That of Numenius the Pythagorian Philosopher, saying, Plato was very Moses,
speaking in the Attique tongue.

3. That of Plato himself confessing, he learned most excellent precepts of
wisdom from the Barbariou^, viz. meaning Moses and the Prophets.

4. That of Numa and Pompilius, approving Moses Law against Images.

5. Livi^s and Homer out of Moses, writ of the creation of the world.

6. That of Orpheus, of the two Tables of the Law. Ovia so, of the general
deluge, Giants.

7. That of the Tower of Babell, though obscured with Fables and many Fictions.

8. That of Cornelius Tacitus of the story in Exodus, though with some
additions of Fables and lies of his own.

9. That of Proco^ins, of Joshua, and how for fear of him, the Phenicians left
their country.

10. That of Abydenus, Sibylla, and Hestica^s, testifying the long lives of the
ancients.

11. That of Eupolenius, of Abraham, how he fought for Lot.

12. That of Apollo's Oracle, as says Eusebius, testifying the Christians
only had the truth and true God.

13. That of Sibylls Oracles, and other heathen testimonies, and Ancients, in
Lactantius Firmianus to be read, abundantly testifying this truth, and that it
is from God.

27. How by the drift of Scriptures?
In that all other writings generally attribute most to wisdom, process,
inventions of men, and speaking little of God, least to his glory: the scope of
holy Scriptures generally is to manifest God, show his acts, and to ascribe
honor and glory to God, to whom it is due, and so apparently showing evidence
of the Spirit, and grace, and power of God.

28. How by the consent of Scriptures?
In that though in sundry ages, and by sundry men written, yet without any
contradiction, all consenting to, and confirming one truth, it is most evident
that one Spirit, the Spirit of truth, was director of them; especially
considering in other writings, even the same author, contradicting and
con^rarying himself and one another, that in them is no end of reconciling the
differences, that it is most plain, as in this, the truth and con^^^t
wonderful, and in them the errors and differences infinite; the union and
truth of this, is from that one, true, and only God, and his Spirit.

29. How the Conscience?
As evinced by the truth and evidence of the graces and goodness of God in
power working upon the soul, enlightened by them, even confessing and
acknowledging the Spirit of God, speaking in them.

30. How are they to be used with profit, or to our comfort?
By our due and devout 1. Reading them as the Oracles of God his divine
ordinances and statutes, recorded in in the covenant of grace. 2. Hearing them
Read Publicly in the Church. Privately for our comfort and instruction.
Expounded in godly Sermons, and such fruitful exhortations ordained to that
end.
3. Meditating on them day and night, Psalm. 1. making them our delight,
companions, and counselors, as he is also said, They have been my songs in the
house of my pilgrimage; all the day long is my study in them, and they are
dearer to me then thousands of gold and silver, so ought we to think of them,
as in them is placed our felicity and comfort; yea, heavenly repast, and
eternally felicity and happiness.


31. Is it not enough to read them, or hear them read?
Though it be good, and cannot be de^ied, but in a large sense, a kind of
preaching; as Moses was read in the Synagogue every Sabbath, yet as the Eunuch
said, how can I understand without aninterpreter, and O how beautiful are the
feet of them that bring glad tidings, and preach the Gospel of peace, so
assuredly most comfortable to the godly soul, yea and after a sort needful to
have it for their better understanding, further illustrated and explaned

32. How is it needful?
Because we see,

1. God has ever sent such as should be converted, and perfected thereby to
such teachers, as of Saul to Ananias, Cornelius to Peter, the Eunuch to Philip.

2. None can worthily and well receive the word that desire not the preaching,
the ordinary means of salvation.

3. It is his ordinance, he appointed it, the means who said, The lips of the
Priest shall preserve knowledge, and thou shall seek the Law at his mouth.

4. It is most convenient to seek it of them, who are most exercised in it,
and as two, see more then one, their advice will help our understanding, and
whom should we better for any art go to, then the Artificer, and teacher of it?

5. We are dull of our selves, and need stirring up to the reading, and
meditating thereon by preaching, that so both teaches the matter, and stirs
up to the duty.

33. Who are to preach the word?
The Ministers lawfully appointed, and sen^ of God, and so ordained to that
office, Gods laborers entertained in his harvest, acknowledged by the Church,
and so entering by the door; the sheep heard their voice, Christ calling by
then, and to their faithfulness and care, Christ has promised his presence,
comfort and blessing.

34. What is preaching?
The power of God unto salvation in the virtue and efficacy of his word,
whereby those that are ordained to life are called, and so it is seen in the

1. Right dividing of the word, and bread of life.

2. Expounding of the word, and mysteries of faith.

3. Ga^hering the flowers of instruction out of the garden of holy Scriptures.

4. Binding them up in fit posies and nosegaies for the comfort of them that
would desire to use them.

5. Applying them to the soul, and spiritual senses at the discretion of the
vigilant Pastor for the information of faith, or reformation of manners.

35. What requisite in the Preacher?
Convenient learning; as having been conversant in the Schools of the
Prophets; discretion in his doings, godliness in his life, that it is so a
continual Sermon and vigilance, care and conscionablenesse in his office.

36. What required in the hearer?
A religious, godly and devout preparation of the soul before the hearing, by
removing all impediments of hearing.

By bringing a desire to learn, and to be perfected.

By presenting himself ready to be taught and instructed.

Devout disposition in hearing the word, to remember we are in the presence of
God, and come to hear his Ambassadors and message to our souls.

To receive it with reverence and fear.

Silence and attention.

Faith and readiness.

Constancy and meekness.

Alacrity, not weariness.

To retain it as a heavenly treasure, and laying it up in our honest heart,
desire and have a purpose to profit by it, and practice it.

Devout demeanor after the hearing, by meditating on it, as those clean
creatures so admitted for sacrifice to God that chew the Cud.

By calling it often to mind as good occasion may serve not being forgetful
hearers.

By endeavoring to practice it, and so to be doers of the word, James 1. 22.
and bringing forth fruit.

37. How is the Catechism needful or useful to this?
For that all Lectures and Homilies, Sermons, and such like godly discourses
whatsoever, whether

1. Of any Catecheticall point, plainly and directly of the Catechism.

2. Of any other point of doctrine concerning faith or manners, that may be
reduced to, as deduced from, and grounded on some point in the Catechism.

3. Of any or many points of such doctrine together, asusually taken out of any
sentence or parcel of the Scripture they can never be well understood without
these points of the Catechism, and grounds of Religion first learned, and in
some measure understood, as the foundation of all further knowledge, as a
child can never read that has not learned to spell, nor spell that has not
learned the letters, or A B C, or if he hap to know any word, or so by some
special mark, it is by so rude, uncertain and imperfect knowledge, he is
little or never the better for the same, so uncertain and imperfect is their
knowledge usually in these divine things that did never fitly lay this
foundation.

38. What else required?
Prayer for a blessing upon good endeavors to have profit thereby, for though
Paul himself plant, or Apollos water, yet is it God that gives the increase,
and prayer usually the key to open, door to enter, way to go, and conclusion
of every good design: we ought to begin, continue and end with it every good
and godly action; and as on Jacobs ladder Angels did ascend and descend, so in
this, our prayers ascending, grace will descend, being so disposed, ascendat
oration, ut descendat gratia, our blessing of God hereby ascending, his
blessings will descend to our eternal comfort; which he grant of his mercy, in
Christ Jesus, to whom with the holy Spirit, be praise and glory for ever, Amen.

An Alpha^eticall Table of the Principal Matters herein contained, as they lie
dispersed in this Book: P. noting Part, S. Section, Q. Question: And may serve
for most common places of Divinity.
The maine Heads in the Method, as they were digested, following the course of
the Catechism, being shown in the Table at the beginning.

A
ABolition of Ceremonies, vid. Ceremonies Abrogation of the old Law, vid.
Morality of the Law. Absolution the true use of it. p. 2. s. 12 q. 9. and seq.
and p. 4 s. 11. q. 30. Adoption, vid. Sons. Adultery. p. 3. s. 9. q. 33.
Aequivocation, vi. Fraud Amen, and the use of it. p. 2. s. 12. q. 63. and p. 4.
s. 7 q. 22. Antichrist, his Name and Number explained p. 5. s. 2. q 77. Ancient
ordring of Churches, vid. Degrees. Ascension of Christ, p. 2. s. 8. q. 23.
Atheism. p. 3. s. 3. q. 15. and seq. Attributes of God. p. 2. s. 2. q. 25. and
p. 3. s. 2. q. 23.
B
Baptism of Infants. p. 1. s. 3. q. 20. and p. 5. s. 2. per tot. diverse sorts
of Baptism. p. 5. s. 2. q. 41. compared with Circumcision. ibidem. Believe
God, and in God. p. 2. s. 3. q. 5. and q. 31. and seq. Bible, the Books
thereof, and how divided, p. 5. s. 5 q. 10. excellency, truth, and certainty
thereof. ib. Blasphemy. p. 3. s. 5. q. 22. Bread and food of life to men, and
Angels. p. 4. s. 5. q. 5.
C.
Catechizing and use of Catechismes p. 1. s. 1. q. 16. etc. Ceremonies and
their use p. 3. s. 1. q. 22. and s. 4. q. 27. and how far abolished, p. 3. s.
6. q. 29. etc. Chastity, p. 3. s. 9. q. 9. Children who accounted, p. 1. s. 1.
q. 10. Child of God who, p. 1. s. 3. q 49. Christ his name nature and offices,
p 2. s. 4. q. 1. etc. His many actions, q. 85. etc. Christian name, p. 1. s. 2.
per tot. Church Catholic p. 2. s. 11. q. 22. how holy, and the marks of it,
ibid. Communion of Saints, p. 2 s. 11. q. 46. Concupiscence, p. 3. s. 12. q. 7.
etc. Confession, vid. Absolution and prayer. Confirmation and the right use of
it, p. 1. s. 1. q. 25. Contentedness, p. 3. s. 12. q. 24. Covenant described,
p. 5. s. 1 q. 12. Covet^usnesse, vid. Concupiscence and stealing. Couzenage,
vid. Fraud. Creation and order of it explained, p. 2. s. 3 q. 67 Creed how
named and composed, p. 2. s. 1 q 7. several Creeds and their use, ibid. the
division of it. p. 2. s 1. q. 67.
D
Daily bread, p. 4. s. 5. q. 5. Dancing, p. 3. s. 9. q. 24. Day of doom and
last judgment, p 2. s. 9 q. 11. Death and descent of Christ into hell, p. 2.
s. 6. and 7. q. 1. etc. Diverse doubts explained ibid p. 2. s. 7. per tot.
Deceit vid. Equivocation and Fraud. Degrees for order and decency in the Church
p. 5. s. 2. q. 50. Devils and his works, p. 1 s. 4. q. 30. Diverse Divisions of
the Catechism, p. 1. s. 1. q. 43.
E
Efficacies and other Considerations concerning prayer, p. 4. s. 2. q. 38.
Emanuel vid. Jesus. Excellency of prayer and other adjuncts, p. 4. s. 2. q 35.
Exposition of the Lords prayer, p. 4. s. 8. q. 11. Exaltation of Christ. p. 2.
s. 8. q. 1. Everlasting life. p. 2. s. 12. q. 42. etc.
F
Faith and the several sort of it. p. 2. s. 1. q. 18. etc. causes ^^tes and
degrees of it, ibid. works the fruit and other effects, ibidem. Faith, p. 5. s
4. q. 22. False testimonies sund^y sorts, p. 3. s. 11. q. 14. Father the first
person. p. 2. s. 3. q. 35. Feasts and fasts, p. 3. s. 6. q. 73. Flattery. p. 3.
s. 11. q. 27. Forgiveness of sins, vid. Absolution. Fornication, vid.
Adultery. Fraud and Couz^enage, p. 3. s. 10. q. 26.
G
Genealogy of Christ, p. 2. s. 5. q. 30. Glory of God, p. 4. s. 7. q. 8. God
and his Essence how known, p. 2. s. 2. q. 5. etc. Godfathers their ancient use,
1. s. 3. q. 4. etc. and their vow, p. 1. s. 4 q. 1. Grace our estate in it, p.
1. s. 5. q. 2. etc.
H
Heaven an inheritance and kingdom, p. 1. s. 3. q. 65. Holy ^aves vid. feasts,
Holy Ghost, p. 2. s. 10. q. 10. and per tot. his name actions gifts, etc. ibid.
Honoring Superiors, vid. Parents. H^mility to God and honoring God, p. 3. s.
3. q. 44. etc.
I
jesus, or Emanuel p. 2. s. 4. q. 4. Idolatry, vid. Atheism, and p. 3. s. 4.
per tot. Ignorance p. 3. s. 3. q. 26. Images, vid. Idolatry, and p. 3. s. 4. q.
14. Incarnatti^, conception and birth of Christ p. 2. s. 5. q. 2. and seq.
In^ants how bound in Baptism p. 1. s. 5. q. 3. etc and p. 5. s. 2. q. 27. etc.
^ustification by faith in Christ p. 2. s. 1. q. 5. and s. 5. q. 27.
K
Keys, and the Churches power and authority p. 4. s. 5. q. 44. and vide
Absolution. Kings, vid. Magistrates, and p. 3. s. 7. q, 43. etc. Kingdom of
Grace and Glory p. 4. s. 4. q. 20. and s. 7. q. 6. Knowledge of God p. 3. s. 3
q. 37. and vid. Name of God.
L
Laws and their soverall sorts p. 3. s. 1. q. 6. and Law how written, ib. q.
42. Law and its use, p. 4. s. 1. q. 10. Last judgment p. 2. s. 9. q. 5. Life
and eternity, vid. Everlasting life. Long life, how a blessing, p. 3. s. 7. q.
62. Lords Supper parts and relat. p. 5. s. 3. q. 4. the mysteriousnesse of it,
q. 38. etc. ^igures and manner of it, ib q 47. preparation to it, ibid. s. 4.
q. 20. Love of God, p. 3. s. 3. q. 34 and p. 3. s. 13 q 3. Love of neighbor,
ibid. Lying and falsehood, vide truth.
M
Magistrates, vi. Parents. Masters theirs and servants duties, p. 3. s. 7. q.
38 Marriage, p. 3. s. 9. q. 52. Member of Christ how, p. 1. s. 3 q. 38.
Mysterys of Religion vid. Sacraments and Lords supper. Mystery of the Trinity,
vid. Trinity. Mysterious names ^ehovah jesus, etc. p. 5. s. 2. q. 76. etc.
Mystery of godliness, ibidem. Mystery of Iniquity vid. A^tichrist. Morality of
the law. p. 3. s. 6. q. 28. and. s. 1 q. 25. Murder and the several sorts, p.
3. s. 8. q. 6. etc.
N
Names and their use, p. 1. s. 2. q. 17. Imposition and change of them, ib. and
s. 2. q. 1 etc. Name of God, p. 3. s. 5. q. 5 etc. and p. 4. s. 4. q. 12. how
^hallowed or propha^ed, ib. and p. 5. s. 2. q. 75. name ^ehovah and q. 79.
Nativity of Christ miraculous; p. 2. s. 5. q. 14. Necessity of Christ's
humanity, p. 2. s. 5. q. 26.
O
Oaths and vows, p. 3. s 5. q. 25. Obedience active, passive, p. 4. s. 4. q.
44. Obedience, and ^umiliation of Christ, p. 2. s. 6. q 4. etc. Obedience, to
Parents and Superiors, p. 3. s. 7. q. 13, etc. Oppression vid. Stealing.
Parents, p 3. s. 67. q. 18. Passion and sufferings of Christ, p. 2. s. 6. q.
27. etc. Petitions and division of the Lords prayer, p. 4 s. 3. q. 4 and s. 4.
q. 1. etc. and s. 8. q. 3. etc. Polithisme, vid. Atheism Prayer and the parts,
p. 3. s. 4. q 34. and, p. 4. s. 2 q. 3. sorts, and other requisites, ibidem.
Preaching and other duties in Gods service, p. 3. s. 4. q. 45. and, p. 5. s. 5.
p. 33. ^uty of preachers and hearers. Preface of the Law, p. 3. s. 2. q. 4.
etc. other circumstances ibidem. Profanes, p. 3. s. 3 q. 32.
Q
Qualification and manner of true prayer, p. 4 s. 2. q. 26. Quallity name and
nature of the Beast, vid. Antichrist.
R
Religion what it is, p. 1. s. 1. q. 37. and the truth of it, p. 2. s. 2 q. 11.
Resurrection and Assention of Christ, p. 2. s. 8. q. 9. tipes of it, ibid.
Resurrection of the body, p. 2. s. 12. q. 17. Repentance explained, p. 1. s. 5.
q. 32. and p. 5. s. 2. q. 18. Requisites in Baptism, p. 5. s. 2. q. 27. etc.
Reverence and Devotion used in prayer, p. 5. s. 2. q. 62. and in the church
ibidem. Robbery vid. stealing. Rules for right expounding the law, p. 3. s. 2.
q. 36. and p. 3. s. 57. q. 3. Rules and other requisites of Prayer, p. 4. s. 2.
q. 28.
S
Sabbath and sanctifying it, p. 3. s. 6. per tot. Sacrament, p. 5. s. 1. q. 1.
etc. number and true use, ibid. s. 1. q. 50. Sacrilege, p. 3. s. 10. q. 33.
Self murder, p. 3. s. 8. q. 37. Servants, vid. Masters. Service of God and
duties therein, p. 3. s. 4. q. 44. and p. 3. s. 6. q 62. Session of Christ in
glory p. 2. s. 8 q. 46. etc. and last judgment ibid. and. s 9. per tot. Sins
their several sorts and divisions, p 1. s. 4. q. 35. Sin against the holy
Ghost p. 2. s. 10. q. 33. Slander, vid. lying and Murder. Sons of God vid.
Father and, p. 2. s. 4. q. 47. and, p. 4 s. 3. q. 7. Soul murder, vid. murder
and lying. State of nature and grace p. 4. s. 1. q. 18. Stealing p. 3 s. ^0. q.
9. etc. Subjects their duties, vid. Kings. Sum of the Catechism, p. 1. s. 1.
q. 42. and p. 5. s. 5. q. 1. and use of it, ibid, Superiors, vid. Parents.
Supper of the Lord, p. 5. s. 3. q. 11. name and benefits. p. 10. etc. vid.
Lords supper. Swearing, vid. Oaths.
T
Tables of the law and their division, p. 3. s. 3. q. 2. Temptations of diverse
sorts, p. 4. s. 6. q. 3. Theft vid. Stealing. Title of the Catechism, p. 1. s.
1. per tot. Trinity of persons in the Godhead, p. 2. s. 2. q. 31. and unity
ibid. and p. 2. s. 3. q. 20. Truth in charity. p. 3. s. 11 q. 9. etc.
V
Union vide Communion. Vow, vide Oaths. Vow in Baptism, p 1. s. 4. q. 2. etc.
Use of the law, p. 4. s. 1. q 9
W
Word and will of God, p. 1. s. 4 q. 71. and p. 5. s. 5. q. 9 vide Bible.
Worldly vanities and lusts, p 1 s 4 q. 50. Worship of God, p 3. s. 4. q. 7.
X.
Initialis litera vacat tanquam nostris exotica, and note xpus set for Christus
and xpt for Christ, generally so taken, and is so generally mistaken, being
indeed the Greek Chi Rho the first letters of the abreviation of the name
(...) Christus, a like mistake of some in H. supposed the lattin H. in the
other name IHS being indeed the Greek Eta and so they the three first letters
of the sacred name Jesus so abreviated.
Y
Younger sort their duty, p 3 s. 7 q 25 and q. 35. Youth vid. children.
Z
Zeal vid the love of God.
The Printer to the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
WHereas the Author, by reason of sickness and other infirmities, could not
be so present in assisting the Correction as he desired; if any small Errata,
or mistakes, have escaped our best vigilancie, such as, Instruction for
Institution, favor for savor, or some particles, as, but, and, in, wanting,
superabounding, or set one for another; it will be thy courtesy and ingenuity
in reading, to certify and amend them, the current of the sense, as it were,
enforcing or showing the true scope of the meaning there intended; and as it
is, I doubt not but thou will be glad to peruse it, and that with good
contentation, and comfort; so that thou may reap both pleasure and profit by
it, is the hearty desire of him that wishes thy best good.

Farewell.
FINIS.

