True Treasure: OR, Thirty holy Vows.

CONTAINING The brief sum of all that concerns the Christian Centurians
conscionable walking with GOD.

FIRST Solemnly made, since often renewed, and again seriously reviewed; with
some particulars added: the more to increase and confirm his Christian
Resolutions.

ALL In the only strength of the Almighty.

By Phillip Skippon, Sergeant Mayor general, etc. The most unworthy Soldier
of Christ Jesus.

I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou upright, Genesis 17.1.
London, Printed for Samuel Enderby, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Popes-head-Alley. 1644.

To all Soldiers of real honor and honesty, P.S. wishes all grace and good
success in the Lord Jesus.
Friends,
_HAving by the especial help of my God, finished and published a Collection of
his promises of good things to us: I here present you with some Vows, of our
obedience unto him: Had not my employments for the Public hindered, I had by
the LORDS assistance, plainly proved every Particular, by express places of
Scriptures; but I hope all is so consonant to sound Doctrine, and the pattern
of wholesome words, that there needs no dispute, I know in these high flying
times, such mean matters as these, are with many of small esteem: However, I
humbly leave them to the due consideration of godly, meek and judicious minded
men, desiring all may be for Christian satisfaction, and no way tend to
unedifying contention; they concern Soldiers especially in many particulars:
Well, such as the Work is, if you please to accept, and make good use of it,
it is all I desire from you for it. Farewell in Christ our Redemer, Amen.

The maine parts of the following Vows, how many there are in each Part, and
concerning what.
The first maine part concerning general Obedience.
And contains one Vow, page 13.
The second part concerning Gods Worship. And contains five Vows.
1. Of sanctifying the Sabbath, p. 15. 2. Of the ordinary parts of Gods
worship, p. 21. 3. Of Examination, p. 26. 4. Of holy Fasting, p. 31. 5. Of
receiving the Lords Supper, p. 38.
The third maine Part concerning his particular Calling. And contains five
Vows.
1. Of opposing evil Persons and courses, p. 45. 2. Of cherishing Good men and
Goodness, p. 47 3. Of giving good example in his place, p. 49 4. Of doing
Justice, p. 51. 5. Of demeaning himself worthily, p. 52.
The fourth main Part concerning Family Carriage. And contains three Vows.
1. Of eschewing the abuse of the Marriage Bed, p. 58. 2. Of edifying his
charge, p. 60. 3. Of walking wisely in his house, p. 63.
The fifth Part concerning his common Conversation. And contains seven Vows.
1. Of avoiding evil Company, p. 65. 2. Of avoiding Excess, p. 71. 3. Of
avoiding flithinesse, p. 78. 4. Of avoiding passion, p. 81. 5. Of avoiding
misgovernment of t^^ tongue, p. 85. 6. Of (...) others, p. 89. 7. Of wary
walking, p. 94.
The sixth maine Part concerning his private Course. And contains three Vows.
1. Of conversing with God, p. 98. 2. Of keeping himself in awe, p. 103. 3. Of
calling to mind Gods especial mercies, p. 106.
The seventh maine Part concerning his outward Estate. And contains five
Vows.
1. How to have a sanct^fied use thereof, p. 110. 2. Of right using Gods
blessings, p. 120. 3. Of giving the tenth to holy uses, p. 121. 4. Of avoiding
suret ship, p. 123. 5. Of avoiding running into debt, p. 125.
The eighth maine Part, and thirtieth Vow, concerning preparing for Death.
And contains one Vow, p. 128.
In all, Vows 30

The Conclusion, concerning seeking of, depending upon, awaiting for Gods help
and Blessing in all and above all things. p. 143.

Thus far of the chief heads of this Treatise.

A brief Preadmonition.
O MY Soul, be Admonished ever to say to heart, and never to forget at what
times; namely, in greatest fears and distresses, Psalm. 66.13, 14. And in what
manner; namely, with fearful imprecations against thy self, in case of
disobedience; these Vows have been made and renewed, and that the Lord will
surely require these things of thee, Deuteronomy. 23.21.

Observe by the way two things.
FIrst, some express places out of sacred Scripture concerning holy Vows.

Secondly, his more especial considerations, in making these Vows.

First, the plain places.
Vow and pay unto the Lord your God Psalm. 76.11.

David vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob, Psalm. 132.3.

When thou vowest a Vow to God defer not to pay it, Eccles. 5.4.

That which is gone out of thy lips, thou shall keep and perform, Deuteronomy.
23.23.

I will pay thee my Vows which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has sp^ken
when I was in trouble, Psalm. 66.13, 14.

Cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flock a male and voweth and
sacrifices a corrupt thing, Mal. 1.14.

If thou shall forbear to vow, it shall be no sin unto thee, Deuteronomy. 23.22.

When thou shall vow a Vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay
it; for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee. and it would be sin
unto thee, Deuteronomy, 23.21.

Better it is thou should not vow, then that thou should vow and not pay,
Eccles. 5.5.

Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say before the
Angel, it was an error, Eccles. 5.4.

To Vow and not to pay is foolish, Eccles. 5.4. troublesome, Prove. 20.25.
sinful, Deuteronomy. 23.21. dangerous thing, Eccles. 5.6.

Therefore according to the Vow that thou vowest, so thou must do, Number. 6.21.

Well Lord, I have sworn, and by thy grace I will perform it, that I will
keep thy righteous judgments, Psalm. 119.206.

See Job. 22.27. Nah. 1.15. Isa. 19.21. Acts 18.18. Genesis 28.20. 1 Samuel 1.11.21.
Joh. 1.16. and 2.9. Mat. 5.33. Psalm. 50.14. and 2.25. and 61.8. and 65.1. and
116.14.

Secondly, his especial considerations.
These Vows are made, not to ensnare any man's conscience, for every one is
left to his lawful liberty, nor as if it were possible for himself or any
other perfectly to perform them; For alas he has sinned does sin, and is
prone to sin, against every circumstance of every one of them continually, and
in many things we sin all, Jam. 3.2. but to testify his hearts unfeigned desire
to walk with his God according to them, and how he resolves, by Gods grace will
endeavor to pay them; and finding his many and great failings against them, to
become yet more vile in his own sight, 1 Samuel 6.22. and to abhor himself in
dust and ashes. Job. 42.6. in the sight of his most holy God, 1 Samuel 6.20. the
more earnestly to beg mercy, Psalm. 51. grace, Heb. 4.16. and compassion in
Christ Jesus; also when at any time, in any particular, he shall hereafter stray
from God, the more strictly (hereby) to recall himself, and return unto him,
Ps. 119.59. and although it be true, they cannot be fully observed, 2 Cor.
2.16. yet may they fitly serve (as they are warranted by Gods Word) as good and
helpful rules to show us our duty, and to further us therein, and to cause us
the more clearly to see, and to make us the more sensible of our sinfulness
and insufficiency, and so the more dearly to esteem Christ's merits, and in him
Gods grace and mercy.

A solemn Prayer concerning the right use of the following Vows.
O My heavenly Father, my only sufficiency, without whom I cannot think one
good thought, but am most prone to all evil: I most humbly and unfainedly
beseech, and urge thee, in mercy; as thou have promised, by the effectual
working of thy holy spirit; notwithstanding my most heinous sinfulness,
exceeding great insufficiency, and al other, though never so many and great
impediments, henceforth to direct, stir up and strengthen me, watchfully,
seasonably, conscionably, feelingly and constantly to remember, respect, apply
and perform, all, every one, and each circumstance of these my holy vows (by
thine own especial grace) most solemnly made, often and earnestly renewed
before and unto thy Majesty, to bind my self the more strictly against sin,
to serve thee. O be herein my strength and sufficiency, that my conscience
hitherto foully polluted and terribly accusing, may be thoroughly purged; and
sweetly excuse me, yea in the very particulars wherein I have most offended,
and am most prone to transgress; that though when I have done my best, I come
far short of my duty, yet that my heart may testify for and unto me, I do the
best I can, though I cannot do as I ought to please thee. My Lord, my God, give
me thy grace according to the light of a well informed conscience (as hereby I
have most strictly tied my self) to walk humbly with and uprightly before
thee, no more daring (as I have done) to offend thee. To this end enable me to
watch and pray, to wrestle, weep and cry unto thee, and never to give over, or
let thee go before thou have herein blessed me, in granting this so exceeding
needful a request; that I be not overcome of evil, but may overcome evil
with good, and so wholly apply my self to do thy will. Certainly thou will
grant it in time and measure as thou see fit. Lord, when, where, or
howsoever, of ignorance, weakness, forgetfulness, or any other way I have
done, do or shall do amiss, contrary to any of these rules and resolutions;
Oh be thou entreated to cause me speedily and soundly to discern, confess,
bewail, crave pardon for, and strength against the same: Oh restore and
receive me, make me more wise, warned, watchful and better governed afterward
thereby; yea, renew mercy and grace unto me to this end I pray thee, and do
not suffer any of my failings or falls so far to discourage me as to drive me
from thee, but make them to move me the more humbly and earnestly to draw
nearer unto thee, and the more zealously to renew my holy purposes, yet the
better to serve thee; Oh do not, do not at all deny, refuse, reject, or turn
from me!

O Father of mercies, my most merciful Father, I most humbly and unfainedly
beseech and urge thee, vouchsafe freely and fully, in the most precious blood
of thy Christ my Redeemer, to forget and forgive all my sins though never so
many and heinous, against all and every one of these my holy vows, and every
circumstance of each, for I have innumerable times and ways most groussy and
wilfully, yea without ceasing offended in every one: O require not these things
of me, for I cannot answer thee one of ten thousand thousands, but require them
of him my alone Savior and alsufficient surety, who has fully satisfied thee
on my behalf for every one of these, as well as for all or any of my other
faults. Oh grant me in the sense of thy infinite, undeserved, never failing
love, according to thy express promises, to fly unto, and trust in his merits;
notwithstanding all my grievous violations of all and every one of these most
solemn vows, and cause me to feel the same most precious balm of Gillead,
to ease, heal and comfort my most sinful and sorrowful soul: for his
infinite sufferings sake, turn thy deserved wrath from me, and deal graciously
with me, give me assurance of pardon from, and peace with thee: O Lord my God,
work, work, work and help, speedily, effectually and constantly: I beg of
thee, that at all times, and in all things, I may with all my heart offer my
self unto thee, that through thy infinite patience I may escape thy justly
merited vengeance, and by thy undeserved mercy enjoy thy loving favor, which
is better then life. All through the alsufficient satisfaction and perpetual
intercession of thy most dear and only Son, my alone sweet Savior and sole
sufficient Mediator Christ Jesus, Amen and Amen.

The following Vows briefly expressed, the more easily to be remembered for
present Meditation and Prayer.
1 TO have respect to all Gods Commandments, and to turn from every evil way.

2 To make strict conscience of sanctifying the Sabbath every where continually.

3 To embrace every part of Gods worship every day, as may be possibly and
conveniently, without superstition or wilful neglect.

4 To examine our repentance and faith by the Law and Gospel, frequently,
seriously and impartially as in Gods presence, who sees our carriage toward
him in this weighty work.

5 To celebrate the several kinds of religious fasts, seasonably and solemnly,
as every extraordinary occasion may require.

6 To receive the Lords Supper, or the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our
blessed Savior, reverendly and fruitfully, when and wheresoever we possibly
may.

7 To oppose and punish wicked men and wickedness, by all means we can.

8 To cherish and assist good men and goodness in like manner.

9 To give good example in our particular calling by avoiding the common sins
thereof, and keeping a good conscience therein, and by walking worthily
continually.

10 In all causes of Counsel, and courses of Justice to be well advised and
impartial.

11 In the Leaguer to carry our selves as in the sight of God in all Christian
wisdom, sincerely and with all circumspection before men worthily.

12 To abstain from all abuses of the marriage bed.

13 To labor the conversion and edification of wife, children, servants, or
any other under our roof, by all good means possible.

14 To demean our selves wisely in all our ways among them.

15 To eschew evil company continually.

16 To avoid all excess every where, all drunkenness especially.

17 To watch against all filthiness in all places.

18 To take heed of breaking out into passion upon any occasion.

19 To set our selves against al misgovernment of the tongue without ceasing.

20 To stir up our selves to edify others in all places, upon all occasions,
and by all means we can.

21 To demean our selves warily in all things.

22 To converse with God in holy matters.

23 To keep our selves in awe by holy meditations.

24 To call to mind the Lords especial mercies.

25 To labor for a sanctified use of our outward condition whatsoever the same
is or may be.

26 To put all Gods blessings to the best use.

27 To give the tenth of all increase to holy uses.

28 To avoid suretiship to the uttermost.

29 To forbear running into, and to endeavor to get out of debt by all means
we can.

30 To prepare conscionably, carefully and constantly for the day of death.

The conclusion, to seek, depend upon, and await for the Lords only help and
blessing in every respect, Psalm. 28.7. and 127.1.2. Phil. 4.13.

Amen my Lord, my God, my Father, according to thy mercy, power and truth in
Jesus Christ, Amen, Amen.
Proofs.
1 Psa. 119.6.101. 2 4. Com. 3 Psalm. 55.17. 4 Lam. 3.40. 5 Joel 2.12, 13. Zach.
12.12. to the end. Da. 9.3. etc. 1 Cor. 11.26 to 32 7 Ps. 101. and 15.4. 8 Ps.
15.4. and 16.3. 9 Acts 24.14. and 23.1. 10 Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19. Pro. 21.3. 11 Deuteronomy.
23.14. 1 Samuel 16.18. and 18.5.14.30. 12 Levit. 18.19. Joel 2.16. Romans 13.13. 13
Deuteronomy. 6.7. 14 Psa. 101 15 Psa. 1.1. Prove. 1.10.15. 16 Isa. 5.11.22. 17 Job
31.1. Romans 13.13. 18 Pro. 14.17. 29 and 15.1.18. 19 Psalm. 39.1. and 17.3. 20 1
These. 5.11. 1 Cor. 14.26. 21 Ephe. 5.15. Ex. 23.13. 22 Phil. 3.20. 23 Psalm.
4.4. and 33.8. and 119.161. 24 Ps. 40.5. 25 1 Timothy 4.5. 26 Mat. 25.16. 27 Genesis
28.20, 21, 22. 28 Prove. 6.1. and 11.15. 29 Romans 13.8. Ps. 37.21. 30 Isa. 31.1.
Mat. 24.42. Mark. 13.37.

The Vows first briefty placed, and in order explained, and how he ought, and
purposes by Gods grace to perform them.
The first maine part containing the first Vow, concerning general Obedience.
As to have respect to all Gods Commandments, and to turn from every evil
way.
That is,
SIncerely, watchfully, willingly, constantly, in thought, word, behavior and
conversation, wheresoever he is, with whomsoever he has to do, and in
whatsoever he takes in hand, according to the light of a well informed
conscience; to ser himself against whatsoever is unlawful and unbeseeming
before God and man; to the uttermost avoiding all the occasions of any sin,
and all appearance of every evil, and to embrace every warrantable and
commendable duty, and all good means that may further thereunto; abhorring all
by-respects of pleasures, profits, fears, flattery, friends, favor, entreaty,
threats, compulsion, company, fashion or custom, multitudes, examples, though
of (otherwise) good men, speaking against of great men, and the like, that
would mislead me, breaking through all impediments, not dispensing with
himself in any particular, approving himself to the Lord in all things, and
above all seeking his glory in the conscionable discharge of his duty.

The second maine part containing five Vows, concerning Gods holy Worship.
First, to make strict conscience of sanctifying the Sabbath every where
continually.
Before it come
TO remember the same, to prepare therefore, to strive for longing thereafter,
to cleanse himself to sanctify the same, wisely, carefully and constantly to
prevent or remove in himself, his, or others (all that he can) whatsoever
would occasion the profaning, or hinder the hallowing thereof on the contrary,
embracing and furthering all that may further so holy a duty, to pray to be
prepared thereto, to keep his heart busied with good thoughts, and tongue with
good speeches the night before; yea, if it may be with possible convenience, to
call those about him together in the afternoon on Saturday, the more solemnly
and thoroughly to teach them their duty therein; and to stir up our selves the
better hereto, often calling upon, and urging of them to sinish our own works
timely and diligently, that our hearts be not troubled with the cares of them,
nor our hands tempted to work about them on the Sabbath; in especial manner
to prevent and break off all domestical grievances and perturbations, because
heart-burnings, discords, and disorders among the members of the Family extend
their infection and hurt even to the profanation of the Sabbath; neither does
the Lord look to be served aright in his house, if people live not quietly,
lovingly and dutifully in their houses; ask experience and be warned, for God
will be sanctified in chose that draw near unto him.

When the Sabbath is come
TO arise early, to give himself throughout the whole day without weariness,
with all diligence and delight to the several duties of the day in Gods house,
in his family, in private; as to hearing, reading, prayer, meditation,
conference, Catechizing, singing Psalms, every duty seasonably, reverently,
attentively, feelingly, profitably, to devide the times aright for every
public family and private duty, that all be done orderly, without have or
confusion, that the one be not a hinderance but a furtherance to the other; to
watch against all worldly, vain and unedifying, much more all wicked thoughts,
words and works throughout the whole day; entertaining only heavenly
Meditations, speeches and actions, when of necessity he shall be hindered by
any importunate and unavoidable duty of his particular calling; as removing,
marching, watching, quartering, sailing, and the like: To consider it is the
Lords day, and as may most stand with Christian convenience, to lay hold on
every opportunity, to do or receive all the good he can; to separate himself,
that he may with more freedom be the better busied; to take occasion to speak
of good things with those I know to be well inclined; to keep his heart close
to the Lord when it comes to the push, not only to know, write and say thus,
but by Gods grace to practice accordingly; to avoid forgetfulness, neglect and
sloth; to take heed of tippling, immoderate eating, and whatsoever would make
heavy and unfit for heavenly duties, or distract from them; not yielding
willingly to any thing that is contrary to the warrantable strictness of that
day by no means, dispensing to transgress in the least against conscience; a
bewailing, craving pardon for, and Reformation of whatsoever he knows amiss;
believing the gracious acceptance of, and a waiting for his promised blessing
upon his poor performances; notwithstanding the w^aknesse of them, and all
other hindrances, only through Christ Jesus; so giving himself to serve the
Lord on his day wholly.

Besides these.
AS occasion requires to exercise Charity to the poor, mercy toward our
selves and others; yea, to our servants and cattle, which are both to rest
that day, yea, in time of earing and harvest: Further, we our selves must rest
also from all works of pleasure and profit; we may take convenient sustenance,
and that with others, and must yield to works of instant and urgent necessity;
for he that is Lord of the Sabbath says, it is lawful for us to do good on
the Sabbath day.

The third Vow, and second of this second maine part.
To embrace every part of Gods worship every day, as he may possibly and
conveniently without superstition and wilful neglect.
That is,

FIrst, in private to pray for himself, his family and Gods people, as most
pressing occasions require, to read in Gods word, and somewhat in a good book,
to examine himself by some part of the true watch, to call to mind his vows,
to remember some of Gods promises, to meditate on some good point, to sing part
of a Psalm, all in the freest and sit season.

Secondly, in his family, morning and evening to pray, to read in Gods word,
and somewhat in a good book, to confer of good things, to sing part of a
Psalm, to pray before, and to give thanks after meals, to season them with
good discourse, to catechize his children once a day.

Thirdly, to lay hold on every occasion, for each part of Gods public worship.

In every one
To set himself to seek the Lord.

Preparedly, with premeditation.

Understandingly, knowing what he goes about.

Deliberately, not slubberingly, nor in have, or wishing the work over.

Humbly, he being so evil, and God so holy.

Feelingly, that his heart lahour in the action, and be affected.

Zealously, with earnestness and stretched out affections till the work be
ended.

Seasonably, when he may be least distracted, and do himself and others the
most good.

Willingly, not as pulled by the ears, or forced, shaking off backwardness.

Cheerfully, striving against coldness, dullness, deadheartednesse and
drowsinesse.

Instantly, without delay, or deferring till another time.

Constantly, at set times, if it may be, catching at convenience.

Conscionably, because the Lord requires it.

Not customarily, for fashions sake, or any by respect.

In sincerity, not to be seen of men, but approving his heart to God.

Resolutely, though nicknamed, scorned and opposed.

Singularly, though never so few do so.

Secretly, in every private and family duty, avoiding all loudness and open
shows, as far as possible may be.

In faith especially, resting on the Lords promised acceptance and blessing in
Christ Jesus.

In hope, awaiting the experimental performance thereof.

With sound application to his especial occasions.

With upright and earnest resolutions to obey.

Powerfully practifing accordingly.

All in the strength of the Lord, as to, and in the sight of the Lord as well
as he can, though he cannot as he ought, with true though weak defire to fear
his name.

These following Exceptions may lawfully hinder or alter the precise times of
performing the foresaid duties, and sometimes some one or more of the duties
themselves.
As

BEing visited with sickness, or being withdrawn by the works of his
calling, or other urgent occasions as will not admit of delay; journying by
water or land, being in places and company where he cannot with christian
convenience, neither need the times be so strictly stood upon, if the duties be
at some other times performed: Yet not to neglect or delay, when and where he
may serve the Lord, as he will answer to the Lord, who searches the hearts;
always laboring to redeem the time, and not to trouble himself, although he
later some duties, and perform others in their places, his conscience bearing
him witness, that he still desires to se^ve the Lord the better thereby.

The fourth Vow and third of this maine part, concerning Examination.
To examine his repentance and faith by the Law and Gospel, frequently,
seriously and impartially, as in Gods presence, who sees his carriage toward
him in this weighty work.
That is,

ACcording to Master Brinslies exposition of the Law and Gospel, in his book
called The first part of the true Watch and rule of life (being in his
judgment the best help for this use that ever he met withal) to try his
thoughs, words and ways past, present and to come, etc.

For the times,
Ordinarily before every Sabbath, more especially before receiving the
Sacrament, and before a public Family, or private Fast; but most of all in
any fore sickness, or any other great calamity, or being summoned by death,
that she may not live in any known sin, or the omission of any required duty
without repent ance; to choose such times of the day, and to seek out such
places at home, or abroad, in field or Garrison, when and where he may be most
private and least hindered, and be surest to prevent and escape all company and
other distractions.

And further,
For more convenience and Iesse rediousnes, to take so much every day, that the
whole may be gone through every week or month, or somewhat every day till all
be gone through at best leisure, and then to begin again; or otherwise,
according to Christian discretion, with all carfulness, without superstition
or negligence.

But when, where and in what Order soever.
To set his heart and affections aright, as in the presence of the al-knowing
God, with whom I have to do; when he begins, to begin with solemn prayer, to
labor that his heart go along with each part of the foresaid rule, purposing
to practice every particular, with feeling affection and settled devotion, to
meditate and pray according to his written quotations joined to that rule of
Examination; to mourn for every sin committed, begging pardon in Christ, and
the imputation and application of his most perfect obedience and all-sufficient
satisfactino; craving freedom from punishment, pleading and urging the Lord,
with his Saviors infinite merits, and perpetual mediation; desiring
preservation from all sin, especially from those he is most prone unto, and
in danger of; yea, from such as he thinks least of, or conceives himself
freest from; to ask those graces he most wants; to give thanks for every grace
in any measure attained unto, and for deliverance out of those sins he has
lived in, and for preservation from many and grievous sins, into which he was
often ready to fall; yea, daily from those sins to which he is most prone, or
to which he is most tempted, or which are most incident to his particular
calling and common conversation; yea from those he least thought of, and so
lest feared; and for faith, comfort and assurance, in respect of every Article
of his belief in the forenamed true Watch, to be thankful for the least
beginnings, to bewail and beg supply of his wants; so laboring for faith and
a good conscience, to apply himself to discharge each part of his duty,
without putting off from day to day, or from one time to another, resisting
dead-heartednesse and weariness, being a duty concerning him so nearly.

The fifth Vow, and fourth of this maine part concerning holy Fasting.
To celebrate the several kinds of religious Fasts, seasonably, and solemnly,
as every extraordinary occasion requires.
That is, In public
WIth Gods people, according to the occasion, time and manner appointed by
authority, upon such general, to add his own, and his Families especial
occasions; wisely to watch for, catch hold of, and attend upon every
extraordinary occasion which God presents, whereby he (as) calls upon him to
this work.

In his Family and alone.
Having fallen into any grievous sin, or being in any great calamity, or
desiring any especial inward grace, or outward blessing, or deliverance out of
any great distress, or fearing, or feeling any outward judgment; to seek the
preventing, removing, or sanctifying the same; yea, in whatsoever inward or
outward misery, he or his may be, in this especial manner (as an especial
means that the Lord has most graciously left to his to attain the same) to
seek all help from heaven.

More especially,
As (by the especial grace of God) it has been, he also resolves it shall be
his constant course, to begin every new year in this manner; also, ever when
the Lord calls him out of his garrison into the field (being then to expect more
then ordinary hard and perilous employments) thus most humbly and unfainedly to
crave grace, wisdom and good government, sufficiency, health, safety and good
success, as need may require: As also, that the Lord will please to watch over
every one of his at home, for good in every respect, all the time of his
absence from them; and if it be his blessed will, we may enjoy a comfortable
meeting, etc. with our particulars, to remember the general necessities of of
Gods Church and Children; yea, sometimes to set such days a part on their
behalf, as fellow-feeling members of the same body, whereof Christ Jesus is
the head; and as we would they should do the like for us in our calamities.

The time for such solemnities.
Cannot (in his judgment) be less then from even to even, one ordinary meal
being only forborne.

All which time to abstain from eating and drinking, so far as nature be not
weakened (as may happen to some aged, sick or weakly disposed persons, or women
with child, or the like, who are to prefer mercy before sacrifice) and so be
made the more unfit to perform holy duties; to lay aside our best apparel,
sweet sme^ls, music, or any other thing that would delight us. Further, to
forbear all works of our calling, use of the Marriage Bed, f^llnesse of sleep,
yea, whatsoever would hinder before, dist^^^t in, or any way violate, (...) a
service.

To weigh
Considerately and thoroughly the urgent occasions thereof, and how happy we
shall be in obtaining what we want or escaping what we fear or suffer, thereby
to stir us up the more submissively and earnestly to crave the same.

To prepare for, and to keep the same as the Sabbath.
All the whole day to apply himself to the conscionable, orderly and constant
performance of every holy duty; to come before the Lord herein with meditation,
preparation, examination and deliberation; in obedience and repentance,
confidently and patiently awaiting a blessing from above; which he has
expressly promised to leave behind him; and as the Lord has in this respect
done to others of his wonderfully, yea, to him and his informer greatest
extremities often and most remarkably; this only of his own mere mercy in
Christ Jesus; in every pressing necessity chiefly, be we never so unworthy, and
be our duty discharged never so weakly, if but sincerely; thus laboring, our
labor shall not be in vain, but be rewarded graciously, plentifully and
assuredly; for was hipocriticall and monstrously wicked Ahab regarded, heard,
and spared, who was only with the threatening terrified, and thereby but
outwardly humbled? what will not our reconciled God and most tenderhearted
Father do for his? how will he then regard, hear, spare and help his? who (by
his good grace) in their extremity thus draw near unto him, humble themselves
before him, and seek all help only from him; with true contrition, filial
fear, humility of heart, sincerity of spirit, Christian confidence and faith
unfeigned; who ever has at any time, in any thing, in this manner sought his
God aright, that has been sent away succourlesse? and has not either obtained
the thing he desired, or that which his experience must confess was much
better for him? the like may we look for undoubtedly; Lord cause me thus to
seek thee, and I am sure thou will (as thou have done and declared) work for me
wonderfully.

The sixth Vow, and fifth of this maine part, concerning receiving the Lords
Supper.
To receive the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our blessed Savior
reverently and fruitfully, when and where soever he possibly may.
That is, before receiving,
Always, oftentimes to call to mind and apply the particulars which the Lord
requires of us before, at and after receiving, and what good the Lord shows
and assures to his in the Sacrament (as follows in brief) and then to turn
all into an humble and earnest prayer, for the Lords especial assistance and
blessing; not forgeting to give thanks for grace and comfort received, nor to
humble himself for present wants; and former abusing this holy Ordinance,
which might now hinder Gods grace, mercy, acceptance, and blessing in this
work; or procure his threatened judgments to the profaning thereof; now
especially to practice the forementioned duty of examination; to remember and
lay to heart with heavenly mindedness the sacred mysteries of this blessed
Ordinance; to embrace the same in obedience to his sweet Saviors command, who
says, do this; and that the more solemnly to celebrate the remembrance of his
death for me, being the chief end thereof, and the more openly to confess his
name thereby; bewailing his own most sinful condition in general, and his
especial sins in especial manner, resolving unfainedly to break them all
off, and to serve the Lord in all good conscience afterward; not leaving out
any one known sin for any respect; herein dealing as before the Lord
directly, as he would the Lord should bless and not plague him in this great
duty; looking from himself, from his own heinous sinfulness, extreme
unworthiness, and most accursed natural condition, to the so freely, plainly,
plentifully, infallibly, assured mercies in his most faithfull^ promises
through the alone all-sufficient satisfaction of his only Savior Christ Jesus;
so denying himself utterly, laboring to seek and find all mercy, grace,
peace, comfort and happiness; all wisdom righteousness, sanctification and
redemption in him only; resolving to live in all love, peace^ and Christian
Charity with every one continually; forgetting, forgiving fore-pash injuries,
utterly passing by offenses wisely; where distaste has been, or heart-burning
may be, to seek and accept reconciliation seriously and gladly; to converse
quietly; to do good for ill heartily and unweariedly.

Approaching to the Lords Table,
To be filled with all holy affections, to give no way to the contrary
thoughts, being busy about so heavenly a duty; to show a most reverent
gesture, as in the presence of the Lord of, and over all; the great King and
Master of this Feast, who is a most holy God, and will be sanctified in body
and spirit of those that draw near unto him, as in the sight of the most
glorious Angels, and Gods holy Congregation.

All the time of Ministration,
To remember, distinguish and apply the several ceremonies, and their
significations with godly sorrow, lively faith, sweet comfort, entire
thankfulness, etc. as is more at large in Master Brinslyes true Watch, the
first part, Page 145, 146, 147.

Going from the Table,
To rest assured that I do and shall as certainly enjoy the thing signified,
even the Body and Blood of Christ, for the free and full remission of all his
sins, and salvation of his soul, as he has outwardly received the outward
signs thereof Bread and Wine; also, that as he received the seals of the
Covenant, so he does and shall partake of all the good contained therein; as in
brief, in this life, for the inward man, perfect justification, true
fanctification, more strength against all sin and especial corruptions; more
fitness to serve God in all things; especially wherein he has most failed;
increase of persever^nce in all saving graces: for the outward man, a good
name, a competent estate, safety from (...), supply of good, sanctified use of
all for, or a turning all t^ his good; good health, good i^ccesse, etc. In the
end, a blessed end; and in the World to come in Heaven, absolute holiness, and
the fullness of all blessedness for evermore; yea, every one of these
undoubtedly; for the Lord is in earnest, and means not, will not, cannot
deceive us.

After receiving,
His whole life must be a testimony of thankfulness for such inestimable
benefits, least if after receiving, he return to his old by as again, and
that prove a woeful testimony against him, he has not received rightly, and
so instead of the former blessings, he feel the contrary judgments as a just
recompense of profaning so sacred and weighty a duty; therefore to give
thanks for grace and comfort again vouchsafed; to be humbled, and crave
pardon for what was amiss in preparation and receiving; to desire and await
for the Lords most merciful promised, and in the Sacrament assured assistance,
and blessing, etc. See in the true Watch, Page 148.

The third maine part concerning his particular Calling, and contains five
Vows.
The seventh Vow, and first of this maine part.
To oppose and punish wicked men and wickedness by all means he can.
That is,

TO discover and discountenance, to speak and to set himself against such,
according to his place and power, in all Christian wisdom and zeal; yea,
though they be near to him, and greater then he; to reprove them, when words
will not help, nor authority cannot prevail, to show in his countenance and
carriage his unfeigned dislike of such persons and courses; mourning and sighing
for those he cannot reform, and for what he cannot mend; not judging the
worst, but hoping the best of them, praying for them, showing a meek and
charitable disposition toward them; so leaving them to the Lord to deal as he
pleases with them.

The eighth Vow, and second of this maine part.
To cherish and assist good men, and goodness in like manner.
That is,

TO enquire after, to converse with such, finding in them words of wisdom and
truth of goodness, though in much weakness; after trial, to be open hearted,
cheerful countenanced, fairly carriaged, and friendly in speeches toward
them; speaking good of them; and if occasion requires speaking for them; yea,
though they be mean in the world; and though it be before great men, or such
as for goodness scorn them, if they be not present (in case any ill be spoken
against them) to speak the best of them, out of Gods Word to advise and
encourage them, to bear with, and take no notice of mere frailties in them;
circumspectly and seriously to admonish them, in their; outward need to relieve
them; to say nor do nothing that may shame or wrong them; by no means before
any to slight them; to take heed he no way provoke, grieve, vex or perplex
them; for his sake to whom they belong to labor for inward affection toward
them; Christianly to respect them; heartily to pray for them, and conscionably
to immitate their good examples of piety, good government and true worth he
observes in them,

The ninth Vow, and third of this maine part.
To give good example therein, by avoiding the common sins thereof, keeping a
good conscience, and walking worthily continually.
That is,

TO set himselse in especially manner against those pattilar sins he most
dislikes, reprovs and speaks against in others, or which he has any way been
noted for; or if some have justly (though out of their malic) cast in his
teeth, (as excess, ^^^sion, bearing injuries in mind, etc.) above all to have
nothing to do with any ways of deceit o^ violence against the ^ands service,
or poor Soldiers due; neither in advice, ^ilence, liking, consent, word or
work, to yield thereunto; though some with all manner of reasons would persuade
to the same, though he suffer never so much therefore; or whatsoever help in
distress, or benefit to him or his might come thereby. But in the strength of
the Almighty which hitherto in this respect has upheld him remarkably, to hold
fast his integrity, in well doing to commend all to the Lords disposing wholly,
who has taken it on himself, to take care for him and his continually; to
trust his God most in greatest extremity; to deal faithfully and equally, as
he will give account to the Lord, answer before the strictest authority;
declare to honest men truly, and as he would be dealt by; so endeavoring to
keep a good conscience in all things toward God and man, and to carry
himself unblameably and worthily; none (no not those that most strictly
observe, or mischievously malice him, and wish, seek and would be glad of his
shame and harm, may have advantage against him.

The tenth Vow, and fourth of this maine part.
In all causes of Counsel and courses of Justice, to be well advised and
impartial.
That is,

HEaring all particulars and parties deliberately and soberly, examining every
circumstance over and over thoroughly, to weigh all seriously; being asted (as
the cause requires) to give his advice to the purpose briefly and discreetly,
when his turn comes, with a settled spirit, grave countenance, well placed and
few words (according to the rule of right) to pass his sentence without any by
respect; plainly, freely, boldly and impartially, whosoever be present,
whatsoever others opinions are, though no more be of his mind; yea, though he
should be frowned upon, slighted and censured for his labor.

The eleventh Vow, and fifth of this maine part.
In the Leaguer, to carry himself in all Christian wisdom sincerely in the
sight of God, and with all circumspection worthly before men.
That is,

BEsides that, he is to have due regard unto the second and third Vow
concerning the Sabbath, and Gods worship daily; when we lie still on shipboard;
or fail, as far as may stand with Christian convenience, to call his company
(at least once a day) together, to pray with them, to read Gods Word and some
good thing to them, to sing Psalms, and to have good discourse among them.

Before every days marching,
To put up some brief and pertinent prayer to the Lord, for the Army, for our
Regiment, for his Company, for himself.

In marching,
To labor to entertain, and to nourish and pour our such meditations before
the Lord, at in especial manner concern the present general, and his own
particular occasions.

When we rest,
To return thanks, and to renew supplications to the Almighty.

In every employment,
To express such piety as may testify to his own Conscience, that he
acknowledges the beginning, progress and issue of all his well doing and
welfare, to be from Heaven only.

More especially when his turn comes to watch,
Be it when, where, or upon what occasion soever, to pray and rest assured,
that the Lords watching with, for, and over us; only must and will, and can
secure us: To give his most gracious Majesty only all the glory for our
safety, and that all has gone well with us, and that we were not affronted,
surprised, ruined, and made to fear, fly and fall by our Enemies when we
watched.

Principally in or against any perilous employment.
In the expectation thereof, and to be well prepared therefore, (be it never so
hard and dangerous) with all humility and earnestness, oftentimes to seek of
God all direction, courage of heart, strength of body; all sufficiency to do
worthily, all preservation from shame and harm, and all good success, with his
soul begging of the Lord (however else he please to deal with him) not to
leave him so to misdemeane himself; or that any mishap should befall him,
whereby his Christian profession should be disgraced, his honest repute
blemished, or the mouth of scorn and injury opened, to urge his God herein to
be jealous of his own glory; be the beggar never so unthankful, sinful,
weak and unworthy, and though he never so much meriteth to be left to do most
unworthy, and to suffer all shame; sorrow and harm irrecoverably; ever to the
death submitting himself to his good Gods good pleasure wholly, as is more at
large in his prayer to this purpose, to be found in his daily devotions, then
that he may be the more thoroughly confirmed, to betake himself to those
particular promises, which in this respect assure him in Christ (as the Lord
sees best for him) the good things he so much craves; which promises are
manifold, and to be found in his collection of promises; and the which he
always carries about him. Thus fitted by Gods good grace, in his only name
and strength, to discharge his duty without backwardness, fear or shrinking,
bravely and resolutely; not giving over till he has done his part fully,
leaving the rest to the Lords disposing freely; not forgetting to give his name
only, for all ability and good success, all praises duly; and now when the
Army is abroad, and his danger the more apparent, to avoid all sinful and
unseemly courses and customs more carefully; yea, most especially.

In all personal employments also,
Either in receiving and executing commands in sailing, marching, quartering,
watching, etc. to be willing, forward, careful, unwearied, with few words,
without arguing, with settled countenance and carriage beseemingly; toward
others to behave himself reservedly, modestly, quietly, friendly,
submissively, respectively, fairly, inoftensively, as every ones person, place
and worth requires of him; so to carry himself Christianly and commendably:
Hereunto help Lord continually.

The fourth maine part concerning his Family carriage.
The twelfth Vow, and first of this maine part.
To abstain from all abuses of the Marriage Bed.
That is,

IN heart (by Gods especial grace) to watch and strive against all vile
conceits,; in words, all imodesty; in behavior, all wantonness; in action,
all voluptuousness; yea, every way whatsoever would provoke unlawful lusts;
to take heed of all unseasonable, immoderate and any way merely lustful use
thereof; to abstain altogether in time of natural separation, solemn
humiliation, in case of sickness, weakness, or any other time when purity,
health, or modesty is wronged; to beg pardon for, strength against the contrary
graces to, prevention of Gods threatened, feared and merited judgments for, and
grace to eschew the occasions of, and power to overcome his forepast offenses;
to labor to possess his vessel in holiness; often and earnestly to beg the
gift of continency; carrying himself chastely; therefore to eat, drink and sleep
moderately, to have respect to the right use and ends of this holy Ordinance,
and to keep the Bed undefiled; so to crave and look for the Lords blessing
therein, to be deeply humbled, and desire mercy howsoever.

The thirteenth Vow, and second of this maine part.
To labor the conversion and edification of his Wife, Children, Servants, or
any other under his roof, by all good means he possible can.
That is,

TEach them where, when and how to perform religious exercises, and what our
duties are one to another, and how to carry our selves Christianly in our
common conversation; to admonish, further and hold them thereunto, according to
the warrant of Gods Word; with wisdom, mecknesse and authority; to reprove
their neglect or unwilling, unreverend or sloathfull performing holy duties;
pressing upon them the danger and illness thereof, and the acceptablenesse and
blessedness of the contrary; not seldom or softly, but often and sharply, to
reprove whatsoever sin or fault he observes in word, behavior and action to
be in any of them; in countenance and speech to show unfeigned dislike of them;
and as need requires, using seasonable correction to his Children, but that not
presently in passion, but considerately with comp^ssion, in obedience to Gods
ordinance, and to show his hatred of the sin, and not to satisfy his froward
humor, or as a cruel Tyrant, and not like an affectionate Parent, whereby the
poor Children are extremely disheartened, and rather imbittered then bettered;
ever letting them understand their offense, and that they are duly chastised
according to Gods revealed will; to pray unto the Lord often, and unfainedly,
to work upon his Childrens hearts, that the corrections may work upon them
kindly; if Servants be refractory (after often, earnest and meek warning) to
part with them; not keeping any person to serve him that continues to be
profane, or that slights and mocks goodness; yea, as much as is possible to
avoid entertaining any so disposed, to cast out a swearer, a liar, a purloyner,
a deceiver, a scoffer, a talebearer, a strife-sower, a medler, a proud
selfe-conceited, gadding, idle, filthy-speaking person; if such amend not, to
use daily upon all occasions, especially at meals, holy conference among them
of what has been heard or read, or otherwise out of, and according to Gods
Word, using to catechize more or less daily, especially on the Sabbath day,
calling his Family together twice a day to prayer; reading the Scriptures and
somewhat in a good book; singing Psalms seasonably, solemnly and constantly,
praying for them in private; especially avoiding those evils he forbids and
reproves in them, and doing those duties he requires of them; taking great care
they may not have cause to note any particular known falt in him, or have
occasion to say, this you reprove in us; yet practice it your self: or thus,
if not so you forget, etc.

The fourteenth Vow, and third of this maine part.
To demean himself wisely in all his ways among them.
That is,

IN his countenance, carriage, and speeches, to show a grave, quiet, sober,
cheerful, wel-ordered disposition, to the uttermost eschewing a churlish,
frowa^d, jealous, possionate, sullen, distempered conversation; in all as he
may most win to good and wean from ill; having a care he find or reprehend no
faults before strangers, or at unseasonable times, or in injurious, bitter, or
vexing manner; but to take convenient time alone thereto, and when he conceives
it may be most kindly; in nothing to vent his own spleen and passion, or to
disgrace the party; but by all means seeking the persons reformation; having
done his endeavor, and commended the same to the Lords blessing; to mourn
for, and yet to be contented with what he (would but) cannot mend; awaiting
Gods own leisure and good pleasure in all things.

The fifth maine part concerning his common conversation.
The fifteenth Vow, and first of this maine part.
To eschew evil company continually.
That is,

I. TO consider what company, viz.
1 Of Atheists, Libertines, Infidels, Idolaters.

2 Sectaries, Scismaticks.

3 Common neglecters and abusers of Gods Ordinances.

4 Swearers, cursers, imprecators, blaspemers.

5 Sabbath breakers.

6 Traitors, disobedient to authority.

7 Cavalers, contentious quarrellours.

8 Gluttons, drunkards, riotous.

9 Foolish, filthy, profane speakers.

10 Proud, scornful, slighting, dis-respective, distasteful.

11 Hasty, hair-braind, humorists.

12 Self-conceited, boasting, detracting, injurious, slanderers, depravers,
tale-bearers, flatterers.

13 Dissemblers, liars, unjust.

14 Idle persons, sluggards, gamsters, prodigals.

15 Whores, and Whore-hanters.

16 Malicious, hard-hearted, hardly to be reconciled.

17 Vain, lewd, profane livers.

18 All such as jeere, mock at, or despise God, his Word, Worship and Service,
his Ministers, good men, and goodness.

19 Time-servers, lukewarm professors, and the like.

II. What course to take to avoid their society.
1 To avoid coming by them and the places he knows they frequent.

2 All familiarity with them.

3 Or joining in affinity or friendship with them.

4 Or seeking any kindness from them.

5 Or accepting any of them (if he can avoid it) so not to oblige himself to
them.

6 Or having any thing to do with them.

7 All delight in their vain, jesting, wicked, world-pleasing words, or ways.

8 All unnecessary discourse with them.

9 All Tobacco-drinking, a main means of fellowship.

10 Seeking them out (for any regard.)

11 Meeting with them if he can (without incivility and with convenience) turn
from them.

III. But when of necessity he must meet with, converse, or be among them.
1 Not to follow their invitation to any evil for any respect.

2 But resolutely to break from them, though they be great, and otherwise
fair conditioned.

3 Though they speak friendly, or invite earnestly, to deny them discre^tly.

4 To stay as little while as may be with them.

5 When he is among them not (in word or deed) to sin with them.

6 To show dislike of, and reprove their vices, as he may wisely and boldly.

7 To grieve inwardly for what he cannot mend.

8 Especially to watch over his tongue.

9 And not conform to their foolish and sinful customs.

IIII. All this for these especial respects.
1 Having by often most woeful experience found they have occasioned his most
heinous and shameful backslidings.

2 And will procure the like hereafter.

3 And that the Lord (in justice) has left him to fall into sin with them,
for not avoiding their society.

4 And will do so again.

5 And that he shall be punished with them.

6 And perish for company (not repenting.)

7 And do more cause them to blaspheme.

8 And harden them in their sins.

9 And cause them more to contemn, scorn, laugh at and reproach him.

10 And speak evil of his religious profession by his evil example.

V. To endeavor all this, although he find these and the like oppositions.
1 Evil will and hatred.

2 Envy, malice, mis-interpretations.

3 Scoffs and reproachful tants.

4 Hinderance in his worldly affairs.

5 Let them all think, speak, or do what they will of, or against him.

VI. Therefore among the rest to use these means to further his performance
hereof.
1 To be sincere, circumspect, and constant in avoiding all occasions.

2 Often and earnestly to crave the Lords help, to which nothing is impossible.

3 To take heed chiefly of such companions as have misled, and whose pleasing
vain, have most power to mislead him.

4 To remember and lay to heart the old Proverb, Woe worth ill company; see the
next Vow.

The sixteenth Vow, and second of this maine part.
To avoid all excess, especially all drunkenness every where.
That is,

TO pass by, not to come at, or near (except for necessity) the places
thereof; as Tavernes, Tap-houses, Ships and Sutlers huts; also all persons that
he knows and finds to be so disposed, or given to tippling, be they who they
will; especially such as have occasioned, may occasion, or whose vain is to
occasion, or that tell, boast of glory in excess; though they promise to it
never so short a time, or to drink never so small a quantity, or though they
pret^nd never so much necessity or convenience, if my former experience and
inward persuasion say the contrary.

Withal to avoid
All drinking or pledging healths, which is sacraficing to Satan; all drinking
of full cups, or great glasses, or many draughts, or so much as may any way
distemper, sitting long at the wine, rising early thereto, or being mighty to
pour in strong drink, or using any provocation to intemperance in himself or
others; yea, all temptations to tippling.

More particularly,
To avoid to invite, or be intited by others that way given; and when it is
convenient to invite and be invited, to pretent, to show dislike of, to refuse,
to break off; yea, discreetly and mildly, and if need be, freely and boldly to
speak against whatsoever would occasion excess and gussing; to let every one
have liberty to drink as little and as seldom as they please, without the very
least urging or show of mislike; to desire and take the same freedom my self;
but if that be displea sing and will not serve the turn, to depart instantly,
though others should think rudely.

When needs must,
That he must be in such places, and among such society as occasion in
temperance oftentimes, as in the Leaguer, going to an Ordinary for my diet, to
go no longer before, nor to stay no longer after meals then needs must, and
having satisfied himself soberly and comfortably, to depart speedily and
civilly; yea, sometimes to deny and refuse that which might else be done
lawfully and freely, least by little and little he be drawn on to forget
himself, and too far to stretch or any way to abuse his Christian liberty; by
no means to provoke others to the least intemperance; to loath all such courses
and customs, and by all means to show it; discreetly and resolutely to
declare the heinousness and danger of them, yea, although in the company of
great men and such as are in authority over him, and who perhaps therefore will
^^out and contemn him; with all friendlinesse and civility to desire them to
excuse him, and to refuse at the first, and to use them thereto constantly,
least yielding a little, and taking liberty sometimes, he be so entangled that
he cannot without great distaste be again freed; yea, rather then fail, at
some times, in some places and companies to vow against, and abstain from all
wine, strong beer, hot-waters, and the like, altogether, when, where and among
whom he fears, or it is likely he may be provoked.

To lay to beart
The baseness and beastliness of this vice; what fools and madmen drunkards
are; the sinfulness and punishment thereof, how it lays us open to all
apishnesse, shame and scorn, to all injuriousnesse, villainy and mischief; how
unfit it makes us to serve God, to converse among men, to discharge our
calling, so that no body respects, or cares to employ, dare, or will trust such
an one; yea, how those that are otherwise wicked men, and their own companions
in their hearts, contemn, scornfully speak of, deride, laugh at, and
shamefully abuse such.

Especially let Professors
Consider seriously and conscionably, how foul a blemish this vice is, and how
much shame, scorn and injury it has procured, and will procure unto them; his
own sinful, forrowfull and shameful experience makes him speak it, for it
has been cast in his teeth, and he has justly deserved it; he prays and
hopes to be the better for it, and resolves by Gods good grace never more to
fall into it, but carefully to eschew all occasions of it; solemnly protesting
as far as is possible never to come in company with those, who out of malice
nor conscience, have spoken of it; or so to abridge his lawful liberty, and to
carry himself so circumspectly and soberly, that their malicious mouths may
be stopped, former scandals remored, and furture prevented; nerer forgetting
what horrible dejections of spirit, terrors of conscience and distempers of
body he has found upon it; therefore daily to pray and watch against it.

The seventeenth Vow, and third of this maine part.
To watch against all filthiness in all places.
That is,

NOt to invent, give way to, or cherish any vile conceits, contemplative
wickedness, or remembering any forepast uncleanness with contentment; to
resist, strive and pray against the first motions thereof, not to utter any
impure, but only chaste speeches; not to suffer his eyes to seek out, to look
at, or wander after any lustful or unclean object, but to make a covenant with
his eyes, and to turn them from such objects; nay not to behold lawful
objects of delight to stir up lust; to abhor, not at all to listen to, but
to forbid, or else to go away from all ribald talk, songs, or books; detesting
all such gestures and pictures; taking heed of all immodest behavior secretly,
or with others; avoiding companying with any woman privately, though at first
intending no harm, especially with such whose too free and loose behavior
might provoke, or whose ill repute would ofter the more freedom, not yielding
to the very least daliance, not playing with the flame least he burn; avoiding
all occasions, abhorring the act of all self-pollution, though in never such
darkness and closely, and all other abominations not fit to be named, and most
horrible to be committed.

And further;
Seriously considering his former offches to be deeply humbled, his evil
inclination to be constantly watchful, his great weakness to fear always,
to remember Joseph's speech and example for imitation; the threatenings against,
and judgments upon uncleannesle, to be terrefied therefrom, or else to look
for the like; to lay to heart whatsoever has occasioned or may occasion any
impurity in himself or others, or that has brought him the nearest to fall
therein to run from the like hereafter; to bear down his body, and to break off
sloth; to eschew idleness, solitariness and intemperance; to learn well that
Heathen lesson, sure cerere and bacho friget venus: to pray often and
earnestly, that the Lord as he wills, will please to work his sanctification,
that he may possess his vessel in all holiness and honor and that
continually.

The eighteenth Vow, and fourth of this maine part.
To take heed of breaking out into pashon upon any occasion.
Especially

UPon evil suspicions without warrantable cause, upon bare relations of
others, before hearing the cause; upon taking things in the worst part;
wresling others words, or mis-interpreting their meaning, or upon rash judging,
or old grudge, or out of an irreconcilable disposition, or being crossed in
his hopes or proceedings, contemned in his person, slandered in his good name,
wronged in his right, ill spoken of behind his back, villified without cause,
or any way injured justly or unjustly; if justly to be silent and do no more
so; if unjustly, to take heed he deserve it not, and to consider Gods dearest
Children, and Christ himself were served so, therefore to examine the cause
seriously, to weigh all circumstances warily, to be informed thoroughly, to take
all in the best part, to judge as he would be judged, to hear the party fully;
if he deny it, to be easily, satisfied, if he maintain it, having truly and
soberly, informed him to be silent and settled, and to turn from him till his
distemper, and his own heat of blood be over; then to discourse again
deliberately; rather to suffer as may stand with Christian decency, then to
enter into contention: Gods Word, his own and common experience tells him, it is
much better to cease from strife in the beginning, then after the matter is
divulged; the one procures peace, love and credit, the other trouble, hate and
shame; yea, so to labor for a meek and sustering, loving and forgiving
disposition, and to abhor, watch against, and break off the contrary; that
whereas he has been noted for hastiness, chollar and passion, to force them
(by Gods grace and government) to say, see how remarkably is the man changed,
what a conquest has he gained; yet if there be cause to clear himself, as if
the wrong may tend to the scandal of his Christian profession, disabling him
for his calling, or blemishing his honest reputation; to declare himself
boldly and wisely, and to assure them that wrong him, conscience not
cowardlinesse, the fear of God, not of their faces, restrains him from taking
the roughest course to right himself; and in his calling, in the greatest
danger to call upon them to behold and testify the truth thereof; he is no
coward that will not, but he that dares not fight; he that is truly valiant,
when there is just cause, will show it; fear the Lord and nothing else, by
mild carriage and soft speeches, prevent and cut off wrath, strife and
vexation; de part from palsion and discord, for an hasty and contentious man
never wants woe; and anger is a short madness, procuring to body and mind most
strange distempers.

The nineteenth Vow, and fifth of this maine part.
To set himself against all misgovernment of the tongue without ceasing.
That is,

TO the uttermost to watch against, to avoid, to break off all ignorant
speaking of things he understand not; all foolith, unadvised, rash, supershous,
unseasonable, hypocritical, double, false, deceitful, vain, proud, boasting,
selfeconceited, vainglorious, detrading, slandering, tale-bearing, carious,
malicious, judging, concurring, uncharible, gibing, ^coffing, meddling,
disputing, cavaling, contradicting, railing, reviling, unmanly, unfriendly,
diftastfull, injurious, reproachful, passionate, provoking, loose, light,
lavish, obscene, profane, ungracious, uncomely, unacceptable, unprofitable
speeches.

To speak
As he would be heard, and content to answer and justify; always to let his
tongue consent with his brains, forethinking before he speak, whether it be
lawful or fitting that he is about to speak, so to speak or be silent
accordingly; to speak of others as he would be spoken of by others; to speak
of the good, but to conceal the ill of every one, especially they being dead
or absent; yea, though of such as have injured him, and given cause to speak
evil of them; to be wholly silent, rather then speak the lest word that
offends God or wrong man; considering it has often shamel, vexed and troubled
him to have spoken, but seldom to have held his tongue, and will do if he
watch not; a word out is no more ours, it is then too late to say, had I not said
it; what will follow of it? Never assirming more then he knows to be true;
sometimes forbearing to relate things strange, though true; to avoid asking or
answering questions, or enquiring after, and relating news lightly; all
talking of State-matters, or of great persons and their proceedings; or of
finding fault where it does not concern him, or more then concerns the
business; to take heed of discovering his affections by his words, of speaking
his own suspicions, of complaining of his condition, of revealing his own or
others secrets; for if he cannot keep his own counsel, why should he conceive
another can or will ^ not to tell another what he would not should be told
forth; to talk with all reverence and wisdom of holy things, with all charity
and sparingnesse of others courses; with all lowliness and sobriety of his
own business; to avoid too much forwardness, and too many words in praising
others who deserve it, not to praise his friend with a loud voice; yet not to
neglect the seasonable and serious commendation of true worth, nor the thankful
acknowledging the favors of his friend; to flatter none, to speak as each
merits truly and discreetly.

In all his discourses
To be inoffensive and acceptable, to remember deliberation and softness; not
to be loud or hasty, not to use re-itterations, not to interupt others, in
speaking, but to hear all out, and than to speak or answer in due season to
the purpose, as briefly and pithily as may be; with freeness, truth and
plainness, and there an end.

The twentieth Vow, and sixth of this maine part.
To stir up himself to edify others in all places, upon all occasions, and
by all means he can.
Thus in his Family,
THat all his discourses tend thereto, yea, to bring our needful talk of
outward things in the conclusion to the same end; also, if the Lord especially
bless or afflict us, out of the same to labor thereafter; yea, out of
whatsoever we hear or observe cerning others to gather occasion thereunto, to
speak of what we hear and read out of Gods Word, or things grounded thereon to
this purpose; to let no occasion slip without some observation and word of
edification thereout, for thansgiving, humiliation, consolation or prayer, etc.

Also with others,
When they come to visit or eat with him, or he with them, or that accidentally
he come to converse with any in the Leaguer, or garrison, or any where else;
always to remember and carefully to endeavor, that we part not without some
edifying discourses, therefore, though they be worldly, vain and wicked men
(if they do not openly and utterly oppose, scorn and rage at goodness, and
so show themselves to be those dogs and swine, to whom these pearls may not
be given, nor bread cast) to seek out or catch at some passage or other that
may minister occasion to say somewhat that may savor of sanctification, to
touch the sins observed in general terms; and to another person, which he
would some other present should take notice of; so for well doing, taking heed
of naming any, to avoid offense, and to win the more, except it be convenient
to mention the names of such as are notable examples of piety, honesty,
sobriety and good government, to move to holy emulation and imitation, among
such as are more civil, and not openly profane to be more free; yet with very
great circumspection and godly discretion, so that some good may be done and no
offense taken, at least that no just cause thereof be given, but among those
that truly fear God, are members of his Church and make a more then ordinary
profession of Religion, and would be esteemed religious, to go yet further
with them, to break off neednesse and worldly discourse, by drawing somewhat
thereout for better; to ask some case of conscience, or the meaning of some
place of Scripture, or to relate some seasonable passage heard at a Sermon, or
read in Gods Word, etc. to lay hold on some good wordspoken, to hold on the
good discourse, to break off his own and others wretched silence and miserable
indisposition, or shame to good conference, and one wayor other to move
thereunto.

Yet all
In all Christian wisdom, well weighing the circumstances of time, place,
persons, occasions, foremost, fitness and best acceptance; ever speaking
circumspectly, distinctly, soberly, friendly and reverendly, with such
expressions, countenance and gesture, that it may appear his only end is
edifying himself and others; avoiding speaking when and where he should not be
heard, or the matter not regarded, and all kind of affectation in words or
carriage; above all beseeching God before, at, and after every meeting (at
least in heart) to guide, strengthen and bless his good, though most weak
desires and endeavors herein, doing all as his duty requires to Gods glory,
others good, and his own satisfaction; having especial care to carry himself
so in all his words and ways, that he may not cross and make fruitless his
good discourses, bewailing if he has been with any without doing or receiving
some good; and that so useful a duty of Edification, has been, and is by
himself and others so greatly neglected, and by the most, so much laughed at
and contemned.

The one and twentieth Vow, and seventh of this maine part.
To demean himself warily in all other things.
That is,

TO watch against, to resist the beginnings of, to restrain, suppress and
instantly, earnestly, constantly to oppose, keep in and root out all hidden,
hateful, headstrong, shameful, harmfull, passions and distempers; his
especial corruptions and daily failings in especial manner; that all,
though(alas) all seeds of sin abound in him, they may neither in countenance,
words, carriage or conversation break out from him; to take heed of being
transported into any such speeches as may declare folly, loosnesse or
profaneness; or into any unchristian, indiscreet, uncomely behavior, through
too much harshnesse or familiarity; not to intrude uncivilly into others
society, nor to interrupt them in their talk, or to intermeddle with their
business; but to go by, step back, or turn away with all civility and
courtesy; in discoursing with others, not to pass his opinion upon any person
or occasion unasked, lightly or hastily; if pressed to speak (if it be a
matter unconvenient, or that does not concern him, or that is not pleasing to
him, or from whence no good may arise to answer with silence, or to ask some
other harmless question, or propound some more fitting matter, or to turn
away quietly and inoffensively.

Further to avoid
Vain, light, loud and unseemly laughter, which is a sure and open sign of
forgetfulness unstaiednesse, misgovernment and folly; to take good heed
continually in his talking with others, and when others talk with him, or when
he is alone it think no body sees him, that he break off and amend, nodding
with, shaking of his head, winking with the eyes, biting of the lip, wrying the
mouth, gaping, putting out the tongue, gnashing his teeth, staring in the face,
hanging the head down, laying it on the shoulder, thrugging his shoulder,
acting with his hands, motions of the feet, or any other unseemly posture with
any part of the body, out of scorn, carelessness or custom, or out of conceit
they become him well, or in vain astectation, or in foolish imitation.

In these to be especially careful.
Because therein he has been formerly so forgetful, that some have noted him
for unbeseeming demeanor; to endeavor in every thing (by Gods good guidance) to
be so circumspect that he in nothing give distaste, but may converse
commendably and acceptably; withal, remembering what contempt, shame and
trouble for miscarriage has procured and will procure him; and not forgetting
that what he mislikes and speaks against, as a blemish, uncomely and misseeming
in others (in their manner of speaking, countenance, carringe and gesture) as
ill becomes him and causes others to blame him, and the less to regard him.

The sixth maine part concerning his private course.
The two and twentieth Vow, and first of this maine part.
To converse with God in holy matters.
That is,

IN his Study, garden, tent, hut, or abroad in the field; to bethink
deliberately, distinctly, affectionately (and not to give over till he have
beaten the matter through, and made it his own by powerful application, and
unfeigned resolution to practice) what holy duties God remires of him, what
warrant there is out of Gods Word for them; and when, where and how most
seasonably, conscionably and profitably to perform them, and what good by the
Lords most merciful and promised blessing, by former experence, and by
examples of Gods Children, he may a flure himself in the use of them.

Also,
How he may carry himself most conscionably, faithfully, worthily and
comfortably in his particular place and calling, and how most religiously and
ordorly in his Family, and how most Christianly and commendably in his common
course.

Further,
How best to walk with his God in saving-knowledge, true faith, sincere
obedience, sound repentance, lively hope; yea, in all good conscience, with
contentation in every condition.

And how,
Best to be assured of Gods love, mercy, grace, peace, joy, strength, rel^efe,
protection and blessing in all he takes in hand, and that concerns him; how
best to demean himself in prosperity and adversity; how to make right use of
every present condition, to draw the nearer to, and to find the more communion
with God thereby, in all his proceedings (though never so small) more often and
earnestly consult with God, to crave his direction and blessing by his Word and
prayer.

To furnish himself
With such meditations, places of Scripture and solid reasons, as may best
fence him against those sins most incident to his nature, calling, common
conversation, family-carriage and private course, and for most Christian and
comely carriage to the contrary.

To remember
He is in Gods al-seeing sight, though never so alone; therefore to take heed
that his thoughts and carriage be such as become his most holy, glorious and
al-knowing presence; and if he must, or when he does think upon his outward,
lawful, worldly occasions, in regard of his employments, distresses, or
Christian comforts, not to dwell too long upon them, but to mix holy
cogitations with them, and by them to be moved to sigh, to call to God for his
direction and blessing in them when he departs from them.

To be often
In prayer and other heavenly exercises when he is in private; to this end,
often seperating himself from impediments, especially from company, and to
love in this manner, to be private and solitary; therefore to choose and
frequent such times and places constantly and unvreariedly.

The three and twentieth Vow, and second of this maine part.
To keep himself in awe by holy Meditations.
Thus,

SOlemnly to call to mind, seriously to ponder upon, and powerfully to apply,
the fearful fall and utter rejection of the Angels; the sin and punishment of
Adam and all his posterity; the vileness of our natures, the illness of our
conversations, the bainousnesse and danger of sin un-repented of, his own
especially sins from his youth up, his many abominable backslidings, his
continual offendings, the grievous failings of his best duties, the
sinfulness of his Family and company, the abominations of the times, the
cursed sins of our calling.

Also,
Gods most fearful and remarkable judgments abroad in the world, his
particular plagues upon particular persons; yea, some that he has known, Gods
heavy visitations general and particular upon his own Church and dear
Children; those afflictions that have been, yet are, or are like to fall upon
himself and his Family; upon them, most near and dear unto him; the vanity
and vexation of all things under the Sun, the mutability and mortality of all
men, the day of his own death, terriblenesse of the great day of account,
endless and eas^esse pains of hell, the full and ever during happiness in
Heaven; the attributes of the Lord God, as his most absolute, infinite and
unchangeable holiness, excellency, power, justice, mercy, wisdom, truth,
omniscience, omnipresence, etc. and every his own extreme wickedness,
baseness, wretchedness, helplesnesse, etc. to keep his heart in awe, that he
sin not; to watch, to walk humbly with, and uprightly before his God; to
labor to lay to heart whatsoever may by Gods working move him, with some sense
and sorrow, to weigh his own and other misdeeds and miscries, and cause him
the more carefully and affectionately to fear, seek, serve, depend upon, and
give due glory unto the Lord his God, who is blessed for evermore.

The four and twentieth Vow, and third of this maine part.
To call to mind the Lords especial mercles.
That is,

MOst respectively to remember; and with all holy affection of heart to be
moved at that most wonderful work of redemption by Christ, when we were (and
had else for ever been) utterly lost; that the Lord has freely chosen him to
be one of his, who was, and is worse then the worst; that he has created him
so excellent a Creature, and not a most loathsome d^formed wretch or monster;
that he was borne and has been brought up in times and places, when and where
the Gospel flourishes; that the Lord has estectually called him by his Word
and Spirit, that he may so freely, plentifully, peaceably enjoy the
opportunities and means of every part of Gods worship; that the Lord has
pleased to give him any measure of saving knowledge, true faith, sincere
obedience, lively hope, sound repentance, sollid comfort by Gods blessing on
the use of the means; that the Lord grants him to enjoy his most holy and
faithful Word, the only guide and stay of his soul; that God has caused him
to escape so many and otherwise inevitable calamities, that he has heard and
known to fall most heavily upon others; that the Lord has pleased so often
and remarkably been his strength in trouble, and great deliverer out of
greatest extremities; that his God has so seasonably, wonderfully and
constantly protected and provided for him, whereas else he had perished utterly.

Not forgetting
How the Lord has pleased to make us, that were mere heathens, his own
people; and what great preservations, victories and deliverances, and
blessings, the Lord has pleased to vouchsafe from time to time to his Church
and Children, especially in England and the Netherlands, etc. How graciously it
has pleased our God to show mercy, to give grace unto, to keep in health, to
restore to health, to relieve, preserve, deliver, to ease, strengthen, and
recover his poor Wife and Children, as every occasion required, and every way
to watch over him and his for good; and how the Lord has most freely, plainly,
plentifully and infallibly assured him, those most near and dear unto him,
and all his all that is good for us here, and all happiness with himself in
Heaven for evermore; see in his records of Gods especial mercies.

All these and the like
To be laid to heart with more large meditations on each, with all entire
affection, in the sense of the Lords unutterable goodness toward us, and with
all deep humiliation in the sense of our unworthiness of them, and with all
Christian confidence in the assurance of his promised favoures; so to give his
God the glory due unto his great name, in heavenly contemplations, holy
acknowledgement, and sincere obedience.

The seventh maine part concerning his outward condition.
The five and twentieth Vow, and the first of this maine part.
To labor after a sanctified use of his outward condition, whatsoever the same
is, or may be.
After this manner;

HIS present outward condition being exceedingly distressed, decaying daily,
and in outward appearance threatening uttermost extremity; as also, in any other
outward calamity th^^ may befall him, to weigh the same with all its
circumstances thoroughly, not to despair or dispure, to murmr or be
impatient, or to be over perplexed, or to limit the Lord about it; but to be
moved the more camestly and frequently to seek that wisdom and strength from
God aright to bear it that he has promised, and a seasonable deliverance our
of it.

Further,
Seriously to call to mind, confess, bewaise, with resolution to forsake those
particular sins, which his conscience tells him have brought this heavy
affliction upon him; to beg pardon for, and reformation of them, and that they
may not hinder Gods helping of him, or the Lords vouchsafeing a sanctified use
of the visitation to him; to consider wisely what outward occasions procured
the affliction unto him, not to blame the ^ame, but his own folly, sin and
weakness chiefly; to raise his thoughts to him that sent it; yea, that the
Lord pleased so to have it, who assuredly (though flesh and blood cannot digest
it) intends and will work (spite all oppositions and impossibilities) his
real good by it; that he daily in all humility with fervency and confidence,
commends his condition to the Lords most mighty, wise, merciful and faithful
disposing wholly, who knows the same and all circumstances thereof fully, and by
often fasting and prayer (as by Gods grace he has done) to beseech his God
according to his own good pleasure, to have regard unto it graciously;
especially to pray the Lord to discover to him the inward causes of it; that he
may aright know his hand in it, and kiss the rod that scourges him, and in
all good conscience, with a contented mind, to await for such an issue as his
good God shall please to give but of it; to use only the lawful means, and
as far as he conceives all lawful means in lawful manner to be relieved;
so to commend the rest to him that can do with him what he will, and will do
what in wisdom, love and faithfulness he sees best for us in the end, and
nothing shall let it, because his mouth has spoken it; who if he think fit to
deny in this or that particular, what we conceive we so much want, and do so
earnestly crave, will undoubtedly help some other way abundantly.

Far his further assurance of all these,
Well to weigh how the Lord has formerly oftentimes, and most remarkably
helped in greatest extremity, when them was as small hope and possibility;
Consider also, what the Lord in such cases has promised in fallibly, and that
he has innumerable ways to help continually; yea, when all seem past remedy,
that he can as easily deliver out of the most and greatest miseries, as if they
were never so few and small, and as well out of this as our of any other; that
he is our beavenly Father in Christ, whom he has given to save us, with whom
he has given and assured us whatsoever he sees best for us.

Therefore
In well-doing to trust God most in greatest extremity (and by Gods especial
grace) to hold fast his integrity, whatsoever he suffer thereby, resting fully
persuaded, though Heaven and earth should meet together, yet that the Lord who
has so expressly promised, it cannot, will not fail, forsake or forget us.

Lord my God,
My soul seeks all help only from thee, I know no help without thee, I pray
alone unto thee, I depend only upon thee, I await always for thee, I submit
wholly to thee, surely thou that art to come, wilt come, and not tarry.

Not forgetting
How graciously the Lord yet sustaineth me, and that I am not overcharged
utterly, and that my punishment herein is so infinitely less then mine
iniquity, and that so many millions more worthy then I am suffer greater
misery; and what an especial favor the Lord does me, that I can all seek to,
and trust in him in my necessity; Lord do but hereby bring me home unto thee,
and further my salvation eternally, and it is enough for me, deal as thou
please with me; see in his prayer to this purpofe, in his daily devotions,
and in his sure stay in greatest extremity.

If his estate be, or by Gods goodness prove more prosperous,
To take especial notice of, in heart to acknowledge, carefully to write up
and record, revetendly to tell to others, affectionately to thank the Lord for
his fatherly love, care, providence, assistance and blessing in that his estate
is bettered, and his great necessities so remarkably relieved, and that his
good and powerful hand has so helped, etc. to be the more humble, watchful
and upright; not to prove proud, high-minded and puffed up, or to grow the more
careless, or to think himself the more secure, or the less to est^eme others
deserving respect, or to flacken or loose his integrity or piety, or sobriety,
or the daily and conscionable performing holy exercises thereby; not to set his
heart thereon, or prodigally to spend the more, or any way to be misled thereby
to any lust, or excess, to be the more conscionable, temperate and charitable,
as having the more to account for, that he may not be transported into any
sin or folly by having the more, to consider the vanity and vexation hereof,
and mixed-here within the very best and most comfortable use, that this outward
prosperity is not simply a certain sign of Gods favor, or of our goodness;
as we see by common experience, for the worst men for the most part in this
world prosper best, and the best are most afflicted; that our estate can soon
be changed to be worse then it was, yea, to the greatest extr^mity; that it
neither commends our persons, prayers, or any thing that we do, or that
concerns us the more unto the Lord; that it can offord us no comfort, ease or
help in any visitation, nor in any wise prevent she same; that it can neither
keep off, nor comfort us at the hour of death, nor further us to Heaven, if
not sanctified to us, and that we have not a sonctified use thereof, therefore
by Gods grace to labor privately before God, and publicly in he face of the
world; to be more devout, and well governed, that the blessings God has given
him, may by Gods mercies prove blessings to him, and pledges of the best
blessings to him, that none may say, see his change of estate has changed him
to the worse, and that instead of comforts, they prove not ^^rses unto him, etc.

The six and twentieth Vow, and the second of this maine part.
To put the Lords blessings to the best use.
That is,

CArefully to avoid improvidence, unthriftinesse, or spending beyond commings
in; lavish laying out upon vain company, excess in eating, drinking,
apparel, and upon all other trifles and unnecessaries; to break off
banqueting, feasting, often inviting, laboring to live within compass; yet
in Christian manner to use the blessing of our Lord freely, for lawful,
seemly, comfortable maintenance, always receiving and using them with prayer
and thanksgiving humbly and soberly.

The seven and twentieth Vow, and third of this maine part.
To give the tenth of all increase to the Lord in holy uses.
That is,

IF the Lord ever please to help him out of debt (for till then he cannot say
certainly what he has) and to bless him with commings in, to keep a strict
account of all that comes into his hands, and to lay aside the tenth of all
lawful profits for pious and charitable uses, as to help to maintain a
Minister, to further Gods divine worship, or to relieve such as are in
distress, etc.

Also,
Carefully to avoid, to break est, to amend forgetfulness, neglect,
unwillingnesse, backwardness, delaying, seeking excuses, dispensing to omit,
and the like hindrances in this case.

Yea,
Although profit come in plentifully, yea, so much the more to continue
accordingly, dealing herein directly as in the sight of God, who knows the
temper of his heart, and manner of dealing herein.

Doing thus,
To testify real thankfulness for blessings received, and sincere obedience
to what is required, and to perform faithfully what he has so seriously
vowed, with an assured expectation of a merciful and plentiful blessing
according as the Lord has promised, and in his good pleasure sees most
fitting, remembering that to dare to dodge with God herein is not the way to
prosper, but to procure the more misery.

The eight and twentieth Vow, and fourth of this maine part.
To avoid suretiship to the uttermost he can.
Therefore

SEriously to consider, and when occasion requires, not to forget what a snare,
trouble, vexation and loss it is, as diverse plain places of Scripture
expressly prove; and if kinsman, friend, neighbor or stranger never so
earnestly desire it, allege never so likely reasons to move him to it, and
promise never so largely to discharge it, and to secure him never so much from
loss or trouble by it, and to recompense him never so liberally for it; but
civily, friendly, with good reasons, unmoveably to refuse it, showing how God
in his Word forbids it, and what inconveniences comes by it; telling them be
has absolutely vowed against it; entreating therefore upon these good grounds,
that his denial be not ill judged, but excused; if they be greatly distressed
that importune it, rather to give or lend unto them freely, or by some other
good means, to help them according to his ability, convenience and best
security; if his refusal cause their frowns or dis-favour wisely to take no
notice thereof, smother or bear it; better suffer that then vexation, trouble
and loss in consenting to it; therefore in it be possible, himself never to
desire it, or not to take it ill if he be refused; remembering (with applying)
how many, he has known and heard to have been extremely disquiered, sued,
hindered; yea, themselves and theirs even undone by it, and cry woe and alas
that ever they yielded to it; to pray to the Lord to give him wisdom and
government to avoid it, and to bless him heartily, that he has pleased
hitherto to keep him from it.

The nine and twentieth Vow, and fifth of this main part.
To forbear running into, and to endeavor to get our of debt by all means he
can.
Thus,

BY avoiding al needly expenses and suretiship, and by living retiredly and
providently, as is before mentioned, and further from henceforth (God
assisting) by eschewing too liberal lending and disbursing to others, as far
as conscience, equity and charity will suffer, wherein he bath beens so free
and unadvised, and much hindered himself formerly; therefore to deny (others
that may desire it) hereafter discreetly and seriously, and to deal herein
plainly, let them take it as they please from him, the rather experience
teaching him, that hereby no small trouble has befallen him, and will come
unto him; for either friends or money, or both, are lost, and he must often,
even with shame and grief entreat for, and be heartily glad (and think
himself much bound to them that are indebted to him) to get his own at all
(after many entreaties and long stay) from them, for running further into debt
thus.

Now considering
His debts are the only present most heavy burden, that even over presses
him; avoiding (as before in this) further increasing of them, that he may by
Gods good providence to deminish and get out of them, to use all possible
lawful means to discharge them, to beg of his God often and earnestly that he
will please to free him of them, to betake himself to such promises as in this
case may most support and assure succor unto him, to take the best course he
can out of conscience to God whatsoever his may seem to suffer hereby, that all
may be fully paid that shall be found justly due at his decease, and then not
to trouble himself too much about them, but to rest fully persuaded, that the
Lord as he sees good can and will as he has declared easily, speedily, amply
and remarkably help him out of them.

The eighth maine part concerning Death.
The thirtieth Vow, or the last of all, and only Vow of this maine part.
To prepare himself conscionably, carefully, constantly for the day of his
death:
In this manner:

AMong many other, these four main points offer themselves to his consideration
chiefly. Viz.

1 How to demean himself in life and health.

2 In time of sickness, and at the point of death.

3 Some sound reasons moving to this course.

4 The great benefit following thereupon.

In life and health
By Gods great goodness and grace to set himself about these two things
especially, viz.

1 To make his peace with God.

2 To put his outward estate in good order.

For the first of these;
To pray and to endeavor daily and seriously to search out, acknowledge,
bewail, abhor, protest against, resolve to forsake, fly the occasions of, to
beg pardon for, strength to resist and overcome every known sin whatsoever,
his especial ones in especial manner; those principally that his woeful
experience has told him, does or may tell him, have broken, do, will or may
most violate his sweet peace with his sweet God, most trouble his mind,
terrify his conscience, makes him most fear Gods displeasure for the present,
and would most affright his soul if he were ready to dye, and had not assurance
they were pardoned; so not daring for any respect to persist in any known
evil impenitently, but seeking of, walking with his God in all things revealed
to, and so required of him sincerely and watchfully, cleaving to the Lord with
full purpose of heart, in all good conscience inseperably; thus dying to sin,
and living to grace daily, the sting of death which is sin unrepented of, may
be plucked out thoroughly, so shall death have no power to hurt me.

Further for this,
By faith feelingly and effectually, to apply the pardon which his most
merciful Father has freely promised, and by his Covenant, examples, and
according to the goodness of his own nature, infinitely assured in the blood
of the Lord Jesus for all his sins, though never so many and heinous; that
the Lord loves him in his most dearly Beloved, with an undeserved, infinite,
unchangeable love, notwithstanding his unmeasurable unworthiness, extreme
weakness, and never so great impediments, to look for mercy and grace, the
cause of true peace from the Lord of life only; often and earnestly to pray to
the Prince of Peace, for that Peace that he has graciously left with and
plentifully promised to his; to consider, be affected with, and embrace what he
has found most to further, or that he daily finds, and conceives he shall find
to be most furtherable to the procuring and keeping this sweet peace which
passes all understanding; to prize this Peace before all the world without it,
in any measure enjoying it, to be affectionately thankful for it, to be most
fearful of loosing it, if it be wanting or decayed, never to be at peace, till
it be vouchsafed or restored, nor to give the Lord rest till he grant it;
considering the great settling against all distempers it brings with it, and
what miserable disquiet, yea, that nothing in this world can give true content
without it; yea, that the remembrance of death is sweetened, and the cure of the
fear of death is furthered by it; for having peace with God through Jesus
Christ, neither sin nor affliction, nor death, nor devil, nor hell, shall
ever be able to harm us, for our God who has assured it in spite of all, that
all these can make against us, will cause all to procure good unto us.

For putting his outward estate in order.
According to the means his good God in his good providence has afforded, or
shall please to vouchsafe unto him, to have especial care, without delay
conscionably and wisely to order all; so that those to whom he may be indebted
at his decease may be honestly paid, that none may have just cause to complain
against him, or lose the least by him, that it may appear he has dealt
honestly with every one to his uttermost power, to keep a true and exact
account of all he owes continually, to prevent future trouble, disorder and
mistakings.

And further;
As by Christianity and nature he is bound, of what shall remain (others to
whom he was indebted, being paid) to provide for his Family, by appointing
every one his portion, as conscience and equity requires, and he with good
judgment and sound deliberation (thoroughly weighing the circumstances and his
charge) sees most fit, and so far as is possible for preventing heart-burnings,
contentions and Lawsuits among those of his he leaves after him, and from
others against them; concerning both these points of debts, paying and division
among his own; timely to make, carefully and constantly to keep in readiness
his Will, or some other writing according to the course of Law, whereby may
plainly appear, what course he would have followed in each particular, and as
occasion requires, changing or confirming the same, leaving the good success
of these his honest intendments and endeavors to the Lords good blessing, and
which he must often beseech the Lord in the future, as need requires to make
prosperous, that none may be wronged, that his may be relieved, and all
contentions prevented.

Thus while he is in life and health.

In time of sickness,
At the beginning, and as it increases by the Lords assistance, most seriously
to search out what sins he can conceive to have procured the visitation, or
that any way troubles his conscience, to renew the most humble acknowledgement
of them, to lament and crave renewed remission of them, and assurance of pardon
for them; also more earnestly renewing his resolutions against them, and vows
(if God please to send recovery) no more to fall into them; to ply the promised
duty of examination now especially, to find out as near as he can what sins
are threatened, with the punishment of sickness particularly, and to take the
same course to be rid of them that is here mentioned already; having thus
nenewed his repentance and faith, and his peace with the Lord in Christ, to
review and settle his will or writing for ordering his outward estate, and then
in obedience unto, and in the fear of the Lord, to use all lawful means for
recovering his health, looking chiefly and only to the Lords blessing
thereupon, without which all is in vain, humbly submitting unto, patiently
bearing of, resting heartily contented with, by no means, or not in the least
to murmr against the Lords good pleasure toward him; with a sober spirit,
meek mind, understanding well governed heart, settled countenance, Christian and
seemly carriage, to demean himself under the hand of his God, justifying the
Lord, though himself be utterly consumed, trusting in him though he should be
killed, thanking of him, and laying to heart that so infinitely far less
then his deserts he is punished, that he is so fatherly chastised, that mercy
in the midst of wrath is remembered, that any ease is vouchsafed, that so many
means of comfort is granted, that a good issue (go all how it will) is
assured, and a sanctified use promised; and that as a Child from a most wise
and tenderhearted Father (though the affliction be long and sore) he is
afflicted, to beseech the Lord for a right carriage in his affliction; for a
sanctified use of his affliction, for a happy deliverance how he pleases from
the affliction, and so without any mere ado or trouble, with a quiet, well
contented mind to await the issue, which belongs to the Lord only, and to
those that visit him, to speak Christianly.

At the point of death,
And the nearer he draws thereunto, to draw the nearer to his God in Christ,
by humiliation, faith, prayer, patience, hope and longing, all through the
strenhth of the Lord, which against that time he must often before, and as long
as he live beseech the Lord to give him; as also to discourse holily; to call
upon the Lord continually; yea, if it be possible to dye praying, or with some
pertinent place of Scripture, or some other godly speech in his mouth, for his
own more refreshing or settling, and the exemplary edification of those most
near and dear to him, or others that are about him; to sigh to Heaven, to
show signs his heart is there, when power to pray or speak is taken from him.

O Lord my God,
Make me mindful of my mortality, and teach me so to number my days, that I
may apply my heart to true wisdom; cause me clearly to discern and rightly to
be sensible of the vanity and vexation of all things under the Sun; Oh let
them no more mislead me, make me willing to part from them, cause me to dye to
sin, and live to thee daily; cause me to live by faith and keep a good
conscience continually, prepare me in my inward and outward man, yea, every way
for thee; settle me against all discouragements concerning the remembrance or
coming of death, yea, cure the fear thereof in me, make me willing to leave
this, and desirous of a better life, dispose me, be I never so averse
therefrom; Oh dispose me to wish to be dissolved, and to be with thee
unfainedly, from a sudden unprovided death, good Lord deliver me; make me
always ready for thee, that I may bid thee welcome, and resign my self into
thy hands gladly; when it comes to the push, Lord when it comes to the
push, help me to do as thou have granted me to know, write, purpose and pray
for, and every way else that thy will and my condition as a good Christian
requires of me; yea, then uphold, govern, work in, with, and for me; when I
am weakest and Satan busiest, that I may not be tempted beyond what I shall be
enabled to bear; that I may find thee my help in need, my deliverer thereout,
and that thou receivest me to thy Kingdom of Glory, Amen.

These among many other reasons, moves him to take this course.
1 Because the Lord expressly requires it.

2 Because it is most sure and comfortable.

3 Because to prepare for death does not hasten but qualify it.

4 Lest deferring time present, he be deprived of time to come; for who knows
what sudden and sore changes a day may bring forth.

5 It being most certain he must dye, and yet as uncertain when, where, or
how.

6 That no outward privileges can prevent or comfort at the time of death, but
this course can comfort, though not prevent.

7 That others as likely to live as himself are dead.

8 That the longer we put off our preparation for death, the more unfit we are
and shall be to dye.

9 That having in sincerity though weakly dispatched this great business,
nothing can be grievous unto us.

10 That when the Lord calls for us, we have no more to do but in peace with
cheerfulness, to give our selves into his hands.

11 That he might give his mind the fuller satisfaction.

12 And be the more free (...) walk in all the narrow way of life to happiness.

13 That we are most unf^^ hereto, when sickness cease on us, and death
threaten us, having then too much to do with our pains and other distractions.

14 That this work being done the greatest work is done that can concern us,
and that as far as we fail herein, we fail of solid comforts.

15 That it is the best wisdom by timely preparation for our most comfort, to
entertain that which all the world cannot keep from us, and which be neglected
will certainly ruin us.

16 By this course we shall much honor God, and benefit others that see, know,
or hear of us.

Now for the exceeding many, and most excellent benefits following this
conscionable, careful and constant course, besides what is mentioned before;
for more brevity he referres you to those places of Scripture concerning death,
and everlasting life, to be found in his collection of Promises, page 33. and
67. where also is more plentifully explained what he understands, believes and
looks for in both these respects: Oh that my soul could sensibly say, Come
Lord Jesus come quickly, ever so come Lord Jesus I beseech thee.

For conclusion of all.
To seek, depend upon, and await for the Lords only help and blessing in
every respect.
Briefly thus;

IN the sense of his extreme ignorance, indisposition and disability to
think, speak of do the least good, and of him most grievous ingratitude,
sinfulness, unbelief in receiving any good, and insatiable pronenesse to all
evil; to think of himself meanly, to deny himself utterly, sincerely (though
he can at the best, but very weakly) to crave of the Lord all understanding,
disposition and ability to discharge each part of his duty, and unfainedly
(though he cannot as he ought, confidently) to look for all mercy, grace and
good from the hand of Heaven; because the Lord God who has promised, is most
merciful, therefore willing; most mighty, therefore able; most faithful,
therefore must perform it; be I never so weak and unworthy, and whatsoever
does or may oppose it; all only because he is so pleased, alone for his own
great glory, through the all-sufficient merits and continual meditation of the
Lord Jesus Christ, my alone Savior and Intercessor, through whom I believe,
and await undoubtedly and seasonably to find it.

Another Exhortation.
Forget not O my soul upon what occasions, and in what manner thou have vowed
unto thy God; but remember to perform them watchfully, faithfully, constantly,
or else thou make way for all the wrath of God to break in upon thee; and
consider, Oh consider, it is a most fearful thing to fall into his hands being
angry!

Lord enlighten my understanding, strengthen my memory, rectify my affections,
to know, retain and choose; grant me feelingly to apply, and powerfully to
practice whatsoever by thy Word thou have revealed to me, that may best please
thee, and that I have thus vowed unto thee, for Jesus Christ his sake I beseech
thee, Amen. Help, forgive, accept and bless I pray thee, Amen. Yea, though I
be as I am, most weak, wretched and unworthy, for thy mercy and thy truths
sake, I beg of thee, Amen.

My good God, to thy great Name be all the glory.
FINIS.

