An APPENDIX to a late BOOK ENTITLED The Unchangeable Morality of the
Seventh-day Sabbath.
OR, A Letter written to some Friends, for further satisfaction in that point:
By WILLIAM SELLER, in the behalf of himself and several other Brethren.
MUch honored and dearly beloved brethren in our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom we
salute you kindly, blessing God for that measure of his good Spirit which some
of us did perceive to be in you when you were at our meeting; since which time
we have judged you meet persons to be conversed withal about the things of
God, and therefore we do take the boldness to second our Conference with this
present writing.

And first, for that Part of the discourse that seemed to some of you so
knottie, as namely, the giving of the Sabbath to Adam in the state of
innocence, to omit what was then Argued from Genesis 1.24. to the end, and Genesis
2.2, 3. for the proof of this assertion, we shall offer these further
considerations unto your i. e.

(1.) The Law of the ten Commandments is manifested in the Scriptures to be the
first Covenant, and the old Covenant, Heb. 8.7, 8, 9. and 9.15. under which the
whole world Was, and is, and are therefore guilty of Sin, and are under the
penalty of death, being accursed by the Law, and therefore stood in need of a
Redeemer, Romans 3.19. and ^^.12, 13, 14. Gal. 3.10, 11, 12, 13.

(2.) The Scriptures do make it evident, that the New Covenant took no place
till the old was broken; and if the Law or first Covenant had not been broken,
the New Covenant had never been sought for, nor would have been needful, Romans
7.10. and 8.3, 4. Gal. 3.21. Heb 8.7. and 9.15.

(3.) It is as plain in the Scripture, that the New Covenant took place long
before the giving of the Law by a vocal voice upon Mount Sinai, and writing of
it upon Tables of stone; as appears from Rom Cap. 4. where the Apostle makes
it his business to prove, that Abraham was an heir of the Promise by Faith and
Grace: which terms do clearly relate to the New Covenant.

(4.) But farther, the new Covenant took place, to keep off the hevy wrath of
God from falling on man in the Act of his first transgression, Genesis 3.15. where
it is clear, that there is a promise of mercy to the seed of the woman; which
could not be, but in and through a Covenant of grace. No surely, brethren,
there is no way to keep the earth and the inhabitants thereof from sinking,
when dissolved by sin, but only by our Lord Jesus Christ bearing up the pillars
of it, Psalm. 75.3. which we beseech you consider: for if these things be so, as
we believe no man can deny, then is it most evident, that the Sabbath was given
at the very first: for nothing is more evident then this, that the
Seventh-day Sabbath is one of the ten Commandments, Exodus 20.8. Deuteronomy. 5.12, 22.
and this we judge to be beyond doubt or contradiction, that the ten
Commandments is the old Covenant, the Covenant of works, Heb. 8.6, 7, 8, 9.
and 9.4. compared with Exodus 34.28 Deuteronomy. 4.10, 11, 12, 13. and 5.22. and 9.9,
10, 11. and 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And if ever there were a time when this Law was
Ordained unto life, as it was certainly, Romans 7.10. surely it must be in an
estate of Innocence: for when it was delivered in Mount Horeb, it was the
ministration of death and condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.7, 9. and therefore when God
delivered unto us the terms and conditions of this his Covenant thus; The man
that does these things, shall live by them, Romans 10.5. Gal. 2.12. and, cursed
is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of
the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10. these we say must needs refer to the time of the
Laws first institution, when man was in a capacity to keep the Law: otherwise
it would be the greatest scorn of poor men in their misery, and cruelty, or
both, that could be imagined, to offer them life upon terms of an absolute
impossibility; this dealing can never agree with the Wisdom, Justice, and grace
of God; for no man can have Life or Justification now by the Law, as is
manifest, Romans 3.20, 27, 28. and Gal. 3.11.

Now put all this together, and if the ten Commandments be the Covenant of
works, and if we exclude the Sabbath, then they will be but odd Nine, and not
even Ten, as Moses says they are, in the forementioned texts, Exodus 34.24, 28.
Deuteronomy. 4.13 and 10.4. And this Covenant to be the first and old Covenant struck
with man, and broke by him, before the new either did or need come in for his
relief; and yet he both stood in need of the New Covenant, and had the help of
it also, as soon as he had sinned: then it roundly follows, that the Sabbath
was given in the state of innocence, for a perpetual Law to all mankind.

In the next Place, we shall give you our Understanding of those two texts
pressed by one of you, to prove the ten Commandments abolished, further and
beyond what we have given you already in our late book aforementioned, Page
20, 21

And first, for that Text 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. we verily believe the
scope and intent of the Apostle there, is to let us understand, that the Law as
it is the Officer of Condemnation, is abolished; Christ having taken that
Office out of its hands, so that it shall never have Power to keep one Son or
Daughter of Adam for ever under the hatches of death, but all men shall rise
from the grave through Christ Jesus, and the Law shall not come in any more to
cast them again: but if they perish eternally, it will be for some disobedience
to the Gospel. But as the Law is a rule of life, it is not abolished, and that
for these further reasons more then we gave you in our forementioned book: i. e.

(1) If the Law of the Ten Commandments had been of that nature, that they
might have been abolished; then from the time that they are abolished, the
persons to whom they are so abolished can be guilty of no sin: Romans 4.15. 1
John 3.4. therefore observe how near this comes to Ranting.

(2.) If so, then from the time that the Ten Commandments are abolished, we
shall not want the blood of Christ to wash away either the guilt or filth of
Sin; and we know no way in the world how this can be shifted, but by saying
that Christ has given us Laws in the New Testament. But if those that say so,
mean only such institutions as Baptism and the Lords Supper, we deny it not:
but if they mean Moral rules of Righteousness, such as are of the nature of the
Ten Commandments; we deny it, and that for these reasons.

(1.) In that it undervalues the Blood of Christ, and makes as if it were given
but to remove the curse of such a Law as had no more equity, holiness, or worth
in it, but that it might be abolished.

(2.) It makes as if Christ after he had by his death abolished the old
Covenant of works, and brought us under a New Covenant of grace, did again
bring us under a third Covenant, even a Covenant of works: a thing strange and
unheard of in the Scripture. It is true, Christ and his Apostles did often warn
us to mind the duties commanded in the the old Covenant; but we never heard
from others, or saw ground from the Scripture, to judge that Christ had ever
brought a third Covenant, and a Covenant of works too, upon the Necks of his
people.

(3.) We conceive there is no reason to be given wherefore the Law of the Ten
Commandments should be abolished in the sense before named, but what will grate
as hard every whit upon all the Precepts of the old Testament. And indeed, both
the consequences, and the evil of the Consequences of this opinion, are so
obvious to every considering man, that we shall forbear to say any more Now.

And as to that which is Objected from Romans 7. we say, that the Apostle goes
not there about to persuade us that the Law is abolished as unto obedience, as
appears by the following discourse in the 7th verse. and so to ult. and the four
first verses of Cap. 8. as also, for the reasons given before. But indeed, this
we take to be the meaning of that place, i. e. That whilst a person remains in
his Natural estate without Christ, having the Law for a Husband (to use the
Scriptures Comparison) he has no help by it, to enable him to bring forth
fruit unto God: but when he is once Married to the Lord Jesus by a lively
faith, he does receive that strength from Christ to bring forth fruits of
Sanctification and holiness; which although the Law taught him what he should
do, yet it did not afford him help to do: but this comes only by union with
this latter and better husband Christ. So commending you to God, and to the
word of his grace, We remain

Your Loving Brethren, as aforesaid.

Postscript.
READER,
THe book entitled The Unchangeable Morality of the Seventhday-Sabbath formerly
mentioned, is to be sold at the Crown in Popes head Alley; and this Letter at
the Seven Stars in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the great North-door.

FINIS.

