A short Treatise of Altars, Altar-furniture, Altar-cringing, and Music of all
the Quire, Singing-men and Choristers, when the holy Communion was administered
in the Cathedral Church of Durham, by Prebendaries and Petty-Canons, in
glorious Copes embroidered with Images. 1629.
Written at the same time by Peter Smart, senior-Prebendarie of the said
Church, a little before he was expeld, deprived, degraded and imprisoned for
the space of twelve years, till the second year of this present Parliament,
by the Bishops and Commissioners of Durham, London and York, for preaching
against superstitious vanities, and opposing then, Thus, by the means of B.
Neal and his Chaplains Altars and Images, etc. were brought in. Then, after the
death of B. James, in May. 1617. There, in the Cathedral Church of Dutham,
from which they spread over all England.
and always before, their unlawful innovations, brought into Durham
Cathedral, by B. Neal and his Chaplains, after the death of B. James, who died
in May. 1617.
THus and then, and there began the setting up of Altars, and Images, with a
multitude of superstitious Ceremonies, changing of services, and corruptions of
Sacraments: which beginning in Durham, have since that time spread themselves
over all the Cathedral, Collegiate Churches, and Colleges in this Realm; yea
and many parish Churches have set up Altars, Images, and Organs, where they
were never before since the reign of K. Philip and Q. Mary; of all such
alterations, and Popish Innovations in our Church, Bishop Neale laid the
foundation; who being an old Courtier, ambitious, violent and cruel against
all that gainsaid him, and opposed his doings: and dispairing to climb to high
preferment by learning and Preaching, (which he could not abide) he set his
mind wholly upon advancing Cathedral pomp, and glorious Ceremonies, easier a
great deal to be performed and practiced by an ignorant idiot, who has only
the outside of a man, then the making of Sermons, or writing books, so that in
few years he got the government of many Cathedrals: first, Westminster, which
once was a Bishopric, and yet has Episcopal jurisdiction: secondly,
Rochester, thirdly, Coventry and Lichfield: fourthly, Lincoln: fifthly,
Durham: sixthly, Winchester: seventhly, the Archbishopric of York. Thus sat
Doctor Richard Neal upon 7. hills, 7. Seas, he Lorded it upon 7. thrones above
thirty years, in the last twenty of which he preached not three Sermons, which
is the principal office of a Bishop, as S. Paul teaches: Yet at the censure
of Doct. Bastwick, he said openly, that he was made Bishop by our Lord Jesus
Christ, and consecrated by the Holy Ghost: unto what office? and what to do?
to hinder Preaching? to persecute Orthodoxe and painful Preachers? to
countenance, cherish, and maintain schismatic, heretical, and traitorous
Arminians and Papists, Cousin, Linsell, Burgoin, Duncan, etc. to heap livings
and Church dignities upon his creatures, and favorites, idle loiterers,
unsatiable cormorants, seven or eight a piece, above all mean and measure: for
what good of the Church and Commonwealth did our Lord Jesus make him Bishop,
and the holy Ghost consecrate him? to wear a Rochet? to set out Ceremonies? to
defile the Church of God with Altars and Images? to gather riches by oppression
of his tenants, and to play the ravenous Wolf, in devouring so many thousand
flocks which he took upon him to feed in seven Bishoprics, the hundred part
of which he never saw, nor one of a thousand ever heard the voice of their
Lordly shepherd, their Bishop, their ghostly Father, and the Pastor of their
souls, as he would be taken to be, being chosen to the office of a Bishop by
Christ, and consecrated by the holy Ghost. I have known this man about sixty
years, (for we were schoole-fellowes in Westminster) when he was plain
Richard Neal, and I Peter Smart, under Deane Goodman, and Doctor Grant; he was
then counted an heavy-headed lubber, put out of that school for a dunce, and a
droane, as himself confessed at his last Visitation in Durham, 1627. saying
openly in the audience of many, that the three last years when he was a
Grammar scholar of Westminster, he made no exercise at all, whereupon it came
to pass, said he, that when I went from Westminster to Cambridge, I could not
so much as write true Orthography (put letters and syllables rightly together
in Latin) and I cannot do it yet: What? not make true Latin, being a Doctor 60.
years old, when he had passed through five Bishoprics, and was to be
translated to Winchester, and York, the two greatest in England, This Bishop
(said M. Kirton in the Parl. 1628.) though he has leapt through many
Bishoprtcks, yet he has left Popery behind him.
after Canterbury. But, howsoever he was an ignorant and unlearned Grammarian,
he profited better in divinity, he had learning enough to run through 7.
preferments, seven Bishoprics, containing the one half of England, in all
which, his principal care and study was to enrich himself, and his kindred,
Chaplains, creatures, and favorites, which he made non-Residents, and
Tot-quots, heaping upon them all manner of preferments, benefices and Q. Mary;
of all such alterations, and Popish Innovations in our Church, Bishop Neale
laid the foundation; who being an old Courtier, ambitious, violent and cruel
against all that gainsaid him, and opposed his doings: and dispairing to climb
to high preferment by learning and Preaching, (which he could not abide) he
set his mind wholly upon advancing Cathedral pomp, and glorious Ceremonies,
easier a great deal to be performed and practiced by an ignorant idiot, who
has only the outside of a man, then the making of Sermons, or writing books,
so that in few years he got the government of many Cathedrals: first,
Westminster, which once was a Bishopric, and yet has Episcopal jurisdiction:
secondly, Rochester, thirdly, Coventry and Lichfield: fourthly, Lincoln:
fifthly, Durham: sixthly, Winchester: seventhly, the Archbishopric of York.
Thus sat Doctor Richard Neal upon 7. hills, 7. Seas, he Lorded it upon 7.
thrones above thirty years, in the last twenty of which he preached not three
Sermons, which is the principal office of a Bishop, as S. Paul teaches: Yet
at the censure of Doct. Bastwick, he said openly, that he was made Bishop by
our Lord Jesus Christ, and consecrated by the Holy Ghost: unto what office? and
what to do? to hinder Preaching? to persecute Orthodoxe and painful
Preachers? to countenance, cherish, and maintain schismatic, heretical,
and traitorous Arminians and Papists, Cousin, Linsell, Burgoin, Duncan, etc. to
heap livings and Church dignities upon his creatures, and favorites, idle
loiterers, unsatiable cormorants, seven or eight a piece, above all mean and
measure: for what good of the Church and Commonwealth did our Lord Jesus make
him Bishop, and the holy Ghost consecrate him? to wear a Rochet? to set out
Ceremonies? to defile the Church of God with Altars and Images? to gather
riches by oppression of his tenants, and to play the ravenous Wolf, in
devouring so many thousand flocks which he took upon him to feed in seven
Bishoprics, the hundred part of which he never saw, nor one of a thousand ever
heard the voice of their Lordly shepherd, their Bishop, their ghostly Father,
and the Pastor of their souls, as he would be taken to be, being chosen to the
office of a Bishop by Christ, and consecrated by the holy Ghost. I have known
this man about sixty years, (for we were schoole-fellowes in Westminster) when
he was plain Richard Neal, and I Peter Smart, under Deane Goodman, and Doctor
Grant; he was then counted an heavy-headed lubber, put out of that school for
a dunce, and a droane, as himself confessed at his last Visitation in Durham,
1627. saying openly in the audience of many, that the three last years when he
was a Grammar scholar of Westminster, he made no exercise at all, whereupon it
came to pass, said he, that when I went from Westminster to Cambridge, I could
not so much as write true Orthography (put letters and syllables rightly
together in Latin) and I cannot do it yet: What? not make true Latin, being a
Doctor 60. years old, when he had passed through five Bishoprics, and was to
be translated to Winchester, and York, the two greatest in England, This
Bishop (said M. Kirton in the Parl. 1628.) though he has leapt through many
Bishoprics, yet he has left Popery behind him.
after Canterbury. But, howsoever he was an ignorant and unlearned Grammarian,
he profited better in divinity, he had learning enough to run through 7.
preferments, seven Bishoprics, containing the one half of England, in all
which, his principal care and study was to enrich himself, and his kindred,
Chaplains, creatures, and favorites, which he made non-Residents, and
Tot-quots, heaping upon them all manner of preferments, benefices and
dignities, to the intent they might flaunt it out bravely, and assist him their
Lord and Master courageously, in setting up Altars, Images, Organs, Copes,
Candlesticks, and all manner of Massing furniture, especially in persecuting
painful Preachers, under the name of Puritans, though more conformable then
themselves, and in hindering Preachers from confuting Popish opinions, and
Arminian doctrines, concerning Altars and Images, and other superstitious
trinkets, with which he pestered the Church of Durham, and many other places
where he had authority, as remains upon Record in the Parliament, 1628. and
printed lately, 1641. In the 45. page thus we The Kings Chaplain and Prebend
of Winchest. Page 45.
read, Doctor More called in to the house of Commons, says, he was referred
to the Bishop of Winchester (Doct. Neal) to be censured for a Sermon preached
by him: The Bishop he had heard him preach and deliver many passages against
Papists, which pleased King James, but he must not do so now: this and more
Doctor More himself told me, before Doct. Sibs: Again, the Bishop said to
him, you have a brother that preaches against bowing at the holy name of
Jesus, and of bowing to the high Altar: and that the Communion Table stood as
in Alehouses, but he P^g. 45.
would have them set as high Altars: This Doct. More delivered in writing to
the Parliament: And in page 33. we read, that Sir Dudley North informed the
House, how the said Bishop Neale told Doct. More, that he had often heard him
preach against Popery (which he said was well The Prince was then in, Spain. D.
Marshall relat^d as much said to him by the Bishop of Winchester. page 40.
liked of then) but now you must not do so, whereupon the Doctor said, that if
occasion did serve, he would not spare to do the like now, to whom the Bishop
further replied, the times were not the same, and therefore you must not.

Whereupon Sir Rob. Philips said, By this you may guess, that this Bishop had
a hand in setting up those Ceremonies in Durham, and that he bears good will
toward them, laboring to make Durham and Winchester Synonimaes: This reflects
upon his Majesty, said he, as if the King should not be pleased, that men in
their Sermons should refell Popery, page 33.

The like D. More told me of Bishop Neals Chaplin, D. D. Beard said that D.
Alabasterpreached flat Popery at Paul Cross The Bishop of Winchester
commanded him as he was his Diocesan, that he should preach nothing to the
contrary. page 40.
Duncan now Prebendary of Durham, how insolently he shook him up, being an
ancient Doctor, and Prebendary of Winchester, about an high Altar to be set up
there, and to be bowed unto, as in Durham. But concerning Bishop Neals
protection of his Chaplin Cozens when he was accused of high treason, for
denying the Kings Supremacy, and giving as much authority to the fellow that
rubs his horses heels, as to his Majesty: you shall have more out of the
Diurnal of the said Parliament, 1628. when that Article of the impeachment, and
the proof thereof shall be examined in its order and place. To conclude, that
which Bishop Neale could not do in his own person, his Chaplains and
favorites of the Arminian faction, did in other places: D. Laud B. of S.
David's, B. of Bath and Wels, B. of London, and Archbishop of Canterbury, D.
Linsell Dean of Lichfield, B. of Peterborough, and B. of Hereford, D. Corbet B.
of Oxford, and B. of Norwich, besides his followers, B. Wren, B. Mountague, B.
Howson, B. Goodman, B. Manwaring, B. White, B. Field, B. Wright, and B. Harsnet
who made this Epitaph of himself,

Samuel Harsnet
Episcopus Cicestrensis Indignus. Episcopus Norwicensis Indignior. Archiepis.
Eboracensis Indignissimus.
Most true, he Lorded it so long til he should have come to Grace, but the
longer he lived he decreased in grace, he descended from bad to worse, from
worse, to worst, as he ascended from high to higher, from higher to highest,
even the titular grace of a most unworthy Archbishop. Al these Bishops were
zealous maintainers of Altars, and Images, and other superstitious ceremonies,
depending upon Altars, so that B. Neal and B. Laud with their factious
associates, and creatures, have been Nostri fundi calamitas, the ruin, the
calamity and misery of the noble Church of England, which they have pestered
with Ceremonies, and corrupted with unlawful Innovations, wherewith they have
hindered edification, and instruction of the people by preaching, so that for
the most part they are as ignorant, as ever they were in the blind times of
Popery. they are as ignorant in the grounds of Religion, and as unable to
render an account of their says, as they were when all the Service was in
Latin before the first reformation in the reign of K. Edward the sixth. And how
can it otherwise be in those places where Liturgies are only read by unlearned
Curats, or learned loyterers in the Ministry, without preaching: or with such
scarcity of Sermons, not above one in a month, nay one in a whole year, as it
was and is in most Parishes, if not all the country towns of Wales, and too
many in England, where atheism, profaneness or idolatrous Popery abound. No
one thing (says B. White) has been a greater scandal to our B. White in his
Epistle to Archbishop Lawd in his book of the Sabbath.
Church, then the profane negligence of conformable Ministers: then their
loosnesse of life, their avarice and ambition in heaping together benefices and
promotions, and then a gross neglect in discharging their duty. On the
contrary (says he) nothing is of greater moment to persuade the people, then
when they shall observe their Ministers diligent and industrious in serving
God, and promoting the salvation of Christian souls committed to their charge.
O ye reformers of the Church, learn this of a Bishop, and amend this fault,
which B. Laud would never do.

The principal Points delivered in this short Apologeticall Treatise.
1 Concerning the Communion Table, falsely termed an Altar, what manner of
furniture is forbidden, as being superstitious, where it must be placed, and
how covered. page 1. 2 D. Hall against innovations and bravery in Gods worship,
contrary to the doctrine of Durhamers, B. Neale and his Chaplains, Cousin,
Lindsell, etc. p. 2. 3 Bernard against the vanity of such which prefer the
glory of material Temples before poore-Christians, the Temples of the Holy
Ghost, as Durhamers do. p. 2. 4 B. Motton out of Hierome and Malachy against
sumptuous ornaments. p. 3. 5 The Homilies, and Hemingius, concerning true and
false ornaments of Churches. p. 3. 6 Bernard, Augustine, etc. against the
statelines of Temples, and gaudy ornaments, especially at the Sacraments, which
hinder devotion. p. 4. 7 Hierome of the riches; brave furniture, and music in
Solomon's Temple, not in synagogues nor to be imitated in Christian Churches,
into which Pope Vitalian was the first that brought Organs. p. 5. 8 Athanasius,
Constantine the great, Basil of Church-musicke, and Psalms. Vitalian hindered
preaching with his piping and chancing, as some of our Prelates do now. p. 6. 9
Justine Martyr and the whole Primitive Church retained the singing of Psalms,
but they abandoned Pipers and Chanters: and though David ordained instruments
of music for the Temple, yet we may not imitate them no more then we can
Aaronicall Vestments. p. 7. 10 Our Church ordains, that all things be done to
edification: but by immoderate music, both Service and Sacraments are worsae
understood, and turned to theatricall stage plays. p. 8. 11 Durhamers would
not suffer the Sacrament of Baptism to be ministered without an hideous noise
of Organs and singers, with the sight also of many brave images on the Font.
But our Homilies teach that we must praise God that our Churches are quit of
images and organs. p. 9. 12 The Church of England terms Images, Organs,
Altars, profanations and heathenish abominations, yet Durhamers retain and
maintain them stoutly. p. 10. 13 They bow down often and profoundly before
their Alter (...) toward the Bible, or the body and blood of Christ in the
consecrated Elements, as if the Altar were holler then Christ's body, and the
Bible, yet they say they worship God, not the Altar: the second Commandment
and B. Buckeridge: each otherwise. p. 10. 14 B. Neals Chaplains, Cousin,
Linsell, James, Duncan, etc. call bowing to the Altar a comely gesture, and
they practice it very often, and profoundly, especially at their coming in and
going out, is if they would salute God, making a low leg before they kneel down
to pray: and when they have done prayer, going out of the Church, turn back to
look on the Altar, toward which they make another profound leg, taking as it
were their leave of God, and departing from God, whom they leave at the Altar.
A most absurd foolery. p. 12. 15 There was never in the world a more abominable
idol then Durham Altar. p. 14. 16 Christ upon earth was never so worshipped by
bowing down of bodies as Durham Altar has been. When it was a table standing
in the midst it was as holy as now, yet then it was never bowed unto. p. 15 17
D. Cousin and his fellows which obtruded to the Church such fanatical and
idolatrous ornaments, are they not seditious innovators? p. 16. 18 May not the
people of Durham be exhorted to communicate in their own Parish Churches, as
the Law commands them: and forbear to communicate in the Cathedral Church,
where it is not rightly administered? yet this is a principal objection against
me in their Durham and York Articles and Censure. p. 16. 19 The representation
of the death and passion of Christ is an action of humiliation, of sorrow and
weeping. Why then should our Cathedral Priests of Durham, pompously and
gloriously attired in sumptuous Copes imbroidered with images, come to a brave
painted Altar with Pipers and Singers, making delicate melody, in such a time
of humiliation? p. 18. 20 Such objects of vanities allure the peoples eyes,
ears, ^and minds from sorrowful meditations of our Savior Christ his death
on the cross, and our sins which caused the same: for which we can never
sufficiently testify our thankfulness, by afflicting our selves with
mourning and tears. p. 19. ^2 God is angry with us for our sins, which
deserve eternal condemnation, if he should enter into judgment with us.
Therefore we must not turn our mourning into merriment, when we would pacific
our angry Judge. p. 20.
THE Communion Table must not The Communion Table must not have superfluous and
superstitious furniture, but such only as is prescribed by the Church of
England, not such as Bishop Neal with his Chapleins brought into Durham, and
polluted the same with superstition and idolatry.
have superfluous and superstitious ornaments, not allowed by the Book of
Common Prayer, Injunctions and Canons, in which whatsoever Ceremony is not
bidden, it is forbidden, it is unlawful it is superstitious. As the Canonists
teach, Superstitio est, relictis Rubricis and directorio Ecclesiae, alias
Ceremonias adhibere pro sua devotione. Leaving the Rubricks and direction of
the Church, to use other ceremonies for devotions sake, that is superstition.

The Rubric and Canon command, that the Communion Table shall stand in the
body of the Church or Chancell, where Morning and Evening Prayer are appointed
to be said: and it must stand covered with a carpet of silk, or other decent
stuff, with a fair linen cloth at the time of the Administration. And
therein Cathedral and Parish Churches must be alike, they must be uniforme,
says the Act of Uniformity.

Therefore the Table (not Altar) must not be removed to the East end of the
Quire or Chancell, as far as can be from the congregation: It must not have a
costly Velvet cloth with gold fringe and imbroydered with images: much less
may it have B. Neales precious golden Pall to cover the Altar, having upon it
the false story of the Assumption of our Lady, then which a more abominable
Idol all Popery cannot show.

Neither must it be a sumptuous Altar of Stone, gilded, painted and polished
bravely, fastened to the ground, having crosses, crucifixes, corporasses,
basins, tapers, or candlesticks set upon it; which by name are forbidden in the
23. Injunction. And never can I find them allowed in any well-reformed Church:
sure I am, they were never in Durham Church till Bishop Neale came to that
Bishopric, 1617.

B. Halls excellent lessons against Innovations and affected bravery in the
worship of God, and consequently against Durham Innovators, with their
sumptuous altar, organs, copes, et caet.
It is a dangerous presumption, says a learned Father of our Church, D. Hall
now Bishop of Exceter, to make innovations, it but in the circumstances of Gods
worship.

These humane additions which would seem to grace the institution of God,
deprave it.

That infinite Wisdom knows best what will please it self, and prescribes
accordingly.

The foolishness of God is wiser then the wisdom of men. Idolatry and
falsehood is commonly more gaudy and plausible the^ truth. That heart which can
for out ward homeliness despise the Ordinance of God, is already alienated
from true religion, and lies open to the greatest superstition.

Never any Prince was so foully idolatrous, as that he wanted a Priest to second
him. An Vriah is fit to humor an Ahaz.

Greatness could never command any thing which some servile wits were not
ready to applaud and justify.

Thus much says D. Hall, whose excellent lessons if the newfangled innovators
and corrupters of our Durham Church would have learned and followed, no Sermon
need to have been preached against superstitious vanities: with superfluity of
which it is exceedingly pestred at this day by our idolatrous altar-building
Priests, without any direction or approbation of our religious Kings and
Princes, who in their Laws forbid both altars and images, and all other
superstitious rites and ceremonies.

For they (Bishop Neales Chaplains) have taught the people in their Sermons,
that too much cost cannot be bestowed upon Christ, that is, the Church, and
Church-ornaments, brave Altars, rich Altar-furniture, gorgeous Vestments,
Sumptuous Organs, glorious glasse-windowes, painted, gilded and garnished
images, and other excessive bravery, vain and unnecessary, which has cost the
Church of Durham above 2000. pound, wring'd out of poor men's purses, to the
utter undoing of many poor tenants.

Bernard cries out against the excessive vanity of sumptuously adorned
Churches, and the neglect of poor Christians, the temples of the Holy Ghost,
which is worse now in Durham, then in the time of Popery.
What would Bernard say, if he were now alive, and saw the glory of our
Abby-Church (as it is called) the superfluous ornaments of which have cost more
then would build a fair Church: who thus writes AdGul. Abbatem, to Abbot
William, making this exclamation: O vanitas vanitatum, sed non vanior, quam
insanior: fulget Ecelesia in parietibus, sed in pauperibus eget. O vanity of
all vanities, but whether more vain, or more mad, I know not; the Church
shines in trimly decked walls, but in the poor members of Christ, it is naked
and needy. And who dare withstand their vain and mad courses? who dare gainsay
them, or mislike their doings? if any do so, let him look for no better then to
be persecuted to death: for they teach the people, that such are very Iudasses,
Counting all to be wast, that is bestowed upon Christ; as if Christ were in
walls, Altars, and Images, more then in the temples of the Holy Ghost, the
bodies and souls of poor Christians: whereby the people learn to contemn
their own parish-Churches, because they are plain and simple, after the old
fashion, handsome enough and decent, though not so proud and stately, not brave
and magnificent, as this Cathedral Abbey; as now it is adorned passing gaily
with paintings and gildings.

B. Morton out of Ierom upon Malachy calls it a festred superstition of the
Jews, to esteem a brave Altar and ornaments of gold and silver better then
the godly minds of them that bring oblations.
This soul error, and superstitious folly is thus refuted by D. Morton now
Bishop of Lichfield in his Appeal: If any happily shall contemn the worship of
God because it is not sumptuous, he shall but renew an old infestred
superstition of the Jews, who esteemed an Altar built of unhewen stones, to be
but a profane and polluted thing: As Jerome has observed upon the first of
Malachy. Reversus de Babylone populus, Altar tantum impolitis lapidibus
extruxerat; the people of Israel, returning home from the Captivity of Babylon,
built an Altar of rough stones unpolished, before there was a Temple, or walls
of a City: Esdr. 1. and they esteemed their religion contemptible, because the
ornaments of the Temple were wanting: to whom God speaks by the Prophet
Malachy.

You think that mine Altar is polluted, the sacrifices also laid on the Altar,
and the fire that consumes the sacrifice you count to be unhallowed and
defiled. Neither understand ye that Almighty God, regards not, nor looks for
either gold or precious stones, or a multitude of sacrifices, but the willing
minds of them that bring their oblations.

The Church of England in the Book of Homilies, and Hemingius show what are
true and false ornaments of Gods Church acceptable to God, and profitable to
men.
Agreeable to this is the doctrine of the Church of England, in the Homilies
against the peril of Idolatry, and superfluous decking of Churches; which
utterly disalloweth our abominable ornaments, Altars and Images, and teaches
wherewith Gods house is truly adorned; which are these.

The Word of God ought to be read, taught and heard: the Lords holy name ought
to be called upon by public prayer, and thanksgiving: his holy Sacraments
ought duly and reverently to be administered (not gawdily, flauntingly,
theatrically) due reverence is stirred up in the hearts of the godly, by the
consideration of these true ornaments of the house of God, and not by any
outward ceremonies, and costly and glorious decking of the said house or Temple
of the Lord.

Pratendunt ornatum, says Hemingius, si illi ornatui adjunctum sit ullum
periculum, sit maledictus. They pretend that Altars and Images are set up in
Churches for ornament, but cursed be such ornaments, to which the peril of
Idolatry is joined.

And again; Spiritus Sanctus, says Ezechiel, Chapter 20. vocat Idola abominationes
oculorum, sed pulvis and cinis ea vocat ornamenta oculorum. The Holy Ghost calls
Images and Altars, (all such as God appointed not) the abominations of the
eyes, but man that is but dust and ashes, calls them ornaments of the eyes.

And then he concludes, Verus ornatus templorum, utilis, and Deo gratus, est
concio, cantio, oration, communio, and non haec quae vel impediunt, vel vitiant:
The true ornaments of Churches, profitable to men, and acceptable to God, is
the preaching of Gods Word, the singing of Psalms, the administration of the
Sacraments and prayer, and not such things as do hinder and defile the same.

This is the doctrine which the Church of England teaches in sundry places in
the book of Homilies, in the Articles and Injunctions, that Images and Altars,
superstitious ceremonies and superfluous ornaments, piping and singing,
beautifying of temples beyond all mean and measure, pollute and defile the
house of God: and none but rotten members of our Church can say the contrary.

Bernard, Augustine, Jerome, etc. reprehend the too too great magnificence of
temples, esp^cially when they are made theaters, rather to delight the peoples
ears and ey^ with melodio is tunes, and pompous spect^cles, then oratories to
pray and praise God, and be edified by preaching.
Bernard also reprehended in his time excessive heights, and immoderate lengths
of Churches, because he misliked worldly magnificence in the spiritual service
of God, who dwells not in Temples made with hands.

So likewise does Augustine, Jerome, Justin Martyr and others, they condemn
gay ornaments and pompous spectacles of glittering pictures, with melodious
tunes of pipers, and singers in the spiritual service of God, especially at
the administration of the holy Communion and Baptism; because they hinder
godly meditations upon our Savior Christ his bitter death and passion, and our
regeneration represented unto us in those mystical Sacraments. For thus writes
Bernard in his Apology against the superfluous ornaments of Churches: I let
pass the great stateliness of temples, their immoderate lengths, their vain
breadths, their sumptuous polishings, their curious paintings, which while they
draw the sight of them that pray unto them, they hinder their affection, and
they seem to me to resemble the old custom of the Jews. Mark this, says a
learned writer in his Commentary on Jude, how Bernard says, that those things
which now adays the defenders of superstitious vanities, in Popery say, were
ordained to help devotion; as gilded images and costly ornaments, curious and
sumptuous paintings, and polishings of Altars and Temples; they are so far from
helping, that they hinder devotion, they withdraw, says Bernard, not only the
sight of them that pray, but their affection also, and they smell rather of
Judaisme then Christianisme.

The Jews had but one temple in the whole world, and that was beautified with
all manner of sumptuous ornaments, altars and vestments, for the Priests to
offer sacrifices, which could be done no where else, it had singers also and
musical instruments. But the synagogues (which are answerable to Churches)
where the law of God was read and expounded every Sabbath day, had none of
those ornaments, neither Priests, nor priestly vestments, nor altars, nor
s^crifices, nor music, either isntrumental or vocal, neither should our
Church have the like, because they are synagogues rather then temples.
Synagoga, a congregation, an assembly.
And Jerome in his Epistle to Nepotian, concerning the life and conversation of
the Clergy, says: Iewrie had a rich temple, and all things then made of gold:
then those things were allowed of the Lord. Then, that is, they are not now
allowed of the Lord.

And where were they allowed of the Lord? Not in the Synagogues, which the
Jews had in all cities of the country, where they assembled to hear the Law
and the Prophets read and expounded every Sabbath day: they had not there
either Altars, bloody sacrifice or incense, golden vessels, or Priestly
vestments, musical instruments or singers, but only in the Temple of
Jerusalem, as David the King and Prophet, by the instinct of Gods Spirit,
ordained there to be used only when solemn sacrifice was offered. For thus
writes Arias Montanus: Fuit in templo suggestum, inter sacerdotes and populum,
atrium constitutum, in quo Levitae musicis instrumentis solennium and
quotidianorum sacrificiorum tempore canerent. There was a pulpit, gallery or
scaffold erected in a great room or court betwixt the Priests and the people,
where the Levites might sing and play upon their musical instruments, when the
solemn sacrifices were daily offered. Daily, says he: but Flavius Josephus
the Jew, being himself both Priest and Levite, knew better what was done: he in
his seventh book of Antiquities says: David, that renowned Prophet of God,
devised many instruments of music, and he taught the Levites to sing and play
hymns to the Lord, per Sabbathorum dies aliasque sol^nnitates: at the
solemnities of Festival days and Sabbaths. Therefore not every day in the
week, nor thrice every day: they did not turn the hours of prayer into solemn
services, with piping and chanting, morning, and evening, and midday, as our
newfangled ceremony-mongers of late most audaciously attempted to do in this
Church of Durham, and did so indeed the space of two years without authority,
contrary to the Injunctions, statutes and customs of our Church, which they
were sworn to observe.

Vitalianus himself was not so impudently presumptuous, who was the first Pope
that brought Organs into Churches, not into his own Chapel at Rome, (for
there they are not yet, nor ever were, says Cardinal Cajetan) not to be used
but only upon Holy Days: and this he did about the year of our Lord 660.
about 60. years after Gregory the great, who would never have allowed such
excess of piping and chanting. Of this Vitalianus borne at Signium a town in
Italy, thus writes Mantuan.

Signius adjunxit, molli conflata metallo,
Organa, quae festis resonent ad sacra diebus.
First Pope Vitalian to the singers joined his Organs,
Which might on Holy Days at Service pipe to the people.
The singing of Psalm^s commended and practiced by Ambrose, Constantine the
great, Basil, and the whole Primitive Church: but organs and pricksong were
never heard of in the Church till Pope Vitalian brought them in.
Athanasius that great pillar of the Church, which he supported against
Arrianisme, Canendi usum in Ecclesiis interdixit, vanitates fugitans: In
detestation of superstitious vanities, he utterly forbad the use of chanting in
Churches: but he forbade not the singing of Psalms in a plain tune, by the
whole congregation, which was then allowed, and highly commended by Ambrose and
Gelasius, and practiced by the Emperor himself, as Eusebius witnesses in the
fourth Book of the life of Constantine the great: Cantare primus incepit, una
oravit, conciones stans reverenter audiit, adeo ut rogatus ut consideret,
responderit, fas non esse dogmata de Deo remiss and segniter audire: This most
famous Christian Emperor that ever the Church of Christ had, he first began to
sing the Psalm, he joined with the people in prayer to God; standing up
reverently, he heard Sermons, insomuch as being entreated to sit down, he
answered, it is not lawful to hear the doctrine of God slothfully and
carelessly.

So that he used not the gesture of standing superstitiously, as a ceremony
more holy then sitting or kneeling, as our upstart reformers do in this Church
of Durham, compelling all the people to stand, looking about them like fools
and noddies all the time that the Nicene Creed is sung with the Organ, etc.
which Creed Why Constantine stood to hear.
they can neither say by heart, nor understand one word when it is sung. But
only that religious Prince stood upon his feet, that he might the more
attentively hear the Word of God preached.

Neither is it likely the Emperor, on whose shoulders lay the mannaging of the
weighty affairs of so mighty an Empire, had leisure to learn prick-song: but
in a plain tune he sung Psalms to God with the whole congregation. Which
singing of Psalms in the vulgar tunes within these five years (now fifteen
years) has Since the year 1627.
quite been banished out of Durham Church, contrary to the practice and custom
both of this and all other Cathedral Churches in the Realm of England, the
Primitive Church also, etc. For thus says Basil, if the Sea be fair, how is
not the congregation assembled much more fair, in which a joined found of men,
women and children (as it were of the waves beating on the shore) is sent forth
to God? And the Book of Homilies report out of Dionisius, that hymns were sung
by the whole multitude of people in the Administration of the Communion.

But Pope Vitalian being a skillful musician, and a lusty courageous chanter
himself, (says a reverend Father of our Church) first brought into the Church
prick-song, descant, and all kind of sweet and pleasant melody. And because
nothing should want to delight the vain, foolish, and idle ears of fond and
fantastical men and women, he joined Organs to his curious music.

Thus was Paul's preaching and Peter's praying (says he) turned into vain
singing and childish playing, to the great loss of time, and to the utter
undoing of Christian men's souls, which live not by singing and piping, but by
every word that comes out of the mouth of God.

The Christians of the Primitive Church met together to sing Psalms, but they
had no musical instruments, says Justin Martyr. Such were left to wanton
children and dancers. Neither must David be imitated in piping and dancing in
the Church, which David never did.
The Christians of the Primitive Church met together in secret caves and
corners, for fear of persecutors, and there they sung ante-lucanos hymnos, as
witnesses Pliny, hymns to the praise of God, in the morning before day, all
the people sung together without any musical instruments: of which Justin
Martyr speaks in his 170. Question: Canere est pueris conveniens, non
simpliciter, sed cum inanimis instrumentis canere, and cum saltatione, and
crepitaculis. To sing is a thing very agreeable to the nature of wanton
children, which are not content with simple singing, but they will pipe also
and dance, playing with their hands upon timbrels and tabers. But says he, In
Ecclesiis sublatus est ex carminibus, talium instrumentorum, and aliorum pueris
convenientium, and relictum est canere simpliciter, i. simplex cantio manet.
Out of the songs of Christian Churches the use of such instruments is quite
taken away, and such like childish toys, and there is left only simple
singing in plain tunes.

Neither may we imitate the Prophet David, in bringing musical instruments
into our Churches, ha^ps, lutes trumpets and cymballs; for that was a part of
the Leviticall service; in the tabernacle, and Temple, of which God himself was
the author, not the idle brain of man. David bids that Gods name should be
praised in the dance, and that praises should be sung unto him on the tabret
and harp: Psalm. 149. And in the 68 Psalm he says: It is well seen (O God how
thou go, how thou my God and King go in thy sanctuary: the singers go
before, the minstrells follow after, in the midst are the damsels playing on
the timbrells.

We may not be so absurd, as (understanding literally this mystical song of
the Prophet) to bring into this quire, even to the Communion table, or Altar,
as they called it, our Sanctuary, or Sanctum Sanctorum as they make it,
minstrells, and dancers, boys, and girls playing on timbrells, and tabrets; if
we do, then may we also admit to the administration of the holy Communion,
instead of decent Copes, ridiculous pie-bald vestments, used a long time by the
youth of this town, in their sports and maygames: which I my self have seen
with great grief of heart, and many more besides me, have oftentimes seen a
partycoloured fooles-coat (which cost 3. shillings 4. pence, worn even there,
at the Communion Table; Macula indelebilis hujus Ecclesiae, and opprobrium
sempiternum authoribus tantae maculae^ B. Neale, Burgoin, Morecroft, the first
introducers of altars, images, tapers, candlesticks, with paultry copes.

Innovators in Durham have so changed services and Sacraments, as if they would
have nothing done to edification, contrary to the doctrine of S. Paul and our
Church, by enclosing it within railes, and separating it from the Church and
Chancell
The book of common Prayer, the Articles of religion, Injunctions and Homilies,
which contain the Doctrine of the Church of England; the denyers and oppugners
of which doctrine are not sound, but rotten members of our Church: those books
I say, appoint, and command, all the service to be said and sung so as the
people may understand all, and be edified thereby. But our new fangled reformers
of Durham, Cousin himself, etc. have within these five years brought into this
Church such a strange change of Services, nay such a confusion of the
fore-noone Liturgy, that the greater part thereof, can no better be
understood, then if it were in Hebrew or Irish. Nay the Sacrament it self of
the holy Eucharist, is turned rather into a theatricall stage play, then a
representation of our Savior Christ his passion; At the administration of
which so many pictures are exhibited to be seen, with other ceremonial toys
and Popish trinkets, forbidden by the Act of uniformity, and injunctions; And
again, so strange, ridiculous, and idolatrous gestures, with excessive noise
of Musical harmony, both isntrumental and vocal, at the same time, as the
like was never used before, either in this, or any other Cathedral Church, not
only of England, but of Spain, Italy, France, and Germany, as travelers
report.

Not only the holy Communion, but the Sacrament of Baptism also has been
horribly profaned, as well with images on the Font, as also with immoderate
piping and chanting, contrary to the doctrine of our Church in the Homilies.
Blaxton and Cousin.
Neither rest they contented with the horrible profanation of the Lords
Supper, with immoderate chaunting, and Organplaying, and with other
superstitious vanities; but the Sacrament of Baptism also, they will not
suffer it to be administered, without an heideous noise of music, both of
voices and instruments.

As appears on Sunday the seventh of September 1628. when a child borne in the
College was baptized in the Cathedral Church at Evening prayer, after the
second Lesson as the Rubric directs.

In the mean time while one of the Prebendaries baptized the child (which is a
principal part of Divine Service) two Prebendaries remaining in the Quire,
commanded the Organist to play, and the Quire-men, and boys to sing the rest
of the Service, at the same instant that the Sacrament was administered, with
such a noise, that they could not hear one another at the Font, to the great
offense of many, and of Mr. Deane himself standing at the Font, who grievously
complained of that insolent fact of two irregular Canons, disturbing most
audaciously Divine Service, the like to which was never seen nor heard in any
Church in Christendom.

Such immoderate piping and chanting, with setting up of Images and Altars,
have been even in the beginning of Reformation disallowed, and banished out of
the Church of England.

For in the second part of the Homily, of the place and time of prayer, we are
taught to praise God, that our Church is rid of the like piping and chanting,
and playing on the Organs (they are the very words of the Homily) that was used
in Popery, and that our Church is delivered from those things which displeased
God so sore, and filthily defiled his holy house, and place of prayer.

And again, in the same Homily we read, they have provoked the displeasure
and indignation of Almighty God, because they have profaned and defiled the
Churches with Heathenish and Jewish abuses, with Images, Idols and Altars, too
too superstitiously and intolerably abused, with gross corrupting the Lords
holy Supper, the blessed Sacrament of his body and blood, with an infinite
number of toys, and trifles of their own devising, to make a goodly outward
show, and to deface the homely, simple, and sincere Religion of Jesus Christ.

But now we ought greatly to praise God, for that such superstitious and
Idolatrous manners, as were naught, and defaced Gods glory, are utterly
abolished, as they deserved,

They that disallow the doctrine of the Homilies, which is the doctrine of our
Church, against such profanation of Sacraments, what can they be but the whore
of Babylons bastardly brood? they are no true children of the Church of England.
This is the doctrine of our mother the Church of England, in her Book of
Homilies; which whosoever, borne and bred in the same Church, rejects, he can
be no other then a bastardly brat of the Whore of Babylon, the Church of Rome,
unless he repent, and renounce his foul errors, and return with tears to
the bosom of his gracious Mother, whom he has most ungraciously abused and
offended, by setting up Altars and Images, and profaning the Sacraments, etc.

For to speak plainly, me thinks these words of the Homily, point out in
lively colors this our Cathedral Church of Durham, as now it is changed, from
that it was lately in our former Bishops time, in which these filthy Jewish and
Heathenish abominations, and intolerable abuses, which in time of Popery
provoked the displeasure and indignation of Almighty God, and profaned the
Lords Supper, the blessed Sacrament of his body and blood, being long since
abolished, are now almost on a sudden, restored again with great advantage.

As appears by the immoderate piping, and chanting at that very time when the
Sacraments are administered.

By having an excessive number of wax candles, whereof sixty on and about the
Altar burning at one time.

By gilding and painting Images, and Angels, set up aloft round about the Quire.

By erecting a most sumptuous Altar, with brave furniture belonging thereunto,
amongst which I have seen abominable and ^ Copes, used a long time at Mass
and May games.

By bowing down, and worshipping the same Altars, so often, and so lowly, as
never was seen the like in the Idolatrous Church of Rome.

Bowing to the Altar is an idolatrous Ceremony, brought in and practiced by B.
N^ale and his Chaplains, Cousin, Linsell, Burgoin, corrupters of our Church with
superstitious Innovations.
But say, they, we worship not the Altar, but God; we bow the knee toward the
Altar, not to the Altar, but to Christ supreme Lord, to whom all religious and
divine adoration is due.

Whose death and passion are there represented at the administration of that
Sacrament; Is this true? then are the Papists more excusable, which believing
the real presence, of the true and natural body of Christ, by
transubstantiation, they worship his body with divine worship, and the Altar in
respect of his body and blood offered thereon in the sacrifice of the Mass.

But our Altar-worshippers, never bow the knee to Christ's body and blood, but
to the Altar only, to the naked Altar, and that continually and daily, whether
there be a Communion or not, turning their backs to the Preacher in the
Pulpit, and Ministers saying service, to the whole Congregation also, and the
Bible it self, to which they never vouchsafe to make one leg; as if there were
more holiness in an Altar stone, then in the sacred Scriptures, the Book of
life.

These their doings are directly against the second Commandment, Thou shall
not bow down to them, nor worship them; for, either their worship is Religious
or Civil; if it be Civil, they are absurd Idiots, in showing more civility to
a stock or a stone, then to a poor man or woman, much better then any
Altar-stone, if he be a true Christian, to whom none of them will bow their
bodies so reverently.

If it be Religious, they are abominable Idolaters in exhibiting Divine
worship, due to God alone, to such contemptible creatures, as is an Altar of
wood or stone.

Again, either they bow to the Altar in respect of God, or to God in respect of
the Altar, both which respects, joining together God and the Altar, being
religious, not civil, make their bowing Idolatrous, and themselves
Altar-worshippers, (as Bishop Buckeridge Roch. says, Nec aliud pro illo, nec
aliud cum illo: We may neither adore another thing instead of God, nor another
thing with God, for he is sole a God.

Moreover, every Image when it is worshipped, is an Idol, and seeing the Altar
is not truly and properly an Altar, but simulachrum, or similitudo, an Image or
likeness thereof, therefore the bowing down of bodies to it, or before it, in
regard of some supposed holiness therein; I say that religious, not civil
adoration, or prostration, makes it an Idol, and they that use such comely
gestures (as they call them in their Articles) are (...), downright
Altar-worshippers.

Surely such comely gestures, neither we, nor our predecessors, since the
reformation of Religion, ever saw in this Church; no nor the name of an Altar;
for the Communion Table was heard amongst us (as you may well remember) till
very lately a company of innovators, Bishop Neales Chapleines and favorites
began to corrupt and confound our old services, Sacraments, and Ceremonies.

Comely gestures to the Altar, not to the ^ont, or ought else in the Church
Altar cringers may as well be termed Altar-worshippers, as the Israelites
Calf-worshippers Worshippers of God make not legs to God, but falling down,
kneeling, or standing, they lift up their hearts, hands and eyes to heaven, as
we are taught to pra^, Our father which art in heaven. When friends p^rt one
from ano^h^r, they mutually make legs, taking their leave When B. Lawd or D.
Cousin going out, turn back to make l^gs, do they take their leave of God? do
they depart from God?
They call them comely gestures, which are indeed Fryarlike, most ridiculous,
and fantastical, and (as they are used in a principal part of Gods service)
they are not only histrionicall, and mimicall, but impious and Idolatrous.

Why are not the like comely gestures used at the Altar of the Font, when the
Sacrament of Baptism is administered? Is not Baptism as comely a Ceremony,
because so many legs, and curches, no not one at all is made to the Font; Is
not comeliness fit for all times and places in the house of God? Must the
Altar at the East end of the Church be so duckt unto, and worshipped with
comely gestures, and the West-Altar want all comeliness of gestures?

But it offends them, that they should be called Altar-worshippers, so it would
have done the Idolatrous Israelites, if one had called them Calf-worshippers;
for they professed themselves to be worshippers of God which brought them out
of the land of Egypt, which they knew their golden Calfe did not.

Therefore Aaron built an Altar before it, and made proclamation, saying,
Tomorrow is a feast to the Lord; Then the people shouted, and sang, and danced
about the Altar, and the Calfe with great devotion, Exodus 3^. and perhaps made
low legs and curches, beholding so goodly an object, a Calfe of gold whith
religious admiration; as some of us do to our gay gilded Altar.

For every man and woman which makes a leg or curchee, they do it to some
visible object directly before them; as Abraham and Let did to the Angels that
came unto them in the likeness of men, and to the people of the land before
whom they bowed themselves, with civil reverence, as Jacob also did, when he
met his brother Esau, he bowed his body thrice to the ground to appease his
wrath.

But when they, or any else did worship God, they did prostrate themselves upon
their faces, or fell down on their knees, lifting up their hearts, with hands
and eyes to heaven, they used not to make legs to God above in heaven.

And this the very Heathen knew by the light of nature, for the Poet speaking
of Cassandra, King Pryamus his daughter, which was taken prisoner, at the
burning of Troy, writes thus in 2. Aeneid.

Ad coelum tendens ardentia lumina frustra,
Lumina, nam teneras arcebant vincula palmas.
Up to the skies in vain her eyes Cassandra she lifted,
Eyes; for palms of her hands from lifting manacles hindered
She implored the help of God above, in her distress, lookind upward, she made
not a low curchie to God in Heaven, whom she saw not: so it is said of S.
Stephen in the seventh of the Acts, That he looked up to heaven, and saw the
glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and said, Behold I
see the heavens open, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God.

It had been an absurd thing in Stephen, to have made legs to God the Father,
and his Son Christ, whom he saw above his head in heaven; as our leg-makers say
they do to God and Christ, at the Altar before them.

For although God be every where, round about us, as well at the Font, in the
West end of the Church, as at the Communion Table in the East: and although
heaven be round about the world, yet every man wheresoever he be, even our
Antipodes, are taught by the light of nature to apprehend the glorious majesty
of God, to be above his head in heaven.

There to be worshipped, with lifting up of heart, hands, and eyes, and not in
those parts of heaven which are before, behind, on the right hand, on the
left, or under our feet (as it seems) on the other side of the world. Christ
teaches us to say, Our Father which art in heaven.

Indeed the Gentiles which worshipped visible Deities in their Images or
annexed to them, bowed down their bodies before the same Idols, as that Roman
Q. Catulus did, of whom Cicero reports these verses,

Constiteram solemn exorientem forte salutans,
Cum subito a dextris Roscius exoritur.
Up as he rose once stood I the Sun with a congy saluting,
Roscius o'th right hand, when I spied on a sudd^n arising.
So that he bowed his knee reverently to the Sun before his face, not above his
head, no higher appearing above the Horizon, then the height of Roscius
standing on his feet.

In like manner our Altar-worshippers, bow their bodies down to the ground to
the Altar standing on the earth, directly before their faces, yet they say they
make legs to God, and to Christ, not to the Altar, then which what can be more
absurd?

When they have done their prayers upon their knees, then to stand up and to
make a low leg to God, and going out of the Quire door, to turn about, and
looking on the Altar, make a leg again to God, taking as it were his leave of
God, and farewell, departing from God, as one man does of another, they take
their leaves, bid one another farewell, when they part company, shake hands,
and mutually make legs.

To teach the Coristers going up to the Altar, to make legs to God, when they
light the Tapers and when they have done them, to go backwards with their
faces to the East* and looking on the Altar, make legs again to God; at every
approaching near it, and every departing from it, at the taking up or setting
down of any thing upon the Altar, ever and anon to make a low curtsie, to make
a profound leg to God, especially going out of the Church, as it were taking
his leave and departing from God, which is a phrase of speech, as absurd as the
action it self is vain, superstitious, and Idolatrous.

D Co^n dishonored and reviled Christian people in the Church, yet he made low
legs to the Altar, so low, that his breech was higher then his head, as was
proved before the Lords in Parliament.
Again, are they not absurd Idiots, or rather incarnate devils, who in ti^e of
Divine Service, will take poor men standing quietly in the Church, and thrust
them out by their heads and shoulders, calling them Pagans; Why stand you here
you Pagans, if you will not observe the Ceremonies of our Church, get you out
of the Church.

Who will say to others, even Gentlewomen of the best rank, sitting in their
pues; Can ye not stand you lazy sows? taking them by their arms, and tearing
their sleeves to raise them up, when the Nicene Creed is sung; thus Doct. Cousin
did.

Who going up to the Altar in a Cope, will say in his pride and contempt of
poor people, stand out of my way ye dirty whor^s, dishonouring the Image of
God in them and immediately make a low leg, down to the ground, before his Idol
the Altar, honoring it, being a stock or a stone, having unchristianly, and
uncivilly, disgraced, and abused his Christian brethren and sisters at the same
time. Durham high Altar the greatest idol that ever was in the world.


But the holy Altar, say they* is not a stock or stone, neither may it be
called an Idol: Not an Idol? I do not think that any Idol in the world was
ever so worshipped, as our Durham Altar has been.

Not the Image of Iupitur Olympius, or the Philistims Dagon, or the Babilonians
Bell, or the Trojans Palladium; not Apis or Anubis, Ox or Crocadill, Dog or
Cat, qualia demens Aegyptus portenta colit? or any other monstrous Deity of the
blind Egyptians, that forlorn and miserable Nation, before the coming of
Christ, who enlightened them with the knowledge of the Gospel, was ever so
worshipped, or had so much cost bestowed on them. When they once fell down on
their faces before those Idols, they had done for that time; but every access,
and every regresse, and every turning, and every rising up; and every sitting,
and kneeling down of the Priest and others about the Altar, whether there be a
Communion or no, has a low leg to the Altar.

Neither are they common curtsies, ordinary legs, such as servants and
petitioners use to make to their Lords and Masters, but they are wonderful
solemn, very profound incurvations, before the venerable Altar, so low, that
they seem sometimes to touch the ground with their noses and beards.

The Communion table was never so worshipped with bowing down before it. And
it is a forbidden ceremony both by the Word of God in the second Commandment,
and the Church of England. Our Savior Christ living on earth was never so
worshipped.
When it was a Table standing in the midst of the Quire; it was as good, and as
holy as now it is being turned to an Altar, at the East end of the Church, yet
no man or woman, bowed his, or her body to it then, as now they do in a
prodigious manner.

Which superstitious ceremony of bowing to that Idol, was generally received,
and practiced amongst us; but within these four or five years, by the
example, persuasion, and compulsion of our new fangled Popish Arminians,
without any warrant of Gods Word, or direction of the Church, in the Book of
Common Prayer, Canons or Injunctions. Nay, it is contrary to the second
Commandment, and forbidden by the Act of Uniformity, and the 12. Canon, and
consequently punishable both in the commanders and obeyers.

Our Savior Christ, when he lived upon earth was bowed unto and worshipped, by
them that acknowledged him to be the Son of God. The Magi Wisemen of the East
fell on their faces, and worshipped him; they did it once, neither they, nor
the Shepherds, nor the blessed Virgin his Mother, nor Joseph her husband,
danced round about him lying in the cratch or manger, ever and anon making low
legs before him, behind him, on his right hand, on his left, now one after
another, now all at once; as daily is done at our high Altar, in Durham;
sometimes far off, sometimes close by it, now at the South end, now at the
North end, now at the West side, sometimes going forwa^d toward it; sometimes
going backward from it, still nodding their heads, and making legs and
curtsies: At which time a delicate noise is heard of Organs, Pipers, and
Singers, filling the peoples ears with heavenly harmony, as was done when
Nabuchadonozers golden Image was consecrated and worshipped.

Our Durham Innovators, Cousin and his fellow^s, which have obtruded to the
Church such strange alterations of services and ceremonies, set up altars and
images, and bow down before them, may they not ^ightly be termed superstitious
Ceremony-m^ngers and idolaters?
They that lately have brought into our Cathedral Church such fanaticall
fopperies, such unlawful rites and abuses, whereby it is defiled, the service
disordered, and the Sacraments profaned, as the Homily teaches: They that
without authority, and against authority, even the sovereign authority of our
religious Kings and Princes and Parliaments which established the whole form
of our Liturgy and Ceremonies, in decent and comely manner.

They that with an high hand, and great violence, durst presumptuously
adventure to innovate all things in our Liturgy, to overthwart the well settled
state of the Church, to put us out of the possession of our Religion, and form
of Service which was left unto us by our Ancestors, and we had quietly
possessed above sixty years.

They that not only observe themselves, but compel others to observe and
approve, their before mentioned ridiculous fooleries, superstitious vanities,
abominations, and Idolatries, contrary to the custom and practice of this
Church, contrary to the example of other Cathedrals of this Realm, contrary to
Laws, which straightly forbid under great penalties, all Rites and Ceremonies not
appointed, and prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer and Injunctions.

May not such rightly be termed newfangled Ceremony-mongers, Idolatrous
Altar-worshippers, seditious Innovators, schismatic, factious, and turbulent
breakers of the peace, and contemners of governors? nay rotten members, and
rebellious sons of this our Mother the Church of England, whose doctrine and
discipline they renounce, they corrupt and contemn it, they shoulder it out
with Popish cashiered antiquities, and outlandish Arminian novelties.

May not the people be exhorted to communicate in their own Parish Churches
where the Sacrament is rightly administered, and so bear to re^e^ve it in our
Cathedral polluted with idolatry, least we receive our own damnation, as the
Church of England teaches in the Homilies?
Now I pray you, you I say, the people of this City have you not Churches at
home in your own Parishes, not yet polluted with Idols, and Communion-tables
not changed into Altars, where you may receive with comfort the holy Communion,
in plain and simple manner, as our Savior ordained, and the primitive Church
practiced, and the Church of England prescribes.

But you must needs come hither, and wilfully make your selves partakers of our
sins, and superstitious vanities, when you need not, seeing that the holy
Sacrament is not rightly administered in this Chruch of Durham as it was in our
former Bishops time.

And where it is not lawfully ministered, there it cannot safely be received
without the danger of damnation. Take heed to your selves, I warned you before,
even this time two years, and now I preach to you the same doctrine again,
that I may discharge mine own conscience, and save both mine own soul and
yours, if you will hear and obey the voice of God in this place out of my
mouth, as I am charged to speak, and so do, in Ezekiel. 3. 17.

For thus the Church of England teaches us in the Homily of the worthy
receiving the Communion in the first part thereof.

We must address our selves, to frequent the same Sacrament, in reverent and
comely manner, left as physic provided for the body, being misused, more
hurts then profits; so this comfortable medicine of the soul, undecently
received, tends to our greater harm and sorrow.

But above all things, this we must be sure of especially, (says the Homily)
that this Supper be in such wise ministered, as our Lord and Savior did and
commanded to be done, as his holy Apostle used it, and the good Fathers of the
primitive Church frequented it. For, as that worthy father Ambrose says, He is
unworthy of the Lord, that otherwise does celebrate that mystery, then it was
delivered by him, neither can he be devout, that otherwise does presume to
receive it, then it was given by the Author.

Now who knows not what strange alterations have been brought into this
Church, within these few years, how the Ministers of this Sacrament have
presumed lately to change in many things the administration thereof, not only
from the practice of the primitive Church, and the institution of the author
Christ; but also from the Rubricks, and Canons of the Church, and the ancient
usual custom of this place.

For it is turned rather into a theatricall Stage Play, where men's ears are
filled with pleasant tunes of musical instruments, and voices of not
communicating singers, and their eyes fed with pompous spectacles of glittering
pictures, and histrionicall gestures of men arrayed in massing and pibald, not
decent robes.

And other unlawful, superstitious and vain rites, and ridiculous ceremonies
are used, with which that holy action is defiled and disgraced: Therefore I did
well, and according to my duty and vocation, in admonishing that Congregation
then assembled, to receive as they were wont to do, in their own parish
Churches, as our Church commands, and to forbear from communicating in this
Cathedral Church, till things were amended, which lately were marred; le^t
receiving the body and blood of Christ, in uncomely and unlawful manner, it
should tend to their greater harm and sorrow, as the Homily teaches.

Augustine says upon Psalm. 21. Tempus lugendi est, cum passio Domini
celebratur, tempus gemendi est, tempus flendi, tempus confitendi, 19 The
celebration of the Lords supper, is the memorial of his death and passion,
caused by our sins: therefore it is a time of lamentation and weeping, not of
rejoicing, not of pompous and g^o^^ous ceremonies, not of music and melody.
and deprecandi; When the Passion of the Lord is celebrated in the holy
Communion, by the breaking of his body, which is the bread of life, and pouring
out his blood, which is the true aqua vitae; the refreshing, the comforting,
the quickening wine and water of life to languishing and dying souls.

That is a time of mourning, a time of sighing, a time of weeping and
lamenting, a time of confessing, and begging pardon, it is not a time of piping
and singing, of wearing and beholding brave clothes and pictures. And Cyprian
says, In the presence of the Lord, tears do never beg pardon in vain, and
the sacrifice of a contrite heart never receives repulse. And again, he says,
in treating of the Lords Supper, and the receiving thereof, As often as I see
thee sighing in the presence of the Lord, I doubt not but the Holy Ghost is
breathing upon thee: Cum intueor flentem, sentio ignoscentem, So often as I see
thee weeping, I perceive God pardoning. And who comes to crave pardon of an
angry King, and terrible Judge, whom he grievously offended, with many haynons
crimes deserving death, who, I say, dare come into his presence, Pompatice, and
glori^se, says Cyprian, pompously and gloriously, in slanting apparel, in
goodly Babylonish robes, imbroidered with Images of silver, gold and pearl,
and with an excellent consort of Musicians singing merrily, piping and playing
joyfully and jollily.

And D. Buckeridge the late Bishop of Rochester, now of Ely, says very well,
in his Book of kneeling at the Communion; What has music to do with mourning?
or a song of mirth, with a day of the greatest sorrow, which is the Passion of
Christ, when the seeds of contrition and repentance must be sowed with tears,
that the harvest in Heaven may be reaped with joy.

And again, we must come weeping before him, that offered up supplications,
and prayers, with strong cries and tears to redeem us, Heb. 5. 7. We must
prostrate our selves humbly before our Judge that is offended by us, and weep
before him whom we would pacify with our tears and compunction; So then,
says he, since we come to the Lords house, and table to pacify him, let our
caraiage be such, that we stir him not to more anger; we must shut up our
senses that they wander not; our eyes must see Gods beauty, not gad after
vanities, and send tears as Ambassadors: Our ears must attend the word of
truth, not delicious tunes of musical melody.

Such gaudy ornaments and paultry furniture as are used in Du^ham Cathedral at
the Communion, with organs and other music, hinder godly meditations,
therefore K. James when he received the Communion at Durham on Easter Day 1617.
commanded all things to be done plainly without music or other bravery.
Why then are set before us so many objects of vanity, so many allurements of
our outward senses, our eyes and ears, and consequently our minds from the
meditation of Christ's death and passion, and our sins which were the only cause
of all our miseries, and his lamentable sufferings. Can such paltry toys bring
to our memory Christ and his bloodshedding? Crosses, Crucifixes, Tapers,
Candlesticks, gilded Angels, painted Images, golden Copes, gorgious Altars,
sumptuous Organs, with Sackbuts and Cornets piping so loud at the Communion
table, that they may be heard half a mile from the Church? Bernard says, no.
Orantium in se retorquent aspectum, impediunt affectum: Such glorious
spectacles, draw away from God the minds of them that pray, they further not,
but hinder entire affections, and godly meditations.

The consideration of which impediments of devotion, moved our most learned and
religious King James, when he received the holy Communion in this Cathedral
Church, upon Easter Day, 1617. to give charge, or at least in his name charge
was given (upon my knowledge I speak it, and in my hearing, in mine own house)
that the Communion should be administered in plain ma^ne^; and it was expressly
commanded, that no chaunting should be used by the Quiremen, nor playing on the
Organs or other Instruments: Which my self being treasurer of this Church at
that time, and receiving the Communion with his Majesty (as my office required)
I did see, and take order, should be performed, according to the Kings pleasure
and direction; at which time there were no Images, or other gay and gaudy
monuments of superstition and Idolatry to be seen.

Two Copes indeed were worn, both decent, as the Canons prescribe, not
party-colored nor pibald, like ours at Durham, but plain without any picture,
or other imbroidring of Crosses, or Images, which the doctrine of the Church of
England, in the book of Homilies, and Injunctions, straightly forbids in our
Churches to be used at any part of Gods service, especially at the Communion
table, or in windows ab^^^ it* And shall we ^ffect so excessive and
extraordinary bravery, such a deal and so great variety of delicious music at
the receiving of the holy Communion, an action of the greatest humiliation and
mourning, which the religiou^ wisdom of so learned a Prince forbad, and
refused.

When we come to Gods ^ble we must endeavor to pacify his anger with our
humiliation and mourning, and not provoke him against us with our proud
behavior, merriment and flaunting! bravery.
When: we come to Gods house, and sacred table to pacify him* (says the
Bishop of Rochester, in his Book of kneeling at the Communion, page 19.) our
carriage must be such, that we stir him not to more anger; and how can lie but
be angry, when we turn our mourning into merriment, our fasting and prayer
into stageplaying, says he? And again, in the same book, we must weep before
him, to wash away our ^ins, and deplore and prevent our present and future
misery: The depth of sin; says he, pierced not only his hands and feet, but
his heart also; in which he offered up prayers and supplications, with strong
cries and tears, that he might overcome the clamor of our crying sins.

And if our Savior wept for us, the Redeemer for the redeemed, we have much
more reason to weep for our selves, and let none be found so profane amongst
us, that when the son of God wept and suffered for our redemption, we should
laugh, and make merry, pipe and sing at our condemnation, as if we were
senseless of our own confusion. We may not presume to eat the bread of
Heaven, and forget the duty of sinful, and earthly men that are but dust and
ashes.

Reverend and dreadful mysteries must have receivers that come with reverence
and dread; and such as our action is, such must be our affection, that is, to
receive that with fear and trembling, (and not with piping and singing) which
is so fearful and dreadful in it self.

And then he concludes, with this admonition; Behold thou sinner how great
reproaches Christ suffers at thy hands, who by thy wilful impieties, do
crucify again to thy self the Lord of life.

And then resolve, that as Christ's hands, and feet, and head, and every poare
and passage of his body, was a fountain of mercy that runs in his blood: so
thine heart must be as a spring of sighs and groans, and thine eyes must be as
fountains of tears, to wash with Magdalen, not so much Christ's feet, as thine
own soul.

FINIS.

