Christian Instruction: DIRECTING TO A more perfect and saving KNOWLEDGE of
GOD, in the Foundation Principles of True RELIGION. By way of Question and
Answer. Meet to be seriously considered by all true Christians, for their help
and furtherance in the great Concerns of Eternal Life.

By W. S.

And this is Life Eternal, that they might know Thee the only True GOD, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. John 17.3. LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith,
at the Elephant and Castle without Temple Bar.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Desire thee to take knowledge, that this little following Treatise is not
intended only, nor chiefly for young Christians, but especially for such
growing Plants, as its to be hoped may be helped thereby, to become so much the
sooner ripe and ready for service to the Church of God. The Texts I point to
for proof of these Doctrines, I neither repeat nor argue; partly, because I
would not make my Book great, that the price might be small; and partly because
I would have thee to exercise thy study: but if thou meetest with any knot in
the reading of my Book, too hard for thee to unty, if thou please to use my
help, I doubt not through the grace of God, but I shall be able to help thee
therein.

And for any Brethren that shall read my Book, and upon the best consideration
of it, shall in any material point or points, be found contrary to me in
Judgment, I should rejoice to see such a frame of Spirit in them, as to write
me the reasons of their dissent: I should comfortably hope this course in some
short time would, through the blessing of God, graciously tend to bring us to
Unity in the Truth; Thus desiring thee to read seriously the ensuing Discourse,
I heartily bid thee farewell, and rest,

Thine in any service for Christ, W. SELLERS.

Christian Instruction: Directing to a more perfect and saving Knowledge of
GOD, in the Foundation-Principles of true Religion.
Question.

WHat are we to judge of God? is there one or more?

Answ. There is but one God, the Father; of whom are all things; Deuteronomy. 4.35.
and 6.4.

Qu. How must we understand and judge of him?

Ans. He is not only the Author of all Beings, but also the Fountain of all
Good; 2 Cor. 1.3. Ephesians. 4.6. Jam. 1.17. And all his Ways, which contain both
his Decrees or Purposes, and his Works, are all like himself, very good; Genesis
1.31. Jam. 1.13, 17. Psalm. 33.4, 5.

Q. But how can it be clearly proved that there is a God beyond doubt?

A. The Works of God make it evident; Romans 1.19, 20. Psalm. 19.1. See more of
this in my Book, called A Preservative from Atheism and Error.

Q. But if God did make all things very good, how came Mankind so very bad?

A. By breaking the Law and Covenant of God.

Q. Is the Law and Covenant all one?

A. There is no difference, but only this; the conditions of cursing the
breaker of the Law, and blessing the doer of it, expressed Gal. 3.10, 12. annexed
or added to the Law, makes it a Covenant.

Q. What Law do you mean?

A. The ten Commandments, expressed Exodus 20.

Q. How does it appear that this Law was given from the beginning, and that Man
transgrest it?

A. In that it is called the old and first Covenant, Heb. 8.7, etc. as also
from Romans 3.19, 20. in that it stops every mouth, and lays all the World under
guilt, and brings them to the knowledge of sin. See more of this in the
forementioned Book.

Q. What is the punishment due for the breach of this Covenant?

A. The Curse of God; Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26.

Q. Did the Curse fall upon Mankind immediately upon the first sin?

A. Yea, in part it did, Genesis 3.17, 18, 19. Romans 5.12, etc. yet not in full
measure, to the utter ruin of the World, as in God's just severity it might
have done.

Q. How came the World to have any mercy and patience extended to it?

A. The Lord did graciously pre-ordain a Mediator to stand between Himself and
Man, who did undertake to die for Man, and so stay the Curse from falling upon
him, to his immediate and utter ruin; 1 Timothy 2.5. Rev. 13.8. Psalm. 75.3.

Q. Do you judge Adams eating the forbidden fruit was a sin against the ten
Commandments, seeing it is judged by some that they were not given till they
were made known at Sinai?

A. It is evident he sinned against that Law, breaking the first, fifth, sixth,
eighth, ninth, tenth, in the very letter of them. And that his sin was against
this Covenant is further manifest, thus: Till the first Covenant was faulty,
there should no place have been sought for the second, Heb. 8.7. For the Law is
not faulty in it self, Romans 7.12, 13. but its only fault was, it would not
save, nor any way help us when once it was broken, Romans 7.10. and 8.3, 4. Now
the breach of this Law leaving us helpless; for it could give no life, when
once life was forfeited, Gal. 3.21. therefore all life and mercy since the Fall
must come by Christ upon a New-Covenant-account, no other way being left now to
attain it. But further; this is clear from this consideration, That by the
deeds of the Law can no flesh be justified, Romans 3.20, 28. and yet
Justification Abel obtained upon a New-Covenant-account at that day: for he was
justified by Faith, Heb. 11.4. and Faith has no relation to the Law, Gal.
3.10, 11, 12. but they that are made just by Faith, it is by Grace, through
Redemption-mercy, Romans 3.21, quite through to the end of the 5th chapter; all
Grace, Light and Mercy whatsoever flowing now to the World through him, ever
since the Fall; Joh. 14.13, 14. 1 Pet. 3.18, 19, 20. Genesis 6.3.

Q. If this Law of the ten Commands were given at the beginning, wherefore then
was it given at Sinai again?

A. First, That the World might the better discern their sinfulness, Romans 5.20.
and 7.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Secondly, That the rich grace extended by
Jesus Christ, might be the better seen and esteemed, and thankfully embraced,
Romans 5.20, 21. 1 Cor. 15.56, 57, 58.

Q. Is then the whole World bound to keep this Law?

A. Yea; as appears, Mat. 5.17, 18, 19, 20. Romans 3.9, to 21. Jam. 2.8, 9, 10,
11, 12.

Q. Wherefore does James call this Law, the Royal Law?

A. Because this Law is Kingly or Supreme; the other Laws of God being
inferior to it in dignity; which, as handmaids, are given to serve this Law,
since sin came into the world; which, but for the sake of, had been altogether
useless. For, what place could there be for the Law of Shadows, but to
represent a Savior to come, to redeem us from the Curse of that Supreme Law:
neither could there be need or use of the Law of Judgments to punish evil
doers, if the Law of the ten Commandments had not been broken.

Q. Does it appear that Man was created very good?

A. Yea; as appears, Genesis 1.31. and 2.1. Eccles. 7.29.

Q. How bad does Man appear to be now, since the Fall?

A. So exceeding sinful, that he of himself, if left to himself, would do no
good, 2 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13. John 15.5. nor spare no evil, but commit all
iniquity with greediness, Psalm. 14.2, 3, 4. Romans 3.9. to 20. Sin having its
rise or spring in the nature or heart of man, Mat. 15.19. Job 14.4. and 15.14,
16.

Q. If all men be by Nature, and of themselves thus vile, how comes it to pass
that many who are not born again, are yet preserved from that high degree of
abomination, that according to some of those forenamed Texts, the heart of man
is let out unto?

A. Men may and are kept from much evil, and carried forth to much good, by the
liberal distribution of common grace, and sometimes by restraining grace.

Q. What call you restraining grace?

A. That is thus to be understood; When God orders Providence so, that
persons are prevented and kept by his overruling hand from the evils that
other-wayes they would do. You have an Instance in the preservation of David
from Saul, when the Philistines Army took off Saul by a strong hand from
pursuing David's life. And many discreet Parents by their good government, and
watchful eye over Children, preserve them from many evils that otherwise they
would run into. These and other like Providence, by which sin is prevented, I
call restraining grace.

Q. What call you common grace?

A. That gracious work of the Spirit, by which the generality of men are
ordinarily followed and striven with, Genesis 6.3. which although it may not
prevail with multitudes to convert them, yet may it carry them far into a
reformation of life, and usefulness to others: The Scripture is full of
Instances; Joash, Amaziah, Vzziah, Saul, Herod himself, with multitudes more.
Yea, many may go far, not in Profession only, but so high in the Practice of
Godliness, as to Prophecy and cast out Devils in Christ's Name, who never were
thoroughly converted, yet take themselves for Converts; but will at last be
disappointed; Mat. 7.22, 23.

Q. What proof is there that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments,
commonly received to be of Divine Authority, are so indeed?

A. It is certainly a tried word, Psalm. 12.6. and he that will faithfully obey
it, shall have sufficient proof of it in so doing; according to John 7.16, 17.
See a fuller proof in the forementioned Book.

Q. Of what use are the holy Scriptures to us?

A. They are of such excellent use to us in so many respects, that it is not
easy to name; but in general thus. They are the only safe Rule of Faith and
Life, without any Tradition whatsoever; giving safe direction, and such comfort
to the observers of them, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. Mat. 15.9. Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33. and
12.30, 31, 32.

Q. Seeing mankind do receive great benefit by the Mediator, let us understand
something of his worth by the Scriptures?

A. This Mediator of the New Covenant in the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. who
for the excellency of his person, even as he is Man, is the only choice piece
in all the workmanship of God; and in respect of his Spirit or inward Man, the
first of all the Creation, Heb. 1.3, 4. Col. 1.15, 16, 17. which lived in glory
with God the Father, before any other of his Works had a being; Prove. 8.22 to
30. John 17.5. and was sent from Heaven to take upon him our nature, Heb. 2.14,
16, 17. and in respect of his body, flesh, or outward-man, he was begotten,
conceived, and brought forth between the most high and omnipotent Spirit and a
Virgin, without all spot or stain of sin; Luke 1.35. Isa. 7.14. 1 Pet. 1.19.

Q. Think you he was no more but a creature, although the most excellent of the
Creation?

A. I believe if he had been but a mere creature, the work he came for, would
have been too hard for him. But he was possessed, filled, or anointed with the
fullness of the Godhead, according to the Scriptures, Psalm. 45.7. Col. 2.3, 9. 1 Timothy 3.16. See the excellency of his Person, set forth and argued more at large
in my Book called, Means to prevent perishing.

Q. Wherefore was it necessary for this most excellent Spirit of Christ to
receive a truly humane body of flesh?

A. That he might die, according to the Scriptures, Isa. 53.7, 8, 9. Dan. 9.26.

Q. What did his Death effect for us?

A. Our Redemption is effected thereby; Rev. 5.9. Gal. 3.13.

Q. What sort of men are redeemed?

A. All Mankind without exception of any.

Q. Are all effectually redeemed, Believers and unbelievers, alike, without any
difference?

A. Yea; believing makes not a man to be ever the more redeemed; nor unbelief
makes him not to be the less redeemed: for that is wrought out by Jesus Christ
for all; it depends upon the price of his Blood alone whether men believe or
not.

Q. Had you not need to prove this point clearly, seeing many learned men deny
it; As also, because it is the great Wheel upon which all the curious parts and
branches of the Gospel turn?

A. I will therefore lay down these fourteen Reasons to prove it.

1. The Scripture in so many plain positive words asserteth it; John 3.16, 17.
and 12.47. 2 Cor. 5.14. 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. Heb. 2.9. 1 John 2.2.

2. There is not one Text in the whole Scripture that says he died for no more
but Believers, or Elect persons, Sheep, or the like. Neither can any Text be
pressed to serve in that warfare, but what may well be discharged of that
Service, and yet have a very clear and holy Interpretation allowed it, every
way according with Godliness.

3. The Scriptures sometimes character or describe the Redeemed by such names
and titles as do not at all agree to Chosen-ones, or Saints, distinct from the
ungodly world; but they bear these names, Sinners, Ungodly, Enemies, Unjust,
Romans 5.6, 8, 10. 1 Pet. 3.18. and in those Texts mentioned in my first Reason,
they are called all men, and every man, and the world, and the whole world. Now
these can be no meet titles for, or descriptions of Redeemedones, if the Elect
distinct from the Reprobates were redeemed only.

4. The work of the Ministry is the unworthiest service that any man can
undertake, if all men be not redeemed: for whoever will preach the Gospel, must
offer Salvation to Sinners in Christ's Name, and upon the account of his Death
call them to Repentance, and press them to believing and an holy Conversation;
exhorting them, and if cause be, reproving them with all Authority, Tit. 2. the
whole Chapter. But this can no man do to the satisfaction of his own
conscience, that does not believe that they are redeemed, that he thus
exhorts and reproves: for if his heart secretly tell him, These Sinners, how
obstinate soever they seem to be, can no way help it, nor possibly be better,
if they be not redeemed, as for ought I know they be not; and if not, then have
they more need of pity than reproof; and if they meet with such as have wit
enough to do it, will soon tell them so, and say, How know you that I am
redeemed? and if not, which way is it possible for me to be better? is there
any grace or strength but what is in Christ? And if I have no share in his
Blood, I can never mend. Your preaching, nor my hearing, without Christ's
Blood, can never change my heart. This Objection can never be answered or
removed. But the only way both to resolve doubts, and convince men of their
evil ways, is, to prove that Christ died for all without exception.

5. The Gospel, expressed in the holy Scriptures, is in it self a truth, whoever
does or does not believe it. Now the Gospel likewise is to be preached unto
all, considered as men, and as sinners, without exception, Mark 16.15. Col.
1.23, 28. 1 Cor. 15.3. And the Gospel, allowed of God to be preached to the
world, is good tidings, great joy to all people, peace and good things, Luke
2.10. Romans 10.15. But nothing of all this Gospel Grace can have sincerity and
truth in it, with respect to any of those men for whom Christ died not.

6. The Scriptures declare, that of them Christ has bought, some will perish,
2 Pet. 2.1. and if so, there is no reason to think that any are left without
Redemption.

7. The Scripture charge the guilt of sin upon the world for their unbelief,
and makes it the true cause of their condemnation, John 16.9. 2 These. 2.10, 11,
12. A charge never to be made good, but upon the account that they are
Redeemed; for without it they cannot be under the New Covenant, nor the duties
of it, which requires faith in the Lord Jesus, but must needs still remain
under the Old Covenant, which requires not that duty at any man's hand, neither
condemns any man for the want of Faith in him.

8. The holy Scriptures manifest that Christ has obtained by his death,
Lordship and Dominion over all men, and right of receiving honor from all men,
and power of Judging them for disobedience to his Gospel. 2 These. 1.8. Romans
14.9. Now to have a just Title and Authority over the men by means of his
death, that he never died for, is in all reason an utter impossibility.

9. The Scriptures are most express in this Doctrine, that God is no respecter
of persons, 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Acts 10.34. and yet does he require faith,
repentance and obedience at all men's hands, and yet without Christ all duties
are impossible, John 15.5. and also unprofitable, Heb. 9.22, 23. and therefore
if Christ have not died for all men, God must needs be of all others the
greatest respecter of persons, which he so earnestly professes against in
himself, and condemns in others, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. Deuteronomy. 1.17.

10. Unless Christ has died for all men, and by his blood opened a door for
the renewing and saving of them, it is impossible for a multitude of Texts to
have any manner of truth in them at all; namely such as do testify his Love to
all, his Word and Oath that he would have men repent, and believe, and be
saved, and not die, nor perish; he says he has no pleasure in it, no not in
the death of the wicked, no not of him that does die; saying, Why will you
die? telling men they destroy themselves, and put away eternal life, and turn
the grace of God into wantonness, tread upon Christ and his blood, and that he
would have gathered them, and they would not; and oh that thou had known;
with many bowel-like expressions not to be numbered. See some of them, Psalm.
145.9. Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. and 33.11. Hos. 13.9. 2 Pet. 3.9. 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6, 7.
Acts 13.46. Jude 4. Heb. 10.29. Psalm. 81.11, 12, 13. Mat. 23.37. and many more
speak the s ame language. But it is impossible for them to have either truth or
savor in them, if Christ have not died for all men: for there is no means
whatsoever that God does use, or that man can use, that can do him any good, to
work him to repentance or believing, that Christ did not die for, or that will
save him if he could do both.

11. Both the Scripture and works of God declare him to be gracious in himself,
and in his nature and disposition inclined to mercy, Exodus 34.6. Jonah 4.2.
Psalm. 19.1. Psalm. 86.15. with much more if need were. But now, if the world
generally perish for want of Redemption, except that little remnant of chosen
ones, it is altogether impossible that he can be according to this description,
Gracious. But, whereas James 2.13. says, Mercy rejoices against Judgment; it
would have been much more proper to have said, Judgment rejoices against
Mercy; for nothing is more evident than this, that God saves no man but upon
such terms as do most abundantly maintain the honor of his Justice; and if in
condemning men he have not the same respect to the honor of his Mercy, which
cannot be without Redemption, how is it possible that his Mercy should be
commensurable to his Severity, much less can it rejoice against it; therefore
it is evident all are Redeemed.

12. Seeing it is plain, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. that by virtue of Christ's coming all
men rise from the dead, he certainly has redeemed them, or else he came
purposely to bring upon them that eternal misery which without him could never
have befallen them. Therefore they that deny Universal Redemption, render
Christ more a Destroyer of mankind than a Savior of them, contrary to the
Scriptures, Luke 9.56. John 12.47.

13. The innocence and profitableness of this Doctrine speaks for the truth of
it; for as it agrees with the Atributes of God in general, so it does not
degrade him of his power, but it tends to show that he will not use it
unwisely nor cruelly: and as it tends to encourage Faith, and so Godliness in
all, so it no way ministers any occasion or temptation to sin; but rather it
tells men that if they go on to sin and perish, it is their own fault
altogether.

14. The contrary Doctrine manifestly tends to work doubts in men's minds,
whether they be Redeemed or no; and so reckons their Faith, and so their
Godliness the fruit of Faith.

Q. Has not Christ by Redemption purchased eternal life for all the Redeemed?

A. Yea; in such a sense as God gave David Saul's House, and his Wives, for if
he had liked to ahve had them, nothing stood in the way to hinder him, but in
no other sense; for Redemption is not Salvation, although it be a sufficient
means to effect it, yet does it not put any man into an absolute right thereof,
but a man without any dishonor to the work of Redemption may miss thereof.

Q. What is Redemption then, and how may it be understood?

A. It is an absolute purchasing of us by the price of his own blood, from
under the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. to himself; as appears from the seventh
and eighth Reasons going before; and so has brought us under the New Covenant,
Heb. 10.19, 20, 29. which is established upon better Promises, Heb. 8.6. than
the Old was.

Q. What are the terms, conditions or promises pertaining to the Old Covenant?

A. These for substance are all the terms of that first Covenant, The man that
does these things shall live by them: And, Cursed is he that does them not,
Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.10, 12.

Q. What are the promises or terms of the New Covenant?

A. First in brief, these are the New Covenant terms; He that believes, shall
be saved; and he that believes not, shall be condemned. But secondly, The
whole revelation of the Lords divine pleasure, expressed in the Promises and
Threatenings of the Scriptures, are the New Covenant Terms; those only excepted
that before were named, appertaining to the First Covenant.

Q. But what is the New Covenant it self, or how may it be understood?

A. Christ himself is said to be given as the Covenant, Isa. 42.6. and 49.8.
Secondly, the Blood of Christ is called, the Covenant, or Testament, Mat.
26.28. Mark 14.24. Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.25. Thirdly, Teaching mercy, pardoning
mercy, and renewing mercy, are called the Covenant, Jer. 31.33, 34. Heb. 8.10.,
11, 12. From all which this is evident, That the New Covenant is Free Grace,
not only tendered, but extended by the Father through the blood of the Son to
all men, sufficient to enable them to believe acceptably; and they that
believe, have eternal life given them, and all that tends to fit them for that
blessed inheritance, while the obstinate unbelievers for their disobedience to
the Gospel of Grace perish.

Q. Is Faith of necessity to this New Covenant benefit?

A. Yea; in all come up to years of discretion, and capeable to attain it; as
appears, Heb. 11.6, 7. Gal. 3.22, 26. John 3.15, 16, 18, 36.

Q. Have Children no Faith, suppose you?

A. We have no reason to believe they have, or can have any, seeing Faith comes
by hearing, Romans 10.14, 17. and there can be no reason to believe, that Faith
can possibly be raised in the soul without hearing, or means equivolent to
bearing, sufficient to enlighten the understanding in the knowledge of the
Truth.

Q. Do you believe Children are saved although they have no Faith, seeing the
Lord will not save persons of understanding without it?

A. Yea; First, because Christ tells us, that Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 19.13, 14. Luke 18.15, 16, 17. Secondly, They being redeemed, and so
delivered from all danger of eternal ruin, upon the Old Covenant account; It
is no way likely that the New Covenant, which is better and more merciful, will
ever condemn such as never live to disobey it; also the Scripture plainly
manifests that the second Adam brought a Cure every way proportionable to the
Disease the first Adam brought upon the world, Romans 5.12, etc. and that the
grace is much more abundant that comes by him: which being true, there is no
place for a doubt concerning the estate of Infants, but that it is well with
them, seeing they have no more disease but what has originally befallen them,
if Children have no Faith.

Q. What then is a visible Church of Christ, or how may it be discerned from
other Assemblies?

A. The visible Church of Christ, is an Assembly of faithful Persons, Saints by
calling at least.

Q. Who are Saints by calling?

A. Those that are won by the Gospel to believe, and voluntarily give up
themselves to the profession and practice of Religion and Godliness, Ephesians.
1.1. Phil. 1.1, 5, 6, 7. Col. 1.2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Q. What Ordinances has Christ appointed in his Church visible?

A. Prayer, Preaching, Baptism, Laying on of Hands, the Lords Supper, with all
Duties of Love in general, and when necessity requires, Excommunication also,
1 Timothy 2.1. Acts 12.5. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. Mat. 28.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.20. Heb. 13.16.
2 Cor. 9.6, 7. 1 Cor. 5. John 13.14, 15. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17.18.

Q. At what age ought persons to be Baptized, and received into
Church Communion?

A. The Scriptures have not expressed any age, but the time when persons do
indeed repent, and with all the heart believe the Gospel, Acts 8.36, 37, 38.
Mark 16.15, 16. Acts 2.38, 41, 42. and so says the Common Prayer Book also in
its Catechism, and that according to truth.

Q. Be those that are Baptized, and so Members of the visible Church, Heirs of
Salvation?

A. Yea; if they do, as they profess, in truth believe, John. 3.15. and 16.36.

Q. What is true Faith, let us understand and know it, seeing it is so
necessary to Salvation?

A. True Faith believes unfainedly all that God says, how unlikely soever it
appears to sense, Genesis 15.6. Gal. 3.6, 7, 9. Luke 1.45.

Q. What is the nature of true Faith, or how may it be known when it is
savingly wrought in the heart?

A. It will work men to a suitable obedience, and deliver them from the love
and service of sin; and therefore if any do live in the service of known sin,
they cannot be in the Faith, nor yet the Servants of Christ, John 8.34, 39. 1
John 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Acts 15.9.

Q. Will not that Faith then justify men, which is without good works?

A. No, it cannot, because it is fruitless and dead, Jam. 2.14, etc.

Q. Are we justified by Faith, or by Works, or by both together?

A. Nay; we are justified by Faith without Works, Romans 3.20; 27, 28. and 4.2,
3, 4, 5, 6. For however the Faith that is without Works will not justify, yet
the Works themselves add nothing toward our justification.

Q. Wherefore then are good Works of necessity?

A. They are not at all of necessity to justify us, nevertheless if we be
without them, our Faith is not true nor living, no more than he can be a living
man that has no breath in his nostrils.

Q. But are Works of no use but only to prove our Faith true and of a living
nature?

A. Yes; we may and must work diligently, as well as believe in order to the
attainment of our Sanctification, which is as necessary to Salvation as
Justification is; and Holiness is not gotten without diligent working, John
3.3, 4. Heb. 12.14. 2 Pet. 3.14. Heb. 6.11, 12.

Q. Wherefore must we work in order to our growth in Holiness, and not in
order to our Justification?

A. In the one works profit not, but contrarily tend to rob the Lord of the
honor of his grace, who forgiveth freely iniquity, Romans 4.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
but in the other works are profitable for the attaining of holiness, as was
showed before; and they are profitable to men, and honorable to God, Tit. 3.8,
14. Mat. 5.16. Heb. 12.14.

Q. But then wherefore must we believe in order to Sanctification, seeing it
will not prevent working?

A. All Works are altogether vain without grace and blessing from God, which
must be fetched by Faith from him through Christ, that we may be kept humble in
working, and withal thankful for what we obtain through believing.

Q. How ought we to exercise our Faith, that we may become Saints? or are we
adopted without it?

A. No, not without it, John 1.12. Gal. 3.26. Heb. 11.6. but thus ought we to
exercise our Faith. First, consider the Might, Grace, Wisdom and Faithfulness
of God; and hence conclude that you may well believe his words be all true.
Secondly, consider the clearness of the Gospel held forth to sinners, lost and
helpless in themselves, yet may scarcely rest upon the grace of God in Christ,
for grace to change the heart and life, according to the promises made to such
in the Gospel, Isa. 45.22. John 3.14, 15, 16, 17. Heb. 7.25. with many like
gracious promises in the Scripture; and through the beholding the glory of the
Lord in his Gospel, thou shall not only be adopted, but also changed by the
Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18.

Q. When a person is a Child of God by Faith, is there any thing more for him
to do in order to his enjoying eternal happiness?

A. Yea; it is his duty, and that in order to his safety, to live by Faith,
Hab. 2.4. Heb. 10.38.

Q. Is there eminent danger of a Believers falling away?

A. There is danger, if a man be careless and decline; but no such eminent
danger, but that he who is in the Faith, may very possibly and well continue
therein, John 15.9, 10. Acts 13.43. 1 Timothy 4.16.

Q. How comes it to pass that any do or may fall away? Does the Lord leave them
to temptation and danger, or comes it to pass through some wilful disobedience
of their own?

A. Their own ungodly turning aside must needs be the alone cause thereof; for
the Lord on his part never fails to do all that is meet for him to do, or that
can honorably be done by him, to preserve them from falling, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23,
24. 1 Cor. 1.8, 9.

Q. Do you think then that the Lord does not save some men by an omnipotent
arm? seeing, 1 Pet. 1.5. says, That they are kept by the power of God to
salvation?

A. Compare that Text with Romans 1.16. and you may see he means no more, but the
Gospel faithfully believed is Gods power to save men; and he that so continues
is safe enough, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2.

Q. But if men do fall from the Faith, may they not be recovered again to
repentance?

A. Yea doubtless, if they fall not into the blasphemy of the holy Spirit, they
may; 1 Timothy 1.20. 1 Kings 15.5. but it is a very dangerous sinful estate, and a
recovery out of it harder than the first conversion, Prove. 14.14.

Q. But how does it appear, that any that do in truth believe with such a
Faith, as, if they had continued in, would have saved them, may finally fall
away and perish?

A. It appears plainly from the express testimony of the holy Scripture,
Ezekiel. 18.24, 26, and 33.12, 13, 18. John 15.6. 1 Timothy 5.11, 12.

Q. Do you think that all that fall away are such as once truly believed, and
should have been saved, if they had continued in their profession?

A. No by no means; for when men do fall off from the profession of Godliness,
especially in great numbers, it is like they were never sound, John 6.60, 66. 1
John 2.19. For, I believe it is not easy nor ordinary for a true Believer to
come to fall from the Faith, especially so low as from the profession of it;
but contrarily many that are not sound, may stand in their profession to the
last, Mat. 7.22, 23.

Q. But is it not possible for a true Believer to secure both himself and his
fears from the danger of falling away?

A. Yea, very well; God affords rich supplies of grace for that end, and he
that takes the direction the Scripture gives, shall be sure he shall never
fall from the Faith, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and 3.17, 18. and he that
persevereth in the Faith to the end, shall never miss of eternal Life, John
5.24. Coloss. 1.22, 23.

Q. How comes a People to be a Church, or what Ministry is necessary to put
them in Order, and make them meet to partake of Ordinances?

A. Christ and his holy Spirit, by the infallible Ministry of his Apostles and
Prophets, Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21, 22.

Q. You speak as if men might put themselves into a Church Order and
Fellowship, do you think they may or can do it warrantably?

A. No; I know it is impossible for men to make themselves an acceptable or a
holy Church, neither do men go about it of themselves when they are directed by
the holy Scriptures in this work; but they are without doubt upon the Apostles
and Prophets truly built, and Christ is the true cornerstone of the Building,
and the holy Spirit the Builder: But if any men should come and say, they are
Apostles, and should also work Miracles, yet ought we not to leave the holy
Scriptures one hairs breadth to follow them; the true Foundation is laid
already, and no man can lay any other, 1 Cor. 3.11. and we have Christ and his
Apostles indeed in the New Testament, Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. and Moses and the
Prophets in the Old, Luke 16.29, 31. all which are a full and perfect guide to
every good work, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

Q. Has not Christ appointed a continuing Ministry to feed and govern the
Church?

A. Yea; we are instructed what their work or office and their qualifications
must be, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.6, 7, 8, 9.

Q. But how shall men come by a power orderly to make or to be made Ministers
now since the apostasy, seeing there is not a succession of that true Ministry
to ordain as Christ left?

A. First, it is Christ and not men that makes Ministers; if we had now the
Churches the Apostles planted, and the Bishops they ordained, they could give
him no lawful power to minister the Gospel that Christ has not fitted for that
work by his Spirit; neither see I any reason to doubt of the lawfulness of his
exercise of a Ministry that Christ has fitted for that work: Gifts to men for
the Ministry, and gifts of Ministers to the Church, are both from him, Ephs.
4.7, 8, 11, 12. therefore his Ministers and his Churches must take heed to his
Word, which is a safe and sure guide to them in all cases. It is beyond doubt
that Churches may, and ought to elect or choose their Ministers, Acts 6. which
plainly shows that they are competent Judges of their fitness for the service
they are to undertake; and as for laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, I
can see no more but these two ends of it; One to seek the Lords blessing and
further assistance of the Spirit upon their Ministry, another end to manifest
their approbation of what Christ has done in fitting of them for that work;
and what they do, seems to me to be done as Servants for the Church, and not by
virtue of any power or authority that is placed in any Officer or company of
Ministers whatsoever, to give him lawful power to Officiate as a Minister of
Christ, that otherwise wanted a lawful authority so to do. My Reasons are,

First, I find hands laid on them that neither wanted an Office, nor a
sufficient Call to the exercise of it, upon their setting forth from the Church
to preach the Gospel abroad in the world, Acts, 12.3.

Secondly, I find that whose has gifts to Preach, may lawfully use them, 1
Pet. 4.10, 11. and yet this seems to be the greatest work of an Apostle of
Christ. Compare 1 Cor. 1.14, 17. with 9.16, 17. And I can find no warrant for
Churches or Ministers to commit a Pastoral charge to any man, but such an one
as is a known, apt, and able Preacher, 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1.9. which cannot well
be, except he be frequently found in the work of Preaching; and therefore my
judgment is, that the work of the Ministry is not bound to a Minister,
although a Minister be bound to his work, Acts 20.28.

Q. You said a little before, that Baptism belonged to such as believe and
repent: Let us understand what that Ordinance is, and wherein it will profit us?

A. It is a Burial in Water, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit;
to signify Death, Burial, and Resurrection, that as Christ died for us and
rose from the Grave, so we that believe shall rise by means of his Death to
inherit eternal life, and shall receive grace through his Death to kill sin,
and quicken us to walk in newness of life, 1 Cor. 15.29. Romans 6.3, 4.

Q. Since you say Believers shall rise to inherit eternal Life, shall no others
rise from the grave again?

A. Yea; although all shall not rise to glory, yet Christ having Redeemed them
from the Curse of the Law, it is impossible the Grave can detain them for ever;
but first or last both good and bad shall rise again, John 5.28, 29. 1 Cor.
15.21, 22.

Q. Do not all the dead, good and bad, rise at once?

A. No; the faithful rise to enjoy a glorious Kingdom with Christ a thousand
years, before the wicked world shall rise again, 1 These. 4.16. Rev. 20.3, 4, 5,
6. yet shall they at last rise to receive the sentence of condemnation, Dan.
12.2. John 5.29.

Q. What think you of the Spirit or Inward-man? Does that more excellent part
die with the Body, or what state is it in till the Resurrection?

A. What its enjoyments are, or in what place or places their Spirits remain, I
shall not say; and I would no man would say more in the case than he can
clearly prove, to raise fruitless contention; but this much is clear, That the
Spirits of men do live when the Body is dead, and are capable of enjoying more
communion with Christ than while they remained in the Body, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8, 9.
and 12.2, 3, 4. Phil. 1.21, 22, 23, 24. Mat. 10.28. Luke 9.30, 31. and what I
have seen urged to the contrary, wants strength and clearness; but Controversy
becomes not a Catechism.

Q. Is the Spirit taken out of the Body to the estate it shall for ever remain
in, as some think, and the Body never rise out of the dust again?

A. Although the forenamed Texts be full of authority, to prove, that that
very Body that dies, and is laid in the dust, shall rise again; yet I for a
further proof commend to consideration 1 Cor. 15. Job 19.25, 26, 27. These
places can admit of no other Interpretation.

Q. Will you speak to the Ordinance of Laying on of Hands, in what cases it is
appointed?

A. It seems to me to be appointed in several cases; First, for the blessing of
the Lord on Church Members for the gifts and increase of the Spirit, that they
may grow useful in and to the Body, the Church, Acts 8.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
and 19.2, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 12.14. and 1.12. And being reckoned among the
Principles, Heb. 6.1, 2. I cannot see but Principles of Religion must belong to
all that are Religious.

Q. But those Texts in the Acts speak of the gift of Tongues given by this
Ordinance; Is it to be practiced for that end?

A. Hands are to be laid on for what Gifts it pleases the Holy Spirit to give,
1 Cor. 12.11. for however it pleased the Lord to give those gifts that were
more than ordinary, in the use of it sometime in that day, yet it seems to be
more the design of the Lord, for the advancement of the Gospel in that day,
than the end of that Institution; and the Gift might exceed the expectation of
the Administrator, or the Receiver, its like, if we consider 2 Timothy 1.6, 7. 1
Cor. 12. and 14, Chapters. It can no more be proved that it was appointed for
such an end, than it can be proved that Preaching the Gospel was appointed for
that end; yet it pleased the Lord to appear as far in the one of those
Ordinances, as in the other of them, in that day, Acts 10.46. But if there be
any ground to expect those gifts that are more than ordinary in the use of any
means or duties incumbant upon us, it may rather be expected from Believing,
Repentance or Baptism, than from Laying on of Hands, Mark 16.17, 18. Acts 2.38.

Q. In what other cases is this Ordinance appointed?

A. In the setting apart Church Officers to their Ministry, for the further
assistance of the Holy Spirit, to supply them with help for the discharge of
their great work, Acts 6.6. 1 Timothy 4.14. as likewise for healing the sick, Mark
16.18. Acts 28.8, 9.

Q. But is it not appointed for Children likewise, that they may receive a
blessing from Christ?

A. I cannot say there is any appointment by way of command for it to them, if
our Lords example, Mat. 19.13, 14, 15. Mark 10.13, 14, 15, 16. be not a
sufficient warrant to his Ministers to bless in his Name, as his Ministers of
old did, Deuteronomy. 10.8. Numb. 6.23, to 27. There is no other warrant that I know
of; I shall therefore leave it to consideration.

Q. But is there not an Ordinance of Anointing appointed for the sick Members
of the Church?

A. Yea; and the manner directed, and precious Promises annexed to the upright
and faithful performance of that duty, Jam. 5.14, 15, 16.

Q. What is the right manner of receiving the Lords Supper?

A. The worst of men do acknowledge that the persons receiving must be
qualified with Faith and Repentance, thankfulness to God, and charity to men; I
need not prove that: Let not such men as confess that, rise up in judgment
against us: But what I shall say, is to the time, which is plainly signified to
be at night, after our own supper is lovingly eaten together; and therefore are
they reprehended, that are their own supper before their poor brethren came to
eat with them, 1 Cor. 11.21, 22, 23, 24, 25. and are commanded for aftertimes
not to do so, but to tarry one for another, verse. 33. there is no warrant from
Christ or his Apostles for any other season; but it is easy for good men to
learn of the Philistines to carry the Ark upon a Cart.

Q. You seem to speak as if nothing might be done, neither for matter nor
manner, but according to direction from the Lord.

A. It is true, it is my Faith; we are not wise enough to guide our selves, nor
any men by humane wisdom fit to guide us, and therefore we must not pin our
Faith upon any of their sleeves, nor follow them but as they follow Christ; the
written Word is the alone rule, Mat. 15.9. Deuteronomy. 12.32.

Q. But will this Rule hold good in all cases, temporal as well as spiritual,
buying and selling, governing and being governed?

A. I know not the case in which it will not hold, for the holy Scriptures are
able thoroughly to furnish a man for every good work, 2 Timothy 3.17. and a King is
bound by the express Law of God to have a Copy of the Law of God by him, so to
direct him in his whole duty, that he turn not from Gods Commandment, neither
to the right hand nor to the left, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20. and so likewise must
every inferior person know how to discharge his duty by the direction of the
same word, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Josh. 1.7, 8. for a man's obedience, where the Law of
Nature most binds him, is to be but in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. the which duties
can never be regularly performed but by the knowledge of the will of God, which
whosoever will attain, must acquaint himself with the Word of Truth, the holy
Scriptures, Psalm. 119.9. and 105.130.

Q. What is the duty of Prayer?

A. First, To ask according to the Will of God. Secondly, Take heed that you
have no iniquity in your hands, nor the love of it in your hearts; but see that
they be purged from all design of serving it, if you would be heard. Thirdly,
Be sure to go with a merciful forgiving heart. Fourthly, Pray frequently, and
cease not till an answer comes. Fifthly, Believe or rest upon the Almighties
grace, and compassion through Christ, for to hear and answer you, 1 John 5.14,
15. Isa. 1.15, 16, 17, 18. Psalm. 66.18. Mat. 6.12, 14, 15. 1 Timothy 2.8. Jam.
5.16. Luke 18.1, to 9. John 16.23, 24. Jam. 1.5, 6, 7.

Q. Who are to be cast out of the Church?

A. Obstinate and scandalous sinners, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.

Q. Are such to be received into the Church again or not?

A. Yes; they are to be received again with all love and tenderness, if they
repent, 2 Cor. 2.5, 6, 7, 8.

Q. What is Repentance?

A. It is an unfeigned turning from all ungodliness and unrighteousness, in all
things to please the Lord.

Q. Does not Repentance consist in great sorrow and humblings?

A. So much sorrow and humiliation is necessary as will bring our hearts to
search out the Will of God and do it; for that is the great end and use of
godly sorrow, to work the heart to that hatred of sin, and that watchfulness,
care, and sense of the evil of it, and danger of falling into it, that we may
be preserved from it for time to come, and have our hearts and ways brought
into a sincere obedience and conformity to the will of God.

Q. Will you now before you conclude, give your sense of God, and of his ways,
how we are to judge of him and them, according as was hinted in the beginning?
Make those things plain, for in those general terms all men will subscribe to
what you say.

A. My meaning is, That whatsoever the Scriptures do attribute to God, which
holds forth excellency and glory, as these, Power, Justice, Holiness, Wisdom,
Knowledge, Truth or Faithfulness, Sovereignty, Eternity, Infiniteness,
Omnipresence, Omnisciencie, or the like; they are to be understood to be so
perfectly the nature and being of God, or which is all one, they bear so
perfect an accord with his matchless being and goodness, that he can neither
decree nor act at any time contrary unto them; but what ever he decrees or
does, bears a perfect accord with these glorious Attributes altogether. But
when any thing is spoken of him which argues frailty, or imperfection, these
must be understood with great caution and restriction; as namely, Wrath,
Hatred, Repentance, or any passage that implies want of Knowledge, these
cannot be properly attributed to God at any time, but do or must refer, or be
referred to some works that God does, that have some circumstances at least in
them, either for matter or manner, which if done by man would argue evil,
weakness, or imperfection in him, but impossible it is that they can proceed
from imperfection in God.

Q. Do you call Repentance imperfection? is it not a fruit of grace and a good
work to Repent?

A. Although it be good and necessary for man to repent, yet it argues
imperfection in him; for if he had done nothing amiss, he need not nor ought
not to repent: but for the Lord, he can do nothing that is evil, and therefore
need not nor cannot repent, Genesis 18.25. Psalm. 5.4. Numb. 23.19. and any word
implying any such weakness in God, is spoken for our sakes, the Lord stooping
down to our infirmity, that we may the better understand him.

Q. What think you of Gods Decrees?

A. First, I believe them to be in Gods purpose determined according to his
infinite Wisdom and Counsel, before the world began, Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 9, 11. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. And secondly, I believe them to be as unalterable as God himself,
Psalm. 33.11. Mal. 3.6.

Q. Think you we may not go too far in searching into the Decrees of God?

A. Yea doubtless, if we go farther than the Scriptures have revealed his mind,
Deuteronomy. 29.29. But for his Decrees or Purposes, which are all one, of Election,
Reprobation, Salvation and Condemnation, these are parts of his Revealed
Counsel, and may be looked into, and must, if we must look into the Mysteries
of the Gospel; for certain it is, that he does nothing in time, nor says any
thing in his Word, but what bears a perfect accord with his eternal and
unchangable Decrees. The Promises of the Gospel do tell us who are Elected to
Salvation, and the Threatenings do likewise tell us who are Reprobated to
Destruction; for God does not Reprobate one sort of men and Threaten another,
nor Threaten one sort and Punish another.

Q. Who are elected to Salvation?

A. Those that in truth believe, and are truly sanctified by the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.

Q. Are persons chosen and made Believers, because they were chosen first? or
being found in a state of believing, are they, as such, chosen to Salvation?

A. I know no Text of Scripture that says that any are chosen any other ways
than they are in Christ, Believers, Saints, or Godly, or foreseen so to be, 1
Pet. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.4. Psalm. 4.3.

Q. But are not persons made Believers by grace? or has any man more than is
freely wrought in him by the Spirit of God?

A. No man is more or can be better than the Spirit of grace makes him; yet
does it not follow hence, that grace is conferred on any man partially or
irresistably, or that any unbelievers do want sufficient supplies of the Spirit
of Grace to enable them to believe, as has before been proved.

Q. Who are Reprobated to destruction?

A. Such as turn the Grace of God into wantonness, remaining in unbelief when
the truth is made known to them; resisting it for want of love to it; not
suffering Christ to dwell in their hearts by Faith, but treading on him through
the love of iniquity, Jude 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. Heb. 10.26, 27, 28, 29.
John 3.18, 19. These Texts with many others, do declare that such men are
reprobated, and for such causes only.

Q. But where the Spirit of grace is extended, it is able to cure the souls of
men of these sins and corruptions is it not, so that they shall not perish?

A. It is so, and it will and does cure them that receive him; but he neither
will nor does cure those that continue to resist him, as Reprobates do to their
own destruction, Genesis 6.3. 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. Acts 7.51.

Q. Is there any profit in the knowledge of the Doctrine of Election and
Reprobation?

A. Yea, great advantage; for he that continues in Christ by unfeigned
believing, is under the Promises of Election and Salvation, and cannot possibly
miss thereof, John 3.15, 16. Romans 8.1. John 15.24. Secondly, In a state of
unbelief and disobedience to the Gospel who ever is found, is under the
threatenings of Reprobation and condemnation, and cannot possibly miss thereof,
John 3.18, 19, 36. Coloss. 3.3, 5, 6. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. Now the knowledge of
this is a blessed means to encourage and quicken men to believing and holiness.

Q. Is not then the free grace of God the principal cause of Gods Election?

A. Yes; unquestionably the free grace and love of God is the original cause of
Redemption as well as of Election; and likewise of all the mercy the Sons of
men are made partakers of in one kind or other from first to last; for there is
nothing in the Creature that can be a cause to move God to be merciful, if his
own infinite compassions did not incline him to extend grace and favor to poor
finners; yet will he extend his mercies upon us, by such means, and upon such
terms as shall wholly agree with his own holy will and honor, Tit. 3.4, 5, 6,
7. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10.

Q. Is not the foundation of God sure? the Lord knows them that be his, and
so consequently them that are not his.

A. Yea it is beyond all doubt, that there is no counsel, thing, nor thought,
but it is perfectly fore-known to God; yet will it by no means follow, that his
foreknowledge of any thing is the cause wherefore it comes to pass, 1 Samuel
23.10, 11, 12, 13. Deuteronomy. 31.21.

Q. Will the Lord give grace to save such men as he fore-knoweth will abuse it
and perish?

A. Yea, and that to so great a degree as might well prevent their destruction,
2 Chronicles. 36.14, 15, 16. Isa. 5.2, 3, 4. Ezekiel. 33.10, 11. with many more Texts of
like import.

Q. Wherefore does the all-wise God do so, seeing he knows it will do them
no good?

A. For many reasons, but especially these two. First, his own rich mercy is,
and will, by this means be exalted so high, that they and all men shall one day
know, that his tender mercies would have prevented their ruin, Psalm. 145.9.
Ezekiel. 18.32. And secondly, That when they do come to perish, they may be
altogether left without excuse, Romans 2.15. John 15.22.

Q. Seeing these are the Counsels and VVayes of the most High, what concerns me
to believe and do, that I may be found in a state of acceptance before him?

A. It eminently and in the first place concerns thee, in all plainness of
heart, to search out the clear knowledge of his holy will in all things, and
firmly to believe the same; for such a sincere Faith will interest thee into a
state of acceptance with God, 1 Chronicles. 28.8, 9. Romans 4.3. Secondly, Live by
Faith, to bring forth the obedience thereof; and in this path thou can not
miss of Glory, 2 Cor. 5.7, 8, 9. Romans 16.26.

Q. Open this Life of Faith with clearness in some main and principal points,
for the safe direction of the soul in this path of peace and happiness.

A. Carry the Truths of God so upon thy heart, that thy whole conversation may
comport or agree with thy Faith; as for example, Consider God is in himself
good and faithful, and therefore all his words are so also: however carnal
sense may present them, yet are they of a most divine quality, Ps. 119.127,
128, 138, 140. All his Commandments are good, and given for our good, Deuteronomy.
10.13. Psalm. 119.165. And mind always, that every saying of his is most true,
Prove. 8.6, 7, 8. Therefore when he threatens sinners, he certainly intends
their destruction unless they take warning and repent; and upon such terms as
he has promised to be gracious, he will never disappoint the hopes of any man;
and when he directs us to the use of any means, he means to bless that
means, if we use it for our saving good; and when he calls us to come unto
him for any favor, he intends the bestowing of it upon us, if we come to him
for it: neither calls he us at any time to any work, but what he means to
assist us in the doing of; no nor yet to suffer for Him or his Truth, but with
an intention to afford us grace and strength to bear us up under them, as also
to sanctify them to us for good, and to deliver us in the best season.
Therefore if thou will live by Faith, lay up these and such like truths in thy
heart, to quicken thee to watch and pray, to resist sin and fly snares. And in
all thy godly endeavors, exercise Faith in and upon the rich Grace of God,
through the blood of Christ, for those supplies of grace which are needful to
mend thy heart and life daily. And if thou run this race humbly, faithfully and
diligently, thou may be as sure as thou art of thy being, to arrive at last
at that Haven of felicity and eternal peace, where no sin, temptation or sorrow
shall ever come to molest or trouble thee more: But if thou prize the pleasures
of sin, thy interest or credit with men, thy ease or peace in the world, so
high, as these things thou will not lose or hazard for Christ, or his Kingdom
and the righteousness thereof; then know that that Lake of fire and brimstone
will be thy portion at last, from whence there is no redemption; And from which
the good Lord deliver us, Amen.

FINIS.

