Sir HARRY VANE'S LAST SIGH FOR The Committee of Safety, Breathed forth in
Discourses and Conferences with the Right Honorable, VICE ADMIRAL LAWSON, On
the Seventeenth of December 1659. aboard the GREAT JAMES.

LONDON: Printed in the Year of our Lord. 1659.

Sir HARRY VANE'S last Sigh for the Committee of Safety, etc.
THe Committee of Safety, and the most Illustrious Council of Officers
assembled at Wallingford House, having received the sad and doleful news of
Lawsons Revolt from their depraved Designs, were now in a peck of Troubles:
Has he, quoth they, forsaken us in the midst of our adversities, and deserted
us in the most unfortunate Juncture of our Calamities? At this they sighed, and
looked demurely toward Heaven, yet not so, but that a man might perceive such a
kind of malice mixed therewith, as threatened God himself for not giving a
satisfactory answer to the demands of their late public and private Fasts.
From lamenting they fell to debating, and after they had turned over all the
leaves of their Imaginations, they could find but one Receipt to stop the
bleeding Wound of their almost perishing Interest: For to revive their dull and
drooping spirits, up steps Sir Harry Vane, who opening his mouth, thus bespake
the Congregation of Warlike Saints, Quoth he, I did not think, dear Brethren, I
profess I did not think our late Vice Admiral would have left us in the Suds
(God grant we may escape their scowring) I thought he had been a surer Card, I
thought we might have played with him securely, and that he would have proved a
Trump, yea a constant Van Trump unto us, even to the winning of our Game, but
it seems it proves otherwise, yet it may be that I may reclaim him for all
this; I am sure he ows much unto me, for when he was but an infant, and knew
nothing of mischief, I suckled him with the sweet milk of State Policy, I
brought him into employment, and taught him to climb the shaouds of Preferment,
and having nursed him to full maturity, placed him where he is, But Ahitophel
was mistaken, and therefore may now go set his house in order.
hoping that he would prove unto us the Instrument of our salvation; therefore
I will go speak with him, and put home his ingratitude to his heart, and if his
heart be not over hardened, I may perchance cause him to relent. Oh, quoth
Fleetwood, talk not of ingratitude, and then weeping more bitterly than St
Peter, my ingratitude, said he, has undone me, for I pulled out my Brother in
Law by the ears, for which I could now tear my flesh; what hopes have we to
find him other wise than ungrateful, that were so our selves? But Sir Harry
commending the oyliness of his tongue, and his Ulysses-like subtilty, prevailed
with them that he might make a trial of them both, and was forth with
commanded, without delay, to make the utmost proof of his skill in that their
time of distress. Now that he might not go alone, there were added to him Major
Saloway, in whom they imagined there was much Oratory, because he once dealt in
Raisons, and Mr. Thankful Owen, a Priest of a late Edition, one who having mist
the great Harvest wherein Marshal, Nigh, and Peter's reaped, is now come into
play, thinking to pick up the gleanings of Ephraim, whose business doubtless
was to urge Scripture, and with his Christen name to put the Vice Admiral in
mind of Sir Harry's former kindnesses; with these went along one Mr. Courtney,
famous for nothing, but that he was a chip of the same block. On the 17.
instant they went aboard the James, where they found the Vice Admiral not
alone, but having his Assistants with him, Colonel Okey, and Mr. Scot, one able
to encounter the subtilties of Sir Harry, well knowing every chink and cranny
of his brain. Then retreating into the great Cabin, they fell to work.

Vane. Vice Admiral, I am come.


Vice Admiral. I see you are come, but to what purpose I know not; had your
Lady come, I might have thought she had longed to eat some of our Ship-Beef.


Vane. I say Sir, I am come from the Committee of Safety.


Vice Admiral. No, but you are not; for you are come from the Committee of
Danger, or to speak more properly, you are come from the Committee in Danger.


Vane. They may thank you for it.


Vice Admiral. I know no reason I have given them to be so courteous: but I
have heard that there is craft in courtesy, which I believe is the reason that
you give me this visit.


Vane. It Is the good of the Commonwealth that draws me hither.


Vice Admiral. Truly I cannot believe it; for you yet bear about you the badge
of Kingship, and your Name still wears a Title received from Monarchy.


Vane. My wife will not let me leave it off, out of a resolution she has to dye
a Lady.


Vice Admiral. But to board your grand Design: What is your Errand hither? I
know you have seen a great Ship before; there was never a one launched, but you
were invited aboard, when you were a Commissioner of the Navy. You got sweetly
by that, Sir Harry.


Vane. And so may you get too, if you will be ruled by me.


Owen. Sir, you have put your hand to the Plough, and it is a great sin to draw
it back.


Vice Admiral. Sir, I am not to answer for that sin, let it light on the head
of your Major General Disborow.


Vane. But, Sir, will you not receive money? It Is the mark of a Saint not to
refuse it.


Vice Admiral. For what should I receive it? or who should give it me?


Vane. Honestly spoke, Sir Harry.
I, and my Faction will, so you engage to betray your Trust.


Vice Admiral. It Is fairly promised; but for ought I see, you have none, I will
not say, for your selves; but none to pay your small Army: and for us at Sea,
you can hardly allow us Biscuit. But would you then have me to betray my Trust,
Sir Harry?


Vane. Yes, for the good of the Public: and truly if you do not, I shall not
take you for a Saint; for gold will tempt a Saint.


Scot. Truly, Sir Harry, though you have an English Nose, yet you have got a
Roman Conscience.


Vice Admiral. But pray Sir Harry make good your Paradox.


Vane. That I shall, and with ease. You seem to be unwilling to take money to
betray your Trust; now I shall make it out that you may: for, those things we
call sins, are no sins, if he that commits them do direct his intention aright.
As for example: Should you take money of us, out of a malicious design to
betray your Trust, Excellent doctrine.
and be revenged upon those that employed you, then it were a sin: but your
intention being directed to your own advantage and profit, which is a good to
your self, and a thing which a man may lawfully seek after, this makes it cease
to be a crime. Thus an Incumbent may without any mortal sin, wish the death of
him that has a Pension out of his Living: And a Son may wish the death of his
Father, and rejoice when it happens; provided, it proceed only from a
consideration of the advantage which accrues to him thereby, and not out of any
personal hatred.


Scot. Truly Sir Harry I have writ many a Sermon in the Abbey, but never heard
this doctrine before now.


Vane. It may be so, Sir, but I have seen it practiced before now, and could
bring you the example of many professors to prove it.


Scot. I have heard you speak, Sir Harry, and the Vice Admiral may do what he
pleases; but if he would be persuaded by me, I should not advise him to run
into hell headlong.


Vane. Surely, Mr. Scot, I never feared any such place; and I thought you had
been so much a Statesman as not to have feared it neither.


Salmon. Verily, I am persuaded in my spirit, Mr. Lawson, that you ought to
obey the Present power, truly I have always obeyed the Present power, and I
hope shall as long as I live.


Owen. I thank the Lord I can be comformable to my Superiors, when they conform
to my interest, and therefore Mr. Vice Admiral, truly I would have you be
conformable to them, since they seek to be conformable to you. Certainly if you
will not own them, the Lord will own his own cause.


Courtney. With a tobaco pipein^ mouth
For my part, I think out Divisions do but give advantages to the common Enemy,
and therefore I would have you make an end of these differences.


Vice. Gentlemen, I see here you all speak me fair for your own Interest: it is
true, your Intelligencer General said, that your Interest would not lie, but he
is such a lying fellow himself, that I can neither believe him, nor you neither
for his sake. But now I take of Interest, pray tell me what your Interest is.


Vane. Our Interest is the good of the Nation.


Vice. So says Charles Stewart, but what reason have I to believe you more then
him?


Vane. It Is that we have fought for. No Kingship, and the Liberty of the
Subject.


Vice Admiral. What becomes then of the Privileges of Parliament?


Vane. My L. Lambert has taken them away, lest they should take away him: You
know his son was to marry Lamberts daughter, but we doubt the Match is spoiled,
and truly my Interest is so woven with his, that I cannot safely forsake him.


Vice Admiral. Why, then you are for a single Person?


Vane No! we will have Conservators joined with him.


Vice Admiral. Conservators! I understand not the word: and truly, Gentlemen, I
am clearly against a Government of Hard Names.


Vane. But the word may be explained; they are men elected to preserve the
peace of the Nation.


Vice Admiral. By what power?


Vane. By your Council of Officers, according to the Instrument of Government.


Vice Admiral. What is become of that Instrument?


Vane. We did light our Tobacco with it in the Council Chamger.


Vice Admiral. And would you be governed by a thing which you have so
contemptibly thrown away? Truly, Gentlemen, I see you would have something, but
know not what your selves: and therefore, as you may see in print, I do here
again declare positively, for the last Parliament, whose subversion you did,
and still do so laboriously intend.


Vane. That Is no Parliament, or, at most, but the Rump of a Parliament.


Vice Admiral. The better able to sit, Sir Harry.


Vane. But they will turn me out; and then people will cry, There goes the
Parliament Fart.


Scot. It Is very probable: and I wish that they could so turn you out, that you
might leave no stink behind.


Saloway. Truly, I wonder at you, Vice Admiral, that you should be for that
which all the people hate, The Rump of a Parliament.


Vice Admiral. Then it seems, good man of Plums, the people do not hate you at
all.


Saloway. Alas, We care not for their hatred: and would you but stick by us
with your Navy, then we should have an Army to quell them, and we might then
with as much ease ride upon the backs of the people, as on the backs of our
Horses. Besides, it is a sign that you are Episcopal, it being the attribute of
a Bishop to love Rumps.


Owen. I hope not so, Major; for I love Rumps and Kidneys too, and yet I am no
Bishop.


Vice Admiral. Truly, Major, I find neither of your Reasons to be
thorough-pac'd: for, as to the former, the Gentleman that spoke last, has
given you a sufficient answer: and as to the latter, give me leave to tell you,
it is an ill time to ride the people, for I perceive them to be in a very
skittish posture.


Sal. Really, Gentlemen, I think this difference might be easily reconciled:
For I see the Vice Admiral is for a Parliament; and if so, why may not another
Parliament serve his turn as well as this? therefore, say I, let us have a new
Parliament, and a free one, once more elected. For, to say truth, Vice Admiral,
should that Parliament sit which you stand for, we are utterly lost: And what
harm have we done you, that you should seek our confusion?


Owen. What think you of a Parliament of women? Truly Vice Admiral, I am
confident they would settle the Ministry, for I find them very respective to
me in particular.


Vice Admiral. Sir, you speak gravely, but not at all wisely.


Salmon. Certainly we might bound and confine the Election to such
qualifications, that neither you nor we might receive any prejudice by it. For
my part I am clearly against Swearers and Whoremongers.


Vane. And I am for no Cavaliers.


Courtney. Nor I for Adulterers.


Saloway. I am for no Papists.


Owen. I would have them all gifted men, and Praise-God Barebones.


Scot. You talk, Gentlemen, as if you were to choose a Parliament in the Kingdom
of Christ: for these Exceptions are not to be made on Earth, unless you, Master
Owen, can take sin out of the World. And as for Praise God Barebones, let us
have no more of them for they delivered up our Liberties before into the hands
of a single Person. But, I pray Gentlemen, why do ye speak against them whom
you call the Rump? What power have you to hinder them? Does not Sir Arthur
increase? and the Vice Admiral stand bravely to his Tackling for it? Then with
what impudent faces can you make these Proposals in the low ebb of your
condition? for my part, I think we are as wise as you, and as cunning as you,
and as good men as you, and therefore why we may not govern as well as you, I
know no reason?


Vane. Truly, Vice Admiral, this Gentleman has spoke well; but the Government
is now in our hands, and should there be another. Change, and that so suddenly,
what would our Neighbors, but accuse us for the most light and inconstant
Nation of the whole World.


Vice Admiral. In answer to this, I shall tell ye, that when you put them out,
it was force, but if they put you out, you ought in Christi^n piety to suffer
it: for you must do as you would be done unto. Now since you put the Change
upon them, you must not take it ill that they put the Change upon you.


Saloway. But this is not the way to settle the Nation.


Vice Admiral. And when do you think Lambert will settle it? Surely, he loves
himself too well, to settle the Nation before he settle himself; and when he
will do that, who can tell, since he must ask Monck leave before he can do it.
Or if he should settle it, who will secure us that Sir Harry Vane will not
trouble it again? I am sure none of his friends in New England, for they knew
him too well, and were glad they were rid of him.


Vane. Had I known you would have been at this lock, I would soon have spoiled
your troubling of us now.


Vice Admiral. But now it is past your skill and cunning, good Sir Harry.


Vane. The worse is my luck, and the better yours, Mr. Vice Admiral. But give
me leave, Sir, to tell you, You are not a little ungrateful.


Vice Admiral. Accuse not me, Sir Harry, are not you so, and does not all the
world know that your Father was so before you?


Vane. Is it then Resolved upon the Question, Mr. Vice Admiral?


Vice Admiral. It Is without Question, Sir Harry, and that so steadfastly, that I
am not to be moved by the most refined of your language.


Vane. Well! I have now been a Statesman this twenty years: And I have been the
Anak of many Factions, but I was never so deserted, as now, before: and by a
friend Vice Admiral? Et tu quoque Brute.


Scot. 'Twas time, Sir Harry, to call for assistance from the Sea, when you,
like a State-Phaeton, had put the Nation into such a flame.


Vane. Come, come, Mr. Scot, you know what belongs to Government, and you know
what a sweet thing it is to be in Authority, and how sour a thing it is to
leave it: and therefore you cannot blame me for endeavoring by all ways to
secure my self and interest.


Salmon. Really, Sir, we have had experience of your diligence, and give you
our hearty thanks; and shall justify the same to the Commissioners, who, no
doubt, will not be backward in rewarding your good service.


Vane. Well said, Tom Telltroth.
But were not I more concerned than you or they either, ye might go drive Hogs
all of ye, for me.


Vice Admiral. Come, this high-soaring spirit of yours must stoop. You that
walk upon the stilts of Ambition, will fall at one time or other: and truly, I
think, you had as good fall now as hereafter.


Sal. But Mr. Scot, I have done no harm, I hope you will let me keep my small
employment still; though if you will not, I thank my God, I have made so good
use of my time, that I can live without it.


Owen. Truly, Mr. Scot, I came only to give the Vice Admiral a visit;
therefore, I trust in the Lord, you will not put me out of my Living: Truly, I
will preach for you too, when you are in authority.


Saloway. I care not a pin for any of ye all, so you will let me have talk
enough for my life.


Vane. I scorn to beg; yet I believe I shall find a trick to keep my Head upon
my shoulders for all this.


Okey. If you do, Sir Harry, it is more than three parts of four in the Nation
desire to see.


The Debate being thus broke off, they returned to Wallingford-House; The
fruitlesness of the Journey was arrived at their ears before; so that when they
saw Sir Harry, they looked all as melancholy as Cars. Quoth he. I can do no
good. Then Fleetwood turning his face to the wall, lifted up his voice, and
wept. Then one stood up, and said, Let us seek the Lord by fasting and prayer.
But it was rejected, in regard that Fleetwood looked so thin, that if he should
fast one day more, his Soul and Body could not hold together. Whereupon they
fell to debate their Agreement, which is now in print: But whether they will
get such terms as they require, a little time will make known. However, the
people take the Parliament for wise men, and therefore they expect that they
should so deal with this Hydra, as not to let one head thereof spring up any
more, to violate their Privileges, or the Nations Rights.

FINIS.

