Sr. KENELME DIGBYES Honor Maintained. (...)y a most courageous Combat which
he fought with the Lord Mount le Ros, who by base and slanderous words reviled
our King. Also the true relation how he went to the King of France, who kindly
entreated him, and sent two hundred men to guard him so far as Flanders. And
now he is returned from Banishment, and to his eternal honor lives in England.



Printed at London for T. B. 1641.

SIR Kenelme Digbies Honor maintained.
FOrtitude is one of the eleven moral virtues, of which there be three sorts,
there is Fortitude or Valor, which consists of rashness, which is to run
wilfully upon danger, having no possibility to be a conqueror.

Then there is an enforced Valor, which is, when a man must either kill or be
killed.

Lastly, there is a temperate Valor, those men which are endued with this sort
of Valor, will neither give occasion to make abuse, neither will they take
abuse, but are ready at all points to defend their King, Country and their own
persons, which is the only true Valor; the other two sorts, though termed
so, yet are not, but rather seem to proceed from the loins of cowardice; for
to be truly valiant, is to be truly venturous, for as I said before, that
Fortitude is a virtue, and by virtue comes goodness, wherefore consequently to
be vailiant, is to be good.

Then let all admire the goodness of that most honorable Knight Sir Kenelme
Digby, which proceeded from his Valor, as I shall now declare.

It is scarce unknown to any how that he was exiled from his native soil
England, which made him oftentimes thus to cry out,

Hei mihi quod Domino non licet ire meo, woe is me, because it is unlawful for
me to see my Master (his King:) he kept his residence nigh to the Court of
France, where he was not less respected for the report of his former valor,
then for the present affability and courtesy which he showed to all men; Omni
solu^ sapienti patria est, to a wise man every country is to him as his own
native Country; but as the quietest of men sometimes have occasion for strife,
so did it fall out with this worthy Knight.

It was his chance to be envited by a Lord of France to dine with him, whither
he went accompained with those servants he had; very merry they all were for a
certain space, at l^ngth they fell to drinking of healths to certain Kings,
as to the King of France, the King of Spain, the King of Portugal, and diverse
others, but in the conclusion, the Lord which ^nvited Sir Kenelme Digby to
dinner, presumptuously began a health to the arrants coward in the world,
directing the cup unto Sir Kenelme, who asked the Lord so soon as he had
drunk whom that was he did so term, he bid him pledge the health and he
should know, which he did; then answered the French Lord, I meant your King of
England, at which the good Knight seemed very much discontent, knowing in what
nature his Sovereign was wronged, yet very wisely did he seem to pass it by
until dinner being ended, then did he desire the same Lord the next day to
come and dine with him, who promised him upon his honor that he would.

The next day Titan being in his greatest pomp, unto Sir Kenelmes lodging this
Lord came, who had entertainment befitting his place, neither did Sir Kenelme
seem to remember the former days discontent, but was very frolic and merry,
and in the midst of dinner time desired them all to be bare for he would
begin a health to the bravest King in the world; the French Lord asked whom
that was, Sir Kenelme made answer that when it had gone about he should know;
well, about it went, and then Sir Kenelme said that it was the health of the
bravest King in the world, which is the King of England my royal Master, for
although my body be banished from him, yet is my heart loyally linckt: the
French Lord at those words seemed to laugh, repeating the same words before
mentioned, then was Sir Kenelme thoroughly moved in the behalf of our
Sovereign King Charles, whereupon he whispered the Lord in the ear, telling
of him how that twice he had reviled the best King in the world in the hearing
of me which am his faithful subject, wherefore for satisfaction, I require a
single combat of you, where either you shall pay your life for your
sauciness, or I will sacrifice mine in the behalf of my King: The French Lord
being of a resolute spirit, condescended to fight, the place was appointed,
dinner being ended, they both arise from table and privately went together,
being in field, off they plucked their doublets, and out they drew their weapons.

Mars would have bashful been to have seen himself by Noble Digby there
excelled, long work with the contemptible French Lord, he would not make, for
fear lest any should lie in ambush and so he might hazard his own life,
wherefore in four bouts he ran his rapier into the French Lords breast till
it came out of his throat again, which so soon as he had done, away he fled
to the Court of France, and made all known to the King thereof, who said the
proudest Lord in France should not dare to revile his brother King.

A guard was pesently chosen to conduct Sir Kenelme unto Flanders, which they
did, where he took shipping for England, where he now is, where in peace and
quietness may he still remain.

As for the French Lord he was paid according to his desert, and may all be
so rewarded which shall dare to revile the Lords anointed, who suffers by other
Nations, for the clemency he has shown to his own Nation, Sed beati sunt
pacifici, but blessed is the peace maker; good King for thy patience in this
world there are Crowns of immortal glory laid in store for thee in the world
to come, there shall not traitors dare to show their faces, nor shall
perplexity proceed from the great care of ruling of a Kingdom, in the mean
while may more such Noble Digbies increase, to rebuke all cursing Achitophels,
and reviling Rabshakey's.

Let God arise and then shall the enemies of our gracious King be sure to be
scattered.

Now I conclude, commanding fame to show
Brave Digbi's worthy deed, that all may know
He loved his King, may all so loyal prove,
And like this Digby to their King show love.
FINIS.

