Epithalamium, OR Solomon's Song: Together with the Songs of Moses, EXODUS 15.
and DEUTERONOMY. 32. The Song of DEBORAH, Judges 5. The Song of HANNAH, 1 SAMUEL 2.
The Churches Song. Isa. 26.

Digested into a known and familiar Meeter, BY SAMUEL SLATER

LONDON, Printed by I. Moxon, for William Lugg^r, at the Postern by Tower Hill,
and Livewel Chapman, in Pope's Head Alley, 1653.

January 17th MDCLII.
Imprimatur,

JOSEPH CARYL,

To my dearly beloved Friends and Fellow Members, the Inhabitants of Katharines
Tower, and others, who are called to hold communion together in the Ordinances
of the Gospel.
IT is a disputing age wherein we live, abounds with Controversies; Religion in
the Practicals, yea in the Doctrinals and fundamentals of it, is by adversaries
loudly alarmed, and hotly charged; even that which in Paul's account was
beyond the line of Controversy, is yet at this day brought within the lists.
And if the foundations be undermined, it is no wonder that that which is
superstructory has strong Battery made against it. Such is the present
condition of the Ordinance and exercise of singing. Some endeavor the
invalidating of its authority, by Arguments framed against it: Others
discourage from the practice, by reproaches and scorns cast upon it, and upon
those helps which have been afforded for the managing of it; making no more
account of the composures of holy men of God, famous in their generations, then
of loose Poems, and profane Jigs. Let such take heed lest they be found under a
malignant influence, and acted by an Antichristian spirit, blaspheming God and
his Temple, his holy Institutions, and them that attend them. A Vindication of
this blessed Ordinance and exercise, has been made by M. Cotton of New
England, M. Manton, on Jam: the 5 th, and of very late days, by M. Ford of
Exon; who have all appeared in a Polemical way, and militated in this behalf:
And I do heartily wish there were better improvement made of such Provisions,
and that the Saints would not suffer themselves to fall under a suspension from
practicing Gospel Duties, merely upon this account, that they are questioned
and contradicted; that they would not fall off from them, because others fall
foul upon them. My business at present is, to promote the practice of that
which my self and others have so justly pleaded for. I engaged at first to deal
with Solomon's Song, that mysterious Marriage Song; moved thereunto by
considering the sutableness of it to Sacramental Communion. Having performed
that task, and communicated my papers to some of my Learned Brethren, they
persuaded me in like manner to deal with some other Scriptural Songs, and so
make them public. Accordingly I have digested the Songs of Moses, Exodus 15.
Deuteronomy. 32. The Song of Deborah, Judge. 5. The Song of Hannah, 1 Samuel 2. and the
Churches Song, Isa. 26. into a familiar Meeter; and in all, have endeavored to
keep as close as I possibly could, to the letter of the Bible. If what I have
done may be in the least to the honor of God, and your advantage, I have my
aim. It is the privilege that Christ our blessed Redeemer has purchased for
you, and others of his Saints that when his enemies shall weep and howl, you
and they shall sing and rejoice. It shall be my Prayer for you and them, that
when others shall lament and mourn for the destruction of Babylon, Rev. 18. you
may be counted worthy to stand on Mount Sion, and sing the Song of Moses, and
of the Lamb.

SAMUEL SLATER.

The Song of Solomon.
CHAP. I.


For why? thy love I do account better then wine to be.

As ointment poured out, therefore the Virgins do thee love.

Into his Chambers did the King conduct me, through his grace.
We will be glad, and joy in thee; remembering more then wine
Thy love: and as for Upright ones, their love is surely thine.

And comely; like as Kedar Tents, and Solomon's Curtains are.

Because the sun with scortching heat has looked upon me.
My mothers children angry were, and on me they did frown;
A Vineyard-keeper they me made: I did not keep mine own.

Where thou do feed, and make thy flocks to rest themselves at noon.
Alas my love, why should I be as one that turns aside
By flocks of thy companions, and so with them abide?

Beside the shepherds tents, thy kids thou may with safety feed.

To company of horses which in Pharaoh's Charets be.

With chains of finest gold also full comely is thy neck.

Borders of gold, and silver studs, which shall be for thy wear.

Then does my Spikenard send abroad the smell thereof full sweet.

And even so between my breasts lie all the night shall he.

As Camphire clusters, which within Engedi's vinyards grow.

Thy beauty in thine eyes appears, yea like Doves eyes they are.

Yea very pleasant for delight, also our bed is green.

The rafters also which it has, even they of Fir are made.
2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better then
wine.

3. Because of the favor of thy good ointments; Thy name is as ointment poured
forth; therefore do the Virgins love thee.

4. Draw me, we will run after thee; the King has brought me into his
chambers: We will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more
then wine, the upright love thee.

5. I am black, but comely (O ye daughters of Jerusalem) as the Tents of Kedar,
as the Curtains of Solomon.

6. Look not upon me because the Sun has looked upon me. My Mothers children
were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the vinyards, but mine own
vinyard have I not kept.

7. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, where thou make
thy flocks to rest at noon; for why should I be as one that turns aside by
the flocks of thy companions.

8. If thou know not (O thou fairest among women) go thy way forth by the
footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherds tents

9. I have compared thee (O my love) to a company of horses in Pharachs
Chariots.

10. Thy cheeks are comely with rows of jewels, thy neck with chains of gold.

11. We will make thee borders of gold, with studs of silver.

12. While the King sits at his Table, my Spikenard sends forth the smell
thereof.

13. A bundle of Myrrh is my well-beloved unto me; he shall ly all night
betwixt my breasts.

14. My beloved is unto me as a cluster of Camphire, in the vinyards of Engedi.

15. Behold, thou art fair my love, behold, thou art fair; thou have doves eyes.

16. Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea pleasant also our bed is green.

17. The beams of our house are Cedar, and our rafters of Fir.

CHAP. II.

Yea I likewise the Lilly am of Valleys, that are low.

Among the daughters so is she that is my love, my dear.

So is my love among the sons, excelling them in grace.
Under his shade with great delight I sat, and was refresht:
His fruit likewise I found to be most sweet unto my taste.

And there the banner of his love he over me did spread.

For I am sick, yea sick of love I find my self to be.

And by his right hand I am now most lovingly embraced.

Even by the Roes, and by the Hindes, of fields that are so large:
That ye take heed ye stir not up my love, who takes his ease;
And that you do not him awake until himself shall please.

Comes leaping, and upon the hills comes skipping toward me.

He looks through window, shows him self through lattess near at hand.

Thou that my love, and fair one art, arise, and come away.

The rain likewise which did descend, is ceased, and does not last.

Their time is come: within our land Vines the Turtle's voice we hear.

Do give good smell; arise my love, and come away, my fair.

Thou that in secret places of the stayrs, thy self do hide.
Thy countenance let me behold; thy voice eke let me hear:
For sweet and pleasant is thy voice, thy countenance is clear.

For that our vines have tender grapes whereof a spoil they make.

The place where he does please to feed, among the Lillies is.

Turn love, and be like Roe or Heart, on Bether mountains high.
1. I am the Rose Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys.

2. As the Lilly among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.

3. As the Apple Tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the
sons; I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet
to my taste.

4. He brought me to the banquettiag house, and his Banner over me was love.

5. Stay me with flaggons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love.

6. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.

7. I charge you (O ye Daughters of Jerusalem) by the Roes and by the Hinds of
the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he pleases.

8. The voice of my beloved, behold he comes leaping upon the mountains,
kipping upon the hills.

9. My beloved is like a Roe, or a young Heart, behold, he stands behind our
wall, showing himself through the lattess.

10. My beloved spoke, and said unto me, Rise up my love, my fair one, and come
away.

11. For lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone.

12. The flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come,
and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our land.

13. The Fig Tree puts forth her green figs, and the vines with the tender
grape give a good smell; Arise my love, my fair one, and come away.

14. O my Dove, that art in the clefts of the Rock, in the secret places of the
stayrs; let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely.

15. Take us the Foxes, the little foxes that spoil the vines, for our vines
have tender grapes.

16. My beloved is mine, and I am his, he feeds among the Lillies.

17. Until the day break, and the shaddows flee away; turn my beloved, and be
thou like a Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of Bether.

CHAP. III.

Him did I seek, and yet, alas! I sought, but did not find.

In streets, and in the broadest ways, there I my self will show.
Him will I seek, whom with my soul I love; he is my dear:
I sought, and when I had so done, yet did he not appear.

If they had seen, or could inform of my beloved dear.

But him I found my soul so loves, and then I held him fast,
And would not let him go, until I brought him for to see
My Mothers house, and chambers where she had conceived me.

I give you this in charge;
Even by the Roes, and by the Hinds of fields that are so large;
That ye take heed ye stir not up my love, who takes his ease;
And that you do not him awake until himself shall please.

Appearing like to pillars, that of smoke composed are;
Sweetly perfumed with costly myrrh with frankincense likewise,
And all the Powders Merchant men do make their merchandise?

And valiant men of Israel, do stand it round about.

With sword upon his thigh, because of terror in the night.

Made of the wood that in the mount of Lebanon does spring.

The bottom also which it had was made of gold most clear:
Of costly purple eke there was a covering made above
For daughters of Jerusalem, paved in midst with love.

King Solomon, who with his crown which appears in dignity.
Crowned I say with Crown, the he from his mother had
In day of spousals, and the day wherein his heart was glad.
1. By night on my bed, I sought him whom my soul loves; I sought him, but I
found him not.

2. I will rise now, and go about the City, in the streets, and in the broad
ways; I will seek him whom my soul loves: I sought him, but I found him not.

3. The Watchmen that go about the City, found me; to whom I said, saw ye him
whom my soul loves?

4. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul
loves; I held him and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my
Mothers House, and into the chamber of her that conceived me.

5. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hinds of
the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till he please.

6. Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness like pillars of smoke
perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?

7. Behold his bed which is Solomon's, threescore valiant men are about it, of
the valiant of Israel.

8. They all hold swords, being expert in war; every man has his sword upon
his thigh, because of fear in the night.

9. King Solomon made himself a Chariot of the wood of Lebanon.

10. He made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the
covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love for the
daughters of Jerusalem.

11. Go forth (O ye daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with the Crown
wherewith his mother crowned him, in the day of his Espousals, and in the day
of the gladness of his heart.

CHAP. IV.
BEhold my love, for thou art fair, lo thou art fair, my dear;
Thou have also Doves eyes, which do within thy locks appear.
Like to a flock of goats, which do on Gilead mountain feed,
And thence appear, so is the hair which is upon thy head.

Like flock of sheep that is even shorn, being washed, and made clear.
All which are fruitful and no less then twins they bear each one;
Among them all a barren sheep cannot be found, not one.

Thy temples in thy locks, like to piece of Pomgranate show.

A thousand Bucklers hang thereon, all shields of men of power.

Which are both twins, and likewise do among the lillies feed.

I Will get me to the mounts of Myrrh, and hill of Frankincense.

Thou art all fair, and not a spot there does in thee remain

My spouse: from top of Amana look with thine eyes and see.
Yea from the top of Shenir look, and Hermon hill likewise;
From Lions dens, and eke the mount of Leopards, cast thine eyes.

Yea, with one ey; one chain that does about thy neck appear.

Yea, how much better is thy love, then any wine can be?
And how much better is the smell (my spouse) which does arise
Out of thine ointments, then the smell of any kind of spice?

Honey and milk under thy tongue are found to have their place.
The smelling of the garments eke the which thou put on,
May well for sweetness be compared to smell of Lebanon.

My spouse a spring shut up and sealed even as a fountain clear.

Camphire, with spikenard, which are sweet are fruits that from thee flow.

All trees of Frankincense and myrrh, Aloes, and all chief spice.

Yea living streams also that do from Lebanon appear.

That by this means the spices which it bears, out may flow.
And now let my beloved come into his garden fair,
And eat his fruits, yea such as to his taste most pleasant are.
1. Behold thou art fair, my love, behold thou art fair; thou have Doves eyes
within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of Goats that appear from mount Gilead.

2. Thy Teeth are like a flock of sheep, that are even shorn, which came up
from the washing, whereof every one bear twins, and none is barren among them.

3. Thy lips are like a thread of Scarlet, and thy speech is comely, thy temples
are like a piece of a Pomgranate within thy locks.

4. Thy neck is like the Tower of David, builded for an Armory, whereon there
hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.

5. Thy two breasts are like two young Roes, that are twins, which feed among
the Lilies.

6. Until the day break, and the shaddows flee away; I will get me to the
mountains of myrrh, and to the hill of Frankincense.

7. Thou art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee.

8. Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon; look from the
top of Amana, from the rop of Shenir, and Hermon, from the Lions dens, from the
mountains of the Leopards.

9. Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse thou have ravished mine
heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.

10. How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse? how much better is thy love
then wine? and the smell of thine ointments then all spices.

11. Thy lips (O my spouse) drop as the honey comb, honey and milk are under
thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.

12. A garden enclosed is my sister, a spring shut up, a fountain sealed.

13. Thy plants are an Orchard of Pomgranates with pleasant fruits, Camphire
and Spikenard.

14. Spikenard and Saffron, Calamus and Cinnamon, with all trees of
Frankincense, Myrrh, and Aloes, with all the chief spices.

15. A fountain of gardens, a Well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon.

16. Awake, O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my garden, that the
spices thereof may flow out Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his
pleasant fruits.

CHAP. V.
INto my garden am I come my sister, spouse most dear;
And gathered the myrrh, and spice which it to me does bear.
Eaten I have my honey comb, and honey with delight:
Yea drunk my wine, and eke my milk since thou did me invite.
And now (O friends) that I have eat and likewise drunk, eat ye,
And drink yea drink abundantly, ye are beloved of me.

Is my Beloved's, yea he knocks who is to me most dear.
Open to me (says he) thou art my sister, and my love;
Thou art my undefiled one, thou art likewise my dove.
And why? for filled I am with dew that on my head does light;
My locks also bedewed are with droppings of the night.

My feet also which washed are, how shall I foul and stain?

My bowels then for him did move, yea they were troubled sore.

My fingers with sweet smelling myrrh on handles of the lock.

But my beloved had withdrawn, yea he was gone away.
My soul in me began to fail when my beloved spoke;
I sought, but could not find; I called, he would no answer make.

Did wound me: they that keep the walls my vail they took me fro.

Tell my beloved, I am sick of love, if ye him see.

Thou fairest one; what is he more then other loveds are?
Yea what is thy beloved more (do thou declare to us)
Then other well-beloveds are, that thus thou chargest us?

Compare him with ten thousand more the chiefest he will show.

Bushy, and black as Ravens, be the locks which he does wear.

Yea such as washed are with milk, most fitly set they are.

His lips also like lillies are, dropping sweet smelling myrrh.

His belly as bright Ivory, with Saphires underlaid.

Set upon sockers of fine gold, and so well underlaid.
His countenance like Lebanon excels, as Cedars tall.

Even such is my beloved one, such is my friend most dear;
O daughters of Jerusalem, of whom I now enquire.
1. I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse, I have gathered my myrrh
with my spice, I have eaten my honey comb with my honey, I have drunk my wine
with my milk; Eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly O beloved.

2. I sleep, but my heart waketh, it is the voice of my beloved, that knocks,
saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled; for my head is
filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.

3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how
shall I defile them?

4. My beloved put his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels were moved
for him.

5. I rose to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with myrrh, and my
fingers with sweet smelling myrrh, upon the handles of the lock.

6. I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone,
my soul failed when he spoke, I sought him, but I could not find him, I called
him, but he gave me no answer.

7. The watchmen that went about the City, found me, they smote me, they
wounded me, the keepers of the walls took away my vail from me.

8. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell
him, that I am sick of love.

9. What is thy beloved more then another beloved, (O thou fairest among
women,) what is thy beloved more then another beloved, that thou do so charge
us?

10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand.

11. His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushy, and black as a
Raven:

12. His eyes are as the eyes of Doves by the rivers of water, washed with milk,
and fitly set.

13. His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers, his lips like
lillies* dropping sweet myrrh.

14. His hands are as gold rings set with Beril, his belly is as bright as
Ivory overlaid with Saphires.

15. His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold, his
countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars.

16. His mouth is most sweet, yea he is a together lovely. This is my beloved,
and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.

CHAP. VI.
THis well-beloved that is thine, O whither is he gone?
Thou that of women do appear to be the fairest one:
Yea whither is he turned aside, that is thus loved of thee?
Tell us and as thou do him seek, so seek for him will we.

To feed in gardens, and withal to gather lillies there.

The place where he does please to feed, among the lillies is.

And beautiful, yea terrible as Troops that Banners bear.

Thy hair is as a flock of goats that come from Gilead-high.

Even like unto a flock of sheep, being washed and made clear.
All which are fruitful, and no less then twins they bear each one:
Among them all a barren sheep cannot be found, not one.

The temples of thy head, which do within thy locks appear.

Then fourscore concubines, besides the virgins numberless.

Her mother has, the choice she is of her that did her bear.
The daughters when they had her seen did bless her, yea also
The queens, and concubines, and they her praise abroad did show.

For fairness, like unto the moon, and as the sun, is clear.
Yea likewise terrible she is, and greatly to be dread,
As is an Army ord'red out, and has its Banners spread.

And see what fruit was to be found in valleys that are low.
Yea likewise I went down to see whether the vine did spring
And flourish where they grew* and eke Pomgranates buds did bring.

My soul made me like chariots of Aminadib that are.

Do thou O Shulamite return, that look on thee we may.
What will ye see in Shulamite, so called as ye hear?
As Armies two in company, even so she does appear.
1. Whither is thy beloved gone? (O thou fairest among women) whither is thy
beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee.

2. My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to seed in
the gardens, and to gather lillies.

3. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine; he feeds among the lillies.

4. Thou art beautiful (O my love) as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as
an army with banners.

5. Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me; thy hair is as a
flock of goats, that appear from Gilead.

6. Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing, whereof
every one bears twins, there is not one barren among them.

7. As a piece of a Pomgranate are thy temples within thy locks.

8. There are threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without
number.

9. My dove, my undefiled is but one; she is the only one of her mother, she is
the choice one of her that bare her: the daughters saw her and blessed her; yea
the Queens and the Concubines, and they praised her.

10. Who is she that looks forth as the morning? fair as the moon, clear as
the sun, and terrible as an Army with banners.

11. I went down into the garden of Nuts, to see the fruits of the Valley; and
to see whether the Vine flourished, and the Pomgranates budded.

12. Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of Aminadib.

13. Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return, that we may look upon thee:
What will ye see in the Shulamite? As it were the company of two Armies.

CHAP. VII.
O Thou that Princes daughter art how beautiful to see
Are even both thy feet, with shoes, the which upon them be?
The joints likewise even of thy thighs are like to jewels rare;
The work of cunning workman his hand does well prepare.

Thy Belly like an heap of wheat beset with lillies round.

To Roes that are both young, and twins, they very even are.

Like Heshbons fish-pools are thine eyes near to Bath-rabbim gate.
Thy Nose also is like unto the Tower that has place
Upon the mount of Lebanon, and does Damascus face.

Like purple is, in Galleries the king is held and staid.

Even for delights, O thou that art my love, my only dear.

Thy Breasts like clusters of fine grapes which on the Vine do grow.

And will take hold upon the boughs that thereupon do grow:
And now like clusters of the Vine, even so thy Breasts shall be,
And eke the smelling of thy Nose, like Apples of the tree.

Even like unto the choycest wine, for my beloved dear.
Such wine (I say) as goes down most sweetly* and does make
And cause the lips of them that are asleep, to move and speak.

And as for his desire, even that is also toward me.

Yea let us lodge in Villages, and there make our abode.

If that the Vine do flourish, and if tender grape there be.
Pomgranates also, whether they their buds put forth and show;
And there will I give out my loves, and them on thee bestow.

Both new and old, which (O my love) I have laid up for thee.
1. How beautiful are thy feet with shoes (O Princes daughter) the joints of
thy thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning workman.

2. Thy Navel is like a round goblet which wants not liquor; thy belly is
like an heap of wheat set about with lillies.

3. Thy two Breasts are like two young Roes that are twins.

4. Thy Neck is as a Tower of Ivory, thine eyes like the fish-pools in Heshbon,
by the gate of Bath-rabbim: Thy Nose is as the Tower of Lebanon, which looks
toward Damascus.

5. Thine head upon thee is like Carmel, and the hair of thine head like
purple, the King is held in the galleries*

6. How fair and how pleasant art thou O love for delights?

7. This thy stature is like to a Palm Tree, and thy breasts to clusters of
grapes.

8. I said I will go up to the Palm Tree, I will take hold of the boughs
thereof; now also thy Breasts shall be as clusters of the Vine, and the smell of
thy Nose like Apples,

9. And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine, for my beloved, that goes
down sweetly, causing the lips of them that are asleep to speak.

10. I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward me.

11. Come my beloved, let us go forth into the field, let us lodge in the
Villages.

12. Let us go up early to the Vinyards, let us see if the Vine flourish,
whether the tender grape appear, and the Pomegranates bud forth, there will I
give thee my loves.

13. The Mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of pleasant
fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved.

CHAP. VIII.
O That thou were to me as he that is my brother near;
As he that sucked has the breasts even of my Mother dear:
And when I should thee find without thou should be entertained
With kisses, yet I should not be despised, or disdained.

Unto my Mothers dwelling, who would duly me instruct:
Yea, I would cause thee for to drink within my Mothers house
Of wine that is well spiced, and of my Pomegranate juice.

And with his right hand eke he should me tenderly embrace.

I charge you that you stir not up, nor wake him till he please.

Leaning on her beloved one, and does upon him stay?
Under the Apple Tree I did brought thee raise, and also there
Thy mother brought thee forth, yea thee forth that did thee bear.

And as a seal upon thine arm, thus do thou with me deal;
For love is strong as death, as grave, cruel as jealousy.
The coals thereof are coals of fire, which flame most vehemently.

It cannot drowned be by floods, though they against it rise.
Although a man would give for love (that so it might be gained)
Even all the substance of his house, yet would it be disdained.

In day she shall be spoken for, and into mention come.

And if a door, with Cedar boards enclosed shall she be.

And then as one that favor found, so was I in his eyes.

The Vinyard he to keepers let, that they the same might dress:
A thousand pieces of silver, each of those keepers were
To bring, which did the vinyard keep for fruit which it did bear.

Before my face it does appear, I keep it in my sight.
A thousand thou O Solomon must have, as due to thee;
To them that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred there shall be.

Companions, hearken to thy voice; to hear it cause thou me.

Or a young Heart, which is upon the mount where spices grow.
1. O that thou were as my brother, that sucked the breasts of my Mother, When I
should find thee without, I would kiss thee, yet I should not be despised.

2. I would lead thee and bring thee into my Mothers house, who would instruct
me; I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my Pomgranate.

3. His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should embrace me

4. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up* nor awake my
love until he please.

5. (Who is this that comes up from the wilderness, leaning on her beloved?)
I raised thee up under the Apple Tree, there thy mother brought thee forth*
there she brought thee forth that bare thee.

6. Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm; for love is
strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are coals
of fire, which has a most vehement flame.

7. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the flood drown it: if a man
would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be
contemned,

8. We have a little sister, and she has no breasts, what shall we do for our
sister in the day she shall be spoken for?

9. If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver, and if she be
a door, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar.

10. I am a wall, and my breasts like Towers, then was I in his eyes as one that
found favor.

11. Solomon had a Vinyard at Baal Hamon, he let our the Vinyard unto keepers,
every one for the fruit thereof, was to bring a thousand pieces of silver.

12. My Vinyard which is mine, is before me; thou O Solomon must have a
thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred.

13. Thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy voice,
cause me to hear it.

14. Make haste my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe or to a young Heart upon
the mountains of spices.

The SONG Of MOSES.
EXODUS XV.
UNto the Lord I will sing praise, for he has gloriously
Tryumph'd the Horse and Rider he has thrown into the sea.

My God, for him I will prepare an habitation.
My fathers God, him will I then exalt and spread his fame:


His chosen captains he likewise in the red sea did drown.

Into the bottom of the sea, even like unto a stone.

Thy right hand (Lord) to pieces has dashed and destroyed thy foe.

Against thee yea thy wrath consumed (as stubble) has thy foes.

The waters which divided were, again together went.
The floods likewise did stand upright and as an heap appear:
And in the heart even of the sea, the depths congealed were.

And of the spoil which shall be found I will division make.
Upon them I will satisfy my lust, and it fulfill;
I will draw out my sword, my hand shall them destroy and kill.

And in the mighty waters they sank down like lumps of lead.

Who is there like to thee among the Gods? there is not one.
Glorious thou art in holiness, yea and in praises, thou
Art very fearful, and thou do abroad thy wonders show.

And then the earth did swallow up deemed thy foes, and them devour.

Guiding them by thy strength, unto thy holy dwelling place.

And such as dwell in Palestine, sorrow shall them possess.

On Moabs mighties, Canaans folk shall melt when this is told:

By greatness of thine arm and power as still as is a stone.
Until the people which are thine, O Lord, are passed over;
I say, until the folk which thou have purchased* pass over.

Even in the mountain which belongs dwell as heritage to thee.
The place O Lord, where thou will and where thy house shall stand,
The sanctuary which thou have established with thy hand.

With charets and with horsemen eke into the sea below.
The Lord then made the sea return* and over them to stand;
But Isreal's folk in midst of Sea did walk upon dry land.
1. I will sing unto the Lord, for he has tryumphed gloriously, the horse and
his rider has he thrown into the Sea.

2. The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation; he is my
God, and I will prepare him an habitation, My fathers God, and I will exalt him.

3. The Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his name.

4. Pharaohs chariots and his host has he cast into the sea, his chosen
captains also are drowned in the red sea.

5. The depths have covered them, they sank into the bottom as a stone.

6. Thy right hand O Lord, is become glorious in power, thy right hand O Lord,
has dashed to pieces the enemy.

7. And in the greatness of thine excellency thou have overthrown them that
rose up against thee, thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as
stubble.

8. And with the blast of thy nostrills the waters were gathered together, the
floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of
the Sea.

9. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; My
lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy
them.

10. Thou did blow with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sank as lead in
the mighty waters.

11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods? Who is like thee, glorious
in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?

12. Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.

13. Thou in thy mercy have led forth the people which thou have redeemed, thou
have guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation.

14. The people shall hear and be afraid* sorrow shall take hold on the
inhabitants of Palestina

15. Then the Dukes of Edom shall be amazed, the mighty men of Moab trembling
shall take hold upon them; all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.

16. Fear and dread shall fall upon them, by the greatness of thine arm they
shall be as still as a stone, till the people pass over which thou have
purchased.

17. Thou shall bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine
inheritance, in the place O Lord which thou have made for thee to dwell in, in
the Sanctuary O Lord which thy hands have established.

18. The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

19. For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots, and with his horsemen
into the Sea, and the Lord brought again the waters of the Sea upon them, but
the children of Israel went on dry land in the midst of the sea.

DEUTERONOMY. XXXII.
GIve ear to me, ye heavens high, and I will utter speech;
And hear O earth, attend unto the words my mouth shall teach.

As rain that is small, on tender herb, as showers upon the grass.

His name, who is the Lord, ascribe ye greatness to our God.

A God of truth, without all sin, yea yea just and right is he.

Is not his childrens spot, perverse and crooked ones they are.

A foolish people, and unwise, so ye your selves declare?
Is not the Lord thy father? yea and has he not thee bought?
Has he not made and stablish'd thee? Oh has he not thus wrought?

The many generations past, do ye likewise consider.
Ask thou thy father, and enquire, and he to thee will show;
Ask thou the Elders, they will tell, and thou by them shall know.

For heritage, and Adam's sons did likewise separate.
Then did he set the peoples bounds, within the same to dwell,
According to the number of the seed of Israel.

The lot of his inheritance, Jacob alone is he.

And in the houling wilderness, both desolate and wast.
He did him gently lead about instruction also gave;
And as the apple of his eye he did him keep and save.

Spreads forth her wings, does take and bear them on her wings along.

And as for other stranger god, with him there was not one.

Might eat of such increase as in the fields abroad should be:
Yea from the rock he made him suck honey, and thereon feed;
And likewise oil, which did from hard and flinty rock proceed.

Yea also fat of lambs and rams that were in Bashan bred.
On goats he fed, yea with the fat of kidneys of the wheat;
Yea and the pure blood o'th grape thou drankest with thy meat.

Even thou I say art waxen fat, and likewise art grown thick.
Covered with fat* then he forsook God which did him redeem,
The rock of his salvation he lightly did esteem.

And with abominations, they his anger made to smoke.

Yea unto Gods they did not know, their wicked heart was bent.
New gods (I say) whom they did serve newly come up they were;
They were such gods as formerly your fathers did not fear.

Yea thou forgotten have the God that formed thee to this state.

Because his sons and daughters eke provoked him so sore.

My face, and likewise I will see what end shall them betide.
For why, a generation of froward ones they be;
Yea they are children in whose hearts no faith at all I see.

To anger with their vanities, they did me much provoke:
I will them move to jealousy, their anger eke shall rise,
And be provoked by such as are no people, folk unwise.

Yea I will make it burn unto the deeps of hell below.
The earth with her increase it shall consume and waste away;
Foundations it shall set on fire whereon the mountains stay.

The arrows also of my wrath I will upon them spend.

Bitter destruction shall devour and eat them up like meat.
Yea I will send the teeth of beasts, wherewith they shall be crushed
Together, with the poison of the serpents of the dust.

Yongman, nor Virgin, sucking babe, nor him that has gray hair.

And cause that their remembrance should with men have any place

And adversary should himself strangely behave and bear;
And lest that they should speak and say our hand full high it is,
And lifted up; as for the Lord, he has not done all this.

For understanding there is none they in them for to be found.

To understand this thing, and would ponder their latter end.

To flight, except the Lord their rock had sold and shut them up.

Our enemies themselves, if they be judges, thus will say.

Yea grapes of gall, and bitter are the clusters which they yield.

Yea cruel venom of the Aspe, even such it is indeed.


Their foot shall slide even in due time the day that shall them waste
It is at hand, the things that shall come on them, do make haste.

His servants power is gone, and that shut up or left none be.

Where are their gods, their rock, in whom they trusted, and did stay?

They offered? let them rise, and for your safety now combine.

No God with me, I kill, I make alive, even I alone.
I wound, and I do heal again, and surely there is none
That can deliver from my hand, or rescue, no not one.

This word, and of my self do say, for ever do I live.

On judgment if my hand take hold, and thereunto be set:
Vengeance I render will on them mine enemies that are;
And eke they shall rewarded be, to me a hate that bear.

My sword also shall flesh devour, therewith it shall be fed.
The blood I say even of the slain, and them that captives be,
From the beginning of revenge upon the enemy.

Avenge his servants blood upon all them that do it spill.
Upon his adversaries he the vengeance just will send,
But to his land and people he his mercy will extend.
1. GIve ear O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear O earth the words of my
mouth:

2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the dew, as
the small rain upon the render herb, and as the flowers upon the grass.

3. Because I will publish the name of the Lord, a scribe ye greatness unto
our God.

4. He is the rock, his work is perfect; for all his ways are judgment, a God
of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he.

5. They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his children,
they are a perverse and crooked generation.

6. Do ye thus require the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? is not he thy
father that has bought thee? has he not made thee and established thee?

7. Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations; Ask thy
father, and he will show thee; thy Elders, and they will tell thee:

8. When the most high divided to the Nations their inheritance, when he
separated the sons of Adam, He set the bounds of the people according to the
number of the children of Israel.

9. For the Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.

10. He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness; he led
him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye;

11. As an Eagle stirs her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad
her wings, takes them, bears them on her wings.

12. So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange God with him.

13. He made him hide on the high places of the earth, that he might eat the
increase of the fields, and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil
out of the flinty rock.

14. Butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of Lambs, and Rams of the
breed of Bashan, and goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat, and thou did
drink the pure blood of the grape.

15. But Iesurun waxed fat and kicked; thou art waxed far, thou art grown
thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook God who made him, and
lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation.

16. They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abominations
provoked they him to anger.

17. They sacrificed to Devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew not, to new
gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not.

18. Of the rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and have forgotten God
that formed thee.

19. And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provoking of
his sons, and of his daughters.

20. And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end
shall be; for they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith.

21. They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not god, they have
provoked me to anger with their vanities; and I will move them to jealousy
with those which are not a people, I will provoke them to anger with a foolish
nation.

22. For a fire is kindled in my anger, and shall burn unto the lowest he, and
shall consume the earth with her increase* and set on fire the foundations of
the mountains.

23. I will heap mischiefs upon them, I will spend mine arrows upon them.

24. They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and with
bitter destruction, I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the
poison of serpents of the dust.

25. The sword without, and terror within shall destroy both the youngman and
the virgin, the suckling also, with the man of gray hairs.

26. I said I would scatter the^ into corners, I would make the remembrance of
them to cease from among men.

27. Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries
should behave themselves strangely, and lest they should say, our hand is high,
and the Lord has not done all this.

28. For they are a Nation void of counsel, neither is there any understanding
in them.

29. O that they were wise that they understood this that they would consider
their latter end.

30. How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight,
except their rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up?

31. For their rock is not as our rock, even our enemies themselves being
judges.

32. For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorah,
their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter.

33. Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of Aspes.

34. Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures?

35. To me belongs vengeance and recompense. Their foot shall slide in due
time, for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall com
upon them, make haste.

36. For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants,
when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left.

37. And he shall say, where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted?

38. Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their
drink offerings; let them rise up and help you, and be your protection.

39. See now that I, even I am he, and there is no god with me; I kill, and I
make alive; I wound, and I heal; neither is there any that can deliver out of
my hand.

40. For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.

41. If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment, I
will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me.

42. I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh,
and that with the blood of the slain, and of the captives, from the beginning
of revenges upon the enemy.

43. Rejoice O ye nations with his people, for he will avenge the blood of his
servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful
unto his land, and to his people.

The SONG of DEBORAH, JUDGES V.

When as the people of themselves did willing offer make.

Even I will praise the Lord, yea I and did to Isreal's God will sing.

The earth did tremble, heaven drop, the clouds did water yield.

Yea Sinai from before the Lord, the God of Israel.

The common paths were left, and men did travel in by-ways.

Till I arose, I Deborah, within a mother in Israel.

Among forty thousand Israelites was there a shield or spear?

Offer themselves among the flock, for this bless ye the Lord.

Ye also that in judgment sit, and by the way do walk.

Where they did draw their water, Gods righteous acts rehearse.
The acts performed for Villagers, in Israel that were;
Then shall the people of the Lord within the gates appear.

And to the uttering of a song do thou thy self betake.
Barak do thou also arise, and now perform thy part,
Lead captive thy captivity, Abinoams son that art.

That did remain, ore mighty ones to me the rule he gave.

Among thy people after thee O tribe of Benjamin.
And out of Machir governors came down, and likewise men
From Zebulun, that handle well the skilful writers pen.

Even Issachar and Barak too, with her they did appear.
Into the valley was he sent, yea sent on foot, but lo
Reubens divisions they did cause great thoughts of heart to grow.

Reubens divisions they did cause that great heart-searchings were

And why did Dan remain within his Ships that were at rode?
After continued on the shore, the sea was at his side,
And in his breaches he remained, yea there he did abide.

To run the hazard of their lives fought even in the open field.

And water of Megiddo: they no gain of money took.

Against the Captain Sisera in sight they did appear.

The river Kishon, thou my soul their strength has trodden down.

By prancings of their mighty ones, the prancings they did make.

Yea the inhabitants thereof, even bitterly curse ye.
Because they came not to the help the help even of the Lord,
Against the mighty, yea because they did not help afford.

Yea more then other women, in the tent shall blessed be.

She brought forth butter, which she did present in lordly dish.

And to the workmans hammer she her own right hand did set.
With hammer Sisera she smote, his head she did remove,
When she had pierced his temples, and through them the nail had drove.

He bowed, and fell, and when he bowed, he did ly down and die.

She looked through the lattess, and after this sort did cry.
Why is it that his Chariot is so long upon the way?
Why is it that his Charet wheels do make such long delay?

Yea even from her self also she did this answer take.

That every man has for his part a damsel, one or two.
To Sisera a prey, which is with diverse colors laid;
A prey of diverse colors, and of needle work is made;
I say of diverse colors, wrought with needle on each side,
Meet for the necks of them that take and do the spoil divide

O Lord, but as for those
That love him, be they like the sun when forth in might he goes.
2. PRaise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly
offered themselves.

3. Hear O ye kings, give ear O ye Princes, I, even I will sing unto the Lord,
I will sing praise to the Lord God of Israel.

4. Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field
of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped
water.

5. The mountains melted from before the Lord, even that Sinai from before the
Lord God of Israel

6. In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the high ways
were unoccupied, and the travelers walked through by-ways.

7. The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until that I
Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.

8. They chose new gods, then was war in the gates; was there a shield or spear
seen among forty thousand in Israel?

9. My heart is toward the governors of Israel, that offered themselves
willingly among the people; praise ye the Lord.

10. Speak ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and walk by
the way.

11. They that are delivered from the noise of Archers, in the places of
drawing water* there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord, even
the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his villages in Israel, then shall
the people of the Lord go down to the gates

12. Awake awake Deborah, awake, awake, utter a song; arise Barak, and lead thy
captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.

13. Then he made him that remains have dominion over the Nobles among the
people, the Lord made me have dominion over the mighty.

14. Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amaleck, after thee
Benjamin among thy people. Out of Machir came down governors, and out of
Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer.

15. And the Princes of Issachar were with Deborah, even Issachar, and also
Barak, he was sent on foot into the valley, for the divisions of Reuben there
were great thoughts of heart.

16. Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds to hear the bleatings of the flocks?
for the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart.

17. Gilead abode beyond Jordan, and why did Dan remain in ships? After
continued on the Seashore, and abode in his breaches.

18. Zebulun and Nephtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the
death in the high places of the field.

19. The kings came and fought, then sought the Kings of Canaan in Tanaach by
the waters of Megiddo, they took no gain of money.

20. They sought from heaven, the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.

21. The river of Kishon swept them away, the ancient river, the river Kishon;
O my soul, thou have trodden down strength.

22. Then were the horse-hoofs broken by the means of the prancings, the
prancings of their mighty ones.

23. Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help
of the Lord against the mighty.

24. Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite blessed above
women shall she be in the Tent.

25. He asked water, and she gave him milk, she brought forth butter in a
lordly dish:

26. She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmans hammer,
and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head, when she had
pierced and stricken through his temples;

27. At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down at her feet; he bowed, he fell;
where he bowed, there he fell down dead;

28. The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the
lattess; why is his Chariot so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his
Chariots?

29. Her wise Ladies answered her, yea she returned answer to her self;

30. Have they not sped? have they not divided the prey, to every man a damsel
or two? To Sisera a prey of diverse colors, a prey of diverse colors of
Needlework, of diverse colors of Needle work on both sides, meet for the necks
of them that take the spoil?

31. So let all thine enemies perish O Lord, but let them that love him be as
the sun when he goes forth in his might.

The SONG of HANNAH, I SAM. 2.
MY heart rejoices in the Lord, joyful in him am I.
Yea in the Lord my horn also exalted is on high.
Over mine enemies my mouth enlarged is likewise,
Because that my rejoicing does in thy salvation rise.

Beside thee; neither any rock like to our God, not one.

And arrogance, let it not out of your mouth proceed.
For why, the Lord he is a God of knowledge, and thereby
The actions which performed are, he does them weigh and try.

And they that stumbled, are with strength begirded round about.

And they that hungry were, have found their hunger for to cease.
So that to her are seven born, before that barren was,
And she that many children has, is now in feeble case.

He brings down unto the grave, and from the grave does take.

He brings low, and then his power in lifting up does show.

From off the dunghill, and among Princes he does him set.
That of the throne of glory, they might be by him possessed,
For pillars of the earth are Gods, the world on them does rest.

Be silent in the dark, because by strength shall none prevail.

Yea also out of heaven above, thunder on them shall he.
The Lord shall judge the earth, he shall give strength unto his king;
The horn of his anointed he to honor high shall bring.
1. MY heart rejoices in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the Lord; my mouth
is enlarged over mine enemies, because I rejoice in thy salvation.

2. There is none holy as the Lord, for there is none beside thee; neither is
there any rock like our God.

3. Talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not arrogance come out of your
mouth; for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed.

4. The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled, are girt
with strength.

5. They that were full, have hired out themselves for bread, and they that
were hungry, ceased; so that the barren has born seven, and she that has many
children, is waxen feeble.

6. The Lord kills, and makes alive; he brings down to the grave, and
brings up.

7. The Lord makes poor, and makes rich: he brings low, and lifts up.

8. He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the
dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit the throne of
glory; for the pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he has set the world
upon them.

9. He will keep the feet of his Saints, and the wicked shall be silent in
darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail;

10. The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces; out of heaven shall
he thunder upon them; the Lord shall judge the ends of the earth, and he shall
give strength unto his king, and exalt the horn of his Anointed.

The CHURCHES SONG, ISA. XXVI.
WE have a City which is strong God will for it ordain
Salvation, and therewith as walls and bulwarks it maintain.

the righteous Nation, which does keep the truth, and it embrace.

Whose mind is staid on thee, because on thee his trust does rest.

For in the Lord Jehovah, is such strength as lasts for aye.

Even to the ground, that lofty is, to dust he makes it bow.

Their feet to stand, the needy ones thereon their steps shall take.

The most upright, do straight the paths wherein the just do go.

Our souls desire is to thy name, remembrance eke of thee.

Yea with my spirit, for thee I will seek early, and enquire.
For when thy judgments in the earth themselves abroad do show,
The worlds inhabitants will then learn righteousness to know.

He will not set himself to learn and practice righteousness.
Even in the land of uprightness unjustly will he deal,
And not behold the Majesty the Lord does there reveal.

But yet they shall be made to see shame shall on them take hold;
Even for the envy which their minds against the people bear;
The fire even of thine enemies shall devour, and shall not spare.

For why, the works that are in us, even thou thy self have wrought.

But by thee; only of thy name the mention will we make.

Thou have them visited and stroy'd their memory fades likewise.

Thou have removed it far abroad, throughout the earth so wide.

They poured out a prayer, when they thy chast'ning hand did bear.

By reason of her pangs, so we have been (Lord) in thine eyes.

And that which is by us brought forth, is as it were the wind.
We have not wrought deliverance in earth, no none at all:
Inhabitants eke of the world, we have not made them fall.

Ye that do dwell even in the dust, do ye awake and sing.
For as the dew that falls upon the herbs, and does them spread,
So is thy dew, the earth also it shall cast out the dead.
1. WE have a strong City, Salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks.

2. Open ye the gates, that the righteous Nation which keeps the truth may
enter in.

3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee; because
he trusts in thee.

4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever* for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength.

5. For he brings down them that dwell on high, the lofty City he lays it
low, he laveth it low, even to the ground, he brings it even to the dust;

6. The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of
the needy:

7. The way of the just is uprightness, thou most upright do weigh the path
of the just.

8. Yea in the way of thy judgments O Lord, have we waited for thee, the
desire of our soul is to thy name, to the remembrance of thee.

9. With my soul have desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit within me
will I seek thee early; for when thy judgments are in the earth the inhabitants
of the world will learn righteousness.

10. Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness in
the land of uprightnes will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty
of the Lord.

11. Lord, when they hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see,
and be ashamed for their envy at the people, yea, the fire of thine enemies
shall devour them.

12. Lord, thou will ordain peace for us; for thou also have wrought al our
works in us.

13. O Lord our God, other lords besides thee have had dominion over us: but by
thee only will we make mention of thy name.

14. They are dead, they shall not live, they are deceased, they shall not
rise; therefore have thou visited and destroyed them, and made all their memory
to perish.

15. Thou have increased the nation, O Lord, thou have increased the Nation,
thou art glorified; thou had removed it far, unto all the ends of the earth.

16. Lord* in trouble have they visited thee; they poured out a prayer when thy
chastening was upon them.

17. Like as a woman with child, that draws ueer the time of her delivery, is
in pain, and cries out in her pangs, so have we been in thy sight, O Lord.

18. We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought
forth wind, we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth, neither have the
inhabitants of the world fallen.

19. Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise;
awake and sing ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and
the earth shall cast out the dead.

FINIS.

