THE PRACTICES OF PERSECVTORS: Delivered in a Sermon on the fourteenth Verse of
the foure-score six PSALM. BY Mr. ARCHIBALD SKELDIE.

The wicked in his pride does persecute the poor.

Psalm 10. verse 1. They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being
a Nation: that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.

Psalm 83.4. August. in Psalm. 39. Persequutio sive a leone, sive a dracone
nunquam cessat Ecclesiae, magis vero metuenda est quum fallit, quam quum saevit.

Printed by James Lindesay, Printer to the Universitie of EDINBURGH. 1645.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MAGISTRATES AND COUNCELLERS Of the most famous City of
EDINBVRGH. SIR JOHN SMITH LORD PROVEST. ANDREW SIMSON, ROBERT ATCHISON, JOHN
INGLISH, and GEORGE WALKER, Bailies. GEORGSVTIE Deane of Guild, and JOHN
FAIRHOLME Thesaurer: And to the whole Council of the flowrishing Town of
Edinburgh: Grace here, and Glory hereafter.
THere is a time to speak, and a time to keep silence, says the wise Preacher,
in the 3. of Ecclesiastes; the truth whereof, though it be acknowledged by all,
yet the fitness of the time of both, is greatly mistaken, by many: For there
are some that think it a time to speak, when they ought to keep silence, and
others think it a time to be silent, when they should speak. It is said in
History, that Guevara lib. 4. di. principe cap. 19.
Acaticus the Philosopher, while he feasted with his friends, being asked,
wherefore he keped silence, when others did speak, he answered, that it was no
less deficil to know when to speak, than to know how to speak. The Scripture
tells us that Herod and Pilate will have Christ to speak, when he thinks it
more expedient to keep silence: and the Disciples will have him to keep
silence, least the Pharisees should be offended, when he thinks it better to
speak freely, that their faults may be reproved. The Greek Retorician
admonished his friend well, Duo loquendi tempora constitue unum de rebus tibi
plane cognitis, alterum de ijs quae necessario sunt dicenda, in his enim solis
praestat silen tio oration in alijs verotacere satius est quam loqui Isocrates
Ad demonicum.
That he should appoint to himself two times of speaking, one of things whereof
he himself had perfect knowledge, and another of things which necessarily
should be spoken, for in such things speech is better than silence, and in all
other things it is better to be silent, than to speak.

One of the Roman writters relates of a Senator, Blosius, Quis Blosium
sceleratum putasset fuisse si tacuisset, quis non etsam sapientem, si pro
necessitate temporis loquutus esset. Valerius maximus lib 4 cap. 7.
That none would have thought him wicked, if he had holden his peace, and any
man would have thought him wise, if he had spoken according to the necessity
of the time.

If then the fittest time to speak be, when the things that are spoken are
needful to be spoken, then it is a fit time to speak when great danger is
threatened and grievous trouble apprehended: for by keeping silence great
skaith and damage may be sustained, and by seasonable speaking great profit
and commodity, may be reaped, and tymous remedy provided. This chiefly
belongs to faithful Pastors, who watch for the souls of people, for in the
time of threatened persecution they should speak to God by prayer, that his
people may be protected, and they should speak to the people by good
instruction, and sound direction, that they may know how to carry themselves in
the time of danger and affliction, for as king Iehosaphat first fervently
prayed to God, and then comfortably encouraged the people when they were
threatened with hostill invasion: So faithful Pastors must not look how their
speaking may offend, or silence may please the enemies of the Truth, and
oppressors of Gods people: But how much their seasonable speaking concerns
the honor of God, and the safety of his people, for whom they must speak to
God, by fervent prayer, Perpende quid dicturus es examina consule interiorem
veritate^ and sic profer ad exteriorem auditorem August in Psalm; 4
and to whom they must speak from God by the Oracles of his Word. And
therefore (most wise and worthy Councillors) as this is the practice of all
the faithful Pastors in this land, to speak to their people of such things as
concern the present state, and condition of the land: I thought it was my part
not to be deficient in so necessary a duty, especially seeing by divine
providence, I have occasion to preach in the most eminent City, though
unworthie to preach in the obscurest Corner of the Kingdom. Be it known
therefore to your Lo. that the occasion of the preaching of this Sermon, to
them that heard it, and the publishing of it, to such as shall read it, wherein
I have weakly described the cruel practices of the proud persecutors of Gods
people, the occasion whereof I say, was the late troubles that our Nation has
sustained by the violent invasion of our unnatural Countryman, whose pride
and ambition has so far miscarried him, that he has troubled the people of
God, and his own Contrymen, with bloody cruelty, and horrible oppression.
It is well known, that once he did take part with the people of God, against
their enemies, but now contrary to the oath which he swore in his Covenant, he
is combined against Gods people, with their open enemies, and shows himself
unmindefull of the love that he ought to his Country, Caedis adb^c cumulo
patriae per viscera vadit Lucan. lib. 7
through whose bowels he passes with continual slaughter. O quantum mututatus
ab illo hectore qui fuerat, so powerful is pride and ambition, to make a
wonderful change, and alteration in the hearts of men, from good to evil, and
from evil to worse, until the extremity thereof be such, as cannot longer be
suffered, but by divine justice, must needs be punished. And truly, the cruel
courses of this Cateline, are known to the world, but what his end shall be,
is best known to God: one thing we know from divine Truth, that the cries of
the Elect shall speedily be avenged. And as Augustine says Oppressio pauperis
vindictam evocat divinam mortem nocentis accelerat, aures divinas iugiter
inquietat August contra Faustum.
The oppressions of the poor calls for Gods vegeance, it hastneth the death
of the oppressor, and continually troubles the ears of the Lord.

Now I have taken the boldness to dedicate this first fruit of my weak labors
to your honorable protection for diverse reasons, first because there is no
Preacher that can have greater or nearer relation to any people then I have to
you, being the son of a Citizen borne in your City, bred up in your Schools
of learning, and by divine providence these 20. years employed in the work of
the Ministry amongst you: in how great weakness is known to God, and my self,
but with what willingness and readienesse it is known to you (my honorable
Patrons and the rest of my worthy Citizens. Secondly because as God of his
goodness has made this City the chiefest of this Nation, so has he been
pleased to furnish you the present Magistrates, and Councillors with wit, and
discretion, virtue, and piety, which the exigencie of this dangerous time
requires in such as are worthy of your places, and as the tree is known by the
fruits, so the eminency of these gifts shows forth it self in you by the
singular care that ye have to see the true Religion flourish in your City, to
charish learning in all kinds of professions of divine and humane literature:
and in a word your Citiznes ought to be thankful to God for your singular
diligence, in punishing of vice, and advancing of virtue. Seeing as the Roman
Orator could say, Nec domus nec respublica stare potest si in e^ nec recte
fact is praemia extent ulla nec supplicia peccatis. Cicero lib. 3. de natura.
deorum.
No house or commonwealth can long continue, where there is no reward
appointed for good works, or punishment for evil: And one of the Latin
Comicks could say, Oppidum si incolae sunt been morati, pulchre munitum arb^
tror Plaus. in pers^.
That he did think a City well guarded whose Citizens were endued with good
manners.

These then being the reasons of the didication of this first birth of my weak
labors which has come to the view of the world, to your honorable
protection. I humbly implore your favorable acceptance, for which I shall
never cease to pray to God for the health of your persons, the prospering of
your weighty affairs and the welfare of your flourishing City. And so shall
remain

Your Lo. humble servant in Christ, to the uttermost of my power, even until
death. Mr. Archibald Skeldie.

THE TABLE. HERE FOLLOWS THE SUM Of the purposes, which are set down in
order.
FOur things are to be handled in the explaining of the words. Page 2 Two sorts
of pride possess and miscarie the children of men. Page 3 This inward pride
has three branches. Page 3 Pride breaks outagainst God four manner of ways.
Page 7 Pride against men breaks out four manner of ways. Page 11 Proud
parsecutors arise against Gods Saints for three reasons. Page 17 The Saints of
God when they are threatened by their proud enemies, may boldly pray to God for
two reasons. Page 21 The Prophet mentions the assembling of his enemies for
two reasons: Page 24 Concerning our trusting in God, diverse things are to be
observed. Page 27 There is a twofold use to be remarked of the affembling of
David's enemies. Page 28 The Covenanters should lay three things to heart, when
they hear of the assembling of their enemies. Page 31 While we pray for the
Lords presence against our enemies, we must look to two things Page 34 The
enemies of the Saints are cruest in three respects. Page 35 When the enemies of
David seek after his soul, there are two things included. Page 38 The
consideration of the cruelty of David's enemies teaches as a two fold use. Page
40 We should avoid cruelty and study to mercy for four reasons Page 41 We
should pray to God to be delivered from our cruel enemies for two reasons. Page
45 The persecutors of the saints are said not to set God before them in a
threefold respect. Page 47 That a Christian may set God before him 4 things
are required. Page 51 To look to the will of God as the rule of our actions
includes 2 things. Page 51 There are three reasons wherefore a Christian
should always set God before him. Page 55
PSALM LXXXVI.
Verse 14. O God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent
men have sought after my soul; and have not set thee before them.


THe present condition and state of this our time, lets us see what need we
have to understand the meaning of these words, for our instruction and comfort:
For as the Prophet David, when he penned this Psalm, was persecuted by
powerful and malicious enemies, from whose rage and fury, he prays to God
for deliverance: So, we being threatened by the like hostile invasion, have need
to crave by humble supplication, the Lords gracious and favorable protection.

This Psalm is justly styled, A Prayer of David, with every petition whereof,
is joined a motive argument, to move the Lord to hear his prayer, and grant his
requests; And because the royal Prophet after his manner in the former verses,
has been mixing praise with prayer, he now subjoyneth two motive arguments,
to move the Lord to grant him, both the petitions which he has put up in the
former part, and is to put up in the latter part of this Psalm.

The first of those arguments, is taken from the consideration of the nature of
his enemies, against whom he prays: And the second; from the consideration of
the Nature of God, to whom he prays.

For amongst all things, betwixt which may be seen any kind of opposition,
there cannot any two things be found more contrary to other, than David's
persecutours, and David's Protector. His persecuters are cruel, proud, and
godless Atheists; His Protector is a Psalm. 86.15
merciful and pitiful God, slow to anger, and of great kindness and truth:
Which makes Jerome to say Divinitatis natura clemens est and pia and magis ad
in dulgontiam, quam ad vindictamprona. Hieronimus in Psalm. 118.
The divine Nature is gentle, and pitiful, more ready to pardon, than
revenge. And therefore the Prophet comparing the gracious Nature of God, with
the wicked nature of his enemies, he more earnestly imploreth, and more
confidently expects the Lords help and protection against the malicious rage
of his mighty enemies.

Now that we may enter upon the words of the Verse, Four things are to be
handled in the explaning of the words.
wherein the Prophet describes the nature of his enemies, both in respect of
their inward disposition, and outward conversation: There are four things to be
exponded in order, together with the uses that arise from the consideration of
them, first, How these proud men are said to arise against David's; For this the
Prophet uses as a motive argument to prevail with God, seeing he knows that
proud men are so hateful to God. Secondly, The enemies of David were not a
few, but a great number, that are said to assemble themselves: and so the
Prophet has the more need of the help of God. Thirdly, The enemies of David
were violent and cruel men, whose cruelty is manifested in seeking of his
soul; To which in the nixt verse is opponed, the pity and mercy of God, and
so this part of the argument is powerful to obtain the help of God.
Fourthly, The gross Atheism of the enemies of David, is expressed when he
says, They set not God before them: No wonder therefore that God cast them
behind him, as afterward shall be declared.

In the handling of the first point, Two sorts of pride possess and miscary
the children of men.
there are two things likewise considerable, first, how the enemies of David
are called proud men. And what sort of pride is this wherewith they were
possessed and miscarried? Secondly, What can be the reason wherefore the proud
enemies of David arise against him? And all other proud persecutors against the
Saints of God.

As for the first, there are two sorts of pride wherewith a great many of the
children of men are possessed and miscarried.

The first may be called an inward pride, because though it be known to God,
from whom Ierem. 16.17
no iniquity is hid, yet it is not known to men, except, Luke 26.45
when the mouth speaks of the abundance of the heart, for so the pride of the
Pharisees was often manifested. But so long as it is not outwardly expressed,
it is no wonder though it be not known to others: seeing it is hid from the man
that has it, for either he no more knows that pride rules in him, tha^ 2
Chro. 26.20.
Vzziah did know, that he was leprous, before he was violently taken from the
altar by the high priest: Or else, which is worse, he is so far from thinking
this pride to be vice, which is to be avoided, that he imagines it to be a
singular virtue, which is to be cherished: for this is one of the miseries to
which sinful men are subject in this world, Fallit enim vitium specie virtutis
and umbra. Iu ven. satyr. 14.
That they are deceived with vice, under the color of virtue.

Now we must consider that this inward pride has three branches, first, The
inward pride has 3. branches.
when men thinks either that they have the gifts and graces that they have
not, or at least, in a greater measure than indeed they have them. Galat. 6.3.
He that thinks himself something, while he is nothing, is deceived: For
as the empty vessels when they are touched, sounds loudest, and the barren
trees lift their branches highest: So where there is least worth, there is
usually a greatest conceit and opinion of worth: Hence it is that oftentimes
men are puffed up with a conceit of righteousness, though they be unrighteous,
as our Savior speaks of the Scribes and Pharisees, They are wise in their
own conceit, when their remediless folly is manifested to others; according to
the saying of Solomon, He that is wise in his own conceit, there is more hope
of a fool than of him. And in a word, they are puffed up with a conceit of
knowledge above other men, while they are replenished with gross ignorance of
things that are chiefly to be known, like the John 7.49
Pharisees that counted the people cursed that knew not the Law: yet they
themselves understood not the meaning of the Law: As we may read in the 23. of
Mattews Gospel, and therefore an Ancient said well, Nulla praesumptio
pernitiosior quam de propria iustitia aut scientia superbire. O superba
praesumptio! O prasumptucsa superbia! Augu. de verbis Domini.
No presumption is more hurtful, than to be proud of our own righteousness and
knowledge, O proud presumption! O presumptuous pride!

2. Men are inwardly proud, when (though they be gifted above others) they
acknowledge not their gifts to come from God, who ought to be praised for the
bestowing of them, and served in the use of them; they find the fruit, but see
not the tree from whence it falls, they see the water, but perceive not the
fountain from whence it flows; they find the gifts to be in themselves,
therefore they think them to be of themselves, and from themselves, for though
they have nothing, but what they have received, they boast, as though they had
not received. This makes them to ascribe the praise of the gifts to
themselves, and to think they may use them at their pleasure: They Habac. 1.16
sacrifice to their own net, and burn incense to their own yarne. As the
first pride was presumptuous, so this pride is sacrilegious, because it
depriveth God of the praise and glory that is due to his Majesty. And
therefore Gregory well observed, Qui bona accepta sibi arrogant, de bonis dei
contra Deu^ pugnant. Grego. in moralibus.
That he who afcribeth not to God the good things that he has received,
fights against the Lord with those good things that he has received from the
Lord.

3. Men are puffed up with inward pride, when, albeit they acknowledge they
have received gifts from God, and are daily craving benefits at his hand; yet
they are filled with such a conceit and opinion of their own merits ^s ^^at
they think they deserve whatsoever they have received, they think the Lord no
less oblidged to them, than they are to him. The old Pharisees though they
could purchase heaven by their own good works. Luke 18.18
Good Master, what good thing shall I do to inherit eternal life, and so they
needed not to be saved by the merits of another, who by their own merits could
save themselves. The proud hypocrites are angry when they are not regarded of
the Lord, as they thought they should have been. Isay 58.3
We have afflicted our souls, and thou has not seen it: greater pride than
all this is found in Papists. In the opinion of their merits of Congruitie,
Dignity, and Condignitie, and in the works of Supererogation, not remembering
what our Savior has enjoined his Disciples to say, Luke 17.10
That when they have done all they can do, they are unprofitable servants. For
albeit the basest man in the world may sometime, well deserve at the hands of
the greatest, and the worse man at the hands of the best, yet neither the
greatest, nor the best man in the world can deserve any good at the hand of
God, Lam. 3.22
whose mercy it is that he is not consumed, and a greater mercy, that by
Christ's merits he is brought to salvation: who by his own merits procures
nothing but endless condemnation. Therefore it was well acknowledged by
Origin, Vix mihi suadeo quod possit ullum opus esse quod ex debito dei
remunerationem deposcat cum etiam hoc ipsu^ quod agere aliquod possumus
velcogitare, vel proloqui, ipsius dono, and largitione faciamus. Ori gen in
cap. 4. ad Komanos.
I hardly can be assured that there can be any work that requires reward of
God according to debt: Seeing even that, that we are able to do any good, or
to think, or speak any good. we are enabled and furnished thereto by the gift
of God. Thus, much concerning the inward pride, which is not here understood
by the Prophet.

I now go on to speak of the outward, which justly may be so be called, not
because they that are miscarried with it, seem to be proud, and are not, as
sometime it falls out in counterfeit humility, when men seem to be humble,
and are most proud: for there is greatest pride in affected humility, which
made Socrates Dicebat Socrates Antistheni, per fissuram palij tui video in
ivanitatem tuam Eras. lib. 3. apopheg. 56.
the Philopher to say, That he saw the pride of Antisthenes through the hole
of his Mantle.

Absalom was never prouder than in his counterfeit humility and courtesy to
the people. And the pride of Caligula was well observed, when he would needs
serve his invited guests in proper person, which did not beseem the majesty
of a Prince, which makes Bernard to cry out, Gloriosa res humilitas qua ipsa
quoque superbia palliari se appetit ne vileseat. Bern. de gradibus humilitatis.
That humility must needs be a glorious thing, wherewith pride it self seeks
to be covered, least if it should be seen, it should be despised.

But it is called an outward pride, because though it be both bred and
cherished in the heart, yet it cannot so lurk, and contain it self there,
but now and then it breaks forth in the looks of the countenance, words of
the mouth, and works of the hand: so that albeit in respect of the inbiding of
it, it is inward and known to God: yet in respect of the out-breaking of it, it
becomes outward, and is made manifest to all people. Now this outward pride
either breaks out immediately against God, to his dishonor and offense, or
else against men, to their prejudice, by disgrace, Pride breaks out against
God four manner of ways.
or skaith, or hurt. Pride immediately against God breaks foorh four manner
of ways: First, by affecting equality with God. Secondly, by seeking to be
worshipped as God. Thirdly, by expressing a manifest contempt of God. Fourthly,
by opponing the will of man to the reveiled will of God.

First I say, When creatures affect equality with God, which is imposible to be
attained, seeing there is no proportion betwixt the infinite Creator, and the
finite creature: Betwixt the creature that has a beginning, and may have an
end, and God, which is without beginning, and can have no end. It is justly
supposed, that this was the sin wherefore Satan was thrown down from heaven
to hell, which made a learned Divine to say, Superbia in coelo nata est, sic
velut immemor qua via inde cecidit illuc postea redire non potuit. Hugo lib. de
anima.
Pride was bred in heaven, but being unmindfull what way it fell thence, it
never could return thither.

And truly that may be well applied to Satan, which in another sense is
applied to the king of Babylon, Isay 14.12, 13, 14.
How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer! son of the morning, and cut down
to the ground? Thou saidest in thine heart, I will ascend above the clouds, and
I will belike the most High.

This venom of pride did the old Serpent spew in our first parents, who would
needs be like God, and aspyring to a perfection whereof they were not capable,
they losed that perfection, whereof God had made them capable, as the Latin
proverb says, Camelus cornua quarens amisit aures. Erasm. in adagtis.
The Camel which seeking to have horns, did loss, his ears.

2 When creatures seeks to themselves the worship that is due to God: Satan
that was punished for his first pride has wonderfully been exercised in the
practice of this second for as Judges 9.5
Abimelech usurped the kingdom, which being offered, was refused by Gedion: So,
though the good angels Revel. 19.10 Revel. 22.9
justly refused worship, when it is offered, the wicked spirits do crave it,
though it be not offered: For in so doing, they think they greatly injure the
Majesty of God, with whom it was impossible to be equal. 1 Cor. 10.20.
The Apostle tells us, That the service that was done to the idols of the
Gentiles, was done to devils. And no wonder that Satan seek to be worshipped
of mortal men, when he durst be so malapert as to crave worship of Christ,
Matthew. 4.9
for which he promised him the kingdoms of the world. Satan likewise that
tempted our first parents to affect equality with God; has taught some of
their posterity to seek to be worshipped as God. History tells us of some
Kings and Emperors, that being unmindfull of their mortality, and humane
frailty, neither considering that they were but pieces of living clay, and as
crawling worms in the sight of their Maker, who though they were lifted above
many men, yet were not exalted above humanity, Psalm. 82.7
but behoved to die like men, and fall like the Princes. Yet I say, They durst
be so shameless and arrogant, as to crave to be worshipped, even while they yet
lived: which was done to Alexander the great, and Caligula the Emperor. Others
again were not desirous of this honor, till after their death, which was
given to the Roman Emperors after the civil wars Bella paeres superis
faciunt civiliae divos. Lucan. lib. 7
betwixt Caesar and Pompei. Others again, though they did not crave this
honor, yet refused it not, when it was offered, as the Scripture tells us of
Herod Agripa, of whose pride and plague we read in the 12. of the Acts of the
Apostles, for he was not like Paul and Barnabas, who though they did miracles,
would not be counted gods, and though he was trained up in the Jewish
religion, he was not so well mannered as Agesilaus the Spartane king, of whom
it is said, That when the Embasadours of Phasis, in the name of their Senate,
offered according to their manner, to make him a god: he asked them by way of
jest, If any of them could make themselves gods, for they that could not deifie
themselves, could much less deifie another.

3. Men are proud against God, when being ignorant of the excellency of God,
and the greatness of his power: they express their contempt of God, by
questioning his power, and charging him with weakness, as though they were
able to hinder him to do what he wills; and he were not able to hinder them
to do what they will. The Syrians blasphemously said, 1 Kings 20.23
That though the God of Israel prevailed in the mountains, he could not in the
valleys. And Senacherib would have Ezekias to know, Isay 36.15.
That his God in whom he trusted, was not able to deliver him out of his hands.

This pride proceeds of ignorance, for if those proud men did know the Lord,
as he is reveiled to his Saints, of whom it is said, Psalm. 76.1.
That the Lord is known in Judah, and his Name is great in Israel, then they
would acknowledge the Lord to be Almighty: Isaiah 36.15
With whom nothing is impossible, to whom nothing is difficill, Psalm. 76.1.
Seeing he can do exceeding abundantly, above all that we can ask or think.
Thence it is that Augustine says, Non enim ob aliud vocaetur omnipotens, nisi
quoniam quicquid vult potest, eiuc voluntas est plenissima potestas Aug lib. 21
de civitate dei. cap. 7.
God for no other reason is called Almighty, but because he can do what ever
he wills, and his will is most full power.

4. Rebellious sinners express their pride against God, when they oppon their
wicked will, to the reveiled will of God, so that albeit they know what God
wills them to do, they are so addicted to please themselves, that they will
do nothing to please the Lord, but make open profession of disobedience, and
rebellion: This was the pride of wicked Pharaoh, that said, Exodus 5.2.
He knew not the Lord, neither would he let his people go. Of this pride,
speaks Gregory, Cum omnia vitia Den^ fugiant, sola superbiase Deo opponit.
Gregin moralibus.
When all other vices flees from God, pride only opponeth it self to God. But
this is more clearly expressed by Augustine, when he says, Superbia est
quaedam praesumptio cum quis prasumit vel audet homo absque timore des facere
ea quae soit esse contra Deu^ creatorem viz peccare, nam superbia est initium
omnis peccati. Aug. in Ioannem.
Pride is a certain presumption, when any presumes, or when a man without the
fear of God, dare do these things, which he knows to be contrary to the
will of his Maker, to wit, to commit sin, for pride is the beginning of all sin.

Thus much concerning the outward pride, which immediately breaks out against
God. Now let us speak of it, as it breaks out to the prejudice and hurt of
men, in which sense it must needs here be taken, when men, whose hearts are
possessed with self love, and filled with a conceit and opinion of their own
incomparable worth, whereby either they think all others to be their
inferiors, or would have them to be their inferiors, none to be their equals,
much less their superiors. When men, I say, that are so disposed, strive as
they find occasion to perform in action, what they have conceived of
themselves, in their own conceit and opinion, that is, that according to their
power, they may make all others their inferiors: This outward pride breaks
out against men, four manner of ways.

First, By unequal estimating of injuries, Pride against men breaks out
four manner of ways.
which either they do to others, or suffer of others. Secondly, By exalting
themselves above others that are worthier than themselves. Thirdly, By cruel
oppression of others, either by fraud or violence. Fourthly, By their
disdainful carriage toward others, to whom they refused to do these duties,
which they are bound to perform.

First I say, in a most unequal estimating of wrongs and injuries, that they
do to others, and suffer of others; what ever be the nature of the wrong
wherewith they injure others, they count it so light, that they think there is
no cause of complaining: and say, That they need make little reparation, or
none at all: but when they are any way injured of others, whither the injury
be real, or supposed, they cannot find sufficient words to agredge the
greatness of it, they complain without measure of the grievousnesse of it, and
are so desirous to be avenged of it, that not a simple, but a sevenfold
reparation must satisfy their vindictive humor, and cruel affection, with
boasting Lamech in the fourth of Genesis. All the wrongs that proud men do, in
their account, are but motes, and feathers, but what they suffer, are talents
of leed, and greater than mountains. They have not learned of the heathen
Philosopher, to speak to themselves by the light of nature, Vide ne alteri
facias quod pati nolis, and alterius animum de tuo metiaris. Hierocles in carm.
Pythag.
See thou do not to another, what thou thy self would not suffer, and measure
another man's mind according to thine own mind.

Secondly, This pride breaks out, when the haughty spirits of unworthie men
sets them forward by unlawful means, to exalt themselves above others,
which are every way better, and more worthy than themselves, like 3 Ioh. 3.
Diotriphes, Which would have the pre-eminence, So Judges 9.2.
Abimelech dealt subtly with the Shechemites, that he might rule over them.
And Sheba 2 Samuel 20.1
taking occasion of the division of the people, caused a trumpet to be blown:
that he might be followed. Those haughty proud spirits never look what they
deserve, but what they desire, neither to the hability of gifts, wherewith God
has furnished them, but to the capacity, which they conceive in their own
imagination: they rest not content with the lot which Providence has disposed,
Cui placet alterius, sua nimirum est odio scrs. Horat. Epist. 34. lib. 1.
But are so well pleased with the lot of their neighbors, that they are
always discontent with their own.

Which lets them never cease from aspyring to eminency of place and dignity
above others, whereof, for the most part, they are altogether unworthy. Like
the Spiders that climb to the roof of the house, and Flies fash men by
fleeing about their faces: when the honey Bees bide in their skeps, and about
their flowers, until men enjoy the fruit of their labor: and like the Judges
9.15
Bramble accepting the kingdom, which was refused by the fruitful trees. So,
persons that are unworthy of place and preferment, are most desirous of honor
and preferment; and to this purpose ingyre themselves in the favor of men;
that by their means they may satisfy their pride in the attaining of their
desired honor: Whereas modest and worthy Christians, do patiently wait upon
the calling of divine Providence, to whatsoever place and station Gods wisdom
has appointed to bring them. This degree of pridethen is so much the more
considerable, because it may daily be observed in all ranks and conditions of
men whatsoever.

Thirdly, Man's pride breaks forth by unjust and cruel oppression of
innocent and peaceable men, whither by secret fraud, or open violence: For when
invie and ambition concur in the hearts of proud men, as they cannot with
patience endure the preferment of such whom they think unworthier than
themselves: So they cannot rest content, unless they possess the places of
others, that are in greater honor than themselves: albeit they may know them
to be more worthy: And because, they cannot win to this desired exaltation,
without the prejudice and hurt of others, they care not to climb to the top of
preferment by other men's ruin and fall, for as king 1 Samuel 20.31
Saul told Jonathan his son, That he should not reign, if David lived. So proud
men assure themselves, that they cannot rise, unless, others fall: nor live,
unless others die, nor prosper, except they perish: which makes ambitious
men neither to care what words they speak, nor works they do, to further
their ambitious designs, while they purpose to bear rule, and not to be
ruled, to command, and not to be subject. Hence it was well observed by a
learned man Ambitiosus non curat prodesse, glory. a tur praeesse, praesumit
esse meliorem quiae cernit se superiorem, grandia loquitur, sublimia cogitat
subesse non patitur praeesse molitur. Innocent. de vilit conditionis humanae
cap. 3
He that is ambitious, is not careful to profit others, but thinks it his
glory to be above others, he presumes that he is better, when he sees
himself superior, he speaks great things, he thinks high things, he
cannot endure to be subject, he devises how to be exalted.

For where this ambitious pride prevails in the hearts of men, it will easily
break all bonds assunder whatsomever, that possible might seem to restrain
it, proud Absalom breaks the very bonds of Nature, to compass his ambitious
design: he first, insinuates that his father is careless of the welfare of
the people, and then he conspireth the death of his father with a great number
of the people. Civil bonds has likewise been uncivily broken, for subjects
have risen against their princes, and so 2 King. 8.15
Hazael killed his master to reign in his stead: others likewise by pride and
ambition have been open enemies to their country, which nature teaches a man
to love, as Seneca says, Patriam quisque amat, non quia magna, sed quia sua,
Senec. Ep. 26.
Not because it is great, but because it is his own.

And yet those ambitious men have greatly troubled the peace of their country
for no other reason, but because they did see others preferred to themselves,
which God made more respected, and better beloved than them; whom therefore
they did hate so deadly that in seeking their ruin and destruction, they were
the Authors of great calamity that befell their country and Nation.

But then it is worthily to be remarked that such unnatural enemies of their
country have not escaped the hand of Divine Justice, but have been plagued
with visible judgments in the sight of the world, for either they have
perished with sudden and violent death, or by imprisonment, or banishment (a
just reward of their treachery, and barbarous enimitie) or they have been so
far from attaining their ambitious designs and projects, that while they
sought for honor and glory, they have incurred shame and ignominy, and while
they promised to themselves wealth and riches, they were plagued with poverty,
and finished their wretched lives in contempt and misery, that in them it may
be observed Quam parva temporis intervalla homines in excelso fastigio
collocant, and eosdem rursus ad extremam miseriam and calamitatem redigunt.
Platina in vita Pij secundi.
That as in a small space of time they have been advanced to the hight of
honor, in a short time likewise they have been redacted to extreme calamity
and misery. Many such examples we may read both in the Greek and Roman
history, in the Turks and Jewish history, some likewise in the Chronicles of
our neighbor Nation, and more in the Chronicles of our own Nation, where we
may read of some miscontented, and ambitious Noblemen, that were men of
greater power and wealth within this Kingdom, than many of our Noblemen, that
by pride and ambition, are become enemies to their Nation, for to the latter
sort can hardly be applied, what David spoke of Doeg, when he said, Psalm. 52.7
This is the man that trusted in the abundance of his riches. For I verily
think that the want of this, makes some of them so wilful as they are. But
those Noblemen of whom our history speaeth, though once they were men, of
great wealth, power, and honor, by reason of their Lineage and Kindred, yet so
soon as by raising of a seditious faction within the Country, or by joining
with the neighboring enemies out of the country, they became troublers of the
peace of their country, they did never afterward thrive nor prosper, their
wealth was impoverished, their persons were plagued, their houses were
ruinated, their honor laid in the dust, and their posterity so extirpate, that
their memory is perished. For since Nature has taught man, to love his
country better tha^ his life, and to count it Dulce and decorum est pro patria
mari. Publius mimus in sen tentiis.
a sweet and comely thing to die for his country: which made the noble
Athenian Themistocles, though he was unthankfully requited for his service done
to his country, and honorably entertained by the Persian king, the enemy of
his country, yet he choosed rather to die, than to further king Xerxes in a
course that tended to the ruin of his country. Upon the other part, I say
nature teaches a man to be greatly grieved if his country shall be troubled
by others, and more to detest and abhor that he should be the troubler
thereof himself, seeing all such unnatural monsters are detestable in the
sight of God: who as they procure the just curse and hatred of their people: so
they escape not the avenging hand of the righteous God, by whom their ambitious
designs are dissapointed, their honors turned unto shame, and while they
greedily desire the wealth of others, they lost that which peaceable they might
have enjoyed themselves.

4 This outward pride breaks forth, when albeit men that are proud, neither
seek superiority above others, neither affect equality with their superiors,
yet they carry themselves disdainfully toward such as they think their
inferiors, and refuse to do the duties that they are bound to perform to
their inferiors by Charity, to their equals by civilitie and humanity, and to
their superiors by loayltie. This kind of pride is most usually accompanied
with frowardness and contumacy, with wilfulness and obstinacy, such proud
men usually are more wilful, than wise, and lean more to their own wit, than
to the counsel of God and men, that might prove more profitable both to them
and to others.

It was this pride that moved churlish 1. Sam. 25.10.
Nabal to answer the servants of David so churlishly, and that made the Elders
of Succoth and Penuel Judges 8.6.
to refuse help and succor to Gedions army. This pride not only proves
hurtful to private men, who by their rashness and indiscretion provocke men to
anger and indignation, and to seek to be avenged of the contempt and injury
they think done to them. But it proves likewise more prejudicial to many,
Quicquid delirant reges plectuntar. achivi. Hor. Epist. 2. lib. 1.
When inferiors are punished for the fault of their superiors.

That is to say, when men are in place and authority in a country or city
they lean so much to their own wit, that they despise the counsel and advice
of others. not being like 2 King. 5.15.
Naaman that heard the advice of his servant, nor like the Elders of Sam. 20.20
Abel, that received the advice of a wise woman, but Sam. 20.20
rather think that their counsel should be followed of all, and they should be
counseled by none: by such wilful pride and proud wilfulness, many good
things are neglected which might profitably be done, and many evils ar
committed which after-wards proved hurtful, and might well have been avoided.

Thus much for the pride wherewith David's enemies were possessed. Proud
persecutors rise against Gods. Saints for 3. reasons.
Now let us consider wherefore David's proud enemies arise against him, and
what can be the reasons that move other proud persecutors to rise against the
Saints of God, the reasons are especially three.

First, Because proud men of all others are most like Satan, and are the
chiefest subjects of his kingdom. Secondly, Because proud men see some
excellency in the Saints of God which is not in themselves. Thirdly, Because
the saints of God cannot be moved to favor their wicked opinions, and follow
their lewd practices
First I say, because proud men of all others are most like Satan, and are the
chiefest subjects of his kingdom. For as the humble Saints are of all other
men most like God, because after their effectual calling, they are renewed to
his image, in holiness and righteousness, and as they only are the loyal
subjects of Jesus Christ, the King of Psalm. 149.2.
Sion in whom they rejoice: So seeing Satan is the first proud creature, and
the author of all pride, that is found in creatures, so the more proud that any
man be, he is the liker Satan the author of pride. Proud men likewise are
Satan's most loyal subjects Job 41.34.
For he is a king over the children of pride, to him they do most acceptable
service, being led captive at his will greatly pleasing him in the plotting
and performing of their proud and ambitious designs, whereby God is
dishonored, his people, troubled and the kingdom of Satan is enlarged. And
therefore, as Satan himself had rather tempt one of the Saints of God, then a
thousand others: so proud men that are the slaves of Satan, take pleasure to
trouble the Saints of God Psalm. 10.2.
The wicked with pride do persecute, the poor that is by mocking and
scoffing, by railing, and reproaching, and by hurting them in their stats and
bodies, as they find opportunity and occasion.

Secondly, Because proud men see some worth and excellency in the Saints of
God, which is not in themselves, by reason of some eminent grace, or gift
wherewith God has endued them, which not only becomes the object of their
invie, but likewise the spur of their pride, when they cannot endure that
another should have the good which they themselves want, and cannot win to,
and will rather Ierem. 11.9.
that the tree should perish with the fruit before it should stand to bear
fruit that is to say, They wish rather that the gifted men should perish, and
their gifts be lost, than that they should see the manifestation of Gods gift
in an other which they have not in themselves. So the powerful words, and
mighty works of Christ make him to be persecuted by the proud rulers of the
Jews least his fame should be the occasion of their ruin, John 11.49
and the Romans should come and take away their place and their Nation. The
proud enemies of David were his cruel persecutors, because they did see that
God was with him, that great things were to be done by him, and that great
honor was to be conferred upon him.

Thirdly, Because the Saints of God cannot be moved nor induced to favor the
opinions of proud men, and aprove their doings, and follow them in their wicked
practices and sinful courses, for proud men do either so presume of their
knowledge, wisdom, and understanding, that they think they cannot err, or
else they are so wilful that though they be convinced of their error, they
will not be reclaimed, sometimes likewise they are so violently set upon
sinful courses, that because they look for pleasure and profit in the
prosecuting of them, that either they think them to be lawful, and equitable,
or though they be convinced of their unlawfulness, yet they will stand to the
defense of them, and obstinatly maintain them as if they were most agreeably
to equity and reason, so that they become open enemies to all that will not
walk in them, or any way disalow them, For as men that go abroad in the world
and by reason of their employment have occasion to meet with people of diverse
humors they will sometimes meet with a sort of men, that if they can flatter
them, and please their humors, ratify their words, and approve their doings,
they will respect them as their brethren, and their dearest friends. But if
they shall find fault with their words, or censure their foolish carrage, then
they shall altogether abhor their company, and count them the basest fools
and idiots in the world. No wonder it is then, that proud men persecute the
Saints of God, that are so far from embracing their erroneous opinions, and
approving their wicked carriage and lewd conversation, that either they are
openly censuring, and reproving them, or else they altogether refuse to be of
one mind with them in their erroneus opinions, and to walk in one way with
them in their lewd and wicked courses. This is the reason of the persecution
that Protestants sustain by Papists, where they live together, and this is the
ground of this great combustion that is kindled in these kingdoms, for there
is no other reason wherefore the Malignants are so violently set against the
Covenanters, but because they cannot be of one mind, and opinion with them
concerning the matter of State and Religion, for that which the Malignants
think and profess to be a mean to propogate Religion, and settle the state of
the Kingdom, the Covenanters with better reason, affirm to be the subversion
of the state, and ruin of Religion.

Now before I come to the second thing considerable in this Text, there is an
use that I would gather from the former considerations, which is both for our
comfort and instruction, when proud persecutors which have great power and
authority amongst men, arise to trouble the peace of the Church of God, by
grievous oppression and persecution. Then the Saints of God may boldly have
recourse to God by earnest prayer in hope of a gracious deliverance from their
eminent danger, and that for two reasons. First, when they consider how
diversely the Lord is affected toward his Saints, and toward their
persecutors. Secondly, when they consider the event of the insultatio^ of their
persecutors. First I say, when they consider how diversely the Lord is affected
toward his humble Saints, The saints of God when they are threatened by their
proud enemies, may boldly pray to God for two reasons.
and toward their proud oppressors, for he takes the humble for his dearest
friends, and the proud for his rebellious enemies. Isaiah 66.2.
He is near to the humble, as a man is to the house where he dwells, Psalm.
25.9.
and a Master to the Scholar that he teaches. But though he be near to the
proud, in the inflicting of of his anger, he is far from them in the
manifestation of his favor. The Psalmist says, Psalm. 128.6.
That though the Lord, be high, he looks to the lowly, but he knows the proud
afar off. And therefore Augustine says, Humiliats Deus appropinquat, ab
exaltato long recedit, nisi quem ipse prius humiliatu^ exaltaverit. Aug. in
Ps. 50.
That the Lord draws near to him that is humbled, but he goes far away
from him that is exalted, except he be one whom the Lord has first humbled,
and afterward exalted.

The Lord multiplieth upon the humble his grace and his favor, 1 Pet. 5.6.
For when they humble themselves he promises to exalt them, and he exhorts
them to humble them selves, that he may exalt them: to him they may pray
confidently, Psalm 86.1.
under the sense of their needines and poverty. And therefore as Bernard says,
Magna virtus hum ili tatis, cui ipsa dei matestas se tam facile inclinat. Bern.
sermo 85. in canticum.
That great is the virtue of humility, to which the Lord so easily inclines
his Majesty. But as the Lord compasses the humble with his favor, so he
pursues the proud with his rath and displeasure. The Psalmist says, Psalm 86.1.
That he plentifully rewards the proud doer, for usually when he punishes
their pride, he abateth their power, and plagueth their persons. One of the
heathen could say, Superbos sequitur ultor a tergo Deus. Sen. in Her. furente.
That God the revenger follows proud men at the back: But the Scripture
tells us, That the righteous Lord stricketh them upon the face. Isaiah 5.15.
When he powers shame and contempt upon all that are haughty, Psalm. 18.27.
and casts down the countenance of them that look proudly. And the Prophet
Isay foretelling the destruction of Moab, He says, Isaiah 16.6
We have heard of the pride of Moab. And the saying of Solomon is worthy of
observation, That pride goes before a fall, and a high mind before
destruction.

Secondly, The Saints of God at such a time may confidently pray, when they
consider the nature and event of the insultation of the proud persecutors, how
hateful it is to God, how hurtful to themselves, whom for a time it pleases:
how comfortable in end it is to the Saints of God, to whom at first it seems
to be fearful and terrible; for when the proud oppressors of the Church of
God, have a purpose to trouble their peace by some grievous persecution, if
they see any likelihood or probability, that they can bring their purpose to
pass, then such is their untimous folly, that as the proverb says, They begin
to sing the triumph before the victory, and to sell the Bear skin, before the
Bear be slain: they threaten to execute what ever their malice can devise
against the Saints of God, as if their power were so strong, that they could
not be resisted, and their wisdom so deep, that it could not be
disappointed, and their purposes so sure, that they could not be overturned:
Now when they thus begin to insult by blaspheming, railing, and threatening,
then the Saints of God betake themselves to prayer, and cry, Acts 4.29.
Lord, behold their threatenings, this prayer so prevails with God, that he
makes a sudden change and alteration, for when the Saints of God are brought
lowest, and the pride of their enemies advanced highest, then it is time for
the Lord to work such a change, as both declares the glory of his mercy,
justice, and power: When like the nails of the wheel of Sesostris his
chariot, that which was highest in a moment, becomes lowest, and that that was
lowest, is advanced highest. Therefore we have reason to think, that in the
beginning of this combustion wherewith now these kingdoms are set on fire,
many of the Saints of God found matter of great comfort, and a wonderful
ground of hope, that the enemies of the cause of Christ should not prosper, and
the Covenanters should be comforted, and graciously delivered, when they did
hear of the untimous and foolish in sulting of their proud enemies, that did
promise victory to themselves, before they did fight, and were dividing Lands,
distributing offices, skaring Cities, and killing all that should make
opposition, before that either they were vanquished or invaded: for as it was a
presage of the Syrians overthrow, 2. Kings 20 11.
when putting on their Armor, they boasted as though they had put it off: and
as it was a presage of the ruin of Senacherib, and his army, when he boasted
so much of his power and victory.

And as our History tells us, that the hudge army of Edward the second of
England, was vanquished by a handful of our Nation, who so presumed of the
certainty of his victory, that before he entered the Country, he divided the
lands, and appointed the King and his Nobles to several torments, and brought
a Poet in his company to describe his victory, who afterward, being taken
amongst other captives, described in verse the victory of his enemies.

In later times we know how the army of the Spaniards was overthrown, that was
called, The invincible Armado. And truly the enemies of our Church and
Kingdom, may learn to know by their sorrowful experience, that such untimous
and proud insulting has been an evident presage of their just confusion, and
a manifest fore-token to the people of God, of their unspeakable comfort, and
gracious exaltation, for when the pride of the wicked, and the prayer of the
godly come together before the Lord, the one cries for speedy justice to
punish the wicked, and the other for timous mercy, Psalm. 32.10.
to compass such as put their confidence in God, as we may see in the pride
of Senacherib, and the prayer of Ezekias the 37. of the prophecy of Isaiah.
The Prophet mentions the assembling of his enemies for two reasons.


Now come we to the second thing considerable in the enemies of David, when he
says, that they assemble themselves together. The Prophet makes mention of
their assembling for two reasons: first for the glory of Gods power, secondly,
that he may declare his trust and confidence, which he had in God.

First I say, for the glory of Gods power, for the weaker that the defendant
party be, and the stronger that the assailing party be, the power of the
defender of the weaker against the stronger, is known to be the greater: the
Scripture tells us that king AchaZ. whose army was miserably foiled by the
king of Israel, was greatly affrayed, when he heard of the coming of the kings
of Syria and Israel, but then the power of the king of Ashur was greater, that
both defended Achaz and vanquished his enemies. History tells us that when
the city of Constantinople was hardly besieged by the hudge army of Bajacet
King of the Turks and the Greek Emperor could obtain no help at the hands of
Christian Princes that were at variance amongst themselves, he implored the
help of Tamberlane king of the Tartars, who forced the King of the Turks, to
raise his seige, and put his army to route, and took himself captive, and so
the power of the King of the Tartars, was known in delivering the weak
Emperor of Greece, from the puissant king of the Turks. The same way the
power of God Almighty is manifested, when his Saints and servants are brought
to extremity, that they can neither help themselves, nor have help of others,
against their many and mighty persecutors: he that manifested his power in 2.
Cor. 12.9
Paul's weakness in the hour of temptation, declares his power in the
protecting of his Saints in time of persecution. Praesidia sua non negabit Deus
suis in necessitato positis. Lyra. in Ps. 91.
For the Lord will not deny his safe guard to his Saints while they are
straited with necessity.

But graciously helps them, when they are redacted to greatest extremity:
remarkable is that example of Ezekias and his people; the army of the
Assyrians was known to be great, Ezekias was sensible of his weakness, that was
not unknown to his enemy, Isai. 33.5, 8
which told him that he had neither riders for horses, nor counsel for war,
but the power of God that protected EZekias was manifested, not only in
promising him security, but likewise in the performing of his safety in the
destruction of his enemy. EZekias that was so weak in the sight of
Senacherib, seemed foolish in holding out a walled city against him, but he
would have judged him mad, if he had hazarted to come in open field against
him, because he should have been like the unhappie young son of king Priamus.
Infaelix puer atqne impar con gressus Chilli. Virg. lib. 1, Aeneid.
Who would needs fight with valiant Achilles. Yet the power of God was
magnified, whose bridle was in the lips of Senacherib, that he could not
further go beyond his permission, than an horse can go but where his rider
pleases. The Church of God in the 83. Psalm, complains of the confederacy
of many enemies, who not only sought the wrack of Gods people, when they say,
Psalm. 38.4.
Let us root out Israel from being a Nation, but their pride breaks out
against the Lord himself, when they say, Psalm. 38.12
Let us take for our possession the Mansions of God: whose destruction the
Church craveth by humble prayer that God may be magnified in his glorious power.

Secondly, The Prophet mentions the assembling of his enemies, to declare his
trust and confidence in God, for the multitude of his enemies is so far from
chassing him from God, that it makes him to run the more to God, by earnest
prayer and settled confidence, who as by his power he is able to protect him,
so by his Psalm. 32.1.3
mercy he will compass him, that puts his trust and confidence in him, for
the Prophet well knew how powerfully this argument would prevail with God,
that he that is pursued by many enemies, and trusts in God, should be
protected by the power and mercy of God. Humanity will teach men not to forsake
nor betray, but rather to protect to the uttermost of their power, such as put
confidence in them, and commit their lives to their care. As it is said in the
History of Artaxerxes king of Persia, which set a Sparrow at liberty, which
fled to his bosom, and would not give it a prey to the Hawk, he uttered these
words in the audience of his Princes, As I have not delivered this Bird to be
a prey to its enemy, so will I never dedeceive, but protect the man that
trusts in me: Much more, I say, will the tender mercy of our gracious Lord,
move him graciously to protect Psalm. 53.1, 4
all those that put their trust under the shadow of his wings.

For the deep consideration, and comfortable application, whereof we have
diverse remarkable things set down in holy Scripture. Concerning our trusting
in God, diverse things are to be observed.


As first, that every one of Gods Saints should well observe what singular
experience they have found of Gods favorable protection, which makes David
not to be afraid of the multitude of his enemies, when he considers how he
has been delivered from the fury and rage of his enemies.

As Basil well explaineth his meaning in the 27. Psa. Quoniam tantum auxilij
divine experimentum accepi ut etiamsi duplo vel triplo plures hosts me obruere
conantur hac tamen spe munitus infracto animo obsiista^ malis. Basilius in
scoliis in Psalm. 26.
Because I have received so great experience, and proof of divine help that
albeit twice or thrice so many prease to overwhelme me, yet being guarded by
this hope, I will withstand all those evils with invincible courage.

Secondly. The Lord himself has exhorted his people to trust in him, with a
promise of security and safety. The 20 of the second of the Chronicles. Psalm.
34.23.
Trust in the Lord, and ye shall be established, believe his Prophets, and ye
shall prosper.

Thirdly, If we look to the experience of his Saints, it may be justly said,
Psalm. 22.5.
None of them that trust in him, shall be desolate, Psalm. 22.5.
because they were always delivered that trusted in him, and our fathers that
trusted in him, were not ashamed: And therefore we must not withdraw our
confidence from God, when we see no appearance of help at the hands of men; but
so much the more rely on him, with trust and confidence, whose relief comes
usually, when there is least appearance. It is our part that are Christians to
say as Euseb^^^ brings in Philo the Jew, speaking to his contrymen, when
Caligula the Emperor would not hear their petition, but commanded them to
avoid his presence. Bono animo esse debemus quibus iratus est Caius. Necesse
enim est adesse auxilium divinum, ubi cessat humanum Eusebius. Eccles. histor.
lib. 2. cap. 5.
We should be of good courage (said Philo) at whom Caius is angry, because of
necessity divine help will be present, when humane help cease. From the
consideration of the assembly of David's enemies, we are to remarke a twofold
use,

First, Here we may observe that albeit the enemies of David be proud, and by
reason of their pride and ambition, have their mutual dissentions and
emulations: yet they can combine themselves to be David's persecutors. There is
a two fold use to be remarked of the assembling of David's enemies.


This may seem the more strange and admirable, if we consider the nature of
proud men, in so far as they are proud, for they presume of their own worth,
and think all others to be base and contemptible, they presume of their own
wit, so that nothing in their estimation can be well spoken or done, but their
own words and their own works, or else what one way or other pleases their
humors, they so look to their own honor and wealth, that they care not for
the wrack and disgrace of others. It is a wonder then, that in any respect they
can assemble with others, that in these respects do separate themselves from
all others, and yet we see that though Pilate and Herod be mutual enemies they
can be friends when Christ is crucified. And though there be mutual hatred
betwixt the Pharisees and Sadduces they can conspire when Christ is persecuted.
There was no greater confusion at the building of the tower of Babel, nor is in
the Roman Church amongst their religious orders: yet all of them can conspire
against the profession and professors of the Truth.

The reason then of the combining of the proud persecutors of the Saints of
God, may be expressed in a plain comparison. A great king that is the
commander of diverse Countries, and Provinces, though those Countries differ in
their Languages, and in their manners, though some of them invie others
privileges, and contemn others baseness, yet being employed in a war against
the kings enemies, they can all make up the body of one Army, as if they were
Citizens of one City, we know that persecution is the work of Satan, the
king of pride: though it be performed by men that are the children of pride,
the persecution of the Saints is hatched in hell by Satan, before it be either
threatened, or executed by men upon earth. Revel. 12.15
This is the water that comes out of the mouth of the Dragon, to drown the
woman and her son; that is a fruit of the enimitie Genes. 3.15.
betwixt the seed of the serpent and the seed of the woman. The proud
persecutors of the Saints of God, are set a work by Satan, the king of the
children of pride, about one work, for one end, to destroy the kingdom of
Christ, albeit it be true, that wicked men, that have hand in the business,
have their own wordly devlish and diverse other respects, in the satisfying of
their wicked humors, ambition, cruelty, and covetousness.

But to bring the application nearer home, it may be questioned, How can it be
thought, that all the Malignant party, which persecute the Covenanters in
these Kingdoms, do service to Satan for one end, seeing many of them make
profession, that all they do, is for the propagation of true Religion? To this
I answer, that seeing there is a great assembly of diverse sorts of persons
against the professors and defenders of the truth in their kingdoms, that is to
say, Professed Papists and Malignant Protestants. Concerning the Papists, we
may justly say, They carry themselves more wisely in keeping of silence, than
if they should speak, for it is well known to God and their own consciences,
and to all that know them, that the maine end of all their doings, is to get
liberty to profess their own Religion, and to find opportunity to extirpate
the Protestant Religion. But the Malignant Protestants do carry themselves
more Antichristian like in the business, than the Papists themselves, for we
know that the name of Antichrist imports one that says, He is for Christ,
and yet does against Christ. so those men make profession, that all their care
is for the advancing of the true Religion, when in the mean time all their
courses and projects tend to the ruin of true Religion, and erecting of
idolatry and superstition. And as History relates of Didius Iulianus, who
succeeded Pertinax in the Roman Empire, which he attained not by the consent
of the Roman Senate, but bought it with money that he promised to the
Pretorian Soldiers, when this man after the custom of the Roman Emperors
would be styled the father of his Country, there was a writting set upon the
gate of his palace by night Didius Iulianus non pater patriae sed emptor,
venditor and proditor patriae mellificium histor.
Didius Iulianus is not the father of his Country, but the buyer and seller,
and betrayer of his Country.

So those Malignant Protestants who profess themselves to be furtherers of
Religion, and defenders of their Country, are by their lewd and wicked
practices declared to be enemies to the Truth, and traitors to their Country.
The Covena^ters should lay three things to heart when they hear of the
assembling of their enemies.


The second use which hereof arises when the Covenanters of Britain and
Ireland hear of the assembling of the Malignant enemies from diverse quarters:
there are three things which earnestly they should lay to heart, first they
should study by all means to keep peace amongst themselves. Secondly they
should hinder by all means the enemies which are in diverse places to come
together into one place. Thirdly they should entreat the Lord by prayer to be
present in the assemblies of his Saints, that so they may be protected against
the assemblies of their enemies. First I say, they should carefully study to
keep peace amongst themselves, that is to say, they should labor to be of one
mind in the matter of Religion, and in the exercise of the service and worship
of God, they should mutually defend one another, according to their Covenant,
they should remove all excuses from them, which may hinder them to advance the
Cause of Christ, none that has power should pretend weakness: nor that has
wealth should pretend poverty, but every zealous Christian should count it his
honor and happiness that God has furnished him with ability, and by his
providence offered him opportunity to honor Christ, and to advance his
Kingdom. Colos. 3.15
Christians that are called to peace in one body, should let the peace of God
rule in their hearts at all times, but especially when their peace is troubled
by cruel persecutors. Abraham thought it not time Genes. 13.8.
To discord with Lot in the land of the Amorites History tells us that
though the Athenians and Thebanes had their mutual jealousies, yet they packed
up all their dissentions, when they were invaded by Philip king of Macedone the
common enemy of the liberty of Greece. It is a lamentable matter Luke 16.8.
that the children of this world in their own generation should be wiser than
the children of light. At this time all the covenanted people of the Lord
should be careful to keep peace amongst themselves, partly when they consider
that usually distraction is a dolorous presage of destruction, as Eusebius in
his ecclesiasticke History observes that the dissension betwixt the Eastern
and the Western Church was the forerunner of the tenth persecution: and
partly, because union makes strength, but devision brings weakness.

There is no Nation under Heaven, has more reason to lay this to heart, then
we of this Kingdom. We read that when Antonius was vanquished by Augustus
Caesar, while he lay a dieing by his own deadly wounds he said to Cleopatra
Queen of Egypt, It is no shame for a Roman to be vanquished by a Roman: but
truly it is the misery and dishonor of this Kingdom, that SCOTLAND has
been so frequently vanquished by Scots, for our History tells us that the
most powerful foreign people that ever invaded this Kingdom, was never able
to vanquish this Nation without the combining of treacherous and miscontented
subjects amongst our selves. Of whom it may be said as the Greek Orator spoke
of the besieged Olynthians, Ibi alij hosts propulsabant, alij urbem prodebant
Demost thenet oratione. 3. Philippica.
That while some valiantly were repulsing the enemies, others were
treacherously betraying the City.

But if we be true to our selves, and keep that peace which we have sworn in
our Covenant, and is recommended to the disciples of Christ, we need the less
to care for all the enemies of the Cause of Christ.

Secondly, when the people of the Lord hear of the assembling of their
enemies, they should labor what in them lies, to hinder them that are in
several places to come together into one place. It was wisely done of the
Romans to fight with the army of Hazruball, before they joined with the army
of Hannibal for otherwise the later troubles of Italy had been greater than
the former. It is a great deal more safe to deal with the several parts of an
Army, than with the complete body of an Army, as the history of our Nation
tells, of one of our Noble men, who with eight thousand of our people, in the
time of Edward the first, King of England, vanquished in one day, thirty
thousand of the English Nation, that were divided in three bands, which would
have been more defieill, if all had been joined together. We know that as
many burns may make a great river: so many hands joined together, may make a
strong and powerful invasion: the smalest enemy is not to be contemned,
because his power may grow if he be altogether neglected and despised, as
Amorath the sixth king of the Turks, told his son Mahomet concerning
Scanderbeg, the prince of Epirus, who increassed in power, because he was
neglected and contemned. It was well said by a Greek writter, Qui hostem
spernit sibi periculum accersit. Thucidides. lib. 1.
That whosoever contemns his enemy, brings danger to himself.

Wise people should do with their combining enemies, as Christians should do
with sin, which in the beginning is to be resisted, lest afterward it grow
so strong, that it car not be resisted. It was worthily said by a learned man,
In rebus omnibus qui maximum malum vitare cupit, necesse est, ut malum exoriens
extinguat. Osor. lib. 4. de institutione Regis.
That in all things he that would avoid the greatest evil, must needs
extinguish the beginning of evil.

It greatly concerns the peace and present saftie of this Nation, to make
timous opposition to the armies of our enemies, before they be strengthened by a
greater faction as 2 Samuel 20.
Ioab pursued Sheba, the son of Bichri before he could gather a greater
company. And truly we have reason to bless the Lord for that singular care
and diligence that he has put in the hearts of our worthy Noblemen and
commanders, that are conservers of peace, that they have so timously opposed
the insulting enemy, that no sooner was his power increased, but als soon it
decreased: like 1 Kings 16 15.
the kingdom of Zimri that lasted for a week.

Thirdly, when we hear of the assembling of diverse people from diverse
quarters, our humble prayer should be to the Lord, Psalm. 89.7.
That he would be present in the assembly of his Saints, that so they may be
protected and defended against the assemblies of their cruel enemies. Romans
8.31.
If God be one our side, who is against us? Chro. 13.10.
Abijam was more encouraged that God was with his people, While we pray for
the Lords presence against our enemies, we must look to two things,
than he was afraid of the hudge number of Ieroboams army which were against
his people. But while we thus entreat the Lord by prayer, we must look well to
two things.

First, That we fear not excessively nor be faintheart, ed, when we are fewer
in number, seeing it is alike to the Lord 1 Samuel 14.6.
to vanquish by few as by many, according to the frequent passages that we
read of this purpose in the book of the Judges, and in the Books of the Kings.

Secondly, Though by Gods providence our number be greater, yet we must not
lean to the strength of man, but to the help and assistance of God: for
neither the greatness of number, nor the goodness of a cause for which they
fight, will make a people prevail aginst their enemies that has greater
confidence in their own strength than in the help of God.

I verily think that when Iehosaphat was threatened by his enemies, he could
have raised a greater Army nor all the kings that were his enemies, such a
number as I think all the Princes of Europe conbined, could not bring the like
number to the field, and yet he says, 2 Chro. 20.12
Lord we know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee: for as he knew
that he was threatened by his enemies, without the Lords approbation, so he knew
that though he had a greater number, he might be vanquished by the Lords
permission. 2 Chro. 20.12
Chariots and horses may run to the battle, but the Lord of hosts gives
victory, wherefore he imploreth the help of the Lord and puts his trust and
confidence in him, by whose only asistance and power the greatest number may be
vanquished, as well as the least, and without whose help and asistance, the
greatest number may be vanquished by the least. But if we shall find access
to God by prayer, then whenever we are threatened by our enemies, we may look
for protection and deliverance, according to the observation of David. Psalm.
56.9.
When I cry then mine enemies shall be turned back, this I know, for God is
for me.

Now let us speak of the third thing considerable in the enemies of David, The
enemies of the Saints are cruel in three respects.
he calls them violent and cruel men that seek after his soul, where we
are to observe, that the enemies of Gods Saints and servants may well be called
violent and cruel, and that in three respects: first in respect of their
affection, secondly in respect of their words, thirdly in respect of their
actions.

First I say, in respect of their affection, for the hatred they bear to the
Saints of God, as it is unjust in respect of the ground of it, and deadly in
respect of the project, so it is irreconciliable in respect of the continuance
of it. First I say, it is unjust in respect of the ground of it, for they hate
the Saints of God for the excellent graces which they see in them. 1 Ioh. 3.12.
Cain slew his brother Abell, because his own works were evil and his brothers
good, and therefore one said well, Si non esset claritudo sanctorum, non
surgeret invidia impiorum. Lyra. cap. 4. Epist. 1 Joan.
If the brightness of the Saints did not shine, the invie of the wicked should
not arise against them.

Next, it is deadly, in respect of the project of it, for wicked men desire the
utter ruin of the Saints of God, and that not of a certain number, but of all
the godly without exception, for as the cruel Emperor Caligula wished that
all the Romans had but one head, that he might strik it aff at one blow: So the
desire of the wicked is, that the Saints of God might perish from the earth.
The confederate Nations Psalm. 83.4.
will have Israel to be rooted out of memory, that they be not a nation. Haman
will have all the Jews to perish in one day: Dioclesian, and Julian the apostate
had a purpose to root out the name of Christians from under heaven. Lastly
their hatred is irreconciliable in respect of continuance, Cain will not be
reconciled to his brother, albeit the Lord offer himself to take up the
matter. Genesis 4.6.
Esau lays up in his heart the hatred of his brother, until the death of his
father. For this Genesis 27.4.
cause they are called not only enemies but likewise foes, Psalm. 27.2.
because their enimitie is altogether implacable, and their seed, like that of
Amalecke, is irreconciliable.

Secondly, They are violent and cruel, in respect of their words, whereby
sometimes they express how they despise and contemn the Saints of God, as
Nabal spoke of David. Sometimes they threaten to execute the extremity of their
rage, and fury, as did Senacherib against Ezohia: and sometimes they burden
the Saints of God with calumnies, and reproaches, as Shimei railed against
David. In all which respects, they are said, Psalm. 27.12.
To speak cruelly, and their words are compared Psalm. 120.3.
to a great scourge, Psalm. 58.3.
and to sharp arrows, to burning coals, and to the venom of Aspes, for as
any of these things can griveously hurt man's body: so the cruel words of
violent men do greatly grieve and afflict the hearts of the Saints of God.

Thirdly, They are called cruel and violent, in respect of action, and so
their cruelty is best seen by some, and felt by others: for when they are
permitted by the Lord, to afflict his Saints, they express all manner of
cruelty that can be devised, or executed, without regard of sex, or age, or
quality of persons. Therefore it is that in holy Scripture they are called 2
Thessa. 1.6
Troublers, Oppressors, Psalm. 10.18.
Persecutors. Ioh. 15.20.
Troublers, because they suffer not the Saints of God to live in peace and
quietness, but frequently give them occasion of grief and sorrow, under the
sense whereof they are forced to complain to God.

They are called Oppressors, by reason of the manifold injuries which they do
to the Saints of God, without any cause or occasion: they do to others, what
they would not be content should be done to themselves. And they are called
Persecutors, partly because though they find not opportunity at the first to
execute their malice, yet they diligently seek occasion, and wait till they
find it, and partly because they invade the Saints of God, as savage beasts
do set upon their prey, to which they are compared by the Prophet David in the
22. Psalm.

The Turks History tells us, that Bajacet the fourth king of the Turks, by
his contrymen was called Gilderin, which signifies lightning, because in a
great battle which his father Amorath fought against the Christians, he brake
in with a part of the Army so fiercely and terribly, as if it had been thunder
and lightning. But there is a word in the Text, which is not to be lightly
overpassed, seeing it includes more than at first it would seem to do: For
when the enemies of David are said, To seek afttr his soul, there are two
things included.

First, When the enemies of David seek after his soul, there are two things
included.
That the harm which David's enemies would do to him, is not a light, but a
grievous hurt. Secondly, That they wish not only the death of David's body, but
likewise the destruction of his soul.

First I say, that the hurt and skaith which they wished him, is not a light
harm, which easily may be comported with, and soon repared, but a great and
grievous hurt, which can neither be endured nor repared: This is not like other
kinds of hurt, that sometimes by men is done to men. King 1 Samuel 11.7
Saul threatens that the oxen of the Hebrews shall be cut in pieces, which
follow him not to war against the Ammonits, and cruel 1 Samuel 11.2
Nahash will put out the right eyes of the Citizens of Iabesh. Luke 23.16
Pontius Pilate will scourge Jesus, and let him go. But the enemies of David
seek after his soul, they will not only spoil him of his wealth and honor,
but likewise of his life: they are set against him, as the Pharisees were set
against Christ, Luke 23.21
That will have him put to death. And as the Jews were against Paul, when they
said, Acts 22.22.
It is not fit that he should live. And as History tells, That Charles Duke
of Anjew, was so cruelly set against Conradine king of Cicily, that the
proverb went through the world, Vita Caroli mors Conradini. The life of
Charles was the death of Conradine, he should not live except he died. And so
the Scripture tells us, That the life of David was fought by his enemies,
both by secret plots, and open violence, which not only makes him to say,
Psalm. 56.1.
That his enemies would swallow him up, but likewise he compares them to
savage beasts, which when they set upon a man, do not simply byte him until
he bleed, neither take they away one of his members, but they leave him not,
until he be dead, and have eaten their pleasure of his carcass, wherefore he
says, Psalm. 27.2.
That his enemies come upon him to eat up his flesh.

Secondly, It imports that the enemies of David not only desired the death of
his body, but likewise they wished that his soul might perish forever, the
like example of matchless cruelty, we shall hardly find in profane History;
for sometimes we read of men that has wished the death of their enemies, and
yet afterward has lamented their death. As it is said of Alexander the great,
that weeped over the dead body of Darius king of Persia: Sometimes though they
lament not their death, yet they will cause them to be buried, as 2 Kings 9.34
Iehu would have done to Iezabel: And as it is said, that Hannibal the famous
Carthaginian Captain, caused the Roman Consuls to be honorably buried, whom
he had valiantly vanquished: sometimes they will not suffer them to be buried,
which was the despite that Caesar used against the Army of Pompei, who was
vanquished in the fields of Pharsaly. Albeit as one said well, Ignobilia sunt
odia qua ultra mortem procedunt. Barclaus. lib. 4 argendis.
That is base hatred that goes beyond death.

The Scripture tells us of the base and barbarous despite of the Caldeans,
that did open the graves of the Jews, and scattered their bones upon the
earth. The writters of the Indian Histories relate, that many of these nations
have a custom to eat their enemies, which they take in the war, and to make
musical instruments of their bones. One example we read amongst the Pagans,
who in his book that he writes against his enemy, whom he dar not name, he
not only wishes many bodily miseries to befall him, but likewise, In loca ab
elisiis di versa fugabere campis quasque tenent seeds noxia turba coals. Et
ibid nec mortis paenas mors altera finiet huius horaque erit tantis ultima
nulla malis. Ovid. in thin.
That his soul may be tormented in hell with endless pain.

We read in the Gospel that the Jews think not enough that Christ should die,
unless he be crucified, because so they thought his soul should perish, by
dieing a cursed death. But if it be asked how may it be known that this was the
dispight of David's enemies, against him, I answer briefly in this plain
comparison, if one man shall desire another to go from one place to another,
in a way that he knows to be full of robbers, and savage beasts, out of all
question, he desires him to die: So the enemies of David did not only banish
him from the house of God, where he was most desirous to dwell, but likewise
they bid him go, and serve the gods of the Gentiles, the 26. Chapter of the
first of Samuel, that by committing idolatry he might perish eternally: and
therefore Psalm. 86.13.
he magnifieth the mercy of God, who in this respect delivered his soul from
the lowest hell. A twofold use may be made of this point.

First, The consideration of the cruelty of David's enemies, teaches us a two
fold use.
Christians should have a singular care not only to look to their words and
ways, that they show no signs of cruelty, but likewise that the spirit of
cruelty be not harbured in their hearts, but rather that they may study to
meekness, and the exercise of mercy, and that for four reasons. First,
because so we are taught by the word of God. We should avoid cruelty and
study to mercy for four reasons.
Secondly because cruelty makes men like Satan: Thirdly in respect of our
union with God. Fourtly, In respect of divine vengeance, which is the reward of
cruelty.

First I say, because Christians are taught by the word of God, to flee
cruelty, and follow mercy, and that by no less example then God their
Creator, and Christ their Redimer, Luke 6.36.
Be merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful Matthew. 11.2^
And learn of me that I am meek and lowly in heart: We justly think that both
the Religion of Papists, and the Religion of the Machometans, cannot be a good
religion, seeing their religion teaches them the practice of cruelty, and to
force people with fire and sword to embrace it, whom they cannot persuade by
their arguments, even as Ambrose speaks of the carriage of the Arrians in his
time, toward the Orthodox Christians, Quos non possunt sermonibus decipere,
gladio clamant feriendos, cruentas leges ore dictant, manu scribunt and putant
quod lex fidem hominibus imperare possit Ambros lib. 5 epist 32
Whom they cannot deceive by word, they cry, that they are to be killed by the
sword, they indite cruel and bloody laws with their mouth, they write with
their hand, and think that their laws can command Faith unto men.

But the Christian and true Religion, which is grounded in the word of God, in
this is known to be a good Religion, because it injoyneth the hatred of
cruelty and love of mercy, and will have none to be forced by violent
compulsion, but rather persuaded by powerful preaching, and evident arguments
from divine truth, that men may acknowledge and embrace the truth, according to
the worthy saying of Tertulian, Religionis non est cogere religionem, quae
sponte suscipi debet, non vi, cum and hostiae ab animo libentiexpostulentur.
Tertu. lib. ad Scapulam.
It is not the part of Religion to constrain Religion, which men should
willingly receive, and not by force, seeing the sacrifices of the Lord are
required of a willing mind: howbeit it cannot be denied but although the Lord
only can persuade the heart: yet when the professors of the truth have to do
with Heriticks and Schismatics, and profane persons, that live amongst them,
but walk not with them in the unity of faith, and in the way of godliness
refusing to be informed, and hating to be reformed, such may be constrained by
humane Laws, to use the means of the true Religion, that either their souls
may be saved, or their impictie may be restrained, that it prove not scandalous
to the people of God, and so the Scripture tells us, that when Josias in the
Reformation of the people of the Jews, renewed the Covenant betwixt God and
his people, 2 Chro. 34.32.
He caused all Judah and Benjamine to stand to it: albeit we have reason to
think that many of them were affected to idolatry in their hearts. But
Papists, and all other enemies of the Truth, who think rather by rigorous
persecution, than by right imformation, to bring people to their erroneous
profession, thereby they declare to the world the cruelty and falsehood of their
Religion.

And therefore whosoever is delighted with the exercise of cruelty, and is
averse from the works of mercy, what ever profession he make of the true
Religion, he has not found the converting power of the Gospel of Christ,
seeing, though Genesis 27.22.
he has the voice of Jacob, yet he has the hands of Esau, together with the
cruel heart of Esau.

Secondly, Because meek and merciful men are most like God, who glories in his
mercy: so fierce and cruel men are most like Satan, who delights in cruelty, to
whom is given the name of a destroyer in the 20. of the Revelation, because he
takes pleasure to destroy the creatures of God, so that when he cannot extend
his malice to men, he is content to exercise his cruelty on beasts, as the
Gospel tells us, of the legion of devils that drowned the Swine.

Thirdly, Because our happiness stands in an union with God, and the neernes
of our access to God, augmenteth our blessedness, according to the saying of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 65.4.
Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and whom thou causes to come to thee.
Cruel men can have no society nor fellowship with God: Psalm 5.6.
Who abhors the bloud-thirstie, for amongst all things that can be presented
to the mind or senses of man, there is not any two things so contrary to
another, as the merciful Creator, and cruel creature.

4. Because albeit cruel and malicious men for a time may get liberty to
exercise their fury, yet in end they shall not escape the vengeance of God,
which is the just reward of their cruelty. Amongst the Pagans Hercules and
Theseus were famous, that subdued, and punished cruel men, by whom many had
been injured and oppressed: And shall it not much more concern the glory of
Gods power and justice, to render to cruel men the reward of their cruelty. It
was observed by Plato the Philosopher, Nullus tam severe inimicum saum ulcisci
potest quam deus solet miserorum oppressores Plato in Timaeo.
That there is no man upon earth, so sevirly can take vengeance on his enemy,
as the Lord God uses to take vengeance on such as oppress poor men.

This vengeance the Lord some time executes by the hand of man which did make
Judges 1.7.
Adonibezek to acknowledge the justice of God, albeit it often falls out,
that men, whom God uses as instruments of his justice, look not to the glory
of God, but to sacisfie their own vindictive humor. Isai. 33.1.
Woe to thee that oppresses, for when thou shall cease, another shall oppress
thee. The Meeds and the Persians were no less cruel to the Caldeans, nor they
had been to the people of God, but more frequently the Lord plagueth cruel men
by his own immediate hand, with visible judgments in the sight of the world,
to the glory of the power and justice of God: We read in the history of the
Macabees, that the bowels of the cruel Antiochus were tormented, who had caused
the bowels of others to be tormented: and in the Jewish history, we read of the
punishment of cruel Herod the great, for his cruelty, as well against his own
Children, as against the Nobles, and people of the Jews. The Scripture likewise
tells us of the condign punishment of the wicked 2 Chro, 21.8.
Iehoram, king of Judah. And in the sea of histories, it is related of the
cruel and bloody Attila, king of the Huns, who was never moved with tears of
any, to show mercy or pity, but as he delighted in the sheding of humane
blood, while he lived, he was overtaken by the vengeance of divine justice in
his greatest triumph, in his marriage day, for he was chocked with his own
blood, which did flow abundantly from diverse parts of his body, until his
wretched life was finished. There are infinite examples both in Ecclesiastic
history, and in the book of the Martyrs, of the just punishment wherewith the
cruel persecutors of the Saints of God in all ages have been plagued:
therefore it was worthily observed by Cyprian, Certi sumuset fidenres quod
inultum non remanet quod perpetimur: quantoque mator fuerit persecutionis
iniuriatanto et iustior pro persecutione viudicta. Cypreanus tract. coutra
Demetrium.
We are sure and confident, that what we suffer shall not be unrevenged, and
the greater the wrong of the persecution be, so much the more just and grievous
shall be the revenge, which God shall take of the persecutors.

The Second use which here is to be observed, whenever we hear of the
cruelty of wicked men, against the Saints of God, in any place of the world,
and when we our selves are threatened with their cruel hostility, then we should
put up our humble prayer to the Lord our God, We should pray to God to be
delivered from cruel enemies, for two reasons.
that if he will chastise us for our sins and offenses, he would do it with
his own hand, and not give us * up to the will of our enemies: For David wisely
choosed * to fall into the hand of God, rather than into the hand of men: Thus
we should pray: for two reasons, First, because no favor toward the Saints
can be expected at the hands of their persecutors: Secondly, because God, to
whom the Saints pray, is both willing to hear, and able to help.

First I say, because no favor, but extreme cruelty to the people of God, may
be expected at the hands of the cruel enemies of God and his people, as
Jeremy speaks of the king of Babylon, * which did show no mercy to the
people of the Jews. The Scripture compares persecution to a flood of water,
for as a flood of water is not like an ordinary river, which runs along in
its own channel, but altogether overfloweth bank and brae, and violently
carries away whatsoever it overtaketh: So persecution is not like an ordinary
war betwixt two Nations, that can give and take reasonable quarters, as
occasion is offered, but persecution passes the bounds of Humanity, and
breaks the bonds of Nature, and commits outrageous cruelty, that Humane
sense abhors, the committing whereof makes the ears to tingle, the flesh
to quake, and the heart to tremble, Quamquam animits meminisse horret luctuque
refugit. Virg. lib. 2. Aentid.
So that the mind of man will abhor the remembrance thereof with grief and
sorrow.

We need not to call to mind the ancient examples of cruelty, that are
registrate in Ecclesiastic history, seeing of later times, we heard of the
Spanish inquisition, and that which has been used in the prison houses, and
pillories of England, while as the tyranny of the Prelates advanced to that
hight, that it could not stand: and that these years bypast, has been more
than barbarously practiced by the Irish Rebels, against the Saints and servants
of God. All this should make us draw near to God, by humble prayer, that we be
not exposed to the cruelty of our enemies, especially, seeing as Solomon says,
* The very mercies of the wicked are cruel: For whatsoever favor cruel
persecutors offer to the people of God, is always upon conditions, that are
worse than death. For as Wizards and Witches, when they cure men's bodies of
diseases, bring greater hurt to their souls, by the use of unlawful means,
whereby they draw guilt upon their consciences: and as that cruel Antiochus in
the seventh chapter of the second book of the Macabees, not only would have
spared the mother, and her seven sons, but likewise would have advanced them to
wealth and honor, if they would have forsaken the Law of their God, and become
idolaters: So the Malignant party will offer both peace, and preferment to the
Covenanters, that will break the Covenant, to which they have sworn; and join
with them in their unlawful courses, and wicked proceedings, that mirely tend
to the overthrow of the true Religon, and erecting of idolatry and superstition.

Secondly, Because our Lord to whom we pray is not like Baal, that neither
could hear nor help his worshippers, for our Lord is willing to hear, and
able to help, and as be hears us, when we pray, so he is able to grant our
requests. For truly the case and condition of the Saints of God were miserable,
if the might of their enemies were answerable to their malice, and their power
to their purposes. But as our Savior said to Pontius Pilate. Psalm. 19.11.
They have no power over God Saints but what is given them from above, the Lord
first breaks down the hedge, Psalm. 80.12 13.
And then the wild boar of the forest pilleth the bark of the vine that the
Lord has planted. Impii non quando volunt sanctis nocere possunt, sed quando
Deus illis nocendi, tempus concesserit, ut suis sanctis. coronam provideat.
Chry. Homil. 25. supr. Ma.
It is a worthy saying of Chrysostom, wicked men cannot always burt the
Saints of God, when they please, but when the Lord grants them a time to hurt
them, that he may provide a crown of glory for his Saints and servants.

The Lord that did send Senacherib to threaten Ezekias, 2 Kings 1.25.
Who came not up without the Lord, did likewise put abridle in the lips of
Senacherib, that he was not able to hurt Ezekias, as he cruelly purposed: as
then the proudest persecutors without Gods permission, are not able to trouble
his Saints, so he can limit their power, and dissapoint their purposes, and
turn their rage to his praise, that his Saints that are preserved from the
fury of their enemies, Psalm. 124.8.
may acknowledge their help to come from God, that made the heaven and the
earth, and heartily bless the Lord that has not given them, Psalm. 124.6.
to be a prey to their teeth.

Now come we to the last particulare considerable in the enemies of David, who
did not set God before them: this is to be under-stood in a threefold respect:
First in respect of their different purpose from the purpose of God in
troubling the Saints of God. Secondly because they are not directed by the
Light of God. The persecutors of the Saints are said not to set God before them
in a threefold respect.
Thirdly, because they forget God, while as they consider not his divine
properties.

First I say, the proud enemies of David, and all the cruel persecutors of
Gods Saints set not God before them, inrespect of their different purpose, and
intention, from the purpose and intention of God while by Gods permission they
are instruments of the trouble of Gods Saints, for as in the crucifying of
Christ, the purpose and intention of the Jews was to destroy him, but the
purpose of God was, that Christ might be glorified, and his Elect redeemed. So
when the Saints of God are persecuted, the purpose and intention of God, is
either that he may be glorified in the exercise and trial of the faith and
patience of his Saints: as in the 14. of the Revelation: or else that like a
loving and wise father he may chastise his children by the rod of the wicked,
for the sins wherewith they have offended him, that they may repent, and turn
to him, as we may read in the book of the Judges in which respect Nebuchadnezar
is called the servant of God: but the purpose of the persecutors is either
altogether to dishonor God, and destroy his people, whereof Gods open enemies
make their boast in the 83. Psalm: or else they do carry themselves like
some knavish servants, that work their Masters work to their own advantage,
and to their Masters prejudice, as we may read in the parable of the unjust
steward the 16 of Lukes Gospel for they altogether so respect themselves by
doing there own will, and seeking their own honor, that they have no regard at
all to the pleasing of God, or advancing of his honor. For while they
persecute the Saints of God, they care not how God be dishonored and
displeased, providing they themselves may be honored and well pleased by
satisfying their wicked humors, and accomplishing their cruel projects, and
so they set not God before them, because they serve not the Lord but themselves,

Secondly, Because though sometime they think they are doing service to God,
yet they are not directed by the light of God, but by a preposterous zeal,
Romans 10.8.
which is without knowledge, they are like some foolish servants that while
they think the work they are working will please their master, it greatly will
offend him, and provocke him to anger. They are like Joshua and his princes,
that made covenant with the Gibionits, John 9.19.
but asked not counsel of the Lord for our Savior says, John 16.2.
That they that persecute his Disciples, shall think they do service to God,
and he well says, That it shall be according to their thinking, and not
according to truth, for doubtless they neither consider aright whom they do
persecute, nor for what they do persecute them, they consider not that they
do persecute God with his servants, Ananias says to the Lord, Acts 9.14.
that Saul the persecuter had a warrant from the high Priest to bind all that
called upon the Name of the Lord, but Jesus himself testifies from heaven 2
Acts 9.4.
That he was persecuted when his Saints were persecuted, neither consider they
for what they persecute them, even for such things as should make them to love
and cherish, and respect them, for they persecute them Matthew. 5.20.
for righteousness sake, and for the Name of Christ, Luke 6.22.
and for the profession of the Truth Acts 24.14.
which they call heresy, and for walking in the way of godliness which they
count superstition and vanity, and therefore as our Savior says in the
Gospel: John 11.9.
He that, walks in the day, stumbleth not because he sees the light of this
world, but he that walks in the night, stumbleth because there is no light in
him: so when a man is led by the direction of the light of God, he is convoyed
safely and walks securely, but when he is not led by the direction of Gods
light, it is no wonder though he miscarie, so fearfully, that he think that to
be service done to God, which is most offensive to the Majesty of God, seeing
they are not enlightened by the spirit of truth, but led by the light of
misinformed conscience, which is nor proper light, but darkness.

Thirdly, They set not God before them, because they do not remember God as
they ought, they are of the number of the people, Psalm. 9.17.
that forget God, seeing they do not consider the presence, nor the justice,
nor the power of God, for other wise they durst not persecute nor oppress his
Saints, but rather would strive to gain their love and favor by profiting
them to the uttermost of their power, seeing such is the sympathy betwixt
Christ and Christians, that what evil or good is done to them, he thinks it
done to himself, the 25 of Matthew.

First then, I say, they consider not Gods all where presence from whose sight
nothing can be hid, and in whose sight all that men do Hab, 4.13.
are naked and open. The light of nature teaches man to know this which made
on of the heathen to say Est profecto Deus qui quae nos gerimus auditque and
videt. Plaut. in capteivis.
Truly their is a God, who sees, and hears all that we do. But all men make
not a right use of this light, for such is the gross atheism wherewith the
hearts of the persecutors of Gods Saints are replenished, that they say with
themselves, Psalm. 10.11.
God does not see them, neither will crave a reckoning of them, which either
they think to be so, or indeed would have it so; but then their folly appears
as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 94.4.
Shall not he that made the eye see clearly even according to the Philosophers
rule, Propter quod unu mque quodque est tale id ipsum est mains tale. Arist.
lib. 2. Topicon.
Whatsoever makes a thing to be such, it self most be more such: nothing can
lurk from his sight who is the fountain and Auther of sight, next they remember
not the justice of God who certainly will revenge, and cannot but revenge the
wrongs that are done to his servants, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.
It is a righteous thing with God to render tribulation to them that trouble
you, says the Apostle, and our Savior tells, Luke 18.7.
That the cries of the Elect which night and day are send up to their heavenly
father, shall quickly be avenged. Lastly they consider not the power of God, who
is able to protect his weakest servants, and to punish their strongest enemies,
he is not like Rehoboam, that for the stoning of his servant, 1 Kings 12.18
is not able to punish the Israelits, but rather like David, who for the wrong
done to his servants, did 2 Samuel 12.3.
grievously plague the Ammonits. And therefore both Scripture and History
tells us, that the persecutors of Gods Saints, neither by their greatness,
nor multitude, could escape the avenging hand of the Lord, who is Almighty, as
Augustine says, Omnipotens est Deus faciendo quae Gult, non paetiendo quae non
vuls. Aug. lib. 5. decivitate dei.
By doing what he wills, not by suffering what he wills not.

The use of this point which Christians should make stands in this, their
singular care should be both in the works of their Christian and particular
calling Psalm. 16.8. That a Christian may set God before him, four things are
to be required.
To set God always before them. To which four things are required. First that
he look to the will of God, as the rule of his actions. Secondly that he look to
the glory of God, as the end of his actions. Thirdly, That he be led by the
light of Gods word, and spirit. Fourtly that he remember God in his divine
properties. First I say, that they look to the will of God as the rule of their
actions, Gala. 6.16.
As many as follow this rule, mercy shall be on them, and peace, but this
includes two remarkable things.

First that a Christian should so look to Gods pleasure, that he should have no
regard to man's pleasure, To look to the will of God, as the rule of our
actions, includes two things.
that is to say, as he most not do any thing offensive to God, though thereby
he should please man, so he most not omit any thing that may please the Lord
though by doing thereof, he should greatly offend man. There is a remarkable
example in Ecclesiasticke history to this purpose, of the worthy Christian
Theodosius the first, Emperor, who when by open proclamation, he had forbidden
the Egyptians to sacrifice to the river Nilus, which had been their yearly
custom by their superstition, which had continued for many ages: it so fell
out, that the next year after, that the river Nilus did not water the land of
Egypt by such abundance as it was wont, for which when the superstitious
people began to murmr, as though the reason thereof had been the neglect of
their wonted sacrifice, the Governor wrote unto the Emperor, that he would
look timously to the matter and consider what might be the event, as if he
would have desired him to revock his former Edict, and to give way to the
superstitious people to sacrifice to Nilus, lest they should rebel. But the
worthy Emperor answered him that he would not permit a thing to be done to the
offense of God, for the pleasure of men, and he had rather that men should be
offended, before the Lord should be displeased. It had been good for Ioab if
he 2 Samuel 11.21.
had so deeply considered the matter of Vriah, he had not offended God to
please his king, it was better considered by Peter and John, who willed the
Jews Acts 5.29.
to judge whither it were better to obey God, than men. For seeing none can
serve two Masters, it is the best and wisest course to serve the best and
worthiest Master, according to the saying of Gregory, Quomodo ergo a vobis
potest par exlerberi famulatus quorum dipar est nominatus Greg. bomil. 12. in
Evang.
How can it be required of you that ye all should give a like service to
Masters that are of an unlike name, That is to say, Mortal men, and the
eternal God.

It were good that this were deeply laid to heart by many Malignants, that
trouble the peace of the Saints of God, that they might look more to the
pleasure of their heavenly, then their earthly king, for so should they do
more acceptable service to God and more profitable service to their king.

Secondly, It includes that he that does the will of God, and makes it the
rule of his actions, should not be desirous to conform Gods will to his will,
but rather to study to conform his will to Gods will. For if this should be
the carriage of servants toward their earthly Masters, much more ought it so
to be toward God, their heavenly Master: whom Augustine brings in thus
speaking, Ille meus minister eris qui non audire quod voluerit paratus est, sed
velle quod audierit. August. in Psalm. 118.
He shall be my servant, who is ready no to hear what he wills, but to will
what he hears. Which a Christian must carefully look to, not only in the
abstaining from things that ought to be avoided, but likewise in doing things,
that ought to be performed, the one, because they are forbiden, the other
because they are commanded of the Lord, for thereby a Christian gives
testimony of his sincer obedience in the sight of God, according to the saying
of Augustine Verus obediens non attendit quale pracipitur, sed hoc contentus
est quia praecipi tur. Aug. ibid.
He that is truly obedient, does not consider what sort of thing is commanded,
but with this he is only content that it is commanded.

Secondly, That a Christian may set God before him, it is not only required
that he look to the will of God, as the rule, but likewise that he look to the
glory of God as the end of his actions, for in this is the fidelity and
sincerity of the servants of God manifested who shall obtain their Masters
approbation in the day of their reckoning for then a Christian may be said, to
look to the glory of God, as the end of his actions, when he so zealously
tendereth the bonour of God, that he will not do any thing to dishonor him
though thereby he should make never so much profit and commodity, neither will
he omit any thing whereby God should be honored, though by doing of it, he
should incur both skaith and ignominy. We read of the servants in the
parable of the talents, that they so respected their Masters honor, that they
rendered into his hands both the talents they had received, and those they had
gained, committing the distribution of their rewards to their Masters
discretion. Happy is that Christian, that can say with Christ John 17.4.
that in finishing the work which God has given him to do, he has glorified
God upon earth, for he may be well assured, 2 Samuel 2.30
that as they that dishonor God, shall come to shame, so they that honor him
shall be honored of him. John 12.26.
If any man serve me him shall my father honor, says our Savior in the
Gospel; upon which words Augustine says, Sic ministrantem Christo
honorificabit pater cius honor illo magno ut sit cum filio cius nec unqua^
deficiet faelicitas eius. Aug. tract. 51. in Joan.
So shall the Father of Christ honor the servant of Christ, with that great
honor, that he may be with his Son, neither shall his happiness at any ty
me fail or fall away.

3. He that sets God before him, must be led by the light of his word, and
spirit, for the word of God, Psalm. 119.
Is a light to our feet, and a la^tern to our paths. Luke 1.79.
It gives light to the^ that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death. Psalm
27.19.
The prophet David entreats the Lord, John 2.20.
To teach him his ways, and to lead him in a right path, because of his
enemies. The Scripture tells us, John 16.13.
That the holy Spirit is the unction, that teaches us all things, * And
leads us in all truth, which is not to be understood of extraordinar, but
ordinar revelations when he makes us to understa^d the true meaning of the
written word of God, that we may flee the evil, which is to be avoided, and
follow the good which is enjoined and commanded.

Fourthly, He that sets God before him, must remember God in the forenamed
properties, in his ubiquity, justice, and power: he must consider that God is
all where present, to take notice both of the inward and outward conversation
of men whither it be good or evil. Therefore Augustine says, Deustotus oculus
est quia omnia videt manus totus est quia omnia operatur totuspes est quia
ubique est. Aug in Psalm. 120.
That God is all an eye, which sees all things, all hand, who works all
things, and all foot, who walks every where.

He must likewise remember, that the righteous Lord will neither suffer the evil
doing of men to be unpunished, nor their good doings unrewarded, of the one,
the Church says in the book of the Lamentations, Lament. 1.18.
The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled: And of the other the Apostle
says, Heb. 6 10.
God is not unjust, to forget your work and labor of love. Lastly, he
mustremember the power of the Almighty God, Psalm. 135.6.
Whereby he does whatsoever he wileth in heaven, and earth. And can do all that
he can will, without impediment: according to the saying of Tertulian, Deiposse
velle est, and non posse nolle est. Tertul. in apologe.
To be able with God, is to will, and not to be able, is not to will.

Whereby likewise he can punish sinners for their iniquity notwithstandsting of
their greatness amongst men, and the multitude wherewith they combine in the
course of sin, by which power likewise, Psalm. 91.1.
He protecteth his Saints in their greatest danger and difficulty, and
comfort and strengthens them, Colo. 1.11.
in their greatest trouble and calamity, Ephesians. 3.20.
and satisfies their desire exceeding abundantly. Now there are three reasons
wherefore a Christian should carefully labor thus to set God before him: First,
There are three reasons wherefore a Christian should always set God before him.
because amongst many other differences this is one most remarkable betwixt
the Elect and the Reprobate; betwixt men in the state of nature, and in the
state of grace. Spiritual men like David, Psalm 16.8.
set God always before them, but wicked and worldly men, like the enemies of
David, do not at all set God before them: but live in the world Ephesians. 2.12
without hope, and without God, and by their carriage, declare to the world,
Psalm 36.1.
That they are void of the fear of God, but when Christians set God before
them, this is an evident note of their effectual calling, Acts 26.16.
Whereby they are turned from the power of Satan unto God, Colos. 1.13.
And translated from the power of darkness unto the Kingdom of the Son of
God. 1 Pet. 2.9.
And are called out of darkness unto the marveilous light of Christ.

2. If we consider the happiness of such as set God before them, and the misery
of those that set not God before them, the happiness of the one appears in
this, that as they set God before them, so he sets them before him: For in
all reciprocal offices betwixt God and man, that is in those things which are
mutually done by God to man, and by man to God, the Lord is always the
preveener, and beginner, so that a man by the performance of his part, may
certainly know that God performs his. There is mutual love betwixt God and
his Saints, but God first begins, as the Apostle John says, And they that
love God, Prove. 8.17.
may know that they are beloved of God God has chosen that man for his
portion, Psalm. 73.25.
who chooses God for his portion. Psalm. 119. ult.
And God seeks us, before we can seek him, and whosoever set God before them,
by doing his will, and seeking his honor, by following his light, and
remembering his properties, the Lord sets them before him by a high
estimation of them, by tender and earnest love toward them, and by a fatherly
and provident care about them. Esai. 49.16.
I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands, and thy walls are continually
before me. But the misery of the other is answerably great, for it may be said
of them, as the Latin Comicke faith of harlots, Nec pol istae metuunt Deos,
neque has respicere D^os opinor. Terent in Hecyra actu 5. Scenae 2.
That they fear not God, and God regards them not.

For as they have no purpose to advance Gods glory, so God has no purpose of
their safety, and as they will not hear God, when he calls on them in their
prosperity, Prove. 1 24.
so he will not hear them when they call on him in their adversity, and as they
contravine Gods reveilled will, when they lived upon earth, so he crosses their
will, when they are tormented in hell, which they testify by gnashing of their
teeth, which makes Bernard to say, Frustra volent quod nunquam erit, and
srustra nolent quod semper erit. Bern. sermon. 10 in Psalm. 90.
That in vain they shall will, which never shall be, and in vain they shall
nill, which ever shall be.

And in a word as they were careless to walk as in his presence, 2 Thessalonians 1.9.
So they shall be for ever banished from the presence of God, and glory of his
power.

Thirdly, This is required in respect of our spiritual walking, For 1 Thessalonians.
4.5.
Christians must not walk like the Gentiles, which knew not God, but rather
like Luke 1.6
Zachary, and Elizabeth in all the commandments of God, Colos. 1.10
This is called a walking worthy of the Lord, Gala. 5.25
a walking in the spirit, Romans 8.1.
and after the spirit, a walking with God, as did Enoch, and before God, as
Genesis 5.25
Abraham was enjoined. Now there is no possibility that any can so walk, Genesis
17.1
unless he set God before him, for this indeed shall make him know the way
wherein, the manner how, and the end toward which he ought to walk, that in
all these respects he may make conscience of his walking in the sight of God,
by walking in his commandments with a perfect heart, Psalm. 84.7.
from strength to strength, toward Sion, where he shall see the Lord of Losts,
Colos. (...)
and by walking worthily of the Lord, pleasing h^^^^th all things, he may be
fruitful in good works, and increase in the knowledge of God.

To which heavenly, and holy disposition, God of his infinite mercy bring all
our souls, for the sake of Jesus. To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost,
be all praise, honor, and glory, world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

