MR 290. a. 65. 105.

MUSICA OXONIENSIS.

A COLLECTION OF SONGS: FOR One and Two Voices, WITH THE THOROUGH-BASS.

Published by Francis Smith, and Peter de Walpergen Letter-Founder, by whom
'twas Cut on Steel, and Cast, by the Directions of the former.

printer's or publisher's device

OXFORD: Printed by Leon. Lichfield: And are to be Sold by John Walsh, Musical
Instrument-Maker in Ordinary to His Majesty, at the Golden Harp and Hoboy in
Catherine-street, near Somerset House in the Strand. And John Hare, Musical
Instrument-Maker, at the Golden Viol in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at his Shop
in Freeman's Yard, Cornhil, LONDON, School.

TO THE Much Honored and Ingenious Thomas Hinxman, Esquire OF TRINITY-COLLEGE in
OXFORD.
SIR,
THE following Sheets, being the first of this Kind that have been Published,
We make bold to Recommend them to the World, by prefixing your Name to them:
And we are satisfied, that however our Performance be Approved of, every Body
will Applaud our Choice of a Patron. It Is under your Protection therefore that
they venture abroad, and it is from your Approbation that they hope to meet with
a kind Reception: For Music can never be better Recommended, than by your
Judgment, unless you please to add your excellent Performance. But it is neither
our Talent, nor Design to aim at Complements, our only Meaning is, to Honor
this Specimen with your Name; and it is upon that Presumption that we hope to
meet with either Encouragement, or at least Excuse from the rest of the World,
if we are but so happy as to have it from You.

SIR, Your most Obliged, and Most Humble Servants, F. SMITH, and P. de
WALPERGEN.


TO ALL Lovers of Music.
THE Character with which all Music has been as yet Printed, not being
Comparable to that which is generally Written; we have been induced to consider
of a new way, how any Music may be Printed, so as to be more Convenient, and
more Beautiful than any yet Published, if not equal to any in Manuscript.
Whether the Effect has answered the Design, we leave to the Censure of those,
who will, without Prejudice, compare this Specimen with any Printed Music; and
we doubt not, but the Neatness of the Character, the Regularity and Evenness of
the Lines, the natural Division of the several Syllables to their proper Notes,
etc. will easily be seen; and the great Expense and Trouble, we have hitherto
been at, be in some measure Rewarded by a can did Reception and Encouragement.

We intend not, by what has been said, any Encomiums of our own Industry, any
more than of the Science of Music it self; since as this needs none, so we
should be glad, for the public Good, to be exceeded in the other.

The Music is Composed by Good Masters, and several Songs by the same Hands
and Others, may be procured and Monthly Published, if the Work meets with
Encouragement.

Be pleased to take Notice, That the Binding of the Tails of the Notes, does
not make them belong to One Syllable, except there be either a Tie over the
Heads of those Notes, or a Division in the Syllable: and that this Character,
or Mark, (which is used by the Italian Masters, and is called a Natural,) is
intended so as to restore the Note following to its natural and true sound; as
for Instance,

^ If any Person has a valuable Collection of Music, and is willing to have it
Printed with this Character, if it be sent to our Printer, it shall be
Carefully and Correctly done.

When Charming Teraminta. A SONG in Two Parts,
Set by Mr. John Welldon.
^WHen charming Tera -- minta Si -- ngs, Every new Air, every new Air, new
Pa-ssion brings; Every new Air, every new Air, new Pa -- ssion brings: And now
-- I Fear; Now I Tri -- umph, now, now Des -- pair: Now I Tri -- umph, now now
Des -- pair. Her Face at last does all re -- move, And my whole Breast con --
sents to Love, con -- sents to Lo -- ve: My whole Breast consents to Love,
consents to Lo -- ve, con -- sents to Love. The tree -- mbling Zephirs rou -- nd
her play, And panting, panting on her Lips would stay. The tree -- mbling
Zephirs round her play, rou -- nd her play: Striving with di -- vi -- ded
Bliss, now would Listen, now would Listen, now would Kiss, now would Kiss, now
would Kiss, now, now, now, now, now, now would Kiss,^ Till by Her Breath re --
puls'd they fly, And in low pleasing Mur -- murs dye, And in low pleasing Mur
-- murs dye. Nor do I ask, that She would give, By some new Note, the Power to
Live:^ I would ex -- pi -- ring with the Sound, Dye on the Lips, Dye on the
Lips, that gave the Wound, Dye on the Lips, that gave the Wound.

WHen charming Te -- ra -- minta Si -- ngs, When charming Te -- ra -- min -- ta
Si -- ngs, Every new Ai -- r, new Pa -- ssion brings; Every new Air, new Air,
new Air, new Pa -- ssion brings. Now I Re -- solve, Now I Tri -- umph. now,
now, now, now Des -- pair: Now I Tri -- umph, now, now, now, now Des -- pair.
Her Face at last does all re -- move, and my whole Breast con -- sents to Love,
my whole Breast con -- sents to Love, my whole Breast con -- sents to Love, my
whole Breast consents, my whole Breast con-sents to Love, con-sents to Love.
The tree -- mbling Zephirs rou -- nd her^ play, The tree -- mbling Zephirs round
her play, and panting, -- panting, panting on her Lips would sta -- y, rou --
nd her play: Striving with di -- vi -- ded Bliss, now would Kiss, now would
Kiss, now would Listen, now would Kiss, now would Kiss, now, now, now, now,
now, now, now, now, now, now, now would Kiss, Till by Her Breath re-puls'd they
fly, And in low pleasing Murmurs die -- e, And in low pleasing Murmurs dye. I
would ex -- pi -- ring with the Sound, would ex -- pi -- ring with the Sound,
Dye on the Lips, Dye on the Lips, Dye on the Lips, the Lips, that gave the
Wound.

ORPHEUS'S SONG to the Satyrs, in the Mask of ORPHEUS and EURIDICE: Performed
at the Boarding-School at Besselsleigh, in October 1697.
Let me, Ye Satyrs, etc.
Set by Mr. Richard Goodson.
^ Flute. Let me, ye Satyrs, let me know, let me know, why you thus, why you
thus distur -- b my Peace? Let me, ye Satyrs, let me know, let me know, why you
thus, why you thus dis -- tur -- b my Pea -- ce? Let me, let me, ye Satyrs, let
me know why, let me know why you thu -- s distur -- b my Peace? why you thus
distur -- b my Peace? Have I not yet, have I not yet, have I not yet Ills
enough, have I not yet, have I not yet Ills enough, that will not let me live
at Ease? Have I not yet, have I not yet, have I not, have I not, have I not
yet, have I not, have I not Ills enough, that will not let me, will not let me
live at Ease? that will not let me, will not let me live at Ease? that will
not, will not let me live at Ease? Have I not yet, have I not yet, have I not,
have I not, have I not yet, have I not, have I not Ills enough, that will not
let me, will not let me live at Ease? that will not let me, will not let me
live at Ease? that will not, will not let me live at Ease?

From shining Courts, etc.
Set by Mr. R. Goodson.
Orpheus's SONG to the Woods, in the Mask of Orpheus and Euridice.

^FRom shi -- ning Courts there is none, none, there is none, none, there is none,
none, there is none, no -- ne retreat; or fly --, or fly --, or fly the Glo --
ries of the Great: Except the Wise, except the Wi -- se, and the Unfortunate:
Except the Wise, except the Wi -- se, and the Unfortunate. I, NO ye Groves do
hum -- b -- ly se, I, O ye Groves, I, Oye Groves do hum -- b -- ly, hum -- b --
ly (...), To bid the idle, idle, idle, to bid the* idle World a -- dieu, a --
dieu, a -- dieu, adieu, a -- dieu --, to bid the idle World a-dieu; And here
dis -- close my very Soul, dis -- close my very, very Soul to you, my very,
very, very Soul, my very, very, very, very Soul to you.

I come to the Waters, etc.
Set by Mr. R. Goodson.
CUPID'S SONG in the Mask of Orpheus and Euridice.
^ I Come to the Waters,
the Woods and the Shades,
where the Swains and the Nymphs do all gang.
With my Shafts that will go,
very swift from my Bow,
and a String that shall merrily cry Twang.
With my Shafts that will go,
very swift from my Bow,
and a String that shall merrily, shall merrily, shall merrily, shall merrily,
shall merrily cry Twang.
II.
An obstinate Swain
Shall receive twice the Pain,
And my Shaft shall stick up to the Fang:
But who e're courts the Fight
Shall find his Wounds light,
And a String that shall merrily cry Twang.

