A Short Introduction TO THE ART OF PAINTING AND Varnishing,

LONDON, Printed for George Dawes, over against Lincolns-Inn-Gate, in
Chancery Lane, 1685.

THE NAMES OF COLORS FOR PAINTING,
WHite Lead, Flake, Ceru's, White. Kirmine, Vermillion, Red lead, Spanish
Brown, Indian Red, Red Ocker. Red. Ultramarine, Bice, Smalt, Verditer, Indigo,
Blew. Distilled Verdigrass, Green. Three sorts of Masticote, Yellow ocker,
light pinck, Ortmeut two sorts, Yellow. Ivory Black, Black. Brown pinck, Brown
ocker, Umber, Brown. Venice Lake, a sort of Red or Blome.
To Mix your Colors.
WHite Umber and Black, Hair Color White and a little Black, Gray Hair. White,
little Black, little Yellow ocker and very little Lake, Dead Body or Face.
Black and little Umber Dark part of the Eye. Lake and Vermillion, Scarlet.
White, Black a little Smalt, Armor. Yellow ocker and little Vermillion, Gold.
Lake and little White, Pale Purple. Lake White and little Indigo, Deep Purple
Light Masticote, Lemmon. Verdigrass, and very little White, Willow Green.
Verdigrass brown pink and very little white, Grass green Verdigrass and light
pink Bright green. Verdigrass and light Masticote another, Green. Smalt and
light Masticote, Moss green. And for Variety you may put together any of the
Blewes to any of the Yellowes. Smalt and White, Sky or Pearl. Vermillion and
Umber Brick. Indigo, White and Lake, Violet. Light Masticote and Vermillion,
Flaming Fire. Lake and Bice, Blome. Indigo and White, Lead. White, Black, and
little Yellow Ocker, Stone. Deep Masticote Buff. Deep Masticote and little
Vermillion, Orange. Lake and little Black Sables. White and little Verdigrass,
Grass Window. Verdigrass and White, Sea. White, Black, and Vmber for grounding.
When you have laid on your Cut and Rubbed it, you are to do it over with Oil of
Turpentine, with a soft Brush, and in an hour after, to do it again with Nutt
Oil, and then to close it well to the Glass with your fingers, to disperse
those little hollownesses that then will appear, and if after there shall
appear any little glissinings or bright places, you are to repeat the last oil
upon the places, and close it well as before, and they will disappear or if
they happen after Painting, then lay your Nutt oil upon the back of the Colors
against the place and it will in a little time pierce through and cure it, but
at the first in laying on of your Oils, use of neither sort more then what will
just wet your Cut through.

You are to grind all your Colors in Nutt Oil, and that extremely Fine.

To make the Varnish.
Take half a pound of Gum Sandrock four ounces of Gum Animy, two ounces of Gum
Copal, one ounce of Mastick and half an ounce of Tackamahacka, steep your
Gumlack twenty four hours in water in a course bag, then put to it a Lump of
hard Soap, the bigness of an Egg and chafe it well about half an hour to beget
a lather to take as much of the Red Tincture from it as you can, then clean the
Soap from it with water, then make it very dry either in the Sun or before the
Fire, then bruise all your other Gums, that is, your Gum Animy, very small, and
the other but as gross Pepper, then divide all your Gums into two equal
quantities, and put them severally into 2 glass bottles that hold 3 quarts a
piece, then into each bottle put two quarts of Spirit of Wine, stop them close
and keep them in a moderate heat before the fire for six or seven days, shaking
'em once an hour to prevent the Gums for settling to the botom, then take it
from the fire and let it rest twenty four hours, then through a cloth into a
clean Bottle, pour as much off as will run perfectly clear and let the
remainder settle again, and as it becomes clear pour it off as before.

To do black Work.
TO some of your Varnish put a little Ivory black in a little pot of a thin
consistance, and do your work over nine times, letting it dry two hours betwixt
each time before a fire, then let it dry a day, then smooth it a little with
polishing Rushes either wet in water or dry. If you wet your Rushes, then when
you have done, wash your work clean, and dry it with a cloth by the fire, then
do it over ten times with clear Varnish, without Color, allowing the same
space for drying as before, then let it dry three days, then pollish it with
Tripola made fine upon a wet cloth until you have brought it to an exact
eveness, then wash it as before, and dry it, then take a little oil upon a
clean soft rag, and just touch it over to take off the dullness given it by
washing, but use not so much oil as to leave your work greasy.

Tortoise-shell upon Red Ground.
FIrst do your Work over four or five times with Vermillion mixed with Varnish
of a like thin consistance until you see your Wood be perfectly covered, then
do it twice with clear Varnish, then cloud it with Dragons Blood and Ivory
black mixed together, then let it dry a day, then varnish it ten times with
clear Varnish, then let it dry three days, and pollish and finish as in your
black work.

Tortoise upon Yellow Ground.
INstead of Vermillion mentioned in the last, use white Lead and very little
yellow ocker and Cover your wood as in the Red Tortoise, then proceed and
finish as in that, only in this you must observe, that your cloudings must be
more Ruddy then on the Red Ground.

Tortoise upon Gold Ground.
WHen you have silvered your work let it dry a day, then with a Camels hair
brush do it twice or thrice over with the mixture next mentioned then let it
dry another day, then cloud it with the clouding directed in your Yellow
Tortoise and go on and finish as in the other.

To turn Silvered work to a Gold Color.
TO half a pint of varnish put as much gam bouge as will lie upon a large
shilling, and as much Dragons blood as will lie upon a groat, both beaten small
and let it dissolve two or three days, sometimes shaking it, then run it
through a fine rag into a clean bottle, and this laid twice or thrice upon
silvered work, 'twill bring it to an Exact gold Color.

To Gild.
TAke Parchment shreds and boil them in water that when the Liquor is cold, it
may be as stiff as jelly, then to some of that put some Spanish White to make
it somewhat thicker than Cream and keep it warm upon a few Coals, and do your
work four or five times, that your wood be thoroughly Covered, then smooth it
with Rushes, and then do it twice over with the Size alone, then smooth it
again a little more, then lay on your Gold Size thin and even and let it dry
until it be of such a temper that when you touch it with your finger, you may
perceive it stick and yet none of the Size to come off upon your finger, then
lay on your mettle and press it down with a Hares seutt.

To do the Red work that appears to have Black to be sprinkled on in little
specles.
FIrst Ground your work with Vermillion, as in the Red Tortoise, then with the
clouding directed for that taking very little in your brush, and holding it
upright in your hand, strike it down pretty quick and hard, and take no greater
compass at a time than you can well attend (before the Varnish dries) to
disperse the little black eyes and froth occasioned by the quick motion of your
brush, and then begin again at the edges where you left off, after that proceed
as in your Tortoise.

To make Gold Size.
TO a quart of Linseed Oil put White Copperis, Honey, razen and Littridge of
Gold, each one ounce, and boil it four or five hours upon a gentle fire,
sometimes stirring it, that it burn not to the bottom, and let it cool, and
pour off all the thin part into a pot or bottle, and as you have occasion to
use it, grind a small quantity of it at a time upon your stone, with a little
white Lead, yellow Ocker, and a little boul Almanick, to be of a thinner
consistance than you make your Colors for Painting, but you must be careful to
grind it extremely Fine, otherwise your mettle will not lie even.

White Varnish.
TAke four ounces of the Largest Lumps of Gum Sandrock four ounces of Gum
Animy, one ounce of Mastick, and one ounce of Camphier, scrape off the outsides
of your Gums that they be very clean, and bruise them all as in your other
Varnish, and slice the Camphier thin, and put them altogether into a quart of
Spirit of Wine, and manage it at the fire after the same method, and for the
same time as you do the other Varnish and when it has stood twenty four hours,
let it through a cloth into another bottle, and it will at once all run off
clear.

This is to be used with Blew and White Colors after the same Manner as you
use your other Varnish, with other Colors (it likewise being twice laid on)
preserves anything silvered from ever tarnishing and is most used for this.

To Enammel.
DIssolve some Gum Arabic in fair water and mix with it some of your Shell
Gold or Shell Silver, and with a small Pencil, draw upon your work either
before your work be fit to pollish or after it be done, but I conceive it best
before you Varnish it the last ten times, so that Varnishing and pollishing
upon it will both secure it from tarnishing and rubbing off.

You must observe, that all the wood you intend to Varnish, that is of an open
grain, as Oak, Firr or such like, you must first white and smooth it just as
you do for Gilding, otherwise the Varnish will not fill it up though you repeat
it never so often.

To lay on your Mettle Speckles.
FIrst wet your work with Varnish, with a soft brush, then while it is wet dust
your speckles upon it through a piece of Tiffany, and then Varnish it twice, to
keep 'em from rubbing off it is enough.

You are to grind all your Colors dry and very small*

FINIS.

