Transubstantiation EXAMINED and CONFUTED, IN TWO SERMONS ON The Lords Supper,
Preached in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

By H. Smith, sometime Preacher at St. Clement Danes.

Licensed, June the 12th. 1688.

LONDON, Printed by J. Wallis, and are to be sold by most Booksellers. 1688.

THE FIRST SERMON ON THE Lord's Supper.
1 Cor. xi. 23, 24. The Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed took Bread:

And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, take, eat: this is my
Body which is broken for you, this do ye in remembrance of me.


THE Word and the Sacraments are the two Breasts The two Breasts of the Church.
wherewith our Mother does nurse us. Seeing every one receives, and few
understand what they receive, I thought it the necessariest Doctrine to Preach
of the Sacrament; which is a witness of Gods promises, a remembrance of Christ's
death, and a seal of our adoption: therefore Christ has not instituted this
Sacrament for a fashion in his Church, to touch, and feel, and see, as we gaze
upon pictures in the Windows, but as the Woman which had the bloody issue,
touching the hem of Christ's garment, drew virtue from Mat. 9. 20.
himself, because she believed: so Christ would that we touching these signs
should draw virtue from himself, that is, all the graces which these signs
represent. Therefore as the Levites, ^ Chr. 35. 6.
under the Law, were bound to prepare their brethren before they came to the
Passover; So preachers of the Gospel should prepare their brethren before they
come to the Supper of the Lord. For which purpose I have chosen this place to
the Corinthians, which is the clearest and fullest declaration of this
Sacrament in all the Scripture.

The Lord Jesus in the night, etc.
The sum of all these words is, the Institution, and use of The Division.
the Lords Supper. First, Paul shows the Author of it, the Lord Jesus; then
the time when it was instituted, in the night that he was betrayed; then the
manner how he did institute it, he took Bread and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and gave unto his Disciphes, etc. then the end why he did institute
it, for a remembrance of his Death.

Touching the Author, he which is signified by it, was the Author of it, The
Lord Jesus has bid us to supper, I am not The Author.
worthy (says John) to loose his shoe: so we are not worthy to wait at his
trancher, and yet he will have us to sit at his Table. Ioh. 1. 27.
To him belongs the power to ordain Sacraments in his Church, because he
fulfilled the Sacraments of the Law. When None but Christ may ordain Sacraments.
Christ came, the Passover ceased, because he is our Passover; that is, the
Lamb by whose blood we are saved. When Christ came, Circumcision ceased,
because he is our circumcision, that is, the purifier and clenser of our sins.
Joh. 1. 29.


Now these two Sacraments are fulfilled: he has appointed Rev. 7. 1.
two other Sacraments for them; in stead of the paschal Lamb, which the Jews
did eat, he has given us another Lamb to eat, which John calls the Lamb of
God, that is himself upon whom all do feed, whosoever do receive this Sacrament
with an assured John 1. 29.
faith that Christ died to possess them of life. The breaking of the Bread does
signify the wounding of the Body: the pouring out of the Wine does signify the
shedding of his Blood. The eating of the Bread and drinking of the Wine does
signify that his Flesh and Blood do nourish in us life eternal, as the Bread
and Wine do nourish the life present.

In stead of Circumcision, which began at Abraham, he has ordained Baptism,
which began at John, a more lively representation of the true Circumcision of
the Heart, because it represents Genesis 17. 10. Who was therefore called John
the Baptis. Mat. 3. 1. Lev. 1. 5.
unto us the blood of Christ, which washes our souls as the water in Baptism
washes our bodies.

Touching the time, in the night (says Paul) therefore this Sacrament is
called the Lord's Supper, because it was instituted at night when they used to
sup. But what night? Even that night (says Paul) when he was betrayed: that
night which he should have cursed, as Job did the day of his birth, if he had
suffered against his will: that night when he should have thought to destroy
men, as men conspired to destroy him. *2.
That night (says Paul) this Sacrament of grace, and peace, and life began:
Even that night when we betrayed him. Many nights did he spend in watching and
praying for us; and is there a night now for us to betray him? That was a dark
night, when men went about to put out the Sun which brought them light. Who can
but wonder, to see how Christ and they for whom Christ came, were occupied at
one time? when they devised mischief against him, and sought all means to
destroy him, then he consulted how to save them, and instituted the same night
this blessed Sacrament, to convey all his graces and blessings unto them, Even
that night when they betrayed him. The reason why this action was deferred
until night, is, because that Why the Sacrament was instituted at night Why it
was deferred to his last night.
was the time appointed by the Law to eat the passover which was like a
Predecessor of this Sacrament. The reason why he deferred it until his last
night, was, because the passover could not be ended before the fullness of
time, and the true paschal Lamb were come to be slain in stead of the other.
Therefore how fitly did Christ end the Passover, which was a sign of his
sufferings, so presently before his suffering; And beside, how sweetly did he
confirm his Disciples faith, when as they should see that the next day
performed before their eyes, which over night both in the Passover and in the
Sacrament, was so lively resembled unto them? if any man from this do gather,
that Why we receive not the Lord's Supper at night.
we ought to eat the Lords supper at night, as Christ did, he must understand
that we have not the same cause to do so which Christ had, because of the
Passover. And therefore the Church which has discretion of times and places,
has altered both the time and the place, using the Temples in stead of the
chamber, and the morning in stead of the evening: for indifferent things are
ruled by order and decency.

Touching the manner, He took Bread, and when he had geven thanks, he brake it
and gave it unto them. He would not eat it, not break it, before he had given
thanks to God. What need he which was God, give thanks to God, but to show us
what we should do when we eat our selves? In all things give thanks (says
Paul) whereby we declare that all things come from God: but the wicked believe
easier that God does take, than that he does give, and therefore they never
pray heartily unto him for any thing, nor feelingly thank him for it. For which
the Lord complains, saying: I have loved you, yet ye say, wherein have thou
loved us? Showing that we are worse then the Ox, Genesis 19. 20.
which knows his feeder. And if that we acknowledge all things from God, yet
we do like Lot, Is it not a little one, (says he) when he craved to go unto
Zoar? as though it were not much which he asked: so we mince and extenuate the
gifts of God, before we receive them and after: like them which have a grace
for dinner, and none for breakfast, as though they had their dinners from God,
and breakfasts of their own.

Our example did not so, although it was but bread which he received, yet he
was more thankful for bread, than many which bury the fouls, and fishes, and
beasts in their belly: for if account of all were kept, for one that prays;
Give us this day our daily bread, a hundred take their bread, and meat, and
Zuke 11. 3.
sleep too which never pray for it.

After he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave unto them, and said. Take,
eat; for when he had given thanks to God, then it was sanctified, and blessed,
and lawful to eat. So when thou servest God, then it is lawful for thee to use
Gods blessings, then Note.
thou may eat and drink as Christ did, but not before: for these things were
created to serve them which serve God: if thou do not serve him for them,
thou encrochest upon Gods blessings, and stealest his creatures, which are no
more thine, then thou art his: for the good God created all things for good
men, as the devils possessions are reserved for evil men.

Therefore as Christ would not break the bread before he had given thanks to
the founder, so know, that there is some thing to be done before thou receive
any benefit of God, and presume not to use his creatures with more liberty than
his Son did, which did not eat without giving thanks, nor rise again without
singing a Psalm.

It follows, This is my Body. Here is the fruit of his Thanks Mat. 26 26
before; he prayed that the Bread and Wine might be blessed, and they were
blessed. As Isaac's blessing showed it self upon Genesis 27.
Jacob whom he blessed, so Christ's blessing appeared straight upon these
mysteries: for it could not be said before, This is my Body, because it was
mere Bread; but now it may be called his Body because his blessing has infused
that virtue into it, that it does not only represent his Body, but conveys his
Body and himself unto us. The efficacy of his blessing is in this Sacrament
ever since, sanctifying it unto us as well as it did to the Apostles, even as
Christ's Prayer stayed Peter's Faith after Christ was dead.

Now you have heard the meaning of these words, He took Luke 22.
Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it: you shall see with Heb. 2.
16.
what a mystical resemblance they unite Christ and us. First, as Christ in the
Supper took Bread to feed us, so in his Birth he took our Flesh to save us.
Secondly, as Christ when he had taken the Bread, blessed the Bread to make it a
Spiritual Food: so Christ when he had taken our Flesh, powered forth most rich
John 17. 1.
and precious Graces into it, to make it Food of Life unto us. Thirdly, as
Christ when he had blessed the Bread, brake the 1 Pet. 2 24.
Bread; so Christ when he had filled his Body with most precious Graces, brake
it up like a rich Treasure-House, his hands Ephesians. 3. 17.
by the nails, his back by the stripes, his head by the thorns, his side by
the Spear, that out of every hole a River of Grace and Goodness might issue and
flow forth unto us. Lastly, as Christ gave the Bread when he had broken it, so
Christ (by a lively Faith) communicates his Body after he has Crucified it.
Hereby we are taught, that when we see the Minister take the Bread to feed us,
we must conceive, that Christ (being God from everlasting) took our Flesh to
Save us. When we see the Minister bless the Bread to a holy use, we must
conceive, that Christ (by uniting the Godhead unto it) sanctified his Flesh
for our Redemption. When we see the Minister break the Bread to sustain our
Bodies, we must conceive that Christ in his Death, break his Body to refresh
our Souls. When we see the Minister give the Bread to our hand, we must
conceive, that Christ as truly offers himself to our Faith, to be received of
us.

Because upon these words the Papists ground their Transubstantiation, that is,
That the Bread is changed into Christ's Flesh, and the Wine is turned into
Christ's Blood, whereby we eat the same Body which dyed upon the Cross; and
drink the same Blood which issued out of his side. That you may see the
blindness of this Popish Dream, I would have you but mark every word of the
Scripture, how they make against Transubstantiation, that ye may see them slain
like Goliath with their own Sword: Even as God made Caiphas speak against
himself, so the Scriptures which Papists and other 1 Sa. 17. 5. Joh. 18. 14. 1
K. 18. 28.
Heretics allege, do make against themselves, like the Baalites which wounded
their own flesh. I may liken their al^egations to Satan's when he tempted
Christ in the Wilderness, he alleged Heretics allege Scripture like the
Devil.
but one sentence of Scripture for himself, and that Psalm out of which he
borrowed it made so plain against him, that he was necessitated to pick here a
word and there a word, and leave out that which went before, and skip in the
midst, and omit that which came after, or else he had marred his cause. The
Mal. 4. Psalm. 91.
Scripture is so holy, pure, and true, that no word or syllable thereof can
make for the Devil, or for Sinners, or for Heretics: yet as the Devil alleged
Scripture, though it made not for him but against him; so do the Libertines,
Epicures and Heretics, as though they had learned at his School.

Now there is no sentence of the Scripture, which the wiser Papists allege
boldly for Transubstantiation but this, that Christ said, This is my Body: by
which they may prove as well, that Mat. 26. 2.
Christ is a Door, because he says, I am the Door: or a Vine, because he
says, I am a Vine: for his sayings are alike. Figurative Joh. 10. 7. 9
Speeches must not be construed literally, but this is Heretics Joh. 15. 1.
fashion. If you mark you shall see throughout, that all the Testimonies which
the Papists allege for their Heresies, are Note.
either tropes or figures, allegories, parables, allusions or dark speeches,
which when they presume to expound allegorically, or literally, without
conference of any other Scriptures; then they wander and stray from the mark,
or else it is impossible that the Truth should maintain Error, that is, that
the Scripture should speak for Heresy, if it were not wrested and perverted:
Genesis 3. 3.
therefore we see that Eve never erred, until she corrupted the Text.

Now we will enter the lists with our adversaries, and see whether these words
do prove that the Bread and Wine are turned into Christ's Body. Paul says,
Jesus took Bread: well then; yet Arguments against Popish Transubstantiation.
it is Bread: when he had taken it, then he blessed it; what did he bless? the
Bread which he took; well then, yet it is Bread: when he had blessed it, then
he break it; what did he break? the Bread which he blessed; well then, yet it
is Bread: when he had broken it, then he gave it; what did he give? the Bread
which he break: well then, yet it is Bread: when he had given it, they did eat
it; what did they eat? the Bread which he gave them; well then, yet it is
Bread: when they did eat it, then he said, This is my Body; what did he call
his Body? the Bread which they did eat; well then, yet is it Bread. If it be
Bread all this while, when he did take it, and bless it, and break it, and gave
it, and they did eat it, when is it turned into his Body? here Mat. 22. 34
they stand like the Sadduces, as mute as Fishes.

Now that ye may see, that not we only say it is Bread and Wine after the
Consecration; in the 27. verse, Christ himself does call it Bread and Wine
after he had given it, as he did before. And in Mark he says, I will drink no
more of the fruit of the Vine. Here Christ says, that it was the Fruit of the
Vine Mar. 14. 25
which he drank; but his Blood is not the Fruit of Vines, but Wine, therefore
Wine was his drink, and not Blood.

Beside, if you would hear Paul expound Christ, he shows that all our Fathers
had the same substance of Christ in their Sacraments, that we have in ours; for
he says, They all did eat 1. Cor. 10. 4. Uerse 3. 4.
the same spiritual meat, and all drank the same spiritual drink. Straight he
says, that this meat, and this drink was Christ. Mark that he Verse 4.
says not only, They did eat the same meat that we eat; but he says, that
this meat was Christ: and not only so, but to show that Christ is not a
corporal meat, as the Papists say; he says, he is a spiritual meat as we say:
therefore you see that we do not eat him corporally, no more then our Fathers,
but that as they did eat him spiritually, so do we; for spiritual meat must be
eaten spiritually, as corporal meat is eaten corporally.

Again, for the signs to be turned into the thing signified by them, is utterly
against the nature of a Sacrament, and makes it no Sacrament, because there is
no Sign: for every Sacrament does consist of a Sign, and a thing signified: the
Sign is ever an Earthly thing, and that which is signified is a Heavenly thing.
This shall appear in all examples: As, in Paradise there was a very Tree for
the Sign, and Christ the thing signified by it: in Circumcision there was a
cuting off of the Skin, and the cuting Gen 2. 9. Genesis 17. 11. Exodus 12. 3. Exodus
23 11 Heb. 9. 1. Exodus 30. Exodus 25. 24 Exodus 17. 16 Mat. 3 16. John 6. 49. John
1. 33. 2 Cor. 11. 19
off of Sin: in the Passover there was a Lamb, and Christ: in the Sabbath there
was a day of rest, and eternal rest: in the Sacrifice there was an offering of
some Beast, and the offering of Christ: in the Sauctuary there was the holy
Place, and Heaven: in the Propitiatory there was the Golden covering, and
Christ our cover: in the Wilderness there was a Rock yielding Water, and Christ
yielding his Blood: in the Apparition there was a Dove, and the holy Ghost: in
the Manna there was Bread, and Christ: in Baptism there is very Water which
washes us, and Christ's Blood washing us: so in the Supper of Christ there is
very Bread and Wine for the sign, and the Body and Blood of Christ for the
thing signified, or else this Sacrament is against the nature of all other
Sacraments.

Again, there must be a proportion between the Passover and the Lord's Supper,
because this was figured by the other. Now the Exodus 12.
Jews had in their Passover, Bread and Wine, and a Lamb: So our Savior Christ
instituting his last Supper, left Bread and Wine, and a Lamb: the which name is
given to himself, because he Mat. 26. 26 John 19.
came like a Lamb, and dyed like a Lamb.

Again, if Christ's very Body were offered in the Sacrament, then it were not a
Sacrament, but a Sacrifice, which two differ as much as giving, and taking: for
in a Sacrifice we give, and in a Sacrament we receive, and therefore we say our
Sacrifice, and Christ's Sacrament.

Again, every Sacrifice was offered upon the Altar. Now mark the wisdom of the
holy Ghost, least we should take this for a Exodus 27.
Sacrifice, he never names Altar when he speaks of it, but, The Table of the
Lord. Therefore it is no doubt but the devil has kept the name of Altar, that
we might think it a Sacrifice.

Again, if the Bread were Christ's Flesh, and the Wine his Blood, as these two
are separate one from the other; so Christ Flesh should be separate from his
Blood, but his Body is not divided, for then it were a dead Body.

Again, that which remains does nourish the Body, and relish in the Mouth as
it did before, which could not be, but that it is the same food which it was
before.

Again, I would ask, whose are this whitness, and hardness, and roundness, and
coldness? None of them say that it is the whitness, and hardness, and
roundness, and coldness of Christ's Body: therefore it must needs be the
whiteness, and hardness, and roundness, and coldness of the Bread, or else
qualities should stand without substances, which is, as if one should tell you
of a House without a foundation.

Again, as Christ dwells in us, so he is eaten of us: but he dwells in us
only by faith, Ephe. 3. 17. Therefore he is eaten only by faith.

Again, none can be saved without the Communion of the Body of Christ: but if
all should communicate with it corporally, then neither Infants, nor any of our
Fathers, the Patriarchs, or the Prophets, should be saved, because they
received it not so.

Again, Christ says not, This Wine, but This Cup: and therefore by their
conclusion, not only the Wine should be turned into Blood, but the Cup too.

Again, Paul says, They which receive unworthily, receive their own damnation.
But if it were the Flesh of Christ, they should rather receive salvation than
damnation, because Christ says: He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my
Blood, has life everlasting. John 6. 54.

Again, if they would hear an Angel from Heaven: when Christ's Body was
glorified, an Angel says to the Woman, He is risen, and is not here, Mat. 28.
as if he should say; his Body is but in one place at once, or else he might
have been there though he was risen.

Again, why do they say in receiving this Sacrament, ever since the Primitive
Church, Lift up your Hearts, if they have all in their Mouths? To end this
controversy, here we may say as the Disciples said to Christ, Whither shall we
go from thee? I mean we need not to go to any other expositor of Christ then
Christ himself, therefore mark what he says: at first, when John 6. 68.
Christ said that he was the Bread of Life, and that all which would live, must
eat him, they murmured until he expounded his words, and how did he expound his
words? Thus, He that John 6. 60.
comes unto me has eaten, and he that believes in me, has drank. After when
he instituted this Sacrament, in like words, they John 6. 35.
murmured not, which they would as before, if he had not resolved them before,
that to eat his Body, and to drink his Blood, was nothing but to come to him,
and believe in him.

After he had said so, they murmured not, because they did see some reason in
it, as it is plainly said, This is my Body: so it John 6. 63.
is plainly said, These words. are spirit: that is, they must be understood
spiritually, and not literally.

But if it be Flesh indeed, why do they not satisfy the simple people how they
may eat this Flesh in Lent, when they forbid them to eat any Flesh, they must
needs eat it doubtfully, and he which doubts, says James, receives nothing:
therefore he which eats the Mass, receives nothing.

I did not allege the Fathers in my Sermon, but if any suspend his assent,
till they bring in their verdict, let him hear them make confession of their
belief.

Augustine says, The Lord doubts not to say, This is my Body; when he gave
only a Sign, or Sacrament of his Body. Aug. upon the 3 Psalm. Tertul. against
Marcion the 4. book. 4. book 4. can. of Sacraments. In his first dialogue upon
the 15 of Mat. Iren. 4. book cap. 34. against Valentinus Ad ob Theod.
Anathematis. 1. Book of Epi. In that Gospel whosoever speaks a word etc. Hom.
60. to the People of Antioch. To Caesirius the Monk Against Eutiches the
Heretic.


Tertullian says, This is my Body, that is a Sign of my Body.

Ambrose says, The Bread and Wine remain still the same thing that they were.

Theodoret says, After the Consecration, the mystical Signs do not cast off
their own nature, but abide still in their first substance and form.

Origin says, The Bread that is sanctified with the word of God, as touching
the material substance thereof, goes into the Belly and forth again like other
Meats.

Irenaeus says, That it has two things in it, one Earthly, and the other
Heavenly.

Cyril says, Our Sacraments avouch not the eating of a Man.

Cyprian says, The Lord called Bread made of many grains, his Body; and called
Wine made of many grapes, his Blood.

Athanasius says, Christ made mention of his Ascension into Heaven, that he
might withdraw his Disciples from corporal and fleshly eating.

Chrysostom says, God gives us things spiritual, under things visible and
natural. And again, being sanctified, it is delivered from the name of Bread,
and is exalted to the name of the Lord's Body, although the nature of the Bread
still remain.

And because they believe that the Pope cannot err, Pope Gelasius sets too
his hand, and says with the rest: Neither the substance of the Bread, nor
nature of the Wine, cease to be more than they were before.

Tell us Papist, do not these Fathers speak as plain as we? Can thou avouch
Transubstantiation more flatly then they deny it? How had this Heresy bin
chased, if the devil had hatched it in their time?

Thus the Scriptures on the one side, and the Fathers on the Upon the Canon
lect. 40.
other side, did so trouble three Arch-papists, Biel, Tonstall, and Fisher,
that Gabriel Biel says, how the Body of Christ is in the Sacrament, is not
found in the Canon of the Bible.

Tonstall says, It had been better to leave every Man to his 1 Book of the
Sacra. page 46. Against the captivity of Babylon, made by M. Luther. Luke 19.
22.
own conjecture, as they were before the Council of Lateran, than to bring in
such a question.

Fisher says, No man can prove by the words of the Gospel, that any Priest in
these days does consecrate the very Body and Blood of Christ.

Here is fulfilled, Out of thine own Mouth I will condemn thee. But we will not
carry the matter so, because a Judge must have two Ears, therefore now let them
speak.

Because they cannot tell how the Bread and Wine should be The Papists
allegations for the real presence. Exodus 4. 8. and 21.
turned into Flesh and Blood, and yet appear Bread and Wine still, they say it
is a Miracle: but how do they prove it? if they contend it is a Miracle, they
must show us a Sign: for every Miracle may be seen, like all the Miracles of
Moses and Christ, and the Apostles: and therefore a Miracle is called a Sign,
because it may be seen like a Sign, and the word signifies a Wonder. And the
Jews craving a Miracle, said; Show us a Miracle: Exodus 9.
as though they were taught to judge of Miracles by sight. All which does show
that a Miracle may be seen: but here no Miracle is seen.

Again, a Miracle (especially in the time of the Gospel) is an extraordinary
thing: but they make this an ordinary thing: for if the Bread and Wine be
turned into Flesh and Blood, then Miracles are as common as Sacraments, and so
because they have Mass every day, they should work Miracles every day.

Lastly, this seems strange that Augustine (whom they so much honor) gathered
all the miracles which are written in the Scripture, and yet amongst all,
speaks not of this: therefore then it was counted no Miracle: but Paul speaks
of lying Miracles, 2. These. 2.
and this is one of them.

If they say that Christ can turn Bread and Wine into his Objection.
Body, and therefore he does. First, they must prove that he Answer.
will, for they can do many things themselves which they do not, because they
will not: therefore it is an old answer, that from Can to Will no argument
follows. The Leper did not say unto Christ, If thou can, thou will: but, If
thou will, thou can.

But the question which they think cannot be answered, like Mar. 1. 40.
Objection.
their Invincible Navies, is this. If the Bread be not his Body, why does he
call it his Body? Resolve this knot, and all is clear. Mark then, and we will
loose it as well as we can: He says, This Answer.
is my Body: as he says after, which is broken for you: Why? his Body was not
broken before he suffered, how did he say then, which is broken, before it was
broken? There is no sense of it but this, the Bread was broken, and signified
that his Body should be broken.

Now as the breaking of the Bread did signify the breaking of his Body, so the
Bread must needs signify his Body: but as his Body was not broken indeed when
the Bread was broken, so the Bread could not be his Body indeed, for then his
Body should have been broken when the Bread was broken: Yet let them object
what they can.

If (say they) the Bread and Wine be not changed into his Objection.
Body and Blood, why does he speak so darkly? he might have spoken plainer.

I answer, though this seem dark to Papists, yet it was not dark to the
Apostles, they understood his meaning well enough, Answer.
and all the rest for 1215 years after Christ, before Transubstantiation was
spoken off. If the Apostles had not understood his meaning, they would not
stick to ask him, as their manner was, until they were acquainted with Christ's
phrase, whenever they doubted upon any of his speeches, they were wont to
come unto him and say; Master, what is the meaning? but they Luke 8. 9.
were used to such phrases: for it was Christ's manner to teach by similitudes,
showing one thing by another, which is the plainest manner of teaching, and
most used in holy Scripture, especially in the Types and Shadows of this
Sacrament. For example, Christ calls the Lamb the Passover, in place whereof
Mat 26. 17
this Sacrament succeeded, and therefore presently after they had eaten the
Passover, Christ instituted the Sacrament to be used for it. Christ (I say)
called the Lamb the Passover, and yet the Passover was this, an Angel passed
over the Houses of the Israelites, and struck the Egyptians: this was not a
Lamb; and yet because a Lamb was a Sign of this Passover, as the Bread Exodus 12.
27
and Wine is of Christ's Body, therefore Christ called the Lamb the Passover,
as he calls the Bread and Wine his Body.

Again, Circumcision is called the Covenant, and yet Circumcision Genesis 17. 13.
was nothing but the cutting away of a Skin: but the Covenant is, In Abraham's
seed all Nations shall be blessed, I will be their Genesis 12 3.
God, and they shall be my people, I will defend and save them, and they shall
serve and worship me. This is not Circumcision, and yet as though Circumcision
were the Covenant it self, it is called the Covenant, because it signifies the
Covenant; so Bread and Wine are called Christ's body, because they signify
Christ's body.

Again, Baptism is called Regeneration, and yet Baptism is Tit. 3. 5.
a dipping of our bodies in water; but Regeneration is the renewing of the mind
to the image wherein it was created. This is 1 Cor. 5.
not Baptism, and yet as though Baptism were Regeneration it self, it is called
Regeneration, because it signifies Regeneration: so the bread and wine are
called Christ's body, because they signify Christ's body.

Again, the Cup is called the New Testament; and yet the Cup Luke 22. 2.
is but a piece of metal filled with Wine: but the New Testament is: He which
believes in the Son shall be saved. This is not a Cup, John 3. 35.
and yet as though the Cup were the New Testament it self, it is called the New
Testament, because it signifies the New Testament: so the bread and wine are
called Christ's body, because they signify Christ's body.

They which knew that the Lamb is not the Passover, though Christ called it the
Passover; that Circumcision is not the Covenant, though God calls it the
Covenant; that Baptism is not Regeneration, though it be called Regeneration;
that the Cup is not the New Testament, though Christ called it the New
Testament; could they not as well understand, that the Bread and Wine were not
Christ's body, though Christ called them his body? As they understood these
speeches, so they understood this speech: therefore they which say, that the
Bread and Wine are Christ's body, because Christ says, This is my Body; may as
Mat. 26. 25
well say, that the Lamb is the Passover, because Christ calls it the
Passover; that Baptism is Regeneration, because Paul calls it Regeneration;
that this Cup is the New Testament, because Christ calls it the New Testament.

If every Sacrament was called by the thing which it signified, and yet never
any Sacrament was taken for the thing it self; what reason have they to take
this Sacrament for the thing it self more than all the rest? It is the consent
of all Writers, that a Sacrament is a sign, therefore not the thing signified:
no more than the Bush at the Door is the Wine in the Seller. If I call the
Prince a Phoenix, the University a Fountain, the Court a Peacock, the City a
Sea, the Country an Hermit: why, can the Papists understand me, and not
understand Christ?

What a dark, and strange, and intricate, and incredible speech had this been
for them to understand grossly, and literally? Would they think that they did
eat Christ's body, when his body stood before them, and he had told them before
that his body was like their body? Nay this would have required more words, and
made them come again; with Master, what is the meaning? for Luke 9. 8.
they were not so instructed yet before the Resurrection, to believe every
thing without questioning, if it were contrary to sense and reason: but as they
asked, who had given him any meat, then he said that he had meat, and they
could see none: so they would have asked, what meat is this which we see not?
How John 4. 33.
can every one of us eat his body, and yet he has but one body, and that body
is whole when we eat it? Lo, he stands before us and says, that his body is
like unto ours, and yet he takes bread and breaks it, and gives it unto us to
eat, and when we eat it, he says, This is my body, and yet his body stands
before Luke 24.
us still. If his body be like ours (as he says) how can it be eaten, and be
there, for ours cannot? Thus they would have questioned, if they had not been
used to such phrases: but as they could understand him, when he called himself
a Stone, a Rock, a Door, a Window, and a Vine: so they picked out his meaning
when he had said that Bread was his body: for he had told them before, that he
was the Bread of Eternal Life.

Now the bread of Eternal Life is not eaten with teeth, for the body cannot eat
spiritually, no more than the Soul can eat corporally; and therefore he is such
a Bread as is eaten with Faith, and so himself says in the Gospel of St. John.
Mark this eating by Faith, and all the strife is ended. Flesh and Blood indeed
John 6 3.
need not faith to chew them, for the teeth can chew them well enough.
Therefore if the Bread and Wine were the body of Christ, then we need not faith
to eat it, but all those which have teeth might eat Christ's body, yea the Mice
might eat it as well as Men, for they eat the same Bread that we do, as well
after it is consecrated, as before.

If this be not enough to batter the ruins of this upstart Heresy, I will
come to Interrogatories, and see whether they have learned it by rote, or by
reason.

If they ground their Transubstantation upon these words of Mat. 26. 2.
Christ This is my Body, which he spoke to his Disciples, I ask them, whether
they receive that body which was mortal, or that body which is glorified?
because one of these bodies they must needs receive, either his mortal body, or
his glorified body. If they say that it is his mortal body, the mortal body
will Whether Christ's mortal Body can be in the Sacrament.
not profit them: for you see that mortal food is but for this mortal life:
neither has Christ a mortal body now to communicate unto them, because it is
changed to an immortal body; therefore they cannot receive the mortal body,
because Christ has not a mortal body to give unto them. If they say, that they
receive his glorified body, then they must fly from this Text: for at that time
Christ had not any glorified body.

When this Sacrament was instituted, and Christ said, This is my Body, his body
was not glorified, because the Sacrament was instituted before his Death, and
his body was glorified after his Resurrection. Therefore if they receive the
same body which the Apostles received, as they say they do, they cannot receive
a glorified body, because then Christ had not a glorified body to Communicate
unto them.

Thus the Rocks and Sands are of both sides them, they receive a body neither
mortal nor immortal: If Christ have any such body, judge you. Here they stand
like a Fool, which cannot tell on his tale. Nabuchadnezzar dreamed a dream and
knew Dan. 4. 15.
not what it meant.

Beside I ask them to whom Christ spoke when he said, This is my Body? S. Mark
says, he spoke to them, that is, to his Disciples: well then, if these words,
This is my Body, were not Mar. 14 24 Christ spoke not to the Bread and Wine,
but to his Disciples.
spoken to the Signs, but to the Persons: not to the Bread and Wine, but to the
Receivers, as the words which follow, Do this in remembrance of me: If these
words were not spoken to the Bread and Wine, then it is plain that they do not
change the nature of the Bread and Wine. If the nature of them be not altered,
then the substance remains, and then we receive no other substance with them,
because two substances cannot be in one place.

What then, is there nothing in the Sacrament but Bread and More in the Lord's
Supper, then Bread and Wine. 1 Cor. 10.
Wine, like an hungry nunscion? Nay, we say not that the Sacrament is nothing
but a bare sign, or that you receive no more than you see: for Christ says,
that it is his body: and Paul says, that it is the Communion of Christ's body
and blood: Therefore there is more in sacramental bread then in common bread;
though the nature be not changed, yet the use is changed: it does not only
nourish the body as it did before, but also it brings a bread with it which
nourishes the Soul: for as sure as we receive bread, so sure we receive
Christ; not only the benefits of Christ, but Christ: although not in a Popish
manner, yet we are so joined and united unto him, even as though we were but
one body with him.

As the Spouse does not marry with the Lands and Goods, but with the Man
himself, and being partaker of him, is made A Similitude.
partaker of them: so the Faithful do not only marry with Christ's benefits,
but with Christ himself, and being partakers of him, they are made partakers of
his benefits, for Christ may not in any wise be divided from his benefits, no
more than the Sun from his light.

It is said, The Father gave us his Son, and so the Son gives us Romans 8. 3.
himself. For as the bread is a sign of his body, so the giving of the bread is
a sign of the giving of his body. Thus he lies before us like a Pelican,
which lets her young ones suck her blood: so that we may say, the Lord
invited us to Supper, and he himself was our Meat.

But if you ask how this is? I must answer. It is a Mystery: but if I could
tell it, it were no Mystery. Yet, as it is said, when Dan. 2. 25.
three Men walked in the midst of the Furnace, One like the Son of God walked
amongst them: So, when the Faithful receive the Bread and Wine, one like the
Son of God seems to come unto them, which fills them with peace, and joy, and
grace, that they marvel what it was which they received besides bread and wine.

For example, thou make a bargain with thy Neighbor for A Similitude.
House or Land, and receivest in earnest a piece of gold: that which thou
receivest is but a piece of gold: but now it is a sign of thy bargain, and if
thou keep not touch with him, happily it will clasp thee for all that thou art
worth: so, that which thou receivest is bread, but this bread is a sign of
another matter which passes bread.

Again, thou have an Obligation in thy hand, and I ask thee Another Similitude.
what have thou there? and thou say, I have here an hundred pounds: why (say
I) there is nothing but paper, ink, wax: Oh, but by this (say thou) I will
recover an hundredth pounds, and that is as good. So beloved, this is as good,
that under these signs, you receive the virtue of Christ's body and blood by
Faith, as if you did eat his body, and drink his blood indeed, which is
horrible to think that any should devour their God, thinking thereby to worship
him: never nay Heretic nor Idolater, conceived so grossly of their GOD before
the Papist. We read of a People which did eat Men, but never of any People
which did eat their God.

All the Apostles say, that it was needful that Christ should take our flesh:
but no Apostle says, that it is needful that we should take Christ's flesh;
for all the blessings of Christ are apprehended by Faith, and nothing fit to
apprehend him whom we see not, but Faith: and therefore one of their own
Pillars said, Believe and thou have eaten. Faith does more in Religion than the
mouth, or else we might say with the Woman, Blessed are Augustine. Luke 11 27.
the breasts which gave thee suck: and so none should be blessed but Mary: but
Mary was not blessed because Christ was in her body, but because Christ was in
her heart: and least this should seem incredible unto you, because Mary is
called blessed among Women; when Christ heard the Woman say, Blessed are the
breasts which gave thee suck, he replied unto her, Blessed are they Luk 8. 21.
which hear the word of God and keep it: these are my Brethrea, and Sisters,
and Mother, says Christ, as though the rest were no kin to him in Heaven,
though they were kin in Earth.

Thus if Christ were in thy body, and thou should say as this Woman: Blessed
is the body that has thee in it, nay would Christ say, Blessed is the heart
that has me in it. If Mary were no whit better for having Christ in her arms,
nor for having him in her body, how much better art thou for having him in Note.
thy belly, where thou can not see him? Must the Sun needs come to us, or
else cannot his heat and light profit us? nay it does us more good, because it
is so far off: so this Sun is gone from us, that he might give more light unto
us, which made him say, It is good for you that I go from you: therefore away
with Joh. 16. 7. Pro. 31. 29.
this carnal eating of spiritual things. Many daughters have done virtuously,
but thou (says Solomon) surpassest them all. So many Heretics have spoken
absurdly, but this surpasses them all, that Christ most be applied like
physic, as though his Blood could not profit us, unless we did drink it, and
swallow it as a potion.

Is this the Papists union with Christ? Is this the manner whereby we are made
one Flesh with Christ, to eat his flesh? nay, when he took our flesh unto him,
and was made Man, then we were united to him in the flesh, and not now. Christ
took our flesh, we take not his flesh, but belive that he took ours, therefore
if you would know whether Christ's Body be in the A way to know whether
Christ's Body be in the Sacrament.
Sacrament, I say unto you as Christ said unto Thomas, touch, feel, and see. In
visible things God has appointed our eyes to be judges, for as the spirit
discerns spiritual objects, so sense discerns sensible objects. As Christ
taught Thomas to judge of his Body, so may we; and so should they: therefore if
you cannot see his Body, nor feel his Body, you may gather by Christ's saying
to Thomas, that he would not have you believe John 20. 27
that it is his body, for my body (says Christ) may be seen and felt. And thus
Transubstantiation is found a liar.

Now, if you ask me why Christ calls the sign by the name Why Christ calls
the Bread his Body.
of the thing it self, I ask thee again; May thou say when thou see the
picture of the Queen, this is the Queen, and when thou see the picture of a
Lion, this is a Lion? and may not Christ say when he sees a thing like his
body, This is my Body?

I showed you before, that every Sacrament is called by the name of the thing
which it does signify, and therefore why should we stumble at this more then
the rest? The reason why the signs have the name of the things, is to strike a
deeper reverence in us, to receive this Sacrament of Christ reverently,
sincerely, and holily, as if that Christ were there present in body and blood
himself,

And surely, as he which defaceth the Queens Seal is convicted of Contempt and
Treason to her own Person; so he which prophaneth the Seals of Christ, does not
Worship Christ, but despite him, and that contempt shall be required of him, as
if he had contemned Christ himself. This is the Reason why Christ calls the
signs of his body his body, to make us take this Sacrament reverently, because
we are apt to contemn it, as the Jews did their Manna.

It follows; Do this in remembrance of me: That is, these Verse 24.
Signs shall be a remembrance of my Death: When you break the Bread you shall
remember the wounding of my body, and when you drink the Wine you shall
remember the shedding of my blood. If we do this in remembrance of Christ's
body, which was broken like the Bread, it is an Argument that his body is not
there, because remembrance is not of things present, but of things absent; we
remember not, but we see that which is before us. This might put the Papists in
remembrance that Christ is not Sacrificed now, when we do but remember his
Sacrifice; this is not Christ's Sacrifice, but a remembrance of his Sacrifice:
he was Sacrificed before, and now it is applied, lest his Sacrifice should be
in vain. This was done once really, when he offered himself upon the Cross,
therefore that offering was called a Sacrifice, because he was sacrificed
indeed; but this offering is called a Sacrament, because it is but a sign of
his Sacrifice.

If Christ in this Sacrament were offered indeed, then it should If Christ's
body were in the Sacrament, it were not a Sacrament but a Sacrifice.
be called a Sacrifice, as his once offering was: but because it is but a
remembrance of his Sacrifice, therefore it is called a Sacrament. This is not a
Sacrifice of Christ, but a Sacrifice of our selves. Least we should take it to
be a Sacrifie of Christ, Christ himself calls it a remembrance of his
Sacrifice, Do this in my remembrance.

Here is our work, as Christ has done, so must we do, so we Minister, and so
you Receive, we can give you nothing but that which we have received from him,
as Paul says. Therefore if Christ did not give his mortal Body which stood
before them, and could not profit them; nor his glorified body, which was not
glorified then, and when it was glorified, ascended up into Heaven, and there
abides: How can these juggling Priests make their God again, which made them?
They can no more turn Wine into Blood, and Bread into Flesh, than they can
command a Gnat to be a Camel; for it is a greater Work to make God, than to
make the World. Therefore as Christ Mat. 24. 23
says, When they tell you here is Christ, or there is Christ, believe them
not: So when they tell you that Christ is in Heaven, and 2 Kin. 2. 17.
that Christ is in Earth, in this place and that place, believe them not; for
Elias's ascension was a figure of Christ's ascension: when Elias was ascended,
yet some sought for his body upon Earth: so though Christ be ascended, yet many
seek his body upon Earth; but as they could not find Elias's body, so these
cannot find Christ's body, although they have sought 300 Years.

But if his body were upon Earth, as they say, should we handle it, and touch
it, now it is glorified? After his Resurrection he said unto Mary, Touch me
not, because his body was glorified: that is, not to be touched with fingers
any more, but with Faith. Joh. 20. 17.
Therefore we read of none that touched his body, (after it was risen) but only
Thomas, to settle his Faith.

Thus you see we need to suborn no witnesses, for every word in this Text which
you seem to allege for Transubstantiation, does make against
Transubstantiation, whereby if Antichrist does signify those which are against
Christ, you see who may be called Antichrist. There is no question in Popery
(except Purgatory the Popes Publican and Tasker) about which the Papists are at
such civil Wars among themselves, as about this Transubstantiation. They cannot
tell when the change begins, nor what manner of change it is, nor how long
the change continues: Some hang one way, and some another, like the
Midianites, which fought one against another. And no Judge. 7. 22.
marvel though their Consciences stagger about it; for to show you the right
Father of it, it was one of the Dreams of Innocentius the Third, in the Year of
our Lord 1215. So many Years passed before Transubstantiation was named, and
then a Pope A Monster of his Age.
set it first on foot: so it came out of Rome, the Mother of all Heresies, and
for want of Scriptures, has been defended with Fire and Sword, and swallowed
more Martyrs than all the gulfs of the Papal Sea beside,

Now, when the Doctrines of men go for Scriptures, you shall see how many
Errors rush into the Church; for grant but this to Eight Absurdities which
follow Transubstantiation.
Pope Innocentius, as the Papists do, that the Bread and Wine are are changed
into Christ's body: First it will follow, that Christ's body is not ascended up
to Heaven, because it remains upon Earth, and so one of the Articles of our
Faith shall be falsified, which says, He is ascended into Heaven, or if he be
ascended, 1.
and descended again, another Article will be falsified, Act. 19. 11.
which says, That he sits at the right hand of his Father, that is, as
Peter says, he abides in Heaven. Secondly, It will follow, Romans 8. 37. Act.
3. 21. 2.
that Christ has not a true Body, but a fantastical Body, because it may be in
many places at one time: for if his Body be in the Sacrament, he must needs
have so many bodies as there be Sacraments; nay, he must have so many bodies as
there be bits in every Sacrament. Thirdly, It will follow, that his Body 3.
is divided from his Soul, and consequently is a dead Body, because the Bread
is only changed into his Body, and not into his Soul. Fourthly, It will follow,
that the wicked and profane, 4.
and reprobate, may receive Christ as well as the godly, because they have a
Mouth to eat as well as the best. Fifthly, 5.
It will follow, that Christ's Sacrifice once for all, was not sufficient,
because we must Sacrifice him again, and break his Body, Heb. 9. 28. and 10. 12.
and shed his Blood, as the Jews crucified him upon the Cross, Sixthly, It will
follow, that the Bread being turned into the body 6.
of our Redeemer, has a part of our Redemption as well as Christ. Seventhly,
It will follow, that Christ did eat his own 7.
Body: for all the Fathers say, that he did eat the same Bread which he gave to
his Disciples. Lastly, It will follow, that a 8.
Massing Priest shall be the creator of his Creator, because he makes him which
made him. All these Absurdities are hatched of Transubstantiation.

Thus when men devise Articles of their own, while they strike upon the Anvil,
the Sparks fly in their Face; and they are like the man which began to build,
and could not finish it. When I see the Papists in so many Absurdities for
entertaining one Error, methinks, he seems like a Collier, which is grimed
with his own Coals. Therefore, as in manners, we should think of Peter's
saying, Whether is it meet to obey God or Men? Act. 5. 29.
So in Doctrines we should think, whether it be meet to believe God or Men?

Thus you have heard the Author of this Sacrament, The Lord Conclusion.
Jesus; the time when it was instituted, In the night that he was betrayed; the
manner how it was instituted, after Thanksgiving: the end why it was
instituted, for a remembrance of his Death; and the discovery of
Transubstantiation, one of the last Heresies which Babylon hatched. Now, they
which have been Patrons of it before, should do like the Father and Mother of
an Idolater, Deuteronomy. 13. 9. and 9.
that is, lay the first hand upon him to shorten his Life. Thus I end: Think
what account ye shall give of that ye have heard.

The end of the First Sermon.
The Second SERMON ON THE Lord's Supper.
1 Cor. XI. 25, 26, 27, 28. After the same manner also he took the Cup when he
had supped: saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood, this do, as aft
as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.

For as often as ye shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye shall show the
Lord's death till he come.

Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink the Cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and
drink of this Cup.


HEre I am to speak of the second service, as it were, at the Lords Table, and
of that preparation, which is like the Wedding Garment, that every man must
bring to this Banquet. These words are diversely repeated of the Evangelists.
Here it is said, This Mat. 26. 28. Mar. 14. 24.
cup is the New Testament in my Blood. In Matthew and in Mark it is said, This
cup is my blood of the New Testament. This is the first mention which Christ
makes of a Testament, as though now his promises deserved the name of a
Testament, because the Seal is set unto them, which before this Sacrament was
not sealed, but like a bare writing without a Signet. This word Testament, does
imply a promise, and therefore teaches us, that the Sacrament does confirm,
and strengthen, and nourish our Faith, because it seals the promise which we
should believe.

Here is to be noted, that Christ does not only speak of a Testament, but he
calls it a New Testament: which words never met together before, as though
the Law were for the old man to mortify him, and the Gospel for the new man to
comfort him again: or, as if the Old Testament had so washed her Face, and
changed her Apparel at Christ's coming, that one would not think it the same,
but a New Testament, because even now she was shadowed with a Thousand
Ceremonies, and now they are gone from her, like a mist at the Sunrising. As
Christ calls Love, A new Commandment, because he renewed it like a Joh. 13.
34.
Law worn out of memory; so he calls the promise of salvation, A new
Testament, because as it was renewed to Sem, and after renewed to Abraham, and
after renewed to David, so now he renewed it again, which should be always new
and fresh unto us. Every Tsteament is confirmed with blood, the Old Testament
was confirmed by the blood of Goats, and Bullocks, and Rams; but the New
Testament is confirmed by the blood of Christ: My blood (says Christ) is the
blood of the New Testament: Heb. 9. 18. Matt. 26. Luk 22. 20
nay, This Cup (says Christ) is the New Testament. You may see then that they
may gather as well out of Christ's words, that the Cup is the New Testament, as
that the Wine is his Blood: for Christ says, This Cup is the new Testament, as
well as he says, this wine is my blood, or this bread is my body. Beside, when
Christ speaks of a New Testament, he implies that the Old Testament is
fulfilled; the Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Law did signify Heb. 8. 13.
Christ before he came, therefore they are fulfilled in his coming: no more
Sacrifices, no more Ceremonies, for the Truth is come: Sacrifices and
Ceremonies are honorably buried with the Priesthood For Types and Figures.
of Aaron, let them rest: it is not lawful to violate the Sepulchers of the
dead, and take their bodies out of the Earth, as the Witch would raise Samuel
out of his Grave. Therefore they which retain Ceremonies, which should be
abrogated, Relics 1 Sa. 28. 14
of Judaism, or Relics of Papism, may be said to violate the Sepulchers of
the Dead, and disturb the deceased, like the Witch, which presumed to raise
Samuel out of his Grave.

This Testament is called a Testament in blood, because the Testament and Will
of a man is confirmed, when the man is dead: so Christ confirmed his Testament
by his death. Moses says, that life is in the blood: so the blood of Christ is
the life of this Testament. Lev. 1 ^^1
If Christ's blood had not been shed, this Testament made unto us had been
unprofitable, as the Testament of a Father is unto his Son, if the Father
should not die but live: therefore the Apostle says, without shedding of
blood, there is no remission of Heb. 9. 22.
sins. Therefore the Testament or Covenant of the remission of our sins, is
called the Testament in blood: the blood of Christ is the Seal of the
Testament, which we have to show unto God, for the remission of our sins, and
the two Sacraments are a Seal of that blood, to witness that it was shed.

Again, this is a matter regarded in Testaments and Wills; to the Testament of
him that is dead, no man adds or detracteth, but as the Testator made it, so
it stands without alteration: so should this Testament of Christ, and this
Sacrament of Christ, no man should alter it now he is dead, for he which adds
or Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Rev. 22. 18.
detracteth, has a curse in Gods Book.

Therefore Christ when he Instituted this Sacrament, commanded, Do this; that
is, do as I do: least they should swerve one whit from his own manner: yet how
many gawdes have the Papists adeed to it, that he which had heard Christ say,
Do this in remembrance of me, and should see how they handle the matter in
their Mass, could see nothing to remember Christ by but a vail to hide Christ
from him. Therefore this Commandment was repeated again, when he gave the Wine,
Do this, etc.

As he commanded them to eat the bread in remembrance of him, The Popish
receiving under one kind confuted. Mat. 26. 27. 1 Samuel 15. 3.
so he commanded them to drink the wine in remembrance of him: nay, he speaks
more precisely of the wine than of the bread: for he says of the wine, Drink
ye all of this, which he says not of the bread. Surely, Christ did foresee
that some proud Heretics would do otherwise after him, even as it is come to
pass: for the Papists do break this commandment of Christ, as flatly as Saul
break the commandment of Samuel. Samuel commanded him to kill the sat and the
lean, Saul killed the lean, but not the fat; so Christ commands to receive
bread and wine: they teach to receive bread, but not wine. Christ says, Drink
you all of this: They say, drink not all of this: Christ gave the bread and
wine to all; they give the bread to all, and the wine to some: their Priests
receive all, but the people must content themselves with half; the Priest eats
and drinks, but the People must not drink for spilling on their clothes. Is
this the Church which cannot err? Do they think to hem Christ in their Mass,
and shut his ordinance out of their Mass? The Soldiers divided Christ's coat,
but these divide his body, and separate the Bread and Wine Mat. 27. 35
which Christ has joined. Paul speaks of Heretics which taught, louch not,
taste not, handle not: so these say, touch not, How the Popish Priests do injure
the d^^p^e. Col. 2. 21.
taste not, handle not; when they should say, touch, and taste, and handle. Of
all Heresies either old or new, there is none so injurious to the common
people, as the pasture of shavelings Popery: for 1st. They may not read the
Scriptures, 2. They may not come to Councels, 3. They may not examine that
which is tought them, 4. They may not be buried without a Mortuary, 5. They may
not drink at the Communion: as the their Priests were their Lords.

Therefore we may say as a Heathen did, There is no charity in the Papists
Sacrament: because like Ananias, the Priests keep Acts 5. 2.
back that which they should distribute, and mangle the sacrifice as tho Ely
his Sons had left his Book to the Massing Friars. 1 Samuel 2. 13


Thus that ye may know who succeeded the Pharisees, they have fulfilled that
which the Pharisees did, that is, By their own Mar. 7. 13.
commandments, they have made the commandment of God of no effect. For
whereas the purpose of Christ was to tie our Faith wholly to himself, that we
should not seek for any thing without him, knowing that the maintenance of this
life has need both of meat and drink, to teach us that all sufficiency is in
himself: by bread and wine he shows, that he is in stead both of meat and
drink, that is, in stead of all: which signification is taken away where the
wine is not given as well as the bread. Therefore as it is said of a horrible
and odious crime, consider the matter, and give sentence: so I wish all to
consider this innovation, jud. 19. 30
and give sentence of it. Can there be any cleerer contradiction to the word,
or bolder check to Christ, then when he says, Drink ye all of this; to say,
drink not all of this? It is even as when God said, ye shall dye, the Devil
said, ye shall Genesis 2. 27.
not dye: Shall we go now to a Council, or a Father, or a Doctor, to enquire
whether this Doctrine be like Christ's Doctrine? I do verily think that none is
here so simple, but that he sees, that if any thing can be contrary to Christ's
speech, this is contrary to it: but this is only their detraction from the
Sacrament.

Now you shall hear their additions to the Sacrament: Look upon their Vestures,
and their Gestures, and their Altars, and their Pix, and their Incense, and
their Becks, and their Nods, and their Turnings, all this is more than Christ
did: and therefore the Prophet may say again, Who has required this of you?
Esaias 1. 12.
Did Christ command you to do more than he did, and not do as he did? Therefore
let them which have eyes to see, be thankful for their light, when they hear
how blind they were whom God gave over to be seduced.

The fruit of this Sacrament is noted in these words, which is Verse 24.
broken for you, which is shed for you, that is (as Matthew interprets) shed
for the remission of sins. As all was made for us, so Mat. 26. 2. Genesis 1. 2
Cor. 4. 1.
all which Christ spoke, he spoke for us, and all which Christ suffered, he
suffered for us, that the sins of men might be forgiven, and yet so few
apprehend this benefit, that the way to Heaven is called A narrow way, as
though all these pains did Mat. 7. 13.
ransom but a small number, and certain order of Men. All are not saved by
Christ's death, but all which are saved, are saved by Christ's death: His death
is sufficient to save all, as the Sun is sufficient to lighten all: but if any
man wink, the Sun will not give him light: so if any man contemn, and will not
receive Christ, he will not thrust him into Heaven, but every man will have
that which he chooses, (as David says) Blessing to him Ps. 119. 17.
that loves blessing, and cursing to him that loves cursing.

There wants not a hand to give, but a hand to take, I would Matthew. 23.
(says Christ) but you would not. Stretch forth thy hand, and here is Christ's
hand, which takes Gods hand, and Man's hand, and joins them together, and then
the remission of sins is sealed. This is the Will and Testament of Christ.

He had no goods, nor lands, nor money to give by his Testament. A rich man
when he dies, bestows the money which he has gathered, and forgiveth many
debts which are owing him: but Christ has nothing to give, nor any thing to
forgive. The Lord of all had least of all, and he might say like his servant
Peter, Gold and Silver I have none, no not a Grave to bury Acts 3. 6. Mar. 15.
46
his body in, but the grave that Joseph made for himself, served to bury
Christ. His Father was a Carpenter, but never made Mat. 13. 55 Luk 2. 16.
any House for himself: his Mother lay in a Stable for want of a Chamber: his
Disciple was fain to borrow Twenty-pence for him of a Fish: therefore when one
offered, Master I will follow Mat. 17. 27
thee, thinking to gain by his service, like retainers to Noblemen; he replied
unto him, The Foxes have holes, and the Fowls Luke 9. 57.
have nests, but the Son of Man has not a house to hide his head: showing that
the beasts and fowls were richer than he, therefore when he had nothing to
give, he gave himself, and when he had no debtors to forgive, he forgave his
enemies. What then, this is a poor and weak Testament, which gave nothing? Oh
the goodliest Testament that ever was made, for it brings to us the Luke 23.
3.
remissions of sins: it is such a matter to forgive sins? Yea, the greatest
benefit in all the world, nay, a greater benefit than all A similitude of man's
estate
the world: For thus it stood, Thou had committed High Treason against the
Queens Person, thou art detected, apprehended, accused, convicted, and
condemned upon it to be hanged, and drawn, quartered, and thy Quarters to be
set up for a spectacle, like a Carcass which thou have seen hanging upon a
Gibbet, and the Crows pecking upon it. What a horror and shaking to thy mind,
to think of that day, when all these torments, and shame and fear shall
surprise thee at once, which would make thee quake and tremble if thou should
see but another so dismembered before thy face? Thou have no comfort now but
this, when I have suffered* I shall be free, before to morrow at this time all
my pain will be past, though my shame continue, and my Children be beggars.
What grace, what favor, what mercy, now to pardon thee all this, and save thy
life, and set thee at liberty, as though thou had never offended? So I and
thou, and every one here had committed Treasons against the King of Kings, and
stood condemned for it, not to suffer, and then be free, like them which break
the laws of Men: but to suffer and suffer, and ever to suffer all that the
Devils would heap upon us.

Then came the mercy of God for Christ, which shed his His words are not so,
but the effect of his words.
Blood, like an Umpire between God and us, and said as Esaias said to Hezechia,
Kings 20. 5 Luke 7. 15. Matt. 26. 28.
Thou shall not die, but live, loose him and let him go, for he is mine. So we
were stayed like the Widows Son, when he was carried to his grave. This is the
benefit of Christ's death, and this Sacrament is the remembrance of it, and
therefore whenever we receive it, this addition comes with it, Which is shed
for the remission of sins: Our fault was so heinous and grievous, that no
Ransom could countervail it, unless God himself had suffered for us.

Being in this extremity, neither Man, nor Angel, offered his Life for us, but
the Prince himself, which should have crucified us, came to be crucified of us
for us, that we might say with steadfast says, I believe the remission of sins,
not the satisfaction of sins, but the remission of sins. Mark this distinction
against Popish Merits of Works or Penance, Christ has satisfied and not we, we
are remitted, and not Christ; therefore we say in our Confession, I believe the
remission of sins, which I may call the The merciful article.
quintessence and sweetness of the Twelve. Therefore who but Antichrist durst
deprave it? If there be a satisfaction for our sins by Works, or by
Pilgrimages, or by our Masses, or by our Penance, let Christ never be called a
Forgiver, but an Exchanger, like the Pope, which sells his Pardons.

Wretched creatures which will not receive the Lord, when he comes to their
door. Christ says; Take for nothing, and they Rev. 21. 6.
say no, we will not take, but buy. Vile, base, miserable Man, disdain to take
Grace of God without satisfaction, but they will cope with the Lord, and give
him so many Pilgrimages, fast so many days, hear so many Masses, and pay so
many Works for it, until they have done as much good as they have done evil.
Our sins are infinite, and God is infinite: but our Works are finite in number
and measure? Therefore be content with Joseph's Brethren, to take your money
again, and say that you have Corn for nothing, Genesis 42. 25
that is, you are saved for nothing, or else when you say, I believe the
remission of sins, you lie unto God, because you do not believe the remission
of sins, but satisfaction for sins, like the Papists.

It follows, As often as ye shall eat this Bread, and drink this Verse 26.
Three arguments against Transubstantiation in one Verse. Dan. 17. 6.
Cup, ye shall show the Lords death till he come. Here are three invincible
Arguments against Popish Transubstantiation, like the three Witnesses, under
which every word does stand.

First we are said to eat Bread; then it is not Flesh, but Bread. Secondly, we
are said to show the Lords Death; then it is but a show or representation of
his death. Thirdly, it is said, until he come; if he be to come, then he is not
come: If he be come, how can we say, until he come? The effect of this Verse
was showed in these words, Do this in remembrance of me. For to say, Do this in
remembrance of me, and to say, So often as ye do this, you show my death, is much
at one: So that if you call this Sacrament a show of Christ's death, as it is
called here, then it is not Christ; or if you call it a remembrance of Christ,
as it is called there, yet is it not Christ, but a show or remembrance of
Christ; but this is such a show and remembrance, that the next verse says,
Whosoever receives it unworthily, is guilty Verse. 27.
of the body and blood of Christ.

Will ye know who Receives unworthily? in the 29th verse, What it is to
receive unworthily.
Paul says, he discerns not the Lord's Body: i. e. which puts no
difference between this bread and oaths, but eats like a Child, the meat
which he knows not: and after the bread seems stones to him, and the wine
poison, because his conscience tells him, I have received unworthily, before
I could say like David, My heart is prepared. My Sheep (says Christ) know my
voice: as John 10. 27
they discern Christ's Body, and therefore so often as they come into the Lords
Table, they seem to come into the Lords presence; there they greet, and kiss,
and embrace one another with affections, which none can know but they that
feel, like John which Luke 1. 41. How receivers may be guilty of Christ's death.
Mar 14. 44 Mar 25. 15 Mar 15. 25
leaped in the Womb, so soon as Christ came near him.

Will ye know beside, what it is to be guilty of the body and blood of Christ?
even as Judas was guilty for betraying him, and Pilate for delivering him, and
the Jews for crucifying him: so they are guilty which receive this Sacrament
unworthily, as Pilate, and Caiphas, and Judas were. If they be guilty of
Christ's death, they are guilty of their own death too; as if they had committed
two murders: and therefore Paul says after, that Verse. 30.
many of the Chorinthians died, only for the unworthy receiving this Sacrament.
As the Word is the savor of death to them which receive it unworthily, so the
Sacrament is the savor of death to them which receive it unworthily: it never
goes into 1. Cor. 2. 16.
their mouth, but they are traitors ipso facto, and may say to Hell, this day
have I taken possession of thee, because I am guilty of Christ's blood.
Therefore it follows immediately, How we should be prepared before we come to
the Lord, Table.
Let a man examine himself before he eat of this bread, or drink of this wine:
as if he should say, if he which receives this Sacrament unworthily, be guilty
of Christ's death, like Judas which hanged himself; if these signs be received
to salvation or damnation, like the word; the next lesson is to examine your
selves before you Receive, lest you Receive like the son of perdition, which
swallowed the Bread and the Devil together. Therefore, let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat; that is, let him examine Joh. 13. 17.
first, and receive after; for if we should receive the bread of the Earth
reverently, how should we receive the bread of Heaven? When Jehonadab came to
Jehu his Chariot, he said, Is thy heart upright as my heart is toward thee? So
when we come 1 Samuel 9. 13
to the Lords Table, he would have our hearts upright 1 Kings 10 15. Sam. 2. 2.
to him. The Golden Ring sits highest at our Table, but the Wedding Garment
sits highest at this Table. It is safer eating with unwashed Hands, than
with an unwashed Heart. The Jews were taught to choose the Lamb of the
Passover Exodus 12. 3. and 6.
on the Tenth Day of the First Month, in which Month they came out of Egypt.
And the Fourteenth day after, they were taught to eat him: so they had four
Days respite between the choosing and the killing, to prepare and sanctify
themselves for the Pass over, which was a Sign of the Lords Supper. This
admonished them that the matter (now to be performed) was very weighty, and
therefore they were deeply to consider it: for now was the action and sum of
all Salvation in handling. If they did prepare themselves so before they did
receive the figure of this Sacrament, how should we be prepared before we
receive the Sacrament it self? Therefore as Josiah commanded the Levites to
prepare the 2 Chr. 35.
People; so Paul advises the People to prepare themselves, that is, to examine
whether they have Faith, and Love, and Repentance before they come to this
Feast. By this all may see; First, That Paul All are bound to know the
Scriptures
would have every Layman skillful in the Scripture, that he be able to examine
himself by it: for this admonition is not to them which minister the Sacrament,
but to all which receive the Sacrament. And the rule by which we must examine
our selves, is the Law by which we should obey: therefore if the Rule be
unknown, the Examination must be undone. Our Doctrine must be Act. 17. 11. Note.
examined by the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles; our Prayers must be
examined by the Sixth Petition of Christ's Prayer; our Belief must be examined
by the Twelve Articles of Faith; our Life must be examined by the Ten
Commandments of the Law. Now, he which has this Touchstone may try Gold from
Copper; Exodus 20 1. etc.
but he which has it not, takes one for the other: Therefore before Paul's
Examine, you had need to learn Christ's Search, Search 2 Cor. 13. 5. Joh. 5. 39.
the Scriptures, and they will lighten you to search your selves. This is the
Doctrine with which I will end, and the necessary Point for which I chose this
Text, to teach (if I could) that Christian Ters. 28.
Art how to examine your selves.

Let a man examine himself before he eat. Here is first an examination: The
divsion.
Secondly, an examination of our selves: Thirdly, an examination before we come
to the Sacrament. Touching the first, here Paul says, Examine your self, but
in 2 Chronicles. 13. he doubleth his charge, Prove your selves; and again at next
word, Examine your selves: as if he should say, this work must be done whon it
is done, because it is never thoroughly done; and therefore we must double our
Examination, as Paul doubleth his Counsel. If a man suspect his Enemy, he will
try him with a Question: if that will not search him, he will put sorth
another: if that be spyed, he will move another, like one which puts diverse
Keys into a Lock until it open: So he which examineth, 2 Cor. 11. 14. 1 John 4.
1
must try and try, prove and prove, search and search: for the Angel of
Darkness is like an Angel of Light, and we have no way to discover him, but
that of John, Try the Spirits. God examineth with trials, the devil examineth
with temptations, the world examineth with persecutions; we which are thus
examined, had need to examine too. If any man skill not what Examining means,
the very word Examine is so pregnant, that it prompteth us how we should
examine; for it signifies to put our selves unto the Touchstone, as if we
would try Gold from Coper. Therefore one says, that Examination is the Eye of
the Soul, whereby she sees her self, and her safety, and her danger, and her
way which she walks, A description of true examination.
and her pace which she holds, and the end to which she tends; she looks
into her glass and spieth every spot in her face, how all her graces are
stained; then she takes the water of life, and washes her blots away. After
she looks again, and beholds all her gifts, her faith, fear, love, patience,
meekness, and marketh how every one does flourish or whither. If they fade and
decay, that she feels a consumption; then she takes preservatives and
restoratives of prayer, and council, and repentance, before the sickness grow.
Thus every day she lets down a bucket into her heart, to see what water it
brings up, least she should corrupt within, and perish suddenly.

To hear, and read, and pray, and sast, and communicate, is a work of many: but
to examine those works is the fashion of few: and therefore Jeremie
complains, No man says, what have I done? as if he should say, No man
examineth himself. Jer. 3. 6.
And therefore in all the Scripture it is said but of one, That he Joh 9. 28.
feared all his works; as though he durst not think, nor speak, nor do any
thing before he had examined what it was, from whence it came, and whether it
went; so the more precious Mat. 13. 14.
treasure is deeper hid in the ground.

The second point is to Examine our selves; Paul says, Try all 1 These. 5. 21
Mat. 13. 25
things, much more should we try our selves. The good sower does sow his own
ground, but the bad sower does sow another man's ground, as the devil did. The
Disciples of Christ said, Mat. 26. 12 Luke 3. 10.
Master, Is it I? not, Master, is it he? The Disciples of John asked, Master,
what shall we do? not, Master, what shall they do? We must obey some, and hear
others, and admonish others, and love all; but examine our selves. That which
we apply unto others, the Apostle applies unto our selves: for when we speak
of an examiner, we intend one which examineth other; when we speak of an
accuser, we intend one which accuses other; when we speak of a Judge, we mean
one that judges others: but the Scripture cries, Examine 1 Cor. 11. 13.
thy self, accuse thy self, judge thy self; that is, be not curious to search a
mete in thy brothers eye, but pull out a beam which is in Matt. 7. 3.
thine own eye. This does show that they which sit in Gods chair to judge
others, commonly have greater fault themselves, than they whom they use to
judge: and therefore Christ calls their fault a beam, and the others a moat.
This made David Psalm. 4. 4.
say, Examine thy heart: thy heart is thine own heart, therefore thou must
examine whether thou pray, whether thou watch, whether thou sast; and not
whether he pray, whether he watch, whether he fast, as the Pharisee examined
the Publican, least thou have Peter's check, when he examined what John should
do, Christ said, What is that to thee; follow thou me. Thou art Luke 18. 11
a private man and have a private examination, therefore let thy question be,
What have I done? and make thy Anatomy of thy Joh. 21. 22.
self.

See beloved, we may not believe our selves, before we have examined our
selves; for we are falshearted, and the notablest cousoner that deceives most,
for one time that he deceives others, ten times he deceives himself. Because
the flesh is a wily servant, and will lie like Gehezi to his Master, and face
him that he has not sinned, when it comes from sin; therefore as Elisha
examined his Servant, so the soul must examine 2 Kin. 5. 25
her servant, that is, man must be jealous of himself, and take himself for a
liar, for a flatterer, for a dissembler, until he be 2 Kin. 5. 26
thoroughly acquainted with himself; for no man is so often bebeguiled as by
himself, by trusting his double heart, and taking his own word without further
trial. If Paul had bid us examine others, we would have sifted them like Satan.
Satan has desired Luke 22 31
to sift thee, (says Christ to Peter) so we have a desire to sift others. Even
Peter which was sifted of Satan, longed to sist John, and know what he should
do, before he harkened to his own charge. Therefore the help of examination is
a needful preservative, although we were as sound as Peter. They which are
suspected of a crime, do not examine themselves, but are examined of others,
lest they should be partial: but a Christian 1 Cor. 2. 11.
must examine himself of his crime, and be his own judge, his own accuser, and
his own condemner: for no man knows the spirit of man, but the spirit which
is in man, which will condemn him if he be guilty, and tell him all that he
has done, and with mind he did it, and with what mind he did it, and what he
deserves for it. This is the private arraignment, or close sessions, when
Conscience sits in her chair to examine, and accuse, and judge, and condemn her
self, because she will not be condemned of God.

Thus holy men have kept their sessions at home, and made their hearts the
foreman of the Jury, and examine themselves as we examined others, the fear of
the Lord stood at the door of their souls, to examine every thought before it
went in, and at the door of their lips, to examine every word before it went
out, whereby they escaped a thousand sins which we commit, as though we had no
other work. So thou should sit in judgment of thy self, and call thy
thoughts, and speeches, and actions, to give in evidence against thee, whether
thou be a Christian or an Infidel, a son, or a bastard, a servant, or a rebel,
a Protestant, or an Hypocrite: if thou find not faith, nor fear, nor love, nor
zeal, when thou examinest thy self, let no man make thee believe that thou art
holy, that thou art sanctified, that thou art a Christian, that thou art a
believer, that thou art a Gospeller, because thou art worse than thou seem
thy self: for every man is partial to himself when he is most humbled.

Therefore if my heart tell me that I do love God, whom shall I believe before
my self? As Solomon says, No man can Pro. 25. 3. 1 Cor. 2. 11.
search the heart of the King: so Paul says. No man knows the spirit of any
man, but the spirit which is in man: that is, no man feels the heart of man
so well as himself. And yet himself, although he have lived with it ever since
he was born, does not know his own heart, unless he examine it narrowly, no
more then he knows his own bones, or his veins, or his sinews, or his
arteries, or his muscles, how many are in his body, or where they lie, or what
they do.

This seems strange that a man should not know his own heart: yet it is true
that the best of all does not know his own heart, though he has dwelt with it
from his mothers womb. For Christ says to his Disciples, you know not of what
spirit you are, that Luke 9. 11.
is, you think better of your selves than you are, and know not what the Clock
strikes within. There is a Zeal without knowledge, and there is a knowledge
without Zeal: There is a Faith without Obedience, and there is an Obedience
without Faith, there is a Love without Fear, and there is a Fear without Love,
and both are Hypocrites. Therefore as Dalilah Judge. 16. 6
searched where Sampson's strength lay, so let every man search where his
weakness lies, and always be filling the empty gap.

Now this Examination must go before us to the Sacrament. Every meat works
according as it is digested, and this meat works according as it is received.
Therefore when Christ had taught what we should do in receiving the Sacrament,
now Paul shows what we should do before we receive the Sacrament. Let a man
examine himself. But some will come before they examine themselves: and
therefore as the Priests of the Law had authority to put by lame and blind
Sacrifices, so the Ministers of the Gospel have power to put by lame and blind
Receivers, and he which does not so, gives a Sword into their hands to kill
themselves. If the Pastor would use this examination duly, it were the only way
to make every one examine himself, lest he be put by like Non proficients As
Jiphtah discerned the Ephramites, because when they should pronounce
Shibboleth, they pronounce Sibb^leth: so all which cannot pronounce Christ,
that is, give a reason of their Faith, are to be thrust from this Table.

There is a Hearing, and a preparative before Hearing. There Luk 8. 18. Eccl.
4. 17.
is a Praying, and a preparative before Praying. There is a Receiving, and a
preparative before Receiving: which if it be wanting, the Receiver receives
uncomfortably, the Prayer prays idly, the Hearer hears unfruitfully, like
those which do eat before hunger, and drink before thirst.

This preparative before Hearing, and Praying, and Receiving, does signify
that there is a kind of Physic in these three: for Preparatives are ministered
always before Physic, and as the Preparative which goes before, makes way to
the Physic, or else it would do no good, but hurt: so unless Examination go
before the Sacrament, we seal up the threatenings which are written against us,
in stead of the promises which are made unto us: for the Sacrament is a seal,
and therefore seals good or evil, as every other Seal does.

The preparative before we receive, is to Examine. As Jobn was the forerunner
of Christ, so Examination is the fore runner Luke 1. 76. The second
examination. Job 1. 5.
of the Sacrament, like the Harbinger which rides before to prepare the Room.
For if Job commanded his Sons to sanctify themselves before they did come to
his Sacrifice, how should we sanctify our selves before we come to Christ's
Sacrament, wherein we are commanded to do as the Lord himself did which
instituted it? It is said that the Chamber wherein Luke 22. 12.
Christ did institute this Sacrament, was trimmed; the Chamber wherein the
Apostles received this Sacrament, was trimmed: If Judas's chamber, his inner
chamber had been trimmed so too, he had received this Sacrament with as much
comfort as the other Disciples did: but because his heart was not trimmed:
therefore he was the first which was condemned for the unworthy receiving of
the Sacrament.

Adam did not think that Death had been in an Apple, so you Genesis 3. 6.
would not think that Death should be in Bread: but as a Coal has fire in it,
beside the Coal it self, which fire does either warm, or burn; so this Meat
has another Meat in it, beside that which is seen, which does either save or
destroy: therefore he which comes to this Spiritual Meat, must examine
whether he have a spiritual mouth, as well as a carnal mouth, or else he shall
receive no more than he sees, and that which he sees not shall destroy him.

No man (says Christ) puts new Wine into old vessels, lest the vessels
break, and the wine leak. This wine is new wine, Mar. 2. 22.
therefore put it into new vessels, holy vessels, sanctified vessels, or else
it will leak forth and break the vessel, and thou shall have no more taste of
it, than while the relish of Bread is in thy mouth. When Christ comes to our
house, shall we not look whether our Chamber be trimmed, as the chamber was
trimmed against his coming to the Passover? But how shall we trim it?

When a man takes an Office, he examineth his substance; when takes a Trade, he
examineth his skill: when he goes to fight, he examineth his strength: but
these wants are no wants when he goes to Sacrament. Will thou know now upon
what articles thou must enquire at that time, that is, how thou should
examine thy self.

As some Prayer may be at all times, and some Rejoicing 1 These. 2. 16 Job 9. 28.
may be at all times; so some Examination is at all times. Thus Job examined
himself every day, nay, every hour, because he scanned all that he did.

But there is a special examination before the Sacrament, because it is the
Bread which is received to salvation or damnation; because it is the Feast, to
which whosoever comes without 1 Cor. ii. 29. Mar. 22. 11
his Wedding Garment, shall be cast into utter darkness; because it is a seal
which seals a curse or a blessing.

Therefore having observed that Examination is the necessariest lesson in
Christianity, and less known than other, I have studied since my Sermon to lay
down three Examinations which you should use at all times, and a special
Examination, for the Communicants Catechism, which leads immediately to the
Sacrament as a Guest is handed to the Table. In the first Examination I will
show thee a Rule how thou shall try others Spirits, and how thou shall try
thine own.

Thou shall try strange Spirits by their manner of speaking, The first
examination upon the marks of true Spirits and the false in our selves or
others. 1 King. 22. 11. Deu. 18. 22 Mat. 7. 15. Mat. 7. 16.
plainly, or doubtfully, boldly or fearfully: therefore we read that the
Oracles of the Heathen had a double meaning, and that the false Prophets never
spoke boldly, but where their Patrons were ready to flesh them.

By the proportion of Faith: For every Heresy is contrary to some Article of
our Belief, as every Sin is against some of the Ten Commandments.

By the event of their Speeches; for they take not effect, as it is said in
Deuteronomie, chap. 18. and therefore they are called false Prophets.

By their Fruits: For none of the false Prophets were good men.

By their success: for if they be not of God they will come to naught, as the
Arrians, and Manichees and Pelagians are vanished, as if they had never been:
fortune shall wear out every Doctrine that is not Truth. This is thy rule to
try other spirits.

Thou shall try thine own Spirit by the motions that it has to good or evil.
For as a good stomach turns all that it eats into nutriment; and a bad
stomach turns all that it eats into raw humors; so likewise a good mind
converteth all that it hears, and that it sees, and all that it feels,
unto some profit: but a bad mind makes a temptation of every thing: therefore
it is said, To the clean all things a clean, and so, to the unclean nothing is
clean; that is, they defile themselves with every thing. Romans 14 14 Tit. 1. 15.


Secondly, By the first cause or preparation which thou had unto it; for
whatsoever it be, thy thoughts will be where thou love: to verify that
saying, Where are man's treasure is, there will be his Mar. 6. 21.
heart: for lightly, the beginning is a picture of the end, and the act is like
the thought which set it a work.

Thirdly, By the manner of the consolation in it, whether it be of Knowledge,
or Ignorance, whether it be constant, or mutable, calm, or boy sterous, simple,
or mixed: for as a clear Fountain yields clear streams, so a pure Heart has
pure joys.

Fourthly, Whether it bring to Christ, or take any thing from him to thy self,
like all the parts of Popery, which mangle his honor either to Angels, or to
Saints, or to Pope, or to Images. If it abide all these questions, and draw
thee not from any good, then thou may say it is from God, water the seed, O
Lord, which thou have sown. This is the fruit of thy first examination. In the
second, by making thee discern whether another be a Christian, I will teach
thee to know whether thy self be a Christian; which that thou may reach to,
observe this direction, and thou shall see of what side thou art.

It must needs be, that they which walk to contrary ends, should go diverse
ways: therefore there be more differences The second examination upon the
difference between the wicked and the godly. Number. 22. 19. Mat. 26. 39. Romans 1.
17. Iam. 29. 1.
between the children of God, and the children of the world, than there be
between men and beasts.

First they are distinguished in will: for the wicked strive to bring Gods will
to their will, like Balaam, which when he had an answer, stayed for another;
but the faithful labor to bring their will to Gods will, like Christ which
said; Not as I will, but as thou will.

They are distinguished in Faith: All men have not faith (says Paul) but the
just live by faith: as if he should say, the just believe, and the unjust
believe not. The just believe, and apply that they believe to themselves; the
wicked may believe like the Devils, but their faith is like the gadding Hen,
which carries her Eggs to other, and never lays at home: so they believe
that other shall be saved, but not themselves.

They are distinguished in Hope: for because the wicked hope 3
not for any mends of God, therefore they never deferr their Matthew. 6.
reward: but if they do any good, they are trumpets of it themselves, for fear
it should be blazed enough: and therefore Christ said, that the Pharisees had
their reward already, because they 2 Timothy 3.
were boasters of their works: and if they do not good but evil, yet they would
be magnified as much for evil, as others are for good. But the faithful are
likened to Handmaids, which wait their reward: Their left hand sees not when
their right hand does Psalm. 123. Matthew. 6.
well, and they are afraid to take honor of men, for losing their honor with
God, like John Baptist, which made his Virtues Joh. 1. 12.
meaner than they were, and debased hemself, when he might have got a name
above his Lord.

They are distinguished in Obedience: therefore Christ teaches Mat. 7. 17.
us to judge men by their fruit, as an unfallible Rule: for the evil. Tree will
bring forth evil Fruit, and the good Tree good Fruit, and neither change his
property, although the evil Fruit is sometimes beautiful, and the good Fruit
sometime blasted. All slip, but in the wicked one Sin teaches another, and in
the faithful one Sin preventeth another.

They are distinguished in Repentance: for the wicked do but weep for their
Sins past, but the godly purpose to sin no more: so Pharaoh, Saul, and Judas
said, I have sinned: but Sadrach, Exo. 10. 16. 1 Sa. 15. 30. Mar. 17. 3. Dan.
3. 18. Isa. 51. 17. Romans 2. 5. Luke 8. 30. 2 Kin. 5. 18. Matt. 14 3.
Meshech, and Abednego said, We will not sin: therefore the Heart of the godly
is called a contrite Heart, but the Heart of the wicked is called a Heart that
cannot repent. Beside, as Christ cast out a Legion of Devils at once, so the
godly would be purged for all their Sins together; but the wicked never consent
to leave all, but as Naaman said, Let the Lord spare me in this, so ever he
excepteth one Sin, which is his beloved Sin; like Herod, which reformed many
things, and yet would not leave his Brother's Wife. 6.


They are distinguished in Charity: for ye shall never see the wicked love
their Enemies: and therefore when the Pharisees Mat. 5. 43. Luk 6. 32.
could not love their Enemies, they taught that men might hate their Enemies:
and Christ speaking of Publicans and Sinners, exhorts his Disciples not to
love like them, because they loved none but their friends.

They are distinguished in Prayer: for the wicked cannot pray, Psalm. 14. 4.
Z^ch 12. ^0 Rom 8. 16.
therefore David says, They call not upon the Lord: as if they had not the
spirit of Prayer: and therefore Christ calls their prayer babbling, for they
think not of God when they speak unto him

They are distinguished in Patience: no Hypocrite can bear 8. Genesis 4. 13. Act.
16. 25.
the Cross, but says like Cain, It is heavier than I can suffer: but Paul and
Silas sing in Prison for a faithful man would have something to humble him, and
rejoice to bear his Masters marks, because the wounds of a Lover are sweet.
Gal. 6. 17.


They are distinguished in the Use of Adversity: for this is a 9.
proper and peculiar mark of God's Children, to profit by affliction: and
therefore we read not in all the Punishments of the wicked, that one of them
said like David, It is good for me that I Psalm. 119. ^1.
have been afflicted.

They are distinguished in Humility: for the wicked are not humbled before the
Cross, like Pharaoh that never sorrowed, 10. Exo. 8. 15.
but when he suffered: but the Apostles learned Humility of their Master,
before their Persecution came. Mat. 11. 29.


They are distinguished in their Judgment of the Word: for to the wicked it
seems the hardest, and simplest, and unpleasantest 11.
Book that is: and therefore St. Paul says, That it is foolishness 1 Cor. 1.
18.
unto them: but to the godly it seems the wisest, and cloquentest, and
sweetest and easiest Book of all others, as though God did suddenly bring the
understanding of it to them, as Jacob said of his Venison: according to that,
He that will do his will Genesis 27. 20. Joh. 7. 17.
shall know his Doctrine.

They are distinguished in their Judgment of God: the wicked 12.
are persuaded now and then of God's Mercy for the present time while they feel
it, as the Jews praised him always, when he did Ex. 15. 20.
as they would have him; but they cannot persuade themselves that God will be
merciful to them still, like Job, which said, Job 13. 15. Pro. 14. 32.
Though the Lord Kill me, yet will I trust in him: therefore the hope of the
righteous is called hope in death. Beside, if the wicked love God, it is but
for his benefits, as Saul loved him for his Kingdom. And this is always to be
noted, that in the wicked, the fear of Hell is greater than is their hope of
Heaven: but in the Pro 23. 18. 1 Samuel 10. 6
faithful, the hope of Heaven is greater than the fear of Hell.

They are distinguished in their Delights: for the sport of the ungodly is
folly, like Belshazzer's, and therefore when they are Dan. 5. 4.
sick or troubled, they never run to the Word for comfort, as though God's
Promise pertained not to them; but to Feasts, or Tables, or Tales, or Mnsick,
as Saul did to the Harp. But all 1 Samuel 16. 23.
the Delights of the godly are like David's Dance about the Ark; they are never
merry but when they are doing well; nor at 2 Isa. 6. 14. Genesis 51. 28.
peace, but when their Prayers have overcome God, like Jacob.

They are distinguished in their Opinions of Death: for the faithful Phil. 1.
23. Luke 2. 29.
long to be dissolved, and although they might live for ever in continual
Prosperity, yet they would not stay so long out of Heaven: but the wicked would
never be dissolved, because Death comes always unto them like a Jailer to hale
unto Prison, as Achab said to Michaiah, That he never prophesied good to 1 Kin.
22. 8.
him. Hereby a man shall know whether he have Faith: for if he do believe the
Promises, he will be glad to receive them.

They are distinguished in their sense of Sin: wicked men feel the lothsomness
of their Vices, but none but the faithful feel the defects of their
Righteousness. The natural man never complains of his good works, but
vaunteth of them: but a godly man finds fault with his Prayers, and his Alms,
and his Esa 64. 6. Psalm 16. 2. Mat. 4. 12.
Watches, like Isaiah, that said, his Righteousness was like a menstruous
Cloth. As Christ met the Temper in the Wilderness, a place of Prayer, and
Fasting, and Meditation: so a godly man meets the Tempter in his Prayer, and
in his Fasts, and in his Meditations, that is, he finds some let, or spot, or
want in all his Devotions. Therefore unless thy Righteousness mislike thee as
well as thy Profaneness, know that yet thou art no farther than the wicked.

They are distinguished in their Ends: for the Children of God propose the
Glory of God, and level all their Thoughts, and Speeches, and Actions, as if
they were Messengers sent to carry him presents of Honor.

Thus did David when he said, All that is within me praise the Psalm. 103. 1
Lord. As though himself had rather been without praise than his Master: but
the Children of the World set up their own Glory for their mark, like
Nebuchadnezzer, which said, For the Dan. 4. 27.
honor of my Majesty, Dan. 4. 27. Therefore they speak, and look, and walk, as
if they did say to their Tongue, and Eyes, and Feet, and Apparel, as Saul said
to Samuel, Honor me before this 1 Sa. 15. 30
People.

Lastly, They are distinguished in Perseverance: for the Zeal of the wicked
lasts not, and therefore God says, They are Exodus 2. 38.
soon turned out of the way: but the Zeal of the faithful was represented by
the fire of the Temple, which never went out. By these differences thou may
see how much thou do differ from Levit. 6. 12
the wicked, or whether thou be of their band.

Then come to the Third Examination: as the Devil tempts The third
Examination. Mat. 4. 9.
thee, to see what thou will do for him, so thou must tempt thy self, and get
of thy Soul what it would do for God, and what it should suffer for him, which
has suffered Death for it. Therefore here we will set down certain
Interrogatories, whereof thou shall examine it. Josh. 24. 15


First, Whether thou have the heart of Joshua to worship God; as boldly as thou
do, though all the World did renounce him, and every one did mock thee as
they did Noah, while he built the Ark? Mat. 26. 70


Whether thou would not deny Christ as Peter did, if thou were in Peter's
straights, and nothing to succor thee but policy? Josh. 7. 8. 1.


Whether thou would not steal, if thou did see a Booty as fit as Achan,
which thou might catch up, and no one spy thee? 2 Kin 5. 16.


Whether thou would refuse a Bribe like Elisha, if thou did meet with one
which were as willing and able to give it as Naaman? Luk 16. 6. Although this
is a Parable, yet it carries the signification of a History. 2 Sa. 11. 4.


Whether thou would not deceive, if thou were in such an Office as the false
Steward, whose Master referred all unto him, and knew not when he kept any
thing back?

Whether thou would not fulfill thy Lust as David did, if thou had the
opportunity and allurement, and might do it without danger of Law like a King,
as David might?

Whether thou would not tell a Lie, as Abraham did, if it stood upon thy
Life, which made him twice dissemble that his Wife was his Sister, lest he
should dye for her beauty?

Finally, if it should be said unto thee, as the Devil said to Genesis 12. 13 Genesis
20. 2.
Christ, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me:
that is no more, but if thou will Sin, whether thou would Mat. 4. 9.
yield or no?

If thou have sinned thus and thus before, I will not say, therefore Psa 66.
18. 1 Kin. 18. 26.
the Lord will not hear thee. But David says, If I regard Wickedness in my
heart, the Lord will not hear me, that is, if for any cause a man purpose and
carry a mind to sin when he is tempted, the Lord is so far from helping him,
that he will stand like Baal, as though he did not hear him: for he has a
Traitors mind as deep as any, which thinks, for a Dukedom I would betray my
Prince, though he never play the Traitor in his life. Thus you have heard how
to try Spirits, and how to discern a Christian from an Hypocrite, and how to
oppose your Hearts, that ye may be sure to judge rightly what ye are.

Now we come to that Examination, which is the Epitome The fourth Examination.
or Abridgment of all these, for memory is short, and all are not of one
strength: but some run, and some go, and some creep, and all do well, so long
as they strive to perfection. The matters whereof principally the Mind should
be examined before Heb. 61.
the Sacrament, are these.

First, Whether thou have Faith, not only to believe that The receivers
Articles.
Christ died, but that he died for thee: for as the Scripture calls him a
Redeemer, so Job calls him his Redeemer.

The Second Article is, whether thou be in Charity, not Esa. 59. 20 Job 19. 25.
whether thou love them which love thee; but whether thou love them which hate
thee: for Christ commands us, To love Mat. 5. 44.
our Enemies.

The Third Article is, whether thou repent, not for thy open and gross Sins,
but for thy secret Sins, and petty Sins, because Mat. 12. 36
Christ says, That we must give account for every idle word.

The Fourth Article is, whether thou resolve not to sin again for any cause,
but to amend thy evil Life, not when Age comes, or for a spurt, but to begin
now, and last till death: for Christ is Alpha and Omega, both the beginning and
the end, as Rev 22. 13
well in our living as in our being, which has made no promise Rev. 2. 11.
to them which begin, but to them which persevere.

The last Article is, whether thou can find in thy heart to dye for Christ,
as Christ died for thee: for we are bid not only Luke 12. 38 2 Timothy 3. 4.
to follow him, but to bear his Cross: and therefore we are called Servants, to
show how we should obey: and we are all called Soldiers, to show how we should
suffer.

These are the Receivers Articles, whereof his Conscience must be examined
before he receive this Sacrament: happy is ^^e which can say, All these have I
kept: for the Dove was not Mat. 19. 20 Genesis 8. 11.
so welcome to Noah, as this man is to Christ. But if thou find ^ot these
Affections within, but a Nest of Vices, leave thine ^^ffering at the Altar, and
return to thine Examination again: Mat. 5. 24.
^or thou art not a fit Guest to sup with the Lord, until thou Mat. 22. 11
^ave on this Wedding Garment.

How is it then, that some regard their other Garments more The preparation of
Countryfolk before they receive.
^^an this? St. Paul says, Examine your selves, and they exa^ine their
Apparel: if they have new clothes in the country, ^^en they are ready to
receive. I have known many kept ^^om the Sacrament a whole Year together by
their Masters, for nothing, but for want of a new Suit to set them forth with
their Fellows.

Others respect whether it be a fair Day, that they may walk after Service,
making that Day upon which they Receive, like a Scholars Thursday, which he
loves better than all the days in the Week, only because it is Play-day. Thus
like the Jews, They sit down to eat and rise up to play, that as Christ calls
the Pharisees Prayer Babbling, Matthew. 6. 7. so their receiving may be called
Dallying.

When they have the Sacrament in their Belly, they think that all is well, as
Micah, when he had a Levite in his House thought that God loved him: but as the
Levite did not prof^^ him, because he received nothing but the Levite, so the
Brea^ Judge 17.
and Wine do them no good, because they receive nothing b^^ Bread and Wine for
want of Faith. Marvel not then if yo^ have not felt that comfort after the
Sacrament, which yo^ looked for, for it is comfortable to none but to them
which prepare their Hearts and examine themselves before, because is not the
Mouth but the Heart which receives comfort.

Now it may be the most that are here have brought Mouth and not a Heart, these
go away from the Sacrament despite Christ, as Judas went from the Sacrament to
betr^^ Joh. 13. 30.
him.

The other go away like one which has received a cheer Countenance of the
Prince, all his thoughts are joy, and t^ Countenance of the Prince is still in
his Eye. As he which h^^ eaten sweet Meat, has a sweet Breath: so they which
ha^^ eaten Christ, all their sayings and doings are sweet, like a P^^fume to
men, and Incense to God, their peace of Conscien^^ and joy of Heart, and desire
to do good, will tell them w^^ther they have received the bare signs, or the
thing signified.

Every one which receives this Sacrament, shall feel him better after it, like
the Apostles: or else he shall find him How a man shall know whether he have
received well.
worse after it, like Judas. Hereby ye shall know whether have received like
the Apostles, or like Judas. Thus we (...) ended the Doctrine, of the Lord's
Supper. Now if you can remember all that I have said, yet remember the Text:
(...) is, examine your selves before you receive the Sacrament (...) after

FINIS.

