HOROLOGICAL DIALOGVES. In Three Parts. SHOWING The Nature, Use, and right
Managing of CLOCKS AND WATCHES: WITH AN APPENDIX Containing Mr. OVGHTRED's
Method for Calculating of Numbers. The whole being a work very necessary for
all that make use of these kind of Movements. By J. S. Clock-maker.

London, Printed for Jonathan Edwin at the Three Roses in Ludgate Street, 1675.

TO THE READER.
CLocks being things in themselves so useful and excellent, that no production
of Art whatsoever does surpass them (especially those that are truly and well
made) yet are extraordinarily subject to give dissatisfaction to those that own
them, which happens from two Causes; the one from the Workman's unskilfulness
and unfaithfulness in making them, and the other is from the Owner's
unskilfulness in keeping and managing them. To remove the latter of these
Causes has engaged me to endeavor (in the following Tract) to reveal (to
th^se that are ignorant) some of those secrets that are necessary to be known
by those that would rightly manage them: in doing which, I have been as plain
as possible, considering the brevity of it, and I doubt not but it will give
sufficient light to any understanding man whatsoever, and though it come forth
into the world but in a plain Country dress, yet I can assure you it has a
good design, and will deliver those things that are of use and profit to all
that have occasion to make use of it, from whom I hope to gain a friendly
acceptance, which if I find sufficient for further encouragement, then this
shall not be the last of my endeavors to serve you,

J. S.

A TABLE Of the Contents OF THE Several PARTS.
Of Part I. Dialogue 1. THe definition of Clocks: the reason of their several
distinctions, with an account of the most common kinds now in use. Dialogue 2.
The manner how all Clocks naturally perform their offices. Dialogue 3. Wherein
the go^dness and excellence of a Clock chiefly consists. Dialogue 4. Of the
several conclusions that have been, are, and may be, wrought by the motion of
Clock-work. Dialogue 5. Some few Rules how a man may furnish himself with
either Clocks for Watches that are really good and substantial. Dialogue 6. The
way and manner of packing up and conveying all manner of Clo^ks from one place
to another, as occasion shall require; as also rules to be observed in setting
them up, and fixing them in the places they are designed to stand in.
Of Part II. Dialogue 1. OF Pocket Watch, Watch and Larrums, and Clocks; their
use, right* managing, and true adjusting. Dialogue 2, Of ordinary Domestic
balance Watches, Watch and Larrums, and Clocks; their use, right managing, and
true adjusting. Dialogue 3. Of Pendulum Clocks, their use, right managing, and
true adjusting. Dialogue 4. Of quarter, repeating, and Chime Clocks, their use
and management. Dialogue 5. Certain cases to be observed in all Clocks
generally.
Of Part III. Dialogue 1. OF the inequality of time in respect of artificial
motions, the nature of it; their time^ of erring and quantity of their error;
from whence several Conclusions are drawn in reference to Clocks. Dialogue 2.
Of refractions what it is, and when it happens, with several Conclusions
drawn from it in reference to Clocks. Dialogue 3. Of the spring, its
definition, nature, and defects, with the effects thereof in Clocks and
Watches. Dialogue 4. Some Enquiries into the Nature of the Pendulum, with the
method of finding their several lengths. Dialogue 5. Of the Clock-bell, the
cause of its sounding, with the nature thereof, proved by reason and experience.
In the Appendix. I. OF Movements or Automata. II. Of finding out fit numbers
for the wheels and pinions. III. Of effecting particular motions required. IV.
A motion to show the age of the Moon. V. A Motion to show the day of the year,
or the degree of the Sun in the Ecliptic, or the time of the Suns rising or
setting, etc. VI. To show the hour of full tide in any Port.

HOROLOGICAL DIALOGVES.
The First Part.
DIALOGVE 1. The definition of Clocks: the reason of their Several
distinctions, with an account of the most common kinds now in use.
Chi BEing desirous to furnish my self with sufficient knowledge in things of
either use or profit to man, I considered the safest Inquiry would be of
persons whose knowledge was complete in those things which I purposed to
inquire after, to which end, being desirous, among other things, to understand
as much of the nature, use, and right managing of Clocks as was possible for
one that was not a workman, in that kind, I thought it best to apply my self to
you; who, being an able Artist in that profession, may therefore be the more
likely to satisfy my curiosity in this particular, provided you are as
willing, as God and education has made you able.


Articus, Sir, the most noble and ingenious productions of Nature and Art (I
have observed) are always of more value and esteem among men, when their
virtues and qualities are thoroughly understood and truly discovered, then they
are so long as the same lies hidden and concealed; which Consideration is to
me a sufficient motive to engage my self to serve you in this your request as
far as my weak capacity will permit me, especially in those things that are
absolutely necessary to be known by those that intend to make use of any sort
of Clocks whatsoever, hoping thereby to whet the edge of your esteem of so
ingenious an art. Propound therefore those things you would be satisfied in and
I shall endeavor to give you an answer.


Chiv. In the first place let me understand what you define a Clock to be.


Art. A Clock is a certain instrument invented and contrived, to give the true
hour, either of the day or night, (by the Circuler moving or certain wheels and
pinions artificially disposed within the Body of the Instrument) without the
help of either Sun, Moon, or Stars, or any other of those elemental
assistances, which the Ancients did in former ages make use of to divide their
time by.


Chiv. Are Clocks more useful for finding the hour, then any other Instrument
heretofore made use of.


Art. Clocks in that perfection, in which this age enjoys them, excel all other
instruments in its officiousness at all times, and in all places, as well in
the nights, as in the day, as well in cloudy skies as in clear weather, as well
in close rooms as in the open Air, which no other Horological Instrument
besides this is able to perform, many being defective, where the Sun gives a
perpendicular shadow, and in cloudy weather, in close rooms, and in the
night, most are likewise of no use; whereas on the contrary, let the time be
when it will, the weather what it will, or the place where it will, all is one
to a Clock, it shall give the time as certain in one as in another, provided it
be in perfect order, and well adjusted.


Chiv. From whence are all those various names, and denominations of Clocks
derived.


Art. They are derived, first, from that which is the principal and prime cause
of their motion, being either weight or Spring.

Secondly, from that, which retards and regulates the violent motion of the
wheels, being either, balance or pendulum.

Thirdly, from the time they continue in motion at once winding up, some going
16 hours, some 30 hours, some 8 days, some 5 weeks, some 3 months, some 6
months, and some a year.

Fourthly, from the offices which they perform, some giving the hour only by
the pointing of the needle, others express the same by the sound of a bell.
Some strike quarters, some repeat the hour, and some chime tunes.

So that from the permiscuous intermixtures, of these four foregoing heads, are
derived all these various and manifold distinctions, and denominations, under
which they have been exhibited unto the world, of which be pleased in the
following Scheam to take a view of.

A Scheam of the names and titles of Clocks.
1. Spring Balance Watches Weight Pendulum 2. Spring Balance Watch and
Larrums Weight Pendulum 3. Spring Balance Clocks Weight Pendulum 4. Spring
Balance Quarter Clocks Weight Pendulum 5. Spring Balance Repeating Clocks
Weight Pendulum 6. Spring Balance Quarter Repeating Clocks Weight Pendulum 7.
Spring Balance Chime Clocks Weight Pendulum 8. Spring Balance Quarter chime
Clocks Weight Pendulum 9: Spring Balance Repeating Chime Clocks Weight
Pendulum 10. Spring Balance Quart. Repeating Chapter Clock. Weight Pendulum

To all which, if you add that space of time, they continue in motion at once
winding up, you have the names of 40. Of the chief and most common kinds now in
use among us, the reason why I have omited the mentioning of some which have
been formerly, and are still made use of, which differ from these
aforementioned both in name and nature, is, because they are but the
productions of meet whimseys, not at all answering the expectations of those
that composed them, or have made use of them, upon which account it is Judged,
their memory may perish with their dissolution, for want of the same kind to
succeed them, when they are decayed, and therefore since there is uo
likelihood, of their being much or long in use, I have forborne to speak any
thing of them.


DIALOGVE II. The manner how all Clocks naturally perform their Offices.
Chi. BY what you have delivered in the foregoing discourse, among other
particulars therein mentioned, I find that Clocks perform their offices by
wheel-work, but in what manner they move, or act, I am still ignorant, and
therefore would be gladly informed somewhat thereof.


Art. All Clocks, consist of one or more parts, or sets of wheels and pinions,
(a set consisting commonly, of so many wheels and pinions, as are moved by the
draught, or poysute, of one Weight or Spring.) Of those that consist but of one
part, or set of wheels, are pocket Watches, and all other moments of what form
or fashion soever, that strike not on a Bell; these having their Wheels and
pinions differently indented in their perypheris (according to the judgment of
him that composeth it.) do by virtue received from either Weights or Springs,
successively move each other in a circular manner, having the rapidity of their
motion, so retarded and regulated, by either Balance or Pendulum, that the
needle, who also is moved with the rest of the work performs its revolution in
twelve hours (or parts of time) thereby dividing at twice going round, the day
and night into twenty four equal parts, which are commonly expressed by the
pointing of the needle to a Circle equally divided into twelve parts, which are
called hours, whereunto are annexed figures, sufficient to distinguish the
successive divisions thereof, so that by the pointing of the needle, to any of
those divisions, or their intermediate parts, you have the true hour given,
whenever you make inspection thereon.

Those that consist of more sets of Wheels then one, are all those movements
that strike on bells, of which the Clock is one, being composed of two parts, a
watch part, and a striking part, the watch being the same as was spoken of
before, I shall pass here: as for the strikeing part, it is that whereby the
Clock is made by art to give intelligence of its divisions of time, by
strikeing several successive blows on a bell, sufficient to express the number
of hours, that have passed, since the last meridian altitude, or depression of
the Sun, which is thus performed.

The wheels contained in the striking part being at the end of every hour
unlocked by certain detents for that purpose appointed, continue the rapidity
of their motion which is the cause of the hammers striking until the locking
detent, which is appointed to stop them, fall into the next successive notch of
a moving wheel, called the count wheel, for that purpose indented concentrick
at several distances according to the number of strokes at each time to be
stricken.


Chi. By the description here given I am much satisfied, concerning the natural
motion of wheels in a Clock, but if you have any thing further to declare I
shall be very desirous to hear it.


Art. There is nothing more to be spoken concerning this matter that will be
worthy your attention; what has already been delivered is sufficient, for
there in not any part of Clock work whatsoever which moves not according to
the order here before described, so that if they contain quarter repeating or
Chime parts, yet their order in motion is the same in effect with what has
been before delivered.


DIALOGVE III. Wherein the goodness and excellency of a Clock chiefly
consists.
CHi. That little knowledge which I have gained by our former discourses makes
me, still the more desirous to be informed further concerning these motions of
returns, whereof in the next place I shall desire some account wherein the
chief goodness of a Clock consists that I may (at least in discourse) be able
to difference those that are good from them that are bad.


Art. The chief goodness of a Clock consists chiefly in these two things; first
in its dureableness; secondly in its officiousness; and that it may be either
durable or officious several things are required.

First for its durableness the first thing required is that the chief parts of
which it is composed, be of metal answerable in hardness to the extremity of
its performance.

And Secondly that true proportion and uniforme figure be observed in all its
parts.


Chi. You speak well in my opinion as to the first of these, for I am certainly
persuaded that those german movements and others, formerly made, were far more
lasting and dureable then those which these latter ages have produced for
certainly, them whose wheels and other parts were made of the purest steel must
needs outlast those who are made in brass, it being a much softer metal and so
consequently more subject to decay.


Art. Your not right understanding the first thing required in my first
propostion has been the cause of this your great mistake. I confess indeed
that some part of those ancient movements you speak of do in our days seem many
of them to be very little worn: Yet I will prove to you by plain and evident
reasons, that those Clocks and Watches, which we make now a days (though the
wheels and other parts are composed of brass the softer metal) shall in the
general out last all others whatsoever, provided it be truly and religiously
wrought: to prove which consider first that the service of all pinions are in
such proportion to the wheels that moves them (or are moved by them) as their
numbers are one to another so that if a wheel contain sixty teeth and the
pinion which it moves about contain but six, the service of this pinion must
needs be ten times as much as the service of that wheel, because it makes ten
revolutions to the wheels one, and so by consequence every tooth (or leaf) of
that pinion must be worn ten times as much as every tooth in that wheel, to
make therefore these wheels and pinions to wear a like, and continue the one as
long as the other, it is requisite that the substance of the pinion should be so
many degrees more hard and durable (as its proportion of wearing is) then the
substance of the wheel which moves it, by which means they will wear better
and continue longer without reparation then otherwise it is possible for them to
do; for if you observe those german movements you speak of (whose wheels and
pinions and other parts are all of steel) you shall find the pinions
irrepairably decayed, when the wheels are never the worse, for since that
almost all the wearing to which those parts are liable be laid one the pinions,
we may reasonably conclude that they are sooner worn out (by just half the
time) then they otherwise would have been, if the wheel had been made of such a
metal, whose proportion of hardness or softness would have admitted an equal
share of wearing with it, which ill conveniences are all avoided by that
method of working now a days used in framing of these movements: there fore in
this sort of work take this for a general rule (where there is no exception)
that what proportion of wearing one part bears unto another such a proportion
of hardness should the metal of the one have above the other to make them wear
equal, and Continue long in that placide estate of motion which is requisite in
things of this nature.


Chi I am now in part convinced of my error, but yet, I think, your general
rule holds not good in all parts of a Clock, for then how comes it to pass that
in Clocks, you make their pevets which are of steel, to move in frames of brass
this according to your general rule cannot wear equally, because they are
substances of unequal hardness, yet perform both the same task; whence we may
conclude that the more soft must needs be more sensiable of the wearing then
that which is more hard, therefore how can your method of working, be good in
these parts.


Art. The rule and method holds good still (with our exception) for though it
be an ill convenience in other parts, yet in pevets and their receptacles it is
not so, for reason requires if 'twear possible, that all the wearing to which
those parts are subject should be in the pevet holes, and not in the pevets
themselves; for when pevets, are worn and decayed there is no repairing them
without new pinions (which is exceeding chargeable) whereas pevet-holes are
more easily reduced and with far smaller cost, thus of two evils we have chosen
the least.


Chi. Why are true proportion and uniform figure required to make the movement
of a Clock more lasting and durable.


Art. True proportion and uniform figure are required, because without it,
movements of this Nature cannot perform, and we count a Clock to be worn or
(which is all one) to be of no value, when he cease to perform that office
for which he is designed: if therefore the teeth of the pinions are not
proportional to the teeth of the wheels, or the teeth of both to themselves, if
the pevets are too big or too little, if the wheels are too large, or the
generality of the work too heavy and cumbersom, it is certain this Clock is not
of the number of those that are accounted the best.


Chi. What is required in its officiousness to make it good or excellent?


Art. In its officiousness two things are required, first continuance in
motion; secondly regularity in the same: as to the first of these it is certain,
that those Clocks, that have true proportion in their parts and uniformity of
figure also, must needs (...) a Clock of continuance in motion, according to
the best kind? provided it be well defended, by case or otherwise, from air and
dust; the one being subject to rust the steel work, which may happen to put a
stop to its motion, and the other, by clogging the teeth, and choking the
pevets, will be apt to produce the same effect.

As to their regularity I shall say only thus much, that those Clocks, who have
their motion regulated by a Pendulum, are more excellent then those who are
regulated by a Balance, and those, that are regulated by a long Pendulum, are
far more excellent than those that are regulated by a short one; to all which I
shall add this one general rule, that those Clocks are to be accounted best,
that perform most with least work.


DIALOGUE IV. Of the several conclusions that have been, are, and may be
wrought by the motion of Clockwork.
CHi. Is it possible by the moving of Clockwork to represent or work any other
motion or conclusion then that of the hour.


Art. Of those several motions and conclusions that may be wrought by
Clock-work I will give you an account as far as my knowledge or inquiry will
permit me: the first thing I shall deliver as possible to be effected by their
motion, is that first they may be made to show the month of the year, the days
of the month, the the hours of the day, the minutes of an hour, and the
secants of a minute.

2, They may (besides the hour in any particular place) be made to show the
hour in any place of the known World; so that, by inspection thereon, you may
have readily given you the hour at that time, as it is naturally, in any
particular known Region, Kingdom, or Principal City in the Universe.

3. They may be made to show the Suns place in the twelve signs of the Zodiac,
his declination from the equinoctial, his right and oblick ascension, his
amplitude, rising and setting, length of the day and night, with the beginning
and ending of twilight, throughout the whole year.

4. They may show the moons age, time of her new, full, and quarters, her
rising, and setting, and southing, her time of shining, and motion through the
twelve signs of the Zodiac.

5. They may show the rising, setting, and southing of any fixed Stars.

6. They may show the time of the tide or full sea in any Port or Harbor
whatsoever.

7. Besides the hour, they have been made to strike the minutes, and quarters,
repeat the hour, Chime Tunes on Bells, play on the Organ, Harpsecal, or
Virginal.

8. Besides the lively and delightful motion that has thereby been given to
Artificial Creatures, such as dogs, mice, flies, fouls of the air, and figures
of men, women, and the like.

Besides all which it has been reported, by one of the Ancients, that a Prince
in his time was (by a German) presented with a Clock, which, besides the hour,
did also represent the moving of the seven planets in their direct retrograde
and stationary motions: which if true was a work worthy admiration.


DIALOGVE V. Some few rules how a man may furnish himself with either Clocks or
Watches that are really good and substantial.
CHi. The time that has been spent in giving and receiving these first
Rudiments of knowledge in this kind, has in my opinion been something larger
then necessity seems to require, Considering that what has been delivered has
rather been to satisfy an inquisitive curiosity then for any great use or
profit contained therein; therefore since I have gained sufficient knowledge in
these lesser matters let us proceed to those of more importance, and herein I
shall desire you to give some few directions what course is safest to be taken
in furnishing my self with a good Clock.


Art. If you intend to furnish your self with Clocks that are really good and
substantial you must observe these three rules.

First that you apply your self to a workman who is of reputed ability: he
that is master of his Art is the only person in nature from whom you can in
reason expect either Clocks or any other movements whatsoever that are perfect,
sound, and good work.


Chi. You say well, but I have observed, that same or repute is many times the
product of some particular affections, and too often is conferred one those
that least deserve it, therefore that I may not be deceived in the repute of a
work-mans ability what rule shall I walk by.


Art. Not by the populer applause of light and vain petsons: but by the
commendation of the more sober and soled sort of men.

Not by the fame of unexperienced relations; as by the testimony of his own
labors.

Not by his fair and beautiful expressions but by his plain downright and solid
reasons.

So that if his reputation be derived from gravity: if his work have performed
according to the expectaion of those that have used it: and he be able to give
a reason of any thing that falls in his business, you may in a large manner put
confidence in his ability.


Chi. But some Clocks that have been made by persons of good repute have failed
exceedingly in their performance (as might be instanced in several) though they
indeed at last were perfected, but it was with a great deal of trouble.


Art. This might be for several other reasons, and not from any deficience in
the workman; as first, it might be some accidental injury in the conveiance
from one place to another, as sometimes happens by jogs or Squats which loosen
either pins, wedges or screws which many ways may impede its motion.

Secondly there may be some small matter not freed in the finishing, which many
times escapes the care of the best workman, and may happen not to discover it
self till sold, all which may occasion some defect in its performance, and this
defect may occasion some trouble to find its cause, for if the cause be once
found it is then easily cured, only the hardest thing is to find the cause, but
however the work of a reputed Artist, may thus fail by chance, yet this can be
no cause for you to distrust his ability, for the best workman being but a man
may be subject to error, and if in the general he prove a sound workman once
failing is not to be taken notice of.


Chi. What is the second rule I am to take notice of.


Art. My second rule is that your workman be not only a person of reputed
ability, but also of known integrity, for though a found workman be able to
furnish you with good work; yet the safest dealing will be with him that is
both able and honest, an able workman can furnish you with good work, if he
will, and an honest man will furnish you with good work, therefore he that is
both able and honest, both can and will furnish you with good work if you
observe.

My third rule, that you resolve to give a price valuable to the work you
purchase, there is a saying which among Clock-makers is aparently true, that he
that sels a Clock for a small price cheats either himself or his customer, for
if he sels good work at a low rate, he cheats himself; but if he sels bad work
at a low value then he cheats his Customer, who expects (commonly) that it
should be good though he buy it at an inconsiderable price; therefore if you
are minded to furnish your self with a good Clock be as willing to give a good
price as you are to have good work.


Chi. But suppose that I should apply my self to such a person you speak of
that is both of repute, ability, and known integrity, and one that for a good
price has made good work; yet, I fear, I may here be cheated, for when I come
into his shop with a resolution to give a good price for that which is good; I
may have chance to pitch upon one that is not of his own make, for I have
observed that they all keep servants, who seldom prove so careful as they
ought, especially if their masters eye is not always one them.


Art. He that is honest and faithful in his dealing will certainly inform you
of the difference if he finds you thus resolved valuably to purchase the best,
but however considering temptations your best way not to be deceived is to be
speak it a fore hand agreeing with the workman both for price, time of going,
performance, and shape; this is the surest way, for a work man that knows his
price knows also what time he can afford to spend in making it good.


Chi. But is it not possible for a man that is not an Artist, to be capable of
knowing good work.


Art. It Is very hard, yet to satisfy your desire I will give you two or three
rules that may possibly stand you in some stead.

First be satisfied if possibly, whether the teeth of the wheels be cut down by
an ingine or not, for there is no man can cut them down by hand so true and
equal as an ingine does,

Secondly let the vibrative train of the Pendulum or Balance be brisk and
lively, continuing its motion some time after the tooth has engaged with its
pallets, and not check or return so soon as they have beaten thereon, it is
always commendable to to see Clock or Watch-work, move thus brisk and lively,
and a great sign it has passed a good hand.

Thirdly, Observe whether every particular part of it be true and square
whether it be clean, smooth, and well polished, whether the needle or hand be
true siled, and of a neat order whether the hammer strike one the Bell so true
as may cause it to give its sound clear and full without intermixture of
harshness and Jurgelling, and whether the work be generally in all its actions
lively, brisk and pleasant, if you find all these in a Clock you may conclude
it was made by the hand of a good workman, and consequently that it is good
work, which is always best cheap though it cost dear.


DIALOGVE VI. The way and manner of packing up and conveying all manner of
Clocks from one place to another, as occasion shall require, as also rules to
be observed in setting them up and fixing them in the places they are designed
to stand in.
CHi. In removing of Clocks, as occasion may happen, how shall I do it without
prejudice.


Art. If you have occasion to convey any Clock of worth from one place to
another you must do thus: provide for it a coffin or box of deal boards or
other wood, let it be strong enough, provided it be not too heavy and
cumbersome, let this box be of bigness sufficient to contain your Clock (with
case or without) having besides space enough left both at bottom, top, and
sides, to thrust in Straw, or Hay, (or any other matter that is soft and
yiedling) in such quantity as may be sufficient to keep it free from the sides
of the coffin: when you have thus provided your coffin or box let your Clock
(whether in case or otherwise) be carefully wraped up in paper or Cloths
(according to its bigness) to keep it from dust and fowlness having before
fastened every thing in it that may receive prejudice by being loose as the
pendent of a Clock, or a Clock in the case, or the like: when you have thus
wraped it up safe, then in the bottom of the coffin or box, place a lay of
Straw, upon which lay in your Clock, then with Straw or Hay let it be so close
packed up both at bottom, top, and sides, as the Clock may not-be able to stir
therein (always observeing to be careful of glases or ornaments that they be
free from compression) then fasten on the cover by nailing or Cording it; so is
your Clock sufficiently packed up, and may he safely conveyed to any place
whatsoever without harm or prejudice.


Chi. When I have thus safely conveyed it to any place, how then shall I deal
with it to set it up rightly.


Art. When you have gotten it home, the first thing you have to do is gently to
open the box, pull out the packing and take out the Clock then take off that
with which it is covered, loosen those things that are fastened in it, so is it
ready to set up for going.

If it be a Balance Clock of the ordinary sort, the trouble is not much but
only to drive in an hook into either post or brickwork, so that it may be
fast, indriving of which observe not to drive it too far at first, till you
have tried with your Clock whether it hang up right from the wall, if it be not
enough you may drive it further till you find it enough, then hang thereon your
Clock (by that provision which is made in it) as upright as your eye can Judge
it will do well enough for these sorts; when you have hung it up, then hang on
the weights, where note that they are, commonly marked, (or should be) the one
with a W., the other with an S. let that weight that is marked with the S. be
hung o^ that line which is next the wall, and let that which is marked with the
W. be hung on the out most line, sometimes there are quarter Clocks which have
more weights then two; in this case, it is convenient to fasten to the lines
pieces of paper marked with the same mark that the weight is to be hung on it.


Chi. In what manner shall I set up a pendulum Clock.


Art. If your pendulum Clock be of the ordinary sort the trouble and manner of
hanging it up is the same with the Balance Clock, viz. to drive an hook for it
to hang on, which when you have done you may hang on the weight without any
difficulty, because they commonly go but with one, which you cannot well miss
in hanging; the greatest difficulty is to hang those Clocks upright, for if
they are not placed exact, they will not go, the only rule to know when a
Pendulum Clock hangs exactly is by the beating of the pendulum, for if it
strike not equal, that is, if there be longer time between beating of one blow,
then there is between the beating of another, be sure it stands not upright; to
remedy which you must elevate either one side of the Clock or the other, till
you find it to vibrate equally, in doing of which observe, that if, when you
have elevated one side of your Clock, it beats more unequal than before, then
be sure you have elevated the wrong^ side, therefore proceed to the elevation
of the other, till you find it to vibrate equally.


Chi. What rules must be observed in setting up the long-swing weekly
Pendulums, or others of the like nature.


Art. In setting up long-swing Pendulums, after you have taken them from the
coffin, open it, and make free all things that are fastened, as before was
taught, then in the room it is designed to stand in, seek for some post if
possible near the place you desire it should stand at, to which proster the
Clock and case together as it is, which done fasten the back part of the Case
with a nail or screw to the post, then hang on the weight according to the
marks by the workman given, and set the Pendulum on vibrating, and according
to the beating of it you will understand which way to elevate or depress the
same to make it beat equal and swing clear of the case: then when you have
found it to stand in its true position, fasten it with another nail or two,
that it may stand firm and not shake: the same rule that is given for this
serves for all other trunck-cases whatsoever.


Chi. What rules have you for placing Spring (or table Clock.)

The difficulty of placing these is not great, for after you have loosed
whatsoever was fastened for convenience of carriage, you have no more to do but
to set it on a Table, Cabinet, or other place convenient for it to stand on
(which most commonly stand up right) but after you have placed your Clock
thereon, if it be a pendulum and you find it not to beat right, you may remedy
it by putting under that part of the Table, Cabinet, etc. that is too low, a
small wedg, till you find it to stand right and vibrate equal.


HOROLOGICAL DIALOGVES.
The Second Part.
DIALOGVE I. Of pocket Watches; Watch and Larrums; and Clocks; their use right
managing and true adjusting.
CHi. What is the chief use of watches, watch and larrums, and Clocks.


Art. The chief use of the pocket watch is, with the pointing of the needle to
the circle of hours, to give the true hour of the day or night; the watch and
Larrum not only gives the hour by the pointing of the needle, but is also by
Art contrived to ring on a bell, at any certain hour you shall appoint, being
chiefly designed to awaken people at any certain hour of the night, according
as they shall have occasion to raise themselves; the Clock not only gives the
hour by the direction of the hand to the Dial figures, but does also (as I have
said before) give intelligence of its divisions of time, by the sound of a
Bell, strikeing thereon so many strokes as are sufficient to give an account of
the hour it expresses.


Chi. What is to be learnt as necessary to the right managing of these
movements.


Art. In the managing of the pocket watch, you must first wind it up rightly;
which you must do by turning the Key of it contrary to the motion of the Sun,
or from your right hand upwards (or from you) toward your self, which ought
also to be done not too hastily, least you force the stop, and break the
string; and commonly those, that strive to wind them up the contrary way, bow
either the teeth, or break the pinions; like unto this is the manner of winding
up either Watch and Larrum, or Clock; but the Watch and Larrum, being appointed
to ring at any certain hour must thus be set to perform its task; they have
commonly two circles whereon, are engraven the twelve hours, one in large or
capital figures, the other in small figures, which are appointed to set the
Larrum by, within which is a small hand; now, what hour soever you would have
your Larrums to ring at, to that figure, i^ the innermost circle, set your
Larrum hand; as if you would have it ring at five in the Morning, then set the
little hand within the small circle (which I call the Larrum hand) to the
figure of five contained in that small circle; then wind up the Larrum, and
the next morning you willl see the effects.


Chi. How is the Clock to be ordered.


Art. The Clock, in the winding up of its several parts, must be ordered as the
watch, but in other respects requires a different ordering, for if the hand be
not at the true hour, it must be set thereunto gradually from one hour to an
other, letting the Clock strike out betwixt each hour, for if you should turn
the hand forward hastily two or three figures together, you will endanger the
breaking of the detents, if they should happen to rise against the warning pin.

If the hand and the striking are not together, that is, if it strikes more or
less then the figure, which the hand points at, you must bring them together
thus, by lifting up continually the locking detent, so often as occasion
serves, till by striking of it round you bring it to strike so many as the
figure signifies, to which the needle points.


Chi. How are these movements to be adjusted and brought truly to the hour.


Art In adjusting of these movements what is necessary in one, is sufficient
for all, being all rectified in their going by the same rule, if therefore a
Watch go too fast, the spring must be let down to make it go slower, if it go
too slow the spring must be taken up to make it go faster.


Chi. How shall this be performed.


Art. By turning the endless screw, that the figures moved by it may increase
or diminish: as if you would make it go faster, turn it that the figures may
pass from 1 to 2 and from 2 to 3 etc. but if you would have it go slower turn
them from 4 to 3 and from 3 to 2 etc. and thus you may bring the most common
pocket work to the true time or motion in which it should move.


Chi. It has been observed, that some Watches go too slow when they are first
wound up, and too fast when they are almost down, and some go too fast, when
they are first wound up, and too slow when they are almost down; which all the
leting down or taking up of the Spring would not remedy.


Art. This proceeds from a fuzey not truly adjusted to the draught of the
Spring, and must be rectified by a workman, being one of the hardest knacks
that belong to a Watch-maker to perform exactly.


DIALOGUE II. Of ordinary domestic Balance Watches, Watch and Larrums, and
Clocks, their use, right manageing, and true adjusting.
CHi. what is the chief use of these movements.


Art. The use of these is the same with those in the former discourse, (only
their use is more manual then these, and the use of these more domestic then
they) but their manner of ordering differ something, for these are drawn up by
the lines themselves, and the Larrum is set by turning the Circle of small
figures, till the figure, representing the hour you would have it ring at, be
set under the back end of the hand; as if you would have it ring at 4 of the
Clock in the morning, turn the Circle about till you set the figure of 4
thereon just under the back (or shorter end of the hand,) so shall you have its
desired effects, if you draw the weight of it up.

For the ordering the Clock, in reference to the making it strike true with
the hand, it is the same before delivered concerning the pocket Clock; whether I
refer you.


Chi. When these movements go too fast or too slow, how shall they be rectified
and adjusted.


Art. These movements going with weights must be brought to keep true time by
adding to or diminishing from them: if they go too slow you must add thin
shifts of lead to the weights to make it go faster, but if it go too fast then
you must diminish the weight to make it go slower, so that, whenever you find
it either to gain or loose, you must thus, by adding or diminishing, rectify
its motion: note that these Balance movements are exceedingly subject to be
altered by the change of weather, and therefore are most commonly very
trou^lsome to keep to a true time, except they are your pocket watches, which
by reason of their being always kept near the heat of a man's body, are less
sensible of the alteration of Air, and so less subject to be varied by it.


DIALOGVE III. Of Pendulum Clocks, their use, right managing, and true
adjusting.
CHi. What rules give you for the right ordering of the pendulum Clock.


Art. The Pendulum Clock being the most perfect, we shall deliver the full
order and manner of true keeping it; first, after you have fixed it to the
place where it is to stand, you must give motion to the Pendulum by a touch of
your finger, for it will not move of it self, but must be set one vibrating by
manual operation, when the Pendulum is in motion it must not be touched, for
that will settle it still, and keep it from going.

It must be pulled up by the hind-most line of the counter weight.

It must by no means be Jogged out of its place, or beaten a wrye, for that
will put a stop to the motion.


Chi. How must it be ordered as to its striking?


Art. The same way that the other Clocks were by continual lifting up of the
locking detent, till you have brought the striking and the hour together, did
it either strike too much or too little; here take notice that the locking
detent is on the right side of the Clock, if it go with one weight, but if it
go with two weights then the locking detent is commonly on the left side of it,
as it is in ordinary Balance Clocks; for the Justening of the Pendulum, it is
done by altering the Radius thereof, either longer or shorter, as occasion
serves, so that if a Pendulum go too slow you must, by screwing the bob from
you, shorten its Radius, which makes it vibrate oftener and go faster, but if it
goes too fast then you must screw the bob lower, by turning the bob toward
you, which makes its Radius longer, and by consequence obliges it to go slower.


Chi* When a Pendulum is once rectified will it not alter like the Balance
Clock?


Art. The short Pendulum is subject to some alteration, but not so often nor
Considerable as the Balance: upon extreme foulness they have been observed to
go too fast (contrary to the custom of ^allance work* who is th^n subject to
go too slow) the reason of its thus going too fast when foul, is the choking
of the pevets with dust, which hinder the motion of the Pendulum, and
restrains it from fetching its wonted compass, so that the Arch of its
recursion being shortened it must needs pass it in lesser time, and so by
consequence gain as to its wonted course; of which more may be understood when
the Pendulum is treated of.


Chi. Have you nothing more to deliver concerning Pendulums?


Art. Nothing more concerning these ordinary ones, I confess, something more
might be delivered concerning the more richer kinds, but it being so hard to
teach by precept without example, that I shall forbear. However what has
before been delivered is of good use in their managment, as to the matter of
adjusting and setting them.


Chi. Is the long pendulum subject to variation as the short one is?


Art. No; being once brought to a true time it always keeps it, for it moves
in so small an arch, that it is unpossible for it to move less without standing,
and more it cannot being impeded by the work; so that being confined that it
cannot remove more or less from its center of gravity, it must needs keep a
certain motion as to it self.


Chi. But it is observed that they vary many times from the Sun, how can this be
but from the Pendulum?


Art. I confess there is some small difference many times between them and the
sun, but this is not from the Pemdulum but from other causes which shall be
treated of when I shall discourse the inequality of time and refractions.


DIALOGVE IV. Of Quarter Repeating, and Chime Clocks, their use and management.
CHi. May there be any rules given for the setting, and keeping in order these
motions, or may their use be known without experience?


Art. The use of Quarter Clocks is, not only to strike the full hour on a
bell, but also to strike at the end of every Quarter of an hour, so many blows
on a smaller bell as are sufficient to express the number of Quarters that have
passed since the hour last struck.


Chi. Do they strike on one bell only or on more?


Art. They are made many times to strike the Quarters on more bells then one,
as many times on 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6. but let them strike on never so many they
must strike them over as many times each quarter, as there are quarters passed
since the striking of the last hour.


Chi. How does the repeating Clock strike?


Art. They not only strike the hour and quarter, but also, immediately after
the striking of each quarter, it repeats or strikes over again, on a different
bell, the last hour that was stricken, by which you are given to understand,
that it is 1, 2, or 3 quarters past that hour which was repeated; this Clock is
of excellent use for the night.

There is another sort of repeating Clocks, which differs much from this before
spoken of, the quarters and repeating, being both performed at the same time,
and on the same bells; it strikes the quarters on three bells, and the hour
bell never strikes above six: to understand the striking of this Clock you must
observe this rule. Look on how many quarter bells it strikes whether on 1, 2,
or 3, for so many quarters are passed since the strikeing of the last hour, as
if it strike on one bell, then one quarter is passed; if on two bells, then two
quarters are passed, if on three bells, three quarters are passed: then again,
look how many times it strikes on any number of the aforesaid three bells, that
is the hour that was stricken last; as suppose it strike five times on two
bells, this signifies its two quarters past five or eleven as the time is,
again suppose it strike six times one three bells, this signifies its three
quarters past fix or twelve, according to the time.


Chi. I understand not the meaning of its striking six or twelve, or eleven or
five.


Art. The meaning is this, the Clock never striking but six, is the cause that
at seven of the Clock in the morning it strikes but one; at eight, two; and at
nine three; at ten, four; at eleven, five; and at twelve, six; which every one
that has common sense cannot imagine to be six at morning, or six at evening,
and therefore must needs be the next extreme from six, viz, twelve.


Chi. How are these quarter and repeating Clocks to be managed in their setting?


Art. Only by the successive striking them round by lifting up their locking
detents so often, till each part agrees with the other in the performance of
its office.


Chi. By what means may these detents be known, or how shall we find them, when
there may be occasion to make use of them?


Art. To write of these things is but in vain, for it is unpossible (where there
is such variety) to give certain and general directions your, best knowledge
herein will be from experience and the assistance of one well instructed
therein.


DIALOGUE V. Certain cases to be observed in all Clocks generally.
CHi. How often do Clocks require to be cleansed?


Art. All Clocks ought once every year to be cleansed from the filth and dirt
they have contracted: they ought likewise to be once or twice oyled between
each cleansing, for when the pevets are once grown dry they wear four times as
fast as otherwise they would do, if they were kept moist with a little clean
oil, and are likewise then most subject to standing still.


Chi. Is not air and dust very Injurious to a Clock?


Art. Yes, and therefore all Clocks in the time of their going, ought to be
kept as free as possible from both, the one will be apt to canker and rust it,
the other will exceedingly clog and soul it, therefore to avoid one ill
convenience in part, let those Clocks that move with lines, be sure to be
always sitted with those that are sound and good, for when once the lines of a
Clock begin to grow any whit worn they foul a Clock exceedingly.


Chi. It Is certain I have known Clocks that for two or three years have gone
well without either cleaning or lining.


Art. This is likewise my experience, having know^ the like both in Clocks and
Watches, but this was commonly the event, that when they were forced to make
them clean they never went well after, for going dry so long without oil, they
were so extremely worn, that it was unpossible they should go longer.

This I fear will be the fate of those long swing eight day Pendulums, so much
at this day celebrated, for so long as they keep going well other things are
not considered, nor no regard is had to those things that should continue them
in that placide estate of motion.


Chi. Which way must the hand be turned when we set either Clock or watch?


Art. When you set your pocket watches to the hour your best way is to move
your hand backward (or contrary to the succession of the figures) but if your
movement be a Clock then you must not turn it thus backward as you do a watch,
because it will endanger the spoiling of it, but strike it forward from hour to
hour, till you come to the time you would set it at, then when you have so done
put it som^thing past the time you would set it to, and then bring it back
again to the true time: as if your Clock were down, and your and stood at
eight, and you were to set it at a quarter past eleven; to do this strike your
Clock gradually from eight to nine, and from nine to ten, and from ten to
eleven; then, to set it at a quarter past eleven, turn it to half an hour past,
and then bring it back to a quarter or the true time. The reason of this advise
is, because, if you put it forward when you set the hand, it will stand still,
for as long time as the shaking or playing thereof contains in time on the dial
ring. I have known the hand of some Clocks and Watches, that have played
forward and backward above a quarter of an hour, and so long will they stand
still, and not move the needle, when they are newly set, by turning the hand
forward, whereas, if according to this direction, you put it backward, it will
move immediately with the rest of the work: the not understanding of this has
bread great mistakes between many a gentleman and his Watch.

Observe also to set your Watch continually by one Sun-dial, because it is
seldom known that two Sun-dials go true together; so that, if you set it
sometimes by one, and sometimes by another, you will never know when your Watch
or Clock goes right. Also observe further to set it (if possible) always to
one hour on the same dial; because many times the hour lines give not true time
alike, which, if it should thus happen, yet setting it always at one hour, will
prevent all mistakes, or at least all those that are sensible.


Chi. What must be observed when Clocks or Watches want cleansing or repairing?


Art. They must observe and be careful to send it to a workman, and not bring
the Workman to it: many Gentlemen are of this humor, that when they have a
Clock or such like that wants cleaning or mending, the workman must come to
their houses to do it, which is a great mistake, for it is impossible for a
workman when he is from his tools to perform his business so exquisitly as
otherwise he might, so that they that desire this are certain to have their
business never well done.

I would also advise all persons whatsoever whose Clocks or Watches want
reparations, that they give sufficient time after they are cleansed or mended,
for the workman truly to adjust them, for there is no man that can say, when
he has mended either Clock or Watch, that it* shall go true, and perform well,
till he have by sufficient trial proved it and adjusted it.


Chi. Is it considerable whether or no we keep a true time in winding up
Watches or Clock^?


Art. Not at all* you may wind them up at what time you please, or as often as
you please, it matters not; only observe in Watches, and other spring movements
to wind them till they stop, and not give over till you wi^d them wholly up;
for if you do, you may chance to find alteration in their motion; for the
spring, when first wound up, draws harder then be does when he is somewhat
settled, and if this happen in any place of the fuzey, that is not diminished
proportionable to this impetuous, it must needs cause variation in the motion.

These are the most necessary, and chief directions, that can be given in
writing, or that can be apprehended without example; nevertheless, whosoever is
Master of either Clocks or Watches, shall certainly find great benefit by what
has been here delivered, if he be careful to observe them.

And though the rules, here delivered in this second part, are not so full and
general as might be expected, yet they are as full as I thought convenient; for
I did consider that every one, that make use of Clocks or Watches, knows also
how to manage them, as to the common rules thereunto belonging, and therefore I
did think it needless to insert those things that are already so commonly
known, only I did give a little touch of some of them (that are most material)
for m^thods sake: for the First and Third parts, and the Appendix, was that
which I chiefly designed, and may be worth the reading, if it be done with
consideration; for they contain those things that are known, but to a very few,
and perhaps not rightly understood by some of them, so as to apply them to use
and benefit.


The End of the Second Part.
HOROLOGICAL DIALOGVES.
The Third Part.
DIALOGVE 1. Of the inequality of time in respect of Artificial motions: the
mature of it, their times of erring with the quantity of their error, from
whence several conclusions are drawn in reference to Clocks
CHi. What is the inequality of time and wherein does it consist?


Art. The inequality of time consists not in the unequal length of days
natural but in the unequal length of hours, as given on a Sun-dial which is a
thing little sought after, and less understood by those whom it most nearly
concerns.


Chi. This is a thing I never before heard of, nor can at present understand,
how the hours given can be one longer then another, that is how the shadow on a
Sundial can be longer time in passing from one hour to another at one time of
the year, then it is at another, for my part I never observed it, nor cannot
imagine which way to do it.


Art. There is no way possible to observe it, but by an exact Clock, that is
regulated by a large Pendulum.


Chi. What is the reason of this inequality of time?


Art. In giving the reason or cause there is great difference, some make the
reason of it to be the obliquity of the Zodiac, wherein the Sun moves; others
make the difference between the Suns true longitude, and his right ascension to
be the absolute cause, others make the unequal motion of the Sun in the Zodiac
to be the cause (which I incline to) but the cause of this cause, I suppose,
all are ignorant of, because God in his word never revealed it, and for any
other way of knowing it, I suppose, it is so far from our attainment that the
wisdom of the best Astronomer will in this prove but foolishness, however they
may otherwise pretend.


Chi. What reason have you to believe the Suns unequal Course to be the cause?


Art. Because the Sun in its motion through the Zodiac passes equal arches in
unequal times, by reason of its swift and slow motion whereby he fulfilleth his
course from Libra to Aries in 178 days (which is the winter half-year) but in
passing from Aries to Libra he takes up 187 days (which is the summer
half-year) being nine days longer in passing through the semi^cliptick of the
summer, than she is through that of the winter, now the Sun being thus swift
and slow in motion cannot give a true and constant hour by its shadow one a
Sundial for the motion of the primum Mobil finisheth its course in exact times,
i. e. in twenty four hours which well agrees with the Suns mean motion near the
equinoctial, but when the Sun is in its swift motion, as it happens when
inclining to the winter Tropic, then there is more time contained in twenty
four hours, as given on a dial, then there was in the equinoctial, and so by
consequence every particular hour in the twenty four must be somewhat longer
then those in the Equator: but when she happens to have slow motion as from
Aries to Libra then there is not so much time contained in twenty four hours as
there is in the Equator, and so by consequence every hour must also be shorter.


Chi. How this swift and slow motion of the Sun should c^use this inequality in
time I cannot well understand.

Suppose there were on an instrument two circles drawn concentrick, and the
outmost Circle should be graduated into 360 degrees, and every degree into
sixty minutes, and suppose that upon this circle thus graduated, there should
some certain figure move, as it were naturally from West to East, which in
Twenty four hours should move almost Fifty nine minutes of a degree; suppose
likewise that in this time of moving Fifty nine minutes, the innermost circle
should completely the same way make one revolution, and should continue so to
do; that is, should always complete its revolution, within it self in Twenty
four hours, in which time the other moves fifty nine minutes of a degree; then
suppose this figure on the graduated circle should increase its motion, and
should move Sixty one minutes of a degree, in the same time as it before moved
but Fifty nine; this must needs cause the innermost circle (who before in
twenty four hours finished its course from one conjunction to another, when the
figure moved but fifty nine in twenty four hours) to be longer time now, then
twenty four hours, in passing from one conjunction to another, because the
figure moves faster, and so by consequence, requires more time to be overtaken
then it did in its mean motion, the same reason is also for its slow motion;
for if the figure move less then fifty nine (as suppose fifty eight or fifty
seven minutes) there is less time required for the prymoby like motion of the
innermost circle to overtake it, then twenty four hours.


Chi. What do you infer from hence?


Art. From hence we may infer, that if the hours given by a Sun-dial, increase
or decrease in length, accord* to the slow or swift motion of the Sun, that
then it is impossible for the most exact* ^l^ck that ever was made, to keep ^^^e
with a Sun-dial, but there will be di^^erence, according to the time of the
y^^r ^^d (...) of the ^u^.


Ch^. How is it then possible to justen a Clock, exactly to the hour.


Art. It Is possible (when a man rightly understands the course of the Sun) to
justen it so, as that if it be set to a Sun-dial at any time it may be right
with the same dial that time twelve month, but to justen it so as to keep touch
with a dial the year round is unpossible.


Chi. At what time will they differ?


Art. If a Pendulum truly adjusted (so as to come right that time twelve month
without setting) be set to the hour in January, it shall in June following be
too slow by the same dial; if it be set in June to the hour, in January
following, it shall be too fast, but if it be let go the year round, it shall
in one half year gain or lose what it lost or got in the other, and so at the
years end come right to the time it was first set at.


Chi. What may be the quantity of their error?


A^ From June to January (if it be well adjusted) twill nevertheless gain about
forty four minutes, or almost three quarters of an hour; from January to June
twill lose near the same time; if set to a dial in March, it may lose by June
something above a quarter of an hour, viz, twenty two minutes; from June to
September twill gain as much and come right again; from September to December
it will gain about twenty two minutes, but from December to March twill lose it
and come right again, Whence observe that Clocks set to the hour, when the Sun
is in either of the tropicks, continues gaining and losing the whole year
round, and never agree with the same dial, till that time twelve month: but if
they are set when the Sun is in either of the equinoctial points, then they may
agree with the same dial twice in the same time or year, and their gaining and
losing will never be so extreme, as when set in the tropicks, for if be set in
March (or the equinoctial of Aries) it shall have lost in June but twenty one
or twenty two minutes, and in September following it will agree with the same
dial again, from thence to December twill gain as much, and from thence to
March it will lose it and come right again; so that from hence we may likewise
conclude that those Clocks, which go to a quarter of an hour or something more
in three months, are the nearest that can be brought to keep true time with the
Sun, let them be of what form, kind, or price soever.


Chi. What is the most true and exact way of justening Clocks by the Sun?


Art. If you would justen a Clock exactly to the Sun, so that a twelve month
after it may agree with the same dial (if set when the Sun is in the tropicks,
or agree with the same dial twice in the year, when set in the equinoctials) do
thus, in the equinox of March let it be set to a true dial that shows
minutes, and when the Sun is in the meridian; then in June following observe
the difference between your Clock and dial, which if it be about twenty two
minutes too slow then conclude it goes well* but if it be more then twenty two
minutes or less, then you must rectify it accordingly, as has been formerly
taught, and thus you may rectify it, according to any other time, if you
consider the difference that happens after so many months going, from any
time of setting.


DIALOGVE II. Of Refractions what it is, and when it happens, with several
conclusions drawn from it, in reference to Clocks.
CHi. What is the refraction of the Suns beams, and how is it caused?


Art. Refraction of the Sun is when she appears higher in altitude then
indeed she is, and is caused by the moist and humid vapors which continually
arise from off the earth, which naturally do represent all things, that are
seen through them, to be larger in bulk and higher in altitude then indeed they
really are, this makes the Sun, Moon, and Stars* when they first arise, to
appear so large in magnitude, which continually diminishes according as they
ascend above the horizon, till being elevated above all vap^urs, they are again
reduced in our appearance to their natuaral magnitude, and as those vapors
make them appear to us of greater bulk and magnitude then otherwise they would,
so they cause them also to appear higher in altitude: so that we see the sun
visibly risen before she is naturally above the horizon.


Chi. How is this proved?


Art. It may be proved thus: take an Horizontal Dial, that is large and truly
drawn, place it exactly in its true position, which having done, let a Pendulum
Clock, that keeps true time, be (about twelve of the Clock) set exactly to
it; the next morning, if the Sun shine, observe how they agree, and you shall
find that at the first rising of the Sun there will be much difference, which
will by little and little diminish, according as the Sun gets above the
strength of those vapors, till at last they come exactly together, which could
not be, if her altitude were not by these refractions, made apparently higher
than her true place.


Chi. What conclusions may be drawn from hence?


Art. Since it is so that those vapors make the Sun at his rising or setting to
appear higher to us than naturally she is, this must by consequence give a
false shadow on all Sun-dials, both at its rising and setting, because the
hour lines drawn on Sun-dials, are designed to receive the shadow of the Sun
from its true place, and not from his appatient; and so by consequence all
Dials whatsoever cannot at those times give the true hour, because they receive
not their shadow from the Suns true place, but from his apparient; therefore
if your Watches and Clocks agree not with your Dial, you are not to conclude
the fault to be in their motion (if they have gone well before) but in the
refracted shining of the Sun.


Chi. What altitude may the Sun attain before we may put confidence in a
Sun-dial?


Art. For this I shall give you a Table made by my observation as near as
possible to the truth.

A Table of the Suns refraction in time, according to the degrees of Altitude.
Alt. Differ. Alt. Differ. 0 18 00 12 04 30 1 14 00 13 04 15 2 11 00 14 04 00 3
09 00 15 03 40 4 08 00 16 03 20 5 07 30 17 03 00 6 07 00 18 02 35 7 06 30 19 02
00 8 06 00 20 01 20 9 05 30 21 01 00 10 05 00 22 00 30 11 04 45 23 00 00

The use of this Table is thus, first find the Suns altitude in the lest hand
column, entitled altitude, and right against it you have the minutes and
s^cants, which those dials vary when the Sun has such degrees of altitude; as
for example, when the Sun first appears, a dial will differ from the true
time 18 minutes; when she has 3 degrees of altitude, the difference is 9
minutes; when she has 9 degrees of altitude, the difference is 5 minutes 30
secants, etc. so that it will not be safe setting either Watch or Clock to the
hour given on a Sun-dial, till the Sun have attained 20 degrees of altitude
above the Horizon, till which time the refraction is something sensible.


Chi. Tell me precisely what hours are fittest for that purpose?


A. The best times for setting either Clock or watch to the time, on a Dial, is
in May, June, and July, between the hours of 7 in the morning and 5 in the
afternoon, in April and August between the hours of 8 in the morning, and 4. in
the afternoon; in February and September, between the hours of 10 and 2, the
other months 'twill not be safe setting them till near noon.


Chi. Suppose a watch should be set to a Sun-dial betimes in the morning, what
then?


Art. Then it will not go right with the same Dial all the prime part of the
day after, but will differ as much as the refraction was, when it was set to
the same dial.


Chi. are not these refractions always equal throughout the year?


Art. No, they are greater in Winter than in the Summer, greater in moist
weather than in dry, greater near Seas or large Rivers than on the remoter
parts of dry land, and greater in the morning than they are in the evening, all
which being duly considered, may prove of good use for the business for which
this discourse has designed it, viz. The true keeping, and right managing of
all Clocks and Watches whatsoever; so that whenever you shall find your
Watches or Clocks differ in the same day from your Dial, you may by knowing the
reason of it prevent those mistakes which otherwise might arise?


DIALOGVE III. Of the Spring, its definition, nature and defects, with the
effects thereof in Clocks and Watches.
CHi. From whence do those Movements that go without weights receive their
motion?


Art. From a spring.


Chi. What is a spring?


Art. A spring is a certain thin plate of steel, drawn by the hammer to a
sufficient length, breadth, and thickness, according as the proportion of
draught (which is designed to it requires) this being exactly wrought, and
artificially tempered, is wound up in the form of a spiral line, not close
together, but at a certain distance, after which it is conveyed into its
barrel, where it lies something closer together in the outward circumference
than in the center, having the one end fastened to the barrel, and the other to
the arbor whereon the barrel moves.


Chi. When it is thus sitted to its work, how does it perform or draw, so as to
give motion to the wheels after it is wound up?


Art. When it is first wound up, it compresseth it self in the center, (as*
before it did in the circumference) but being by the temper made as it were
free Deniz^n of a certain Orb, it never rests till by extension it has
a^^ained to its first place, which it does not in an instant, but by degrees as
the motion of the work, which it draws along with it, will suffer it to move
round.


Chi. Is the draught of a spring equally in a^l places alike, or does it differ
according as it may be str^^ned?


Art. The spring is always strongest when first wound up, and weakest when
returned to its natural position; from whence it happens that the fuzey (by
which the spring draws the work about) is made commonly in the shape of a
Counical screw, by which means this unequal draught is regulated and made alike
equal; for when the spring is first wound up, and its draught strongest, there
the fuzey is least, and so as the strength of the spring decreaseth, so the
bigness of the fuzey increases, by which means the wheels move most commonly
with a pretty equal motion.


Chi. Is it possible so to adjust a fuzey to the draught of a spring, that
there shall be no alteration of time in those Watches which it moves?


Art. The answer to this your question is a thing of great consequence, and
deserves diligently to be enquired into: my opinion is, that the spring like a
wise Master-fencer, has reserved to himself some certain unlucky tricks (which
it is most diligent observers cannot attain to the knowledge of) that so it may
be able on occasion to give a foil to those that think themselves sufficiently
able to overcome all its difficulties: Certain it is that those occult defects,
which are yet remaining in the spring, are the very scourge and disgrace of
Clock-makers, working those effects in the motion of Watches, which the most
sound workman is not able to remedy, it being equally as unpossible to make a
Watch go always true, as to have light and darkness both in the same place at
the same time.

Some Watches there are that for 6 or 8 days will go indifferent right, and
after that it may be check and go too slow, and another time too fast, and
seldom continue in one estate of motion, although it have always one bent
offspring; this is often remedied with a new spring, but never with the same.

Others there are that shall never go well 24 hours together, but shall either
gain or lose in spite of Art.

Springs many times draw well for a time, and then faulter at last, as is seen
in many new Watches, who go well when first sold, but afterward upon settling
of the spring; have moved very irregularly, which may be rectified by another
new spring; however the Workman is commonly on such occasions blamed, though
the fault be none of his, but is rather (if in any) the fault of the
spring-maker.


Chi. How is it the Spring-makers fault?


Art. Either he works them not truly to an equal thickness, or gives them
not a true temper in all places alike, or it may be leaves them too high, or
takes them down too low, all which may be the cause of their unplacent motion;
for if they compress themselves more in one place than in another, it cannot in
its extension move so free from jerking or twitching, as those that are
compressed alike in all its parts, which illconveniencies though they many
times are caused through the Spring-makers neglect, yet I date not affirm it to
be always his fault; for I believe, let them take all the care that possibly
they can, yet the nature of steel is such, that it will not in all places take
temper alike, which how the best workman in this way will be able to remedy, I
know not; however it is certain, that where a spring is wrought with care, let
it be what steel it will, yet it must needs prove better than those that are
wrought with neglect.


Chi. Are all springs troubled with those defects?


Art. No, all are not, in so high a measure, for then 'twere unpossible any
Watches should go true. Some are far better than others, and by chance a man
may light on some that are purely good, but this is very rare, but for the most
part, they are either more or less defective, and so by consequence those
Watches that are moved by them, keep either a certain or uncertain time,
according as the springs are in goodness that move them, always having
consideration to the goodness of the work; from all which we may conclude that
the pains and care of Watch-makers ought to be very great that bring those
Movements to any true performance, and if those that buy them, were as careful
to pay them for their trouble, it would in this Art produce great effects.

Let me advise all Gentlemen (and others) whose fortune it has been to light
on those Watches, that by the care of a good Workman, are brought to perform
well, that they value them accordingly, and take great care that they do not by
violence put them into disorder, it is possible that a Watch may go near the
true time, though not set in many days, this account excellent; but if it go so
well as to require setting but in two or three days, this is very considerable;
and where you have one that goes better you may have two that go worse;
therefore prise these also, and account that work that performs thus* to be
good work, and carefully finished.

Note, That Pendulum Clocks or Watches which are drawn by springs, are not
subject to those irregular motions as balance movements are.


DIALOGVE IV. Some Enquiries into the Nature of the Pendulum, with the method
of finding their several lengths.
CHi. The Pendulum being one of the most exact means yet discovered for the
keeping of true time, it would be time well spent to enquire something into the
nature of its motion, both as to its vibrations and terms of suspension.


Art. As for the vibration of Pendulums suspended at any length, it is certain
that the times of it, vibrations natural to any Pendulums length, are so
limited and prefixed, that it is impossible to make it move under any other
period than that only one, which is natural unto it, let any one try all the
ways he can to increase or decrease the frequency of its vibrations, and he
shall find his labor all in vain, provided he increase or decrease not the
arch of its recursions; that is, that he remove it not farther or lesser from
its Center of gravity, than such a certain number of degrees.


Chi. You need not have made any exception, for it is well demonstrated by one of
the Ancients, that if it be removed from the Center of gravity, any number of
degrees whatsoever from one to ninety, yet the number of vibrations in the same
Pendulum shall not increase or decrease: His words are these, That the
Movables that should descend along the Cords, that are Subtenses to any Arch,
must necessarily pass them all in equal times, as well the subtense under an
hundred an eighty degrees (that is the whole Diameter) as the subtenses of an
hundred, sixty, ten, two, or half a degree, four minutes: still supposing that
they all determine in the lowest point touching the Horizontal plain. An effect
which has in it so much of wonder, by how much at the first apprehension one
would think the contrary would follow; for the term of the beginning and end of
the motion being common* and the right line being the shortest that can be
comprehended between the said terms, it seems reasonable that the motion made
by it should be finished in the shortest time, which yet is not so, but the
shortest time, and consequently the swiftest motion, is that made by the Arch,
of which the said right line is Cord.


Art. But if this ancient Writer had had the same opportunity of experiencing
these things as we have now, he would have been of another opinion: For to
confute this, trial was made by a Pendulum about seven foot long, which
vibrated (by a Clock showing secants) 41 times in a minute, at which time it
swong or moved in an Arch of four inches, the same Pendulum, at 12 inches Arch
vibrated but 40 the same at 10 foot Arch vibrated but 39 times, the same
Pendulum at the whole Semi-arch vibrated but 37 times, so that here was four
blows difference in the same Pendulum, when vibrating in different arches,
which clearly prove that Pendulums cannot perform all its vibrations great,
lesser, and least, under times precisely equal.

Besides, it is clearly apparent that ordinary pendulum Clocks and others, whose
pendants are but short, that when through foulness or natural wearing, they
fetch not so large a compass as when they are clean, and in order it is then I
say apparent that their motion is swifter than at other times.


Chi. It Is probable that your Mechanical observations may be of more weight
than the best rules of Art in this kind, for the truth is, if rules of Art will
not keep touch with the Mechanics, it is not to be regarded; in the next place
let us consider the vibrations of Pendulums of different lengths in the same
time, what proportions they beat?


Art. As to the times of the vibrations of pendulums suspended by verges of
different lengths, those times are in subduple proportion to the the lengths of
their verges, or if you will, the lengths are in duplicate proportion to the
times; that is, are as the squares of the times: so that if for example the
time of the vibration of one pendulum is double to the vibration of an other,
it follows that the length of the rod of that is quadruple to the length of
the verge of this, and in the time of one vibration of that, another shall make
three vibrations when the verge of that shall be nine times as long as the
other. From whence does follow, that the length of the verges have to each
other the the same proportion as the squares of the number of vibrations that
are made in the same times have.


Chi. Then if I have rightly understood you, I may easily know the length of a
pendulum hanging at never so great height, although the sublime term of
suspension were invisible to me, and I only saw the lower extreme, for if it
should be set on vibrating too and again, and a friend telling some of its
recursions, and I at the same time tell the recursions of another pendulum
suspended, on a verge precisely a yard long, by the numbers of the vibrations
of these pendulums made in the same time: I will find the length of the
pendulum whose term of suspension I know not, as for example, suppose in the
time that my friend has counted twenty recursions of the long pendulum, and I
had told two hundred and forty of mine that is a yard long: squaring the two
numbers of 20 and 240. which are 400 and 57600. I will say that the long string
contains 57600 of those measures of which my string contains 400.


Art. You are in the right, nor will you be mistaken one inch, especially if
you take a great number of vibrations: by the same rule also you may (having
the length of any one pendulum from its upmost suspension to the Center of the
bob, and the number of its vibrations in a minute) find out the length of a
pendulum that shall vibrate any number of blows in the same time; suppose I had
a pendent three foot long that vibrated 62 times in a minute, and I have
occasion for to find out the length of a pendulum that shall vibrate but 20 in
a minute. Do thus, square the two numbers 62 and 20, which produce 3844 and
400, now divide 3844 by 400, the quotient is 9 61/100 therefore I say that this
pendulum to vibrat 20 in one minute, must be 9 61/100 times as long as my
standard pendulum, which being 3 foot, the other will be 28 foot 8 inches long
from the term of suspension to the center of the bob, and thus you may do for
any other whatsoever, by observing what has been here delivered. For so often
as the square of any number of vibrations is contained in the square of another
made in the same time, so many times must the length of that pendulum (which
made the greatest square) be contained in the length of the other which made
the smaller square.

By the same rule inverted, you may, by having the lengths of two pendulums,
and the vibrations that one of them makes in a minute, find out also the times
that the other shall vibrate in the same time: for if you have a pendulum whose
number of vibrations in a minute you know already, and would know the
vibrations that another pendulum, which is longer, shall make in the same time:
Consider how often the length of your short pendulum is contained in that
longer pendulum, and so often shall the squares of that long pendulums
vibrations be contained in the squares of those vibrations made by the short
pendulum in the same time: So likewise if you have a long pendulum whose
vibrations you know, and you would know how many vibrations a pendulum that is
shorter, shall make in the same time, look how much your first pendulum is
longer than your short one: so many times greater must the square of your short
pendulums vibrations be above those made by your longer pendulum in the same
time.

Note, that great care ought to be had in taking the true length of your
pendulum, from the utmost term of suspension to the center of the bob, and
likewise that your pendulums bobs be of an equal weight, or reduced thereunto
by rules of proportion.


DIALOGVE V. Of the Clock-bell, the cause of its sounding, with the nature
thereof, proved by reason and experience.
CHi. The nature of sounds in my opinion, is one of the most subtle pieces of
nature, being equally mysterious with that of light and colors, and a thing
that hitherto has been but superficially observed, and as yet very little
minded, and though we cannot expect the true reasons thereof can be soon
attained, yet to make some certain enquiry thereinto will not be time misspent;
therefore to come the more close to our intended design, what is your opinion
concerning the first creation of sound in a Clock-bell.


Art. Air* being the most pure Medium of all sounds, must be wrought upon by
such means as are solely necessary for the creation of a sound, which will be
effected, if tortured by most quick and subtle motions; hence it happens
that Bells, having by means of the percussion of the hammer, a trembling
wrought in the minute parts, which by its quick and subtle working upon the
air in the concavity of the Bell, produces a tone or sound.


Chi. What is the reason of the trebbleness or baseness of tones, one above
another.


Art. The trebbleness or baseness of tones in Bells, is from two causes; First,
from the quantity of air that is p^rcused or contained in the concavity of the
Ball Secondly, from the quickness or slowness of the percusion. To prove this,
take Bells of different greatness, but the same thickness in metal, and you
shall find them to produce different tones, according to the quantity of air
contained in their concavities Again, take Bells of the same breadth and depth,
but differing in their metal, and you shall find that Bell whose metal is
thinnest, to give the most base sound, and those that are thickest in metal,
shall produce the most treble sound; for the thicker the Bell is, the more
quick and sharp is the percusion of the air within it, which produces the
treble tone, but the thinner the Bell, the more weak and slow is the percusion,
which according to its nature, produces a more base or flat tone.

Tones are the same in Bells of several weights, but differently majorated
according to the magnitude of their bodies that produce it, for you shall have
a Bell of a pound weight carry the same tone as a Bell of two or three hundred,
but not in the same strength to be heard so far; so likewise it is possible that
a Bell of ten pound weight may produce the same tone as a Bell of four or five
thousand weight, but yet their different majoration will be according to the
proportion of their metals.


Chi. May not the sound of two Bells of the same weight be different in
majoration, that is to be heard, one farther than another.


Art. Yes, it is certain they may; for always observe, the sharper the tone is,
the farther the sound is heard, being more active and sprightly than those
tones that have a more dull and solitary note; from Bells of the same weight.

From what has been delivered, it will be worth the while to draw some heads
of enquity.

First, what just proportion of air in the concavity of a Bell, shall be
sufficient to produce a whole Musical tone, and what proportion will hold in
every tone.

Secondly, what diminution of substance in a bell of any weight, will be
sufficient to make that Bell a tone more bas^? or what diminution of depth
shall be sufficient to make it a note sharper?

Thirdly, what bore a Bell of any weight requires to majorate the sound thereof
to the highest degree possible?


Chi. How do sounds of Bells spread or move in the air?


Art. All sounds of Bells spread themselves into a spherical area, where there
is no impediment; otherwise they move more oval, if carried by the violence of
winds, or otherwise obstructed.

Though sounds of Bells spread themselves spherically, yet they go farthest in
the fore lines from the first local impulsion of the air.

All reflections concurrent, make sounds greater (but if the body that creates
the reflection be clean and smooth, it makes them sweeter) as is seen in large
and stately Halls or Churches, where the least voice is soon heard.

Soft and foraminous bodies in the first Creation of the sound of Bells, will
dead it, as is apparent where hangings are used, but in passage of sounds, they
will admit it better than hard bodies.

Querie.Whether the sound of Clock bells may not be majorated by means of its
passage through certain trunks on purpose artificially placed for the sound to
pass through, that by the penning thereof it may come forth more strong and
loud, this would be a thing of excellent use, if it could be effected?

Querie also. What weight of Hammer is best for to make the Bell give forth its
true and natural sound? for it is observed, that if the Hammer be too heavy or
too light for that quantity or quality of metal contained in a Bell, they give
not their sound so clear and full as when due proportion is observed.


FINIS*
AN APPENDIX WHEREIN IS Contained a METHOD OF Calculating all Numbers FOR
WATCHES. Written Originally by that famous Mathematician Mr. WILLIAM OVGHTRED,
and now made Public. By J. S. of London, Clock-maker.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin at the Three Roses in Ludgate Street, 1675.

TO THE READER.
THe method following was many years since Compiled by Mr. Oughtred for the use
of some Ingenious Gentlemen his friends, who for recreation at the University,
studied to find out the reason and knowledge of Watchwork, which seemed also to
be a thing with which Mr. Oughtred himself was much affected, as may in part
appear by his putting out of his own Son to the same Trade, for whose use (as I
am informed) he did compile a larger tract, but what became of it cannot be
known.

As for this work it self, I need not commend it, because it has in the front
Mr. Oughtred's Name, which alone is sufficient to bespeak its worth; nay, it
would in my Judgment be an Injury to the fame of that excellent Author, thus to
seem to argue a distrust, as if any thing that were Compiled by him should be
in it self so deficient as to borrow a supply of its own praise from another's
Pen.

It suffices me therefore to let you know it is his, Compiled by himself for
the same use for which it is now Published, and is without doubt a work of that
worthiness, that whatsoever Artist shall truly and rightly understand it, shall
also gain most excellent benefit by it.

The Method it self indeed as it is by him delivered, relates only to Watches,
which notwithstanding may be as aptly applied to any other number whatsoever
required in the Art of Clock-work, as every ingenuous man will soon find.

I have only one word more, and that is, that whosoever has a desire to attain
this Analletical way of Calculation must consult that Book, Entitled Clavis
Mathematica, written by the same Author, wherein they may be fully instructed
concerning the understanding of it.

Thine, J. S.

APPENDIX.
I. Of Movements or Automata.
1. IN every Movement some of the wheels and pinions effect or incite the
motion, and some others do determinate or spectisicate the same.

2. They which effect the Motion are first, the great wheel ( A) with the
fuzey, which moves ( ^) the pinion of the second wheel, ( E) which again
moves ( i) the pinion of the third or Cantrate wheel, ( J) which again moves
( o) the pinion of the Crown wheel, ( O) which lastly, moves the balance*

3. They which spectificate the Motion, are the pinion ( a) fixed to the Arbor
of the great wheel moving, ( B) the Dial wheel having its revolution in ( H)
hours or parts of time together with such intermediate wheels and pinions as
shall be found necessary.

4. If the number of any be divided by the number of another wheel moving it,
or moved by it, the quotient shall show how many revolutions of the Divisor are
to one turn of the Dividend, and how much of the Dividend goes in one turn of
the Divisor, as if ^ it shall be A=g E that is one turn of ( A) is equal in
time to (2) turns of ( E) and A/2= E that is () part of (A) is equal to one
turn of ( E) Again, if B / a=b it shall be B=ba that is one turn of ( B) is
equal to (b) turns of ( A) and B / 3= A that is (1/3) of ( B) is equal in time
to one turn of ( A and

5. Wherefore in every motion the number of the two wheels do make a Ratio or
fraction, whereof the Motrix is the Nrator in those that effect the motion; as
A / e=2. E / 1=8. I / o=5. But in those that specificate the motion it is the
denominator as B / a=b etc.

6. A view of the wheels and pinions.

^

7. A=^ B=^8 ^=285, O which are so many turns of ( O) if it be taken for the
wheel, or so many notches of the wheel, if it be taken for the number; which is
also to be understood of the rest of the Letters, ^i^.

E=A / 2=8J=85,0

J=A / 28=E / 8=5,0

O=A / 285=E / 85=J / ^

8. ^

9. 285, O= D by which note I signify the number of the notches of the Crown
wheel ( O) gone in one turn of ( A) by number 7. wherefore ^.

10. ^ which is the number of notches of the Crown wheel ( O) is gone in one
hour, or 1/ H for by number 8. H b285, o 1. ^*

11. Out the former propositions, these follow, viz.

^

12. ^ for if in ( H) hours are (b) turns of (^) or (b D) nothes gone (per10)
then in one hour (b / H) turns of ( A) or (^) nothes gone 8 then also in ( c)
hours (which is the continuance of the watches going) are gone ( T) turns of (
A) or turns about the fuzey.

13: Wherefore the lesser (b) is taken, the longer shall ( c) be at an equal (
T).

II. Of finding out fi^ numbers for the wheels and pinions.
14. AN^ two fractions, whose terms are proportion^^ perform the same motion
9/1 or 36/4 or 4^/^ the lower of which is for the pinion, and the upper for the
wheel

15. The same motion may be performed either by one wheel and one pinion, or
else by many wheels* and many pinions; so that the product of all the wheels,
be to the product of all the pinions, as that one wheel is to that one pinion,
as in this example 1440/28=x36/2^x8/1x^/1 or 16/4x8/7x50/10 neither is it any
matter in what order the wheels and pinions are set, or which pinion stands
under every wheel.

16. And these two factors (36x8 being given may be manifestly varied by this
rule, if two factors given be divided by any two other numbers, which will
measure them, and the quotients be multiplied by the altern divisions, the
product of these two last numbers found shall be equal to the product of the
two fractors given Thus for 36x8 you shall have found 9 8 36 x 8 4 1 32 9 32 x
9 for 1x9.1x84x9.4x8

17. If fit proportional numbers cannot be had by any of these three last
rules, you may seek some Ratio, as near unto it as possible in this manner, say
as one of the two numbers given is to the other, so is 360 to a fourth divide
that fourth number, as also 360 by 4. 5. 6. 8. 9. 10. 12. 15 or by which of
them that brings a quotient nearest to an integer; as if two numbers given be
147/170 which are too great to be cut in small wheels, say therefore
170.147360.311

147.170360.416 ^ Wherefore for the two numbers 147 and 170, you may take 52
and 60, or 39 and 45, or 45 and 52, etc.

18. If two wheels of a motion touch without they move contrariwise, but if
they touch within, they move the same way.

19. In lesser Watches D must be at least 8000, but in greater D may be 4000,
for in lesser pieces a swift train is more commendable, and in greater pieces a
slower.

20. To give numbers to a Watch of a swift train about 10000, for D you must
have T 12. and C 16 hours, and O 17. say (by number 12) T. C D. D. that is, 12.
1610000. 13333= D. and because (by number 9) D.=185, O. 17) 13333(784=285.
which are three quotients for finding the three pinions, seek therefore three
numbers, which being multiplied together, produce 784, very near let them be
11. 9. 8^ the product whereof is 792=285. Correct them 792x17=13464= D. Correct
and say T.C D. D. that is, 16, 12 13464. 10098= D. Correct also say C. T H.b /
a (by number 12) that is, ^ 16. 1212.

Then by the 3 quotients assumed 11. 9. 8. find out the 3 wheels ( A.55) E.45)
J.40) and the 3 pinions (^.5) i.5) o. 5) as is done on the side. ^

D, 13464 D, 10098 T, 12. 6. 16
21. To find how long this watch before found, may be made to go by slackening
D to 8000 (by number 12) say D. DH..B / a C.T. that is ^ again, ^6/5, ^2 T 12.
C 20, it may therefore be made to go 20 hours by altering (...) 36 and a to 5.

22. To give numbers for a Watch of about 5000 for D, that may have T 12, C
170, and O 17; this work is as in 20, say therefore 12. 1705000. 70833= D 17)
70833 (4167 for 2850, because three quotients will yield too big a number for
wheels let them be 10. 8. 8. 6.. which multiplied continually together with 17,
make 71808= D Corr. and say 170. 1271808. 5069= D Corr. also and say ^ or ^ for
144. 170360* 425 and divid. by 8. 170. 144360. 305 This Watch has 4 wheels
besides the Crown wheel O, which by help of their quotients, are with their
pinions found out as here in the side is set down. ^

23. This Movement being given, viz. wherein are four wheels, besides the Crown
wheel, ^it is demanded how long it may be made to go with a good train of about
9000 for D say 60480. 90012

D, 60480. T, 12. 25/14, B / a(b And 25/14.1212.80 16/24 for C.

24. Secondly, if it be demanded whether it may not be made to go 150 hours,
with a convenient train say C. TH. b that is in numbers 150. 1212. 144/150
24/25 B / a and 150. 1260480. 4838 D which train will be fit enough if the
piece be big, but it is too slow for a small Watch.

III. Of effecting particular motions required.
25. THe number of a motion is the number of the turns of the wheel ( A) or
pinion ( a) which are gone in one revolution of that motion, or else it is the
proportion of that motion to one turn of the wheel, D=b A=H.

26. A motion to show the days of the month; because the greatest number of
days in any month is 31, and in one day B goes about twice the number of a
motion showing the day of the month, shall be ^ or ^ or ^ (for ( a) pinion 1
moves not) but B / a A are all ready in the Movement, therefore ^ in wheels
shall express the motion; that is on the wheel B fix concentrick a pinion 10
leading a wheel of 40, which again by a pinion of 4 shall carry about a ring of
62, divided on the upper side into 31 days.

IV. A Motion to show the age of the Moon.
27. BEcause the number of the Moons revolutions is days 29 or 59/2 and in one
day B goes twice about, the number of a Motion showing the age of the Moon,
shall be ^, or 59/4 x 4/1 x B / a A, or ^ (for a pinion 1 moves not) but ^ are
already in the Movement, therefore 59/4 x 40/10 B in wheels shall express the
motion this upon the wheel B fix concentrick a pinion of 10 leading a wheel of
40, which again by a pinion of 4 shall carry about a ring of 59 divided into
days 29.

V. A Motion to show the day of the year, or the degree of the Sun in the
Ecliptic, or the time of the Suns rising or setting, etc.
28. BEcause the number of days of a common year is 365, and in one day B goes
about twice, the number of a Motion showing the day of the year shall be, ^, or
^, or ^, or ^ (for a pinion 1 moves not) but ^ already in the Movement,
therefore ^ in wheels, shall express the motion; that is upon the wheel B fix
concentrick a pinion of 4, leading a wheel of 20, which again by a pinion of 5,
leads a wheel of 50, which thirdly by a pinion of 4, shall carry about a
wheel of 73, divided on the upper side into the 12 months, and their days, or
into the 12 signs, and their degrees, or into the hours and minutes, of the
Suns rising or setting, agreeable to the days of the year, in that Altitude of
the Pole, for which you would have the Watch to serve.

VI. To show the hour of full tide at any Port.
29. LEarn in what point the Moon makes full Sea at that place, (as at
London Bridge on N. E. and S. W.) convert that point into hours, allowing for
every point, N. or S. lost 45 of an hour, set the hour so found against 12 a
clock, and beginning at that hour divide a ring in the Dial-plate, close to the
Moons ring, into 24 hours, that way the Moons ring moves; so shall the day of
conjunction or new Moon, with a little stud, show the hour of full tide in that
part or place every day.

FINIS,

