FOR THE HONOR OF THE KING, AND The great Advancing thereof (amongst men) over
all Nations in the World: In the ensuing PROPOSALS tending thereunto: Stated in
Six PARTICULARS.

Concerning the KING'S Honor:

1. By His Subjects Unity one with another. 2. By His Subjects Submission to
all his Laws. 3. By His Subjects Faithfulness unto Him. 4. By His Subjects
Uprightness in Traffic with other Nations. 5. By His Subjects Departing from
that which dishonors both God and the King. 6. By His Subjects Being the
peculiar People of God, and they having his Spirit to counsel him.
By HUMPHREY SMYTH.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

FOR THE HONOR OF THE KING, And the great Advancing thereof (amongst Men) over
all Nations in the World.
I. Concerning the Honor of the King, by the Unity of his Subjects one with
another.
WERE All (or the major part) of the King's Subjects so in Unity one with
another, that every man sought each others good as much as his own, and so
fulfilled the law of God therein, by each man's loving his Neighbor as himself,
and doing unto all (and at all times) as they would be done unto; having the
Bond of Peace upon their hearts, by the Power of his Spirit, who commanded the
Christians, not only to love one another, but also their Enemies; whereby they
are so far from Defraud or coveting other men's Goods, or wronging any man in
Person or Estate, that Covetousness is not named among them, neither could be
by any justly charged upon them; but rather the things they possess are
acknowledged to be the Lord's, and themselves to be but Stewards thereof, and
therefore durst not be unfaithful toward God or man, in the Unrighteous
Mammon, lest the Lord should refuse to commit unto them the greater Riches: And
were they brought to have a certain knowledge one of another herein, that they
durst with boldness confide one in another Constancy in those things, without
the least fear of being any way wronged, oppressed, or injured by each other;
with what abundance of satisfaction would such live upon the Earth? and how
desirable and amiable would this be for Christians, and Brethren, to live thus
in Unity?

And were they brought not to turn away their faces from their own flesh, nor
to slight the Cry of the Poor; but with an Eye of Pity still to be
commiserating the Needy, and much caring how to have Oppression removed, that
so with the more cheerfulness the Necessities of their poor Brethren might the
easier be relieved, and such continual Care to be taken herein, until all
Oppressions were brought to an end, and all the Poor kept from want (there
being sufficient within the King's Dominions to do it) that what is spent in
Vanity might be forborne; and what is wasted in Oppression might be withheld,
and other ways found out (as something has been prescribed by Thomas Lawrence
of Marleborough) until there were not one poor Member of all the Body of the
King's Dominions to be found, that had need to ask for Food or Raiment, by
reason of the Brotherly Care, Love and Unity in the foresaid Subjects.

And all Jealousies and Heart-burnings one against another, and fear one of
another, as to be hurt in Person or Estate, or destroyed one of another, to be
as clearly removed out of all minds, as if such things had never been; all
being contented with the things (and places) that they have, and no man seek
another's Goods, or House, or Lands, or Place, or Worldly Honor from him, nor
any strive to be greater than another therein; but if any strive, then so to
strive, as to excel in Virtue, and in his service of love to his Brethren, and
People of his Nation, until Love, Unity, and lasting Peace and Concord spread
over all, and all the contrary removed: which would be much for the Honor of
the KING, not only all the days of his Life, but would reach unto the Ages to
come.

II. Concerning the King's Honor, by his Subjects submission ( actively or
passively) unto all his Laws.
Were the King's Subjects (or the major part thereof) brought to be as ready
to observe and keep all his Laws, Edicts and Commands, which are according
unto, and grounded upon good Reason, the Holy Scriptures, and according to
God's Witness in their Consciences, as he is to require it; and as freely
willing to walk according to all such his good and wholesome Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances, as he is to impose such upon them. And moreover, that they could
not be constrained to break them by any Foreign Prince, or evil Member at
home, but at all times, and in all Cases, standing so faithful, that the King
be never dishonored by their transgression of his Just and Righteous Laws, and
that for Conscience sake, out of Love, and not for Fear. And moreover, did the
King make such Laws and Orders, or suffer such to remain in force, which his
Subjects aforesaid did certainly know were contrary to good Reason, and not
according to the Scriptures or Law of God, but quite contrary also to God's
Witness in their own Consciences; and that such Laws also were well known to
them to be destructive to the King's Subjects, and much hurtful to their
Estates, and danger of ruinating their Families; or, if it should reach to
Death or Banishment, yet they not to rebel against the King, nor raise Arms to
defend themselves, though they are truly satisfied that such Laws are
unreasonable; yet for Conscience sake not to oppose, but submit unto every
Ordinance of man, whether unto the King, or such as are set in Authority under
him: and so, though they cannot actively obey those Laws which are contrary to
God's Righteous Law, written in their Hearts; yet passively to fulfill those
Laws also, by a passive suffering the Penalties which those Laws require of
such as actively keep them not; and so therein again are those Laws fulfilled
also by them: that so it might be said of him, That his Subjects are always
ready to fulfill, or submit unto all his Laws and Orders, either by active or
passive obedience, whether they be reasonable or unreasonable. And a People
being brought thus to submit to the King in all things, would be very much for
his Honor in Truth and Righteousness.

III. Concerning the King's Honor, by the Faithfulness of his Subjects unto
him.
Were all the King's Subjects brought unto such Faithfulness unto him, that he
himself could with good Confidence trust them, or himself with them; and,
without any doubting, believe and know that they would not harm him in the
least, nor in the least contrive the shortning of his days; but all desiring
his long life, to govern in Righteousness: and were they all of such a
Principle, and unalterable therein, as not to destroy any man's Life, though
their Enemies, much less a Friend, a Neighbor, or a Christian; that the King
might be well persuaded of them, that they would never harm him, nor plot, nor
conspire against him, nor ever offer or intend Violence toward him, though he
had none to guard him; so that if he please, he might even with boldness and
confidence at any time trust himself with them, or amongst them, without the
least danger or fear in himself; knowing all his Subjects to be as careful of
his Life, as his Lifeguard; so that if he please he might not need always to
keep one Company of his Subjects to guard him; for fear of any other of his
Subjects; but rather for fear of such as are not his Subjects. And were (...)
his Subjects brought in such Faithfulness, and the King west and truly
satisfied therein, would it not ease him and his Council of much Care and
sometimes Fear too? and to be so well satisfied in himself concerning his
Subjects Faithfulness to him herein, that he could take their Word for it,
without Oath, Bond, or Surety; Or, if he had no Word or Promise at all from
them, yet could believe and trust them, that they would never plot or rise
against him, nor do him harm, but remain as firm, steadfast, and true to him,
as any other Prince's Subjects in the whole World, by any of their Oaths,
Bonds, or other Engagements whatsoever, if not more constant and steadfast:
which, were all the King's Subjects brought unto, would be such an Honor unto
the King therein, as would hardly be found belonging unto any Prince in the
whole World again.

IV. Concerning the Honor that the King might have by the Uprightness of his
Subjects in their Traffic with other Nations.
Were all the King's Subjects (or most part of them) brought into Truth,
Plainness, and Righteousness, so that their Yea was Yea, and their Nay, Nay;
that so all Merchants and Factors could take their Words, and trust to their
Words to be of more value than the Oaths of most Princes Subjects in the World;
and that in what Nation or Kingdom soever they come in the World, as soon as it
was heard they were such a Prince's Subjects, that then both the King of those
Dominions, with Princes, Judges, Merchants, Factors and People, might all
conclude they were true men of their Words; and that any man might deal with
them, and none be afraid to traffic with them, because they abhor Deceit,
Defraud and Lying, and all manner of Cozening or Dishonesty: and would not this
also promote Trading, and so enrich the Kingdom, and be some means to relieve
the Poor? And is not the enriching of the Kingdom for the King's Honor? And
what Man or Nation is it, but would desire to deal with Just Men? And would not
the Fame of such a Prince, and such his Subjects as deal justly and truly
wherever they come, soon sound over all the World? And would it not be for
his Honor, that had such a People as did neither seek nor ask but a Just
Prince wherever they come amongst all Nations in the World? And if such
Honor beforementioned be esteemed, what part of it is beyond this, which might
cause a King's Name to be renowned over the whole World, having such upright,
true, just, honest-hearted men in all things, to his Subjects, as not any other
Emperor or Prince could produce the like?

V. Concerning the King's Honor, by his Subjects departing from that which
dishonors (both God and) the King, and themselves.
Were all the King's Subjects brought to leave and utterly to forsake the
Devil and all his Works, the Pomp and Vanities of this wicked World, and all
the sinful Lusts of the flesh, and the carnal desires of the same; and so to
leave and utterly forsake all manner of Evil in word and deed, and to bear no
Malice or Hatred in their Hearts; to keep their Tongues from Lying and
Evil-speaking, seeing it is the evil words that corrupts the good manners; and
so not to speak proudly, nor contemptuously, no not of the meanest Member in
the Nation; but to abhor and leave Arrogance, with all manner of
Voluptuousness, knowing, that God resists the Proud; and so not one such
profane person as Lord Esau to be found amongst them; nor one Swearer, nor
Liar, nor Thief, nor Murderer amongst them; neither yet a Drunkard, nor a
Glutton, nor a Whoremonger, nor a Covetous Person (which is Idolatry) to be
found amongst them; nor any that spend their days in Vanity, nor that abuse or
waste the good Creatures of God in any of the King's Dominions, whereby any of
his Subjects may come to want, to his dishnour. And were they all brought to
forsake the very Appearance of Evil, and so never to transgress any of his good
Laws, to his dishonor: herein also would this be for the Honor of the King.

And thus might his Fame ring over all the World, and be of great Renown among
all the Upright-hearted in all Nations: for what is a King without his
Subjects? and when is a King more honored by his Subjects, than when his
Subjects themselves are most honorable, and act most noble and honorably? And
what is more honorable and more noble in the outward practice among the sons
of men, whereby a King might be honored, than the things aforesaid? Nay, does
not the Principles, Qualities and Practices aforesaid, make men more noble and
honorable than the Titles of For Esau was called Lord, and Edom had many
Dukes, and Ishmael had twelve Princes.
Lord Esau, or Dukes of Edom, or Princes of Ishmael, seeing Abraham was a
Wanderer, and Jacob a Pilgrim, and Israel dwelled in Tents; who obtained a good
Report through Faith, and whom God has renowned with an everlasting Honor.

VI. Concerning the Honor of the King, and also his great Benefit, by his
Subjects being the Peculiar Chosen People of God, and their having the Spirit
of the Lord to counsel Him.
WEre many of the King's Subjects the true Servants and Children of the
Invisible God of Heaven and Earth, by true Mortification, Sanctification, and
Regeneration, and truly led, moved, and guided by the Spirit of God; and many
of them so grown into the Power and Wisdom of God really, and absolately so
having the Spirit of the Lord poured forth upon them in these latter days,
according to the Promise of God, which must be and is already fulfilled, so
that at a needful time One of them having (as it was said of Daniel, chap. 5.
v. 11.) the Spirit, Light, Understanding and Wisdom being found in him, could
show unto the King such a thing or things, or secret Determination of God,
which all others (the King's Wisemen) whomsoever could not; and to discover
the lurking of the King's Enemies unto him, and their secret purposes against
him, though they were far remote; as Elisha discovered unto the King of Israel,
(...) which the King of Syria in his Bedchamber contrived against him, whereby
the King of Israel escaped his Plots, not once or twice, 2 King. 6.10. And that
they could and did at any time, and often times (as moved of the Lord) declare
and show unto the King, the Counsel of God concerning himself and his Kingdom,
and what would come to pass concerning both: and how he might avoid the Evil,
and choose the Good, like as Samuel and other Prophets, who had the Spirit,
were wont to do unto the Kings of Israel in the days of old, that so his
Throne might be established in Righteousness; which would be more than an
ordinary Honor for the King; and God might bless and prosper him for their
sakes, as He did Pharaoh for the sake of that one faithful man, Joseph, after
the King had released him out of Bonds.

But by this time many might say unto me, as a Lord said unto the Prophet, when
he spoke of things much unlike to come to pass, How can these things be,
though God should make Windows in Heaven?

To which I answer, That though I do not affirm, that all those things shall
come to pass concerning him; yet I say, that many are already, and many more
may come to the state aforesaid; And it would be his Happiness, and more for
his Honor than men can yet receive, to be Chief Magistrate among or over such
a People, and to have most of his Subjects so qualified, and great would be his
Peace thereby.

And thus further I say, That the God of Heaven and Earth has promised that a
People shall be all Righteous, and that Iniquity shall cease, and the Nations
shall learn War no more, but every one shall rest under his own Vine, and none
shall make them afraid: And they shall be in league with the stones of the
field; and the Beasts of the field shall be at peace with them. And the Lord
God has brought many into the entrance of these things, that with Christ in
the Prophet, they can give their Backs to the smiter, and their Cheeks to him
(...) plucketh off the hair. And if it were well if that all the King's
Subjects were come to the things aforesaid, and to live in that upright state;
Then it is not (...) that some are come unto that state already. And if the
Little that is begun toward this Work were cherished, might it not grow and
increase toward that state hinted at in the former brief Particulars, touching
the Honor of the King? though there is an Honor which exceeds all this.

And certainly the Word of the Lord will stand for ever, though men and their
Powers, and Heaven and Earth may pass away: And assuredly the God of
Righteousness has begun his Work in this Nation, and in the Hearts of many of
his Little Ones; and a Little One (he has said) shall become a Thousand, and a
Small One, a strong Nation; and the Kingdoms of this World shall become the
Kingdom of our God and of his Christ. And what if a Nation be born at once, and
She bring forth before her travel, and the Lord answer before his People call,
and hear while they are yet speaking, and multiply the Seed of Abraham as the
Stars of Heaven, and increase the Innocent Flock of his Fold as the innumerable
Plants upon the face of the Earth, that Sin and Iniquity may have an end, and
Righteousness reign for evermore?

And if it be further enquired, How the King might have his Subjects truly
principled and qualified as aforesaid; or, have such Subjects generally thus
for his great Honor?

I answer further (to the Everlasting Praise of God) That there are many (which
may well be called some of his truest Subjects in his Dominions) that are
already truly principled, and qualified as aforesaid; and more are entering and
growing up into the same Faithfulness, Love, Unity and Peace with all men, and
God will increase them; and it might be much for the Honor of (God and) the
King to encourage them therein; and much for the dishonor of God, and
dishonor and great disadvantage of the King diverse ways, if he seek, or
should be persuaded to seek the hinderance of these things, or of his Subjects,
who are thus already qualified, or the Increase of their number therein, or
their Increasing in the Honest, Noble, Honorable, Upright things aforesaid:
which things might make for the Honor of the King; and will certainly be for
the Glory of God.

And this is written by one that desires the Peace of all the Nations, and
Unity amongst all men; and that many more may come into the Righteous Things
aforesaid; which would be for the Glory of God, the Honor of the Chief
Magistrate, the great Benefit of the Nations, and much Comfort to themselves.
And that desires the Increase of Love, Truth and Virtue, which brings into the
true Honorable Nobility; for the which this is written, That men may come into
the true Noble and Honorable Estate in the sight of God and all Just men,
among whom I am a true Friend to them all in Love,

Called Humphrey Smyth.
The Tenth of the Fourth Month. 1661.

