IDOLATRY DECLARED AGAINST.

By a servant of the Living God, A sufferer for the Testimony of his Name in
the Common Goal at Winchester.

HVMPHRY SMITH.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1658.

Idolatry declared against.
THe Great and Mighty God who made the heavens and the earth, and the Sea, and
made all men of one blood upon the face of the whole earth, and breathed into
man that which is of his own life, that by it man might seek after him, and
find him, who is infinite incomprehensible eternal and glorious, even he
dweleth not in Temples made with hands, Acts. 17. 24. Neither is he worshipped
in one high place or another by any of the professing Jews who deny his son,
of whom he gave testimony that in him he is well pleased, neither is there any
worship, or service accepted with him, but that which comes from them who are
led and guided by the spirit of truth, and in it worship the Father who is a
spirit, and delights not in those oblations that are vain proceeding from the
vain minds of such who takes his Name in Vain, of whom he says in vain do
they worship me, and of all such I say their faith is vain, who are yet in
their sins, and found among the Gentiles, who sacrifice unto Devils and not
unto God, being Children of wrath, and strangers to the covenant of promise
whose prayers the Lord abhors, whose vain bablings casts an ill savor in the
nostrils of the most high, and their coming together is not for the better, but
for the worse, even to feed and nourish the young Serpents, and to increase in
that knowledge which puffs up and increases sorrow, the which knowledge the
(hireling) priests lips preserve, which the Devil once taught, saying, ye shall
be as Gods knowing good and evil, and all they who increases in this
knowledge, increases in that in which the knowledge of God does not stand,
neither can be received, and so the woe from the Lord God will come unto all
them that continue their seeking the living among the dead, crying for their
place of holy worship (which is to be laid desolat) and living in
unrighteousness, and in all ungodly practices, without the fear of God, and
talking of him with that mouth, which is full of cursing and bitterness, the
heart being not turned to God, nor the mind unto the light of his Son, who are
themselves in the jaws of Satan, and are sometimes made sensible of the power
of the Devil working in them, stirring them up to wrath, and moving them up to
envy, pride, and unrighteousness, and the lusts of the creatures, and the
vanity of the mind, but feel not at all the power of God to work in them the
newness of life and his pure i-image, who made man holy and upright, neither
are they willing to receive that power in them by which they might come to
overcome their sins, and be led up to him who is the God of the spirits of all
flesh, whom all the world, (no^ knowing) is ignorant by worshipping, and
denying his Son (who makes an end of sin) and contemning the just One who is a
man of sorrows, and denying him who is led as a Lamb dumb, and slighting him
who is the light, and refusing him who is the living Minister, not made by a
carnal commandment, but by the power of an endless life, who teaches all to
profit (who learn him) and none teaches like him, who says learn of Me, then
not of another, not of a hireling, not of one that pleads for sin, but of him
that makes an end of sin, whom God the Father has given a light to the
Gentiles, a covenant to the people, that all men through him might be saved,
who has spoiled principallities and powers and all authorities, and now all
dominions and authorities are to be subject to Him, who said the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth, and truth is that
which makes free, but the worshipping the unknown God in a synagogue, Idols
Temple or Steeple-house, does not make free, neither makes an end of sin, but
all them that are there, are in their sins, and have not received power to
overcome their sins; but are following such Teachers, which Peter said should
come in the latter days, who cannot themselves cease from sin, and these
Teachers, Peter said (and so say I) that they are cursed children, beguiling
such unstable souls, who are carried about with airy windy Doctrines, after the
cunning craftiness of men, who still lie in wait to deceive, against whom we
bear testimony, from the spirit of Truth, which ^^^deth us not to handle the
word of God deceitfully, nor to ^^ke Merchandise of the people, neither come we
with flat^^^ing titles, but in the power of the Lord, and in the demonstrat^^^
of his spirit of truth, do we declare against all unrighte^^sness of Men,
whether Priests, Rulers or people, without respect of persons, and we declare
his Name in the world, who in the light of the world, and publish him, among
the Sons of (...) who is Gods power, that saves his people from their sins,
who is the true prophet, whom all are to hear, that all night come to learn of
him, and be guided by him, in the ^ay of everlasting peace, that so such as are
strangers to the covenant of grace (being yet in their sins) (and are the
outcast of Israel) might now come to be taught of the Lord, and hear the
powerful voice of his Son, and not follow strangers any l^^ger, nor the dumb
Idol sheapherds, who are become brutish Jer. 10. 21. and cannot understand,
Isa. 56. 11. That from them all, such who fear the Lord might be gathered,
Ezekiel. 34. and may come to know the one Lord, whose name is one and the one
truth, and the one way, and the worship of the one true God, and not follow
them any longer, who are strangers to the life of God, nor such as cannot cease
from sin, who are all in the curse, being not reconciled unto him who was made
a curse, and so they come not to receive that by which the curse is taken away,
and such are without God in the World, and of such the Lord has said, you have
wearied me with your sacrifices, and so say I to you now, you have wearied the
Lord with your words) and yet many are saying wherein have we wearied him? I
say in this have you wearied the Lord, in that you say such as do evil are good
in the sight of God, Mal. 2. 17

Therefore thus I declare unto you, who are yet in your sins meeting together
in the Idols Temples, your service is not the service of the true God, neither
is your worship that which the Lord accepts, for he accepts none but the
worship in spirit and in truth, not in one high place or another, but your
worship is in some high place, Idols temple or Steeple-house where all manner
of Viperous Beasts are found, and unsanctified Persons meet together, who
commit all abominations and live in all manner of filthiness, and yet lean upon
the Lord, and say is not the Lord among us, no evil shall come unto us, whereas
they are an evil and an adulterous generation, ^^^tarated from the spirit of
truth, in which the true worship stands, and are ignorantly worshipping in a
Temple made with hands, in which God dwells not, neither is his power there
received, to overcome the sin, and so the people are wearying themselves for
very vanity, and traveling to bring forth death, and laboring for that which
profits not, neither do they come to meet the Lord in the way of his
judgments, nor find the path of life, where the unclean can never come,
neither yet do they know the bread of life, nor drink his blood that cleanses
from all sin, nor come to be translated into the kingdom of the Son of God, but
remain in that ground which was curssed by reason of man's rebellion, Genesis 3.
17. Heb. 6. 8. which ground being not removed with the mighty power of God, the
blessing cannot be received, nor the understanding opened, to know and receive,
that which the natural man perceives not, the eyes of their mind being
darkened, through the ignorance that is in them, the vail being over the heart,
when that is read every day of their worship, which discovers sin, but makes
nothing perfect which worshippers did and do crucify him that comes to take
away the sin.

But now he is come, who has for ever perfected those that are sanctified, and
he that sanctifies and they who are sanctified are all of one, but they that
are not sanctified are not of the one, out are in the many opinions, in the
lusts of ignorance and ways of unrighteousness, being not come to the one
faith which purifieth the heart, nor to know the one baptism, one Church, one
way, one truth, one God the Father of him who is the one light, which
lighteneth every man that comes into the world of the which light which is but
one, there is given a measure to every one of you, which light shines in
darkness, though not by it comprehended, which light will let you see that you
your selves are out of Gods Covenant in the worlds worship, not reconciled to
God, upholding idols temples, and heathenish cus^oms, with Bells and such things
which the people of God never used, but did and do deny for ever, and exhort
you and all others to leave worshipping the Beast, or upholding that which is
not the true worship of the true God, practiced by (...) of sin, in
Steeple Houses every first day.

Wherefore all people every where leave your Idolatry which you have learned
and received by tradition from the former Papists and Heathen who worship the
work of their own hands, and bow down to their own inventions, as you long have
done, and for this many hundred years have been learning, and yet are not come
to the truth, neither to believe in it, but remain in unbelief and ignorance,
and your long time of ignorance God winked at, Acts 17. 30. but now light is
come, in which God is calling to you, and all men every where to repent and
forsake your Idolatrous worship, which by you a sinful generation is practiced
in a Steeple-house one day in seven, and Cains nature remaining in the inward
parts, from the which Idolatry all that fear the Lord God of Abraham are now to
come from the uncleannes of that Worship which is upheld by the Heathen, for
verily the hand of the Lord God Almighty is stretched forth against it and them.

Wherefore all people turn your minds to the Lord God of life, who dwells in
his people (and not in Temples made with hands) and has given to every one of
you a measure of the true Light of his Son, which light, in you, will let you
see your secret sins, and will teach you and show you plainly of the Father,
if you love it, and come to be led by it, to do Gods will, so may you come to
worship the Lord God of Life, in spirit and in truth, with the children of the
Light, and of the day which has dawned upon many, who need not any man teach
them, but are all taught of the Lord, glory and honor and everlasting praises
to his blessed Name for ever and ever, Amen.

Given forth, A Testimony against all Idolatry and Heathenish Worship; from the
true love of God the Father, in pity to the souls of them who have eyes and see
not, and ears and hear not, that they may come forth of darkness, to follow
Christ Jesus the Light of the World, who is bringing the blind by a way that
they know not, Isa. 42. 16.

Therefore is this to go abroad among all people, and read in Steeple Houses,
Streets, Marketplaces, Private meetings and Families, that all may consider
what they have been doing in the dark, Ezekiel. 8. 12.

By a servant of the Living God, A sufferer for the Testimony of his Name in
the Common Goal and House of Correction at Winchester. The fourth Month, 1658.
Humphry Smith.

THE END.

