Licensed, May 10. 1676.

Roger L'Estrange.

THE Art of Painting.

Wherein is included The whole ART of Vulgar Painting, according to the best
and most approved Rules for preparing, an laying on of Oil Colors.

The whole TREATISE being so Full, Complete, and so Exactly fitted to the
meanest Capacity, that all Persons whatsover may by the Directions contained
therein be sufficiently able to Paint in Oil colors not only Sun-Dials, but
also all manner of TIMBER WORK, whether Posts, Pales, Pallisadoes, Gates,
Doors, Windows, Wainscotting, Border Boards for Gardens, or what ever else
requires either Use, Beauty, or Preservation from the Violence or Injury of
Weather.

Composed by John Smith, Philomath.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Crouch, at the Corner Shop of Pope's Head Ally, on
the right hand next Cornhill, 1676.

TO The Reader.
IT is well known to all persons, that understand the Mathematics, that
Dialling (one excellent part thereof) has with much Care and Industry been
improved of late years, and abundance of Treatises have been written thereof,
wherein several ways have been delivered, for delineating the Hour Lines on
Dial Playns, some more speedy, as the Instrumental way; some for more
exactness, as the Arithmetical, and the Geometrical way good in it self, and in
some cases serving, where the other two cannot conveniently be made use of.

Dialling being thus plainly and familiarly communicated to the world, it is
easy for an Industrious and Ingenious spirit to attain the knowledge of it, so
far as to be able to draw his draught; but then wanting the knowledge of
Painting it on the Plain, he is fain to sit down and satisfy himself with
having taken much pains, to attain that, which in the end will not profit him,
by reason that he has learnt but half his Art. Just like a Surveyor, that can
hardly draw the draught, and give the proportions, or dimensions for the
building of an house, but cannot rear the Fabric thereof, of, without the help
of Carpenters and Masons; So here, our Dialist can only draw the draught, but
must be beholding to the Painter to finish his Dial.

The Consideration of which has made me adventure in the ensuing Work, to lay
down such Rules for preparing, mixing, and laying on of Oyl-Colours, as that
the meanest Capacity may thereby attain to the knowledge of Vulgar Painting, and
may render our Ingenious Artist a Complete Diallist; not able only to draw his
Draught, but, also to finish his work, and make it sit for use; which I have
observed, not one in twenty, that are otherwise knowing in this Art, can do.

I am not ignorant of the lightness and vanity of the Times wherein we live,
and therefore expect to be censured by a sort of people so vain, that they are
apt to Condemn all, before they Understand any; Yet let the Ingenious know,
That the Rules herein delivered, are the same, which I my self have always
practiced, and that with as good Applause as any Professor in this kind
whatsoever; and I doubt not, but he that industriously practices what he finds
here delivered, will soon become my Champion to defend my Rules, which he finds
so true, against all opposers whatsoever.

The truth is, the meanness of my style may perhaps not a little detract from
the Reader's pleasure; for which I hope the subject will plead my excuse, which
requires to be delivered, rather in demonstrative, than Elegant Expressions;
and it is the Profit of my Reader that I more aim at than his Pleasure: however,
if he chance to fail of his expectation in both, through Sloth or Ignorance,
yet he cannot accuse me for being prodigal of his time, the Discourse being so
brief, which I desire may be as kindly accepted, as freely imparted.

Farewell.
A TABLE of the Contents of the several Chapters.
CHAP. I. THE Description and Use of the several Tools used in and about the
Art of Painting. Page 1 CHAP. II. A Catalogue of several Colors used in the
Art of Painting; their Nature and Use. p. 11 CHAP. III. How to order such
Colors as require to be burnt in the fire, to make them the more sit for some
uses. p. 24. CHAP. IV. How to wash such Colors as by their grittiness are not
otherwise to be made fine enough for certain Uses. page 32 CHAP. V. How to
grind Colors with Oil. p. 29 CHAP. VI. How to order Colors for working after
they are ground. p. 32 CHAP. VII. How to make Gold size to lay Gold on when you
would guild. p. 36 CHAP. VIII. What Colors set off best one with another. p.
40 CHAP. IX. What Colors are sufficient for Painting Sun-Dials. page 42 CHAP.
X. Some Instructions for making of Plains and Boards to draw Dials on. p. 44
CHAP. XI. How to make the best Glue for glewing the Joints of Dial-Boards. p.
49 CHAP. XII. A Catalogue of such Books as are necessary for him that would be
a Complete Dialist. CHAP. XIII. The Practice of Painting Sun-Dials. page 56
CHAP. XIV. How to guild the Figures of Sun-Dials with Gold. page 63 CHAP. XV.
How to lay Smalt, the only Color that requires strowing. p. 67 CHAP. XVI. The
Practice of Vulgar Painting. pa. 69 CHAP. XVII. How to scowr, refresh and
preserve all manner of Oil Paintings. 72 CHAP. XVIII. Some Improvements in
Painting to resist weather, and preserve Timber or wooden works from rotting.
p. 79
THE Art of Painting SVN-DIALS.
CHAP. I. The Description and Use of the several Tools used in and about the
Art of Painting.
2. A Grinding stone and Mulier; the stone it self ought to be of a Porphyrie,
which is the best; but for want thereof, any stone will serve, whose hardness
will not suffer a Knife to wear it away, and withal sound and free from small
pores: for if your stone be full of small holes, as some are, the color that
you first grind thereon cannot be so cleansed off, but there will remain some
of it in those small holes, which will stain and spoil the next different
color that is ground after it. This Grinding-stone ought to be a foot and a
half square, and so thick as may make its weight sufficient to keep it firm
from moving when you are grinding on it.

When at any time you have done using of your Stone, you must be sure to
cleanse it well from all the color that shall remain, by scowring it with a
Cloth and fine dry ashes or other dust; for if you set up your Stone foul with
color, it will put you to great trouble when it is dry to make it clean when
you come next to use it.

The Mulier must be a pebble stone of the fashion of an Egg, with one end
broken off flat, three inches Diameter is sufficient on the flat end, and five
inches in height is convenient, that you may with more ease command it in the
time of grinding.

2. You must have a piece of Lanthorn horn about three inches square, this
piece of horn is used to keep the color together in the grinding, and to take
the color of the stone when it is ground sufficient.

3. You must have Galley-pots, Pans or Pipkins to put your colors in when you
have ground them; and these Pots or Pans ought to be proportionable to the
color you grind: for if it be but little, and your Vessel great, your color
will be lost and spent in daubing about the sides of it; therefore for a little
quantity of color, have a small Vessel; and for a larger quantity, a larger
Vessel: however, let the largest hold not above two quarts, lest it prove too
cumbersome and troublesome to you.

4. You must have Brushes and Pencils of all sorts, some for priming and laying
on of colors; others for drawing Lines, Figures, Letters, and the like;
Brushes are made with bristles, and are of several sizes, as from two inches
and an half diameter, to a quarter of an inch: their goodness consists in the
bristles lying close and even at the ends, and being well bound to the frame.

Pencils are made of finer hair, as of Colaber tayls, etc. They are of several
sorts, as of Swan, Goose, and Ducks quill fitht and pointed; their goodness
consists in their being well bound, and that the hair lies close, and that the
pointed ones draw very sharp, being wetted with your tongue, and drawn through
your lips.

When you have done using of your Pencils or Brushes, you must wash the color
clean out with Soap and warm water; else the drying of the color will so mat
them, that they will never be fit for use afterward: however, take notice you
need not wash them every time you have done using them, but only when it will
be a considerable time before you use them again; otherwise putting them into a
pan of water, or letting them remain covered with color or Oil, will preserve
them sufficiently when you use them often together.

5. You must have an Easel for the painting of Dials, easy to be made by your
self or by a Joyner; it must be almost of the fashion of a Ladder about 7 foot
high, having the uppermost round moveable with a stay in it on the backside of
the Easel to stay it in what posture you please; the sides of it must be boared
full of holes at equal and opposite distances, wherein two pins are to be put
on which your Dial board is to be set, and may be let lower or set higher at
pleasure according as occasion shall require.

6. You must have Black-Lead Pencils, which you may buy at the Colour-Shops, or
at the Stationers; good Pencils have of late been very scarce in London, till
just upon the writing hereof there came Advertisements abroad of good ones to
be sold at the Prince's Arms over against the King on Horseback in the
Stocks-Market. Which Pencils I have since tried, and find excellent good; they
are marked thus, R. F. so that you may easily know them: however, the best way
to be sure is to try them on Paper; if they shed their Color freely, and draw
a black line oft-times together, they are good; else not. The Use of these
Pencils are to draw the draught of your Dial on paper, and afterward to draw
it on the Plain it self, as hereafter is taught.

7. You must have Guilding Cushion to cut your leaf-Gold upon when you guild;
the bottom is a Board about 6 inches broad, and about 12 inches long; one which
is fastened to the Cover, which should be a piece of fine tanned
Calves-Leather, the flesh side outward: This must be stuffed extraordinary
hard, and as flat on the top as may be; for want of this, the leathern bottom
of an ordinary Cushion will serve at a pinch, if you have not much to do.

8. You must have a Knife of Cane to cut your Gold on the Cushion; you must
form or shape it with a very sharp edged Knife, that the edge of your Cane may
be the sharper and clearer. If you want a Cane Knife, and know not well how to
make it, an ordinary pocket Knife will do the business; provided its edge be
very sharp, and free from notches. You must wipe it very dry on your sleeve or
some dry Cloth; for if the edge be never so little moist, the leaf-gold will
stick to it, and spoil all.

9. You must have a tuft of Cotton, or the hinder foot of a Hare or Coney to
press down your gold after it is laid on the size, to make it take well and lie
smooth.

10. You ought to have several pieces of wood about 3 inches long, some one
inch broad, some half an inch broad, and some not above a quarter; These must
have fine pieces of Cloth glewed on the bottom, with a small button or handle
on the top to hold it by, this is to take your leaf-gold from the Cushion when
it is cut in shape, and lay it on such figures, letters or mouldings of a
Sun-Dial as you intend to guild (as hereafter is taught) if your work be hollow
or protuberant that you are to guild, then the gold is commonly taken up on a
bunch of Cotton, and laid on, pressing it down with the same.

11. You must have Brass Compasses, which will be useful to you on all
occasions; indeed you cannot be well without them: The best places to buy them
at, are the Mathematical Instrument-makers.

12. You must have Rulers of several lengths to draw your lines with; these
must be footed upon one side with little wier pegs to stand from the wood about
a quarter of an inch; this is to keep your Ruler up from the board, that when
you lay it across lines newly drawn, it may not blot them.

13. Fine neat squares are also necessary, they will be useful at every turn to
draw perpendicular lines, or what else requires to be true and square.

14. You must have Crusiples or Melting-pots to burn such Colors in that
require it: The best places to buy them at, are the Iron-mongers in Foster-Lane.

15. You must have also large Earthen Vessels to wash such Colors in that
require washing to be fit for use.

16. You must have also Cane-plyers to take your Leaf-gold out of the Book, and
lay it on the guilding Cushion to be cut.

CHAP. II. A Catalogue of several Colors used in the Art of Painting; their
Nature and Use.
White-Lead and Cerus, these two Colors are much of a nature, Cerus being only
White-Lead more refined; which advances its price, and renders it something
more esteemed among Picture-Drawers; but the White-Lead is every way as useful:
This Color is naturally apt to be ground very fine, and is the only White
color used in Painting with Oil: With this Color the Playns of Dials are laid
for the last Color to draw thereon the Hour Lines, that they may be the more
visible. With this Color Posts, Payls, Palisadoes, Gates, Doors, Windows,
diverse Wainscottings, and other Carpentary and Joynary work are often colored
both for beauty and preservation. It resists the weather well, but within doors
it is apt to tawnish and grow rusty. This Color dries of it self indifferently
well, especially if it be wrought pretty stiff; however, to make it dry
speedily, some put Oil of Turpentine to it, in the tempering, which makes it
dry much more speedily; but then without doors it will not resist the weather
so well: Therefore the best way to make it dry speedily, and yet last long, is
to put drying Oil to it, which is made by steeping Red-Lead in Linseed Oil for
about a fortnight, stirring it every day once or twice, and afterward let it
settle clear before you use it.

Lampe-Black, Is a Color that of it self is very fine, and may be tempered
with Linseed Oil, and used without grinding, after it has soaked two or three
days in the Oil; but when it is thus laid on, it will be a long-time a drying,
by reason of a certain greasiness that is inherent to it; to remedy which, it
must be burnt as hereafter is taught, which consumes the fatty substance, and
then it dries well. But note, That after it is burnt, it must be ground on a
stone; otherwise it will not work well by reason of its being hardened or
crusted in the fire. This Color is used in the Margins of some Dials that have
their Figures guilt; A little of this Color and much white, make the Ash
Color; and according to the quantity of either more or less, it gives several
delightful varieties.

Willow Charcoal and Sea-coal; These two are a good Black for ordinary uses,
only they are something coarse, and require good labor in the grinding to make
them fine; they dry well, especially the Charcoal.

Spanish Brown. This Color is a certain Earth brought out of Spain; the best
is that which is of a deep bright color, and free from stones; indeed I think
there is little of it free from grittiness more or less: This Color will grind
well, notwithstanding its grittiness, if you take pains with it. This is the
only Color used in priming of all manner of Timber-work, being fittest for
that purpose for diverse reasons: As first, for its Cheapness, it being but of
small price. Secondly, it dries kindly for that purpose, not so soon but that
it gives the Oil sufficient time to pierce into wood; nor is it so long as to
make the time over-tedious. Thirdly, it kindly receives all other Colors that
are laid on it. Some are of such a nature, that when they are dry no other will
take on them but with great difficulty. For Example, White-Lead when it is
thoroughly dry is so greasy, that if you would either draw Lines on it, or lay
other Colors upon it, they will run together just as Ink will when you write
on greasy paper. This Color of it self is a perfect Horseflesh color; it is
the natural shadow for Vermillion, and being mixed with White, gives several
varieties, according as the quantity of each is predominant.

Red-Lead, Is a Sandy color, not to be ground very fine on a stone: The only
way to make it fine is by washing (which shall be showed afterward): This
Color is an exceeding great dryer and binder, for which purpose it is many
times mixed with other Colors (such as will bear it) to make them dry
speedily: It Is a Color that resists the weather as well as any color
whatsoever, if it have the same advantage in working. It Is of it self an Orange
color, and is the only Color used in making of drying and fat Oils.

Vermillion. This is a very rich Color, and of a good body; and if pains and
time be bestowed, it will be ground as fine as is possible for a Color to be
ground: which it must be, or else it works as bad as any Color whatsoever; but
if it be ground fine even as Oil it self, no Color works better. This Color
is used to draw the Hour Lines on Sun-Dials, and for diverse other not common
uses: it drys well if you work it stiff. The best way to buy it is in the
stone; for otherwise it may be sophisticated and spoiled with Red-Lead if
bought in the powder. This Color is a perfect Scarlet, mixed with White it
gives Scarlet Carnation in diverse varieties, according to the quantity of each
Color mixed. The natural shadow for Vermillion it self, is Spanish Brown.

Lake, Is also a rich Color, and may be ground very fine; it is often used in
Ornaments of Dials, and a Margin of it sets off well with gold figures,
especially if a little white be added to it. It Is excellent in diverse kinds of
Flowrages. Lake and Bice make a Purple of diverse varieties according to the
Blew that is mixed with it. Lake of it self is an excellent Crimson color.
Lake and White make an excellent Crimson Carnation in diverse varieties
according to the quantity that is mixed of each. Lake and White, and a little
Red Lead make a Flesh color.

Smalt, Is a lovely Blew at a distance, if strewed on; if you will work it in
Oil, it must be made fine with washing: The truth is, when it is at the finest,
it works but badly in Oil, by reason of its harshness; It must also have
White-Lead added to it if wrought in Oil, or else it is too dark, and shows not
its self; and when all is done, time is apt to turn it Black: Therefore the
best way is to strew it (as shall be showed hereafter) and then there is not a
more glorious Blew to be made. This is an Excellent Color for the Margin of a
Dial, if the Figures are guilt, and for several other purposes, as it may by an
ingenious spirit be made use of: If you buy it to work in Oil, the finest is
best, which they call Oil Smalt; but if it be for strewing, the coarsest you
can get is the best, both for Color and Continuance.

Blew Bice, Is a Color fine enough for almost any use; it is but a pale
color, and in Dial-Painting is used for a Margin ground to guild figures in
small playns or stacks of Dials that are near the eye: This Color works well,
though it be a little sandy; Bice and Pink make a Green; Bice and Lake make a
Purple; Bice and White make a light Blew, of each several varieties according
to the quantity of each.

Blew Verditer, Is a Color something sandy; it is subject to change and turn
greenish, and makes a good Green, mixed with Yellows, this Color may serve in
Dial-Painting, where Bice and Smalt are wanting; but not so good as either of
them mixed with Whites and Yellows; or both, gives variety of Colors for
diverse uses.

Indico, Is a very dark Blew, and seldom used without a mixture of White,
unless to shadow other Colors; it grinds fine, and works well, and is much
used in vulgar Painting for the last Colors of Windows, Doors, Pales, Posts,
Rails, Pallisadoes, or any other Timber-work. It resists the Weather well,
only it is something dear, and yet not very chargeable for work, by reason much
White must be mixed with it, which makes a little of it go a great way: Vulgar
Painters instead thereof use Blew Balls, which they buy at the Colour-Shops
which nearly imitates it, but is not so good a Color neither for Beauty nor
Lasting. Indico and White make a Lead Color; it is a pleasant color to Marble
White withal, or to shadow it.

Amber, Is a color that will be ground very fine, but must have labor and
time bestowed on it: it is very apt to furr the Mulier, and difficult to be
drawn under it, without sleight of hand in the grinding this Color; dryes and
binds exceedingly, and therefore resists Weather well: It Is much used in
Painting, for the many pleasant Varieties it gives. This Color of it self is
a perfect Hair color, and being mixed with White, gives variety of pleasant
colors. This color burnt in a Crusipple is the natural shadow for Gold; It
likewise shadows diverse other colors, and in great varieties.

Verdigrease, Is a good Green, something inclining to a Blew; therefore for
diverse uses it is Willowish color must be corrected with Yellows: This color
is commonly very foul, and requires time and pains to pick and cleanse it: It
requires also labor to grind it fine. This color dryes speedily, and is a
Green that is used on most occasions that require that color. It is of it self
a perfect Willow green; and being mixed with Pink Yellow, it makes a pure
lively Grass-green: and these being mixed with White, gives several varieties
of Light Greens, according to the quantity of each.

Yellow Daker, Is of two sorts; the one gotten in England, the other brought
from beyond the Seas: the one is a light Yellow, much like the color of Wheat
straw; the other is somewhat of a deeper color. This Color may with labor be
ground very fine, but something troublesome by reason of its Clamminess: This
color is used to make Gold size, and is also much used in vulgar Painting.

Pink Yellow, Is a color something inclining to a Green; it is a good Yellow
for some uses, and grinds well. It Is chiefly used to mix with other Colors to
make Green.

Besides these Colors, a Dial-Painter must furnish himself with Leaf-Gold for
Guilding, Linseed Oil to temper his Colors with, and Oil of Turpentine to make
his Colors dry the more speedily, by mixing a little of it among his Colors.

CHAP. III. How to order such Colors as require to be burnt in the fire, to
make them the more fit for some uses.
Colors that commonly use to be burnt, are Lamp-Black, Umber, Yellow Oaker,
and Spanish Brown. Lamp-Black must always be burnt, otherwise it will never
dry kindly. Umber works and dryes well enough without burning for many uses:
But when you would color either Hair, Horse, Dog, or the Bodies of some
Trees, then it must be burnt, which makes it of a deeper and brighter color;
So likewise for some particular uses the others are burnt, else not: The manner
thus, Take a Crusipple or Melting-Pot of bigness sufficient to hold the
quantity of Color you desire to burn, set it in the midst of a Charcoal or
other clear fire, and let it continue therein till it be all like a coal; then
take it out, and let it cool of it self; then grind it and make it fit for use.

CHAP. IV. How to wash such Colors as by their grittiness are not otherwise to
be made fine enough for certain Uses.
SOme Colors are of such a gritty sandy nature, that it is impossible to grind
them so fine as some Curious Works do require; therefore to get forth the
flower and fineness of the color, you must do thus; Take what quantity of
Color you please to wash, and put it into a Vessel of fair Water, and stir it
about till the water be all colored therewith; then if any filth swim on the
top of the water, scum it clean off, and when you think the grossest of the
color is settled to the bottom, then pour off that water into a second Earthen
Vessel that is large enough to contain the first Vessel full of water four or
five times; then pour more water into the first Vessel, and stir the color
that remains till the water be thick; and after it is a little settled, pour
that water also into the second vessel, and fill the first vessel again with
water, stirring it as before: do thus so often till you find all the finest of
the color drawn forth, and that none but course gritty stuff remains in the
bottom; then let this water in the second Vessel stand to settle till it be
perfectly clear, and that all the color be sunk to the bottom; which when you
perceive, then pour the water clear from it, and reserve the color in the
bottom for use, which must be perfectly dried before you mix it with oil to
work.

The Colors thus ordered, are Red-Lead, Blew and Green Bice, Verditor Blew and
Green, Smalt, and many times Spanish Brown, when you would cleanse it well for
some fine work, as also yellow Oaker, when you intend to make Gold size of it.

Take Notice also, That unless you intend to bestow some cost on a piece, you
need not be at the trouble to wash your Colors, but use them for coarse
ordinary work as you buy them at the Shops.

CHAP. V. How to grind Colors with Oil.
WHen you come to grind Colors, let your grinding-stone be placed about the
height of your middle; let it stand firm and fast so that it soggle not up and
down; then take a small quantity of the Color you intend to grind (two
spoonfuls is enough) for the less you grind at a time, the easier and finer
will your color be ground: lay this two spoonfuls of Color on the midst of
your stone, and put a little of your Linseed Oil to it, (but be sure you put
not too much at first) then with your Mulier mix it together a little, and turn
your Mulier three or four times about, and if you find there be not Oil enough,
put a little more to it, till it come to the consistence of an Ointment; for
then it grinds much better and sooner then when it is so thin as to run about
the stone: You must oftentimes in the grinding bring your Color together with
your piece of Lanthorn horn, and with the same keep it together in the middle
of your stone; when you find you have ground it fine enough (by the continual
motion of your Mulier about the stone, holding it down as hard as your strength
will permit, which you must also move with such a slight, as to gather the
Color under it) and that no knots nor grittiness remains; then with your Horn
cleanse it off the stone into a Gally-Pot, Pan, or what ever else you design to
put it into: and then lay more color on your stone, and proceed to grinding as
before: do so thus often till you have ground as much of this same Color as
shall serve your occasions; and if you grind other Colors after it, let the
stone be well cleansed from the first color with a cloth and fine dry Ashes.

CHAP. VI. How to order Colors for working after they are ground.
WHen you have ground your Colors (if you observe my Directions in grinding)
they will be too thick for use without the addition of more Oil; therefore when
you have ground those Colors you desire, and intend to use them either simply
by themselves, or compounded with others, according as your fancy or occasions
require, you must then add more Oil unto them, till they be so thin as not to
let the ground on which they are laid be seen through them; for if it be so
thin as to let the ground be seen through them, or to run about when it be laid
on, it is not good, and will require to be colored the oftener before your work
be perfect and substantial; whereas if your Color be as stiff as it can well
be wrought, your work will be done with more speed; once doing being more
substantial then three times doing with thin Color.

Here by the way take notice of the fraud and deceit of Common Painters, who
commonly agree to do work by the Yard at a certain price, and the work to be
colored three times over, which they commonly paint with such thin color, (to
avoid the labor of grinding, a little Color serving a great deal of Oil, and
besides it works with less pains, and takes up less stuff) that all three times
doing over is not so substantial as one time would be, if the Color had a
thick and substantial body: and I Will maintain, that three times coloring with
substantial and well bodied Color, shall last ten times as long as that which
is wrought thus slightly by common Painters.

In mixing Oil with your Colors, take this further Note, That if the color to
be mixed be your priming Color, (that is the first color you lay on) it ought
to be made very thin, that it may have Oil enough to pierce into the Wood,
which is much for its preservation; but after your first color is laid, let
your next be thicker as before is taught.

But if your Color to be mixed be for the drawing of the Hour Lines, or making
the Figures in a Sun-Dial, then let it be tempered as stiff as is possible to
work it, that it may not presently decay, but may be capable by the quantity
laid on, to last as long as any Color on the Dial; to which purpose its being
wrought in fat Oil will much conduce to its lasting: How this fat Oil is made,
see Chap. 7. where you have the manner of it taught at large.

CHAP. VII. How to make Gold size to lay Gold on when you guild.
GOld size is made of fat Oil, and Yellow Oaker; the Oil is no other than
Linseed Oil thus ordered; Take what quantity of Linseed Oil you judge will
serve your turn, put it in a Brazen or other Vessel that will endure the fire;
when it is in the Vessel, put to it a certain quantity of Red-Lead; the more
you put in, the better will your Oil be (provided you put not in so much as to
hinder its boiling) for this Red-Lead adds a drying quality to the Oil, which
otherwise being thus ordered, would not dry in any time: when the Oil and Lead
are thus mingled together, let them gently boil over a fire of coals without
flame a pretty while; when it is boiled enough, (which you may know by taking a
little of it, and let it cool, and if it roape like thin Treacle, then it is
enough) then with a lighted paper set it on fire, (which fireing will burn away
much of the greasiness of it) which let burn about a minute or two, or more or
less, according as your quantity of Oil is; and then let it be extinguished (by
clapping a Cloth over it) afterward let it stand to cool and settle; and when
all the Lead be sunk to the bottom, and the Oil be clear, then pour it off, and
reserve it in a Bladder for use.

Your Yellow Oaker must also be thus ordered before it be made into size; Take
Yellow Oaker and grind it on a stone with water till it be very fine, and
afterward lay it on a Chalk stone to dry; this is the common way: but a
better, is to wash it as is taught in the Fourth Chapter. For when it is
washed, to be sure nothing but the purest of the Color will be used; and
besides, it is done with more ease, and less daubing.

When your Oil and Oaker are thus prepared, you must grind them together, as
you do other Oyl-Colours; but it is something more laborious work, and must be
ground very fine, even as Oil it self: for the finer it is, the greater Luster
will your Gold carry that is laid on it.

Here Note, That you must give it such a quantity of your fat Oil, that it may
not be so weak as to run when you have laid it on; nor so stiff, that it may
not work well; but of such a competent body, that after it is laid on, it may
settle it self smooth and glasie, which is a chief property of good size.

CHAP. VIII. What Colors set off best one with another.
YEllowes set off best with Blacks, Blews and Reds.
They set off indifferently well with Greens, Purples, and Whites.
Blews set off best with Yellowes and Whites.
They-set off indifferently with Blacks and Reds.
But they set not off with Greens, Purples, and Browns.
Greens-set off best with Whites and Yellows.
They set not off with Blacks, Blews, or Reds.
Reds set off best with Whites, and Yellows.
They set off indifferently with Blews and Blacks.
Blacks and Whites set off well with all Colors, because they differ so much
from all.

CHAP. IX. What Colors are sufficient for Painting Sun-Dials.
IF you are to Paint a plain Sun-Dial, these four Colors serve, viz. Spanish
Brown, White Lead, Vermillion, and Lamp-Black: The Spanish Brown is for the
priming Color, the White Lead is for the last color of ^^e plain; the
Vermillion is for drawing the Lines, and the Lamp-Black is for drawing the
Figures.

But if your Dial be more rich, you must have (besides the four forementioned
Colors) Gold size to make the Figures to lay Gold on, and Smalt or Blew Bice
for the Margin and inner Table; and if you intend to bestow Curiosity, then you
may use such other Colors as your fancy shall direct you may be most suitable
to your design; for which purpose your care must be to observe the Ornament and
Fashion of whatsoever good Dial you meet with, and to register your
Observations: This will be a great help to your fancy on all occasions.

CHAP. X. Some Instructions for making of Plains and Boards to draw Dials on.
DIal Playns are of two sorts; first, such as are of the Wall of a Building it
self: or secondly, such as are drawn on Tables.

The first sort if they are made on Brick-work, is done with Lime and Hair
plaistered on the Wall, of what bigness the Owner pleases; This is the Common
way.

But a better and more durable way, is to temper Lime and Sand with Linseed
Oil; it is not very chargeable, but exceeding profitable: for this substance
will harden to the hardness of a stone, and not decay in many Ages.

If you cannot have Oil enough to temper a quantity of Plaster sufficient for
your Plain, then temper your Lime and Sand with scummed Milk; this you will
find to last six times as long as your Common plaster.

Now for Tables of Wood, they being the most Common, I shall give such
Directions for the making of them, as I have always found most profitable and
fit for this purpose.

The Woods that I find best for this use are the clearest Oak, and the reddest
Firr, provided it be not Turpentiney; between these two Woods I find little
difference as to their alteration by the weather, both being subject to split
in case they are bound, and have not free liberty to shrink with dry weather,
and swell with wet; but as to their lasting, I judge Oak to be the better: and
how long Firr will last thus secured and defended with Oil Colors, I have not
yet experienced; but we may judge that good red Firr that is very Roseny, will
last the age of any man whatsoever, if it be secured as things of this nature
ought to be.

In working any of these woods, I advise, that first your Boards be cut to such
a length as you intend your Dial Board shall be of, and so many of them as may
make up the breadth designed; then let them be Joynted and plained on both
sides, and afterward set to dry (for it is observed, That though Boards have
layn in an house never so long, and are never so dry, yet when they are thus
shot and playned, they will shrink afterward beyond belief, if kept dry): when
you think they are dry enough and will shrink no more, let them be again shot
with good Joints, and every Joint in the glewing doubled together with Pins, as
Coppers do the bottoms of their Tubs; after it is thus glewed, and the Joints
be sufficiently dry, then let the face of the Board be very well playned and
tried every way, that it may be both smooth and true, and the edges shot true,
and all of a thickness, as panels of Wainscot are commonly wrought, the edges
must be thus true and even, that it may sit into the rabet of a moulding put
round it; Just as a panel of Wainscot does in its frame: This will give liberty
to the Board to shrink and swell without tearing; whereas Mouldings that are
nailed round the edge as the common way is, does so restrain the motion of the
wood, that it cannot shrink without tearing: but Boards made this way will last
a long time without either parting in the Joints, or splitting in the wood.

Dials are sometimes drawn on Playns lined with Copper or Lead, that they may
be free from splitting or tearing; but I prefer a Board (if it be made as above
is directed) before them in many respects: As first, it is much Cheaper:
Secondly, Lead (and Copper too a little) will swell with the heat of the Sun,
and grow in time so hollow, and as it were swelled outward, that the truth of
its shadow will be much injured. Thirdly, the Colors will be apt to peel from
the metal, and the Dial will be that way more defaced than on wooden Playns.

CHAP. XI. How to make the best Glue for glewing the Joints of Dial-Boards.
TAke a quantity of Milk that has stood so long to Cream that no more will
arise from it; scum it very clean, and set it over the fire in a Leaden Pot,
and let it boil a little; and if any Cream arise, take it off, then put in your
Glue first divided into small pieces, and it will soon melt; and when you have
boiled it to a good body, that it be neither too thick nor too thin (for in the
right observance of this lies much of the Art) then use it as you do other
Glue: This binds beyond belief, and will not be subject to resolve with any
Competent moisture of the weather.

It Is certain, that when any sort of Glue is burnt to the sides of the pot, the
whole is spoiled of its former strength; to prevent this, let your Glue be
always melted in Balneo Maria, which is thus; Take a large Skillet, or a
little Kettle full of water, into which put your Glew-pot with a wispe of Hay
or Straw under it, to keep it from the bottom of the Vessel; and as the water
in the Vessel heats, so will your Glue melt: And thus you may do at the first
making of your Glue, by which means you may boil it to what body you please,
without danger of burning to the sides of the pot.

CHAP. XII. A Catalogue of such Books as are necessary for him that would be a
Complete Dialist.
DR. Record's Castle of Knowledge. This Book (though something scarce) is an
Excellent Book for those that would attain the Knowledge of the Sphere, or
motion of the Heavens; which every one that would be a Complete Dialist ought
perfectly to understand.

Stirrup's Complete Dialist. In this Book is contained a Brief Explanation of
the Sphere; as likewise three several ways to draw Dials, two of them
Geometrically, and the third Instrumentally; All of them as Expeditious and
True as most. To this Book is added an Appendix by Mr. Leybourne, showing the
best ways for furnishing Dials with such Lines as show the Suns place in the
12 Signs, his declination, right ascension, length of the Day and Night, the
rising and setting of the Sun, his Azimuth and Circles of altitude, with the
Jewish, Babylonish, and Italian hours.

Collins Sector on a Quadrant. In this Book, among other things, are Excellent
Scales and Instruments for Dialling. To which is added an Appendix by John
Lion, showing the way of drawing all manner of Dials on the Seelings Floors,
and Walls of Rooms, to receive the reflection of a small glass.

Collins Dialling. This Book among several good Geometrical ways for drawing
Dials, shows also ways to draw Dials from a Gnomen stuck into a Wall at
random, without knowing the declination; a good Book throughout.

Leybourne's Art of Dialling. A very Ingenious Piece, where you will find
(among many other good Conceits) a very Easy, Exact, and Speedy way for
drawing fair upright Decliners; and also an Instrument the most Compendious of
all others, especially in drawing small Dials.

Leybourn's Introduction to Astronomy; Sold by Robert Mordant at the Atlas in
Cornhill. In this Book is showed how to draw all manner of Dials by the Globe;
And among the rest, he shows a way to draw an East or West Dial Geometrically,
the best of any extant.

The Use of Sutton 's large Quadrant, Sold at the Atlas in Cornhill; which
together with the Instrument is very useful for a Dialist.

Phillips's Mathematical Manual; Wherein are the Tables of Signs and Tangents
for Calculating the hour distances the Arithmetical way.

The Works of Mr. Edmund Gunter: or, The Use of his Sector. An Excellent Piece.

Foster's Azimuth Dialling. An Ingenious Work.

Oughtred's Circles of Proportion: In which (among many other Ingenious
Conceits) you have the way and manner of drawing the double Horozontal Dial.

Blagrave's Dialling: A good Piece, wherein you have several Choice Conceits
and Explanations of the nature of Dials, with the way of drawing the hour Lines
belonging to, or showing the hour in any Country whatsoever.

These are the Books of greatest Note that are yet extant. There is one more
yet expected from Mr. Leybourn, which will be the Whole Body of Dialling, after
several most New and Easy ways, which without doubt will be an Excellent
Piece.

CHAP. XIII. The Practice of Painting Sun-Dials.
WHen according to the Rules given in the Books aforementioned, you have drawn
on Paper the draught of your Dial; and that your Board be ready, and your
Colors prepared according to the Directions before given, you must in the
Painting of your Dial proceed thus; Take Spanish Brown that is well ground and
mixed somewhat thin, and with a large Bristle Brush dipped therein color your
Board or Plain all over on every side, so that you leave no part uncoloured;
this is called the Priming of your Dial: When this first Color is dry, do it
over again with more of the same Color tempered somewhat thicker; and when
this is also dry, you may if you please do it over again with the same Color,
your Work will be the substantialler, and last longer.

When this last time of Coloring with your Red Lead be dry, then with White
Lead color the face of your Plain over, and when it is dry work it over again
three or four times more successively after each drying, so shall the face of
your Plain be sufficiently defended against the many years fury and violence of
weather.

When the last Coloring of your White be dry, you must draw on your Plain
(with a Black-Lead Pencil) a Horozontal Line so far distance from the upmost
edge of your Dial, as your discretion shall think fit, or your Experience finds
to be most becoming your Plain; then set out the Margin of your Dial with
boundary Lines for the hour, half hour, and quarter divisions of your Dial (as
in most Dials you see is done): when you have thus set out the Margin and
Boundary Lines of your Dial, then take your Paper draught fairly drawn, and
place the Horozontal Line which you before drew on your Plain; in doing of
which observe to place the Center according as the situation of your Plain for
Convenience sake requires: thus; If your Dial be a full South Dial, then let
the Center be exactly in the middle of your Plain: but if your Dial decline
from the South either East or West, then place not the Center of your Draught
in the Center of your Plain, but nearer to one side or other of it, according
as it declines, having also respect to the quantity of its declination.

For Example: If your Dial decline Eastwards, then let the Center of your
Draught be placed between the Center and the Eastern side of your Plain, the
quantity thereof must be according as your Dial declines; if it decline but a
little, then place the Center of your Draught but a little from the Center of
your Plain; and if it declines much, place the Center of your Draught the more
out of the Center of your Plain: The reason of my advising this, is, that by so
doing you may gain a greater distance for those Hour Lines, which in declining
Playns fall nearer together on one side then they are on the other; for which
reason I always use it in all declining Playns, except they decline far, as
between 80 and 90 degrees; for then we commonly draw them without Centers, to
gain the more distance for the hour Lines.

When your Paper Draught is thus Artificially placed on the Plain, and fastened
with pins or small tacks; then let the draught thereof be transferred to the
Plain, by laying a Ruler over every hour, half hour, and quarter division: and
where your Ruler shall cut or intersect the boundary lines of your Margin,
there make marks by drawing Lines with a Black-Lead Pencil, of such a length as
each division requires (or is designed by your boundary lines) observing
always to draw the hour, and half hour lines quite through your Margin, that
they may be guides for the right placing the Figures, and for a small spot that
is usually placed in the Margin, right against the half hour.

When your Dial Draught is thus transferred to the Plain it self, you must not
forget to draw the substill Line according as it lies in your Draught, to be
your guide for the right placing your Still or Cock; for you must in every
particular be very exact, or else your Dial cannot be good.

When you have taken every thing that is required from your draught, and have
transferred it to the Plain, then take your draught off, and with Vermillion
very well ground and prepared, as before is taught, let the boundary Lines of
your Dial, as also the hour, half hour, and quarter divisions be drawn
therewith; let your Color be as thick and stiff as you can possible work it,
so as to draw a clear and smooth line.

When your Vermillion Lines are drawn, then with Lamp-Black let the Figures be
drawn, a spot in the middle of the Margin right against the half hour line; and
if you please in the Margin at the top of your Plain you may put the date of
the Year, your Name, or some divine sentence, as is usual in things of this
nature: then fit in your Cock so as to make right Angles with the Plain, so
shall your Dial be drawn and finished in all respects as a plain Dial ought to
be.

CHAP. XIV. How to guild the Figures of Sun-Dials with Gold.
IF you intend to bestow more Cost on a Dial then what is expressed in the last
Chapter, by guilding the Figures or other Ornaments, you must proceed thus;
Whatsoever you would guild must first be drawn with Gold size (of the making of
which, see Chap. 7.) according to the true proportion of what you would have
guilt, whether figure, letter, or what ever else it be; when you have thus
drawn the true proportion of what you would have guilt, let it remain till it
be sufficiently dry to guild upon, which you shall know by touching it with the
end of your finger; for if your finger stick a little to it, and yet the Color
come not off, then is it dry enough: but if the Color come off on your finger,
then is it not dry enough, and must be let alone longer; for if you should then
lay your Gold on, it would so drown it, that it would be worth nothing: but if
your size should be so dry as not to hold your finger as it were to it, then is
it too dry, and the Gold will not take; for which there is no remedy but new
sizing; therefore you must watch the true time that it be not too wet or too
dry; both extremes being not at all convenient.

When your size is ready for guilding, take your Book of Leaf Gold, and opening
a leaf of it, take it out with your Cane-plyers, and lay it on your guilding
Cushion, and if it lie not smooth, blow on it with your breath which will lay
it flat and plain, then with a Knife of Cane, or for want of it, an ordinary
pocket Knife that has a smooth and sharp edge; with this (being wiped very dry
on your sleeve that the Gold stick not to it) let your leaf-gold be cut into
such pieces or forms as your Judgment shall think most suitable to your work.

When you have thus cut your Gold into convenient forms, then take your tool
that was before described in number. 10. of Chap. 1. and draw the Cloth side of
it across your tongue, or breath upon it to make it dampish that the gold may
stick to it; with this tool take your Gold up (by clapping it down on the
several pieces you had before cut into forms) and transfer it to your size,
upon which clap it down according to discretion, and your gold will leave your
tool, and cleave to your size; which you must afterward press down smooth with
a bunch of Cotton, or a Hares foot: and thus you must do piece by piece till
you have covered all your size with gold; and after it is fully dried, then
with your Hares foot brush off all the loose Gold, so will your guilding remain
fair and beautiful.

Note, That after your guilding is thus perfectly laid on, you may if you
please diaper or flourish on it with thin Umber whatsoever shall be suitable to
your design; the form and order of which take from Examples which are abundant,
where Painting and Gilding are to be seen.

CHAP. XV. How to lay on Smalt, the only Color that requires strewing.
IF you make the Margin of your Dial Blew with strowing Smalt, it must be done
after the Figures are guilt; thus:

Take White Lead stiffly tempered (if with fat Oil it will be much the better)
and therewith color over your whole Margin, repairing therein the Figures as
you come to them; when you have thus done your Margin all over with thick
color, take your Smalt, and with a Goose-quill-feather cover all your Margin
with it, and with a piece of Cotton dab it down close that it may well take
upon the ground laid under it; and when you imagine the ground to be thoroughly
dry, then wipe off the loose color with a feather, and blow the remainder of
it off with a pair of Bellows, so is your work finished. And thus you have a
Method for Coloring any thing else with this Color besides the Margins of
Sun-Dials.

CHAP. XVI. The Practice of Vulgar Painting.
THat which I call Vulgar Painting, is only the way and manner of Coloring
Wainscot, Doors, Windows, Posts, Rayls, Pales, Gates, and the like; the method
of doing which differs not at all from that of Painting Sun-Dials, that is, in
the preparation, mixing and laying on of Colors; and one Example I know will
be sufficient to direct you in any business of this kind: Suppose you have a
pair of Gates or the like to paint, you must proceed thus; first prime it with
Spanish Brown (as you did your Dial-Board) twice or three times, when this is
dry take White Lead well tempered (as before was taught) or Umber and White, or
Blew Balls, or Indico and White, or any other Color you intend your work shall
be laid in, and with that Color (whatsoever it be) let your Gate be colored
four or five times over successively after each drying (for the oftener you
Color any thing without doors, the longer will it last; Wainscotting indeed
you need not do over above twice with the last Color, because it is within
doors) listing, quartering or panelling it as your fancy shall please; or else
letting it go plain, and all of one Color as you shall best like; so shall
your work be finished; and thus may you do for any other: and if you are minded
to gild or the like, repair to the 7. and 14. Chapters, where you are
sufficiently taught in that also: So that you may see that in this Method of
Painting Sun-Dials, I have also delivered the whole Art of Vulgar Painting,
because they are indeed but one and the same thing.

CHAP. XVII. How to scour, refresh and preserve all manner of Oil Paintings.
THe Oil Paintings that I here intend, are only such as are kept from the
injuries of weather; for such paintings as endure the fury of rain and storms
(such as Sun-Dials, Posts, Pales, etc.) are not any ways to be renewed or
refreshed, but by being new colored with the same Color in which it was at
first wrought, because that the body and strength of the Color is worn out by
the continual assaults of wasting time.

But as for such Paintings that are sheltered from weather, as all in-door
Paintings are, they still keep their Body and Color, although their beauty may
be much impaired by dust, smoke, fly-shits, humid vapors, and the like, which
will in time soil and tawnish them; To remedy which, take these few Rules:

If your Painting be Wainscotting or any other Joynary or Carpentary work that
is painted in Oil, take Wood ashes well sifted, which mix with water somewhat
thickly, then take a stubbed bristle brush (like those we call shooe-brushes)
and dip it in the moystened ashes, and therewith rub and scour your painting
all over in all places alike, and when you find that all the soil is taken off,
then wash it clean with fair water, and let it dry; after which take common
Varnish and therewith varnish your work all over alike, and you will find your
painting to be near as fresh as when first laid on.

Note, That if your Varnish be too thick, you must put Oil of Turpentine to it,
which will make it as thin as you please.

But if your Painting be more Curious, whether Figures of Men, Beasts,
Landscape, Frutage, Florage, or the like, then take Smalt, (a sandy Color, to
be bought at the Colour-Shops) with which and a sponge wet in water, let your
Picture be gently scowred, and then cleanly washed off with fair water: after
it is well dry, let it be run over with Varnish, and you will find the beauty
and luster of your Picture much recovered.

But Note, That this scowring ought not to be practiced but very seldom (as
when your Picture is very much soyled) because often and too frequent
operations in this kind must needs wear off a little of the Colors; therefore
strive what you can to preserve their first beauty, by keeping them free from
smoke, and by often striking off the dust with a Fox tail; as likewise
preserving them from Flies, by dressing up your Rooms with green boughs, to
which the Flies will gather themselves, and so not hurt your Pictures. Sir Hugh
Platt in the First Part of his Garden of Eden, and 17 page, tells us of an
Italian Fancy for this purpose, by hanging in the roof and sides of the Room
small Pompions or Cow combers stuck full of Barley, which will sprout into
green spiers on which the Flies will lodge. Querie, Whether Vessels of Tin made
round about full of holes filled with Earth, and every hole planted with a
sprig of Orpen, Penyroyal, Mints, etc. and watered as need requires, would not
be more beautiful and useful for this purpose.

Another Note worth Observation is, That all Pictures (especially those that
are wrought with mixtures of White Lead) are apt to tawnish and grow rusty, as
is seen in all ancient Pieces; To prevent which, in the Months of May and June
let your Pictures be exposed to the hot Sun three or four days; this will draw
off much of the tawnish, and make the Colors more fresh and beautiful: and
thus doing from year to year will preserve them wonderfully.

Although in the beginning of this Chapter I mentioned Dials among those things
that are not to be refreshed but by new painting; yet here take notice, That I
think it not convenient at all to lay new Coloring upon the old ground of a
Sun-Dial (that is, to draw the old Lines and Figures over again in the same
posture wherein they were drawn before) but rather to take the declination
anew, and according thereunto make a new draught of your Dial, and proceed in
the painting of it in all respects as if it were a new Dial: For it is
observed, That Dials which were made many years ago (which we believe went true
when first made) will not give the true hour now, but go very false and
unequal, which is caused by some secret motion of the Earth not hitherto taken
notice of, which apparently alters the declination of all Playns whatsoever. If
any one requires more satisfaction herein, let him repair to some old Dial that
was made many years ago, and according to the distance of the Substile from the
Meridian, let him find out the declination when first made, as any man that is
an Artist can easily do; then let him take the declination of the Plain by the
Sun, and he shall find these two declinations to differ considerably according
to the number of years contained between your observation and the time of the
Dials first making; so that a Plain that stood full South 30, 40, or 60 years
ago, shall now decline some degrees either to the East or West, according to
the nature of the Earths motion.

CHAP. XVIII. Some Improvements in Painting to resist weather, and preserve
Timber or wooden works from rotting.
TAke the hardest Rosin you can get, clarify it well; to which Rosin add
Linseed Oil so much as you find by experience to be sufficient; let them be
well melted and incorporated together on the fire, then take either Umber,
Verdigrease, or Red Lead (these being extraordinary drying Colors) first
ground fine, which put into the Oil and Rosin; and when they are well mixed
together, you may use them in Coloring Timber as you do with other Colors:
it is best always to be used hot, least it be too stiff.

This is a most excellent thing to preserve Timber, it lies like the China
Varnish, and will endure 10 times as long as other Painting (if rightly
wrought); this is a most excellent way to preserve the Border Boards in
Gardens, and any other thing that we would have last long in wet and moisture;
this Color spread on Cloth with a Trowel, is a most excellent Covering for
Tents, Huts, Turrets, Houses of Pleasure, and the like.

And let me add one Experiment more that will much commend the use of this
mixture; which is this:

Let those wooden Vessels (whether Hogsheads, Barrels, Kilderkins, or any
other Vessel whether upright or decumbent) that you design to keep any
drinkable Liquors in, be well and entirely painted on the outside therewith;
which Vessel so painted shall keep and preserve all manner of Liquors equally
to the best Bottles whatsoever, by reason that the sponginess and porusness of
the wood is entirely closed and shut up by this tough rosinious varnish,
thereby keeping the spirits of the liquor from flying away, and so consequently
preserving the whole body thereof in its strength and vigor.

The best way to make the Varnish (or Color) for this purpose, is to put no
more Oil to the Rosin than what shall just serve to toughen it; nor to mix any
Color with it, but burnt Umber, because Verdigrease and Red Lead may be
objected against by reason of their corroding quality: The best way to lay this
Color on, is to heat it hot before you work it, which will make it close the
firmer to the wood.

Postscript.
ONe thing I had forgot when I spoke of Pencils in the First Chapter; that is,
whereas I told you that Pencils or Brushes were to be cleansed from their
color by washing them with Soap and warm water, it is to be understood that
this is most convenient in large Brushes; but for smaller Pencils, the better
way were to dip them in clean Sallet Oil, and draw them between your fingers
diverse times till they are clean; and when you come to use them again, dip them
in a little Linseed Oil, and squeeze it out again, and then use them.

FINIS.

