CLOD-PATE's Ghost: OR A DIALOGUE Between Justice CLOD-PATE, and his [quondam]
Clerk Honest TOM TICKLEFOOT; WHEREIN Is Faithfully Related all the News from
Purgatory, about Ireland, Langhorn, etc.
The Author, T. T.
Courants, Diurnals, will not do it;
Gazetts no News can tell;
Then Hey! for Brave Tom Ticklefoot!
Who brings us News from Hell!
L. Epigr. Lib. 3. Ep. 5.
Ticklef. WHat a Rumbling, lumbring Noise do you make there? Cannot an Honest
man sleep for you? would I could find the Bed-staff.


Clod-p. Would you were hanged, you Rascal! Cannot you put your Chairs and
Stools in better order when you go to Kennel? I have broke my Shins most
lamentably.


Ticklef. I would you had broke your Neck for me, whoever you are; I Am sure
you have broke my Sleep, and I value an inch of my own Sleep before three
Inches of your Neck; besides you have spoiled as hopeful a Dream as ever I had
since I understood the Art of sound Snoring: But who are you with a Rope to
you? and what make you here?


Clod-p. How now Tom! what, do not know thy old Master? you and I have been
better acquainted when time was.


Ticklef. My old Master Clod-pate! Beshrew your Heart, you put me in a cold,
clammy, muck Sweat: I Am all of a Lather; I always hated Converse with the
Folks of the Invisible World, ever since I could write Ticklefoot. But what
Wind has blown you hither? I thought we had been cock sure of you.


Clod-p. I Will do thee no harm Tom, upon my honest word; but I vow I have broke
my shins filthily in the dark.


Ticklef. Why, could you not see your way by the Light of your Nose? I Am sure
it used to outshine a Beacon, or, at least, a Flam-Boy.


Clod-p. Ay Tom! But I am now a Ghost in Quirpo, and have left my Nose behind
me.


Ticklef. why did you not leave your Shins behind you too?


Clod-p. Oh Tom! there is a Mystery in that: how should I walk without my Legs?
And how should I bring my Legs without my shins? But I see every Convenience
has an Inconvenience; either I must leave my shins behind me, or be a lame
Cripple; or my Nose, and so be your poor Blind-man Sir: but leave off your
Fooling, and give me a little of John Pontaeus his Balsom, whilst my Wound is
green.


Ticklef. Nay Master, if I had broke your Pate, I would have given you a
Plaster; but if you break your own Shins, you must be your own Surgeon for
Tom.


Clod-p. Well Sirrah, I Will be even with you; but let us be serious; I have a
great mind to divert my self with a little Discourse with you about the Affairs
of your Hemisphere.


Ticklef. What you please for that, Sir! but pray be as concise as you can for
your Life; I must be up by Break of day, and trudge ten Miles to a Wake, by
Eight a Clock in the morning, and I Am sure there will be no sport there till
Tom Ticklefoot comes with his Tabour and Whistle.


Clod-p. A Fool scratch you with your own Nails! Have thou no more Wit, than
to quit the Gentile and Laudable Employ of a Justices Clerk to run rambling up
and down the Country, and be the Buffoon to all the Wakes, May-games,
Morrice-Dances, and Whitson-Ales? Especially Tom, when thou had such
excellent Education under me: I am sure thou have heard me Tickle a Point of
Law many and many a time, would have done a man's heart good to have heard it:
Ah Tom, Tom! thou might have learned something, if thou had had Brains.


Ticklef. You may speak your pleasure; but so long as I can get Fools pence,
and pick young Folks pockets with my Drollery, call me Tom Ticklefool, if you
will, it is all one to Tom: Shall I tell you, Master, I got more by
Buckingham-Ballad, than by a Dozen of your Warrants; and then I writ a Play
the other day, without Head or Foot, Plot or Language, Wit or Fancy, and yet it
turned to more Account, than Licensing half the Alehouses in our Division at
Easter: Well! That Is my Good, that does me Good: I Am Master of more Shillings
now, since I was my own Master, than I was of Pence when I was your Servant;
and I protest I get more by Tickling my Tabour, than ever you got by Tickling a
Point of Law in all your Life.


Clod-p. Ay, but Tom! The Creditableness and Gentileness of an Employ is worth
something.


Tickef. Yes, but the Honesty of an Employ is worth more. I tell you true, my
Conscience grumbl'd filthily to live upon the Sins of the People; and I Am
certain, two parts in three of those we punished for Sinners, we first made
Sinners; but that which vexed me to the Guts, was, that when I (under
correction) was the better Justice of the two, you engrossed all the Profits,
and fob'd me off with your Leavings, and poor Tom had nothing but some odd
Scraps out of the Compositions of poor Whores, to keep Life and Soul together:
my Doublet was almost all together out at Elbows with writing of your Warrants,
and my Stockings out at Heels with running of your Errands; I was your Loadsman
to bring Grist to your Mill, and yet I have not quit Scores with the Botcher to
this day: but this I say, my Conscience would not let me tolerate Whores for
our Fees.


Clod-p. This it is when every hair-brained half-witted Coxcomb will be wiser
than Roman Catholic Church: She upon politic Reasons tolerates Whores and
Stews, as knowing, if men's Lusts be damm'd up in their ordinary Course, they will
find a more filthy Channel: She allows Simple Fornication, to prevent
Adulteries and Sodomies; the lesser Evil to be the Remedy for the greater.


Ticklef. Wisely done Master! for Satan to cast out Satan, one Sin to cure
another! Why could not She use God's Remedy as well as the Devil's? She
prohibits Marriage in the Clergy, which is God's Remedy; and allows Fornication
in all, which is the Devils: and yet no Remedy neither; for the Devil does but
enter his Whelps with the unmarried, that when they have got Impudence enough,
he may Flesh 'em upon the Married: And examine it when you will, you shall find
all your Adulterers to have first been Fornicators; and he tranflates them as
they are ripe for the Game, as we do Young Players, from the Nursery in
Barbican, to the Academy in Salisbury-Court. I hope this is as serious as your
heart can wish.


Clod-p. Well, take your Course Tom; but we had a strange piece of News in
Purgatory the other day, that you had invaded the Bench, Tom, and had Arraigned
the Prisoners, when they were Acquitted by that Blessed Jury, and Condemned the
Judge himself too; I promise you, had I caught you enterloping upon my Office,
in my time, I had bestowed such a Clapperclawing on you, you should not have
Clawed it off in one Seven Years. But Tom! --


Ticklef. What a Stir's here with Tom, Tom? Nothing but plain Tom! Were I not
under such Circumstances as oblige me not to provoke you, I would tell you,
Sir, the Toms are as good Gentlemen as walk upon English Ground: There Is
Tom-Fool, a very Ancient Family; and Tom-a-Bedlam, that has built him a Stately
Palace near Bishops-Gate, and Tom-Tell-Troth; that thinks his Penny as good
Silver as the proudest Bully, whose Ignorance will not let him understand, nor
his Guilt bear Plain-dealing; and there is I Tom Ticklefoot, simply, though I
say it that should not say it, can derive my Pedigree as high as he that wears
the Cock's-Feather in's Cap; Ay, and many other Toms, that are not ashamed to
show their Faces before the best man of the Parish.


Clod-p. But all this is nothing to the purpose.


Ticklef. It may be not to your purpose; but it is close and pertinent to my
purpose: I Will justify it, I am a Gentleman every inch of me; and though the
Ticklefoot's Family, like some great and famous Rivers, ran underground for a
few Generations, we have as daring Blood running in our Veins as our Neighbors.


Clod-p. Yes, yes, it seems so; and from hence you took the Confidence to try
over the Trials of Wakeman, Marshal and Corker, and reflected sawcily upon you
know who!


Ticklef. Pish! Go to Law with a Beggar, and get a Lowse! and if ever he get
other Costs and Damages of me, I Will forgive him. Besides, I Will lay you an even
Wager, two round Six-pences to a broad Shilling, there is never a Jury that
plies in Westminster Hall, would give a Lowse-damage against me if I were Cast;
but I have raised such a Mutiny between his Conscience and his Guimneys, as
will not be hushed again in one Twelvemonth; but to cry Quits with you, pray
what News of Father Ireland in your parts.


Clod-p. Not a Syllable, I protest Tom.


Ticklef. Now that is a Wonder, Master! Why, does not Purgatory lie in the ready
High Road to Hell?


Clod-p. Oh yes; we are within a stones throw of the Road; and not two
Flightshoots from Hell it self: I have seen Souls crowding and thronging upon
the Road thither, as thick as ever I saw Gowns in Westminster Hall in the Term,
especially after the famous Victory we had over the French at Monts; and yet I
could never hear a word less or more, good or bad of Father Ireland: I conclude
therefore he cannot be there; for being a person of great Civility, and very
much a Gentleman, he would, no doubt, have called in, to see some of his old
Acquaintance, though some of them of late have got their Habeas Corpus, and are
released.


Ticklef. Habeas Animam, Master; for so the Writ runs in your Court; but if I
might be so bold, pray how do they get out of Purgatory? for I have learned all
the cunning Tricks (you know) our Rogues here use to break prison, but how to
get of Purgatory, seems to me a difficult matter.


Clod-p. Why, I Will tell thee, Tom; we all stood pricking up our Ears, and
listening, like a Sow in the Corn, and as soon as any one hears the Money chink in
the Basin, that is offered at the Mass, upon any particular Souls account, away
whips he up to Heaven, without the Civility of taking leave, and leaves all his
Bag and Baggage behind him for Garnish amongst the poor prisoners: and
therefore the Canon Law determines, That the poor who are dead can have no
Benefit by the Suffrages of the Living, because they are non-solvent. I, for my
part, have lain here these 3 years and upwards, and unless 'twas once or twice
that I got out upon my parol, have not seen Sun, Moon or Stars all the while,
because I left nothing to the Priests to pray me out, and they will be hanged ere
they do ought for Charity; but I Am very confident, Father Ireland, dying a
Martyr, was not obliged to take a Turn in Purgatory, but had all his Sins
expiated by his Sufferings, and went the ready way to Heaven.


Ticklef. I promise you, Master, that is very probable; for some such Hopes
Father Turner gave us in his last Prayer at the Gallows.


Clod-p. Ay smeet Tom! that thou would favor me with a Copy on it!


Ticklef. You may command a greater matter than that comes to: Here it is; O
sweet Jesus, who has suffered a most painful and ignominious Death upon the
Cross for our Salvation, Apply, I beseech there; unto me the Merits of thy
Sacred Passion; and satictifie unto me these Sufferings of mine (which I humbly
accept for thy sake) in union of the Sufferings of thy Sacred Majesty, and in
Punishment, and Satisfaction of my Sins.


Clod-p. La' you there, Tom! you see the Excellency of our Religion, when our
own Sufferings for Christ's sake (such as be sure, Father Turner's were) joined
with the Sufferings of Christ, will make Satisfaction to Divine Justice for our
Sins.


Ticklef. The Excellency of your Religion! pray forbear: I can show you as
excellent Doctrine as this comes to, from a Reverend-Father of our own Church;
If a man (says he) be ready to be thrown into the Sea, he may be piously taught
to pray after this manner, [Grant, O Lord, that the Death of thy Son, and this
my Death may be united into one; that so being conjoined; they may be accepted
by thee, for the punishment of my Sins, that all thy Wrath may be forgotten,
and all my Sins blotted out of thy Book.] Nay, I can tell you more, That your
Father Turner (though he was not so ingenuous as to confess it) did but borrow
that Doctrine from that Roverend Father of ours, whom he may thank for the
first occasion of his being a Catholic: Nay, I Will tell you more than all this,
that the degenerated Jews use to conclude their Lives with this Prayer; Let my
Death be the Satisfaction for all my Sins! So that I see no singular Excellency
in your Religion above other men's.


Clod-p. However Tom, a blind man may see they died Martyrs in the Judgment of
their own Consciences.


Ticklef. It may be so; but I assure you, they died Traitors in mine.


Clod-p. O abominable uncharitableness! Why, do not believe those solemn
Protestations of their Innocence, those serious Appeals to God made at the very
last Gasp?


Ticklef. Not a word, upon my Honesty: For, as for Father Ireland, he died with
a loud Lie in's Mouth, enough to have choked a man of an ordinary Swallow,
without a Hempen Squinzey.


Clod-p. That was an ugly Business indeed Tom: But how do thou prove it Tom?
how do prove it Boy?


Ticklef. Prove it! Why, Mr Jenison, a Zealot of their own Religion, has proved
it over and over; for though modest Ireland faced the Court, and would have
outfaced the King's Evidence, that he was in Staffordshire from Aug. 3. to the
middle of September. yet in comes this Gentleman, and of his own accord swears,
that he saw him, spoke with him in London, Aug. 19. at his own Chamber,
plucking off his Boots, saying he was just then come Post out of the Country:
And this he did as a Gentleman, upon no other Motive, but because he saw how
this bold Jesuit Brazen'd it out against Authority, and huff'd and hectored
the Sheepish Protestants, when yet all Ireland's Asseverations were broad
Falsehoods; so that the thing's as plain as the Nose on your Face.


Clod-p. Ay marry Tom! that was worded like a cunning Sophister; As plain as
the Nose of my Fate! why thou know I have no Nose on my Face; and so I told
thee before.


Ticklef. Why Master, have the Worms, or the Pox eaten it off? But I meant
innocently; and to clear it, I say, it is as plain as the Nose upon my own Face.


Clod-p. Come Tom, enough of this jesting! do think I Am in a pickle to drole
it, when I have lain so long reezing in the Smoke of Purgatory, that since the
Prohibition of Westphalia Hams, I do not believe there is any thing left in
England that can sample my Blackness. But are not things strangely varied with
you since the last Pacquet-Boat?


Ticklef. Ay indeed Master, we have rung Changes so long, that now we begin to
ring the Bells backward: you shall see a man as hot as Mustard against Plot and
Plotters one day, and as cool (not to say frozen) as Charity, the next; so that
I Am confident, Modern Charity, and Zeal against Popery, equal Quantities, a
Spoonful, is the best Julep in a buring Fever, that is in all the Dispensatory.
Good lack! how have I seen a man bawl, and some at mouth for the Plaintiff to
day, that would bawl as loud for the Defendant to morrow! in twenty four hours
the Nature of things and men shall be so changed, that you cannot know 'em
again; He that was all Choler, shall be all Phlegm, as if the man had been Tapt,
and a Sheep's Blood transfused into a Lion's Veins.


Clod-p. Prithee Tom unriddle me this Riddle; for I protest it is beyond my
Clod-pated Capacity to understand it.


Ticklef. It Is done as easily as you can kiss your hand; it is but fluxing a man
with Quicksilver, and he is clear another thing.


Clod-p. Ay but it is dangerous meddling with these Quicksilver Medicines Tom.


Ticklef. Upon my word, Sir, none at all; you may give it to a Chrysom-Child;
it is as safe as Buttered Ale, and as nourishing; my Life for your, there is no
danger in it; you may if you please, give it inwardly in a competent Dose of
Aurum Potabile (that is a rare Vehicle!) or outwardly, by Unction, which is only
a hard word for Greasing in the Fist.


Clod-p. And has it done those Feats they boast of?


Ticklef. Oh Sir! believe it, if all the Blind that have had their Eyes opened,
all that have had their Tongues loosed, all that have been cured of Deafness,
Dumbness, by this rare Receipt, were but so Civil as to make their
Acknowledgments, our Lady of Halle would not Glory in a more numerous Retinue:
It has made that, no Evidence to save one, which was clear and good Evidence to
hang a whole Baker's Dozen; it has made sometimes two Witnesses necessary to
every Branch and Article of an Indictment, when, in another Case, and at
another Time, one Witness to each Branch or Article, had been mortal, and
killed a man as dead as a red Herring: It shall make a Plot no Plot, in eight
and forty hours, and convert deadly poison into a Sovereign Cordial; and that is
pretty fair, I think, for one Receipt: which you may see in Poor Robin's
Pharmacopoeia. But I beseech you Master, how come you by your Intelligence?


Clod-p. We know nothing but what we have from the public Prints, Diurnals,
Courants, Gazettes, Pamphlets which fly up and down thick and threefold,
especially of late. Indeed formerly we had St. Coleman's Letters twice a Week;
and they were Authentic: but he is now better employed, and our Staple Advice
is from the Gazettes.


Ticklef. I wonder who writes these Gazettes in your Territories.


Clod-p. In truth Tom, I cannot well tell; but some few years agone there was a
Slip-string-Fellow wrote 'em; he had a hardish kind of Strange Name; but really
I have forgot it, only I remember they say he was one of old Noll's Fiddlers,
and was old Dog at it; he could tell you where Rowland Pippin dwelt, and
decypher all his Bum-Trusses. There was not a Spaniel, or a Watch lost, but he
could recover it better than Will. Lilly, Moll Cutpurse, or the City-Marshal:
but now I think on it, there has been a great Smoke and Smother of late about
the Fires of London and Southwark; prithee what do you above-ground say of that?


Ticklef. Nay, what do you below-ground say of? for most men with us think you
have Reason to know more on it than we.


Clod-p. Pardon me Tom, for that! we must not tell Tales out of the School;
we are under an Oath of Secrecy, not to reveal the Arcana Imperii, the
Mysteries of our Subterranean Kingdom. Besides, to tell you true, we are not of
the Divan; poor Wretches, we are kept close prisoners, and know as little as
you do, what the Grand Signior of Hell is plotting in his Cabinet-Council, only
common Fame goes with us, that the Fire of London wonderfully abated the Flames
of Purgatory, they were e'ne ready to leap out of their skins for Joy at the
News; but tell me seriously, whether you believe our Friends had a Finger in it?


Ticklef. A Finger! Ay a Hand, a Head, a Heart, and All in it. Honest Reading
tells us in his Trial, that Mr. Bedlow had laid in Fagots behind the
Palsgrave's- Head Tavern, to burn Westminster; this he did when a Papist; but
he repented sincerely, was pardoned fully and freely; and when Reading charges
it, and he owns it, who can deny the Truth of it?


Clod-p. Did Reading charge it on him? then was he as great a Clod-pate as my
self; and yet I thought I had been the Head of our Family, and the Top of all
our Kin! well! I shall never be dead as long as Reading is alive; I only wish
instead of the Pillory, he had mounted the Gallows; for he has done our Cause
more Disservice by this Jobb, than ever he did it a Kindness by disparaging the
King's Witnesses.


Ticklef. Why then, Master, I perceive you and I are agreed; let him hang
himself to save Squire Ketch a Labor, and honestly cheat him of his Fees.


Clod-p. But Tom, what say thou to those sweet hopeful Youths that came from
St. Omars? Did they not play their parts notably, and manfully overwhelm the
King's Evidence with a Torrent of Truth?


Ticklef. I promise you they had been excellent Tools, had they been in all
points a little better instructed; for they spoke home to the Time in Question,
but for an hour before, they spoke as they had never been born; and for an hour
after, as if they had been already dead.


Clod-p. I confess some of 'em came blewly off; but we can have Twenty more
such Instruments for time of need; and we resolve never to starve our Cause, as
you silly Protestants do.


Ticklef. Nay I Will say that for you, you rather cram your Cause than starve it;
but have a care you do not kill it with Kindness, and whilst you would feed it,
burst it; overdoing is sometimes undoing; but I Will bear you good witness, he is
a Fool that will accuse you Catholics for starving of your Cause.

Inprimis, For Firing the Borough of Southwark 1000 l. Item, For poisoning the
King, 15000 l. Item, For removing Sr. Edmondbury Godfrey, 4000 l. Item, For
Lessening the King's Evidence, and making the Witnesses easy, per An. 1000 l.
Item, For pistolling the King, 1500 l.



Clod-p. Trouble not your self Tom with us or our Concerns; we will look well
enough to the main Chance I Will warrant thee, without thy Advice; but God has
given you Protestants one singular Gift: That you believe our Words that you
hear, and will not believe our Works which we do, and so neither your Faith,
nor your Unbelief can save you: but so long as we can make you believe your own
Ears more than your Eyes, let us alone; we will deal well enough with you.


Ticklef. Well Master, it grows very late; you know my Occasions, pray leave me
to my self; I shall be peevish and wranglish all day, if I want my Natural
Rest; and so good Night Sir; betake your self to your Rest.


Clod-p. To my Rest, Tom! No haste but good: Rest in Purgatory! Thank you for
nothing: O the Lassies of Red-hot Whips of Steel-wire! O the burning Pincers
that must tear me! O the glowing Coals that must be my Couch! What horror does
the remembrance of what I have suffered, and the anticipating Thoughts of what
I must suffer, work in my amazed Soul, when the destined Hour calls me to that
Penance; and do you bid me go rest?


Ticklef. Why Sir, is the Body in Purgatory?


Clod-p. What a Childish Question is that for a man of your years? My Body (all
that is left on it) is in the Grave; I Am sure I left it there: but it is my Soul,
Tom, that is tormented in these Flames.


Ticklef. Now for Old-Acquaintance-sake, Master, tell me, are these Whips,
these Pincers, these Flames you talk of, Material, or Immaterial?


Clod-p. That Is a Captious Question now; the Pincers, and Whips, Tom, are
Metaphorical Terms; but I Will assure thee there is as real Lashings, Whippings,
Scorchings as ever you saw a Felon endure at the Whipping-Post, or a Thief when
he is Burnt in the Hand.


Ticklef. But I cannot conceive for my Life, how Material Instruments can
affect an Immaterial Being.


Clod-p. You cannot? perhaps so Tom; you are a dull Philosopher: but to put you
to it a little; why may not a Material pair of Pincers take hold of an
Immaterial Spirit, as well as a pair of Immaterial Pincers take hold of a
Material Corporeal Substance? Is there not the same proportion between Material
and Immaterial, that there is between Immaterial and Material?


Ticklef. Ay Sir, to a single Hair's Breadth; and if you can show me those
Immaterial Tweezers, or Pincers, that can take hold of a Body, I shall easily
believe that (though not so easily conceive how) a Material pair may take hold
of a Soul: Come, let me see you do it, and I render my self your prisoner, and
shall become your Proselyte.


Clod-p. Look thee there Tom, is not Feeling Believing, as well as Seeing? What
say you now?


Ticklef. Oh, Oh, Oh, Oh, my Nose, my Nose, my poor Nose, my precious Nose!
Purgatory take your Immaterial Pincers; you have almost plucked off my Nose.


Clod-p. Really Tom, 'twas only my Immaterial Fingers.


Ticklef. Would you had left your Fingers behind you, as well as your Nose: but
I remember now an old Charm we had when we were Boys.

Hob with my Heels, and Bayard with my Toes.
Rise up Dead-man, and catch me by the Nose.

Clod-p. 'Twas only in jest, Tom; to convince thy Incredulity, of the Truth of
the Doctrine of Purgatory, and the Extremity of our Torments; but it is an easy
matter for such Raskals as you, to drole and gibe very pleasantly upon our
Sufferings; I Am sure it is we that feel the Smart on it with a witness.


Ticklef. I wonder in my heart how you, of all men living, came to drop into
Purgatory. I always thought that either your Virtues would have saved you, or
Vices damned you; for I protest, I could never for my life yet tell whether
your Virtues or Vices were greater.


Clod-p. The very Truth is, Tom, I had Virtues more than ever I got by; but
there were an infinite Number of odd Trifles that I had set of the Backside of
my Book, and thought no more on than my dying day; they call 'em Venial Sins,
but they may call 'em what they will, and Nickname 'em how they will; this I
know, if this be the punishment of the Venial, I wonder how they fare that die
under Mortal Sins: Now and then there would come dropping in a Sugar Loaf;
sometimes a Couple of Capons; sometimes a Fat Pig; and what Sin (thought I) can
there be in a Fat Pig, or Couple of Capons? Really they were very agreeable
Food. Twice or thrice (but that was seldom) a Paper of Guinneys was thrust into
my hands, handsomely, and modestly, as who say, Say nothing; and I have wondered
at it, but could never find the Reason, my Fingers would stick to 'em like
Bird-Lime; I vow it was always against my will: Then, once, or twice, or so,
came a loving Letter from my Lord --, to show decent Favors to an Innocent
Gentleman at the Sessions; but thou know I always did Justice right or
wrong. It Is true, I had some times occasion to be Drunk; but Good Casuists
assured me 'twas lawful, for my Health's sake, once a Month; and though I
reduced it to once a Fortnight, or once a Week, a sorry Circumstance, could
never make that Mortal, which before was but Venial, if a Sin at all; now I
argued thus with my self, If we be agreed that the Thing is Lawful in it self,
why should we make such a Stir about the Quoties?


Ticklef. I protest you argue most profoundly, and had your Learning out of our
Law Books; for when a Capias will not do, we take out an Alias, then a Pluries,
and last of all a Toties quoties.


Clod-p. Ay but, Tom, Tom, there was a nicer Point; for I ha been overtaken in
a Bawdy House; and though my strictest Confessors gave it under their Hands
(and I always had a Jesuit) that a man may frequent those Places, though he
finds himself ordinarily overcome with the Temptation; provided always that it
be not his Primary Intention, in going thither, but that he designs either the
Conversion, or Correction of those Sinners; and though I were never good at
Conversion, yet thou know I have clawed the Jades, and made 'em sing
Lachrymae in Bridewel; and as I am a living Soul, I evermore set my Ends, and
Aims, and Intentions as straight as an Arrow, when I went in; yet, I cannot
tell how, e're I came out again, my Hand turned, and I was carried down with
the Stream: but this I must needs say: I have been guilty of Lying, which, in
some Cases, they say, is no Sin at all; as when the Lie is Officious: in others
but Venial; as, when it is Ludicrous: and if in some Cases it be Mortal; as,
when it is Malicious: yet I dare swear, my Venial Lies were more by half than my
Mortal ones; and then why might not I set the one against the other? But upon
the whole, I must needs say, I Am better dealt with than I deserved.


Ticklef. I Am clearly of your mind for that matter; I Am sure on it, we poor
Protestants must have been damned for the tithe of what comes to: but, I assure
you, we were so far from dreaming that you were in Purgatory, that we never
suspected you to be a Papist.


Clod-p. There was my Masterpiece Tom: It gave me a little refrigerium, once
to think how I had eluded all their Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, their
Tests, and State-Ordeals; but I went to Church, when I could not handsomely be
sick, nor take Physic; I railed at Fanatics, and boasted of my Loyalty, and
passed for a very good Son of the Church: but, prithee Tom, how did my
Executrix behave her self toward my memory?


Ticklef. Oh, Sir! With all respectfulness imaginable, you had a most splendid
Funeral, and at the Funeral a most elegant Sermon, where the Parson Canonized
you for a Saint, the best man, the most tender Husband, the most useful
Neighbor, the greatest Peacemaker, the Oracle of the Bench for a Justice, the
grand Pattern for a Christian; and, in a word, you was the Mirror of Chastity,
Charity, Piety, and so he drew the Curtains about you, and left you to your
Rest. I, for my part, as I came out of the Church-door, could not but say, Well!
whatever I thought, I see my Master (peace be with him) is in Heaven: And my
Mistress, who c^^'d and took on without all who, caused a sumptuous Monument
to be erected to your Memory, with the name of both your Wives, your Ancestors
(indeed they mentioned not your Children, for a reason that we all knew;) and
last of all, there was an Epitaph bestowed upon your Marble.


Clod-p. An Epitaph, Tom! Thou do me good at heart: I prithee, without more
ado let me hear it; you cannot think how we are affected with those Honors and
Respects which are shown to our Vrns and Memories.


Ticklef. Indeed Master, I cannot vouch for the Poetry of it, but 'twas the
best we could choose out of a dozen, and, to be plain with you, I made it my
self, but it cost me pumping. Here lies old Justice Clod-pate,
Who had many a crotchet in's od-pate;
And had it not been for Grizel his Wife,
He might have lived all the days of his life.
Sic cecinit Tom Ticklefoot. but Master, our case is very hard beyond yours,
who count those sins venial that we judge mortal, and must pay for 'em.


Clod-p. Who Will pity you, Tom, when you may so easily evade the danger of mortal
sins, and will not?


Ticklef. I had as lieve as a hundred shillings, I had the knack on it, how to
sin, and enjoy my self all my life long, and then escape eternal Torments at
the last.


Clod-p. Come, Tom, what will you give me, if I instruct you in the Mystery
on it in a moment?


Ticklef. Ah, sweet Honey-Master! I Will give you a Ten Groats-Fee; or you shall
have all I get at the Wake to morrow, be it less or more; Happy go Luckie, you
shall have it every Farthing, bona fide; you see I have not forgot all my Latin.


Clod-p. Ten Groats! Who Is Fool then, Tom? Will you procure 15000 Masses to be
said for my Soul?


Ticklef. You fly high, Sir; why, Pykering was but to have 15000 Masses for
killing a King.


Clod-p. Nay, now you are out, Tom-fool: Do think those Masses were to
deliver him from Purgatory for such a Meritorious Work? No, no, he never needed
fear Purgatory on that Account; but if perhaps he had died in the Act under
some Irregularities; as suppose, guilty of some other Peccadillo's, those
Masses should have quitted his odd Scores, and fetched him out of Limbo with
flying Colors. Now for the Vastness of the Sum, Tom, that was only (as the
Learned speak) in majorem Cautelam; or as we of the Laity, to make sure work
on it: And is it not better to have a Thousand or two of Masses too many, than
one single Mass too few? Come Tom, Store's no Sore, in my mind; and if he
happened to have any Overplus, he might sell 'em at a Marketable Rate, and do
his Indigent Friends a Kindness: What say you, Tom, will you come up to my
price?


Ticklef. Upon my honest word, I Will procure you fifteen thousand, under or
over; it is pretty hard to count exactly to an Unite; but I Will be as good as my
word, and there is a Tester to bind the Bargain.


Clod-p. Why, then in the first place, you must confess all your Sins, with
their Circumstances, in Thought, Word and Deed, and get your Ghostly Father to
absolve you for 'em; then you must provide your self of good store of
Indulgences for all those Sins that are out of the Priest's Jurisdiction, and
when you come to die, get a Franciscan's Cowl thrown over your Ears, and I Will
warrant you, Purgatory shall never singe a Hair of your Head; but if you should
drop in by chance (as who can be against a Chance) then get some of your
Friends to lay down as much Money for you as will purchase fifteen thousand
Masses for your Soul, which is but fifteen hundred Pound.


Ticklef. Ay marry Master! this is just as long as it is broad; I must get 15000
Masses to be said for your Soul, to tell me the rare Secret of getting 15000 to
be said for my own; and so I must be at the Charge for my self and you too,
which comes to three thousand pounds sterling: I see the Priests will lick
their Fingers on both sides, and gain, whoever loses; would I had my Sixpence
again: I Will not hold.


Clod-p. Nay I knew thou would play the Jack with me; but I Am well enough
served, to trust a Rascal that has cheated me so often.


Ticklef. And so are we easy Protestants, to trust you, when we have had such
dearbought Experience of your Famous Maxim, That no Faith is to be kept with
Heretics.


Clod-p. But, Tom, I Will tell thee a pleasant Story.


Ticklef. I cannot hinder you telling your Stories; but I Am resolved never
more to believe a Word you say.


Clod-p. Your Unbelief comes too late now Tom; you have believed us so long,
and we have made that advantage of it, that we care not Twopence whether you
believe us or no: you believed us till we had done our Work; you may now spare
your Faith; we will make you live by Feeling, e're we have done with you.


Ticklef. Pray leave Fidling with my Nose then, and I defy you; do your worst;
but what will you, what can you do?


Clodp. What Is that to Tom Ticklefoot? Do you think us such Fools as to tell
you before hand? No: We Will cast a Mist before your Eyes, you shall not see what
you do see: nor hear what you do hear, nor believe the fullest, clearest
Evidence that can be brought in against us.


Ticklef. And so I hope you have done: Bonus Nocius, Master, in plain English,
Good Night.


Clodp. Farewell, honest Tom: but wonnot you hear my fine Story out?


Ticklef. Hear it out? Why, it is not begun yet; and when you once begin, you will
never know when to make an end; you will have all the Talk to your self, engross
and monopolize the Discourse, and poor Tom shall not wedge in a word to save
his Life: I am never more tormented than with your wordy, long-winded
impertinencies.


Clodp. Why then I Will tell thee the shortest, and truest Story that ever I told
in all my days.


Ticklef. That you may soon do, I promise you, but pray Sir, what is it?


Clod-p. Honest Dick Langhorn came late last night to Purgatory.


Ticklef. And is this one of the short Stories? why, I foresee, if a man had no
more Grace and Wit than to sit it out, you will make this short Story last till
to morrow this time. He came to Purgatory; and he came last night to Purgatory;
pray let us divide the point, that we may handle it more distinctly. And first,
I pray, why to Purgatory? I had thought your Martyrs had made but one Stage
on it to Heaven?


Cold-p. No great matter what you think: I tell thee I saw him there, with
these Eyes, by the same token, there were two or three young Jesuits, that gave
him the coursest Complement for a welcome, that I suppose he ever had in's life.


Ticklf. I long extremely to hear their rude Salutation.


Clod-p. Why Tom, as soon as ever they spied him, without Preface, without
Ceremony, they fell aboard him, and so belabour'd him, each with his
well-tempered Steel whip, that had lain soaking in Fire and Brimstone above a
Month (Ay, Tom, there were Rods in piss for him) and did so firk him too and
again, raked him fore and ast, that I protest I have seen few such Bouts since
I came hither.


Ticklf. But still I Am in the dark, why such an Eminent Saint, such an Heroic
Martyr, should be doomed to Purgatory; if he dropped in by chance, it was an
ugly chance.


Clod-p. The plain truth is, it is whispered amongst us, that Dick Langhorn
played the Scoggin, and revealed some Mysteries of his own Trade, and some of
the Jesuits, about some Lands settled upon their Society, for their better
Maintenance, and other Uses, which they call Secret Service.


Ticklef. Then Master, Secondly, Why not before late last night? did he make
Loyterpins by the way? had he bestirred his stumps, and not truanted his time,
he might have reached his Journeys end a fortnight ago.


Clod-p. Come, come, Tom, make it your own case: he that is to be hanged finds
most of the Spectators at the Gallows before him; I Will engage for thee, Tom,
had thou been sent of that Errand, thou would not have broke thy shins for
haste.


Ticklef. It may be I might, if some unhappy Wagg had set Stools and Forms in
my way, when I came groping in the dark: Ha, Sir?


Clod-p. Well, well Sirrah; leave your frumping, the Case was this; When he
came just to the gate, and viewed the frightful Frontispiece, all cross-barr'd
with Iron; Smoke and Flame breaking out at the Loop-holes, his Heart misgave
him; and though he was led by four stern infernal Paritors, he claps his Feet
against the Threshold, and his hands against both sides of the Wicket, and
there he stuck and hung an Arse so obstinately, like a Thill-Horse, that with
all the strength and cunning they had, they could not get him in. The Governor
of our Bridewell sends out half a dozen of us to assist the Beadles, but two of
'em (I thank ye,) having got a Spit and a stride, showed us a fair pair of
heels, and honestly ran away. I confess, I had as good a mind as the best to
have made one, but being troubled of old with a scurvy Sciatica, I distrusted
my Footmanship, and durst not venture to augment my Torments by a fruitless
Attempt, but there stood we heaving, lifting, thrusting, shoving, three or four
days, till we were all quite spent, to no purpose; till yesterday in the
Evening, one of our fine-witted Jesuits with a wile, (which they have at their
Fingers ends) got him into Limbo.


Ticklef. I wonder you have not a squadron of Angels there ready for a
desperate piece of service.


Clod-p. Why, truly Tom, there were Angels there of both sorts, Good and Bad;
but the good had a great kindness for him, for he is right in the main, and they
would not make, nor meddle with us, hot nor cold, but bid us bake as we brewed,
for they would not concern themselves without an express Order from
Rhadamanthus. As for the bad Angels, they showed themselves very officious, but
he was so anointed all over with oil of Equivocations, they might as soon hold
an Eel by the tail, as get a gripe on him: besides, he had so flancker'd and
fortified himself, with Crossings, Agnus Dei's, and Relics, he was more
Impregnable than Ostend or Stockholm: but at last, what Force could not do,
that fine Policy I told you of before effected.


Ticklef. You told me before: Sure Master you talk idly for want of sleep: I
never heard the fine Policy, nor do I believe that any quirks or tricks as Hell
it self could overreach a Catholic Lawyer.


Clod-p. In short, it was this: A crafty Jesuit comes me as far as the Wicket;
Dick Langhorn, (says he) what will you not see your old Friend Bedloe? he is
just now arrived a back-way in our Quarters. Is the Rogue Bedloe arrived
(replied he) I Will have one lash at his Breech for all his good Deeds: and being
a little tickled with the sugared hopes of Revenge, was not, it seems, so
careful of his hold, but let his Hands and Feet slacken, and the Officers
watching their opportunity, heaved him in, and fairly clap't the gate upon him:
but I shall never forget how they ferretted him; Banks his Horse never danced a
Galliard at that wild rate: they smoak't him, they jerk't him, and bounc'd him
about the stoops, and scoured all the Arrears of his four days obstinacy upon
his hide, though we might legibly read the marks of a late Discipline he had
undergone before he came thither.


Ticklef. Now, I protest Master, All this is as pure a Romance as Purgatory it
self: and I Will be as good as my word, not to believe one syllable of this short
long Story; but yet I would fain know the order of your proceedings in
punishing Offenders there.


Clod-p. Tom, Did ever see the Discipline of Bridewell?


Ticklef. Yes, Master, many and many a time; but once to my exceeding great
Mortification, above all the rest.


Clod-p. Why just such is the Discipline of Purgatory; for this is certain,
that in the Time of Popery in England, a curious Artist brought 'em a Model of
Purgatory, and the Court of Aldermen made Bridewel by the Platform: the
Delinquent is brought in, and with strong Cords is made to embrace the
Whipping-Post, two sturdy stout Knaves stand ready Armed with their Instrumens
of Execution; the Master of this House of Correction sits in his great Chair,
his Assessors on either hand, he holds in his right hand (that is, except he be
left handed) a small Hammer (thus far you would say it was but an Auction) and
when he gives the word of Command, the Lictors fall to Work; that is, Knock
goes the Hammer, Slash (say they) upon his Posteriorums: Thump again goes the
Hammer, Thwack go they; and so as long as the Hammer goes, and --


Ticklef. Pray Master, pardon me, if I interrupt you a little: I protest
Purgatory has been as ill bestowed upon you as upon any man that ever went
through that Gantelope.


Clod-p. Prithee, why, Tom?


Ticklef. You three years and upwards in that School! Fie, I Am ashamed of you.


Clod-p Why, Tom.


Tickef. Why? What an incorrigible piece are you? The End of the Institution of
that Furnace was, to burn off all the Dross, Rust, and Filth that Sinners had
contracted here in this World; but I perceive you are as famous a Liar as ever
you was in your Life: I Will exchange places with you, if ever the Legends told
greater Rappers than you have done in so few Lines. For shame, Master, for
shame, no more of this Stuff; you may lie for the Whetstone, I Will warrant you.
You think you have Traveled where I shall never come to confute you; and now
you think you may lie by Authority, and cum Privilegio.


Clod-p. What, you are got into one of your Railing Humors.


Ticklef. Out upon it, these are all mere Parkerism's; get a Sac. Dom. to
License your Stories, or I Will hold you a Wager your Book will be burnt like
Muggleton's.


Clod-p. Well then, Tom, tell me some truer Stories of your own: I long to
carry some News with me down below; if I come empty, they will go nigh to send me
back again. What News, prithee, about your Elections? I hear there is old
Drinking, and Feasting, and Treating still for Members to serve in Parliament:
What kind of People do they choose?


Ticklef. Why, Sir, e'ne so, so; a Thief and a Gentleman, as they couple
Rabbits.


Clod-p. But I would fain hear whom they have chosen at my Native Town of B --.


Ticklef. Well thought on, Master; I have just now received a Letter that will
gratify your Curiosity, and Importunity both with a Labor: In the first
place, they have pitched upon an Old, Rotten, Crooked, Warped piece of Timber,
that will never make a Supporter for a Tottering State, or a Crutch for a Lame
Church; such a Stick of Wood as I durst not venture to make a Hovel-Post on:
They may make a pair of Gallows of him to hang his Electors, and that is all
that ever he will be good for: And in the next place, they have chosen a Son to
Vote against, and Condemn his own Father: And is it not a comely Sight to see
the Son within the Walls of the House of Commons, when the Dad is within the
Walls of the Tower for High Treason? This is their Choice; and now they are ready
to eat off their Fingers for their Folly, when it is too late.


Clod-p. That Is a piece of the best News I Am like to carry down with me: But,
Tom, how have they chosen in Essex?


Ticklef. O! Upon my Word, there is a Cooting Card for you: But I perceive you
play Loath to Depart: Good Night, Master, once for all. Pray have a Care you do
not break your Shins again as you go out: And if you have a mind to tell any
more Stories, pray tell 'em to the Wall for me; I Will go sleep as hard as I can
drive; and so Farewell Master Clod-pate.


Tom Ticklefoot To his Reader, Greeting.
It Is more hard to Reform an Inveterate, though Irrational Custom, than to
Cure the Itch; and a Non-sensical Whim, that can plead Prescription, will crush
a private Practice to dirt, that wants Gray Hairs and Gravity to procure it
Veneration: the plain English of all which is but this; As good be out of the
World as out of the Fashion, though never so Apish and Ridiculous: however, for
once, I Am resolved on it to try whether my New Book (like the New Barge) will
not Sail against the Wind of Antiquity, and the Tide of Peevish Example: It has
hitherto all along been the Mode of all our Scriblers to March their Epistolary
Addresses in the Van of their Books; An errant Hysteron Proteron (say I) the
Cart before Horse, for all the World: To call him thy Courteous, thy Candid,
thy Ingenuous, thy Learned Reader, (marry, come up my Dirty Gossip!) when
perhaps the poor man has not read one Line, one Word, one Syllable on it, and if
he be wise, be sure, never will; whereas I, upon good Advice, have placed mine
in the Rear, politickly considering, that by this Artifice he must be my
Reader, e're I call him so, in spite of his Nose. Now then have at thee,
Courteous Reader, (or by what Name or Title soever thou have a mind to be
Dignified or Distinguished) I do boldly recommeed my Dialogue to thee my own
self, because, perhaps no body else will; and if thou think that to applaud
it upon my Credit, is to venture thy Judgment upon an Implicit Faith; prithee
consider, the most of Mankind have taken up their Religion upon no better
Principle: Thou Wilt hardly believe me, if I should tell thee I could have had
the Licenses of all the Fat Choplains, Middle-sized Chaplains, and the
Thin-Gutted Chiplains about Town, and a thousand thanks to boot, that I would
honor them so for, as to suffer their Names to appear in the Frontispiece:
whether the Pope has got it into the Vatican, I dare not say; but its more than
probable if the Act for Regulating the Press, had been in force, both the
Universities had claimed their Copies by this time; and yet now I think on it,
it had then never been written: It has been a Question moved among the Learned,
whether the Expiration of that Statute has done more good than harm? and
without doubt it had been very pernicious to the Public if this one Dialogue
had not made amends for the Mischief of our Scurrulous Pamphlets: To tell thee
one half of its Excellencies, would tempt thee to disbelieve the other half;
and whilst it pretends to cure all Diseases (with our Quacks) thou wilt be ready
to Question whether it can cure any? yet take a Taste of its Charity. Is it
nothing to release fourteen poor Prisoners out of Ludgate, and set 'em up as
fish-whole as before they were cracked? What think thou of 20 poor Lads put
out Apprentices? or of 40 poor old Widows clothed from Top to Toe against
Winter? I will not affirm this, but enquire, and thou wilt soon know the Truth of
it: What strange Cures it has wrought upon those that were given up by the
College, I shall not need to relate; how it has opened the Thorax, and
discussed Hypochondriacal Winds, removed the Obstructions of the Spleen, broke
Imposthume with a Fit of Langhter, is obvious to conceive; but the shortest way
is this; Look into the Printed Miracles of Rhodocanaces Spirit of Salt, the
Pillulae Proprietatis, Elixir Vitae, the Golden Spirit of Scurvy Grass; and if
all their Boasted Cures be but the Wonders of my Dialogue, and visibly stolen
from thence, thou can not but confess its Medical Excellencies. Now for Feats
of Activity, Sleight of Hand, and all Manual Operations, it cuts the World out
of Distance, it shall turn your Spit far beyond the Dog in a Wheel; it cracks
Nuts faster than any Squirrel; it will pick thy Pocket of thy Money ere you are
aware, and shall make thee rejoice to be so cheated; for the Advancement of
Trade, there is nothing like it; send it but to the East Indies, and the Company
may spare us our Gold; it will fetch us home Cloves, Cinamons, Mace, Nutmegs,
Pepper, Ginger, and all the Oriental Spiceries; nay Diamonds are like to be
Dog-cheap another Year, Silks more common than Searges, and French-Wines had
come in helter skelter in Exchange for it, but for an odd thing, the call it (I
think) Staving. If thou have an Ambition to be reputed a Scholar, cry up this
Piece; it shall satisfy the World more of thy Abilities, than if thou
talked'st nothing but Sanchoniathon, and Jerom-Baal: Thou Wilt wonder above all,
if it should have been turned into Latin, French, Italian, Spanish so soon;
ay, and into Dutch too, had it not been above their Phlegmatic Intellectuals. I
might have had Money for my Copy, if I had been wise; all the Fear was, some
Knaves would have Printed upon the Proprietor: And yet I cannot deny some
Accidental Inconveniences have attended it, which was beyond my Foresight and
Power to Remedy. It has utterly spoiled two of the D -- 's Vindications, and
half Broke A. Brewster: The Jesuits Trials, (some think) will fall to
Threepence apiece in a day or two: The Hawkers may go cool their Toes; this
Dialogue has suppressed 'em far better than my Lord Mayor's Proclamation; but
the worst of all is, lest some silly Protestants should believe the Reality of
purgatory, and so turn Papists, upon my Master Clod-pate's single Authority;
but I can easily satisfy them: The plain Truth is, I do suspect that 'twas
none of my Old Master that told me that long Flim-flamprittle-prattle of
Purgatory, but Old Nick in his Likeness; for in the Morning I could trace him
to the Window by the print of his Cloven Foot, as easily as ever I Traced Hares
in the Snow. To conclude, Reader, if thou shall duly prize and value this as it
deserves, I Will have another Dialogue for thee, and another Tackt to the End of
that; but beware of a Surfeit. Two Sheets is enough in all Reason for a Dose
for the strongest Constitution, and one for the weaker; but if thy Ignorance
and Pride shall suffer me to break off my New Trade, I can Retreat Honorably
to my Late Employment, and once again become

From Green-Goose- Fair, Aug. 25. 1679. Tom Ticklefoot the Tabourer.

FINIS.

