Perlegi hunc Librum qui Inscribitur (...) in quo nihil reperio Doctrinae
Disciplinaeve Ecclesiae Anglicanae aut bonis moribus Contrarium.

Joh. Hall, R. P. D. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.
Mar. 8. 1665.
(...) King SOLOMON'S Portraiture OF Old Age. Wherein is contained A SACRED
ANATOMY Both of Soul and Body. AND A Perfect Account of the Infirmities of Age,
incident to them both. And all those Mystical and Aenigmatical Symptoms,
expressed in the six former Verses of the 12th Chapter of Ecclesiastes, are
here Paraphrased upon, and made plain and easy to a mean Capacity. By John
Smith, M. D. E. Coll. Med. Land. Cand. ET E. Coll. Aenea-nasensi Oxon. quondam
Com.

Nam pernicitas deserit, Consitus sum
Senectute, onustum gero Corpus, vires
Reliquere; ut aetas mala, mala merx est ergo?
Plautus. LONDON, Printed by J. Hayes for S. Thomson, at the Sign of the
Bishops Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1666.

The Epistle to the Reader.
WHosoever thou art, into whose hands this Paraphrase may fall, know that the
Author of it, is not near enough any Nobleman to put it into his hands; nor
has he face enough (as is the mode of this daring Age) to call at a distance;
but could he do both, yet know also he would do neither; for he desires not,
that any thing, either of others, or his own, should be patronized beyond its
own native worth; And is himself as willing, as any touchy-headed Decryers of
Anatomy and Anatomists, of all Art and Artists; that all the shame that is due
to the ill managing of this good Subject, should return upon his own pa^e; And
such is his Allegiance to his King, that if he can but keep off their foul
fingers from Him, to which they are apt enough, he cares not how heavy they
fall upon himself: And on the other hand, if there be any thing herein
contained, of true value, it will but shine the brighter for the rubs and
petulant endeavors of all Conductitious detractors; who being thrust out of
some mercenary Employments, in a few months time by their mother wit (which for
want of good neighbors they greatly cry up themselves, and instead of bad
neighbors do closely insinuate as if all others wanted it) can get knowledge
enough in Physic to contemn and vilify, and in two words ( viz. Galenists and
fools,) abundantly confute all those worthy Persons, who from Childhood to
Gray-hairs, have been studying, endeavoring, and praying; have been exercising
both their minds and their bodies; their heads, their hearts, and their hands;
that they may become expert Seconds unto Nature, and meet Combatants for all
those dreadful Enemies that the Sins of man have stirred up against the peace
of his own body. But beside this scum of ill conditioned Zoili, there are
others also nipling at the heel of learned Physicians: Whose wounds though
seemingly slightly inflicted, yet are far worse than the former, and that not
only because they are persons of credit and knowledge, but because they pretend
Friendship, and kiss while they do the mischief. These are those, whom Birth,
Education, and Industry, have so securely seated in honor, that nothing can
possibly disthrone them, but that which cast the Angels from heaven, and man
out of Paradise; that abominable (...), which for ever did, and for ever will,
set God in a resistance; and the best of their Friends cannot but in time mind
them, that those smart reflections without cause, both in private and public,
not only upon particular persons, but upon whole Societies of men, (half of
whom they know not so much as by hearsay,) seem to have a tincture of that
virulent poison, which as easily and as quickly proceeds out of knowledge, as
the Worm did out of Jonah, Gourd; and will (if not speedily prevented) soon
wither into nothing all that content under which they have for a season gladly
shadowed themselves. And here I am afresh put in mind of the Story of Herod,
who persecuted the Worlds Worthies, and because he saw it pleased the People,
he proceeded farther also: And thus prosecuting his rage and ambition, in royal
Apparel, and with Popular Oratory, the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he
gave not God the glory, and he was eaten of Worms. That main and best end,
which secureth all men in their undertakings, was it which first moved the
Author hereof to study sacred Philosophy, and to apply himself to the
interpretation of such Scriptures, as border upon that Faculty unto which he
has betook himself, ever since he has had the judgment of Election wherein he
might be most serviceable in his Generation. This was the good Seed: but
falling into a barren and ill manured soil, has for the present, produced no
better a blade, than what you here see; which however, if it please the Lord to
prosper, may bring forth as useful fruit as those that seem more fair and
flourishing. Herein old men may see their own natural faces, as in a Glass; and
young men may foresee, what (if they live) will certainly betide them in their
latter end. Systemes and complete Treatises (though out of fashion, and
consequently neglected in this Mimical Age) are of better use, than fragments
of Mechanism, and Independent Pieces of Experimental Knowledge, which by most
men at present are had in greatest honor and reputation; But in this respect
of honor, the groundwork of what is here discoursed upon, far surpasses them
all; the Author thereof being the wisest, and the greatest Earthly Potentate
throughout all Generations. The Portraiture that is here drawn, is done by the
hands of no meaner a person than King Solomon, and may justly be called, (...);
that superabundant wisdom in natural things, which it pleased God miraculously
to enrich him withal, beyond all that were before him, or since to this very
day; being no where more Graphically delineated, than in this description of
Age; whereby it plainly appears, that Solomon was not like that forward
Traveller, who was well skilled in Foreign Countries, and in the mean time
knew little or nothing of his own native Land. For as he very well knew all
Vegetables, from the Cedar in Lebanon, to the Hyssop that springs out of the
wall, and those Creatures also of a^ higher rank, namely, all Beasts, Fowls,
Creeping things, and Fishes: So neither was he ignorant at home; but that
wherein his greatest wisdom consisted, was, that he perfectly knew himself; And
that Intus and in Cute; both in respect of the inward and the outward man: All
the secret and mysterious powers of the mind were as naked and open before him,
as the visible parts of the Body are before a Vulgar Anatomist, and his (...)
in this Allegory contained, does more fully and satisfactorily declare and
distinguish them, than whatsoever hitherto has been endeavored to that
purpose, by the best of Moralists; and as for the parts of the body, those
apposite Symboles which are here all along the Description brought to express
them, do abundantly declare his most exquisite and exact knowledge in them all.
Not only such a knowledge, as was then attained in the World, or as should in
after Ages be attained by any; but such an one, as was attainable, or as the
Humane Nature was able to Comprehend; and whatsoever certain Inventions in
Anatomy have crowned the ingenious Inquirers of succeeding time, lie couched in
some one or other Expression of this Allegory. Among many other things, it is
here clearly demonstrated, that Solomon perfectly knew, and as plainly as his
Figurative Method would give leave, described the Circular Motion of the Blood;
the best and most useful Invention of this Latter Age. And as for the Subject
which is directly here intended, viz. the Description of the Infirmities of
Age, though it be Compendiously handled by him, yet it is Completely done in
all things appertaining thereunto, both Moral, Natural, and Divine. And indeed,
what can the man say that comes after the King? The most knowing and ingenious
Persons in the best enlightened Generations, can add no more hereunto, than they
can unto their own stature: It only remains, that some such, give us the full
Interpretation of what is here delivered, since it pleased the King to leave it
to after Ages, inveloped with a Canopy of the same wisdom that indicted it. And
if this weak Essay may excite any such, for the future lovingly to Correct what
is here amiss, and to supply what is here deficient; it will be a most
acceptable work; but if for the present, Courteous Reader, it may be of any use
to^ thee, as a Man, as a Scholar, as a Philosopher, as a Physician, as a
Christian, follow the intimation that is here given thee, and I will follow
thee with a good wish, which I am sure shall be accomplished for thee, and for
all those, that honestly labor in Gods Word and Work? I mean,

I bid thee God speed. J. S.

Errata.
PAge 24, line 13. read Hypallagen. p. 97. l. 22. r. do so appear. p. 156. l.
24, r. (...). p. 159. l. 5. r. Essence. p. 161. l. 29. r. hasting. p. 172. l.
10. r. pinguescet. p. 199. l. 16. r. praeexistent. p. 246. l. 12. r.
Tabernacles.

King Solomon's Portraiture of Old Age.
Eccles. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall
say, I have no pleasure in them

While the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not darkened, nor the
clouds return after the rain.

In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men
shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and those
that look out of the windows be darkened.

And the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is
low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of
music shall be brought low.

Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in
the way, and the Almond tree shall flourish and the Grasshopper shall be a
burden, and desire shall fail, because man goes to his long home, and the
mourners go about the streets.

Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the
pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the Cistern.


THE Oracles of God are given forth that the men of God may be made wise unto
salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
and all those that through faith have themselves exercised therein; shall,
through grace, (the Spirit of God moving upon the waters,) obtain that most
desired end; but this main happiness, is not the only, that may be acquired by
searching the Scripture; for there are many natural things, the knowledge
whereof may be better gained in one line of them, than in whole Volumes of
confused Naturalists: Wherefore he that in the true fear of God shall apply
himself to them, may think not only to have eternal life, but by the way also
to obtain the true knowledge of most things that appertain to this. M^t. 6. 33.
Seek first the Kingdom of God, and all other things shall be added unto thee.
Solomon sought after nothing but wisdom, but see what a gracious answer he
received, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart, 1 King 3. from
v. 5. to v. 15.
I have also given that which thou have not asked, both riches and honor, and
I will lengthen thy days. Thus it pleases God to deal with those who are
sincere, not only to give them their hearts desire, but to superadd somewhat
they were not aware of, that may be beneficial to them in their course of life.
Looking after the duty of man, which is completely set down in ver. 13. of this
Chapter, I find before I come there, an Anatomical Enumeration of the sad
Symptoms of extreme Old Age, And such an one as I dare be bold to say, is not
elsewhere to be found. When the wisdom of the omniscient God, through his
Servant Solomon shall describe it, why should I search any further?
Aen^gmatical I confess it, and exceeding difficult; wherefore I have the more
diligently applied my self to the Interpretation of it. And so much the rather,
because I find various senses put upon the words, and scarce any one has,
without interruption, carried the Allegory clean through the whole six verses,
as I judge it ought to be. And because a mistake in the parts of man, may cause
a mistake in the literal iuterpretation, I (whose study it has been to be more
versed in those than usual Interpreters) do take the liberty to endeavor
explication, wherein, if beside my own satisfaction and content, I shall add
any thing to others knowledge, I shall therein have a second reward.

I am not ignorant of all, nor do I despise any, of those several
interpretations both Literal and Mystical, that several learned and good men
have been exercising themselves in. There are that expound all this Allegory,
or at least some part of it, to a state of wickedness, to a state of poverty,
^o a state of spiritual desertion, to a famine of bread, or of the Word of God,
to the several dispersions and Captivities of the Jews, to the destruction of
both the Temples, and of Jerusalem, to the obstinacy of the Jews, to the
unprofitableness of the Gentiles under their Ministry, to the Apostasy of the
latter times, to the end of the world, and to the day of Judgment. I know God
does at sundry times, Heb. 1. 1.
and in diverse manners speak unto the World by his Servants. And knowing this
first, that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation; I
know this from thence, that no private Interpreter whatsoever is to bind up
others to the measure of his own understanding. Now as I am against no other,
so there is no other against me in this that I am about. All that can be said
concerning it, is, that it is low, and mean, and ordinary, however (confessed by
all) it is true, genuine, and proper. And this may be said of it beyond all
other whatsoever; that it is the basis and foundation of all the rest. And
every one of them receive their clarity of truth, from the Analogy they bear to
this primary Interpretation; that is, that these six verses, are a true and
proper description, of the natural, infirm, and decrepit Age of mankind. That
which the Latins call Aetas Capularis; the age of him who is shortly to be
taken; unto Death, or into the Coffin, or upon the Bier, or into the Grave;
plainly the age of him, who is by Course of Nature just at his last, and must
ere long necessarily yield to inevitable dissolution. There is in that language
also another word (which way soever we take its Etymology) that will
excellently signify unto us the Condition here delineated. And that is
Silicernium; for whether we take it, quasi silicea hernia laborans; he that is
troubled with hard ruptures, as very old men for the most part are, or Sili
herba usurus, he that will soon call into use such an herb as was then
accustomed to funeral entertainments, or Silentibus brevi Cernendus, he that
will quickly be free among the dead; or lastly, Silices cernens; he that by his
age and infirmity is continually put in mind of his Tomb; or rather (that which
seems to me most proper) he that is bowed down with age, so that he cannot but
behold the ground whereon he now stands, and under which he must ere long be
laid. And this answers exactly to the Greek word, (...).

I shall not take upon me precisely to limit the bounds of this decrepit state,
forasmuch as they are various, in respect of the dispositions of men's bodies,
of their course of lives, and also of the places and ages in which they live.
The lives of the Patriarks before the flood were extended to almost a thousand
years, Genesis 5. 27.
and yet we read not of those sad Symptoms attending them, as attend us now at
fourscore. About the time of the Flood, God abbreviates the course of man's
life, and seems precisely to set it at one hundred and twenty years. ^en 6. 3.
I know very well most men would have this Text to be understood as a
threatening only to the present Inhabitants of the Old World, that it should be
so many years before the Flood swept them all away: But it seems to me (and not
to me only) rather to intend the cutting short of the life of man for the
future. Josephus lib. 1. c. 7.
For it is clear by the Context, that the Flood came upon the World within an
hundred years after this denunciation; which was made when Noah was five
hundred years old: Genesis 5. 32. Cha. 7. 6.
And he was but six hundred years old when the Flood of waters was upon the
Earth. Now God does seldom anticipate the execution of his Judgments in
wrath, but does often prorogue it in mercy. It is as clear also, that many
there were, even after the Flood, whose lives were prolonged beyond this
appointed period, but they found it very burdensome and grievous, and miseries
with their age daily came upon them; the firstborn of death about that time
began to devour their strength, Job 18. 13.
and to take possession of them in the right of him that was to succeed. And
they might then be said to die, in the same propriety of Language, as Adam did
in the day wherein he did eat the forbidden fruit; but the Psalmist gives a
more exact account of this thing, which may stand firm to this very day: Psalm
90. 10.
The days of our years are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of
strength they be four score years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow, for
it is soon cut off, and we flee away. But as the universal Fabric, that God at
first extracted out of nothing, draws nearer to its end, so does every
particular structure therein made, weaken and decay. As the heaven and the
earth wax old, Isa. 1. 6.
so they that dwell therein shall dye in like manner. And therefore it is not
to be thought, that in these days man's age should be so long, nor so many
arrive at it, as in the days wherein the Bow of Universal Nature abode in its
greater strength. Nor can we exactly put the terms of any man's old age, so as
to say he is now old at this present moment, but was not so before; for it is
that which creeps on by steps and degrees, as the shadow upon a Dial.

Inde minutatim vires, and robor adultum
Frangit, and in partem pejorem liquitur aet as.
Some of the flowers of age blow before othersome; sometime on one bough,
sometime on another; here one, there one, insensibly; however when perfected,
you have it stand in full bloom, as is to be seen in the ensuing Analysis.

Age is here described, Generally, v. 1. by way of Assertion. The evil days
come. Negation. No pleasure in them.
Particularly in Symptoms forerunning death. Mediately in the Weakened
Faculties. Internal, v. 2. Rational Principal. The Sun shall be darkened.
Inferior. The Light.
Irrational. The Moon. Subservient to them both. The Stars.
External, Animal. v. 3. appearing in the Limbs, Superior. The keepers of the
house shall tremble. Inferior. The strong men shall bow themselves.
Mouth. The grinders shall cease because they are few. Eyes. The lookers out of
the windows shall be darkened.
Natural. v. 4. The beginning. The doors shall be shut in the streets, when the
voice of the grinding is low. Mixed, v. 4. later end. Of Inward and outward in
want of sleep, which binds up both. He shall rise up at the voice of the bird.
Vital and natural; The Active Daughters of Music belonging to the Vital; The
Passive to the Animal. All the daughters of music shall be brought low.


Simple eminent affects, and most remarkable alterations, v. 5. Of The Mind.
Fear Lesser. He shall be afraid of that which is high Greater. Fears shall be
in the way.
The Body in respect of parts, Excrementitious, The Almond tree shall flourish.
Aliment. Sperm. or hard. The grasshopper shall be a burden. Sang. or tender,
Desire shall fail.



Immediately, v. 6. such as belong to the Brain, and the parts arising
thencefrom, Without the scull. The silver cord be loosed. Within the scull. The
golden bowl be broken.
Heart, and the parts arising thencefrom, as they relate to Importation. The
pitcher broken at the fountain. Exportation. The wheel broken at the Cistern.




Statutum est in Caelis. It is a statute in Heaven, Heb. 9. 27.
for all men once to dye; by virtue of which it is, that man must necessarily
pass through all those various steps and passages, from the Womb to the Tomb,
that are appointed unto him in that unalterable Decree. As sure as Man is born,
so sure he must pass along, and unless it please the Lord sooner by a violent
stroke to take him to himself, he must go from state to state, from age to age,
and never stay, till he come to these evil days, and unpleasant years,
mentioned in the Text. There was, it is probable, within the compass of the
Creation, that which had a natural property in it to preserve mortal, yea,
sinful man without alteration. Genesis 3. 22, 23.
Now lest he put forth his hand and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat, and
live for ever; Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the Garden of Eden to
till the ground from whence he was taken. And when the Creatures shall be
delivered from the bondage under which they now groan, this Panacea may again
be restored to its Primitive use: Then shall the leaves of the Tree of Life be
for the healing of the Nations; Rev. 22. 2.
but for the present, this is kept from us by a flaming Sword, and therefore
not to be attained unto. And I never knew any one touch but the foot of that
Mount, I mean, attempt any thing that is but analogous thereunto, but his work,
if not himself, was destroyed thereby. And as our Case now is, he that made us,
he can save us; he that made the Sun, can cause it to stand still or go back at
pleasure; and he that made man, can uphold him without those changes, which
otherwise unavoydably attend him. And in the days of wonder (when Shoes and
Garments kept equal duration with men's flesh) so he did his Servant Moses,
Deuteronomy. 29. 5.
concerning whom it is said, when he was one hundred and twenty years old, Deuteronomy
34. 7.
his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated. But this is his own
Prerogative, when he pleases; In his ordinary Providence, as he has set
certain bounds that a man cannot pass, so he has set certain other that he
must. Man that is born of a woman comes forth as a flower, Job 14. 2, 5.
he flees as a shadow; he flees from Infancy to Childhood, from thence to
Youth, from thence to Strength, from thence to Full Age, from thence to
Declension, from thence to the State we are upon. And thus some interpret the
second verse, While the Sun is not darkened, (i. e.) the prime of youth be not
spent, the light of that Sun, is the full age; the Moon, is declining age; and
the Stars, are the beginning of Old Age; but this I judge not so primarily and
properly the meaning of the place, as you will hear in this ensuing Explication.

Verse I. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.
THis Chapter begins with an Exhortation to the most necessary duty of man,
which is pressed upon him by a double inconvenience that will certainly come
upon him, and for the future render him incapable to perform the same. The last
and the greatest is that of death, described in the seventh verse: And this is
the night wherein no man can work: The other is that of age, described in these
sixformer verses. And this is the Evening or latter part of the day, wherein it
is very ill working, and nothing can be done, in comparison of what might have
been done before; let the neglect therefore of this duty for ever be annexed to
a (...), God forbid that any one should defer the remembrance of his Creator
until he be not able to remember at all, or put off the work of the highest
concern, until he be altogether unfit to perform aright any of the meanest: But
because it is my present design only to meddle with the Allegory wherein is the
description of Age, I shall not detain you in this most important entrance, but
immediately fall upon my work. In this verse we have only a general description
of that infirm condition, which is more particularly treated of in the
following verses.

Age though it naturally creeps upon all men, whatsoever their Constitutions
and Compositions are, yet it is it self a disease. Senectus ipsa morbus. And it
does certainly induce such a Cachexia, or ill habit, that it renders us
inserviceable to our ends, and does as it were set open the gates, that all
that troop of enemies may enter in, which follow here in their order.

Here are two expressions that intimate unto us the unavoydable approach of
these decrepit years ( i. e.) come and draw nigh; of which gemination,
signifying the same thing, I may well say, as Joseph did upon the doubling of
Pharaohs dream; Genesis 41. 31.
It is because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it
to pass. Whosoever we are, whatsoever we are doing, whithersoever we are going,
they are still coming on. Be we Male or Female, be we Jew or Gentile, be we
bond or free, be we Princes or Subjects, be we what can be imagined, they come,
they come: While I write, while thou read, while we wake, while we sleep;
while we abide at home, while we go abroad; while we eat, or drink, or sport;
while we retire our selves, we pray, or fast; while we neglect our selves,
while we defend all we can against them, they draw nigh, they draw nigh. And
that man who wrote a book, Gal. lib. de Mara^moc. 2.
de non senescendo, lived to his own disgrace, to see his own error confuted
in himself.

Here are two words also to express the continuation of this state so long as
it shall be, (i. e.) days and years; both these words signify also the same
thing in the general, viz. how long this state shall remain: And thus Jacob
uses them both, in giving an account unto Pharaoh how long his life had
continued: Genesis 47. 9.
The days of the years of my pilgrimage are one hundred and thirty years, few
and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained
unto the days of the years of the life of my Fathers, in the days of their
pilgrimage. But in particular, they intimate unto us a diversity of their
continuation to diverse persons. Some men post over this bad way, and remain but
a very little while in it; others pass over it more slowly, and continue
therein much longer. Some have but a few days of labor and sorrow, others
have them prolonged out to years. As the Lord only knows what person in the
world (for there are but few in these last Ages) shall be brought to this
state; so he only knows how long they shall remain in it. Whether this time
shall be more or less, whether days or years shall determine it, is to us
uncertain, but this is most certain concerning them both, that if they be at
all, so long as they are, they shall be evil, they shall be unpleasant.

Evil days.
I here take the word evil in a good sense, that is, not for the evil of sin,
but the evil of misery, the fruit of sin. I know there be them that would have
this word, if not the whole Allegory, understood of such days and years as
wicked men, by their giving themselves up to follow their own hearts lusts with
greediness, do voluntarily bring upon themselves; but it seems to me to be
otherwise, and that chiefly from these two reasons: 1. Because I find nothing
in the Allegory that is not competible to every particular person that lives to
the time of this state, both to the good and bad, both to the righteous and the
wicked; Weaknesses, infirmities, diseases both of body and mind attend them
all: Isaac, Jacob, Eli, David, as well as those who lead never so contrary
lives, must bear the burden of their age, if they live to the time. It is most
certainly true, a course of wickedness does wonderfully hasten both old age,
and death it self. The wicked man shall not live out half his days; Psalm. ^5.
23.
nor shall he keep off decrepitness half the time; Pro. 5. 9
his honor shall be given away, and his years unto the cruel. And beside the
hastening of these evils, he does infinitely augment them both for number and
quality, he shall have a thousand fold more, and a thousand fold greater: Every
sore shall be a Plague, and every ach shall be an hell unto him; but this is
not the condition in this Text described, but the declension of man's life as a
man; and that from this second reason drawn from the Context* when I look
immediately before the description I find youth, mentioned: Remember thy
Creator in the days of thy youth. when I look immediately after it, I find
death, described, The dust shall return to the Earth as it was, and the spirit
shall return to God that gave it. Now as youth and death, are appointed for all
living, without any discrimination of him that swears, or him that fears an
oath, as terms a quo, and ad quem, of their pilgrimage; so this state also, as
an intermediate stage, is as certainly appointed to them all, unless it please
God before that constituted time, to give them a deliverance by immature
dissolution. It is said of Old Age, Ausonius.
Expectata diu votisque optata secundis,
Objicit innumeris corpus lacerabile morbis.
Though this state be never so much desired of men, yet when it comes, it
brings along with it abundance of all manner of evils, as the following
Discourse will sufficiently make appear, and therefore may well be called, an
evil state.

But here I must needs meet with this most obvious objection: Prove ^^^^.
Is not Old Age a great blessing from God, Genesis 15. 15.
and are not gray hairs an honor, Genesis 25* 8
do not you call that evil, which God calls good? Judge. 8. 31.
How often in Scripture is it said, 1 Chronicles. 29. 28.
A good old age, and counted as a privilege? I must needs therefore here
distinguish of old age; and consider it in a threefold state. First, Crude,
green, and while it is yet in the beginning, while men are able to do business,
and go about their employments, and this is but one little remove from manhood,
and does immediately border upon it. The second is, full, mature, or ripe age;
when men begin to leave off their employments, and betake themselves to
retiredness; when God has no more work for them, and they have no more
strength for him; or lastly, extreme sickly, decrepit, overgrown old age; in
which it may be truly said, Job 30. 2.
Old Age is perished; when their breath is corrupt, when their days are
extinct, and the grave is ready for them: Job 17. 1.
And this only is the state the Wise man here so Rhetorically describes. And
that age which is so often called good, I take to be the second before
mentioned state; and so much the rather, because in most places where it is
said, they dyed in a good old age, it is also added, and full of days; by
which I understand, not a fullness of possibility, that they lived so long, as
from the principles of their Composition, they could not have lived any longer;
but a fullness, as I may so say, of satiety; they had enough of living, they
lived as long as living was good, they lived to a full, ripe, and mature age;
such an one as would force them, to be of the mind with him in the Fable, to
refuse immortality in this present life; and earnestly to desire it in a
better. Tithonus*
There is an excellent illustration of this in the speech of Eliphaz, wherein
he sets down the special Providence of God toward them that fear him, and are
bette^ed by Correction; Job 5. 26.
Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like a shock of corn in its
season: Now if a shock of Corn stand very long in the field, it sheds, and is
spoiled, and the season of it is as well lost, as if it had been taken in too
green. Jacob, most certain it is, died in this good old age as well as others;
yet he himself says unto the King, a little before he died, that the days of
his years were few, and he had not attained the days of the years of his
Fathers in their pilgrimage. Genesis 47. 9.


Had St. 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7.
Paul departed when he had fought the good fight, finished his course, and kept
the faith, and was ready to be offered; he had surely dyed in a good old age,
although his pulse had not then beaten above threescore years* Now, most
certain it is, that the arriving at this state is one of the greatest outward
blessings that man is capable of in this life. Nor dare I say otherwise, if it
should please the Lord to protract the life of man to the extremest point it
is capable of; If he should withhold his hand from pushing down the house which
he has made, and let it fall to decay upon its own principles, his forbearance
would be the greater, its fall would be the lesser; however in the mean time,
it would stand most ruinate, deformed, useless, and encumbered with infinite
inconveniences, that it was never liable to before; He^ quam continuis, and
quantis, longa senectus, plena malis. But this is not all, it is not only an
evil age, but there is no pleasure in it; As there is no condition that frail
mortality is capable of so good, that has not a participation of evil; so
there is scarce any condition so evil, that is not attempered with some good;
but this seems to be excluded from such a mercy as this. Prove 31. 1^.
It is said of a good Companion, she will do a man good, and no harm all the
days of her life: But contrariwise, it may be inverted concerning this bad and
morose Companion, she will do a man evil, and no good, so long as she
continues with him.

I have no pleasure in them.
I take pleasure here also in the best sense, not for any sinful content
whatsoever, not for the lusts of the flesh, 1 John 2. 16.
the lusts of the eyes, or the pride of life; but for those lawful pleasures
and repasts both of body and mind, that the nature of man, while able, might
comfortably have solaced her self in. The mind of man busiing it self, and
taking contentment in the speculation of natural causes, the body of man in all
its outward senses, in all its internal appetites, sporting and refreshing it
self in all proper and peculiar objects; but no such refreshments as these in
old age; which is a principle so well known to be true, and so much rooted in
the judgment of men; that the news to the contrary (though brought immeditely
from God himself) did, at the first, startle, and put a very hard stress too,
upon the faith both of the Mother, and Father of the Faithful. Pleasure in old
age, (and to such persons who were as good as dead, and with whom it had ceased
to be after the manner of men and women) was such an incredible thing, as both
Sarah and Abraham laughed at the news; which laughter, as it might proceed
partly from a confident affiance upon the Word of God, and a contentation
thereupon, Genesis 17. 15, 16, 17.
(as is usually said,) so partly without all doubt, from that reluctance they
found in themselves, Genesis 18. 11.
and those heart-risings, and internal arguings against the reception of those
joyful tidings; the spirit indeed was ready, but the flesh was weak. And this
will sufficiently appear in the Text, from the grounds of their laughing, their
reasoning thereupon, and from the Lords answer to them both, and what pains he
takes, and what arguments he uses further to persuade them, that it should be
so indeed as he had promised.

There is a learned Commentator says upon the word (...) here translated
pleasure: Lorinus.
Hebraea vox non modo voluptatem, sed etiam negotium quodlibet opusve
significat; The original word, says he, signifies work and business, Eccl. 3.
1.
as well as pleasure. And so indeed it does, and may very well do in this
place. When decrepit age is come, a man's work is at an end, he is able to do no
more. Eccl. 9. 10
Solomon says, there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the
grave whither thou art going: Now o^d men are very near it; our English Proverb
is, They have one foot in the grave; they have no more work to do, their course
is finished, and their time of departure is at hand.

Verse 2. While the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not
darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain.
HAving before in general showed this state to be miserable, he now comes to
tell us wherein these miseries particularly consist. I must here be
necessitated to go an untrodden path, and possibly an unacceptable one to some.
As for all those Interpretations that are beside the Allegory, you know I have
already waved them, and therefore shall not so much as mention them in this
verse, nor in the whole ensuing Discourse. As for those that say, the Sun, and
the Light, the Moon, and the Stars, signify the several Ages that man must
pass through, as was before hinted; they make this Allegory, not so much a
description of old age, as of the way to it, and therefore are not to be
admitted: forasmuch as this is the description of complete and perfected
decrepit age, as you have already heard. There are that take these Luminaries
absolutely literally, for the several heavenly bodies as they stand fixed in
their Orbs, and differing from one another in glory. But unto man in this state
they are not really darkened, for as they communicate of their light and
influence equally both to the good and bad, to the just and unjust; so also, to
the young and old, to the strong man, and to the feeble, by reason of his age.
And then it must of necessity be understood, per Hypalagen, only that they
appear so to them, by reason of their inability to receive their light, and by
reason of the weakness and dimness of their outward sense. And so this opinion
will in effect coincide with the following, which is indeed most considerable.
And that is, that these lights are metaphorically here expressed, and do
principally allude to the lights of the body. And this interpretation does
principally and primarily arise and take its authority from the Chaldee
Paraphrase; which is by Interpretation as follows: Antiquam mutetur splendour
gloriae faciei tuae qui assimulatur soli, and lumen oculorum tuorum antequam
obcaecetur, and decor maxillarum tuarum antiquam obtenebrescetur, and pupillae
oculorum tuorum qui assimulantur stellis antequam extinguentur. And after this,
men of very great names have walked in the same steps. But as most other
Interpreters seem to strain the Metaphor too far, and carry it beyond the
signification of the natural parts of man; so these seem to me to draw it too
straight, while they keep it within the compass of the external parts of the
body. And so much the rather, because by this Exposition is intimated only the
change of the countenance toward deformity, which is sufficiently elsewhere
expressed, as you will hear anon; and the dimness of the sight, which is far
more plainly expressed in the latter end of the third verse, nemine
contradicente. And that in this brief description the Wise man should
tautologize, is not to be supposed. On the other hand, it is not to be
imagined, that any infirmities appertaining to this state, especially those of
the mind, which are the greatest of all, should be neglected herein.

Omni membrorum damno major dementia. Now as Delilah said to Sampson, Judge* 16.
17.
Thou have mocked me these three times, and have not told me wherein thy great
strength lies; so might it be said of Solomon, if he should take upon him to
describe any thing, and do it but in part, and so deceitfully, that he should
neglect the principal part, wherein the great strength lies; but I am otherwise
persuaded; that he has here told us all his heart, and that there is no
remarkable infirmity, either of body or mind, that belongs to age, which is not
contained in this Allegory. Now forasmuch as all the Symptoms in the four
following verses belong properly to the parts of the body, as you shall hear. I
take this verse to be a description of the infirmities of the internal powers
of the soul; and why most Divines do on set purpose avoid this Interpretation,
which is so plain and obvious in this place, I cannot tell, unless it be
because they are so much taken up with the contemplation of the soul of man,
that they forget it has any thing at all to do with the body. There is a vast
difference between the soul of man as it is in its united state, and as it is
in its state of separation. It is not sent from heaven into the body as an
assistant only, or like some tutelar angel, with Commission and full power to
guard, protect, and counsel that person, toward which it is for a season the
deputed Minister. For if so only, then it might recount and tell us, how
curiously it wrought for us in the lower parts of the earth, and what wonderful
Idaea's it had before it, to have done further for us in that darksome region,
had we been capable to receive them; yea, then it might accompany us beyond our
pilgrimage, remaining in the body even after dissolution, and taking care for
our burials.

But the Case is far otherwise, it is sent to inform the matter, and together
with it to make up one Compositum, the man being not the one, nor the other;
but most properly that which does arise from the perfect union of them both;
and whatsoever is predicable of the whole, is predicable of the parts united;
whatsoever may be said of the man, may be said of the body and soul united; and
as they are thoroughly joined together, so they do intimately participate one
with another, they are cleansed, they are defiled together; they are bound,
they are loosed together; they are well, they are ill together: If the flesh
upon him have pain, Job 14. 22.
the soul within him shall mourn; they grow up together, they stand together,
they decay together. How often are persons in Scripture said to grow both in
mind and body, and eminently concerning our Lord, which is instar omnium; he
increased in wisdom, Luk ^. ^2
in stature, in favor both with God and man. The soul is as weak as the body,
both at first and last; Senes bis pueri, is a known maxim, and daily
experienced; and by all men understood of the feeble understanding. Anima comes
into the world, tanquam rasa tabula; and it goes out tanquam derasa. The soul
appears at the first as an unwritten Table Book, and when it disappears at the
last, it becomes blanck as it was before. Jobs pious and patient exclamation,
Job 1. 21.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked must I return, may be well
extended to a separation, not only from the goods of the body, and estate, but
from those also of the mind; which has nothing at best, but the beginning and
groundwork whereof at the least, is picked up from the Communication of the
outward senses, and when those public Intelligencers fail, so also does this
their Lord and Master. And therefore by the Sun, Light, Moon, and Stars being
darkened, we do positively assert to be meant, the most inward powers of the
mind, in this state do, together with the outward members of the body, weaken
and decay.

But it may be here said, is the whole inward man liable to this decay? Is
there not something in man, while in this state, altogether independent of the
body? and perfectly free from the frailties of age? Does not the Scriptures in
many places seem to speak of renewed strength in this state of weakness, and
plainly prove, that while the outward man decays, 2 Cor. 4. 16.
the inward man may be renewed day by day; for the right understanding of this,
and several such places as these are, we must of necessity distinguish of the
inward man. There is the inward man of the head, (as I beg favor to say, since
the soul of man there chiefly does exercise its principal faculties,) and
(since the other contradistinct term is so appositely given in Scripture, viz.)
the inward man of the heart; plainly, there is the inward man of nature, and
the inward man of grace; there is the inward man of the first birth, and the
inward man of the second birth, or of Regeneration. Now I speak here concerning
the former of these, that has its decays as age comes on, not at all
concerning the latter; And as I have before excluded a state of sin from the
Text, so I do here wholly exclude a state of grace. The partial falling from
divine grace, is not so much as aimed at in this place of Scripture, as the
total not in any. Most certainly true it is, that the work of grace stands upon
its own foundation, not at all depending upon the principles of humanity,
either for its Creation, or Renovation; forasmuch as the holy Spirit of God,
who is as much at liberty as the wind, is both the begetter, and the
strengthener. Joh. 3. 4.
And as a man may be born when he is old, contrary to the reason of Nicodemus,
so also may he be fresh and flourishing in his old age; Those that be planted
in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the Courts of our God, they shall
bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing. Psalm. 9^. 13,
14.
David prays, O Lord when I am old and gray headed forsake me not; spiritual
desertions, and spiritual manifestations, are immediately handed out from God,
and do not at all depend upon the mutability of the nature of man, nor
accompany him in his several changes.

They are only the several lights of nature, which, as age comes on, fall to
decay without remedy. Now, as God, in making of the greater world, said, Gen 1.
14, 16.
Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven to devide the day from the
night; And he made two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the
lesser light to rule the night; he made the stars also: So also has he done in
the little world of man; he has made two great lights, (as they are set down
in this verse,) the one, viz. the greater, to rule the day of man; which is
that clear shining part of man, whereby he is differed from all other created
beings whatsoever, and discerns himself so to be; and this I understand by the
Sun, and the Light: And the other, viz. the lesser light, to rule the night of
man, which is that darker discerning part of man, that has very little, or no
light in it self, neither does distinguish him from irrational Creatures; And
this I understand by the Moon; he made the Stars also, as it follows yet more
plain.

The Sun.
By the Sun, I understand here the most superior power of the rational part of
the soul of man, that primary light of the understanding, that does at once
both receive the species as they are communicated from the Imagination, and
also render them intelligible to the mind; that pure innate light of the mind,
without which no man that comes into the world, can either apprehend what is
from without transmitted to him, or actuate any of those phantasmes which are
already impressed. This we may see illustrated by the light of the body, which
is the eye: For in the eye there could be no perception of any outward object,
unless there were an inward implanted light in the proper Organ, which does
both dispose it to receive the visible species, and render them proportionable
to the Organ, giving them thereby actual representation. Now that which this
implanted light of the eye does in vision; the same does this Sun of the soul
in the understanding. Prove. 20. 27.
This is that which in Scripture is so often called the Spirit, or the spirit
of the mind. And sometime in a distinction from the soul, as where it is said,
Ephesians. 4. 23
I pray God your whole spirit, soul and body may be preserved blameless to the
coming of our Lord Jesus. 1 These. 5. 23.
Now, because this is a difficult point, and has gravelled most undertakers, I
will give one Essay more, and that from Scripture Light, which hitherto may not
have been taken notice of, to the present purpose; It is said, The Word of God
is quick and powerful, Heb. 4. ^2
and sharper than any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of
soul and spirit, and of the joints and the marrow. Among many other truths this
place does afford us this for one; That it is very difficult to divide or
distinguish between the soul and the spirit, because there is an intimate
Communion and Conjunction between them; such an one, as in some measure bears
proportion with that, which is between the joints and the marrow. Now because
this latter of the parts of the body, (though hard in it self,) yet is far
easier to be understood, then that former of the parts of the mind, let us well
consider this, and possibly it may give us some light to the other. The joints
are the turning places of the body, upon which all the actions of the limbs are
performed, and therefore they are articulated several ways, according as the
position, alteration, motion of the adjacent parts do require; these are the
most visible acting parts of the body; The marrow (by which we are to
understand not the medulla ossium, the marrow of the bones; but the medulla
spinalis, the marrow of the back; for this has much more intimate communion
and conjunction with the joints than the other has,) is the apprehending and
instructing part of the body, that which carries the impressions of external
objects to the inward sense, and reconveys the mandates thereof to the members
of the body, to be put in execution upon the joints. D. Willis, c. ^9.
Ejus munus est spirituum copias and motuum obeundorum instinctus extra
defer, atque sensibilium impressiones intus convehere; this is the secret
inward influencing part of the body. In like manner, the soul is the most
apparent active part of the mind of man, whereupon all its operations, both
speculative and practical, are turned and performed; of which there is a
particular account given in the explication of the following word: but the
Spirit is a more mysterious, and hidden power, that does most secretly, and
undiscernably, both gather up those intimations that come from without; and
also give forth an effectual influence upon the whole inward man, to put all
its well regulated Commands in execution upon the soul: Both which offices of
this Sun ( viz. both of reception from the outward senses, and actuation of the
inward) is very clearly expressed in that speech of Zophar unto Job; I have
heard the check of my reproach, and the spirit of my understanding causes me
to answer. As if he had said, I have received through mine ears the sound of my
reproach, and an answerable impression is made upon my spirit; and the same
spirit also has drawn forth my understanding into act, toward the formation
and production of an answer. And this is the constant manner of the operation
of man's understanding; this is also that part of the mind, which Aristotle, and
all his followers, meant by their Intellectus agens; this is that Candle of the
Lord, or light within them, which the unsound Teachers of old, Pelagi^
and those more innocent ones of late, would have to be a sufficient guide to
everlasting life: But if it be so, it will be good hearkening to it, while it
does remain in its strength; for this Sun also, as years come on, does
certainly decline, and great must that declension be. For if the light of the
body, Luke 11. 34.
which is the eye, be darkness, great must that darkness be; much more surely
if the light of the soul, which is the Sun, be darkened, how exceeding great
must that darkness needs be: Indeed, there must be a defect in the whole
understanding, when this primum mobile can scrace act any longer; and therefore
it is, that the Apostle speaks concerning the spiritual understanding, alluding
therein unto the natural; Ephesians. 4. 1^
Having their understanding darkened, through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their heart. When there is ignorance to receive,
and blindness to guide, in this principal faculty, all those which are thereby
acted, must certainly be weakened, as the next word does clearly import.

The Light.
By the light therefore, I understand all those more inferior powers of the
rational part of the soul of man, that are any way set on work by virtue of the
principal Agent; which is an efflux from the before mentioned Sun; the Possible
understanding also, in all its operations participates in like manner of this
state of weakness. Now the operations of man's understanding are various, both
ad extra, in respect of the Objects; and ad intra, in respect of the will.

The first, are speculative, the last, are practical. The first (whereby the
understanding is conversant about things as they have in their own nature a
distinct being) are principally three. The first is perception, or the simple
apprehension of an object, from the immediate impression thereof by the
ministry of the beforementioned Sun. The second is Composition, or Complexion,
whereby we try, and weigh the particulars that we have before received, and
compound, and divide, join, and separate one thing from another, as may be most
convenient for the improvement of them, to their appointed ends. The third is,
reason, or discourse, whereby we gather up to our selves somewhat farther than
we understood before, and make our selves masters of a new and better
knowledge, which the things themselves received, as in themselves, could not
administer.

The last (whereby the understanding is conversant about things as they are
good or evil) may also be reduced to three. The first is Conscience, which is a
reflection of the understanding upon a man's actions, together with a sentencing
them to be good or evil, according to those unquestionable principles which are
already received. This is the search which the Candle of the Lord makes in the
lower part of the belly. Prove 2^* 27.
The second is direction, or judgment, whereby the understanding* does propose
an end to be desired and prosecuted, the execution of which, that is, the
resting satisfied in, and desiring of that end, is that which Morallists
ascribe to the will, and term (...). The third is Consultation, or (...), the
reasoning about the means to attain that end, together with an Inquisition and
Collation of several means among themselves, and an election of those which are
most proper, the embracing of which, and putting them in execution, is that
which they call (...).

Now these, and all the operations of the rational soul, however they may be
distinguished, have in this state an answerable imbecility. Be a man never so
apprehensive, be he never so ingenious, be he never so rational, be he never so
conscientious, be he never so judicious, be he never so prudent; when his Sun
begins to set, and his light to decline, he must become weak as another man,
nay, weak as a child. And this the Author of our description here, though he so
well knew it, and foresaw it, yet was not able to prevent it in himself, but
found his own words sadly verified in his own condition. For it came to pass
when Solomon was old, that his Wives tu^ned aw ay his heart after other Gods; 1
Kings 11. ^.
he that for understanding surpassed all men, since God gave unto him wisdom
more than to any man, before him, or since, to this very day; And for light of
Conscience also, V. 5, 7.
since the Lord had appeared to him twice, yet, when he was old, he fell to
such irrational, ^ottish, senseless abominations, and that only by the
^eduction of women, as nothing but the frailty of age could possibly have given
way unto.

Now as the soul is, by reason of age, weakened in the directing part, which
usually is called, the understanding; so also in the executing part, which
usually is called, the will. Old men when they do apprehend an end, and the
means to attain it, they haesitate about prosecuting the mandates of the mind,
and stand for the most part timorously and child-like at, shall I, shall I. I
find one Commentator upon the place say, Non fruitur libero arbitrio. Lorin^^^.
There is not a ready embracing, nor a free acting toward the attainment of
what is by the understanding first dictated. Farther yet, old men are very
easily drawn off, and lead aside from their own intentions, every weak
suggestion is too strong for them, and takes them Captive at pleasure; and as
our Savior said to Peter, though in another sense, so may it be said to every
one who shall live to the time, When thou wast young, thou girdest thy self,
Joh 2^. 18.
and walkedst whither thou would, but when thou shall be old, another shall
gird thee, and carry thee whither thou would not: A man shall not then be
master of his own actions, but be very liable to the seductions of whomsoever
shall beset him.

And thus by these two words, the Sun, and the Light, you perceive is meant,
the whole rational soul, with all its powers and operations, as it may be found
exercising it self both inwardly and outwardly. And though here be two words
more significantly set down, for the fuller and clearer manifestation of what
is here intended, yet it might have been expressed (though not so plainly) by
one word only. And therefore it is, that the Syriack Translation, and some
followers of it, have only the Sun expressed: Antequam Sol obtenebrescetur: for
the Sun may signify, not only that light which is contained within its own
body, but all those Emanations that illuminate whatsoever is thereby
enlightened. And the woman's Candle in the Gospel, by which she found her groat,
might signify, not only the light in the Candle it self, (which answers here
to the Sun,) but all the light in every part of the room also, (which answers
here to the light.) And thus we find the greater light, which rules the day of
man, to be darkened; the lesser, which rules the night, is that which follows.

The Moon.
By the Moon we must understand that other part of the soul of man, which is
not in it self rational, (...), Aliquo tamen modo rationis particeps. I
confess, reason may in man have some influence upon it, but in its own nature
it is altogether devoid of it; it is that part of the soul which is usually
called sensitive, and is common to all other animals as well as unto man; and
in him is but the lesser light, and rules but the darker part only, and
therefore may be most aptly expressed by the Moon. It is conversant principally
about those species which are communicated to it, from the outward senses; the
operations about which are either simple, or compound: The simple operations
are first to receive them as they are communicated from without, and then to
retain them for so long time as it is exercising it self about them. Secondly,
To dijudicate them as they are in themselves, and to discern them as they
differ from all other whatsoever. The Compound operations are excellently
described by a modern Author of our own; who says, Dr. Reynolds upon the
faculties, p. 24.
that the liberty of the Imagination is threefold, Either Composition, or new
mixing of objects; Translation, or new placing of them; Creation, or new making
them. Now all these, or whatsoever else may be comprehended within the compass
of the pure sensitive part of the soul, are but the operations of one faculty,
and therefore by one word, are most fitly here expressed. And though the
Philosophers have usually distinguished them into more, as into the common
sense, the Fancy, both Estimative, and Cogitative; yet really and truly they
are but one: for as one superior faculty in the superior part of the soul,
which is the understanding, could both receive, compound, and collect, as you
heard before; what hinders but the same may be done in the same manner in the
inferior? And we are not to multiply faculties without necessity: Beside the
ground of their variety is not to be admitted. For they supposed the operations
about their objects to be diverse, attributing perception and discerning to the
common sense only, dividing and compounding to the Fancy.

Now the fancy does as well perceive and discern, nay, better too, than the
common sense does; and the common sense may be said to compound, and divide, as
the fancy does: Therefore some, more quick sighted of late, perceiving this
ground not sufficient, that they might be sure to uphold Aristotle's division of
the inward senses, have found out another way, and say, that the common sense
is conversant about a present object only, the Fancy about that which is
absent; but this seems as weak as the former, and that according to the
Peripatetick Doctrine; forasmuch as the Fancy is conversant about an object
only while present with it; Indeed it can detain it a while, until it have
done its work about it; so can (...) common sense also; And it can receive it
again after it is passed away, and (...) upon it anew, but for this it must be
beholding to the memory, and can do nothing upon an object by its own strength,
but while it has it present with it. I argue this, only to show that they are
but one faculty, and therefore by this one word, viz. the Moon, they are both
represented: which (as the more superior powers of the soul, and all the
members of the body,) has in this state of weakness its answerable declension.
I confess, with Aristotle, Arist. de anima, lib. 3.
if an old man had a young man's eye, he would see as well as a young man; but I
deny that, which I suppose he meant by it, that is, that he would perceive and
discern as well as a young man, unless he had a young man's internal faculty
also. It is one thing, to see, it is another thing, to know that a man sees,
and to distinguish what color, and what figure he sees. As age brings a
weakness upon the outward sense, so that they cannot see, so also upon the
inward, that they cannot discern could they see; And this is most significantly
expressed by old Barzillai, when King David would have had him, to feed him at
his own Table; I am this day, 2 Samuel 19. 35.
says he, fourscore years old, and can I discern between good and evil? Can
thy servant taste what I eat, or what I drink? Can I hear any more the voice of
singing men, and singing women? He first expresses his inward decay, I cannot
discern; and then his outward, I cannot taste, nor hear. It is proper to the
outward sense, to taste and hear; but it appertains to the inward, to know
whether the objects both of tasting and hearing, and of all the other outward
senses, be good or evil. And thus old Isaac was imposed upon, not only in
respect of the dullness of his outward senses, (all five of which are mentioned
in that one Chapter, where his younger Son is said to come with subtilty, Genesis
27.
and take away the blessing,) but chiefly in respect of the weakness of his
inward sense, wherein he was most mistaken; for he discerned him not. Ver. 22.
And thus you have the lesser light, that rules the night of man darkened, as
well as the greater, that rules the day; that which is subservient to them
both, is that which follows.

The Stars.
By the Stars, I understand, (...), All those species whatsoever, either
rational or Imaginary, that (like the Stars in their Orb) stand fixedly
treasured up in the memory. Now the Stars do not properly pertain either to day
or night, but are distinct Luminaries from the Rulers of the day and night, and
subservient to them both; and do communicate both day and night, to all
inferior bodies, of their influences, and also of their light; for although
the greater light of the Sun in the day time does cause them to us to
disappear, yet they are still shining, as is sufficiently demonstrated in the
Eclipse of the Sun, when that greater light is darkened; or in the narrow and
long contraction of the visible species, either by art, in glasses, or
naturally, if a man stand at the bottom of a deep and narrow well; then will
the Stars give their light apparently at noon day. In like manner, all the
species and representations of things that are past, whether they are the
product of the day or night, that is, as you have heard, either of the
understanding, or of the Fancy, are treasured up in one single faculty of the
memory. And that the Stars have belonged only to the night, has not been a
more common mistake among the Vulgar; then that the memory belongs only to
the Imagination, has been among the Learned. And therefore they have much
troubled themselves, and confounded others, in finding out another receptacle
of the intelligible species, which they call Reminiscency or Recordation; as
though one and the same faculty were not able to retain the species that are of
a dive^s nature; the ground of this mistake has principally risen from this;
that they have given more unto the memory, than properly does belong unto it,
in that they have assigned unto it three operations, viz. Reception, Retention,
and Rendition; that this faculty does not only keep, what is committed to it,
(which indeed it does most faithfully,) but that it does also take into
custody, that which it keeps; and deliver it up again, when called for; hereby
making the memory, both Candus, and Promus, of the things therein contained,
and giving unto it such a power, as many Noble men to their Butlers, whereby
they become more Masters of what is contained in their Cellars than they that
made them. Now if we will divide aright, and give unto the memory that which is
its; and unto the understanding and imagination that which is theirs; we shall
soon understand how species of a diverse nature, whether sensitive or
intelligible; more or less spirituallized; and diversely circumstantiated, in
respect of time, or place, or whatsoever else may alter them; may easily be
contained within the same faculty without multiplication. Say we, that the
understanding and imagination as they make their several species, so also they
take them, and they lay them up in the memory, as they are by them altered or
circumstantiated; and as they have occasion to make use of them, they look for
them, and find them treasured up in the same nature, order, and manner, that
they put them in; and from thence they themselves take them out again: The
memory in the mean time doing nothing at all, toward either the receiving
them, or delivering them up, but only exercising its passive power in the
keeping of them; which keeping also is nothing else, but the duration of that
impression (without any act, or endeavor, or knowledge, on the part of the
memory) which the more superior faculties make; The Memory being most truly
that, which Philosophers have usually said of the Will, Caca pot^ntia; keeping
those things committed to its charge, with no more knowledge, or action, than
the Wax does the Impression, or the Paper the writing thereon made, or the
Coffer the Treasure therein reposited: Which being so, it may easily contain
things of a diverse nature, and as much diversified in respect of circumstances,
as the superior faculties can possibly make them. The same Coffer may easily
preserve the Gold of one man, and the Silver of another, till they each of them
come, and take their own goods again. And thus we understand, that the power of
this faculty in man is only passive, and its only work is to retain those
things that are committed to its charge; which work it performs with great
trust, so long as man abides in strength, but as he declines in age, so also
does this faculty in its use; not only unfaithfully and confusedly retaining
the Images that are made upon it, but oftentimes letting them slip.

-- Nec
Nomina servorum, nec vultum agnoscit amici
Cum quo praeterita caenavit nocte, nec illos,
Quos genuit, quos eduxit.
And as it is said, concerning the greater World, when it shall draw toward
its end, The Sun shall be darkened, Mat. 24. 29.
and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Star^ shall fall from heaven,
and all the powers of the heavens shall be shaken; so also may it as well be
said in that Worlds Epitomy, Man: As he shall draw toward his end, his
understanding shall be darkened, his Imagination shall be weakened, and withhold
its light, and those things that were fixed in the Memory shall fall from
thence, and all the powers of the mind shall be broken; And this is that which
to me seems the true meaning of this second Verse.

And hence we may gather how sad man's condition must needs be in this last age
of his, in respect of his mind. The diseases and symptoms which do necessarily
arise from the darkning of these Luminaries are these which follow. Mentis
imbecillitas, hebetudo, stupiditas, fatuitas; (...), ( i.e.) stultitia,
tarditas ingenii, judicii defectus; (...), ( i.e.) amentia, melancholia,
desipientia, memoria imminuta, abolita. And these proceed from the darkning of
the several and particular lights; there are others also incident to age that
shake all the powers of the heavens at once, and they are Vertigo, Carus, and
Apoplexia. And these are the miserable attendants of this feeble state, which
is so much the more to be lamented, by how much the less it is to be helped.
Sad are the infirmities before mentioned in any age, and most difficultly do
they receive their cure; but in this they admit of none at all. Some means may
be by Physicians used for the proroguing of them, and keeping them off for a
time; and for the mitigation of their violent assaults, but for the total
preventing, or the absolute curing, let no man living hope for.

(...). And this the ensuing Proverb does sufficiently confirm.

Nor the clouds return after the rain.
Having before showed, that the precedent words do not signify the infirmities
of the eyes, I need say no more, to show that these do not intimate the rheums
or distillations from the eyes or head, falling upon any of the subjected
parts. It will be enough plainly to declare, that these words signify, that
the miseries and infirmities of old age, do uncessantly and unavoidably succeed
one upon another, as the showers in April. And they are placed here in the
midst between the descriptions of the infirmities of the mind which preceded,
and those of the body which immediately follow; as having reference to them
both. Whereby we must understand, that all the infirmities that appertain to
this state, whether they be those of the mind, or those of the body, do
immediately follow one upon another, and one Paroxysme upon another, and that
without remedy. Nubes post imbrem, is a known Adagy, signifying, the speedy
succession of miseries upon miseries; as on the contrary is signified joy and
happiness, after affliction, by that Proverb, Post nubila Phoebus. The
infirmities in this Allegory mentioned, if they shall at any time fall upon a
man in any other age, may possibly be eased: And if so, there is good hopes
that they may be kept from redintegration, or ever returning more; but in this
age no such hopes; if their violence may possibly be for a time remitted, yet
they will as certainly return again, as the clouds after a rain in a rainy
season. Now when the weather is (as we usually say) set in to rain, it is
wonderful to see, how quick the clouds will rise and ride one after another,
and every one, the smallest of them, pour down rain upon the earth beyond all
expectation. And if there shall be any small interval between shower and
shower, and the Sun at any time begin to peep out between the clouds, it is
soon darkened again; and the clouds return thicker and blacker, and the showers
greater and longer, than they were before. This is a most lively representation
of the infirmities of the decrepit age of man; wherein as deep calls unto deep,
Psalm. 42. 7
so one grief, pain, weakness upon another, until all the waves and billows
thereof are gone over him.

Velut unda supervenit undam. And if nature shall be able at any time to gather
up her self, and unite all her force, to give a glimmering light through the
darkness that oppresses her; yet it cannot long continue, but a greater
darkness will presently succeed, as it is in the light of a Candle, which is
almost consumed in its socket; sometime some light appears, then presently it
is darkened again, and some such interchanges may be for a season made, but it
will grow darker and darker, until at length it be quite extinguished. And that
wonderful redintegration of the sight and teeth of the old Minister in
Yorkshire (like all those lightnings before death,) was but the last and utmost
endeavor of perishing nature, Et quasi m^x emoriturae lucernae supremus
fulgor. If old Jacob shall be able to strengthen himself, G^n 48. 2.
and sit up in his bed, at the news of his Sons approach to visit him; yet his
weakness must return again, and he must lie down in his bed again, and again,
until at length he lie down in the grave.

If Art shall be able to contribute any thing to the present allay of any of
the miseries of this state, yet they will surely and unavoidably return again;
if seeing delightful objects, or beloved friends, if hearing of news, or
pleasant discourse, or melodious music; if the prattling of Grandchildren may
give any divertisement or refreshment to the mind: if a more suitable air,
convenient bathings, unctions, or frictions; Genesis 2 4.
if an easier bed, if savory meat, or delightful wine, or any thing else,
outward, or inward, that Art can find out, may give any ease or refreshment to
the body, yet the comfort of them will be but for a small season, and the
former troubles will certainly return again.

If a young Virgin, lying in David's bosom, shall cherish him a while, and
administer that heat and comfort to him that Clothes could not do, yet it must
be but for a time, 1 Kin 3.
and David must grow cold, and chill, and comfortless again, and that more and
more, until he be taken into the house of all living. And this is the great
misery that attends all the miseries of this miserable state, that they are
altogether incurable; and though some refreshment may sometime seem to
interpose for a season; yet they will all most certainly return again, as the
clouds after the rain.

Verse 3. In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the
strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders shall cease, because they are
few; and those that look out of the windows be darkened.
HAving sufficiently before showed us, what the infirmities of the mind are in
this condition, he comes now to treat of those of the body; wherein the body is
most aptly compared to a building, or an house going daily to decay, and that
cannot be repaired. And this similitude of the body, whereby it is compared to
an house, is most Scriptural. David says, Psalm. 1 ^ 9. 54.
Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage. And Paul says,
If our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, 2 Cor. 5. 1
we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens.

Now the decays of this house in old age are many; four of which, viz. those in
respect of the keepers of the house, the strong men, the grinders, and the
lookers out of the windows, are mentioned in this verse, in the Explication of
which I shall be the briefer; because what I understand by them all, in this
verse, has been for the substance of them, formerly treated of by others. And
here the current of Interpreters has run much-what the same way, and left
behind them less obscurity in these words, which are indeed in themselves the
plainest that are contained in the whole allegory.

The keepers of the house shall tremble.
I could willingly consent to those, that by this expression would have the
ribs to be meant, were the predicate as applicable as the subject; the Thorax
does most sa^ely keep, and excellently well defend the principal parts therein
contained. And Job speaks of the fence of the bones, Job 10. 1^.
as of the sinews: Thou have fenced me with bones and with sinews, but how they
shall be said to tremble, is not to be made appear; forasmuch as experience
does sufficiently confirm, that they stand as fixed in old as in young, and
more fixed too. And indeed their Articulation, both to the Sternon, and also
(and especially) to the Vertebrae of the back, is such, that they admit of very
little and obscure motion, but not at all of this trembling. And therefore we
must find out some other parts of the body which are the constituted keepers of
the house; And they certainly can be no other than the hands. Now the
anatomical hand contains not only the Carpus, metacarpus and phalanges
digitorum, but the whole superior artus; all those higher parts of the limbs
that are divided from the trunk of the body, and therefore it is well divided
in brachium, cubitum, and extremam manum. And these are they which most
properly are styled the keepers or defenders of the house; and that which makes
it the more unquestionable is, because they answer so directly to the strong
men, as it follows in the next words. And these hands and arms do several ways
keep and defend the house. And there is nothing more frequent in Scripture than
the expressing of defense by the power of the hands and arms; when Jacob
blessed his Son Joseph, he spoke how he was defended from them that beset him,
and says, His bow abode in strength, the arms of his hands were made strong by
the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. Genesis 49. 24.
And as if there were no other way of expressing preservation, defense, and
deliverance, these members are almost always mentioned, and most frequently
attributed to God himself; They got not the Land into possession by their own
sword, Psalm. 44. 3
neither did their own arm save them; but thy right hand, and thine arm,
because thou had a favor for them. And if there be any impotency in the
hands and arms, a man is no longer able to defend himself; Job has a most
remarkable expression to confirm this truth; If ever he used his defense and
help to oppress the Fatherless, he wishes that now he might be left altogether
helpless, and that his defenders might be taken from him, or rendered wholly
unserviceable to their ends; If I have lift up my hand against the fatherless
when I saw my help in the gate, Job 31. 21, 22.
then let my arm fall from my shoulder blade, and my arm be broken from the
bone. Beside this, they may be said to keep the house, in that they provide for
it, getting maintenance for the whole body, for by working they get bread. 2
These. 3. 10. Acts 20. 34.
Paul says, These hands have ministered to my necessities. And as they do
defend the house, and provide for it; so also they do offend whomsoever would
hurt it; they do not only get, but protect, and also keep off the adversary.
And all this was done at once by the power of the hands of the Jews in their
great necessity, when they were rebuilding the Temple, their hands were
thoroughly filled, and employed in a double defense; For they which builded on
the wall, Neh. 4. 17
and they that bare burdens, with those that laded, every one, with one of his
hands wrought in the work, and with the other hand held a weapon. Now such,
through the wisdom of God, is the dexterity of the hand, that it can employ a
weapon to be a better defense to a man, than whatsoever is naturally allotted
to any creature beside. And that audacious Carper at the works of God (who
complained that other Creatures had naturally a defense given, and man only
left weaponless) was sufficiently silenced, when it was told him; Man had
reason and hands, which together, can make a better defensive or offensive
weapon for him, than all the horns, and hoofs, the tusks, and talens, or
whatsoever nature has more largely lent to other Creatures, can do for them.
And if we thoroughly consider the fabric of these parts, according unto what
Anatomy does give sufficient light unto, we shall yet farther be convinced of
the truth of this matter. If we consider on the part of the bones, first the
Scapula, and take notice that it is seated in the strong part of the back, with
freedom of motion in its place, in which it is contained by the Clavicle, and
with great advantage of moving the arm which way soever it pleases; that it is
formed with its basis, angles, ^ibs, processes, Cavities, for the better seat
of the muscles, and command of them to their appointed Services; that it is
articulated to the humerus per Arthrodiam, wherein the Cavity is
improportionate to the head of the humerus, that the shoulder may thereby with
greater facility and liberty admit of all manner of motion, which it could not
possibly have done, had this articulation been any firmer and closer in it
self. Now that this joint may be kept from luxation, either from it self, or
from any thing might fall upon it, to which it was very liable by reason of
what was before said; It is sufficiently defended by a very thick, and nervous
ligament; and by the broad Tendons of four great Muscles; which do so strictly
compass about the joint, that by its own motion, though never so violent, it
cannot be put out; and also by the Clavicle or kennel bone, which is so
directly laid cross over it, that it defends it from all external violence
whatsoever. Again, if we consider the humerus, its head, its neck, its pullyes,
its Cavities, its Extuberances; If we consider the Cubitus, and the Radius, and
their diverse articulation; the one being per ginglymum, which gives flection
and extension with strength; the other per arthrodiam, which gives pronation
and supination with ease. Lastly, if we consider the bones of the extreme hand;
and therein the eight bones of the Carpus, which are joined to the Cubitus, and
to the bones of the Metacarpus per arthrodiam, among themselves per harmoniam,
if we consider the four bones of the Metacarpus, and their articulation to the
fingers per Enarthrosin, the fifteen bones of the fingers, and their
articulation among themselves, (for the firmer holding any thing in the hand,)
per ginglymum. Now I cannot pass the thumb in the general name of the fingers,
without a particular and special taking notice of it; forasmuch as that above
all the rest both in its use, and also in its repute, may be said to contribute
chiefly to the keeping of the house; for it is equivalent to all the fingers,
and therefore in Latin is called, Pollex, a pollendo, being as it were an
antagonist grasper to the whole hand, and does as much toward the firm holding
and dextrous using of a weapon as all the hand: And therefore it is that idle
persons, or effeminate men, or whosoever are unfit for service in war; are
called polletrunci; as who should say, men that have not the use of their
thumbs. And it was a Custom among the Nations, for the Conquerours to cut off
the thumbs of the Conquered, thereby rendering them disgraced, and utterly
unable for future employments either at Sea or Land. And Scriptural Story also
seems to confirm this in Adonibezek, who said, Threescore and ten Kings, having
their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table,
as I have done, so God has requited me. Judge. 1. 7.
Thus far on the part of the bones. Again, if we consider on the part of the
Muscles; how they are variously shaped and formed according to their several
uses, how they are perforated according to necessity, how they are seated to
the best advantage, how they are to one another friends or antagonists, how
they are derived from one part, and inserted into another, how much strength
and vigor they have, how by their hormetick power and contraction into their
own bodies, they can readily perform whatsoever motion the Organ is capable of;
they can stir the limb inward, outward; forward, backward; upward, downward;
they can perform adduction, abduction; flexion, extension; pronation,
supination, the Tonick motion, circumgiration; and all these with so great
expedition and agility, that they are much sooner done than said, yea, as soon
done as thought on; the actions of the Muscles keeping pace, nay, many times
out-stripping the volubility of the mind: If we yet further consider them in
their Tendons, and the variety of them, how they are either solid, plain,
round, broad, long, short, one, many; or of whatsoever form may render them
most expeditious in their motions; how they are strengthened by several
Ligaments, especially that annulary Ligament in the Wrist.

I say, if we consider these wonderful things, wherein man differs from all
other Creatures, and many others, which good skill in the anatomy of these
parts would easily furnish a man with, all which would be too large here to
insert; It would enforce us to say, that these of all the parts of man do most
properly defend him, and may justly be styled, the keepers of the house.

Now, that these may be said to tremble, needs no words to make appear,
forasmuch as the experience of every old man does sufficiently confirm it.
Which word does comprehend within it self all the weaknesses, infirmities,
inabilities of these parts in this condition: Whether they be outward, as
stiffness, contraction, rugosity; or inward, as aches, pains, numness, palsies,
cramps, tremblings; yet notwithstanding it has, in a more especial manner,
relation to that grand symptom, that does most certainly attend this
condition; which is called, Tremor artuum, the continual and unavoydable
trembling of the hands and arms. Now, forasmuch as the last age of man is
eminently above all others he passes, the cold and the dry; it must needs
incline him, and at last most certainly cast him into this distemper.

For these two qualities, and, for ought I understand, these alone, are the
natural fathers of this trembling child. If we remember how going abroad in a
bitter cold morning, how drinking a great deal of cold water, or swimming in
the water; if we know how the use of Poppies, Henbane, Opium, the cold fit of
an Ague, and other cold things, will easily set us a shaking; if we consider
that long fastings, great evacuations, especially Venerial, which do most dry
the Nerves, violent heat in Fevers, fluxing by the use of Quicksilver,
immoderate sweatings in hot houses, or elsehow; do cause the same distemper; we
shall be induced chiefly to attribute this terrible symptom, to these two
deadly enemies of a well tempered Constitution, coldness and dryness; which are
so contrary to the instruments of voluntary motion, whose life and vigor
consists in radical heat and moisture; that they take off their strength, and
render them unable to perform their duties, making them so weak, that even the
weight of the member they are to move, is now their equal Antagonist; for they
going about to move the member as they usually had done, are resisted with
equal force by the weight of that member; which causes as it were a continual
combat between the strength of the mover, and the weight of the moved, so that
the Limb is always drawn one way by that, and another way by this, which
causes a perpetual trembling of the keepers of the house; which is reckoned
here as the first, and indeed is one of the most remarkable symptoms upon the
body of man in this decrepit state.

The strong men shall bow themselves.
Having before treated of the infirmities of the superior Limbs, he comes now
to those of the inferior; the keepers of the house being the hands, the strong
men can be no other than the feet; now as the hand was divided before, so also
is the anatomical foot, containing not only tarsum, metatarsum, and phalanges
digitorum, but also femur, tibiam, and extremum pedem; and as before I showed,
the beginning of the hand was to be accounted from the Scapula, so here I must
also tell you, that the beginning of the foot is from the Os Iliuns^ And those
Muscles which are inserted into the thigh, and have their use for the motion
thereof; notwithstanding their origination may be either from the back,
(inwardly as the chief flector the Psoas, or outwardly as the first extendor,
Gloutaeus major,) or from the (...) Ilium, (as most other movers of the thigh
have,) ought all to be accounted into the number of the strong men. And if we
well consider the true nature of progressive motion, and firm station on the
ground, we shall soon conclude, that the instruments of them both (which are
none other than those we are treating of) are the best demonstrators of humane
strength, and may more aptly than any other parts of the body be called the
strong men. And this we may also have confirmed in the holy Writings of God;
the strength of the legs, as the instruments of motion, seem to be expressed by
the Prophet, Psalm. 147. 10.
when he says, He delights not in the strength of the horse, he takes not
pleasure in the legs of a man; their strength, as they are the instruments of
firm station, is excellently expressed by the Spouse, when she says concerning
her Beloved; Cant. 5. 15.
His legs are as pillars of marble. And as they are the Instruments of both,
you have them notified in the Story of Peter's curing the lame man; Acts 3.
wherein (as if the use of legs (both for standing and walking) and strength
were Convertible terms, signifying the same thing; we have his cure once
expressed by these words; Immediately his feet and his ancle bones received
strength, V. 7, 8.
and he leaping up, stood and walked; and presently after only by the word
strength; Ver. 16.
His name, through faith in his name, has made this man strong. I shall give
but one instance more, and that most remarkable, having in it the great wisdom
of God to express this thing; and that is the touch of the hollow of Jacobs
thigh; Genesis 32. 25.
when God would intimate to Jacob, his own weakness, and his inability to
wrestle, and to prevail with God and man by his own strength; he smites him in
the thigh. Thus he dealt also with Paul, 2 Cor.12. 3.
who least he should be puffed up with his Visions and Revelations of the Lord,
(having been taken up to the third heaven, and so much spiritualized, that it
was hard to say, whether he was in the body, or out of the body,) he had such a
direct contrary infirmity laid upon him, that it might sufficiently take off
all other men, from admiring him, and himself, from being lifted up beyond what
he ought to be; Lest any man should think of me above what he sees me to be,
Ver 6, 7.
and that he hears of me, and lest I should be exalted above measure through
the abundance of revelation, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure; all
occasions of glorying in his spirituality, was abundantly taken away, when he
had a continual memento of his carnal weakness, a thorn in the flesh. And thus
also may Jacob, and all Jacobs children, for ever, be taken off from boasting
in their own strength from his prevailing with God and man; since ever after he
bare that most certain symptom of humane weakness, halting on his thigh, for
when this part is once rendered unserviceable, there can be no more strength to
contend.

And the perfect conquest that Sampson got over the Philistines, whereby they
were unable any more to resist, is expressed, He smote them hip and thigh.
Ju^g. 15. 8.
Beside, the Counsel which is given to Joshuah is worth our observing to this
purpose, whereby he is taught to make the horses of the many Kings he should
suddenly subdue, for ever more unserviceable, and yet to save their lives;
Josh. ^1. 6.
Thou shall hough their horses, and burn their Charets with fire. Whereby we
may understand, that if the back sinew of an horse hind leg (wherein the great
strength of these parts lies) be cut in sunder, he is made altogether as unfit
for service in the war, as the Charets that are burnt. I might further yet
confirm this truth by an Anatomical Enarration of the several compounding parts
of these limbs, but forasmuch as I did that before, in the treating of the
superior Artus, I may the better omit it here; because there is a very great
similitude between these parts and those spoken of before; and what was there
said of them, as unto the parts, and also unto the diseases, may for the most
part be translated hither, and said of these. And it is the principal argument
that induces me to believe that we are in the right in our Interpretation of
these two symptoms, because of the likeness of the parts we are speaking of,
and also of the terms to express them. It is well known to all those that take
delight to search into the wonders of God in the frame of man's body, that the
Shoulders, Arms, and Hands; and the Thighs, Legs, and Feet are very much alike;
so also are these two expressions, the keepers of the house, and the strong
men. The diseases also of these parts in Age are much-what the same, and so
also are the words that here express them. For although we translate the latter
word, Shall bow themselves; yet the Vulgar Latin translate it, Nutabunt, shall
nod or shake; and doubtless, the original words are of very near signification,
so that the Syriac Translation, and the Chaldee Paraphrase upon these words
differ very little or nothing at all, but translate them both to trembling or
shaking. However give me leave to take notice briefly of one or two things
wherein these members differ from those before spoken of, and Wherein their
strength and use is principally made appear.

The bone of the thigh, is of all other bones of the body the biggest and the
longest; and is called in Latin, Femur, a ferendo, because as a strong man it
does sustain and bear the whole weight of the body. It has in the head of it
three eminent processes; The first is the great and the round head, which is
inserted into the large Cavity of the Hip, per Enarthrosin, which admits of all
manner of motion, and there is detained by a double Ligament; the first is
common, broad, thick, membranous, that does strongly compass the joint about,
and the other is a round, and Cartilagineous Ligament, which proceeds out of
the very head of the Femur, and being inserted strictly into the Cavity of the
Os Iscii, does firmly hold this bone in its place, that it cannot be moved. The
other two processes are called, the Trochanters, the lesser, and the greater;
whereby the Tendons of the Muscles moving the thigh, are more conveniently
seated, that they may the better wheel about that Limb to whatsoever position
they please. It has moreover at the upper end a more slender part, which is
called the neck of the Femur, which is so framed for the more convenient
lodging of the Muscles, and passing of the Vessels, ( viz. the Arteries, Veins,
Nerves,) for the use and benefit of the subjected parts. Its form also is most
remarkable, in that it is on the external or forepart, gibbous or bunching
outward; on the internal or hind part, simous or bending inwards, which frame
does wonderfully conduce to the convenience of sitting, to the firmness of
standing, and to the dexterity of walking.

Lastly, It is articulated to the Tibia, per laxum ginglymum, which adds very
much to the expedition in motion, and is of such a frame, that on the back part
it leaves a most convenient hollow place, which we call Poples, the ham, for
the passing down of the Vessels; and on the fore part it is wonderfully
defended by the Patella, or knee pan, as by a shield, the form, and name of
which, this bone does continually bear. And it is so much the more to be
observed, in that no such bone is in the superior Artus, nor in the whole body
besides; for it is articulated to no bone at all, but is kept in its place by a
double Ligament, the one inward, which is that round, bloody Ligament, which
firmly annexeth it to the thigh; the other outward, which is the Conjunction of
the Tendons of the four Muscles which extend the tibia, which together make a
broad Ligament that does encompass the whole knee, and strongly bind it in its
place; wherein it exceedingly conduces to the defending of the joint, over
which it is placed. For that Articulation being loose in it self (as was before
said) would be very apt to luxation in sudden and great flexures of the knee,
or in going down steep places; were it not by this shield bone abundantly
strengthened, and sufficiently defended from all those inconveniences.

Moreover, the Conjunction of the Fibula, being otherwise than that of the
Radius, which answers it in the arm; is well worth our observation to our
present purpose; the Radius of the arm is Articulated (as you have heard
before) per Arthrodiam to the Humerus, which renders it more expeditious as to
several motions, and therefore more properly a keeper of the house; but the
Fibula is not at all Articulated to the Femur, but is affixed to the external
part of the Tibia, and does stand as it were an underprop to that, whereby they
may jointly with greater strength support the whole body, and be the more
justly called, the strong men. There is yet one observation more from the
Anatomy of these parts, that does with great delight and content demonstrate,
that those are the keepers of the house, and these the strong men, and that is
from the variety of their flexures; the hand in all its several joints, is
bended one and the same way; the shoulder is bended inward, or foreward, and
extended outward or backward; so also is the Arm, the Hand, the Fingers, and
this is for the better apprehending and comprehending any thing, and using any
defense; and therefore they are the keepers of the house: The foot is bended in
its several joints, several ways; one, one way; and another, another; the
thigh is bended forward, the leg is bended backward; and again, the foot is
bended forward, and the toes are bended backward; and this is for the greater
coveniency of going, and for the firmer standing, and therefore these are the
strong men.

We might yet further and principally confirm this thing, by the several forms
and uses of the Muscles of these parts; for it is not so much great bones, nor
great veins, nor a great deal of blood or fat, that makes a man strong; but
great, and strong, and eminent Muscles, they are the true indicators of
strength. Now these parts of the body have bigger, stronger, and more raised
Muscles than any beside; and by how much the higher the Tendons of the Muscles
are raised, with so much the greater strength must they needs perform their
Offices, and so much the more declare the strength of a man; and therefore we
have an ordinary observation, and a probable one, to judge of a man's strength,
or weakness, by the elevation or depression of the Calves of his legs. I might
also add many more observations of the like kind; but I desist, forasmuch as a
good Anatomist can furnish himself with enough; and he that is none at all, can
scarce understand these, when he is told.

And because the great strength of a man lies in these parts, therefore in his
infirm and weak condition these parts must be more eminently feeble.

A Child before strength comes on, and an old man after his strength is
departed, must have but little use of these members. As it was said of Asa, In
the time of his age, 1 Kings 15. 23.
he was diseased in his feet; so may it be said of all who shall live to that
time. Now, forasmuch as what was said before of the infirmities of the hands,
may also be said of those of the feet, I shall chiefly refer you thither:
However, because the word is here somewhat differently translated in our
Language, and we have no reason to complain, forasmuch as it does primarily so
signify; so that some have translated it, Pervertentur, others, Curvabuntur,
and the Septuagint, (...); I judge there is one grand symptom of age that in
this place, and upon these parts is principally aimed at; and that is the
pervertion, crookedness, abbreviation, and alteration of the position, of the
several joints of these parts; and their inability of being reduced to a firm,
strait, and tonick posture, wherein the strength of a man does wholly consist.
And it is wonderful well worth our observation, that if a man at his best and
stongest estate, should be kept in that bending posture, which age necessarily
binds every man unto; he, in that condition, were scarce able to go, or stand,
without the help of a staff; and the reason of it is plain, because the Center
of gravity is not equally poysed upon the basis of the feet; but hangs as a
weight behind, and therefore had need of another Fulciment, upon which it might
the more firmly rest. And therefore it is said of old men: Membra levant
baculis; when these members are perverted in their joints, and the tone of the
Muscles is so much relaxed, that they are unable to bring them to straitness
again, there is great need of the support of a staff; for without it, there is
an utter inability of going steadily, and standing strongly, which is the
principal symptom intimated by the strong men's bowing themselves.

The grinders cease because they are few.
That there may in man's body be other grinding, than mastication, or chewing
the meat in the mouth; and other grinders, than the jaws and teeth, the ensuing
Discourse; and that there can be no other in this place intended, this present
Discourse, I hope will make appear. Grinding all men know to be performed by
two hard bodies, the one immovable, upon which the grinding is made; the other
moveable, which by strong Compression against the former, and by its motion,
makes the grinding; so that to it, there is necessary both these, viz. the firm
stander, and the strong mover; the upper, and the nether millstone, as we have
them often mentioned in Scripture; Deuteronomy. 24. 6.
now answerable unto these in the mill, there are for that grinding which is
performed in the mouth; two jaw bones, which are called the upper and nether
Mandible. The upper Mandible, is compounded of eleven several bones, which
among themselves, and to those adjacent are joined either per suturam, or
harmoniam, which admit of no motion at all, and therefore this stands firmly in
its place, and is that immovable millstone upon which the grinding is made; the
nether Mandible is one single, hard, and strong bone, whose Articulation is
very loose, for the greater liberty of motion; and it has two or three pair of
Muscles, especially the Temporal, which strongly bring it upward, for the
closer acting against the other Mandible, and one wonderful pair of Muscles,
called, the Masseters, and are derived from a double original, and beyond all
others of the body whatsoever, have their several Fibers so crossing and
interwoven one with another, that they are severally inserted into this lower
Mandible, and so are able to move it upward; to the right, to the left;
forward, backward, and consequently round about, and so performing that action
which we call Mastication or chewing, and therefore this is that other movable
millstone which makes the grinding.

Now out of both these, equally proceed in the season of them a certain number
of small bones which we call the Teeth; which howsoever they may be numbered
among the bones, yet they have one or two especial properties which are
competible to no other bones of the body, (at least in that measure,) whereby
they are principally adapted for the grinding.

The first is, they are naked, they have no covering or skin upon them, no not
so much as that common Membrane, called, the Periostion, which does encompass
all the bones of the body beside; and that is because they might the better
atting one another bodies, and in their attrition one against another they
might feel no pain; but I must needs here take notice that the words of Job
seem to be against me, where he says, Job 19. 20.
I have escaped with the skin of my teeth; This is easily answered, if we
consider the two parts of the Teeth, viz. the Basis, and the Radix; that, is
the part which eminently appears white above the Gums; this, is that part which
is within the Gums, and stands fixed in the Mandibles: Now by Jobs skin or
covering of his teeth, it is apparent he meant the gums which cover the roots
of the teeth; his sores, and his boyls were so great and terrible upon him,
from the sole of his foot to his Crown, that there was no part of the skin of
his body to be seen, but only about his teeth, which in all such Cutaneous
diseases does for the most part wholly escape.

The second is, they have the vessels which convey life and sense unto them,
contained only in the inward parts, that the outward parts may be freer and
better to grind.

The third is, that they are growing or increasing so long as man lives, so
that what is worn away of them by their continual attrition and manducation; is
daily repaired, otherwise they would grow shorter and smoother, and not be so
able to perform their work; and this is a wonderful piece of the wisdom of God
in nature, which Art cannot possibly reach unto; and therefore because they
cannot make their mills grow, as they daily decay by grinding; they are fain to
supply that want, by often pecking their milstones, and at length changing
them; and by those means as it were renew their teeth, without which they were
able to do nothing at all.

The last I shall mention is, that the teeth of all the bones of the body are
the hardest, and will suffer the least from any other bodies whatsoever, and
therefore are the fitter for such a work as this. A millstone is of all other
stones supposed to be the hardest, and therefore Job when he had expressed the
hardness of the heart of the Leviathan by a stone; as if he had not said
enough, he farther adds one degree more, yea, says he, As hard as a piece of
the nether millstone. These short observations may suffice to teach us in the
general, that the teeth also may be called the grinders. If we yet more
particularly consider them, and how they may be divided, we shall have a
farther light into this matter. The teeth are of three kinds, either Incisores,
Canini, or Molares: The first are the broad fore-teeth; the second are the next
round teeth, which are usually called the eye-teeth; the last are the great
double and hindermost teeth; the first, bite or cut the food; the second, break
or bruise the food; the last, chew or grind the food. And this distinction also
may be found in Scripture, the first are alluded to, where it is said, The
Prophets bite with their teeth. Mic. 3. 5.
The second, where it is said, He has the cheek teeth of a Lion: Joel 1. 6.
And both these, where it is said, There is a generation whose teeth are as
swords, and their jaw teeth as knives. Prove 30: 14.
The last is alluded to, where it is said, While the flesh was yet between
their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the
people. Number. 11. 33.
They had bit the flesh of the Quails, and had passed it from the first teeth,
to the last, which are the grinders, and there it stuck till they died. And
thus at length we are fallen upon the true, proper, and strict instruments of
grinding; we have hitherto been showing the whole frame of the mill, and how
several parts do wonderfully contribute toward this work, and now we are come
to those parts, wherein the close pinch of grinding lies, and that is in the
great, broad, and hindermost teeth, which from the day of the writing of this
Allegory, to this present time, have ever among Anatomists retained the name of
grinders.

And that not without exceeding good reason, for the form and figure of these,
above the rest does abundantly show that these are the fittest of them all for
this work; for these are bigger, larger, broader every way; especially at the
top, where their form is much-what like to that of a mill, where also they have
eminent asperities, and protuberances, exactly answerable to the roughness of
the Milstones; by which the grinding is far more easily and perfectly
performed; beside, these are more firmly inclavated, and infixed into the jaw
bones, by treble, or quadruble roots; whereas all the rest are but by single,
or double at the most; and being more strongly rooted, they are the fitter for
more eminent services; Lastly, and chiefly, the experience of every man does
sufficiently confirm that this is the proper use of these teeth; and that the
more solid food which needs greater manducation, cannot be sufficiently
comminuated for chyle, or ground low enough for the stomach, until these teeth
have done this work upon it. And thus it is plain, that the jaws, and teeth,
and eminently these last mentioned, are appositely and elegantly called the
grinders; which how much service they do to man while usable, and how much
detriment and loss they bring upon him when they cease from their use, is well
known to all men. Strong meat belongs to men of full age, Heb. 5. 14
says the Author to the Hebrews. It belongs to them, and only to them, because
they alone, have, as I may so say, their mill in tune, their mouth full of
strong teeth, and set directly one against another, whereby they may bring the
strongest meat into a meet consistence, and a due preparation for easy
digestion in the stomach. But it may here be said, there are many Creatures
that are not thus strongly armed, and have not so many teeth, nor those they
have so well set, as your position supposes they should be, for the due
preparation of the meat; And these are the Sheep, the Goat, the Cow, the Deer,
and all other Creatures that have teeth only on the lower Jaw, and none at all
on the upper. These have no antagonist grinders, nor contra-acting milstones,
and yet these Creatures in their full age, eat as solid food, and as hard of
digestion, and withal, do as well with it, as they that are better provided in
this respect; to this I must needs answer, it is very true, so that from hence
we may take occasion to admire the wisdom of God in the various formation of
several Creatures, tending notwithstanding to the use and benefit of them all.
However this in these Creatures is a want, and must have stood for a want, had
they not been abundantly supplied in another kind. For all those Creatures that
are thus deficient in their teeth, and only those; are they which chew the Cud,
which is a reassuming the food into the mouth, and a grinding of it a fresh the
second time, so that they are fain to do that at twice, and to be three or four
times as long about it, as those creatures whose grinders are better placed;
neither would this suffice alone, for if they should be chewing their meat all
the day long with the teeth that they have, it would never be sufficiently
prepared for nourishment, were there not yet a farther preparation in their
bodies for that purpose; and that is, that those Creatures, and only those,
have a peculiar vessel in their bodies assigned for this work, and that is that
which Anatomists call, Oma^um, and our Butchers, the Read; wherein the meat
must be macerated for a certain season, and by the fermentum therein contained,
brought to such a Consistence, that afterward by a little chewing in the mouth
again, it may be committed to the stomach with the same hopes of success, that
in other Creatures that are toothed on both sides, it is committed at the
first: Now, man being in the number of these last mentioned, must for the due
preparation of all strong food, trust alone to his grinders; so that the time
of ablactation of the child, and of alteration of the diet of the old man, is
most certainly indicated by the beginning and ceasing of the use of the Teeth;
milk is fit for babes, before their teeth come; and old men when their teeth
decay, Heb. 13. 14.
are again become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

Now by the ceasing of the teeth we must understand, all those infirmities that
are incident to them by reason of age, whether looseness, hollowness,
rottenness, brokenness, blackness, foulness, stench, wormeatenness,
excrescency, or whatsoever else may be any impediment to them in their use. But
the chief symptom here intended is, the falling out, and consequently, the
paucity of the teeth; which is gathered from the reason here annexed, Because
they are few; which is very well translated in our Language, following the
Vulgar Latin; Otiosae erunt molentes in minuto numero. For although the
Original word do primarily signify no more than because they are diminished,
yet it must of necessity be understood, in respect of their number; for
otherwise they are not diminished, but do grow so long as they remain in the
head, even to the extremity of old age. But as age comes on, the natural
moisture at the root of the teeth is consumed, and a preternatural is distilled
thither in its room, which does by degrees relax them in their sockets, and at
length quite expel them: And when some of them are thrust out, and but a few
left in, it is easy to conceive from what has been said, how the chewing in
the mouth cease; yea, it cease more, when the teeth are few, than when they
are none at all. For then the Gums might act one against another, and,
forasmuch as they grow harder in old age, might do something weakly toward the
chewing of the meat; but when they are few, they hinder those from working in
the least, and having no antagonists (were they firm in the head which they are
not) are not able to work themselves, and so the whole grinding cease; which
is a very great and most certain symptom of this state of weakness, and yet is
neglected by our great Master of natural knowledge in this kind, Hippo. l. 3.
Apho. ult.
in his best enumeration of the diseases of age.

And those that look out of the windows be darkened.
That by this clear expression the eyes and the infirmities of them in old age,
is intimated unto us, was never yet, and I persuade my self never will be, in
the least measure doubted or questioned.

Forasmuch as they are the only true, and proper Organs of seeing; however, it
will be well worth our labor to consider, how the eyes may be called, the
lookers out of the windows. One may be said to look out of a window in a double
sense, either when he looks through the glass of the window, and through the
pellucidity of that most refined body, discerns those things which are
without; or when he looks through the open Casement, or through some open hole
of the window, wherein there is nothing at all interposeth between him and the
object. Now in both these senses may our interpretation well be made. For the
Explication of it in the first sense, we must take notice of all those
transparent parts, through which the visible species must of necessity pass
before vision can be perfected: For as a man could see nothing through a
window, were it not made of glass, or of some body alike Diaphanous: So neither
could he perceive any thing with his eye, were not the parts thereof, through
which passage is made, of the very same nature. Now, the parts of the eye,
through whose bodies the visible species must pass that they may be discerned,
are either the humors, or the Tunicles; The Humors are three, the watery, the
Crystalline, and the glassie humor, so called by Anatomists; and you may
perceive by their names that the substance of them all is Diaphanous; all
which, howsoever they wonderfully differ among themselves, and several ways
contribute to the use and benefit of the eye, and consequently are made
variously instrumental unto vision, yet they all agree in this one thing, that
they are transparent; and that they must of necessity do, forasmuch as into
their bodies, and through their bodies, must the visible species pass, before
they can perfectly be discerned by any man. And if one opacous, or darksome
body interposeth, they can go no further, but there they must determine their
course.

The Tunicles or Coats, through which the sight is made, are only two, for
although there are other Tunicles of the eye, which conduce wonderfully to the
sight, (as you shall hear beneath,) yet those through which the species pass,
are only the Tunica Aranea, and the Cornea. The first is so called from the
similitude of a Spiders Web, because it is most fine and subtle, and being
derived from the Brain and Optic Nerve, it becomes a most tenuous vestment for
the humors; and is so pellucid, and transparent, that among the Learned it
bears the name of Speculum. The other is called, Sclerotica, or Cornea; and
that is, that hard and horny Membrane, which being derived from the dura matter,
encompasseth the whole body of the eye, without any perforation; and on the
back part, behind the sight of the eye, is more obscure and dark; but on the
forepart, is far more plain, polite, and diaphanous, that the species may pass
through its body most pure and unaltered. And now I am come to that part of the
eye, that does most aptly resemble the glass of the window, by reason of which
a man may be truly said to look through a window, and an old man, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
to see through a glass darkly, without the use of Spectacles, which some would
fain have here to be understood; of whose opinion I cannot persuade my self to
be, because it is uncertain to me, whether those helps of nature were then, and
there, in use: And most certain it is, that they are without the compass of the
Allegory, and are not part of that house or body of man, whose decay is here so
lively represented. Beside, this Tunicle has the same use to man, in his
perfect state, that Spectacles have in his imperfect. And this be confident of,
that there is nothing that Art has found out to help man in his decays, that
has not its footsteps first in Nature, and is not an imitation of those things
in man, that were most completely in him in his perfection. And here I must of
necessity go one step farther, than our common Oculists; who ascribe to this
part but a low and a mean office, which is only to keep the humors (...) their
place, or at the best, to defend the inward parts from external injuries; but
without all question, it has this farther, and more noble use, viz. so to
dispose and order the visible species, that they may in the most convenient
manner, make their impression upon the proper Organ of sight; and this their
Crassitude or thickness, together with their Convexity or bending outward, does
sufficiently make appear. I here all along retain the term of the Ancients,
viz. visible species, as being most known, and that by which I may be better
understood among most, to whom this Paraphrase may come, though it be not so
proper, and the Conceptions which they had about them, are not to be admitted;
for there is no new Entity, either material, or immaterial, cast off from the
object, distinct from it, and from the light, which is the cause of vision in
the eye; by the visible species therefore, I mean no more, than the several
beams of light being so reflected from the object, as that they become fully
fraught with the representation of it, (not only in respect of the proper
object of sight, which we call color, but of these common ones also, which we
call situation, figure, distance, bigness, and the like,) and have a complete
power of impressing the same upon the Retina, which is the strict and proper
Organ of sight, and is nothing else than the dilation of the Optic Nerve all
about the bottom of the eye. For the better understanding of all which, we must
know that the species pass along the medium in a Pyramidical figure, and as
they are cast off from one point of the Superficies of the object in a Cone, so
they must be reduced again in the same Conical figure upon one and the same
point of the Organ; which reduction is performed by that collection,
refraction, and direction, which happens to them in those several pellucide
bodies through which they pass, and primarily (while the eye remains in its
vigor) in the Tunica Cornea; but as age enfeebleth the eye, the form and
figure of it becomes more plane and depressed than it was before; and the
Crystalline humor, which had a power of reducing it self, and consequently the
whole body of the eye, to a more oblong and Unequal shape, becomes dry, and
altogether unable for such an end; so that now the Species cast off from the
object at a convenient distance, cannot be brought to a Cone upon the Organ,
which must needs breed a confusion in the fight: To avoid which consusion, old
men hold the object that they look upon at a greater distance from the eye,
because so, the present Constitution of the eye can better regulate the
Species; and thus also Spectacles are placed before the eye to collect,
refract, and guide the Species, that they may point together upon the Retina;
which by how much the thicker, and more Unequal they are, by so much the more
powerfully do they do this work: And therefore as age increases, and the form
of the Crystalline humor, and of the whole eye is more depressed, so much the
thicker, or so much the more Unequal, or both, must the Spectacles be made, that
they may be answerable to the age. And this is done only in imitation of that,
which is far more perfectly done while man abides in strength, by the hard
Membrane we are now treating of; and this is the first sense in which the eyes
may be called the lookers out of the windows.

The other is, that whereby they may be said to look through the holes of the
window, when there is an open passage, and nothing at all interposeth between
them and the object. And this indeed is the most proper reading of the words.
(...) signifies in foraminibus, or as the Vulgar Latin, per foramina; and the
Seventy, (...). Now there are several ways, whereby the eye may be said to
look in, or through the holes.

The first is, in respect of their seat, or the form of that place, in which
they are fixed in the head. And if we should strictly hold the word to that
interpretation of in foraminibus, or the lookers in the holes, nothing could be
so applicable as this; and hereunto to be sure the Chaldee Paraphrase has
reference, Qui vident per Cancellos Capitis tui, those that look in, or through
the strong bounds of the head, which can be no other, than those firm holes, or
arches, which are made in the forepart of the head, for that very purpose,
viz. to receive into their Cavities the whole body of the eye: And these are by
Oculists called Orbitae, and are each of them compounded of six several bones,
which, being most conveniently suturated among themselves, do make up those
curious arched chambers in which these lookers or beholders dwell, in which,
and from which, they may be aptly said to perform their offices. And to these
allusion is had in the Plague wherewith the Lord will smite those that fight
against Jerusalem, Zach. 14. 12.
Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their
eyes shall consume away in their holes.

Secondly, They may be said to look in, or through the holes; in respect of the
palpebrae or Eyelids; for although the use of the eyelids is to cover or
close the eyes, so that they are called, Oculi ab oculendo, vel occultando,
because they lie hid under their lids; yet whenever the eye is exercised in
seeing, they must depart one from another, and so leave an open hole through
which the sight may be made. And thus every man discerns in himself that he can
take away sight, or cause it at pleasure, by drawing, or withdrawing; by
letting down, or pulling up, these shutters of the windows. And it is wonderful
to consider how ready they are in this work, that they might be no impediment
to vision, so that an instantaneous action is no way better expressed, than by
the motion of the eye lids: 1 Cor. 15. 52.
Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. And when we look earnestly
upon any thing, we steadfastly keep the windows open; and a shut eye, in
Scripture phrase, signifies imposibility of seeing; Isa. 6. 10.
Shut their eyes lest they see; and an open eye signifies power of looking or
beholding; 2 King. 6. 20.
Open the eyes of these men, says Elisha, that they may see, and the Lord
opened their eyes, and they saw, and behold they were in the midst of Samaria.
And a Seer, and a man whose eyes are opened, are the same thing, Balaam the son
of Beor has said, Number. 24. 3, 4.
and the man whose eyes are open has said, he has said, who heard the words
of God, who saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance, but having
his eyes open; And thus also may the eyes be said to look through the holes,
and all those that have taken exact notice of the Foramina Cutis in the body of
man, have been sure not to neglect these.

Thirdly, They may be said to look through the holes, in respect of that
outward Membrane of the eye, which is called Adnata, or Conjunctiva, and this
is that which being divided from the Pericranium, is next of all to the Orbita,
and firmly holds the eye in that Cavity, it encompasseth the eye round on the
back part, and on the forepart so far as the white of the eye goes, and no
further, and so leaves the whole Iris, the rainbow, or party-colored part of
the eye, as an open hole, which the visible species may freely without
interruption pass through; the truth of this any one may discern in the
inflammation of the eyes, for that is a disease for the most part seated in
this part alone; then you may see the veins and the Arteries very red and
swollen, so far as this Membrane or the white of the eye reaches, and the Iris
or darker part of the eye in the mean while wholly free.

Fourthly, The eyes may be said to look through the holes in respect of the
Pupilla, or the apple of the eye, which is nothing else, but an open hole in
one of the coverings of the eye, as I may say, bored for that very purpose,
that the lookers through the windows might have an open view; for that Covering
which is called Tunica Uvea, is a thick, and a close, a dusky, and a dark
Membrane, through which the visible Species, or the light cannot easily make
its way. And therefore on the back part its use is to preserve, and to keep
together the innate light of the eye, and also to give a stop to the visible
species, so that they can pass no farther, but must there impress their Images;
like the lead, or the steel, or whatsoever else is put on the backside of the
Looking-glass, without which there can be no impression made; but on the
forepart it is most conveniently perforated, and at such a proportion, that
the light or the species through it have freedom of access: which perforation
is the apple of the eye, that wonderful part, which is so often noted in
Scripture to be above all other parts of the body tendered and observed, Genesis
32. 10. Psalm. 17. 8 Pro. 7. 2.
and therefore here I would principally take notice of it; and of all the parts
of the eyes, and of all the holes through which they look, let this be always
accounted the most observable. For it may be dilated or contracted as it may be
conducible to a more perfect sight; if there be requisite thereunto, a greater
or a lesser light; if the object we would look upon, be farther off, or nearer
to the eye; or if we do more carelessly or curiously look upon it; this hole is
presently made wider or narrower; that it may be the more serviceable for the
present occasion.

Lastly, They may be said to look through the holes in respect of the Optic
Nerves, for these above all the other Nerves of the body are apparently
perforated; and although neither these, nor any other, does so appear in a body
that has been long dead, yet doubtless they have open passages while the body
is yet alive, forasmuch as they are the Conveyers of matter, though more pure
and refined, from one part unto another, as the other Channels of the body are.
And here the Cavity and Porosity of the Optic nerves, ought as well to be
reckoned among the, holes through which sight is made, as any other that are
placed before the proper Organ, upon which the representation of outward
objects is first made, and that because there can be no perfect perception of
any thing, unless the impression made upon the Sensory be truly conveyed into
the most inward recesses of the brain, where the soul makes its seat of
judicature. For as all the things in a Chamber may have their firm
representation in a glass that stands upon the Table, yet if any thing
interpose between me and the glass, I discern nothing at all; and they are all
as much hid from me, as if they had never been there represented. And thus we
know a total obstruction of the Optic Nerve, which is called, Gutta Serena,
makes as perfect a blindness, as an obstruction of the humor Aqueus, which is
called, a Cataract; And thus I have endeavored to show, and that I hope with
some satisfaction, how the eyes may be called, the lookers through the windows.
Now as age comes on and increases, it is well known to all men how sight goes
away and decreaseth; the lookers out of the windows must assuredly be darkened,
and by how much the more excellent these parts are, by so much the more
apparent are their decays. It is said of the heart, it is primum vivens, and
ultimum moriens; but contrariwise it may very well be said of the eye, that it
is ultimum vivens, and primum moriens. This most wonderful and tender part of
man, in that it has more curious and more various work in its formation, is
the last that lives; and in that it has need of more life and vigor, more
firmness and purity in its operation, it is the first that dies; and indeed
the insensible encroach of age, is no where so soon discovered, as in the eye;
and men are loath to think themselves declining in age so soon as the eye gives
warning thereof; and we have scarce any description of an old man by his
infirmities, wherein those of the eye are not principally mentioned: When
Isaac, Jacob, Eli, Genesis 27. 1 Genesis 48. 10. 1 Samuel 3. 2.
and others are recorded as old, it is said of them, Their eyes were dim, and
they could not see; for whatsoever may either incrassate the diaphanous bodies
before mentioned, and render them less transparent; or stop the several
perforations, and so hinder that open view: must of necessity cause a
diminution, and in time a perfect abolition of the sight; and here give me
leave to name one or two principal symptoms of vision that are the chief
attendants of this declining state; The first is Caligo, which is the obscurity
of vision by reason of the Crassitude or thickness of the Tunica Cornea; which
by reason of the dryness of age does together with the nails of the fingers,
Fernel.
grow darker and thicker, and consequently lose daily somewhat of its
perspicuity: Another is Glaucoma, which is the change of the color of the
Crystalline humor, by reason of its dullness and thickness, whereby old men do
look upon all things as it were through smoke, or a cloud, and so do but darkly
discern them: Another is Zinifisis, which is a change of the figure of the
whole eye, whereby it becomes more plain and depressed, and a dryness in the
Crystalline humor, whereby it is unable to reduce the eye to that form, which
may be most advantageous to vision; so that they cannot perceive any thing at
an equal distance, but must have their objects more remote from the eye, or the
species first refracted and directed by the use of Spectacles; Another is
Suffusio ex cruditate, or any interposition of any preternatu^al matter between
the sight and the Tunica Cornea: I might also add Corrugatio and relax^tio
uveae tunica, the contraction or dilatation of the apple of the eye; or
whatsoever else by obscuring the glass, or obstructing the holes; may be justly
said to darken the lookers out of the windows.

Verse 4. And the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the
grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the
Daughters of music shall be brought low.
THus far the Preacher has been treating of all those faculties which are
termed Animal, and their decaies in the time of age; he passes in this verse
to those other which are called natural, of which he treats in the beginning
of this verse, and then to those that are mixed, in the latter end; and that in
a double respect, first, those that are mixed of the faculties, inward and
outward, and that is expressed in the want of sleep, in those words, He shall
rise up at the voice of the bird; forasmuch as sleep, Fernel l. 6 Pathol. c. 11.
if perfect and sound, is the ligation of all the senses both inward and
outward for the refreshment both of the mind and body. The other mixture of
faculties is of vital and Animal, in the last words, All the daughters of
music shall be brought low; For the passive daughters of Music belong to the
Animal faculty, being the Instruments of an outward sense, viz. hearing: And
the active daughters of Music belong to the vital, being the instruments of
respiration, as you shall hear hereafter. Now to the understanding of this
verse, especially the former part of it, I hope to let in some glimmering of
light, which formerly has lain undiscovered.

The doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low.
For the right understanding of these words, we must be sure in the first place
to take notice that all these words are but one Sentence, and confequently but
one Clause of the description of age; the former words, viz. The doors shall be
shut in the streets, are not a distinct symptom of themselves, as most men
have formerly said, but they have their reference to the ensuing words, viz.
When the voice of the grinding is low. And the doors and streets here
mentioned, are no other, than such as concern the grinding, and are as inlets
and outlets, ways and passages unto that. And I persuade my self, that the
hitherto miscarriage in the Interpretation of these words has proceeded from
neglect of this consideration. The doors shall be shut when the grinding is
low, and only then; and the lowness of the grinding, is the cause of the
shutting of the doors. In humilitate vocis molentis, says the Vulgar Latin.
Ob, per, vel propter depressionem vocis molentis, say others, and that very
consonant to the Original, inasmuch as the grinding shall be low, or by reason
of the lowness of the grinding, the doors shall be shut in the streets.
Wherefore for the better clearing of the whole Sentence, we must first of all
show what is to be understood by the grinding, and afterward what the doors
and the streets are, and what the sound of the grinding, will easily be made
appear. The wisdom of Solomon is so famous throughout all Regions and Ages,
that I need not here Apologize for it. It would be unbecoming an ordinary
Writer, much more the Penman of this Allegory, to deliver the same thing twice
in a breath; And I wonder with what face any Interpreters could put so great an
absurdity upon the Wise man, as to make this grinding signify no more than
that just mentioned before. But for the clearing of this, we must know that
grinding is of two sorts, either Per extra positionem, or Per intra
susceptionem, (as Philosophers use to distinguish of augmentation,) there is an
extrinsecal, or an intrinsecal grinding; the former of these is performed when
two hard bodies acting against each other, do break and bruise into small
parts, that which is put between them. And this is the grinding as in a Mill,
of which you heard before. The latter of these is performed, when the parts of
the same mass, by reason of the exaltation of some internal principle, or the
addition of some fermentum, are so acted among themselves, that the whole mass,
and every the least part thereof, is changed and brought into a new
Consistence. And this Philosophy calls Fermentation, and is that of which the
Wiseman speaks in this place; And it is therefore called grinding, because it
accomplisheth the end thereof better than any mill can do. It will comminuate
things of so hard a substance that no mill can break. I would fain know what
Mill could have ground Aarons golden Calf, Exodus 32. 20. Deuteronomy. 9. 21.
but by the help of fire, and possibly some specific menstruum, as a proper
key for that Solar Mineral, it was easily ground to powder. Again, it can
divide the matter that is to be ground into smaller parts than any mill can do;
it will not leave the most minute part unsearched, A little leaven, 1 Cor. 5.
6. Gal. 5 9. Mat. 13. 33.
says the Scripture, leaveneth the whole lump. And our Saviors expression of
it, is yet more significant, The Kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a
woman took and hid in three measures of meal till the whole was leavened,
(...), till the whole of mass, and every one of the least parts thereof be
leavened. No Mill can be set so low, as to grind every Corn, and every part of
every Corn; but Leaven leaves none untouched, but divides (beyond what
Philosophy gives way for) into parts indivisible.

Now of this sort of grinding there is very much to be found in the body of
man: And indeed all the natural alterations that tend either to the
preservation of the person, or propagation of the kind, are the products of
this intestine grinding. And there is scarce a part in man, especially an
internal viscus, that does not particularly contribute to such a work as this.
And surely, that which lies daily upon our trenchers, had need of many through
grindings, that it may be really transubstantiated into our flesh; these in the
body of man are by Physicians called digestions, or concoctions, and are to be
found almost in every part, as was said before; but I shall instance only in a
few, and those well known to all those that have the least skill in natural
things; and these few grindings, together with the voice of them, the doors and
streets that lead to, and from them being well understood; those that are more
accurate in the knowledge of all the alterations of the nourishment of man, may
thence from easily attain the whole intent and purpose of the Wise man in this
part of the description of age. I shall only mention five: Three in respect of
the Individual; and two in respect of the Species; and they are those common
ones; Chylification, Sanguification, Assimulation, Lactification, and
Spermification.

The first of these, viz. Chylification is thus performed, after the meat is
sufficiently chewed in the mouth, it is committed to the stomach, where
continually there lies treasured up a certain acide juice, the relicts of the
last Concoction; which (as the Leaven in the bread) does presently infect the
whole mass, and every part thereof; and does so penetrate and search the parts,
and so divide and separate them one from another, and join it self to every one
of them, that at last the matter of nourishment is so perfectly ground, that it
is brought to a new Consistence and color, very like to the Cream of Barley,
and is that Physicians call the Chyle; and this is the first intrinsecal
grinding that the food receives, and is next of all to that of the mouth, and
not altogether unlike to it; and therefore when mastication is but weakly
performed, you heard before that it was helped by infusion of the food in a
Ventricle prepared for that purpose, whereby the parts were acted among
themselves, and better comminuated, than if they had been never so long chewed
in the mouth.

The second of these, viz. Sanguification is performed, when the Chyle it self
is ground over again, and receiving yet farther exaltations by a greater
solution of the more noble, and active principles; it once again deposites its
old color, and consistence, and so at length becomes perfectly changed into
that true liquor of life, Lev. 17. 11, 14.
which is called blood; and although it must always be acknowledged that the
Chyle does receive many alterations, and exaltations before it come to the
heart; almost in every part it passes through, both in the guts themselves, in
the Mesentery, the Glandules, and the milky vessels, both of one sort, and of
another; and also in the veins; and after it has passed through the heart, it
must be once or twice circulated through the body, and receive several
defaecations, as in the Liver, the Spleen, the Kidneys, and the like; before it
be completely accomplished for its ultimate use, all which exaltations, and
defaecations, are included in this Text; yet it must still be remembered, that
the principal and supreme exaltation of the blood, the most eminent and
remarkable grinding toward Sanguification, in comparison of which, all the
others are little to be accounted of; is always performed in the heart, that
fountain of life; for as soon as the Vena Cava has committed the matter of
nourishment into the right Ventricle of the heart, the fermentum therein
contained working suddenly and thoroughly upon it, sets the active principles at
a greater freedom, and so inducing new motion, and effervescence into the
blood, does happily impraegnate it with vitality. And not only this new matter
of nutrition, when it first attingeth, the heart is thereby enlivened; but the
best blood it self, after that by various circulations, and imparting its power
and life to the parts that are nourished by it, it becomes weak and much
depauperated; is fain to return back again to the heart for a fresh
impraegnation. And such a vast difference there is between the blood in the
Arteries newly brisked in the fountain, and that in the Veins lowered and
impoverished with its journey, that the Ancients took them for two several
things, and knew not that they were the same; like the men of Bethlehem, Ruth
1. 19, 20, 21.
who knew not Naomi, nor would acknowledge her the same person, because she
went out full, and returned home again empty; and she her self was not
unwilling to have changed her name: And he that shall call the rich blood going
out in the Arteries, Aerial, Jovial, Spiritual; and the mean and poor blood
returning home in the Veins, Earthly, Saturnal, Gross, shall make no Schism at
all in the unquestionable doctrine of Circulation.

The third of these, viz. Assimulation, is then performed, when the nutritive
juice is sufficiently prepared in all things that are allotted to it, and by
the impulse of the conveying vessels is brought near to the parts that are to
be nourished, and then every one of the parts by a certain allective property
of its own, does draw that which is most agreeable to it self, and then falls
to acting, searching, breaking it over again into most minute parts, and so
those that are like to prove unconformable, are excommunicated to the pores;
and the other are taken into joint fellowship and communion, and so made one
with the part; and that which is most remarkable is, Genesis 18. 10.
that according to the time of life, wherein augmentation or increase of
stature is appointed to man, every one of the parts takes so much to it self,
as will answer its daily growth, and after that is accomplished, every part
takes only so much to it self, as does answer its daily decay. Exodus 16. 17, 18.
The Children of Israel gathered Manna in the wilderness, some more, some less,
yet when they did mete it in an Omer, he that gathered much, had nothing over;
and he that gathered little, had no lack; they gathered every man according to
his eating: This is truly verified in the food of all mankind. Some there be
that make greater preparations for the belly, othersome there be that make
lesser, yet when this comes to the measure of God, I mean, to be put to that
end which he has appointed, he that made the greatest has nothing over, and
he that made the least has no lack, every one according to his wasting. The
Princes superfluities, and the Beggars penury, both of them make but equal
reparation for the daily Consumption of their own flesh.

The fourth that I mentioned, was the making of the milk; which although it be
peculiar to one Sex only, yet I cannot but take notice of it among the rest,
because a principal alteration of the nutritive juice is thereby made, and the
wisdom and goodness of God is therein (as in the formation and birth of the
Infant) most eminently made appear. Psalm. 22. 9.
Thou art he (says David) that took me out of the womb, thou did make me
hope when I was upon my mothers breasts. Now, this is thus performed: The
Breasts by their attractive property, draw from the Arteries that blood, which
is the least altered from Chyle, as being most agreeable to their glandulous
substance; and from the Nerves, that juice which they convey for the
nourishment of the spermatick parts, and by a specific Fermentum in themselves
contained, do subact, and comminuate, both these liquors, and by a perfect
mixture of them, and a certain peculiar alteration, at length prod^^e that
white, sweet, pleasant, alimentory liquor which we call the milk, which
contains in it meet matter of nourishment for all the parts of the Child,
both sanguineous, and spermatical: and is the most proper food for it, and
exactly agreeable to that, with which it was sustained in the womb.

The last of these we have named is, the production of seed, which because it
is the highest, and most wonderful of them all, it had need of greater
preparations, and more alterations than all the rest; and therefore it is, that
there are several vessels appointed for that purpose, and many admirable
Combinations, Complications, and intertextures of them all, which are not
elsewhere in the body to be found. The Vasapraeparantia, and Deferentia, the
Vas Varicosum, the Epididymis, and Parastatae, the Vesiculae seminales also,
and the Prostatae, do each of them add somewhat to the making of the Seed meet
for propagation; but it must alwa^es be acknowledged, that the principal
Fermentum that does most of all exalt the seminary matter, and chiefly render
it prolifick, is contained in the soft, spungy, glandulous substance of the
Testes; which therefore bear their name, because they give testimony of
virility, and show that a man is perfec^^n his kind, Gen 5. 3.
and therefore able to produce his own Image; the spiritous and benign matter
most apt for generation, being from all the parts of the body by the Arteries
and Nerves conveyed to these parts; it is herein by a mysterious faculty of
their own, elaborated into that noble Elixir; which from one man has dilated
the world to so many millions as of which it now consists; and does continually
from generation to generation make abundant reparation for the cruelties of the
King of terrors. For although in the space of an hundred years or thereabout,
all the living upon the face of the earth are driven thencefrom by the stroke
of death, yet by the virtue of this divine extract, the earth is at all times
sufficiently peopled, and the Inhabitants thereof perceive no lack. So that
this does in a manner perpetuate mortality, and cause men to survive the
funerals of all mankind. Hence it is that the wisdom of God in Scripture does
always express Posterity, and the Generations that were yet to come, by the
word Seed, Genesis 3. 15
I will put enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and her seed.
And the Lord said to Abraham, Genesis 15. 5
Look now toward heaven, and tell the Stars if thou be able to number them, so
shall thy seed be.

And this is the last operation in man which I shall mention that is here
intended by the word grinding; and this, viz. the preparation of seed (if not
all the other) is eminently called grinding, in that place where it is said,
Job 31. 10.
Let my wife also grind to another, and let others how down upon her; and all
the other alterations of the nutritive juice in man (if not this also) are
eminently so called, in the Story of Samson; for although it be generally
understood that Samson ground in a Mill, and our later Commentators, (as if in
a Mill themselves) following the beaten tract, do all take it up from others,
and leave it unto others as granted: yet in the Text there is not once mention
made of a Mill, but there are many Circumstances that do to me clearly evince
the contrary; the words run thus, Judge. 16. 21.
The Philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought him down to Gaza,
and bound him with fetters of brass, and he did grind in the prison house:
Wherein it is very observable, that it is not said, they made him grind, or
they forced him to grind, but he did grind in the prison house: And it is so
much the more observable, because all the injuries done to him before named,
are expressed by a force put upon him; they took him, they put out his eyes,
they brought him down to Gaza, they bound him with fetters, and if this last,
had been a like injury and force unto him, it had been more congruous to have
continued the same manner of expression, and to have said, They made him grind;
but the violence is here left out, and his grinding made his own doing, He did
grind in the prison house. Beside those Manicles put upon him were exceedingly
inconvenient for a grinder in a Mill? And it is most improbable, that for that
small advantage or pleasure that should accrue to them by his grinding in a
Mill, that they should at any time take off his setters, since they had had so
many, and so sad experiences of his unparallel strength. And if at any time
they should loose him, then sure was the least danger, when the Lords of the
Philistines, and three thousand of the people were gathered together to see him
make sport; yet at that time he was kept (by his chains doubtless) at the
disposure of a Lad; Ver. 26.
For Samson said to the Lad that held him by the hand, suffer me that I may
feel the pillars whereon the house stands, that I may lean upon them.
Moreover, the ancient Rabbis give us an Interpretation upon this place, which
is not altogether improbable, and which is confirmed unto us by Hieron in his
Commentary upon the second verse of the forty seventh Chapter of Isaiah, and
that is, that this people being very desirous of Giants, and boasting much in
their strength (as is well known by sacred Story) brought of their choicest,
and lustiest women to him in the Prison, that from this mighty Destroyer of
their Country, they might have a Gigantick Race for its preservation: However
in the main, I persuade my self, his grinding was nothing else, but performing
the offices of nature, his eating, and drinking, and being nourished there; his
turning his food into chyle, his chyle into blood, his blood into flesh, and
other the like natural operations, which is the true meaning of the word
grinding in this place.

We now proceed to the sound of the grinding, which is nothing else but that,
by which the grinding is known, some natural symptom significative of
digestion; and all those indications that do demonstrate that the works of
nature proceed aright, and according to their primitive institution (whether it
be the appetite of the parts, their action or excretion of their excrements,
those subservient faculties which usually are called Attraction, Retention,
Expulsion, or whatsoever else may manifest Concoction) may truly and properly
be called the voice of the grinding. I shall instance in a few, whereby the
rest may be easily discerned, and therein I shall observe my former method
having reference only to those five great works of nature before treated of.
The voice of the first grinding, is the natural appetite of the stomach to meat
and drink, and is usually called hunger and thirst; the strength and power of
the stomach to retain its food; and the seasonable evacuation of well concocted
excrements. The voice of the second, is a free passage of the chyle without
obstruction, a quick, strong, and a lively pulse; a due separation of gall, of
urine, and the rest of the excrements of this Concoction. The voice of the
third, is the proper tone of all the parts of the body, the fastness and
fullness of the flesh, and convenient perspiration. The voice of the fourth,
Genesis 31. 3
is the Custom of women, the stiffness, lively color, and freshness of the
nipples, the smoothness, fairness, elevation, and towering of the breasts, as it
is called in Scripture, Cant. 8. 10.
Her breasts are as towers. The voice of the last, is appetite, aptness, and
ability for Copulation; Inflation, and Turgescency of the Seminary vessels both
preparatory, and ejaculatory; commonly called, Fratration; a right temperament
of the parts appointed for propagation, strength, vigor, and liveliness of the
whole body beside: These, and the like excellencies of nature are the voice of
the several grindings while they remain in power; but as age enfeebleth a man
the grindings are weaker, and the several voices of them more submiss;
wherefore it does necessarily follow, that in decrepit age, all the before
mentioned indicatours of strength and perfect Concoction must be depraved,
diminished, or abolished; which is the lowness of the sound of the grinding,
and does include the weakness of the natural faculties in man which stand in
direct opposition to those excellent voices before treated of, and such are
these that follow: Dejectus appetitus, imbecillitas stomachi, faeces alvi
indebitae: obstructiones omnes, pulsus debilis, ra^^^, tard^s; mala sanguinis
defaecatio quoad serum, bilem, etc. tonus partium vitiatus, Carnis ariditas,
indebita perspiratio: Cessatio mensium, papillarum pendentia and lividitas,
mammarum flacciditas and rugositas: impotentia and inappet entia Concubitus,
vasorum spermaticorum imbecillitas and (...), Romans 4. 19.
testium and partium propagationi dicatarum Cachexia and refrigeratio, totius
corporis langu^r and marcescentia. These are the decaies of man intended in
this part of the Allegory.

Now the grinding and the voice thereof being thus far explained, I question
not but the doors and streets, that relate thereunto, are by this time
understood; but because the word doors has some peculiarity in it, I cannot
but take more notice of it: (...) this word being of the duall number,
signifies properly the two doors, or both the doors, or the double doors. And
although I know no authority for the translating of it into Latin, otherwise
than fores, or ostia; yet I submit it to the Learned to consider, whether the
word Valvae or Valvulae will not as well, if not better, agree to the Text; the
folding doors, or the doors that clap together, or that have a double use. For
the better understanding it, therefore we must know that the doors that relate
to the grinding before spoken of, are of two sorts; either the extreme doors,
or the intermediate doors. Again, the extreme doors also, are of two sorts;
either the fore doors, or the back doors; either the doors that first let in
the matter of nourishment for the body, that it may therein be ground for its
use; or the doors that last let out the relicts of the grindings, or that
matter that upon the several grindings becomes altogether useless. The fore
doors, or the doors by which the food is first let into the body, are none
other than the Lips, for by the shutting of them, the meat is kept out, and by
the opening of them, it is let in, to the first grinding in the mouth. And as
they are called doors in respect of words, forasmuch as they let them out;
Psalm. 41. 3
Keep the door of my lips, says David. And again, Keep the doors of thy mouth
from her that lies in thy bosom. Mic 7. 5.
So they may as aptly be called doors in respect of the meat; for they let that
in.

And hence it is, that the Orbicular Muscles, which make the substance of the
lips, (being therefore called the Calves of the Lips,) Hos. 14. 2
and have the power of the keys to shut and open them, are called Oris Pylori,
the explication of which word (as being very conducible to what we are now
about) you have hereafter. And therefore those former Interpreters that have
applied these words to the Lips, have done exceeding well; the report they have
given has been true; yet I may, with the Queen of Sheba, farther add, Behold
the half has not been told us, 1 King. 10 6, 7.
the wisdom of Solomon exceeding the fame which we have heard. For beside these
fore doors, there are other extreme doors also, viz. the back doors, which
serve only for the carrying out of the Excrements. And although the Ears, the
Nostrils, and the Eyes, and all the Emunctories of the body may be here
included, yet those which are principally intended, are those eminent Posterns,
which so long as man lives in strength are always ready for their work, which
is to give pass to those three several Excrements which we daily avoid, either
by the guts, the bladder, or the habit of the body; and therefore these doors
are, Sphincteres any, and vesicae, and pori Cutis: For all these have a power
of opening and shutting, and consequently of keeping in, or letting out,
whatsoever comes unto them, and are often at convenient seasons retracted for
the cleansing of the body. Thus far of the extreme doors, which are placed at
the extremity of the body, and serve only for inlets or outlets to the surface
of the body, for all that which is either desired or rejected of nature. The
intermediate doors are seated within the body, and are inlets and outlets only
from one part of the body to another; like the doors within the house, which
according to their shutting or opening are stops or passages from one Room of
the house to another. These may be said to be double doors, because they relate
to two parts, to that which is before, and to that which is behind; they let
out of that, and into this; and of this sort there are very many in the body of
man, and some, I persuade my self, that are not yet sufficiently discovered.
The first that the matter of nourishment meets with after it is chewed in the
mouth, is the Pharynx, or head of the oesophagus, which while it be kept close,
keeps the meat in the mouth, till it be there sufficiently ground, and
afterward by the retraction of the Muscle of the throat, which for this very
reason is called Sphincter gulae, it is committed into the throat, which is the
high way to the stomach; but before it can come there, it meets again with
another door, which is called, the mouth, or superior Orifice of the stomach,
which unless it be opened also it cannot pass. And this any man may perceive in
himself in a morning, or after the mouth of the stomach has been long and
close shut, if he hastily swallow down solid food before he drink, it makes a
stop there, and stands knocking as it were, with pain waiting for admittance.
The third door that the chyle meets withal, is the passage out of the stomach
into the guts, and this is the inferior Orifice of the stomach; which is so
wonderfully framed, that it gives easy admittance for the chyle from the
stomach to the guts, but back again from them to this, very difficult, or none
at all; and it has a power of dilating or contracting it self, making way, or
stopping it, according as the necessity of Nature requires; from whence it is
by Anatomists called Pylorus, which is a Greek word, as most of the Anatomical
terms are, and is derived from (...) porta, and (...) curam gero: and is as
much as Janitor, the Porter or doorkeeper; and it does faithfully, according
to the dictates of nature, shut or open that passage unto which it appertains.
Besides these three, there are many others which I shall only generally name;
The Capillaries of all the containing vessels in the body, the feveral stops of
all the Veins and Arteries, which are called valvulae, especially those eminent
ones about the heart, of which more hereafter, the porosity of all the inward
parts of the body, the Valvula Coli, the Annulus Fibrosus of the bladder of
gall, the several heads of the Ureters, their wonderful insertion into the
bladder, these, and whatsoever else in the body of man can by their
constriction stop that which comes unto them, and by their dilatation give it
convenient passage, are in this place called, the doors of the streets.

The streets are those open ways and passages in the body of man, which the
matter of nourishment passes along without let or molestation. 1 King. 2 ^, 34.
Thou shall make thy self streets in Damascus, says Benhadad to Ahab; that is,
thou shall pass through Damascus at thy pleasure, without interruption; there
shall always be a broad and an open way. Platea dicitur a (...), latus; and in
this place is, as much as, Latitudo foranea patens and aperta. And of such
there are diverse found in our body; The oesophagus, or Gullet, the six several
intestines or guts, as usually they are divided by Anatomists; the milky
vessels of one sort and of another; all the Veins and Arteries; the Nerves and
Lymphaeducts; the ductus Cholidochi, Pancreaticus, Salivalis; the Vasa
praeparantia and deferentia, tubuli lactiferi; the Ureters and the Uretra, in a
word, all the Communes ductus, or open passages which are by nature appointed
for the conveyance either of the Aliment or Excrements, are the streets here
intended; forasmuch as they have reference to the grinding before mentioned,
and are the common roads or high ways to, and from, the places where the
grinding is performed.

What remains now, but only that I briefly name unto you those symptoms of age
which are signified unto us by this clause, The doors shall be shut in the
streets. What the doors are you have abundantly heard, the shutting or them is
nothing else but their ceasing from their use, or their not being exercised to
that end unto which by nature they are appointed; when by reason of the
extremity of age the voice of the grindings is very low, then shall the doors,
all the doors, both the doors, the doors of both kinds, the double doors, shall
be shut in the streets; they shall all have lost their opening faculty, so that
they shall neither let in, nor let pass, nor let out, what they ought to do, as
they formerly did, so long as the strength of man remained, and the voice of
the grinding was high. Occlusio labiorum contraum cibum; obseratio pharyng is,
ulriusque orificii ventriculi; deglutiendi difficultas, impotentia reserandi in
omnibus, arteriarum and venarum, imo omnium internarum partium ostiis, and
valvulis; pororum constrictio; dysuria, stranguria, iscuria; alvi adstrictio,
sen potius pigra tardaque depositio. These and the like symptoms that arise
from the inability of those parts that have in themselves a power of opening
and shutting for the benefit of the body, are hereby indicated unto us. And
thus far of the natural faculty of man, both in reference to the preservation
of the Individual, and the propagation of the Species; from which short
observations they that are better skilled in the hidden mystery of the frame of
man's body and know all the wonderful alterations that are therein made may
easily attain the knowledge of the full scope and intention of the Wiseman in
this place.

He shall rise up at the voice of the bird.
This expression being in it self easier than the rest* and having been well
understood by most that have considered this. Allegory, I shall not much insist
upon it. I shall only tell you, that it is to be understood of those
infirmities of age, whereby men are altogether unable to take that content and
quietness, that sleep and nocturnal repose, which formerly they had used to be
refreshed with, there are that earnestly contend to have the latter part
translated. Ad vocem passeris; others would have it, Ad gallicantum; others are
content with, Advocein volueris. For my own part I think it not worth the
dispute what this bird is in particular: The general word pleases me best,
and the Original word, Omnem significat avem mane surgentem ad gurriendum; For
the Radix is (...) and has two eminent significations, one is, Alas habere
sive evolare; and the other, Maturare sive mane surgere; and that which else
where is translated the early morning, Ezekiel. 7. 10.
is from the same root with this word in the Text, so that if we say, the early
bird, or the bird that is warbling its accustomed note betime in the morning
(without descending to particulars) we shall take in the whole latitude of the
signification of the word, and the full scope of this part of the description
of age; which is nothing else but to show how restless, and wakeful men are in
their old age, so that that which is said of the abundance of the rich man, may
as truly be said of the infirmity of the old man, Eccl. 5. 12
it will not suffer him to sleep. In the night time possibly he may have some
unquiet drowsings, but when the morning approaches, that time wherein man in
his perfect state takes the greatest refreshment, and the soundest sleep; then
shall he be broad awake, and rising up; He shall rise up at the voice of the
bird; that is, at that time when they utter their voices; not (as some have
interpreted it,) Causa vocis aviculae, by reason of the voice of any bird, as
the crowing of the Cock, or the like, as if the voices of them, should wake
them from their sleep; for it is not said, he shall wake at the voice of the
bird, but he shall rise at the voice of the bird, presupposing his being awake
long before, it may be all the night: Beside the ensuing words, as you shall
immediately hear, do demonstrate the deafness of old men, and therefore it is
not to be thought that they should easily be startled, as it were, and awaked
at the voice of any bird; therefore it must of necessity be understood, as it
is elsewhere phrased, Cant. 2.
At the time when the singing of the birds is come. Now the time of the singing
of the birds may be said to come, Annually, or Diurnally. The yearly coming of
the singing of the birds is in the spring of the year; to which allusion is had
in that place of Solomon's Song: And the daily coming of the singing of the
birds is in the spring of the day, or very early in the morning; by which time
the decrepit old man is very weary of his bed, having in it neither ease, nor
sleep. The singing of the birds, and the sighing of old men, are early
Contemporaries: These are as ^oon weary of their lodgings, through the pains
and wakefulness, that has attended them in the night season; as they are
lifting up their pleasant notes, after their refreshment. Anxiety and trouble
of mind, was so grievous to Ahasuerus, Hest. 6. 1.
that it is said, On that night could not the King sleep: Upon the same
occasion it is said concerning Darius, Dan. 6. 18.
His sleep went from him: Pains and diseases of the body, were so troublesome
to Job, that he complains, Job 7. 4.
When I lie down I say when shall I arise, and the night be gone, and I am full
of tossings too and fro, until the dawning of the day: both these joined
together in age, together with that which is worse, namely, the natural dryness
of the brain, and a Consumption of those benign vapors that overcome it in
sleep; must needs produce the like, or more uncomfortable effects. So that the
symptoms hereby indicated unto us are, Anxietates animi, inquietudines
nocturnae, and dolores Corporis; and principally the product of them both,
which is Vigiliae.

I should thus pass hence-from, were there not a grand objection lying hid in
the body of this discourse, which upon this occasion does more apparently
discover its face. It may be here said, are there not some Contrarieties in
this description of age, or at least in this Interpretation of it? Are there
not some inconsistent symptoms reckoned up, to make this miserable state yet
far worse than it is? Was not Carus and Apoplexia diseases of overmuch sleep,
in the Exposition of the second verse numbered among the Symptoms of age: How
therefore comes it to pass that Vigiliae, or overmuch wakefulness can be an
attendant upon the same condition?

To this I must answer, Were this our fault, it were not ours alone; for so
clear is the Case, and the truth of it by daily experience so apparent, that
whosoever has at any time treated of the diseases of age has constantly
enumerated them both, Hippo. l. 3. Apho. ult. Galen l. 3 c. 6. de sanitate
tuenda. Ranchin. de morborum senum d^lis.
as being not the least inconsistent one with another; and that is, because
they are not of the same kind; Necesse est ut opposita sint sub eodemgenere.
Now sleep, and the abstinence from it, may each of them be considered either in
genere naturali, or in genere praeternaturali; there is a natural, there is a
diseased or preternatural sleep. And between these there is a vast difference.
Natural sleep, is a woing of the body and mind to quietness, whereby the benign
vapors, by their amicable embraces of the brain, get power of it, for its
refreshment: Preternatural sleep, is a committing a rape upon the body and
mind, whereby the offensive superfluities, by their violent assaults, force the
brain to a benummedness for its destruction; the same Diametrical difference
there is between natural and preternatural wakefulness. Natural waking, is when
the brain, by its own vigor and strength, does, Samson like, Judge. 16. 20.
arise and shake it self; Casting off all those exhalations which, having spent
their virtue for the refreshment of the body, are become altogether useless; so
that hence-from all the spirits of a man are enlivened, As a bridegroom coming
out of his Chamber, Psalm. ^9. 5
and rejoicing as a strong man to run a race; but when the race is run, and the
spirits are thereby tired, there is need of a recruit by sleep. So then, when
there is in the nature of man a paucity of those pleasant vapors, and an
ineptitude in the brain to receive those few that are, there must needs follow
natural watching or wakefulness. Preternatural waking and watching, on the
contrary, are, when there is an external force put upon the brain, either to
raise it from sleep, or to keep it so. Now, to apply this distinction, we must
know that sleep and the want thereof are directly contrary one to another,
supposed always they be in the same kind. Preternatural sleep, and
preternatural watching are altogether inconsistent, and therefore an Apoplex
and a Frenzy, are in no wise incident to the same person at the same time: So
also natural sleep and natural watching are inconsistent one with another, and
not competible to the same age; but are to be found in man at as great a
distance as his life will give way for; Senibus natural est vigilare, pueris
dormire; but when they are one of one kind, and another of another, namely,
preternatural sleep, and natural watching, they may both of them without any
incongruity at all, be reckoned up as the Symptoms of old age.

I make the more of this distinction, (though very common and ordinary,) and so
I would have others do too, because of its universal use upon this occasion;
for not only here, but in most of the other descriptions of age, it has its
place for the decision of Controversies; in the very last description, Pigra
and tarda alvi depositio was numbered as a symptom of age, because the
Sphincter any is hardly and seldom retracted for the natural evacuation of the
Excrements of that kind; yet alvi humiditates are reckoned as an attendant on
the same state, Hippo. l 3. ^ pho. ult.
because without any opening of the door, there is a preternatural flux that
way. So also in their Urine, there is a continual stopping, and yet withal a
continual dropping. The Teeth are relaxed by reason of dryness, and yet
moisture expels them their sockets. Siccity of the Eyes is their chiefest
disease, and yet they run with a continual Rheum; Hardness and dryness also is
the temper of the brain, and yet it is always distilling Coryza's and
Catarrhes. In a word, this distinction will be found of most general use,
forasmuch as there is such an intricate mixture of naturality and
preternaturality in age, so that that plain and easy description which is
usually given of it, seems to me ingenious and most significant. Senectus est
morbus naturalis.

All the Daughters of Music shall be brought low.
The Organs that have reference to Music in the body of man (beside which I
would by no means seek an Interpretation) are of two sorts. They are either
such as make music themselves, or such as take and receive the Music that is
by others made; the first of these I call, the Active daughters of Music,
forasmuch as they are themselves musical, and every one of them bear their part
in making of it; the other I call, the passive daughters of Music, forasmuch
as they only receive it, taking delight in that, of which they have not the
least share in making.

The Chaldee Paraphrase has reference to the first of these, when it says,
Remittentur labia tua a dicend^ Cantico. The Lips, and whatsoever other parts
in man, are any way instrumental unto singing, may be very well signified unto
us by the Cantatrices multeres, or female Choristers in the Text; and these are
very many in our bodies. For beside those remote helpers, the Thorax, the
Diaphragma, the Muscles, the Nerves, the Glandules, etc. There are three
several kinds of Organs, that do more immediately, and yet distinctly and
gradually conduce to the production of vocal Music. The first, are those that
prepare and administer the matter for a sound; The second, are those that form
that sound into a voice; The third, are those that modulate that voice unto
Music.

The first of these, are none other than the Lungs, which are the proper
instruments of our breathing; which how excellent it is in it self, and how
necessary to our being, Gen 2. 7. Job 1^. 10.
the Scriptures of God do demonstrate without compare. The life of man in this
world, runs parallel with his breath; Psalm. 104. 19.
All the while my breath is in me, and the Spirit of God is in my nostrils; Job
27 3.
and the death of man is still signified by the departure of his breath; It is
said of the widows child, He had no more breath left in him. 1 Kings 17. 17.
Psalm. 146. 4.
Plainly throughout the whole Word of God, breath, and life, and soul, and
spirit, are synonomous, and often made exegetical one of another. Among other
excellencies of breathing, that whereby it is made instrumental to speech and
harmony is not the least; in all wind Music, there must be first a gathering
of the air into some Cavity to contain it, and afterward a pressing of it forth
into those pipes or holes, that are artificially made for the dividing it unto
its appointed end; Now of this kind of Music is the voice, and the Lungs being
of a light, soft, spongy substance, are those parts, that do both draw in,
contain, and press forth the air, the matter of the voice, according as there
is occasion. And those Creatures that have no Lungs have consequently no voice,
so that Fishes, which are herein deficient, are mute even to a Proverb. And man
himself, if by reason of any preternatural matter stuffing the Lungs, or by
reason of any violent motion, or long expiration, he becomes out of breath, he
is not able to speak, much less to sing, till he have recovered it again.

The second sort of Organs that conduce to Music, are such, as form the breath
into a voice; And they by Logicians, under whose subject they do directly fall,
are accounted nine, numbered up in this following Distick. Smith aditus ad Log.
l. 1. c. 2.
Instrumenta novem, sunt guttur, lingua, pala-
Quatuorand dentes, ac duo labra simul. (tum,
And moreover, hence it is that the wisest of Grammarians, observing that the
several words, by which man utters his voice, are formed against these
several parts, sometime more against one, sometime more against another; have
aptly divided their Letters, the first compounding parts of words into
gutturales, linguales, palatina^, dentales, and labiales, according as in their
pronuntiation they bear themselves the hardest against either of those parts.

That part which these two Artists have called guttur, Anatomists do more
strictly and properly call, Trachaea sive aspera arteria; and since the word
Artery is derived (...), this of all the parts of the body may primarily and
most aptly bear that name: for this is the great Con^^uit pipe of air in
respiration; it gives pass unto it in inspiration, and in expiration (whereby
the voice is framed) it gives a certain impression, which is the first
alteration of it toward Articulation; which impression does remain in the
voice when perfected; so that if these parts do first dispose the voice to
hoarsness or shrilness, or any other preternatural tone, the whole speech has
a tincture of the same imperfection. And hence it is, that the Welsh
pronunciation being performed by too hard a collision of the air against these
parts, makes all their letters and words to become guttural.

The second Instrument of the voice is the tongue, and this, by reason of its
fungous substance, and volubility, is so meet, and so principal an agent
therein, that speech it self, and all the variety thereof, does among all sorts
of men go by the name of tongue; Acts 2.
There were in the daics of the Apostles dwelling at Jerusalem devout men out
of every Nation under heaven, and they all said, we do hear them speak, (...),
in our own tongues, the wonderful works of God. Ver. 11.
And this great miracle, both as unto hearing, and also unto speaking, is
introduced by the appearance of Cloven tongues, Ver 3.
to show that the chiefest instrument of the voice, was to be acted by the Holy
Ghost; Ver. 4.
For they began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance.
Among the many expressions that the Word of God abounds with, for the
confirmation of this truth I cannot but take special notice of that of David,
Psa. 139. 4.
where he says, There is not a word in my tongue, but thou know it
altogether. As if that member alone kept the power of words within it self, and
ordered them all according to its own pleasure; and where there is an inability
of speaking, it is aptly said, such persons are tongue-tied, and when that
faculty is again restored, Mar. 7. 35
it is said, the tongue is loosed; and so was it with Zacharias, concerning
whom, after he had been dumb for a season, it is said, Luke 1. 64
his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and he spoke and
praised God.

The third Instrument toward the formation of the voice is the palate of the
mouth, for beside, that some particular Letters and words are formed more
immediately against this part, it does also give strength and clearness to the
whole voice, and to all the words that are pronounced in the mouth. And this it
does the better do, because the tenuous bone that makes the Palate, is an
arched roof, covered over with a nervous skin, corrugated with several
asperities, for the better retaining and rebounding the air in the voice. And
all our places dedicated to divine service, are made of the same concamerated
form on the top of them, (questionless in imitation hereof,) for the better
sounding and echoing sorth both of vocal and instrumental music. And beside
the bone which constitutes the Palate, there is a little fleshy part, which is
called the Uvula, that does so much contribute to the voice, that it deservedly
retains the name of plectrum vocis. Paulus Aegin^ta l 6. c. 51.
That the Palate or roof of the mouth is a great instrument in speaking, is
sufficiently proved by the defect thereof, for if there be the least fault in
this part, there presently succeeds a faltring in the Speech. So that a man may
say to any Son of Venus, who has followed her destructive enticements to this
imperfection, Thou also art one of them, thy speech bewrays thee. This part,
together with that last mentioned, is taken notice of, as serviceable unto
speech, by Jo^, when he says, Job 29. 10.
The Nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their
mouth. And God himself says unto the Prophet, I will make thy tongue cleave to
the roof of thy mouth that thou shall be dumb. Ez^k. 3. 26.


Fourthly, The teeth, and especially the four fore-teeth, are very instrumental
to our speech, Dentition and Locution are for the most part Contemporaries;
toothing and speaking usually come, and go together; the Child cannot speak
till he put forth his teeth, neither can he speak well, when he sheds them, nor
leave his lisping till they come again. And the reason of it, is because there
are many words that are pronounced by the dilatation of the tip of the tongue,
and clapping of it against the teeth, which any man may easily experiment in
himself, if he will but gently assay to pronounce any word that has Th
together in it; and all those Operators that live by setting in of Artificial
teeth, do observe that they have more come to them upon the account of their
speech, than for all other ends whatsoever; and indeed this ingenious help of
Art, does in no other defect of nature, make such complete reparation.

The last Instruments of the voice are the Lips; even as the Aspera Arteria (as
was said) gave the first Articulation, so these do give the ultimate Completion
to our words; so that when they have once slipped this guard we can have no
more power over them. Nescit vox missa, reverti: that which is gone out of thy
lips thou shall perform, Deuteronomy. 23. 23.
says the Lord. How exceedingly instrumental the lips are to speaking, the
Scripture does abundantly prove, He that will love life, and see good days, 1
Pet. 3. 10.
let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile.
Hence is it, that as the words are, so the lips are often said to be: Psalm. 12.
2. 17. 1. 31. 18. Isa. 6. 5. 28. 11. Heb. 13. 15. Isa. 57. 19.
therefore we read of flattering, fained, lying, unclean, stammering lips, etc.
And again, words are elsewhere called, the fruit of the lips; Let us offer the
sacrifice of praise to God, that is the fruit of the lips. And these are the
second sort of Organs that conduce to vocal Music, namely, those that form the
sound unto a voice.

The third are those that modulate this voice into music; and although it here
must always be acknowledged, that every one of the parts before mentioned, do
also contribute something toward modulation; yet the more proper and peculiar
instruments thereof, are the Cartilagineous parts of the Aspera Arteria, or the
windpipe; and especially those which are termed, the Larynx and the glottis.
The Larynx is the head of the windpipe, which although it be but a very little
part, yet does consist of more variety of compounding parts, than any other
whatsoever; as little as it is, it has thirteen Muscles belonging unto it,
most of which are framed only for the modulation of the voice; some shut the
pipe, some open it, some dilate, some contract it, so that acting severally, or
jointly according as there is occasion; they do wonderfully conduce to the
variation of the tone. It has moreover five Cartilages, whose substance and
consistence is most apt of all other whatsoever, for the dividing of a sound;
some of them are movable, some immovable, some of one form, some of another,
that they may the better contain the air; and alter and break the voice into
melody. Beside it has certain Glandules belong unto it, which by their viscous
moisture do so irrigate, and as it were oil the pipe, that it takes off the
harshness that otherwise would be found, and adds much sweetness and
pleasantness to the Music. The glottis is reckoned among the Cartilages before
mentioned, yet because it is the principal instrument of modulation, we cannot
but take most special notice of it. And it therefore bears its name, because
what eminency the tongue has above the rest in reference to our speech, the
same has this part in reference to our singing; for the air being pressed
forth from the Lungs, this part rises up to meet it, embraces it, plays with
it, and by a certain innate property of its own, without the help of Muscles,
alters it, divides it, at its own pleasure, into all that diversity of
amplifications and flourishes, that the Art of man can possibly reach unto. If
a man make a pipe in the middle of a green reed, and leave the inward thin film
as the tongue of the pipe, and then breath against it; he shall then find, that
tongue to receive the breath, and so to modulate it; that it shall be a lively,
though but a short resemblance, of what we are now speaking of. And indeed,
whatsoever Art can do, must give way to the works of nature: And that one pipe
in man, which has the wisdom of God for its formation to the intent of music,
can amplify and divide a sound, to as much variety of musical accents, as
David's Instrument that had ten strings. Psa. 144. 9.
For there is no Instrument howsoever formed, that can surpass the music of
the voice, which is performed by the several Organs we have here recited, which
may therefore justly be called, the Active Daughters of Music.

The Passive Daughters of Music, are those which only receive the Music that
is by others made, and these are the Organs of hearing; which indeed may most
properly be called, Filiae Carminis, or Filiae Cantici, and seem primarily to
be intended in this place; for as a learned Commentator renders the reason of
it exceeding well; Corne^. ^ L^p.
Aures ad hoc unum factae sunt, ut voces and Carmina audiant, quare ex iis
natae, ^orumque filiae esse videntur. And again, Objectum delectabile efficit
in auribus sensationem delectabilem, quare ejus quasi parens, and matter esse
videtur. All the several graces and eligances of Music, the soft and silky
touches, the quick and pleasant relishes, the nimble transitions, and delicate
closes, are far more exactly represented in the Instruments of hearing, than
the Image of the Mother is in the Daughter; Ventrem sequitur partus, the birth
is like the belly that bears it, but the Music that is heard, is even the same
with that which is made: For there is a continuation of the audible Species
from the maker of them, to the last receiver; without any production of new.
And that this may be the better done, there are several parts, both for the
apprehending of the variety of sounds, as they pass up and down in the air, and
also for the Commodious conveying of them, that they may make a due impression
upon the proper Organs of Hearing; plainly, there is the outward and the inward
Ear.

The outward Ear is spread abroad like a net, that it may catch and gather into
it self, Avecen.
that vocalem, or sonantem undam, as it roles about the Ocean of the Air; which
that it may the more conveniently do, the Cartilagineous part of it is divided
into two winding Channels, called the Helices, or Elices, which draw and suck
into themselves the wave before mentioned, and pass it into the Auditory gulf.
I know the word Helices, is mostly wrote with an H, and then it must be derived
from (...) cum aspero, which signifies Involvo, Circumago, Circumvolvo. And
thus primarily the word signifies a certain sort of twining Ivy, and from
thence then must the Metaphor be fetched, and that very appositely, relating to
their form: But I rather incline to those who write it without an H, and then
it must be derived from (...) cum tenui, which signifies, Coarcto, Cogo, in
angustum redigo, in arctum Congrego, and thus the word signifies primarily,
little Channels that are made to draw the water from some great and bro^d over
flowing sulci aquarii, water furro^^ or trenches to draw in the stream, and
this relates to their use. And thus it is an elegant Metaphor from waters; for
these parts do Elicere, allure and suck into their narrower Channels those
sounds that wander more at liberty in the open air; and then they convey them
to the meatus auditorius, which is sufficiently defended by the Tragus that is
over it, and the Antitragus, that is near it, so that no violent noise can
offend it, nor any preternatural matter fall into it, to obstruct it. This
outward Ear is placed upon the Os p^trosum, on the side of the head, and at
some distance from the head, and were it not pressed and bound down while it
was tender, it would stand at a further distance, and consequently more
commodious for hearing; so that while our Mothers and Nurses study Ornament,
they injure us: Indeed, they do hereby make us more unlike to the beasts, but
it is in such an excellency, that it were well for us if we surpassed them. And
hence may the reason be given, why those that are thick of hearing, may find
great benefit by laying their hand dilated behind their Ear, or using some
Otaco^^st^on, and placing the mouth of it toward the sound, that they may
thereby the better apprehend it; like unto those Animals, that listening after
any noise, prick up their ears, as we say, and cast them forward, for the more
expeditious receiving those motions of the air, that otherwise would pass by
them more insensibly.

The inward Ear is a great secret, and such an one, that while the men of
greatest knowledge have gone about to find-out and describe, they have every
one of them sunk under his burden, and confessed his own inability in some such
expression, as the Psalmist concerning the general frame of man's body; Such
knowledge is too wonderful for me, Psalm. 139. 6.
it is high, I cannot attain unto it. The first part we meet with is a thin,
strong, pellucide Membrane, called, the Tympanum, which being placed transverse
the hole of the Ear, does divide between the ou^ward and the inward Ear, as the
Diaphragme does between the breast and the belly; within this there are three
Cavities, the Concha, Labyrinthus, Cochlea; there are also three little bones,
the Malleolus, the Incus, and the Stapes; Moreover, there is implanted in the
Ear, a pure, subtle, and quiet air; which is called, aer innatus; And lastly,
and chiefly, because the proper Organ of hearing, we may observe the Filaments,
or the utmost extremities of the softer part of the Auditory Nerve, as they are
wonderfully disposed in the inward Cavity by the innate air; and then the whole
Nerve it self; by the help of these several parts our hearing is thus
performed. The motion of the air (as that of the water) is continued by certain
circles and rings, till it be taken by the outward ear, and by the Elices is
conveyed upon the head of the Tympanum, where it makes the very same impression
that it received from the body that made it; which impression, by reason of the
Conjunction of the bones before mentioned, is continued unto the innate air,
which, because in its self most quiet and still, is easily moved according to
the motion of the Tympanum; so that the Filaments hereunto annexed must of
necessity answer the foresaid motion, and so consequently gather into
themselves the sound or music, which they convey to the Auditory Nerve, that
from thence it may be sent to be discerned and judged in the inward sense.

These are the Daughters of Music, which, so long as man abides in strength,
are exceeding lovely and flourish; but as he declines in age, these also pass
their flower, they become humbled, and decline apace toward uselessness and
deformity.

In Age the several holes and Cavities of the Ears are stopped, the Drum is
unbraced, the Hammer is weakened, the Anvill is worn, the Stirrup is broken, and
the inward Air is mixed and defiled, the Filaments are dulled, the Nerve it
self is obstructed; so that there cannot but follow heaviness of hearing, and
at last, deafness it self. And this is that imperfection which Barzillai
complains of to King David, 2 Samuel 19. 35.
I am this day eighty years old, and can I discern between good and evil? Can I
hear any more the voice of singing men, and singing women, wherefore then
should thy servant be yet a burden to my Lord the King? And this certainly is
the principal Symptom here intended by these words, The Daughters of Music
shall be brought low. And therefore the Vulgar Latin translates it only,
Obsurdescent omnes filiae Carminis; but the word (...) is of a far larger
signification, and might be translated many ways, as Deprimentur, Dejicientur,
incurvabuntur; but cannot possibly be better translated than it is already by
the Seventy, (...), humiliabuntur, brought low. And this still holds out the
native Latitude of the word; which I would by all means have preserved; that
all the Daughters of Music, both Active and Passive, and their infirmities in
age may be here included; so that all those symptoms of the decrepit state of
man, that belong to any of the Organs before mentioned, whether of speaking or
hearing, are to be understood by this last clause; All the Daughters of Music
shall be brought low; and such are these that follow: Dispnaea sive spirandi
difficult as, destillationes tussim inferentes; (...), sive vocis abolitio,
diminutio out depravatio; exsiccatio asperae arteriae, induratio Cartilaginum
Laryngis, sordes aurium, praecipue autem barycoia sive gravis auditus and
surditas.

Verse 5. Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall
be in the way, and the Almond tree shall flourish, and the Grasshopper shall be
a burden, and desire shall fail; because man goes to his long home, and the
mourners go about the streets.
HItherto Age has been described unto us, as it has influence upon all the
functions and Faculties of a man; Superior and Inferior; Inward and Outward;
Animal, Vital, and Natural. And the Preacher has exactly declared unto us, how
far they are all weakened in this declining state; he now in this Verse passes
to another head of Symptoms, which is usually called, Qualitates mutatae,
taking notice of the simple affects, and those eminent and most remarkable
alterations that attend men in this condition. And here again he does most
elegantly run over all the parts of man, and give only one most significant
alteration in each of them. The Compounding parts of man (as all men know, and
as we have already heard) are the Soul and the Body. The principal affect of
the mind in Age, is that of fear, which is hear expressed in respect of a
double Object, a greater and a lesser; which consequently makes the passion
lesser or greater; according to the increase of Age; They shall be afraid of
that which is high, and fears shall be in the way. The parts of the body are
either inanimate, or animate; of the inanimate parts, the Hair receives the
greatest alteration in Age, which is here signified by these words: The Almond
tree shall flourish. The animate parts of the body, are also of two sorts,
either the hard, and crusty parts, or the soft and spongy parts; and these two
are usually known by the names of the Spermatical and Sanguineous parts. The
change of the former of these in age, is intimated unto us, in those words, The
Grasshopper shall be a burden; the change of the latter in those, Desire shall
fail; as it follows more clearly hereafter. After this most mysterious and
Hieroglyphical description of the Symptoms of Age, he does in a plain and
easy transition pass from those general Symptoms that attend a man all along
this state of weakness, unto those particular ones, that do more immediately
forerun his dissolution: For man goes to his long home, and the mourners go
about the streets.

They shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the way.
The powers and faculties of the mind, as they are weakened in age, are
abundantly described in the second Verse: In these words is notified unto us,
that most remarkable change that is made upon the affects and passions of the
mind in the same condition. And this is only in respect of fear, and those that
are nearly related unto it. For as for those which are placed, (...), in
appetitu Concupiscente, such as Love, Hatred, Desire, Joy, and the like; they
are in no wise excessive in this weak state of age, forasmuch as a firm and a
vigorous habit of body, quick and lively senses, both outward and inward, do
most promote them; So that where there is a general defect in both these, and
all desire does fail, it is not to be supposed, there should be any
predominancy of any of those passions, that proceed from the Concupiscible
appetite; as for those which are placed, (...), in appetitu irascente; They all
have for their object either good or evil; those which have good for their
object, as Hope, and such like, have little or no place in the time of age,
forasmuch as it is an evil time, and there is no pleasure in it. Now, all
imminent evil is looked upon either as vincible, or invincible; if a man look
upon an approaching evil, as that which he is able to overcome, it naturally
produces boldness in him, which is the contrary passion to fear, and can in no
respect agree to the same persons. It remains therefore, that that distress of
the mind, which arises from the apprehension of some approaching evil, that is
either destructive or burdensome to our nature, and not easily resistible by
our strength, is the passion that is most incident to Age. True it is, that
anger and vexation, grief and sadness, and such like, as have for their object
some present evil, and border hard upon this we are speaking of; may in some
measure be found in Age; yet the true and proper, the most notorious trouble of
the mind, is that dumpish, melancholy, destructive passion of fear; which
together with all its attendants and necessary consequences, such as suspicion,
jealousies, superstition, dislike, inconstancy, betraying the succors of
reason, are too familiarly observed in the best of men that are crooked with
age; And by how much the more man declines, by so much the more do these
superfluities increase, like Misletoe, and some other Excrescencies of trees,
that flourish not, till the stock decay from which they spring. And the reason
of it is, because the true Causes of this affection (namely, misapprehensions
of the things feared, and inability to resist them) are increased together with
age, and therefore must needs produce their answerable effects. The first of
these Causes, proceeds from the weakness of the Imagination; the other, from
the lowness of the spirits, and the imbecility of the outward Organs: The
first, makes the Cause of fear to seem the greater; the other, to take the
deeper impression. Imagination puts a double fallacy upon ancient men; first,
it makes them undervalue themselves, and minorate their own abilities; and then
it makes them overvalue the objects of ^ear, and make them far greater than
they are; like some Perspective glasses, that at both ends misrepresent the
things seen, yet with a contrary appearance, at one end making them appear
lesser, and at a farther distance; and at the other end, greater, and nearer
than they ought. And hence it is, that they are so timorous upon every the
least occasion; that which is said of wicked men, may also be said of old men;
They are in great fear where no fear is; Psalm. 53. 5
Qu^^ finxere, timent; the weakened Imagination creating objects of fear unto it
self, or at least much falcifying them, and increasing them, like the man in
the Gospel, that had but an half and a broken sight, He saw men as big as trees
walking. Again, the dullness and ^eaviness of the spirits, and the impotency of
the members, renders a man most obnoxious unto fear; the spirits being of a
strong, quick, and subtle motien, are the principal instruments of in^er
course between the soul and the body, and do consequently bring in the greatest
aid and assistance against this passion; but, in age they are benumbed as it
were, and congealed, so that they cease much what from their operation and
motion, and can administer little, or no courage at all.

Nor is it thus only with the Spirits, but the Organical parts also of the
Body, are in this state made unfit for their Functions, and altogether
unserviceable to resist the very appearance of danger; and stand (as I may so
say) ready prepared for the entertainment of fear; The great consequences
whereof, such as whiteness and stiffness of the hair, trembling of the joints
and heart, impotency of speech, failing of the eyes, and astonishment, paleness
of the face, horror, gnashing of the Teeth, involuntary Emission of
Excrements, are very easily produced in this condition; nay, they are most of
them already there to be found, without an object to effect them; therefore no
wonder if those things which are (...) to the strong Man, prove (...) to the
decr^pit.

These things were known to be true, without an Instance; yet, I cannot but
take notice of Jacob, who, while young and strong, did exceed most Men we read
of, for Courage and Boldness; with what audacity did he manage the two great
Enterprises of obtaining both the Birthright and the Blessing; and that while
he was yet very young? with what Courage did he undertake, and go through with
a long and lonesome journey, and hard and a deceitful Service? but when he was
old he was of a more timorous spirit: it was fear let fall that passage, If I
am bereaved, I am bereaved. Genesis 43. 14.
Such news as one would have thought would have refreshed his heart, when he
was old overcame it; for when it was said Joseph is yet alive, Genesis 45. 26.
and he is Governor over all the Land of Egypt, Jacobs heart fainted: Fear
was a passion so ready at the door, that it stepped in first, and had almost
overborn him, and left no place for joy to enter in. 1 Samuel 2. 22.
God Eli when he was very old, was very fearful, he timorously reproves the
outrageous wickedness of his lewd Sons; and after this black and dreadful enemy
had once taken possession of him, it followed him continually, and dogged him
till he died. When the Israelites and Philistines were about to join Battle, he
sat in a fearful posture, and it is said, his beart trembled; and when the
issue was told him, 1 Samuel 4. 13.
he fell from off his seat backward, and his Neck brake that he died; and the
reason is added, V. 1^.
for he was an old Man and heavy. I will not here be so bold as those that say
(building their opinion upon the original word) his falling down backward and
dying, was from a voluntary Principle; but I dare say, it was from an inward
one: his Age had so enfeebled him, that he was not able to bear the news of a
defeat, especially such an one, wherein the Ark of God was taken, but his
darksome inward foe, taking advantage hereupon; strikes him surely, under the
fifth rib, that he died.

The Objects of old Men's fears are here presented unto us under a double
notion; First, those things which are high, Excelsa timebunt, aut de excelso;
They shall be afraid of that which is high: Secondly those things which are
lower, more plain and obvious, even in the way; Consternati in via, vel
formidabunt in viis; Fears shall be in the may. Consternation and Fearfulness
do not surprise Men, and overthrow them all at once; Nemo repent ^it
timidissimus; but they come on by degrees, and first those things that have
more of dread in them, become the objects of their fear: High things; high,
either in respect of place, as steep and emineut Ways, Hills, and Mountains,
Steeples and Towers, which formerly they could without fear ascend, and walk
upon: or high, in respect of the Air, as Fiery Meteors, Strange Apparitions,
Thunder and Lightning, and such like: or high, in respect of abstrusness, or
mysteriousness, as the deep and subtle points in Divinity, about the Escence
of God, and the duration of Eternity, about the Immortality of the Soul, and
changes of the Body, and many other things, which while young they could better
have born the Discourse of: or high, in respect of Hardship, or Difficult;
those great Enterprises, and hazardous Undertakings, which while strong they
durst with boldness have ventered on, do now become a terror to them, even in
the thought of them; but as Age comes on, and their fears increase upon them,
not only those things which are high, but even plain and easy things become
the objects of their fear; Pavores in via: Mole-hills are now as dreadful, as
Mountains were before; every thing that is near them, and about them; every
thing that is plain and obvious; every matter that is facile, and easily
attainable, bears it self with terror toward them; they are afraid of every
thing they are doing: they walk in fear, sometime least peradventure they
should dash their foot against a Stone; sometime least that other People
heedlessly passing by, should rush upon them, and injure them: being conscious
to themselves of their own impotency, it makes them most obnoxious to this
terrible passion, which is the great change that is made upon the Mind in the
time of Age.

The Almond Tree shall flourish.
The Symptom last treated of was in reference to the great change that is made
upon the Mind of Man; those which follow have reference to the Body. And that
we may accurately observe the Wise Man's Method, we must premise one common
distinction of the parts of the body; for we must know that these are not
independent sayings, cast forth at a venture, but a most exact and methodical
Treatise of the symptoms of Age, as it influenceth and alters all the parts
of a Man: Now the parts of the Body (as the word is taken in the largest
signification) are either Animate or Inanimate; either such as participate of
the life of the whole, and are nourished by the intra-susception of enlivened
aliment; or such as have no life at all from the Body, or in themselves, and
are nourished only by the juxta-position of an excrement: Of the first of
these, there are very many in the Body of Man, which are treated of in the
following words: of the latter of these there are very few, as the nails and
the Hair; and of these the hair receives the most notorious alteration in Age,
which is here signified unto us by these words; The Almond Tree shall flourish.

The word which is here translated an Almond Tree, is from the original word
(...), advigilavit, to watch, or wake, as it is used in that place; Psalm. 127.
1.
The Watchman waketh but in vain: And by way of Analogy it is translated to
signify Amygdalus, the Almond Tree: Quae prima inter arbores evigilat; because
this Tree before all others first waketh, and rises from its Winters repose;
it Flowers in the Month of January, and by March brings its Fruit to Maturity.
Plin. lib. 16. c. 25.
The forwardness of this fruit-bearing Tree is intimated unto us by the vision
of Jeremy; for the World of the Lord came unto him, saying, Jeremy what see^t
thou? and he said, I see a Rod of an Almond Tree: Then said the Lord unto him,
Jer. 1. 11. 12.
thou have well seen, for I will hasten my word to fulfill it. The same word is
in this Text used, both for the Almond Tree, and for hastening; Thou have
therefore well seen. Nothing could have better represented the speedy
fulfilling of the Word of God, then that hastening, the Almond Tree. The manner
that the Wise Man is pleased here to take, to express the great changes that
happen to the Body of Man in the time of Age, is according to that intricate,
and most mysterious, and aenigmatical way of the Egyptians; whereby they are
wont to express their meaning of the things intended, by some other Creatures
which do most resemble what they are speaking of. Now there is no change that
befalls Man that can be so lively represented by the blooming of the Almond
Tree, as that whereby the Hair of the Head becomes Hoary and White; and
therefore florebit amygdalus, must needs signify unto us, this great
alteration; which bears resemblance unto that of the Almond Tree in several
particulars, some of which follow hereafter.

First, They are both of them of the same color, and represent themselves
alike to the sight; the Blossoms of the Almond Tree are perfectly white, and
so are the Hairs of the Old Man, and they are not only nakedly of the same
color, but both of them so, by way of eminency; not only white, but the
whitest of all, none so white as they: Flores amygdali primi existunt and
maximi sunt albi prae caeteris arboribus. So also is it with Man in the time of
Age, he is white, and no Creature, living to that time, so white as he: and
hence it is that Logicians make Canescere to be proprium homini, tertio mo^o;
quod convenit omni, soli, non semper. They will allow no Creatures at all to
grow white when they are old, as Man does: and although our Sense teaches us,
that almost all Creatures tend toward that color, yet they very much vilify
it in comparison of a Man, and therefore give it a far more inferior,
Gricescere.
and an unhandsome Name.

Secondly, They do very much agree in their hastiness, and forwardness of
putting forth; how early and quick the Almond Tree is in putting both its bloom
and fruits has been already ^hewn; and might yet farther be confirmed in that
great Mystery the Rod of Aaron, which although it was miraculously changed in
one nights time, as a Token against the Rebels, to take away their Murmurings;
yet it is to be noted, that it was done upon this forward Wood: Numb, 17. 8.
And it came to pass that on the morrow, Moses went into the Tabernacle of
Witness, and behold the Rod of Aaron for the House of Levi was budded, and
brought forth buds, and bloomed Blossoms, and yielded Almonds. But naturally
also, this bloomes much sooner then other Trees; this is the true Erigeron,
that early in the Springtime bears the representati^n of Old Age. Now it is
better known to all Men how exceeding forward Gray-Hairs are.

Obrepit properata malis inopinata senectus,
Intempestivi funduntur vertice cani.
There is no Symptom of Age puts forth its self sooner then this; and as the
Almond Tree buds sooner by two or tree Months then most other Trees, so do
these hasty buds of Age appear sometime twenty or thirty years before some
others: Some Men's Hair begins to change when they are but thirty or forty years
of Age, whereas many other symptoms appear not till they have passed sixty or
seventy years. These steal upon Men suddenly, before they are aware, to which
the Prophet does allude in those ripe and unexpected Judgments that were
falling upon Ephraim; Gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows
it not. Hos. 7. 9.


Thirdly, They do agree in their eminency and remarkableness, they are both of
them most signal things; Men stand still and admire if accidentally they cast
their eyes upon the Almond Tree that stands all on the Blossom; and so they do
if they behold a comely and honorable Head of Hair, that is as white as that:
the Trees that blossom in March, or April, are little taken notice of, because
then it is a common thing, neither have they that splendour upon them, that the
Almond Tree has, that advances its most comely top all alone, while all other
sleep in their Winter Garments: In like manner the Almond Head is taken special
notice of among a thousand, every one being very desirous to behold it, and
that with great admiration and reverence; The glory of young Men is their
strength, and the beauty and honor of old Men is the Gray-Head: Prove. 20. 29.
And this honor is put upon it by the special appointment of God himself, Thou
shall rise up before the Hoary Head, and honor the face of the Old Man, and
fear thy God: I am the Lord. Lev. 19. 32.


Fourthly, They are very much alike in their Indications, they are both of them
most certain Diagnosticks of the thing they appertain to; if there are no other
sings then they, yet may all Men be very well assured of the truth they
bespeak; If there be no other Tree in all the Woods, or Orchards, blossomed
beside the Almond, yet know assuredly from thence, the Spring is come; if there
be nothing at all besides that shows it: if no Flowers appear on the Earth, if
the singing of the Birds be not come, if the voice of the Turtle be not heard
in the Land, Cant. 2. 12, 13.
if the Fig Tree does not yet put forth her green Figs, not the Vines with
their tender Grape give a good smell; yet if the Almond Tree be blossomed, know
of a truth, that the year is turned, and that the Sun is coming nearer toward
us, and that the Sap stirs, though it be not elsehow perceived: The same
certainty of demonstration also does attend the Hoary Head; if no other
symptom appear, yet if the Hair begin to change white, know from thence, that
the Winter of Age has already begun to show it self; the evil days are coming
on apace, though the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not
darkened; though the keepers of the House, the strong Men, the Grinders, and the
lookers out of the Windows, be not yet enfeebled; though the Doors be open in
the Street, and the voice of the Grinding, and the Daughters of Music be as
high as ever; yet if the Almond Tree flourish, if the Hair of the Head be
changed to White, it is an undoubted Indication of the weakness attending age:
the habit of the Body is already changed, the innate heat begins to be
suffocated, the radical moisture is consuming, the excrements (which constitute
the Hair) are inconcocted, and the temperament of Old age has already seized
the Man, although it be no other ways to be discerned.

Lastly, They do also exceeding well agree in their Prognostics; they are both
of them most certain forerunners and foretellers of what is to follow after
them. If the Almond Tree be blossomed, it is a most certain sign that Fruit
will come after, and that it is not far behind; Aarons Rod budded (as you
heard) and soon after it brought forth Almonds, the Flowers are in order to the
Fruit that must succeed.

-- Cum se nux plurima sylvis
Induet in florem, and ramos curvabit olentes,
Si superant faetus, pariter frumenta sequentur
And thus Gray Hairs the flowers of old age, do give a certain Prognostic,
that death which is the Fruit thereof, is near at hand. Jacob says concerning
his son Joseph, If mischief befall him by the way, then shall ye bring down my
gray hairs with sorrow to the grave. Genesis 42. 38.
A sad accident might have brought them down with sorrow to the grave; but they
would have come as surely without. These are Churchyard flowers, which may
serve to them that bear them, in stead of Passing-Bels, to give them certain
notice, whither they are suddenly going. There are some Naturalists who are yet
bolder, and affirm, that the very thought and imagination of gray hairs, even
in the dreams of them, though in a Person never so young, do portend the same
thing: When they were Sacrificing in behalf of one of the Emperors of Rome,
the hairs of a Boys Head, who did Administer to the Priests were all on a
sudden changed to white; which the Soothsayers and Wise Men did presently
interpret to the Change of the Emperor, and that an Old man should succeed,
which accordingly fell out; for Nero, who was but one and thirty years old, was
soon taken away, and Galba, who was seventy three, Reigned in his stead: There
is far more certainty in the reality of the thing. It may thus fall out to
young men, but it must thus fall out to old: Mors, senibus, in foribus est;
juvenibus, in infidiis: Young men are taken away, but Old men go away, in
their own natural course; for Candidi are Candidati mortis, and per eam,
immortalitatis. Those that are white are marked out in order unto death, and
thereby unto immortality. There might many other Particulars be assigned,
wherein the Almond-Tree and the Hoary Head do exactly agree, but these few may
suffice to show us, that the change of no other part of the Body in age, can be
hereby figured out unto us so properly as this we have been speaking of.

Beside Canities is a constant attendant on age, and is intimated unto us in no
other part of this allegory: How often in Scripture are they mentioned both
together? I am now old and Gray Headed, says Samuel: 1 Samuel 12. 2.
and David Prays, When I am old and Gray Headed O Lord forsake me not. Psalm.
71. 18.
Nay, I may say one thing of this Symptom, that is not to be said of any of
the other; It is a plain and a full description of Age, without any addition at
all; say a Gray Headed man, and you say an Old man, without any farther
Periphrasis. The sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the
young man, and the Virgin; the Suckling also, with the man of Gray Hairs. Deuteronomy.
32. 25.


The Grasshopper shall be a burden; Or rather, Shall grow (or show) big and
burdensome.
In the interpretation of this sentence, and that which follows, which does
depend hereon, I must of necessity recede somewhat both from the common
Translation, and the usual interpretation of the place; wherein, if my opinion,
together with its novelty, bring along with it any thing of satisfaction, I
presume it will be never the worse accepted: For in these Theoretical notions,
the danger is not so great, to deviate from the beaten road, and to be
Heterodox to the general received opinion. For the subject of this Proposition,
without all controversy, it is the Locust or Grasshopper, which differ very
little, either in their nature or form, and may very well intend the same
thing: The predicate is far more difficult, and therefore has given occasion
to more variety of translations; that which is most usual is, Erit oneri, which
our English exactly follows, The Grasshopper shall be a burden; from whence most
Interpreters do put this sense upon the place, viz. that the Grasshopper, or any
such small thing, is a great burden to old men; which although it may be a
truth, yet it can in no wise be intended by these words. For then King Solomon
would in this clause vary much from the general scope of all these verses,
which is (as has already been said) Allegorical, and from the particular mode
of expressing himself in this verse, which is Hieroglyphical. Beside the words
in no propriety of Grammar can possibly bear such a sense as this; and it has
been a great wonder to me how this Construction was first taken up, and how it
has gained so great credit among men: Nor can I yet give my self the least
satisfaction herein, unless it be from the ambiguity of the Latin Phrase, Erit
oneri, which may very well be taken in a double sense; either Erit oneri seni,
seu alteri; or Erit oneri sibi. The first of these must be taken for the
carrying the words to the interpretation which has been before mentioned; but
how incongruous it is to the very Grammatical reading of the words, any one who
is the least skilled in the Original can easily give an account. For what is
here predicated is directly predicated of the Grasshopper, and not in relation
to any other person, or thing else whatsoever. And hence some have translated
it, Onerabitur, sive gravabitur; others, Onerabit, sive gravabit se; others,
Crescet; the Vulgar Latin gives the Metaphor one remove more, to those that
are burdened with flesh or fat, rendering it, impinguabitur Locusta; but the
Translation of the Septuagint upon this word is most remarkable, and gives very
great light to the understanding of the true meaning of the place, (...),
Crassabitur, densabitur, vel pinguecset. Wherefore that the doubtfulness of
speech, both in the Latin and English, (which has misled most Interpreters)
may be for the future removed, I judge it most convenient that the Translation
of the Vulgar Latin take principal place, or that it be rendered in Latin,
Locusta, onustam se reddet, or, praebebit; which the Conjugation does mostly
favor; and in English, the Grasshopper shall grow (or show) big and burdensome.
For the right understanding of which words, we must be sure to enquire, what
parts of the body of man they are, that may be most aptly represented by the
Grasshopper, and what change that is, that is here denoted unto us: Which that
we may the better do, we must also take notice of one special distinction of
the parts of the body.

Of the parts of the body that are enlivened by the spirit of the whole (for of
the other mention was made in the last) there be two sorts: Either the fluid,
moist, succulent, tender, and soft parts of the body; or the dry, solid,
tensile, hard, and cru^^y parts of the body. The first of these, seem to be
intended in the following words, the last of these, in these that are before
us. This distinction is usually termed, the distinction of the Philosophers, in
opposition to all those manifold divisions of the parts of the body, that are
to be found among Physicians; And indeed it has more of clearness and
demonstration in it, than any of the other; neither that of Hippocrates in
(...), and (...); nor that of Galen, in spermaticas and sanguineas; nor that
generally received among most, In similares and organicas, is without its
difficulties; It has put very learned and ingenious men very hard to it, to
make the best of these stand firm against its opposers: but this that we are
now speaking of, is so plain and obvious to the sense, that no man ever yet
disallowed of it, or has at any time undertaken to contradict it. Indeed, that
distinction of the parts into spermatical and sanguineous, as usually it is
applied, comes the nearest to what is here intended; but the terms are not so
proper; and beside, they are built upon a false foundation, which is, that the
several parts of the body have their origination from several and distinct
principles of generation: viz. semen and sanguis menstruus; but the ingenuity
of this later Age, has justly exploded such a Doctrine as that, and has
brought all knowing men to confess, that all the parts of the body, both of one
kind and of another, have their original equally from one and the same seminal
matter. And yet the former distinction of the parts, in molle^ and duras, may
be found to have a just right, even from their first producer. For the seed it
self, is not of so equal a substance and consistence, but that variety of
parts, as to softness and hardness, may easily be discerned in it. And this Job
(beyond all humane Writers whatsoever) does plainly declare, when he says, Job
10. 10.
Thou have poured me out like milk, and crudled me like Cheese. The very first
matter of generation in this respect has a double substance; there is a
lacteous, and a caseous part therein; there is a tenderer and a more fluid
part; there is also a more Condensed and Coagulated part; which are apt to
produce afterward parts in the body of the like diversification; as the
following verse does plainly express; Thou have covered me with skin, and with
flesh; thou have fenced me with bones and with sinews; bones and sinews, they
proceed from the crudled part of the seed; flesh of all sorts, both Musculous,
Parenchymous, and Glandulous, that proceeds from the fluid or milky part; and
skin, that is the medium participationis of them both. Flesh and bones
therefore seem to stand in the greatest opposition one unto another in respect
of this distinction of the parts; And all the other parts of the body to each
other, as they have relation to one of these. Now which of these two the
Grasshopper does best resemble, is very easy for any one to give an account.

The Locust and Grasshopper are both of them hard, crusty, cragged, crumpling
Creatures, differing from all others principally in the protuberance of their
limbs, having their legs strangely crooked, and their joints very closely
inverted, and at a great distance from the trunk of their body. And this is the
most remarkable thing in their frame, and that by which they are described in
the Book of God; Lev. 1. 22.
Yet these may ye eat of every flying creeping thing that goes upon all four,
which have legs above their feet to leap withal upon the earth; And afterward
they are enumerated, The Locust after his kind, and the Grasshopper after his
kind. Ver. 23.
This then being the known form of these Creatures, they do most aptly
represent the hard and solid parts of the body, the bones and their
protuberances, and all those parts that are produced from the thicker part of
the seminary matter. Osteologers have very well observed, that the parts
appertaining to the bones, which stand out at a distance from their bodies, are
either the Adnate, or the Enate parts, either the Epiphyses, or the Apophyses
of the bones. The first of these in Age grow harder and more compact and
affixed to the bones themselves; the last of these in Age grow more apparent,
and seem to be bigger, and stand at a farther distance, than they did before:
And unto this it is that the Chaldee Paraphrase does directly point;
Inflabuntur tali pedum tuorum. Now, the Tali are sometime taken for the
Astralagi, the bones in the heel, and sometime for the Malleoli; the Apophyses,
of those two bones which constitute the leg, namely, the Tibia, and the Fibula;
all which, together with them that answer them in the wrist, and all other
bunching parts of the bones, (which would be needless particularly to name,) do
in age appear far bigger, and at a greater distance from the body of the bone,
than they did before. Yet I cannot but take more special notice of one sort of
bones, whose Apophyses are more eminent, than any others; and may therefore be
more aptly resembled by the Grasshoppers, and they are the Vertebrae of the
Spine; every one of which, both in the neck, in the back, and in the loins,
have seven several prominencies, four oblique ones, namely, two ascending, and
two descending: two transverse ones, and one acute, strait forward toward the
skin. Now, when man by reason of age begins to stoop and bend forward, and
withal those fleshy parts, that cover these processes, begin to shrink and
decay, (as shall be showed in the following symptom) it must necessarily
follow, that all those Apophyses must appear a great deal plainer and bigger,
than they were before, whereby they will so exactly resemble the several
protuberances of the limbs of the Grasshopper, that no words can sufficiently
express their likeness, and none but the diligent observer of them both, can
possibly understand. And from this exact likeness, without all doubt, arose the
Fable of Tithonus, that living to extreme old age, he was at last turned into a
Grasshopper, and into it, it may be very well moralized again; For then the body
of man is quite another thing than what it was in its prime, it is contracted,
and becomes much less, and crumpled up together, and in the end is brought even
to crawle upon the ground.

Contrahimur, miroque modo decrescimus ipsi,
Dimidium nostri corporis esse putes:^ infans,
Fitque tripes, prorsus quadrupesque ut parvulus
Et per sordentem f^^bile serpit humum.
Cornel. Gallus.
There remains yet one reason more that induces me to believe, that the
parts we have been speaking of, are principally here intended, and that is
taken from the word which is here the predicate, whose root (...) signifies
primarily, to carry or bear burdens, Lam. 5. 7. Ezr^ 6. 3. Nch. 4. 10
and in this sense it is mostly used. Now, the parts in man that may be called
the Porters, and which bear the burdens that are carried, can be no other than
the S^apula, and its A^r^mion, which is the part upon which the burden is
pitched; and the back bone which is the part that gives the greatest strength
toward the bearing of it, both which, when age has much enfeebled a man,
become unserviceable as unto those ends, these Porters do now become a
porterage themselves, and those parts that were wont to bear the greatest
burdens, are now so great a burden themselves, that the man stoops under them,
and is scarce able to bear them.

Now, as the bones are principally here intended, so also all the other solid
parts of the body, that are made of the same crassiment of seed, may be here
included; and if we do but here recall the Translation of the LXX, we shall
understand what change it is in age, that all these undergo; the Cartilages of
the body, the Ligaments, the Membranes, the Fibers, the Veins, the Arteries,
the Nerves, and Tendons, and the like, do all grow harder and drier in age, and
tend more toward the nature of bones. The skin also being partly of this kind
(as was before said) is to be numbered hereunto, which so long as man remains in
strength is beautiful, plain, and polite; but as he declines, grows more
crustly, and dry, and callous, and consequently falls into abundance of
wrinckles.

Plurima sunt juvenum discrimina, pulchrior ille,
Hoc, atque ille alio --
Una senum facies.
And that learned Physician, Vallesius, de sacra Philos. c. 66.
(who in his youth had wearied himself out with the uncertainty and confusion
of profane Authors, and therefore in his age betook himself to sacred
Philosophy,) that he might more powerfully assign over this Hieroglyphical
expression to the sense we have here delivered, says; the Locust ought to be
understood of the Sea-Locust, which is covered over with an hard, and a crusty
and rugged shell: and whosoever shall so take it, cannot but conclude, that it
does decipher the parts, we have now treated of. However, I judge the
Land-Locust, or Grasshopper may very well signify the same thing; beside, it is
much better known to men, than the other is, and may be extended to some parts
(that ought here to be included) which the other cannot so significantly
denote; For by this Clause, the Grasshopper shall be a burden, we are to
understand the alteration of all the more hard and solid parts of the body,
usually called the spermatical; Ductilium, viz. induratio, and incrustatio; and
fragilium extantia, and prominentia.

Desire shall fail, Or rather. The Capers shall shrink.
The word (...) has two remarkable significations, the one primary and plain,
whereby it signifies, desiderium, concupiscentia, appetitus; desire, or
appetite; the other, secondary or figurative, whereby it signifies Capparis,
Capers, or the fruit, or rather the flowers of the Caper shrub, or bush. And
this word is translated from its first signification to this latter, because of
the known use of Capers, which is to excite the appetite; Capparis excitat
orexin, and appetitum, cibi, and veneris: from whence it is, that some do not
improbably derive the word from (...), ad luxuriam concito; and for these ends,
especially that of the stomach, are they preserved in pickle, and so often used
among us for sauce. Now, that the word in this place ought to be taken in this
latter, that is, in the figurative signification, these following reasons do
induce me to believe, every one of which singly, seem to have a good persuasive
power; but all of them jointly, have doubtless a compulsive power, to any
rational man to be of the same opinion. The first, is the general scope, that
the wisdom of Solomon* proposes to it self in this whole description of age,
which is by way of Allegory all along. No wonder therefore if the same wisdom,
where there be two significations of a word, shall rather prefer the
Allegorical; the second, is the particular intent of this verse, which is to
show the sensible alterations that are made in man in old age, both in respect
of his mind, and of the several parts of the body, and that symbolically, or by
way of resemblance to other things: and not at all to relate to any of the
faculties; and that which does abundantly back this reason, is, that the
weakened faculties were described before, and particularly it was shown
sufficiently, how the appetite both ad cibum and Coitum was weakened, in the
last verse, in those words, the voice of the grinding is low: And therefore a
learned Commentator upon this place, Cornel. a Lap.
when he had said, Senum libido frigescit, further adds, (that which might
better distinguish it from what went before,) and organa coitus dissipantur;
which is indeed, the true purport of the words, though but in part. Again, the
Contextural expressions are of the selfsame nature, both those that follow in
the Allegory, namely, the silver Cord, and the golden Bowl: and also those that
immediately precede, namely, the Grasshopper, and the Almond tree: And as the
word (...) was translated from its primary signification, which is, waking, (as
was said,) to that figurative, of the Almond tree; so also would it be most
congruous to deal with this word we are now about. Again, Authority is
sufficient, yea, abundant for this way of translating it: If any one please to
consult all the variety of Interpreters, he shall find (that which is a great
rarity) the most and the best to go together, this way; and since Hieron did
but give favor hereunto, I find no Translatour vary hencefrom, but some few
into Vulgar Tongues.

Lastly, By this way of translating only, there will be a direct opposition,
and a perfect Antithesis (which certainly there ought to be) betwixt this word
and that which immediately went before. The Grasshoppers and Capers are in their
form and fashion; their substance and consistence, clean contrary one to
another; The one, being protuberous, rough, crusty, and hard: The other, round,
smooth, spongy, and soft: And therefore may be very fit Emblems to represent
the several contradistinct parts of the body, under the same variety of
consistence. Wherefore, as the Grasshopper did principally represent the bones,
and secondarily, all those parts that proceed from the Crassiment of the seed;
so also here, the Capers do as aptly represent principally the flesh, and
secondarily, the other moist and fluid parts of the body that proceed from the
more tenuous part of the seminary matter: and that which does farther confirm
this reason, is, from the Antithesis that is also in the predicate of these
expressions: For as there, the Grasshoppers are said to grow big, or burdensome;
So here, the Capers are said to shrink or decay; for so the word (...)
signifies, and is usually translated, dissipabitur, abolebitur, conteret,
shall wast or consume, shall be spent, or worn out; and is a Metaphor taken
from interbastation, patching or piecing, sewing or clapping close together,
making faster or harder those things, that were more dilated, spongy, and
flourishing before: So that what we are to understand by this Sentence, the
Capers shall shrink, is the alteration of all the moist and tender parts of the
body, usually called, the sanguineous; Fluidarum, scil. depravatio and
minoratio: and mollium ariditas and consumptio; I cannot exclude hencefrom that
change that befalls the blood and natural humors of the body in the time of
age: For they become low and much depauperated, they are diminished, and far
less in quantity than they were before.

Minimus gelido jam corpore sanguis. Nor can I exclude that change that happens
to the fat and marrow; man in his full strength is described by Job to be such
an one, Job 21. 23, 24.
Whose breasts are full of milk, and his bones moystned with marrow: But when
he is very old, there is scarce any milk, or fat, or marrow, or moisture left
in all his body; a Consumption is determined concerning them all. But that
alteration which is principally here intended, is that which befalls those
parts of the body that usually go under the name of flesh. Now, the flesh of
the body is of three sorts, Parenchymous, Glandulous, or Musculous; The flesh
either of the bowels or entrails, or of the Glandules or kernels; or lastly, of
the Muscles, or outward parts of the body that are the instruments of voluntary
motion. It is without all question, that the entrails of man, as the Liver, the
Spleen, the Heart, the Lungs, etc. do receive great alteration in age, they
decline very much from their softness, sponginess and porofity, and become far
harder and faster, and more Schirrous than they were before. The same also may
be said concerning all the natural Glandules in the body of man, those that
serve either to Excretion, to Reduction, or to Nutrition: They all of them vary
much from their primitive tenderness and bigness, and so become more durous,
and are far more consumed than they were at first; and that which the Learned
and most ingenious Author of the late Tract De Glandulis, Dr. Wh^rton, c. 16.
does observe of the Thymus, by the time of middle age; may be also observed of
most of the other Glandules in the time of extreme age; that is, that they will
bear very little proportion either in weight or substance, to what they did at
first, but by experience they are found to shrivel and shrink away, and be
consumed almost to nothing.

But of all the parts of the body, those lax and tender flakes of flesh, that
lie over, and cover the bones, and are at both ends affixed to them, which from
the form of some of them are usually called Muscles, do most properly deserve
the name of flesh, and are consequently chiefly intended in this place. These
are in Scripture called the coverings of a man: Psa. 139. 13. Job 10. 11.
Thou have covered me, says David, in my mothers womb. And again Job, Thou
have covered me with skin, and with flesh. Now, as man declines in years, so do
these coverings wax old and shrink, so that at length they become shorter and
narrower, than that a man can comelily be wrapped up in them: So that this,
together with the former Symptom, does abundantly show the great alteration
and deformity that is easily discerned upon the external parts of the body, in
the time of extreme age. The body becomes more uncomly, cragged, and crumpled,
the bones stare through the skin, the flesh that should cover them is wasted
much away. And this condition is lively described by Elihu, one of the friends
of Job; who speaking of Gods dealing with men, sometime in reference to their
body, (pointing therein at Jobs Consumption, which in this respect is exactly
answerable to the Marasmus Senilis,) says, His flesh is consumed away that it
cannot be seen, and his bones that were not seen, stick out. Job 33. 21.
I would have this expression be principally noted, and remembered, as being a
most perfect Comment upon these two last mentioned Symptoms of age. For the
former words, viz. His flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen, is the
same that is said in these words, Dissipatur Capparis: and the latter words,
viz. The bones which were not seen, stick out, is the same which is said in
those, Impinguatur Locusta.

And thus much shall suffice to have spoken for the Explication of all those
Symtomes that attend a man all along the time of his decrepit state.

For man goes to his long home: and the mourners go about the streets.
These words being not at all figurative, but only a plain and easy transition
from one part of the Allegory to another, namely, from those Symptoms that
attend a man all along his decrepit state, unto those that do immediately
forerun his Dissolution: It is beside my purpose to speak to them at all, for
my intention has been only to explain the difficult terms in the Allegory; And
I would not willingly seem to any, 1 Pet. 4. 15.
(...), to play the Bishop in another Diocese, or to meddle with those matters
that are peculiarized to another Coat, yet because the words are now read, I
cannot but take notice of two things in them, that is, first, the term of long
home; and secondly, the mourning at the funeral.

The word (...) which intimates unto us the state of death, and is here
translated Long: has three eminent significations, either of which may be very
well accepted in this place.

In the first place it signifies, abditum, occultum; a secret and an hidden
thing, and thus it is derived from the word (...) Latitavit, absconditum fuit,
as it is very often used: Lev. 4. 13. 5. 2.
If the whole Congregation of Israel sin through ignorance, and the thing be
hid from the eyes of the assembly. And again, (not to cite many places to this
purpose which were easy to do,) in the last Verse of this Chapter and Book of
Ecclesiastes; For God will bring every work to judgment, with every secret
thing; which is from the same original word used in this fifth verse for long
home. And indeed, that home that we are all hasting to, and know not how soon
we may recover or come at; and aged persons are undoubtedly at the door of: is
the true and proper hiding place for all living: For they shall all lie down
alike together in the grave, Job 21. 26.
and the worms shall cover them. 40. 13.
Men are hid together in the dust, and their faces are there bound in secret.
Death is a state of obscurity, and the Grave a place of secrecy; and therefore
it is that Job, wishing for death, phraseth it; Job 4. 13.
Oh that thou would hide me in the Grave, that thou would keep me in
secret: But beside the bare signification of secrecy, this word does for the
most part carry along with it an intimation of duration or continu^nce; and
therefore may very well be translated, Tempus eujus duratio est abscondita, an
hidden duration, a time that no man knows how long; which is exactly answered
by our English Law-phrase, time out of mind; and that both a part, post; and a
part, ante; time either that is past, or that is to come; of which no man can
give an account: Both which also are signified unto us by the Latin word Olim,
which without all question came from the Hebrew word we are now speakking of;
Eccl. 1. 10.
as both the sound and signification will abundantly make appear: Now this
duration at least is in the state of death, that no man knows how long it will
continue: No one living can give an account how long it shall be before, the
earth shall disclose her blood and her bones, and shall no more cover her slain.

The second signification of the word is avum, seculum an age, a certain long
space of time, that is, commensurate with the duration of the thing, that is
spoken of* A perpetuity (as I may so say) that is circumscribed; an
everlastingness that lasts as long, as the thing of which it is affirmed: It is
said of an Hebrew Servants refusing to go out free, Deuteronomy. 15. 17. Exodus 21. 6.
His Master shall bore his Ear through with an Aul, and he shall serve him for
ever. And again when Hannah resolved to present her son Samuel to the Lord, she
says, I will bring him, that he may appear before the Lord, and there abide
for ever: 1 Samuel 1. 22. 28.
which Term for ever is afterward explained, when she does bring him and
present him; then she says, I have lent him to the Lord as long as he lives:
1 Samuel 27. ult.
Now in this sense also may the word be taken in this place, so long as Death
lives (and it is the last enemy that shall be destroyed) it will keep in its
possession, all that it has, or shall surprise: The Graves must be our homes,
when once we come there, as long as there is any Dust to cover us, or Heavens
to surround us. Men lies down and rises not, till the Heavens be no more,
they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep. Job. 14: 12.
Until the grave shall not only cease from craving, but from being; and
until death be wholly swallowed up of victory, all those Bodies that are under
their power, must there quietly remain, as in their own unalterable habitations.

The last signification of this word is duratio absolute infinita, aeternitas:
A complete and absolute perpetuity, eternity. And in this signification it is
mostly used, and must always be interpreted when it is applied to God, or any
of his Attributes, as often it is. When Nebuchadnezzars understanding was
returned to him, he blessed the most high, Dan. 4. 37.
and praised and honored him that lives for ever, whose dominion is an
everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation: Again
it is said in Isaiah, Isa 45. 17.
Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation. Now in this
last sense also may the same word in this place be safely taken; in domum
aternitatis suae. The state we arrive at, by Death, is an everlasting state,
and we shall never return to this life again through all eternity. And hence it
is that usually we find such Epitaphs; hanc aternam sedem sibi pos^it: and Hac
domus aeterna est, hic sum situs, hic ero semper.

Nor is the Scripture without its testimony hereunto; Ps. 39, 13.
for David says, Spare me a little that I may recover strength before I go
hence and be no more. And Job does not only, say it, but argue upon it: There
is hope of a Tree if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, Job 14. Ver. 7.
Ver. 8.
and that the tender branch thereof will not cease. Though the root there of
wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground: Ver. 9.
Yet through the sent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a
plant; But Man dies, Ver. 10.
and wastes away; yea Man gives up the Ghost, and where is he? And that
Interrogation, Ver. 14.
If a Man die, shall he live again? which usually is interpreted vehemently to
affirm; seems on the contrary to me, most earnestly to deny, and is as much as
to say, if a Man die he shall never live more, no hopes of a return to this
life again: And this

First the manner of proposing the question seems chiefly to intend; for it is
not negatively proposed; If a man die shall he not live again? but
affirmatively, shall he live again? Now Negative Interrogations do in all
Languages, and in Scripture phrase too, more properly intend affirmative
Propositions, as where it is said, Does not each of you, Luke 13. 15, 16.
on the sabbath day loose his Ox, or his Ass, from the stall? and ought not
this Woman also to be loosed? both of them most vehemently affirming: and
again, another Interrogation; How shall he not also with him give us all
things? Romans 8. 32.
is as much as to say, he shall most surely do it. On the other hand,
affirmative Interrogations do for the most part intend negative Propositions:
Joseph says, How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? Genesis 39.
^.
and the Lord says, How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? how shall I deliver
thee Israel? Hos. 11. 8 9.
how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? all of them
intending the denying of the thing: Both these Interrogations, about the same
subject too, are together in one Verse of the Psalms, still intending their
contrary Propositions; What Man is he that lives, and shall not see death?
Psalm. 89. 48.
shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? the first part of the
Verse is negatively proposed, and therefore signifies the strong affirming of
the thing, he shall surely see death: and the latter part of the verse is
affirmatively proposed, and therefore signifies the vehement negation of it;
he shall in no wise deliver his soul from the hand of the Grave: The manner
therefore of proposing this question being without a negative, does seem to
carry the sense, that if a man be dead he shall never live again.

Secondly the inference that is hence made confirms the same thing; All the
days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come; does far more
naturally and powerfully proceed from the denying of life again, then from the
asserting it: as to the diligent observer will easily appear; if a man shall
never live again in this world, it is of most high concern to prepare for that
change that foreruns an everlasting state. There is no returning more from
death, and therefore let every one wait upon his business, and finish it,
before that time come: There is no work, nor devise, nor knowledge, nor wisdom
in the grave, whither we are going: And since there is no returning thencefrom,
how cogent will the argument be, for every one to wait all the days of his
appointed time, till his change shall come. If the Tree fall to the south,
Eccles. 9, 10.
or to the north, in the place where the Tree falls, there it shall be: And
therefore it is of the greatest concern to take care how the Tree fall. If a
man at his departure out of this life fall toward happiness, or toward
misery, in the same condition he falls, shall he remain for ever; and therefore
it is a business of everlasting concern, to await our fall.

But lastly, that which makes it yet more clear, that this interrogation
intends the negative, is the words in the latter end of this Chapter; where Job
resuming the subject, and summarily declaring what he had been before speaking
of; he says plainly, Thou prevailest for ever against him, Job 14. v. 20.
and he passes, thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away. I speak
not these things in the least to enervate that most comfortable Christian
Doctrine of the Resurrection; and as Job was very careful in the forecited
Chapter, to keep his reserve as unto that; so that in the midst of the
Chapter (that therefore it might have an aspect over the whole) he interposeth
a sentence to that purpose; Verse. 12.
Man lies down and rises not, till the Heavens be no more. So I would not
have any one so far mistake this Doctrine, as to think the Body of Man shall be
kept in everlasting Chains of darkness: for, though it shall never return to
this working state again, yet God has appointed a set time, Verse. 13.
to remember it in: at which time it shall, by the Word of God, shake off its
corruption, dishonor, and weakness; and by his gift shall be clothed with
spirituality, 1 Cor. 15. 41, 42.
glory, and Immortality. Herein no one can err, who knows the Scripture, and
the Power of God, as our Savior intimates; Mat. 22. v. 29.
The Power of God reaches us, that God can raise the dead; and the Scriptures
teach us that he will; and what God can, and will do, must certainly come to
pass: But the Doctrine of the New Testament gives a far clearer light hereunto,
therein there is a sufficient testimony given unto all Men, in raising Christ
from the dead: 1 Cor. 15. 23.
For he being the first Fruits of them that sleep, gives a certain
demonstration, that all the other also must follow in their order. Act. 17. 18.
(...) are so nearly related to each other, that they are Preached, and
Believed, they are slighted, and contemned together: their foundation is so
much the same, that they must necessarily stand and fall alike. I have observed
that those late spreading Doctrines that have purposely obscured the History of
Christ at Jerusalem, have, before they have been aware, wholly lost the
Doctrine of the Resurrection: I shall not farther add hereunto; it may seem
that I have too much digressed already; but I hope no farther, then for the
necessary clearing of the words long home, and the reserving entire, that
unquestionable Article of our Faith, the Resurrection of the Body.

The other remarkable thing is the Mourning at the Funeral; I shall not spend
time in discoursing what kind of Mourners these are; whether Children,
Relations, Friends, Neighbors, hired Persons, these, or any, or all of these;
it is enough that there is a Public Mourning expressed, at such a Funeral as
this; I say it is enough, and methinks I hear some others say, it is too much;
for if it be so, as has been related, if Age be so miserable and comfortless a
condition as hat been described; happy sure are they, that are gone, or going,
off from it: If all manner of evils do attend those that are extremely aged,
and nothing that good or pleasurable is; when they change this State, for that
which is perfectly happy (as we ought to believe concerning all our Christian
Friends departed) in stead of Mourning, why should there not be Rejoicing? in
stead of hanging down the Head and Weeping, Why should there not be lifting up
the Head and Triumphing? at so great a bettering their condition, as such a
Change must necessarily produce: To this I must needs answer, That, if we truly
understood our selves, and were thoroughly possessed of what we do profess, in
respect of the party Deceased, there were no cause of Mourning at all, but
rather of Rejoicing; And this not only in respect of Persons decrepit with
Age, but of any other, in whatsoever flourishing condition of this Life; for
the change would then be, but from a less miserable estate, to that which is
most completely blessed: for Man, at his best estate, as he is altogether
Vanity, so is he very miserable, and encompassed and perplexed with abundance
of evil, which his last happy change gives him a deliverance from for ever.
Isa. 57. 1.
The righteous are taken away from the evil to come: and the state they are
taken to, is infinitely and unexpressibly happy. Most noble and excellent was
that saying upon a Moral account; The selfsame journey that thou have taken
from no being, unto being, and from a perexistent being, to this mortal life;
thou may again take (with the same assurance of preferment) from this Life,
by Death; to a Life that has Immortality in it: but the Believer in Christ
Jesus only, has a true prospect of the advantages of his great Change: the
Life of Christ, and the gain of death, are known and apprehended together:
Phil. 1. 21.
For me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. He that has lived unto the Lord
knows fullwell; 2 Cor. 5. 1.
That when his earthly house of this Tabernacle shall be dissolved, he has a
building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. He
assuredly knows from the prelibation of Eternal Life, which he has had in
this World, that then all tears shall be wiped away from his eyes, and he shall
never know one evil more, and that he shall be put into immediate possession of
all those good things, that he either Prayed, or hoped for in this life, into a
perfect state of Bliss, infinite, at least, for the duration: And therefore
upon this account, there will be very little cause of Lamentation. And,
whosoever he is, that Mournes merely upon the account of the Party deceased, he
does necessarily redargue himself of unbelief, and plainly show, that there is
an haesitation in his Mind, concerning one of these two things; whether Heaven
be such a place as has been described unto us in the Book of God, or whether
his Friend be assuredly gone to that place. So that Funeral Mournings are, as
Divines say of Funeral Sermons, more in respect of the Living then of the Dead.
To go unlamented is no misery to the Dead; but a shame to the Living. There
does indeed lie a Duty upon all that are left behind, to bewail their own loss
of their Godly Friend; Natural Affection, and the Fleshly part of Man ought
something to be indulged in this respect; but the loss of a great and a long
Example of Piety, whose presence has been a continued blessing, both to
persons and places; ought most seriously and sadly to affect the inward man;
and therefore they are sharply reproved by the Prophet, Isa. 57. 1.
who are negligent in this duty; The righteous perishes, and no man lays it
to heart; the merciful men are taken away, none considering, etc. And it is to
be observed, that the Saints of God, though never so old, and brought never so
low, through the miseries attending them; when they changed this life for a
better, were still buried with great lamentation. Genesis 50. 11.
Abel-mizraim was a place never to be forgot, 1 Samuel 2^. 1.
either by the Egyptians, Number. 20 19.
or the Canaanites; and not Jacob only, but Moses, and Aaron, Deuteronomy. 34. 8.
and Samuel were buried by the assembly of the people of Israel, and very great
public mournings was made for them all.

Verse 6. Or ever the silver Cord be loosed, or the golden Bowl be broken, or
the Pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the Wheel broken at the Cistern.
THus far the King has been treating of all those Symptoms that accompany a
man all along his decrepit state, which may appear upon him, while yet he may
have some space given him, to remain in the Land of the living: These that
follow in this verse are such that immediately forerun his dissolution; which
when they once appear, there remains nothing, but a present preparation for his
Funeral. And they may serve as indications, not only in this weak and spent
condition of age; but in whatsoever other condition of man's life, by the
violence of a disease, they are jointly found; they give a most certain
Prognostic of approaching death. In the Explication whereof there is very much
variety of opinions; so that it would be exceeding tedious and troublesome to
follow them all; but I shall spare all that pains, and take notice of none of
them, but what I judge to be nearest the intentention of the Wise man,
forasmuch as most of the other, carry their own refutations in their faces: and
if I may be directed to find out any thing of truth contained in them, that
also will bear its own evidence along with it, and may serve for eviction of
whatsoever is contrary thereunto. Forasmuch as rectum est index, sui, and
obliqui. Death, which is the fruit of old age, and the unavoidable receptacle
of all living: is descried to be just at the door, by those Symptoms that
belong to the instruments, either of the animal faculty, or of the vital; (as
for those that belong unto the Natural, they have very little or no certainty
in this Case.) Those that belong to the animal, have reference unto the brain,
and the parts arising from it; either as they are continued without the
Cranium, Or ever the silver Cord be loosed; or else as they are contained
within the Cranium, The golden Bowl be broken. Those Symptoms that belong to
the vital faculty, have reference unto the heart, and the parts arising from
it; as they serve, either for importation of the blood and spirits; The Pitcher
broken at the Fountain; or for exportation of the same; The Wheel broken at the
Cistern. Now of all these in their Order.

Or ever the silver Cord be loosed.
The first thing that we must here make enquiry into, is what we are to
understand by the Cord; and we must be sure here also as in all other parts of
the description, to keep within compass of the Allegory; and find out those
parts of a man that are hereby represented. For he it is, that has hitherto
been described unto us, as an old house greatly decayed and ruinated, but yet
standing, by all the foregoing Symptoms; but now as an house falling down
which must no longer remain, by this Symtome, and those three which immediately
follow in this verse. And therefore these may very well be called, Cajetan.
quatuor mortis Concomitantia; the four attendants upon dying man.

The Scripture makes mention of the Cords of a man, Hos. 11. 4.
which although they are there to be taken in a Moral sense, and so
excentricall to what we are now about, yet they are a Metaphor taken from the
natural cords of a man, and may give some light thereunto: for as love in all
bodies politic (and consequently mystical) does both draw and unite; so in all
bodies natural, the self-same offices are performed by those parts of which we
are about to speak; for we must know, that all the several parts of man, are
not kept, and bound fast together by spells, nor are his several members moved
several ways, as it were by Magic Art, the soul of man does not by a bare
jubeo, cause the representation of outward objects, or the variation of the
position of the several limbs, without the help of instruments, but by the apt
frame of the whole body, and the pliableness of the several parts, and the
convenient position of all the Cords and Pulleys toward their appointed ends,
we perceive outward objects, and move our selves at pleasure so; as that an
artificial man, could there be in it, the same organs, and the same disposition
of them all, together with an active power to put them in execution, would have
a like sense and motion with our selves. The Chaldee Paraphrase does interpret
this Cord to the Ligula linguae, the string of the tongue; others interpret it
to the Spinalis medulla, the marrow of the back; others, to the Nerves; others,
to the outward Tunicle of the Nerves and marrow, which they have proper to
themselves, for their own strength; beside the other two which they receive
from the brain. All these have offered exceeding well, and without doubt have
hit the truth, and being put together may seem to make the whole of what is
here intended, which is the whole instrument of sense and motion, after it has
proceeded out of the Scull, and as it is distributed throughout the body; with
all its Coats and Tunicles, with all its divisions and separations. I mean, not
only the spinal marrow is here to be understood, (as principally it ought to
be,) but all the Nerves arising thence from, (both those seven pair, be they
more or less, that proceed from it, before it has attained any of the spines;
and those thirty pair, that proceed from the several Vertebrae of the neck, the
back, the loins, and the Os Sacrum,) and also the Filaments, and Fibers, and
Tendons, that proceed from all those Nerves. The Nerves and Fibers must in no
wise be here left out, forasmuch as they do more apparently both unite and
draw, than any other of the parts whatsoever. Job 10. 11.
Job says, Thou have fenced me with bones and with sinews. I compare these
fences of a man, to those of an hedge; where the bones answer to the stakes in
the hedge, making the substantial trunk of the body, unto which all the other
parts are to be fastened: and the Sinews or Nerves to the binders of the hedge;
which fasten and unite all the other parts to that trunk; and as for motion or
drawing, it is well known that there is none in all the body performed,
(whether voluntary or natural,) but by the influence of the animal spirits upon
the Nerves and Fibers, and their contraction thereupon, in those several parts,
into which they are inserted. Now, although all the several and innumerable
Filaments are to be accounted hereunto, yet they are most aptly expressed in
the singular number, by funiculus argenteus, the silver Cord, because they are
but the continuation of the same thing: The Fibers being nothing else but the
Nerves divided and dispersed, and the Nerves nothing else but the marrow in
like manner separated, as so many arms and branches of the same tree; they are
all one in their original, the brain; they are all one in their continuation
for a long time, in the spine; they are all one in their color, white; they
are all one in their form, long and round; they are all one in their Coats
having each the same three Tunicles, they are all one in their use, to convey
the animal spirits, and all this in an apt resemblance to a Cord; to which also
they are not unlike in their division, for then, they are but as so many
wreaths, or wattles of the same Cord; and that which is most observable to our
present purpose, is that by how much the more distant they are from their
original, by so much the thinner, and finer, the harder, and more compact do
they grow, like the several smaller, and better twisted ends of the same Cord.

It is called the silver Cord, first from its color, for it appears to the
eye, of a white, shining, resplendent, beauty, bright as silver; and thus it is
even when it is taken out of the body, after it is dead; but how much more
admirable and glorious must it needs be, while it remains in the body yet
living, and actuated with abundance of most refined spirits, which continually
ascend and descend thereupon. An Ancient and an admirable Anatomist, F^llobius
upon consideration of the great luster and perspicuity of it, compares it to
the Crystalline humor of the eye, and farther affirms, that he never saw any
thing in all his life, more beautiful than those two things.

Secondly, It may be called the silver Cord, from its place in which it is
seated in the body: it is placed very deep, secret, and secure; Job 2^. 1.
Job says, Surely there is a vein for the silver; that is, there is an
intricate, hidden, and mysterious Cavity in the earth, in which this Lunar
Mineral, does more securely pass its branches; just thus the Cord of our body,
as soon as ever it has left its original, it is passed into the most inward,
and secret Cavity of the Spine, which by reason of that admiration and
reverence the Ancients had for it, they called, (...), the holy Pipe; and when
in several places it passes thencefrom, it is conveyed all along with
wonderful artifice, both for secrecy and security, which is continued to the
most minute Filaments, for throughout the whole body, it lies lower, and
deeper, and safer, than the Veins, or Arteries, or any other common Conveyers
in the body of man.

Lastly, and chiefly, It is called the silver Cord, because of its excellency:
For as Silver above all other Minerals whatsoever (save only that most absolute
and perfect one of Gold,) is, and ought to be most valued and esteemed; so is,
and ought, this part we are now speaking of, next unto that most absolute and
perfect part, the brain, which in the very next following Symptom is
assimulated unto Gold. The ingenious Chemists take pleasure to liken the
several Metals they find in the bowels of the earth, to the heavenly
Luminaries, who after they have compared the most perfect, aptly to the Sun;
they in the next place, liken this of Silver as aptly to the Moon, and
therefore decipher it also by the self-same Character; showing us hereby, that
as the Moon in Heaven, is far more glorious and excellent, than all other
Celestial Bodies whatsoever, (the Sun alone excepted,) so Silver in the earth,
above all Terrestrial Bodies whatsoever (Gold alone excepted) has the same
pre-eminence.

Micat inter omnes,
-- Velut inter ignes,
Luna minores.
And this dignity has the Spinal Marrow with all its branches above all other
parts of the body except the brain; it has been in such esteem among
Philosophers, Plato in Timaeo. Hippoc.
that the best of them has acknowledged it the foundation of life; and the
great Master of Physicians has dignified it with the name of (...), thereby
clearly intimating, that if vitality be not chiefly therein placed, yet the
highest and most noble operations thereof, are performed thereupon. And such an
exact likeness there is between the Nerves and Silver, that they do by a mutual
and reciprocal Metaphor, sutably express one another, in the two several Worlds.

For as the Nerves or Sinews are here said to be the Silver of the Microcosme,
or little World, so is Silver as aptly said to be the Sinews of the Macrocosme,
or greater World. There being nothing in the whole World that is vigorously
carried on among Men, but by the help thereof: Silver is the Sinews of War and
of Peace, of Merchandise and of Tillage, nay I may farther add, of Learning,
and of virtue too.

Quis enim virtutem amplectitur ipsam Praemia si tollas. Now, as all the Works
of the greater World soon come to naught, if the influences of the Sinews
thereof be intercepted; so do all those of the Lesser World, if the Silver
thereof perish and decay; and therefore the loosning of the Silver Cord is here
given as an undoubted sign of instant Dissolution. For, as it was said of the
Tabernacle, J^r. 10. 20. Isa. 33. 20
That it was spoiled, and near its utter ruin, when the Cords thereof were
broken; so may it also be said of this earthly Tabernacle of our Bodies, when
we shall be unstrung, and the Cords of our Bodies broken asunder; we must then
expect suddenly to be dissolved: The Word here is variously translated,
rumpatur, elongetur, contrahatur, revertatur, dissolvatur; which variety may
give very great light unto the several causes of the symptom here intended:
but because such a narrow scrutiny may make a digression from what is here
intended, I shall for the present pass it by, and only take notice of the
symptom it self which is here aimed at; and, that the Latin word dissolvatur,
and the English loosned, do directly point at, namely the solution of the
Nerves or Marrow, called in Latin (from the Greeks and their Radix (...),
solvo) paralysis, and in English the Palsy: Sometime this solution happens only
to one part of the Silver Cord, which causes paralysis particularis, and then
the enlivening influence of the animal spirits is hindered only from those
parts of the Body, to which that does immediately tend, and so those parts
become wholly deprived both of sense and motion; Death has already taken
possession of a Leg, o^ an Arm, or the half of that Man, that is so far
paralytick, hardly or never more to be dispossessed; and therefore in our
language it is well styled the Dead Palsy. Sometime it happens to the head of
the spinal Marrow, and so hinders the influence of the spirits upon the whole
Silver Cord, and consequently takes away all sense and motion from all the
subjected parts; and this causes Paralysis universalis, which at all times,
and upon all occasions, gives a very probable Prognostic; but in the decrepit
Age of Man, a most certain and infallible one, of immediate Death.

Or the Golden Bowl be broken.
The Symptom last treated of, had reference to the rivulets of animality; this
we are now speaking of, relates to the fountain: For we must know that the Soul
of Man, the Queen Regent of all his operations, makes the Head the Royal Palace
of her residence, from whence she gives forth all her Precepts, Edicts, and
Commands, for the regulating and actuating all the subjected parts of the Body.
Now the parts of the Head are of two sorts, either the containing, or the
contained parts thereof: The last of these, namely the encompassed, or
contained parts, are the cerebrum, the cerebellum, and the medulla, with all
those several smaller parts, which curious observers have found out, to belong
to any of them, which I shall not so much as mention, because they are not so
directly pointed at in this place: And I do here, as I have done all along,
industriously avoid all things, especially all terms of Art, or second
intentions, that do not immediately conduce to the understanding of the
symptom under hand: but we must not so exclude these parts as to judge them
not all concerned in this expression; for upon the breaking of the Golden Bowl,
the brain it self, with all the contained parts appertaining thereunto, does
immediately cease, from all its operations: And if we shall take the Original
word in its plain signification, Cant 4. 12.
and as it is often used in Scripture too; Judge. 1. 15.
for f^ns, or scaturigo, a Fountain, or Spring; it would seem most properly and
primarily to intend this most noble part, the first spring of animality, the
original fountain of all sense and motion.

But because I find the word otherwise translated, and that upon very good
grounds, by all that have undertaken that charge, I shall in no wise dissent
from them; for indeed the Mystical and Metaphorical sense of Words ought still
to be preferred all along the Allegory: And I would not by any means break a
firm, well set, and a lasting Hedge, if there be any the least reason for the
standing of it. The root from which this word is derived is (...) volvit,
circumvolvit, complicavit, circumduxit: Sometime it is translated to roll, or
to roll together, sometimes to roll away, or to roll back; sometime to roll
over, wrap up, or encompass; so that the word in the Text is sometime
translated ^ecythus, Zach. 4. 2, 3.
a Pot, or Bowl, to hold any liquid substance in: sometime lenticula, a
Chrismatory, or Cruet, or Vessel to contain Oil; sometime orbis, 1 King 7. 7.
4^.
a Sphaerical Body encompassing others: The vulgar Latin removes the Metaphor
once again, and brings it home to its own door; vitta aurea, the Golden
Headband, for vitta signifies a Veil, a Coy^e, a Garland, or whatsoever else
may circle, or encompass the head: the LXX. has it (...), the repository of
the Brains; by all these we understand, that Interpreters do uno ore, with
full consent render the Word to the involving, circumscribing, encompassing,
containing parts.

Which also are of two sorts, either the external containing parts of the head;
or the internal: The external (beside those common Vestments that appertain to
other parts of the body also, as the Cuticula, Cutis, etc. which cannot be here
understood) are only two, the Perieranium, and the Cranium it self; now
although these are not chiefly intended in this place, yet surely they will put
in for a share of this Elogie; for as much as these do environ, defend, and
suspend all the inward parts, and do consequently exceedingly conduce toward
all animal operations. And the Chaldee Paraphrase does directly interpret this
word hereunto, when it says, Et ne sit Confractus vertex capitis tui. The
Crown of thy head be not broken: beside the Hebrew word for the scull (as it is
used in that place with many others, where it is said, when they went to bury
her, they found no more of her then the Scull, 2 King. 9. 30.
and the Feet, and the Palms of her Hands) is very near a kin to the word here
in the Text; Judge. 9. 53.
they lie both together in a belly, and are derived from the same stock. And
that famous word which is a medly of the Oriental Languages, being partly
Syriac, partly Chaldee, and partly Hebrew, is also nearly related hereunto; I
mean the word Golgotha, that is to say the place of a Scull. Mat. 27. 33.


The internal containing parts are also two, those two Membranes, namely a
thicker and an harder; a thinner and a finer, that do yet more immediately
encompass the brain, which to the Graecians are known by the name of (...), to
the Latins by the name of Matres, which title they took from the Arabians,
intimating thereby unto us, not only that they do give a being to all the
other Membranes of the body, as unto their own natural offspring, but chiefly,
and that which is most to our present purpose, that they do Materna cura
cerebro prospicere, Spigelius.
With a Motherly care and tenderness over-see and overruled all the actions of
the brain: but yet more particularly, the most inward of these two, that does
by immediate contract encircle the very substance of the brain, does seem to me
to be (...), by way of eminence, the golden bowl here intended. This is that
part which deeply insinuates it self into all the anfractuous passages of the
brain; and, being firmly annexed thereunto, keeps every part thereof in its
proper place, and due texture; so that whatsoever is performed within the whole
compass of the brain, whether the making of the animal spirits, their exercise
therein, or their distribution thencefrom, is done principally by the help of
this Membrane: Therefore the Ancients from that reverence they had for it, have
justly honored it with the name of Pia matter. And if we do but thoroughly
consider the innumerable branches of the veins, but especially of the Arteries
that are hereinto inserted, and their several wonderful interchasings and
intermixtures, and insertions, not only one into another, but even among
themselves (which is not found in any other part of the body) we shall surely
be induced to believe, that the greatest depu^ation and defaecation, and
consequently the highest exaltation of the blood and vital spirits, is
performed herein. And though it pleases the most worthy, and most learned
Author of the Anatomy of the Brain, D. Willis.
to give the honor of making the animal spirits, to the Substantia Corticalis
Cerebri; yet if you well weigh the Doctrine there delivered, you will find it
clearly evinced, that the greater work is done before; And that the Substantia
Corticalis does but Midwife that into the World, which the Pia Matter conceives
in its own bowels.

Portio sanguinis subtilior (nempe talis facta in vasis hujus Membranae) hic
(nempe in substantia Corticali) rude donata, in spiritus animales facessit. Now
whether the purification and spiritualization; or the manu-mission or
liberation, be the most noble work, I think it no hard matter to determine.

It is called the Golden Bowl, for the self-same reasons for which the other
was called the Silver Cord. First, In respect of the Color, not only because
that most precious, and deep colored liquor of life, is abundantly contained
in the Vessels of this Membrane, but chiefly because the Membrane it self is
somewhat of a flavous Color, and tends more, toward that of Gold, than any
other part whatsoever. Again, as there is a place for Gold where they find it,
so there is an hidden, secret, and well defended place, where this precious
part has its natural residence; much industry must be used for the finding
out, and yet much more, for the following of it, and tracing it, into all those
secret Caverns, into which it does most mysteriously diffuse its branches; but
chiefly it is so called from its excellency, and its universal use. The
instrument that does depurate the best of blood, and defaecate and exalt the
vital spirits, and so prepare them for animality; can be likened in this lower
world, to nothing, but that most absolute, and perfect, that best concocted and
most exalted Mineral of Gold. When the Lord God had made the whole Creation, he
in the last place makes him, for whom all the rest were made, And he took man
and put him in the Garden of Eden, to dress it, and to keep it: This place, of
all the earth, was the meetest receptacle for so noble an Inhabitant, for it
had in it a River, which was divided into four heads, Genesis 2. 10, 11.
The name of the first is Pison, which encompasseth the whole Land of Havilah,
where there is Gold; and all the other are there reckoned up by their names:
when the Lord God had made this noble Inhabitant of the dust of the earth, he
in like manner in the last place breathed into him that more noble part of him,
for which all the rest were made; And the soul of man, which is to rule and
guide him, has he placed in this most convenient seat, which is watered by a
River, that is parted, and becomes four heads, which are all known by name,
where also there is Gold. Arteriarum quadriga ad quatuor distinct as (...),
plagas evehitur; D. wills, is Anatom cerebri, Cap. 10.
the two Carotidal, and the two Vertebral Arteries are this golden quaternion,
whose streams make glad that City, wherein the breath of God has its principal
abode. There is yet another thing, wherein this part we are now treating of,
and Gold, have a very great resemblance, and that is in the ductility of them
both: Gold of all Metals is the most ductile, and may be drawn out at the
greatest length; this only makes good that Maxim in Philosophy: Quantitativum
est divisibile in semper divisibilia; No man can draw Gold so thin, but a
better Artist, can yet make it thinner, it is the nature of this Solar Mineral
to be endless in purity; how pure fine the Pia matter Cerebri is, none can
express, and none but the diligent observer of it, (who has often endeavored
its separation from the parts to which it is annexed,) can possibly understand.
This, as so much leaf-gold, drawn out to a very great thinness, does securely,
tenderly, and universally wrap up, all those little hills and valleys, those
unequal or concavous parts, that are within the compass of its own Circumference.

This golden Bowl, so long as man remains in his strength, is firmly knit unto
it self in all its parts, but in the extremity of extreme old age, when he is
just giving up the Ghost, it can no longer continue its continuity; but by
reason either of its natural dryness, shriveling into it self, or preternatural
moisture, imbibing excrementitious humors, till it is over-full, it often
snaps asunder, and so recurs into it self, as the word properly signifies;
from whence the brain must necessarily subside, and all the parts serving in
any wise to animality, must be suddenly and irrecoverably smitten, and cease
from their several uses; and moreover, immediately hereupon follows a change
of the whole Countenance, the Nose appears very sharp, the eyes sink in the
head, the Temples are pinched in, the ears become cold and contracted, and the
Fibers thereof inverted, the skin about the forehead hard, intense, and dry,
and the color of the whole face livid and black, and in all things perfectly
representing, that ultimum vaele, known among Physicians by the name of Facies
Hippocratica, and so consequently the man does immediately dye Apoplectical;
according to that of Job, Thou changest his Countenance, (and what follows
immediately thereupon,) Thou sendest him away. So that the Symptom hereby
intended, is, Repentina omnium operationum Cerebri; motus, viz. sensus, and
aliarum functionum animalium, tam principalium, quam minus principalium
abolitio: cum facie Hippocratica.

It cannot but here upon this occasion be remembered, that an Apoplex was
mentioned before, in the Explication of the second verse, and that as a disease
of old age, which might surprise a man, and yet not immediately kill him, and
of which there might possibly be a removal, at least for a season, that there
might some space be given him to recover a little strength, before he go hence
and be no more seen; how therefore comes it to pass, that it is here accounted
as one of the immediate Harbingers of death?

For answer hereunto, we must know, that an Apoplex falls under a double
consideration; either as it is a disease, or as it is a Symptom. In the first
consideration, it is Morbus Conformationis respectu meatuum; when by reason of
some preternatural matter, in, or about the Vessels, there become an
obstruction, constipation, or compression of them, so that either the vital
Spirits cannot be received, or the animal spirits cannot be exercised or
distributed as they ought to be. This matter may sometime possibly be
discussed, or carried off for a season, or change its seat, and so the Apoplex
degenerate into the Palsy; however it is not an infallible sign of instant
departure, and under this Consideration it was handled in the second verse. But
in the second Consideration it is Symptoma morbi, nempe solutae unitatis, when
by reason of the breaking of the Golden Bowl, and shrinking up into it self,
there immediately follows a Coalescense of all the Vessels thereof, and a
Subsidence of the brain it self, and consequently, a total abolition of all the
actions of the animal Faculty, from whence there is not so much as the least
hopes of recovery, and under this Consideration it is handled in this place. Or
it may be, the distinction of the learned Nymmanus, Nymma. de Apopl. cap. 21.
may be more satisfactory to some in answer to this Objection.

Apoplexia est vel vera vel notha. A true Apoplex is when the meatus and open
passages of the brain are shut up and obstructed, and so the Communication of
the spirits is intercepted, the substance of the brain, and of all the parts
appertaining thereunto, remaining otherwise in good plight, as they ought to
be, in their due place, with their wonted firmness of Composition: And this is
like unto an house, whose entry or common passages are wholly filled up with
rubbish, so that it becomes altogether useless, and this is the disease of old
age beforementioned. But a bastard Apoplex is a far more dreadful thing, when
the tone of the brain, and of all the parts within the compass of the Pia
matter, is wholly relaxed and destroyed, and by consequence only thereupon, all
animal functions do in a moment cease, in the manner of the true Apoplex, but
yet with far more terrible and amazing Symptoms, the pulse and respiration
also being wholly taken away, and the Countenance changed to that ghastly aspect
before mentioned; which is an infallible sign of the dust immediately returning
to the earth as it was, without any the least stop in its course; (...). Hippo.
l. 2. Apho. 42.
And this is like that house wherein the Philistines were gathered together to
see Sampson make sport, which came tumbling down, when the two foundation
Pillars thereof were violently torn from their place; Ut Collapsa ruit domus,
subducta columnis; and this is the certain Symptom of death, treated on in
this Verse. And thus much shall suffice to have spoken for the Explication of
those Symptoms of death, that belong to the instruments of the animal Faculty,
those two that remain belong to the Vital.

Or the Pitcher be broken at the Fountain.
For the right understanding of this Sentence, and that which follows, which
does depend hereon, both of them belonging to the vital Faculty, I must crave
leave to premise something concerning the life of man, wherein it consists; and
what those parts are, that do principally conduce to the production and
preservation of it; for otherwise it is impossible to understand these
Symptoms. For as the Prophesies of Daniel, and most others of the latter
times, Dan. 12. 9.
are closed up and sealed till the time of the end, when their known
accomplishments shall demonstrate the truths contained in them: Just thus has
it happened to the great mysterious truths contained in these two last
expressions; forasmuch as the frame, action, and use of the heart, together
with the true motion of the blood in man's body, has lain hid from the time of
Solomon throughout all generations, unto this last wherein we now live; the
words of this Allegory that contain the sum of that Doctrine, have all this
while been an undiscoverable mystery, as a book sealed up, that none could read
or understand. And as all those who have endeavored to reveal the Revelations,
that must remain unrevealed till the appointed time of their revelation; have
by all their industry only declared their own weakness and insufficiency for
such a work; And describing at the best rate they could the mystery of Babylon,
by their darkness and confusion, have only evinced that they themselves were a
part thereof; even so all those that have undertaken the explication of what we
are now about, before the Doctrine of Circulation was received among Men, and
gave light to the World; have, with their utmost endeavors, only declared
their own inability, and have left these two Aenigmatical symptoms far more
intricate then they found them; And of all those ancient Commentators and
Critics that I have seen upon the place (which has not been a few) I never had
the least content in any, but one; and that is he, who after he had set down
the four symptoms in this last verse, he subjoynes as his comment these words,
Haec quatuor ego non intelligo. Most ingenious Castalio, had all Interpreters
been so plain and honest, I persuade my self we had had lesser volumes, and yet
far better understanding of the sense of Scripture, then now we have.

Now, in order to the end proposed, we must know in the first place, that which
the Scripture does far above all other Writings most clearly declare, and that
is, that the Life of a Man consists in his Blood. For it is the Life, of all
Flesh, the blood of it is for the life thereof; Lev. 17. 1^. 14.
therefore I said unto the children of Israel, ye shall eat the blood of no
manner of flesh, for the life of all flesh is in the blood thereof. And this
most noble Liquor of Life has a primary seat or fountain, where it is
principally made, and from whence it is dispensed throughout the whole Body;
and this is none other then the Heart; for out of it are the issues of life,
Prove. 4. 23.
is a truth not only Moral and Spiritual, but Natural also. This part
continually issues forth abundance of blood, wherein is the life, to all the
parts that are to be quickened thereby. Hence those Medicines that are of a
quickening and enlivening virtue, are not unfitly called Cordialls, because they
help the heart in its work, and do that by art, unto which the heart is by
nature appointed: And surely between them there is a very great resemblance,
which makes the Wise Man say, A Merry Heart does good like a Medicine. Prove.
17. 22.
This wonderful part of Man has abundance of the wisdom of the Creator
showed in its formation, in so much that none is able fully to comprehend it,
for it is exceeding deep. Psalm. 64. 6.


And that which is said of the Kings heart, though in another sense, may as
truly be said of Man's heart in general, The heart of Man is unsearchable. Prove.
25. 3*
Yet thus much cannot but be observed by all those that take pleasure in
searching out this great work of God, that it is the fountain of life, the
first living, and the last dying part of Man, and that it does communicate of
its life and vigor to all the other parts of the Body, though at the
extremest distance; which live or die, according as the beams and influences
of this glorious Sun of the Body, are communicated unto, or intercepted from
them. It is said of Nabal, his heart dyed within him, and immediately he became
as a stone; 1 Samuel 25. 37.
If the heart give not forth its vivifying virtue, the flesh does immediately
fail; And there is no fear of the latter, if there be a continuation of the
former, for a sound heart is the life of the flesh. Prove. 14. 13.
My son give me thy heart, says Solomon, Prove. 23. 26.
intimating that that was vertually a gift of the whole. The sovereignty and
principallity of the Heart above all the other members of the body, might be
abundantly confirmed from Scripture, but what has been said may suffice: Yet
there is one place relating more particularly to the action and use of the
heart, that I would especially note; and that is in our English Books, My
heart is inditing a good matter: Psalm. 45. 1.
But here, as in many other places the Translation comes very short of the
Original, and so the whole strength of the Metaphor is lost. (...), the word is
not elsewhere used in the Bible, and therefore in this place greatly to be
weighed, it has two significations, which joined together, make up the whole
work of the heart.

The first is fervere, ebullire, praeparare cibos; the other is cum impetu
pr^trudere, long eructare sive pulsare; the heart gives heat, and motion, and
life unto that which is to be our nourishment; and after that it does with a
certain force and vehemence cast it forth, and pulse it to all, even the
extremest parts, that are thereby to be enlivened. And this in the Letter not
having been understood by Interpreters, makes them come far short also in the
Mystery; which is that the Doctrine of the Kingdom of Christ (for that is the
good thing that his heart is here inditing) having not as yet had its full
measure of strength and life in the World, and that which it formerly had, by
reason of the revolution of time, and circulation of Ages, being much weakened
and enfeebled, is now again in David's heart by the Spirit of the living God,
impraegnated with new vigor, and thencefrom with great earnestness pulsed
forth to the Generations to come, even to the end, to sustain and support them,
and to quicken them all to their duty, and to a longing expectation of the
Glorious Kingdom of their Lord. But to return to the Heart with the Blood: We
must farther know for the explication of these symptoms, that there are within
the body of the heart, two firmly distinct cavities, a right and a left,
usually called Ventricles: from which there arise, and unto which there are
annexed certain peculiar vessels conducing to the ends hereafter specified. Out
of the right ventricle of the heart, proceed the great vein called Vena Cava,
which sends forth branches throughout the whole body, and has at its entrance
into the heart, certain portals, from their form called valvulae tricuspides;
And also that Artery, anciently called vena arteriosa; inserted into the lungs,
unto whose original are annexed, the portals resembling the Greek Sigma, and
are therefore called valvulae sigmoideae, Out of the lest Ventricle proceed
that vein anciently called arteria venosa; inserted in like manner into the
lungs; and also the great Artery, called Arteria aorta, which dispenses its
branches throughout the whole Body, both whose Cavities are defended with the
like portals with the former. It remains only that we show how the blood and
life is actuated in these parts, and howit passes in, and through them, and in
and through the whole habit of the Body; which is by way of Rotation, or
running the round, going out from the fountain, and returning thither again.
Eccles. 1. Verse. 5.
The Sun arises, and the Sun goes down and hastes to the place where he
arose; The Wind goes toward the South, and turns about unto the North, Verse
6.
it whirleth about continually, and the Wind returns again according to its
Circuits; Verse 7.
All the Rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full; unto the place from
whence the Rivers come, thither they return again. Thus it pleases the King to
express the Circulations of the greater World; those of the lesser are no less
remarkable. The Blood wherein is the Life of Man passes about the Body
continually, and returns according to its circuits; the streams thereof run
into the fountain, which is never full, unto the place from whence they come,
thither they return again; which is by the Instruments before mentioned thus
performed. The Vena Cava containing much blood in its cavity, near the basis of
the Heart, on the right side, does gently pass it into the right Ventricle of
the Heart, which is dilated in its Diastole for its reception, and immediately
thereupon contracting its self in its Systole (the three pointed Portals
hindering the passage back again into the Cava) it must necessarily thrust the
blood through the open passage of the Vena Arteriosa (where the sigmoidal
Portals hindering its return) it must pass through the Streiner of the Lungs,
and so be received into the branches of the Arteria Venosa, and thereby brought
into the left Ventricle of the Heart, where again it is with violence pulsed
forth into the Aorta (the Portals here as before always hindering its regress)
by the branches of which Artery it is carried to all the parts of the Body to
enliven them, which work being done, what remains is received into the
Capillaries of the Veins in the several parts, whence it passes of its own
accord naturally toward its Center, from the lesser into the greater branches
of the veins, and consequently at last into the great Trunk of the Cava, from
whence it is recommitted into the right ventricle of the Heart, to be chased
the Foyl. This is the true Doctrine of the excellency and motion of the blood,
and of the use of the Heart, and the parts appertaining thereunto; all which
were perfectly known to Solomon, as will abundantly appear anon, in the
explication of the symptoms we are now about. Yet it pleased the Lord that
this knowledge should with the possessor of it, sink into dust and darkness;
where it lay buried for the space of 2500 years at the least, till it was
retreived thence from by the wisdom and industry of that incomparable, and for
ever to be renouned Dr. William Harvey, the greatest honor of our Nation, and
of all Societies of which he was a Member, who stands, and ever will do, with
the highest note of Honor in the Calenders both of Physicians and
Philosophers, and it were but justice to put him with the same eminence into
that of the Church, since he has Contributed more to the understanding of
this, and many other places of Scripture, then all that ever undertook that
Charge.

These things being thoroughly weighed, and well understood, the two symptoms
which remain to be spoken to, do open themselves into the same Doctrine without
any more ado. By the Pitcher therefore we must understand the true and proper
conceptacle of the Blood, namely the Veins, which throughout the whole body
serve only as a vessel, to contain that noble Liquor, and carry it back again
to the Fountain. The Original word (...) signifies sometime more generally any
containing vessel, 1 King 17. 14.
and so is taken for the Widows Barrel in which was the meal, Genesis 24. 6. Judge.
7. 1.
but more especially that which is called a pitcher, and so more frequently it
is used. This word both the Greeks and the Latins take unto themselves, only
varying the Termination as is most proper to each Language, and that in the
very same signification. Now the proper containing Vessel for the blood is the
Veins, there the blood is, as I may say, at home, in its own place; while it is
in the heart, it is preparing, enlivening, and enobling; while it is in the
Lungs, and all the other Parenchymous parts of the bowels, it is depurating and
cleansing; while it is in the Arteries, it is by force journeying; while it is
in the Porosities of the fleshy parts, it is communicating of life, and
nourishing; but while it is in the Veins, it has no force upon it at all, nor
is it doing any thing of general use to the Body, only consulting its own good,
and tending in its own natural course to its proper Center; as milk is in the
breasts, and marrow in the bones, so is blood in the veins, and therefore these
are the Pitcher here intended. This Pitcher also has its Ear, which is usually
called, Auricula Cordis; which (notwithstanding its name, as if it most
properly appertained to the heart) yet we must know does rather belong to the
vein, and is indeed a part thereof, and not only a part, but the principal and
primary part thereof, from whence all other parts and branches do arise, as
from their original, and whereunto all the blood of the body by the Compressive
motion of the Veins, does naturally tend, as to its ultimate hold; and
whence-from it will in no wise depart but by force; and therefore this
head-spring of the veins being dilated by the continual afflux of blood, is
necessitated to ease it self by Contraction, and so conveniently forces out a
due proportion of blood into the Fountain, whereunto it is annexed.

Now the Fountain can be no other than the right Ventricle of the heart, for
this is yet more strictly the fountain of life, and forge of the vital spirits,
and it does sensibly live before, and dye after, the other parts, even of the
heart it self; Moreover, here it is, that the matter of our nourishment
receives its first enlivening, for our food being received from the stomach
and guts into the common passage of Chyle, is thence-from carried directly into
the subclavial branch of the Vena Cava, where being mixed with blood, it yet
remains lifeless and heartless, till being carried along that vein, it is at
last brought into the right Ventricle of the heart; wherein the heat, motion,
and ferment, set the active principles thereof at a perfect freedom, and so
instantly endow it with plenty both of life and spirit. Thus richly fraught,
does the blood pass out of its fountain, and, by the ways before described, it
is brought to all the parts of the body, where parting with much of its lading
for their sustentation, and being refrigerated by the coldness of the
extremities, and the ambient air; it would soon be coagulated, and altogether
barren, did it not return again to the right Ventricle of the heart, as unto
its own fountain, to recover its former perfection. This part therefore, that
does at the first give life to that which enliveneth the whole man, and does,
as often as it returns thither, impraegnate it anew with the same, must needs
be the fountain here intended. And to this the Original word gives an
extraordinary clearness; implying, not only the Signum, but the Signatum; not
the Hieroglyphick only, but the part thereby deciphered: signifying in the
first place, Fons, a Fountain; and secondarily, Scaturigo Venarum, the spring
or original from whence the Veins arise; and this is so clear, that made
ancient Commentators interpret the Fountain here unto the Liver: Now, had they
been right in their natural knowledge; that is, had they known that the Veins
do not arise from the Liver, as from their first original, but from the right
Ventricle of the heart, (as all knowing men now confess they do,) they had
without all doubt, by the guidance of this most significant word, pitched upon
the true meaning of the place.

These Vessels being thoroughly understood, we must farther know, that so long
as man remains in perfect health and strength, they are uncellantly and
carefully performing all those offices unto which they are appointed; but this
natural Course does not continue for ever, for this Pitcher is but an earthen
Vessel, and does not so often go to the Fountain, but at last it comes broken
home. This breaking of the Pitcher here (which is the Symptom of old age just
upon the point of death) is the failing of the Veins, their ceasing from their
natural action and use, when they can no longer carry back, nor conveniently
pass into the heart that liquor, which they properly contain. That little blood
that remains in the cold body of man near his end is soon Coagulated, and
stagnating in the Veins, the motion and circulation thereof is hindered, and so
it becomes thick, like unto the pith of Elder; And because it cannot return to
the fountain, for a redintegration of its life and spirit; it dies in the
veins, and so all the extreme parts of the body become spiritless and cold;
which is the Symptom here intended. Frigiditas extremorum is acknowledged by
all that have considered that subject, as one of the most certain signs of
approaching death. And our great Master of Prognostics, in that complete and
yet compendious book of his Aphorisms, does once and again, not out of
forgetfulness, but out of earnestness, that it may more especially be taken
notice of; give us that famous Maxim, (...).

The wheel broken at the Cistern.
The Symptom last spoken of, had reference to the Instruments of the vital
Faculty, which serve for importation, and reception of the blood and spirits;
this that we are now speaking to, has reference to those, which serve for
exportation and rejection of the same.

The blood (as was before observed) naturally, of its own accord, tends in the
veins, unto the heart; but it returns not from the heart, into the parts of the
body, but by force: Thus all the Rivers in the Land naturally ebb into the Sea,
but they flow not thence-from, any farther, than the violence and impulse of
the Sea extends. The blood, being once forced from the heart, is presently
received into the Trunk of the great Artery, called the Aorta; and by the
branches thereof is carried to all the parts of the body. This therefore being
the chief and principal instrument of Rotation, or Circulation of the blood, is
most aptly intimated unto us by a Wheel. For what is a Wheel, but an instrument
of Circulation? And what can a Wheel be an Hieroglyphick of, but of something
that goes, or makes the round? And this is so obvious to every one, that all
that have ever Commented upon this place, have been still hammering at some
such thing. Some therefore have interpreted this place to the life of man,
which passes as in a Ring, according to that saying, (...). Others have
interpreted it, to the death of man, when his compounding parts shall revert
into the first beings.

Cedit enim retro, de terra quod fuit ante, In terram, etc. And so they make
this expression explained at large in the following verse; The dust shall
return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to God that gave it.
Others interpret it to the reciprocal Communications between the heart and the
head; the heart continually sending to the head, blood and vital spirits; and
the head again returning them to the heart, sublimed instruments of animality.

Lastly, There are that ingeniously interpret it to Respiration, which is
performed by a circular motion, Inspiration, and Expiration continually
succeeding one another in their Courses. All these Archers have shot exceeding
well, and have hit the But, (while many others have shot at Rovers,) yet these
not being able to discern the White, have not touched that principal Mark. I
mean, the grand Circulation in man's body, not being known to these ancient
Commentators, they have done the best that could be in the second place. What
this grand Circulation is, and how performed, has been already described; and
those vessels that are inward bound, which bring home the noble Travellour, the
encompassour of the little World, were described in the Explanation of the
foregoing Symbol; but those which are outward bound, which carry him forth
with all his wealth and substance to accomplish his intended end, are here
intimated unto us by the Wheel. That the great Artery, with all its branches
throughout the whole body, is here principally pointed at, has been already
said; and may be farther confirmed; first, in that it answers so directly to
the vein signified in the last Symptom, by the Pitcher. Secondly, In that it
is to us the most apparent Pulsor; we can feel the blood to be forced along its
Cavity, in the Wrists, the Temples, and diverse other parts of the body. Lastly,
in that it is so appositely placed at the Cock of the Cistern, as you shall
hear hereafter. Yet we must not so limit this Wheel to the Arteries, as to
exclude the very substance and Parenchymous part of the heart it self: For upon
whatsoever Instruments the pulsifick faculty is exercising it self, they are
all here intended, by the Wheel; for they are they, and they only, that carry
off the blood from the fountain, and force it from the Center of the body, to
the Circumference. Water may easily be conveyed in Trunks or Pipes, by its own
natural tendency only, unto all those places that are beneath or level with the
Spring from whence it first comes; but if you would have it of a farther use,
to serve those places that are higher than the spring, you must then fetch it
up with violence, by a Wheel, or some such Instrument of force, as is to be
seen in our Waterhouses, and all such ingenious Inventions of public good.
Thus all the blood in man's body is, in certain Pipes and Trunks, by its own
natural tendency only, brought home to the heart; but it will in no wise go
farther, to be of a more general use to the whole body, till it have some
Instrument of force to compel it thence-from; The Pulsifick faculty is the
mover, and the Instruments of Pulsation the Wheel, that performs this work,
that is of so public a concern to the whole.

The Cistern from whence this Wheel forces that liquor which afterward it
conveyeth throughout all the parts, is the left Ventricle of the heart, for
hereunto it is, that the great Artery is annexed, and from hence it does arise.
A Cistern is a Vessel made on purpose to receive a due proportion of water, and
to contain it till the time of use, and then conveniently to pass it into those
other vessels, that are appointed to receive it thence-from. And thus the left
Ventricle of the heart does in its Diastole, receive that blood that is brought
unto it by the Arteria Venosa of the Lungs, and having retained it a little, it
does in its Systole, conveniently pass a due proportion thereof into the Aorta,
to be dispensed as was spoken before; And this is the true and only use of the
left Ventricle. For the blood being enobled and enlivened in the right
Ventricle, and refrigerated, and cleansed from its fuliginous vapors in the
Lungs, it is now in all things accomplished for its ultimate use, and remains
only to be sent, into those several parts it is to quicken, which it cannot
conveniently be, unless it be first received into this Cistern, and afterward
by the Pulsifick Faculty and Instruments, be disposed of, to that appointed
end; and we cannot but here remind, those portals that are placed, both at the
entrance into, and passage from, the vessel we are now speaking of, namely, the
Valvulae tricuspides and sigmoideae, which as the Cocks to let in, and let out,
do by their opening or shutting give convenient passage, or absolute stoppage
to that liquor which continually runs that way.

It cannot but by this time be acknowledged by all those that have gone along
with us, and taken special notice of the aptness of these two expressions, viz.
The Pitcher at the Fountain, and the Wheel at the Cistern, to symbolize unto us
the circulation of the blood, and the use and action of the heart, and the
parts belonging thereunto; that the Doctrine which is now justly called
Harvaean, was at first Solomonian. For as it pleased God in these latter days
to give in this certain and most useful knowledge, to the industrious and
indefatigable endeavors of the Learned Dr. Harvey; so did he of old, give in
the same, unto King Solomon in the lump, together with all other natural
knowledge, as a superabundant answer to his fervent and effectual Prayer; which
great truth being confirmed by the powerful reasons and ocular demonstrations
of the one, and by this divine testimony of the other, let it not be for the
future in the least measure doubted or questioned; but let it be greatly
prized, and so much the rather, because (while many others of great importance,
wherein these two Worthies doubtless agreed, have perished by the way,) this
only from them both, has escaped safe to our hands.

It remains now, that I only name unto you that Symptom of Old Age, at the
time of death; that is here signified unto us, by the Wheel broken at the
Cistern; which cannot but be understood, to be the ceasing of the Pulse; the
Instruments of Pulsation decay, and can no longer perform that work, which must
necessarily be continued for the preservation of life; Exodus 14. 24, 25.
It came to pass when the Lord had a purpose immediately to destroy the Host of
the Egyptians, that he looked upon them, and troubled them, and took off their
Charet wheels, that they drove heavily. Whenever it is the good pleasure of
God to give that word of Command, that the Tabernacle of our bodies, should be
as they were; his purpose is easily discerned beforehand by his looking upon
us, and troubling us, and giving disturbance unto, and taking off, those Charet
wheels, upon which our life is turned; but yet this is far more apparent in the
time of Age, for then the Charet wheels are more sensibly hindered and removed,
and so taken off by degrees. The old man's Pulse does yearly and daily decline,
both in respect of the mover, the stroke and the intervall; so that it must
needs beat more languidly, slower, and seldomer than it did before. The Faculty
grows weaker, the use is not so urgent, nor the Instruments so vigorous, in
age, wherefore all the Causes of a quick and a lively Pulse failing, the sad
effect thereof must undoubtedly follow; nor will it ever cease declining, till
it cease beating, and then the man immediately cease living; Pulsus, rarus,
tardus, languidus and nonnunquam intermittens, is the true pulse of the old
man, all the while he is in that condition, and is like unto the toling of a
passing bell, which may put him and all his friends in mind, that he is shortly
going the way of all flesh, but Pulsus omnino abolitus sive asphyxia, (which is
the Symptom here mentioned,) is the condition of the dying man, and is like
the stinting of the Passing Bell, or rather the ringing out of the Knell, which
gives notice unto all that he is gone, and may serve as a loud, and distinct
invitation to the Funeral.

And thus I have as plainly, and as briefly as I could, run over all these
mystical Symptoms; both those that attend a man all the time of his declining
age, and those that more immediately forerun, and foretell his last change. And
now I judge it time for me to desist, when all sense and motion, both in the
Rivulets and Fountain is quite taken away, when there is death in the face,
when there is a coldness in the extremities, and an utter abolition of the
Pulse, there is no more room for the Physician, or space given him to
intermeddle any longer: Thus far I hope I have kept within my bounds, and given
no offense to those jealous Overseers, to whom only the interpretation of
Scripture is deemed to belong; this Subject has been purely Physical,
wherefore in the prosecution of it, I have not exceeded my own Last, nor made a
breach upon that politic Rule: Quod medicorum est,
Per tractent medici; tractent fabrilia fabri.


It remains only that we review, and sum up, what has been here spoken, and so
gather close together that plentiful crop of miseries which this Earth we bear
about us, naturally produces.

Febre caret sola, circumsilit agmine facto,
Morborum omne genus.
Fevers set aside, there is scarce any infirmity incident to the body or mind
of man, that is not predominant in Age; the Old man is beset with a troop of
diseases, when he is not able to resist a single one, and therefore must be
subject to them all, as has been said, and is resumed in the following
Anacephalaeosis.

I have here set down this Recapitulation, that what is in these six verses
delivered, may be compared with any, or all those Systemes of the diseases of
Age, which have been given us by Hippocrates, Galen, or any of their followers;
by David d^ Pomis the Jew, Franc Fogerolaeus, or FrancRanchinus, or any other
Heathen or Christian, that have anciently or modernly treated of this Subject;
and let preference be given to the most worthy. I would fain have the Crown to
be put upon the Head of the King, his wisdom only, among all the rest, being
pure and from above: which that it may be, I would in no wise have the comment
delivered by us, but the Text delivered by Solomon, to enter the List of
Compare. The Penman of the Allegory, without all doubt, thoroughly understood
the Subject, and fully declared it, in these Aenigmatical Phrases: the
Interpreter, like his Forefathers, may come very far short of understanding
the whole Truth, and possibly may in some places miss it; In many things we
offend all. I know not that Man, though place^ in never so eminent a Chair, who
can, in the Interpretation of Scriptures of much higher concernment then this,
give an infallible judgment, or pass things from under his hand so sound Morbi
and symptomata senis. Adhuc viventis. In Genere, Verse. 1. Senectus ipsa, quae
morbus est, etsi naturatis. Cachexia (i. e.) Malus Corporis habitus.
in specie respectu Iaesarum facultatum vel functionum Internarum, Verse. 2.
Mentis imbecillitas, hebctudo, stupiditas, fatuitas, (...) (i. e.) stultitia,
tarditas ingenii, judici^ def^ctus. (...), amentia, melancholia, desipientia
animi, memoria immiauta, abolita. Vertigo, Carus and Apoplexia. Externarum
Animalium, Verse. 3. in Artubus in genere Omnes infirmitates, motus and sensus
impotentia, and hebetudo, rugosit as, languores, dolores, convulsiones,
rigiditas, ma^il^ntia. specie Tremor artuum; contractiones; abbreviationes and
incurvation^s ^orundem.
Dentibus Siccitas, vacilla^^o, putred^, cavitas, scabritie^, nigredo;
p^ae^ipue casus, and defectus; seu rari^as. Oculis Corrugatio, vel relaxatio
uveae tuaicae, suffusio ex Cruditate, caligo, glaucoma, Z^nifisis.
Naturalium, Verse. 4. In principio Dejectus appetitus, imbecillitas stomachi,
faeces alvi indobitae, obstructiones omnes; pulsus debilis, rarus, tardus, mala
sanguinis defaecatio, quoad serum, bilem, melancholiam, etc. Tonus partium
vitiatus; carnis ariditas, indebita perspratio: Cessatio mensium, papillarum
pen^^tia, and lividitas; mammarum flaccidi^s, and rugositas: Impotentia and
inappetena concubitus, vasorum spermaticorum imbcillitas, and (...), testium
and partiu^ propagationi dicatarum cachexia, and refri ge^atio, totius corporis
languor, and mar ces centia.

Occlusio labiorum contra cibum, obseratio pharyngis, utriusque orificii
ventriculi, deglut^endi difficultas, impotenti a r^serandi in omnibus
arteriarum and ven^rum, imo omnium internarum partium ostiis and valvulis;
pororum constrictio; d^suria stranguria, ^schuria, alvi adstricti ^seu pigra,
tardaque naturalis depositio.

Mixtarum, V. 4. In fine. Anxietates animi, inquietudines nocturnae, dolores
corporis, praec pue vigiliae.

Et dyspnaea ^vae spirandi difficultas, distillationes tussim infere t^s,
(...), sive vocis abolitio, d^ minutio aut depravat^ exsiccatio asperae
arteriae, induratio Cartilaginum laryngis, sor^ au^i^m praecipue ba^yco^a, sive
gravis auditus and surditas.



Simpliciu^ affectuu^; sive Qualitatu^ mutatarum, Verse. 5. Animi, timo^ Minor,
Major.
Corporis quoad parts Excrementitias. Canities. Alimentitias easque vel Duras.
Partium ductilium induratio and incrustatio, and fragili extantia and
prominentia. Molles. Fluidarum partium depravatio and minoratio, and molli
ariditas and consumptio.




Jam morientis Verse. 6. Quoad instrumenta facultatis. Animalis Extra Cranium.
Paralysis particularis and universalis. Intra Cranium. Omnium sensuum subita
abolitio cum (...) Hippocratica.
Vitalis Importantia. Frigiditas extremorum. Exportantia. Pulsus abolitus.





and perfect, which a more knowing, and a better enlightened Generation, may not
find just cause to Correct. If what I have said, may serve only to tell Men,
that there is a Treasure hid in this Field, and withal to show of what nature,
and what value it is, and which way the veins of it do secretly pass under
ground, I shall have my full end thereby. For howsoever I may, in my own
search, in digging and delving after it, mix earth, and dirt, and rubbish, with
Silver, and Gold, and precious Stones; yet it will, without all doubt, give
occasion to all those, who love and long after the Acquisition of such
Treasures as these, to come to the place where they are to be had. The Word of
God does upon many Subjects of Natural things, though but briefly and
incidently mentioned, give a clearer and more sure light, then all the
voluminous Writings of the whole shoale of Heathenish Philosophers. He that
planted the Ear shall he not hear, Ps. 94. 9.
and he that made the Eye, shall he not see? Ps. 103. 14.
he knows our frame, and the frame of all things that he has made; and
therefore whatsoever he says concerning any of them, ought most diligently to
be hearkened unto, as to the best and truest word that was ever spoken about
them. This great Truth, I know, many Learned Men are not aware of, and none but
those that do (...), search the Scriptures, and dig in them, as for hid
Treasure, can ever understand. The labor that I have taken upon these six
verses, I am so far confident of, as that it has made this truth appear upon
the Subject we are now treating of, as I have already done upon some others,
especially that, De formatione foetus in utero materno. And following the
commendable intentions of Levinus Lemnius, Vallesius, Bueus, and other Learned
Men; and the Pious Exhortation of the Honorable Mr. Boil thereupon, Natural
Philosophy, p 31.
if God give me life and opportunity, I may yet further cultivate the same
Theme. My design is plainly to persuade Men to be in love with the Scripture;
that as some looking after eternal Life, have therein by the way, found out
many Natural things; so others looking after Natural things only, may yet far
more happily find eternal Life: like Zacheus gazing after the Novelties of the
World, and yet being in the way where Christ passed by, they may hear that
joyful voice of Salvation being brought to their House; Nescio quo modo
sacrorum librorum lectio, Vall^sius sac, Philoso. in proae^^io.
etiam historica aut Physica, animum pietate imbuit latenter. This eternal
concern is the principal drif^ of these Holy Writings of God, yet they are
every where besprinkled with abundance of other Truths of less concernment,
which will give great delight and satisfaction to the diligent enquirer: For
they are as the Garden of God, Wherein grows every Tree that is pleasant to
the sight, Genesis 2. 9.
and good for food, the Tree of Life also in the midst of the Garden. I must
confess with others that there are many Natural things herein contained, that
are inconsistant and contrary to what we have learned in the Schools, but that
matters not; let us be sure to make God wise, and him true; though every Man a
fool, and a liar. There are also some things which will startle and amaze the
best humane reason, nay, that which is much farther, some things that our
senses will hardly give consent unto; yet in all these difficult cases, I have
had a ready solution (which although it will not untie all those intricate
knots I meet with, yet it will loose them, which is full as satisfactory) and
that is, that grace and gift of God which is (...), and (...). Heb. 11. 1.


I have I hope by this time done a double good work, on the one hand I have
vindicated our profession, from all those abominable and filthy scandals, that
impudent and malevolent Persons have been apt to cast upon it; as though the
studies we addicted our selves unto, did (like the Sin of Adam) naturally make
us run from God, and hide our selves from him, and patch up some perishing
remnants to cover our nakedness, after our own contrivances: whereas in truth,
there is nothing in all the World, that Man can be busied about, that will
sooner bring him to God, then the earnest beholding him in the Book of the
Creatures; there is not the most contemptible being, which by virtue of the
Almighty Fiat, at first started out of nothing, that will not (if it be
thoroughly searched and followed) at length bring us home to its eternal Father;
As of him, and from him, Romans 11. 36.
and through him; so to him also are all things, to whom be glory for ever. But
how much more shall we be instructed in this Divine Lesson, by intimately
contemplating that Heavenly Work of Works, the sum and height of the visible
Creation, that honorable piece, tantum non Angelical, in which the Creator
himself, rested in time, delighted from Eternity, being the true pattern of his
own Divine Image; Man. And God in his Providence having so ordered, that the
Holy Writings should begin, with the History of the Creation of all things, and
lastly and chiefly of Man; does plainly teach us this lesson, that none are so
Idoneous hearers, or so meet receivers of the words of his mouth, as those that
have first well understood and abundantly admired the Works of his hand. All
which fall under our consideration, as the proper subject of our knowledge, but
chiefly the chiefest, which cannot but in the end bring us to him, who made and
knows all things, as the saying of the Woman did the Samaritans, John 4. 39.
42.
and being hereby brought unto him, we afterward hear him our selves, and
believe now, for his own word sake; That he is God, and the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Savior of the World.

We are so far from slighting or contemning the Scripture, that we are the
great admirers of it, and do endeavor to advance it above all other Writings
whatsoever, and that even in Natural things, though never so accidentally or
cursorily handled; and we had rather that all our other Books, though very
curious, and greatly valuable, should be burnt; then that one line, nay one
letter, one jot, or tittle of it should in any wise pass away.

And on the other hand, I hope I have persuaded and prevailed with all my own
Brethren, to be more wise for themselves, and more wary in respect of others,
then some severe and jealous-headed censorours have judged them to be: that we
may none of us give the least occasion for any one to speak evil of the things
they understand not; but by taking heed to a sure Rule, we may bring perpetual
honor to our own faculty, and shame to the loose professors of a better. A
light and superficial knowledge of Natural things, may indeed consist with
Atheism, but a deep and a profound search into them, does bring Men back again
to God, and necessarily bind them over to Religion. Solomon's Wisdom stayed not
in the Creatures, though he perfectly knew so great a variety; but did from
them only (as it were) take its rise, and mount higher then the Cedars, even
into Heaven its self, and there only could find its rest, from whence it had
its first beginning, like the spirit of man, returning to God that gave it. Let
no Man think he has sufficient knowledge in Natural things, who has not by
them been directed to Divine, or that he has viewed the Creatures enough, who
has not been lead through them to the Creator. Nor shall ever any one have my
consent to pass for a Philosopher, who keeps himself so ignorant of the
Scripture, Act. 17. 23.
as with Devotion to admire that Academical Inscription, (...). Knowledge
Natural and Spiritual are not so contrary one to another, but that they may
very well agree together, and cohabit in the same Mansion: nay, they are
greatly conductive to the growth and promotion of each other. None can be a
better Evangelist then the beloved Physician, and none so complete a Physician,
as he who is frequently conversant in the Word of God; and able to Evangelize:
For that is the Fountain that sends forth plentifully of both these Waters, and
is alone able to make a Man perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work.

Now in the last place I must acknowledge, upon the review of what is here
written, that there are many things herein (I my self being Judge) which might
have been delivered after another manner, much more consonant to those
plausible and probable Doctrines which are the products of the Industry and
Ingenuity of this Inquisitive Age. It is far more easy to be Skeptical, and to
overthrow the positive assertions of others, then to produce anew those which
will prove more firm and lasting, or to instaurate better in their room. But I
question not but the good intention hereof, will among all honest and Candid
Persons, in some measure, compensate for all those miscarriages; especially
since by this leading attempt, in a way so obscure and difficult, and withal
so untrodden, Men of the greatest parts and abilities will be induced for the
future to step into, and to become painful laborers in, the Vineyard of God.

Which will be a most acceptable work to the whole Christian World, and most
honorable to themselves; For as Hiram was eminent in Tire, for his Wisdom,
Understanding, 1 King 7. 14.
and Cunning in all manner of Workmanship, yet that which crowned all his
Excellencies, and renowned him to this very day, was, that he came to the
adorning of the Temple of God at Jerusalem. Those Learned Men who exercise
themselves in Natural Philosophy alone, produce only Newes-Books for the
present Generation, and so a little time does consume all together: Whereas the
labor that is taken in the Word of God, is of a far more durable nature, and
is like to run Parallel with everlasting truth.

But yet more particularly, I cannot but call for help upon this individual
Subject: It is my earnest desire that Physicians would study the Gerocomical
part of Physic more then they do: And indeed no part wants our help so much as
this; for among all the Verbosious Graecians there is not one complete Tract
upon this Subject only: And there are but very few to be found among all other
Writers, and those so miserable and barren, that the Readers are left
exceedingly in the dark, and can scarcely be resolved in the first question
belonging thereunto, namely to what part of Physic it most properly
appertains. That one Aphorism of Hippocrates which a Man might easily prove
(would it not give occasion to some foul-Mouthed Libellers farther to detract
from the reverence due to Antiquity) is not Totum teres atque rotundum, Lib. 3.
Ap^o. ult.
perfect and complete in all things; has scarce been outdone for these 2000
succeeding years.

Now, as this part of Physic needs it most, so I am as bold to say, it is as
capable of improvement as any other part whatsoever; And the improvement that
may be made thereof would be as useful to Mankind as any one discovery of
Nature, that has at any time hitherto been made. Let none give over their
Patients when they come to be burdened with the infirmities of Age, as though
they were altogether incapable of having any good done unto them; for, as this
will argue great weakness and ignorance in the Physician, so it is exceeding
curelty to the Patient; For, as the slothful in his work is brother to a great
waster; so those that are negligent toward their ancient Friends, are very
near of kin to those inhumane Barbarians and Americans, who with great pomp and
alacrity, both kill and devour them; thinking thereby they perform a most
charitable office, in delivering them from those incurable maladies, which will
for ever render them miserable: But sure an industrious Artist may find out
ways to be charitable at a more merciful rate. The Methods which are already
known to some more quicksighted herein then their fellows, do abundantly teach
us, that although a perfect cure is not to be proposed or hoped for; yet a
conservative cure in respect of Age, and, a complete Cure in respect of some of
the diseases before mentioned, and a palliative in respect of most of them, may
easily be effected. A convenient Diet, and meet Applications of proper
Medicines (supposed always, the blessing of God thereupon) cannot but preserve
old Men, and hinder and keep off those Miseries which otherwise would sooner
creep upon them, and give much ease, and very considerable rebukes, to the
violent assaults of all those, that have already taken possession: But those
things which are already known by the most knowing Men in the World, are little
or nothing in comparison of those that remain yet to be known upon this
Subject. The high and supreme matters thereof being yet unattempted by any,
cannot but stir up more sedulous and active Physicians to be aiming at least at
the attaining them; wherein if they shall not possibly accomplish to their full
satisfaction their intended purpose, yet surely they will much out-doe all
those who content themselves with Projects of a lower Sphere.

-- who aims at the Sky,
Shoot's higher much then he that means a Tree.
Herbert Perirrhanterium.
The reasons why Persons in this Age fall so soon into this decrepit state, and
why the miseries thereof are so multiplied and magnified upon them, is, because
either they call not in soon enough for help, or because those that are called
in, either understand not, or mind not what they ought to do. An honest and an
able Physician, may surely approve himself to his ancient Patient (as Ruthe's
Son was to his Grandmother,) A restorer of life, Ruth 4. 15.
and nourisher of old age. Much, without all question, may be done by humane
knowledge, for the retarding and keeping off Old Age for a competent season;
and for the quitting and clearing of it, from that multitude of grievances that
do so easily beset it: Though the Completion of this work be reserved in Gods
own hand, until he shall bring that happy state upon his People, which was
typified by Moses, Who when he was one hundred and twenty years old, Deuteronomy. 34.
7.
had not his eye dim, nor his natural force abated. And was plainly prophesied
by Isaiah, saying, Isa. 65. 20.
There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that has not
filled his days, for the child shall dye an hundred years old.

And yet farther, it seems not to me in the least incongruous to Christian
Religion to affirm, that life it self may be prolonged. There are certain ways
and methods that have a natural tendency in them either to life or death: Prove.
11: 19.
As righteousness tends unto life, so he that pursues evil, pursues it to
his own death. Abbreviation and prolongation of life stand upon the same
foundation, and the self-same arguments either confirm them, or overthrow them
both together. Now most certain it is, Psalm. 55. 23.
that evil men shall not live out their days; And as certain it seems to me,
that good men shall outlive their days, else what means that promise of
additional life; Pro 3. 2.
My son forget not my Law, but let thine heart keep my Commandments, for length
of days, and long life, and peace shall they add unto thee. Yet the words of
Job are everlastingly true, Job 14. 5.
The days of man are determined, the number of his months are with God, he
has appointed his bounds that he cannot pass; His Prescience and
Predetermination do not at all hinder the influences of natural Causes, but he
knows and disposes of them also, equally with their effects. And thus those
things, that are with us reputed the most contingent, are also foreseen and
fore-ordered, as well as others. 1 King. 22. 34.
The drawing of a Bow of a certain man at a venture, was as well known and
determined, as the death of that King that fell thereby. The whole Story of
Hezechiah's life and death was alike predestined; Isa 38.
yet he was sick unto death, and had then certainly died, had not God lengthned
out his life yet fifteen years, and had he not followed his appointment in
making use of the Plaster of Figs. Paul's most comfortable words in his
dangerous Voyage to Rome, There shall be no loss of any man's life among you,
Act. 27. 22, 31.
was a true report of the sure unchangeable and Eternal Counsel of God: Yet had
not the shipmen abode in the ship, they could not have been saved. The death
and continuation of life of every man, and of every individual living Creature
is certainly determined; yet they shall both of them as necessarily follow
their constituted means, as day and night, do the presence or absence of the
Sun.

But yet once more, it is more than probable, that such noble medicines may be
found out and prescribed, that may innovate the strength of all the parts of
old men, and bring their Temperament back again to equality; that may so
fortify nature, and consume or expel whatsoever is contrary thereunto; as
life and vigor may be restored to such a measure, which may safely be called,
The renewing of youth. It is said of Captain Naaman the Leper, after he had
made use of the Ordinance of God for his recovery, that his flesh came again
like the flesh of a little child, 2 King 5. 17.
and he was clean. And thus through the blessing of God upon our weak
endeavors, we daily see brought again from the Graves mouth, and restored to
perfect health and strength, many that were Confecti morbo, spent and consumed
with a disease, and why some that are Confecti senio, wasted with age, may not
in like manner be renewed, seems not at all impossible. Nay, this Elihu, one of
Jobs friends, does abundantly prove, from the power and providence of God, when
he says; Job 33. 25.
His flesh shall be fresher than a child's, he shall return to the days of his
youth. And those Critical returns of nature, (which are vulgarly called
lightnings before death) that do usually continue but for two or three hours or
days at the most; are notwithstanding sometime by the strength of nature only;
lengthned out to so many weeks or months; and there can no reason be given, why
a skilful and successful Artist, may not be made instrumental for the farther
prolonging them, with greater comfort, to so many years or Lustra's. The whole
Creation now grown old expects and waits for a certain rejuvenescency, Romans
8. 19, 2.
with which ere long it shall surely be blessed: In the mean time, this is
presented unto us in a figure, in those several Transformations and Renovations
of the Ant, and Silkworm, and many such Insectiles, which are soon brought to
extreme old age by their incessant labor, in recompense whereof, by a
wonderful Metamorphosis they are renewed into brisk and lively Flies. And there
are abundance of more perfect Creatures also, which depositing their old skins,
or shells, or some such emblem of their age, are at certain seasons brought back
again to a youthful state, and such are Snakes, Lizzards; Crabs, Crevises;
Eagles, King-fishers, and such like; and why some such thing as this, or at
least something Analogous hereunto, may not be wrought upon man, the most
perfect Creature of all the earth, I am sure no one can give an account. David
in his Doxology intimates, that there may, saying, concerning God in his
Providence; He satisfies thy mouth with good things, so that thy youth is
renewed like the Eagles. Psalm. 103. 5.
Yet were not these things thus visibly demonstrated to us, God might in his
(...) alter the Course wherein hitherto he has manifested himself; Ephesians. 3. 10
And in some things he has given us assurance that he will; the way that
hitherto he has been pleased to take to bring our bodies to glory and
immortality, has been through misery, dust, and darkness, but in the last day
he will take a nearer course to do the same thing; 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52.
Behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye at the last trump, for the
Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall
be changed.

These Magnalia naturae, ( viz. the preventing, alleviating, and curing (as far
as is attainable) the diseases before mentioned, the retarding of Age, the
prolonging of Life, the renewing of Youth,) that have scarce entered the
thoughts of Vulgar Pretenders to Physic; have been as unto the practick part
under our Consideration, with like care and industry, as what you here see in
the Theory; and that from principles gathered up, not only from reason,
reading, and experience; but from some eminent instructive expressions of Holy
Writ, which are not obvious to every cursory and superficial Reader: all which
may also be communicated to you in a convenient season.

FINIS.
The INDEX.
THe Introduction from page 1 to 12, The use of the Scripture P. 1, 2. the
several interpretations of this place 3, the true 4, the names of age 5, the
bounds 6, 7. the Analysis 9, the only Panacea 10.

Verse. 1. From page 12 to 23, the exhortation p. 12, the general diseases and
inle^s to all the rest 13, the certainty of this state 13, 14, the continuation
15, how evil days are to be understood 15, 16, 17. what old Age is called
good 18, how pleasure is to be understood 21, incredible in Age ib.

Verse. 2. From Page 23 to 54, the several interpretations of this Verse p. 23,
24, the proper 26, the union of the Soul and Body ib. their communion 27, the
inward Man which does not decay 29, 30, the sun, or rational faculty superior
31, the difference between soul and spirit 32, 33, the light, or ration^
faculty inferior 30, the speculative operations ib the practical 37, Solomon's
declension 38, the Wi^^ 39, the Moon, or sensitive faculty 40, its operations
41, the common sense and fancy the same faculty 42, the Stars, or the Species
in the memory 45, not only of the fancy, but of the understanding 46, the
use of this faculty 4^, 48, the diseases 49, Clouds after Rain ( i. e.) one
misery after another 50, 51, notwithstanding what nature can do 52, or art 53.

V. 3. From page the 54 to 101, the Body compared to an House p. 55, the
keepers of the house not the Thorax, but the Hands 56, how they keep the house
57, 58, the bones 59, 60, the thumb 61, the muscles 61, 62, the diseases 63,
the causes of them 63, 64, the strong Men, or the Feet 65, 66, 67. their
likeness to the keepers of the house 69, the femur 70, the Patella 71, the
conjunction of the fibula 72, the variety of the flexures of the hands and feet
73, the muscles 73, 74, the diseases 75, the grinders, the jaw-bones 76, 77,
the teeth several ways fitted for grinding 77, 78, 79, the division of them
80, the reasons why the great and broad teeth are most properly the grinders
81, 82, Creatures that have teeth only on one jaw, and how that want is
supplied 83, 84, the diseases 85, how the Eyes may be called the lookers out of
the Windows 86, the pellucide parts 87, the humors ib. the tunicles 88, the
use of the tunica cornea 90, the visible species ib. how vision is made 91, the
holes 92, the orbitae 93, the palpebrae, or eyelids 94, the Iris, or
party-colored part of the eye 95, the pupilla, or apple of the eye 96, the
optic nerve 97, the diseases 99, 100.

V. 4. From page 101 to 150, The connection p. 101, the cause of former
Interpreters mistake upon this Verse p. 102, 103, a double grinding 104, why
fermentation is called grinding 104, 105, Chylification 106, Sanguification
107, 108, Assimulation 109, 110, L^ctification 111, Spermification 112, the
Grinding of Samson 114, 115, the sound of the Grinding 116, 117, the lowness
thereof, or the diseases 118, the doors 119, the fore-doores 120, the
back-doores 121, the intermediate doors 122, 123, the Streets 124, the
shutting of the doors, or the diseases 125, the voice of the bird 126, 127,
the diseases 129, how both sleep and waking may be accounted infirmities of Age
130, 131, why Age is defined morbus naturalis 133, the active Daughters of
Music ib. the lungs 134, 135, the Organs of Speech 136, the Aspera Arteria ib.
the Tongue 137, the Palate 138, 139, theTeeth 140, the Lips ib. the Organs of
Singing 141, the Larynx ib. the Glottis 142, the passive Daughters of Music
143, 144, the outward Ear 145, the Elices ib. the inward Ear 147, how hearing
is performed 148, the diseases 149, 150.

Verse. 5. From page 150 to 202, The Connection p. 150, 151, the Passions of the
Mind 152, fear 153, its attendants and causes 154, 155, its consequences 156,
the fearfulness of Jacob and Eli 157, the objects of Old Men's fear 158, high
things ib. plain and easy things 159, the division of the parts of the Body
160, the Almond Tree, or Hoary Head 161, which agree in color 162, in
hastiness 163, in eminency 164, in diagnosticks 165, in Pr^gnosticks 167,
Canities 169, the Grasshopper shall be a burden, or rather shall grow (or show)
big and burdensome 170, the mistake of former Interpreters 171, how removed
172, the division of the animate parts 173, the Grasshopper resembles the bones
175, and their protuberancies 176, chiefly the Vertebrae of the spine 177, the
other spermatical parts, and the skin 179, the diseases 180, defire shall fail,
or rather the Capers shall shrink 181, the reasons for this Interpretation 182,
183, the diseases 184, the blood and humors, and entrails 185, the Glandules
186, the Muscles 186, 187, long home implying secrecy 189, long duration 191,
eternity 192, that interrogation, if a Man die shall he live again, intends the
Negative 193, 194, 195, the Res^rrection 196, the Mourning at the Funeral 197,
no cause of it, in respect of the dead 198, 199, but of the living 200.

Verse. 6. From page 202 to 249, the Connection p. 202, 203, the Cord 204, 205,
the instrument of sense and motion after it has proceeded out of the scull
206, why expressed in the singular number 207, it is called the Silver Cord
from its color and place 208, from its excellency 209, 210, the loosning of
the Cord 211, the symptom of death here intended 212, the bowl 213, the
contained parts of the Head ib. the containing parts 215, external 216,
internal 216, 217, the Pia matter principally here intended 218, why called the
Golden Bowl 219, 220, 221, the symptom of death here intended 222, how an
Apoplex may be reckoned both as a disease of Age, and a symptom of Death 223,
224, why this part of the Allegory could never be understood formerly 226,
wherein the life of Man consists 227, the use of the heart 228, 229, 230, its
vessels 231, the Circulation of the blood how performed 232, 233, the Pitcher
or the Veins 234, 235, the fountain, or right Ventricle of the heart 236, 237,
the symptom of death here intended 238, 239, the wheel is the in strument of
circulation 240, 241, 242, the Cistern, or left Ventricle of the Heart 243, the
agreement of King Solomon and Dr. Harvey 245, the symptom of Death here
intended 246, the sum of all the diseases 248.

The Conclusion from page 249 to the end. Solomon's Systeme to be compared with
others p. 249, the Scripture light the best in natural things 250, its
excellency 251, 252, the Vindication of Physicians 253, 254, Natural things
lead to Divine 255, the inducement to study the Scripture 257, and the
Gerocomical part of Physic 257, 258, what cures in respect of Age are already
found out 259, what are wanting 260, the retarding of Age 261, the prolonging
of life 261, 262, the renewing of Youth 263, 264, 265.


