woodcut portrait of man CATILINE

Printed for James Norris at the Kings arms without Temple Ba^



Patriae Parricida: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Horrid Conspiracy OF CATILINE
AGAINST The Commonwealth OF ROME.

Translated out of Salust, By C. C.

Plots, true or false, are necessary things
To raise up Commonwealths, and ruin Kings.
Absalom and Achitophel. LONDON: Printed by J. C. and F. C. for James Norris,
at the Kings-Arms without Temple Bar. 1683.

TO Sir JOHN FOWELL Bar. WILLIAM CARRY Esquire; And JOHN GLANVILL Esquire; My Quondam
Worthy School-fellows.
SIRS,
SInce Books (as well as Authors) want Patrons, under whose protection they may
pass free and undisturbed through the whole series of Censure, nor be carpt at
by every pretending Zoylus, and Factious Critic; the aspiring Catiline, dressed
in his English Garb, lies at your mercy for his Doom. He was once raging in his
Passions, and immoderate in his Ambition, affecting no less than the
Sovereignty of the only Empire of the World; but that same Civil War which he
was the only Author of, turned at last to his own ruin, like Envy in Ovid
became his own Tormenter and Executioner: Or like that foolish Bird that stole
a Coal from the Altar, which burnt and consumed he whole Nest.

Thus we see to what Ruins and Precipices the Igni^ fatuus of his Ambition
decoyed him. But it is not only the fate of Catiline, but all, whose shallow
brains entertain such extravagant Chimaera's, and are pufft up with the empty
bubble of haughty Ambition; and it is the rarest thing in nature, if ever they
at last compass what they aim at, though to the attaining but the least part of
it, they render themselves the most contemptible of Mankind. Catiline, who
could content himself with no less Power than that of Sylla, yet condescended
to be a public Pander to procure Whores and Horses for the Roman Gentlemen,
whose Heads and Purses he made use of, and whose Ruins he caused as well as
his own.

The first ambitious men in the World, the old Giants, are said to have made an
heroical attempt of scaling Heaven in spite of the Gods, and they cast Ossa on
Olympus, and Pelion upon Ossa, two or three Mountains more they thought would
make them absolute Masters of Heaven, as well as Earth, but the Thunder came
and spoiled all, when they were come to the third story.

The great Attempt was all in vain;
They reapt their labor for their pain.
Cromwell, the great Giant of our Nation, one of their Offspring, when from an
inconsiderable Captain he made himself Lieutenant General of a little Army of
Titans, which was his first Mountain; afterward General, which was his second;
and then absolute Tyrant of three Kingdoms, which was his third; is really
believed to have died of Discontent, because he could not attain the name of
King, and the formality of a Crown: But if he had compassed that, yet still
something else had been necessary to complete his Felicity; either the Title of
an Emperor, or a God.

And to this day what are the minds of many men infected with, but the same
Disease? what mean else these Plots and Conspiracies (of which Catiline is but
the Model)? and these flyings from Justice, but the cursed fruits of Ambition?
What makes men of profligate Lives and lost Consciences endeavor the Death and
Ruin of their own Monarch and the best of Princes? a Prince whom Wonders and
an inscrutable Providence have preserved, and attended from his Cradle to his
Crown; whose Grace has warmed into life the Vipers that would have stung him,
and entertained the croaking Vermin into his own Palace.

We might well now reflect on the Iron Age of Ovid, Filius ante Diem Patrios
inquirit in annos: Or the days of Sylla, when the Sword had free sway, and
acted what it pleased, and was as familiar with Entrails as the Augurs. And may
not we as well imagine that Catiline or Cethegus is now raised from the dead,
and like Mahomet's Pidgeon inspires men with the horrid principles of Blood and
Rebellion? What puts the Nation into Frights and Jealousies, what ruins
Friendship and Commerce among men, and turns the whole course of Nature into
Chaos and Confusion, but Ambition and its pernicious Attendants?

Thus have I made so large a digression in an Essay of Ambition: all that I
have to say is, That Gratitude and a sense of Honor for my Countrymen and
School-fellows, was the only cause (in this interval of my business) why I
were so ambitious to attempt so difficult a Task. The Original in Latin we
learnt at School; and I know some will object, that like a Schoolboy I have
handled it: but as I covet not their Smiles, so I fear not their Anger, but am
much of Martial's humor, that only studied to please and gratify the
Nobility; Let Poetasters beat their Brains
To please the Vulgar, what is their gains?


But my ambition was only to please my self, and if possible, gratify my
Friends; (but especially you, who are my Holy Day Friends, and ought to be
distinguished from Pretenders): If I have done this, my ambition is at its
height; and it is but reason I should study not only to requite, but if
possible, erect so lasting a Monument, Quod nec Jovis ira, nec ignis should be
ever able to demolish their Names, who have so largely and generously obliged
me, and I doubt not but will continue it.

I pass by your Virtues and your Pedigree, and hate to be thought guilty of the
least of flattery: for as I acknowledge you my Friends, I should be far from
being so, should I in the least endeavor it. If Virtue be Nobility (as the
Satyrist observes) you have a double Claim to it: Virtue to a Noble Extraction
adds Luster, carrying a Majesty with it, and claiming a veneration from every
one, especially when conspicuous in such young Personages. Which that it may
still flourish, as it is the Wish of all that love you, so of none more, than,

SIRS, Your most humble and obliged Servant, CALEB CALL.

THE INTRODUCTION.
LVcius Sergius Catiline was sprung from an Illustrious Family, and endowed
with a vast strength both of Mind and Body, but of as wicked and villainous a
disposition: to him, even from his youth, Civil Wars, Blood, Rapine, and
Dissentions, were ever grateful and welcome, and in them did he altogether
exercise his Youth. He had a Body that could endure Hunger, Heat, and Watching,
almost beyond belief: His Mind was bold, subtle, various, that could
counterfeit or dissemble any thing; greedy of another Estate, and very
prodigal of his own; raging in his Passions, and more Eloquent than Wise: His
Desires were of so vast an extent, that they immoderately coveted things
incredibly beyond his ability. As soon as the Government of L. A Noble Roman of
the Families of the Scipio's: He first served under Marius; afterward aspiring
to the power of a Dictator, became a great Enemy to Marius, and at last his
ruin. Then had he power to overruled all Rome, which he did by cutting off his
Foes, and enriching his friends. At last he di'd at Puteoli of the Lousie
Discase, ( a sit death for all such aspiring Usurpers,) after he had slain
10^000 men, 90 Senators, 15 of the Consular dignity, and 2000 Gentlemen. Of his
Life, vid. Plutarch.
Sylla had its Exit, an ex-travagant desire seized him of invading the
management of the Commonwealth; neither did he ever value by what means he
attained it, so he got the Reins of Sovereignty into his own hands. Still the
wants of his Family and the guilt of his Villainy more and more blowed up the
Coals of Discontent in his turbulent breast, besides the corrupt Manners of the
City; which Luxury, Avarice, and other complicated Debaucheries, never ceased
to foment. Nor can I omit (the matter it self requiring it) to repeat and treat
of the Acts and Institutions of our Forefathers, both in Peace and War; by what
means they founded the Commonwealth, in what a prosperous condition they left
it, and how Rome, from the most flourishing and best of Cities, became the most
wicked and debaucht.

The Trojans (I have read) were the first that built and inhabited the City of
Rome; who like Vagabonds wandered from place to place under one The Son of
Venus and Anchises, who when Troy was taken, came into Italy. He began his
Reign over the Latins (says Buchole) about the year of the World 279. at which
time Sampson was Judge of Israel. Ante urb. Cond. 427.
Aeneas their Commander, to-ge-ther with the Quasi sine Origin, by reason of
their antiquity; Vel Aberrigines, ex aberrando, a wandering People, whose
Offspring is not known.
Aborigenes, a brutish kind of People, without Laws, without Government, free
and absolute. It Is almost incredible to relate how both these, of a different
Offspring, different Language, and different Manners, did so easily mix and
incorporate, as soon as they were settled in one place; and afterward when the
number of their Citizens, the goodness of their Manners, and the extent of
their Territories, had advanced their fortunes, their Condition seemed very
prosperous, and their power formidable.

But it is a general Maxim, that the abundance of all things begets Envy: for
we find that the bordering Kings and People began to wage War against them.
Some few of their Friends came to their assistance, others out of fear and
cowardice shun d all dangers; but the Romans were very active to encourage and
exhort one another to encounter their Enemies, and with their Arms defend their
Liberty, their Country, and their Fathers. But as soon as their Valor had
dispelled the Mist of Danger, they immediately sent Aids and Supplies to their
Friends and Confederates, and became more beloved by giving than by receiving
of Favors; insomuch that their lawfully-acquir'd Power obtained at length the
Royal name of Empire.

They had * Delicti Delegates, A Deligendo: No sitter term for it in English
than Deligates.
men chosen out to consult the good of the Commonwealth, whose bodies as age
had rendered weak and infirm, so their Wisdom was the more strong and valid: To
these, either in regard of their years or Office, they gave the honorable
appellation of Fathers.

But as soon as the City had assumed its Liberty (so much did the desire of
Glory inflame them, that) it is incredible to relate in how short a time, to how
great an height they arrived.

For the Roman Youth, as soon as they were capable, learned in their Tents
Military Discipline by labor and practice, and took greater delight in shining
Armor, and warlike Horses, than in the sordid pleasures of Banquets and
obscenities: And by this means it came to pass, that nothing they undertook was
strange, or unusual to them; no place, though never so difficult, impassable;
no armed Enemy in the least formidable; but a true Valor subdued and made
every thing easy.

But the greatest emulation of Glory was among themselves; for every one strove
to give the first onset to the Enemy, who should first scale a Wall, or do the
most noble action: this they accounted their greatest Treasure, their greatest
Fame, and the most honorable Nobility. They were ever covetous of Praise, and
liberal of their Money, and affected a great deal of Glory and a competent
Estate. I could tell ye in what places the Roman Valor with a small Party has
conquered vast Armies of their Enemies, what Cities armed both by Art and
Nature, they have besieged and took; if I should not make too great a
digression.

The Achievements of the Athenians were indeed very great and magnificent, but
somewhat less and obscure than what Fame has reported them; but because Athens
abounded with such great and eminent Writers, their Actions were so
hyperbolically celebrated, and their Valor had as great an Encomium, as the
best Wits of the Age could express in words.

But the Romans had never that Vacation, because every of the most prudent and
sage men, were ever employed in the most weighty Affairs; and no one amongst
them exercised the Gifts of the Mind without those of the Body: the Esse quam
videri bonus malibat. sic Aeschilus, (...).
best men knew that Virtue consisted in Action, and were more addicted to do,
than talk; and had rather their good deeds should be commended by others, than
that they themselves should be Trumpets to sound forth their own Praise. Every
where, both at home and abroad, good Manners were their only study: Joined
with the greatest Friendship, and the least Self-interest, Vid. D. August. de
Civit. Dei, lib. 2. cap. 18.
Goodness and Honesty more prevailed with them by the Law of Nature, than of
Nations: Their Enemies were the only Objects of their Wrath, Hatred, and
Discontents; and the only Strife among themselves was, how one Citizen should
out do another in works of Virtue; in their Devotions to the Gods they were
liberal; parcimonious at home, and very true and faithful to their Friends:
They maintained themselves and the Commonwealth by these two Arts; in War,
Courage; and in Peace, Justice.

For I have known punishment to be inflicted oftener on those who contrary to
command have fought against their Enemies, and though called home, returned but
unwillingly, than on those who have basely deserted their Colors, and given
way to the Enemy. But in Peace they exercised their Authority more by Mildness
than Severity, and had rather pardon and pass by an Injury, than endeavor to
revenge it. But when by Industry and Justice they had raised the Republic to
its Grandeur, great (yet conquered) Kings, mighty Nations, and vast Multitudes,
were subdued by the Roman Valor; and Carthage, that was emulously fired at the
Glory of the Roman Empire, lay buried in its own Ruins; both Sea and Land lay
open to them, and Fortune began to play mad freaks, and make a mixture of every
thing: Those who had undergone all Labors and dangerous Adversities, left
Riches and Idleness to be wished for by others, and accounted them as a burden
too heavy to be born.

And therefore first an immoderate desire of Riches, and then of Sovereignty,
so far increased, that they became the Subject and Original of all Mischiefs:
for Covetousness having subverted Faith, Honesty, and all good Arts, taught men
Pride, Cruelty, Contempt of the Gods, and Bribery, and compelled the greatest
part of Mankind into Falsehood, to speak one thing and think another, and to
value Friendship not for its own sake, but for the profit that attended it; and
to regard more the outward countenance of the Face, than the inward beauty of
the Mind. These things at first grew by degrees to an height, at length to be
pleaded for and vindicated.

Afterward when this Contagion like a Pestilence had infected the whole City,
the Empire, which before was most just and excellent, was metamorphos'd into
cruel and intolerable. At first indeed Ambition possessed the minds of men more
than Covetousness, being the more plausible Vice, and nearer resembling Virtue:
for the nature of the wise man and the ignorant are alike desirous of Glory,
Honor, and Command; but the one takes just and true measures, and the other
(blinded with unlearned Ignorance) by unjust and deceitful Fallacies,
endeavors to attain them. Covetousness is no other than a strict search and a
fixed desire after Riches; which no wise man was ever guilty of, because it has
that poisonous quality, to render both the Mind and Body weak and effeminate:
it is infinite and unsatiable; neither is it possible for Plenty or Want to
hinder or diminish it.

But after the Commonwealth was retaken by L. Sylla, his good beginnings were
attended with far otherwise events: for the Army fell immediately to Rapine and
Violence; one coveted this house, and another that field: neither had they any
Conscience or Modesty, but made the poor Citizens the deplorable Objects of
their Cruelty and Outrage.

Hence it came to pass that L. Sylla, that he might the more endear the Army
(he led into Asia) to himself, gave it a toleration for all Luxury and
Debauchery: for the bewitching delicacies of the Place, and the pleasures of
Peace, soon turned the flinty breasts of Soldiers into softness and effeminacy.

There was the fatal place where first the Roman Army grew to an habit of Lust
and Intemperance; here they first came to admire painted Tables and imboss'd
Cups, and privately and publicly to steal and plunder, rob Temples, and make
no distinction at all between things sacred and profane; so that wherever
they came and were victorious, they never left any thing for the conquered to
enjoy.

For prosperous Events are a great clog to the Spirits of wise men, lest they
too should become Slaves to their own Victory; but when the richest men were
accounted the most honorable, and that only they were invested with Command
and Authority, the edge of Valor was soon blunted, Poverty was accounted a
Reproach, and Innocence a morose Ill Nature.

So that Riches were the unhappy cause that Luxury, Avarice, and Pride, so
generally invaded the whole Roman Youth, that they were given up to Rapine and
Prodigality; to be profuse of their own Estates, and yet very covetous of
another; to set no value either on Shame or Modesty, but to mingle divine and
humane things promiscuously alike.

It was a Golden time when whole Houses and Villages, built after the forms of
Cities, came to visit the Temples of the Gods, founded by our most religious
Ancestors; when they adorned the Temples of the Gods with Piety and Devotion,
and their own houses with Renown and Honor; when they never debarred the
Conquered of any thing, but only the liberty of doing Injuries.

But on the contrary, these (rather Bruits than Men) by the greatest Injustice,
and the height of Villainy, (as if to do Injuries was only to make use of
Authority) have stripped their Companions of all those Privileges that were left
them by their most valiant Conquerors: For why should I tell you things which
unless seen are incredible, that many private men have levelled Mountains, and
drained Oceans, to whom their Riches seemed as a Play-game, and though lawful
enough in themselves, yet were wilfully abused to all manner of Impiety.

Neither did they rest here, but no less immoderate desire of Filthiness and
Folly, and other unlawful Extravagancies, did possess them: even men changed
the course of Nature, and acted the parts of women; and women did no less
impudently prostitute their shame in public; both Sea and Land were ransackt
to afford them Delicates to please the witty gluttony of a Meal; and they took
greater delight in Sloth and Drowsiness, than in a moderate Sleep and natural
Refreshment: No longer did they undergo Hunger, Thirst, Cold, or Hardships, but
made every thing subservient to their Luxury.

These things, when their Prodigality had brought their Estates to a low ebb,
fired the Roman Youth to some rash Attempt; for a mind once polluted, or
tainted with debaucht principles, never wants fuel to maintain them: and
therefore in every respect they gave Prodigality a greater scope, and a freer
career.

Patriae Parricida: OR, CATILINE 's Conspiracy.
IN so great and so debaucht a City, Catiline had every day Cabals of
Pensioners for Mischief and Villainy; for every Debauchee that had either by
Riot, Gaming, or Whoring, consumed his Patrimony, or had mortgaged his Estate
to procure a Pardon for some notorious Crime; besides all Parricides,
Sacrilegious, arraigned at the Bar, or deserved and feared it; besides Thieves,
perjured, and Murderers; and lastly, all those whom any notorious Villainy,
want, or an evil Conscience had made infamous, were by Catiline picked up as the
fittest persons for his purpose. These were his very Family and Domestics; and
if any one of an honest Reputation, free from those Enormities, ever happened
into his acquaintance, by perpetual Persuasions and insensible Allurements, he
becomes a Proselyte as bad as the worst. But for the most part he coveted the
acquaintance of young men, because their Spirits are more pliable in the bloom
of their age, and consequently swallow the Bait with less difficulty; therefore
he adapted a particular Temptation to every particular Constitution: To some he
would become a Pander, for others he would procure Dogs and Horses; and without
regard either to Modesty or Expense, he would never refuse the most vile and
abject services, so he could but bring them over to his humor, and make them
true to his interest.

For Catiline, when but a Youth, committed several notorious Rapes, first on a
noble Virgin, then on a Vestal Nun, and was guilty of many such egregious
incestuous Extravagancies, contrary to all Law and Nature. At last he sell in
love with Aurelia Orestilla, in whom no good man found any thing commendable
but her Beauty; and because she doubted to marry him, fearing her Son-in-law,
then in age, it is really believed he poisoned his only Son, to make way for
their unlawful Marriage; which thing in my opinion was the chiefest cause why
Catiline so soon endeavored to ripen his Conspiracy: For a mind polluted with
Impiety, is hateful both to Gods and men, and can never be sedate nor composed
with sleep nor watchings. Thus did self-guilt weary and waste his enraged,
turbulent breast: from thence proceeded that languid bloudless color in his
face, staring eyes, his pace confused, now quick and then slow; and the uneasy
discontent, and War within him, discovered it self too apparent in his looks
and gestures.

But he not only betrayed a great part of the Roman Youth, but he taught them
diverse Formula's and Methods in the commission of notorious Villainies. Out of
them he furnished himself with false Evidences and counterfeit Seals, insomuch
that they Set all their Credit, Fortunes, and Dangers at a very despicable
value.

But after he had made shipwreck of their Reputations, he soon commanded things
of far greater consequence: for if but a small cause or opportunity for
Mischief did occur, lest their hands should grow dull for want of use, yet
their minds should be gratuitously mischievous to circumvent and ruin the
Innocent as well as guilty.

Catiline reposing so great a trust and confidence in these his Friends and
Allies, (considering that there was no Country but to which he and they were
deeply indebted, and that Sylla's Soldiers were in want, who reflecting on
their former Victories, wished once more an opportunity for a Civil War) began
to consult by what means he might best curb the Commonwealth, and take the
Government into his own hands. In Italy there was no Standing-Army, and
Father-in-law to Julius Casar, for his valor surnamed Magnus. He was of such
an Heroic Spirit, that he could not admit of an Equal; and Caesar so stout,
that he could not endure a Superior: whence arose the Civil Wars in Rome.
Cn. Pompeius was waging War in the utmost confines of the Roman Empire, that
he himself stood very fair for the Consulate, and the Senate nothing at all
cautious and suspectful, but every thing moved in a safe and undisturbed
Sphere; all which wonderfully favored his design. And to that purpose, about
the Which was about the beginning of Junei, for the Calends were the first day
of every month. Vid. Godw. Antiq. Romans
Calends of June he first began to discover it apart, to persuade some, and
allure others, and promise all, that the Aids and Forces he should have
(considering the Commonwealth was careless and unprovided) would make the
rewards of the Conspiracy great and answerable. When he had discovered what he
thought convenient, he summoned all those, the greatness of whose wants
afforded them the greatest stock of Resolution and Boldness.

Thither came of the Senatorian Order, P. Lentulus Sura, P. Antronius, L.
Cassius. C. Cethegus, the two Sylla's, P. and Serve. L. Vargunteius, Q. Annius,
M. Porcius Lecca, L. Bestia, and Q. Curious.

Of the Equestrian Order (or Knights) came M. Fulvius Nobilior, L. Stanlius, P.
Gabinius Capito, C. Cornelius, besides many nobly descended out of the
Colonies, and free Towns. Many more Noblemen were made more privately
acquainted with it; whom the desire and hopes of Command, more than Want or
Necessity, persuaded to be Traitors. The rest that favored the Design were
for the most part of the Roman Nobility, who desired to live in ease either
splendidly, or effeminately; preferring Sic in bello Jugurthino. Quanquam
opibus suis consideret, tamen non debere incerta pro certis mutare. Irem
Plautus, in Pseud. Certa amittimus, dum incerta petimus. Et Hesiodus, (...).
Chimaera's before Realities, and the dubious events of War, before the certain
tranquillity of a settled Peace.

At that time there were some that thought that M. Licinius Crassus was not
altogether ignorant of the Association, because he bore an inveterate hatred to
Cn. Pompeius, who was then General of a great Army, and was very willing to
raise any Forces whatsoever to curb his growing Greatness, hoping that if the
Plot had took effect, to make himself Commander in his stead.

When they were all met, Catiline, though he had discovered several things
before apart, yet thought that in this matter 'twas expedient to convene all,
to give them a sufficient satisfaction of the goodness and justice of his
Cause; took them apart into a private Room, and thus bespoke them.

In vain were all opportunities of time and place, and pregnant hopes of
Dominion and Sovereignty, if either your Valor or Integrity were in the least
to be suspected; neither would I through ignorance or a capricious humor,
leave a substance to embrace a shadow, or refuse solid certainties to grasp
empty hopes, or Clouds of Air: but since in many and prodigious difficulties I
have had sufficient experience of your Courage and Honesty, my mind prompts me
on to undertake the greatest and the most honorable Enterprise imaginable: for
I know what things will turn to the profit and disadvantage of us all; and for
you to Will and Nill the same with me, is the very height and complement of
Friendship. What I now design, you have been severally acquainted with, how
glorious and honorable our Undertaking is; but my Spirit is more inflamed,
when I reflect how miserable the residue of our lives will be, unless by some
noble Attempt on the public Liberty we endeavor to evade it.

For as soon as the Commonwealth was delivered to a few rich and powerful men,
mighty Kings and Tetrarchs became their Tributaries, vast Multitudes and whole
Nations became their Vassals, and paid them Stipends; and we that are truly
valiant, honest, and nobly born, have been ranked with the ignoble Vulgar, and
been basely subject to their humors, without any Authority, or the least mark
of Greatness, to whom (were things justly managed) we should appear great and
formidable: for we see that all Command, Honor, and Riches, are absolutely
possessed and disposed of by them, when only Dangers, Disgrace, and Poverty
are all our fortunes; which how long (O invincible Spirits) will ye undergo! Is
it not much more honorable to die in the Bed of Honor in a Righteous Cause,
than lose a miserable and a sordid life in the base service of a Great man's
Pride? But now (O the faith of Gods and men!) Victory smiles, and seems ready
to put her triumphant Palm into our hands; and what should hinder? Is not the
power in our hands? our Age in its full strength and vigor? and our Courage
equal to our Age? and every thing as it were conspires to make us absolutely
happy? When on the contrary, to them, Age, Riches, and Security, render every
thing old and tedious. Nothing now remains but the Attempt it self. Other
things the justice of our Cause and the necessity of our Action will
consequently dispatch: for what one of us, that has the true Roman blood
flowing within him, can endure that such men should have so great an affluence
of Riches, even whole worlds of Treasure, which they profusely waste in Riots
and Excess, in levelling Mountains, and draining Seas; when we, who are far
more meritorious and deserving, cannot supply the necessitous wants of our
selves and Families: they are happy in the number of their Palaces, and we
miserable in the want of a small House, or a settled Habitation. They can
purchase rich Attick Tables, carved Images, and embossed Cups; pull down this
new Structure, and raise another, and endeavor by all means imaginable to
consume and even torment their Treasures, which are as boundless as their
Passions; while we labor under the intolerable burden of Wants at home, Debts
abroad, in a deplorable condition, and much more deplorable hopes: and
therefore what should hinder an immediate Insurrection? Lo, Liberty, Liberty!
the Goddess whom you often have courted, now courts you, attended with that
inestimable Dowry of Riches, Honor, and Renown. Fortune has designed these
Rewards only for Conquerours; and now the Cause, Opportunity, Danger, Want,
and all the splendid Spoils of glorious War, should have a greater influence
upon your Spirits, than an excellent Oration, though decked with the choicest
Flowers of pleasing Rhetoric. Either use me as a Commander, or a Soldier;
both my Presence and my Courage shall ever attend you. These things when I am
Consul, with your advice and help, I hope to effect, unless perchance my Trust
fail me, and you more inclined to live slavishly, than command victoriously.

Soon as the Conspirators had heard this, though they had neither money nor
probable hopes of carrying it on, yet they thought they should reap sufficient
satisfaction in disturbing the Peace of the Commonwealth; and to that end they
required him to propose in what nature or condition the War should be, what
Rewards, what hopes of Aid did seem to favor it. Catiline immediately promised
them new Laws, the They were properly said to be proscribed, whose Names were
very fairly written and set up in the Forum (or Exchange) to give notice that
for some Misdemeanour their Goods were to be sold, and the Malefactors banished.
Proscription or Sequestration of the rich men's Estates, their Magistracies,
Church Lands, Plunder, and every thing which the will of the Conqueror should
lay claim to.

Besides this, Piso was with an Army in the yonder Spain, and P. Sitius
Nucerinus in Mauritania with another; both his Friends, and both Partners in
the Conspiracy: that C. Antonius, his familiar Acquaintance, a man every where
surrounded with wants and necessities, endeavored the Consulship, whom he
hoped should be his Colleague; and as soon as he had acquired that, he would
begin the Attempt. Soon as he had spoke this, he fell a railing on all the
Loyal Party with opprobrious Language, and dire Imprecations; then naming every
one of his own, began to praise them for the nobleness of the Undertaking; to
one he objected his Poverty, to another his Ambition; many he advised of the
danger and disgrace they should contiue in without it: but mostly he insisted
on the Victory of Sylla, and the rich Spoils and Plunder that attended it. At
length, when he perceived the joy of their hearts appear in their looks,
desiring them to consider what he had recommended to them, he dismiss't the
Conventicle.

At that time there were some that reported that Catiline, after he had made an
Eloquent Oration to allure the Instruments of his Mischief to an Oath of
Secrecy, gave each one a Cup of Wine mixed with Hac de re Florus sic scribit.
Additum est pignus Conjurationis Sanguinis humanus, quem circumlatum pateris
bibere. Summum Nefas, nisi amplius esset, propter quod biberunt.
Human Blood; which when (with an Execration, as is usual in solemn Sacrifices)
they had drunk off, he discovered every Circumstance of his hellish Intrigue.
And this they report he did, that, seeing they were scared with the horridness
of the Plot, they might be the more faithful one to another, and keep the
Design more secure from discovery.

In this Association there was one Q. Curious of a Noble Family, but involved in
all debaucht and villainous practices, whom the Censors banished the Senate for
his scandalous deportment. This man as he was bold and daring, so he was very
foppish and idle; he could neither be secret in things imparted to him, nor
cease to be the Divulger of his own Debaucheries, making no distinction at all
between what he did or said.

Betwixt him and Fulvia, a Lady nobly descended, was contracted a very intimate
and immodest Familiarity; to whom when Poverty had rendered him less
acceptable, he immediately boasted of and promised Golden Mountains, and I know
not what impossibilities; sometimes threatening her with death if she did not
incline to his lawless humor; at length came to be more boldly rude than usual.

But Fulvia so prudently managed him, that by degrees she got out of him the
Cause of his insolence, and thought that a matter of that dangerous consequence
to the Commonwealth, ought not to be longer kept private; insomuch that many
whom she made acquainted with it, were very desirous to entrust the management
of the Commonwealth to M. Tullius Cicero, whom before most of the Nobility
envied, and thought it a degradation to the Consular dignity, that so great an
honor should be conferred on such a new Upstart person, though of
extraordinary Parts and Abilities; but when dangers made things look with so
ill an aspect, that Envy and Pride suddenly vanished and gave place to Safety.

Therefore in the next Senate, M. Tullius Cicero and C. Antonius were declared
Sic dicti, a Consulendo Populo: No Citizen could be made Consul, till the forty
third year of his age.
Consuls; which at first struck the Conspirators with a Panick fear: Neither
was the rage and madness of Catiline any whit abated, but urged him to greater
and more fatal Resolutions.

For now he began to fortify several of the most convenient and chiefest
places in Italy, and sent Money to Manlius at Faesulae, which he had borrowed
both on his own and the account of his Friends. This Manlius became afterward
the Head of the Rebellion.

He betrayed likewise a vast number of all sorts and conditions, besides some
women who had got vast Estates by the prostitution of their bodies. Even these
Catiline designed to be instrumental to his Association, who by Courtship and
other verbal Services, should engage their Husbands to his interest, and if
not, to kill them.

Amongst these was the Lady Sempronia, a true Virago, who commonly committed
many notorious Mischiefs with a masculine impudence. This woman was very nobly
descended, and of an excellent beauty, very happy in a Noble Husband and lovely
Children, learned in the Greek and Latin Tongues, could sing and dance more
Semproniam hic reprehendit Salustius, non quod saltare, sed quod optime
scierit, quod ut vitium Notavit Aemilius Probus in Epaminondae vita.
ingeniously than an honest woman ought to do, and had several more
qualifications subservient to her wanton Luxury: she accounted any thing at an
equal value with Virtue and Modesty; and it would be very difficult to discern
whether she was more prodigal of her Money or her Reputation; being so
naturally lascivious, that rather than not be courted, she would court others.

But this woman had before this made shipwreck of her Fame and Credit, was
perjured, guilty of Murder, and involved in all manner of Luxury and Necessity.

But her Wit and Parts were not in the least despicable; she could compose
Rhymes and Sonets, was very jocular in all Society, and could talk either
modestly, moderately, or lasciviously, and had indeed a great deal of
Complaisance and Gentility in her Conversation.

These things done, and the Plot so far laid, Catiline the ensuing year
endeavored no less vigorously for the Consulate than before, hoping that if he
was chosen, he should manage C. Antonius, and cast him in what mould he pleased.

Neither was he now quiet, but sought by all means possible to entrap Cicero,
who was no less sedulously cautious to prevent him: for from the beginning of
his Consulate he so managed Fulvia, that she promised to induce Q. Curious to
discover the whole Association. Moreover, he sent away C. Antonius his Colleague
to the Government of a Province, suspecting lest he also should have some
private grudges against the Commonwealth; and had continually a private party
of his Friends and Clients about him for the safeguard of his person.

But when the Council-day came, and Catiline saw that none of his Designs and
Stratagems against the Consul took effect, resolved immediately to take Arms
and absolutely try the utmost event of all things, since all his Contrivances
met with a far different Event than he expected.

Upon this he dispatched away Manlius to Faesulae, and other parts of Etruria;
Septimius to the Territories of Picenum; and C. Julius into Apulia; some one
way, and some another, as he thought convenient.

In the mean time he himself was not idle at Rome, but still plotted the ruin
of the Consul, to prepare fit Instruments and Materials for firing the City,
and to beset strong and convenient places with armed men, to be himself armed,
to command and exhort others to be prepared and in readiness for what they were
to execute, to be active and vigilant both by night and day, and let no labor
nor hardship in the least weary nor discompose them.

But at last, when he saw nothing take effect, at an unseasonable time of night
he summoned the Chief of the Conspiracy by M. Porcius Lecca, complaining of
their sloth and tardiness in so weighty an Affair. He gave them to understand,
that he had sent Manlius before to those Forces which he had ordered to be in
Arms, and others into other opportune places, to commence the War; and that he
himself desired to hasten to the Army, if by any means possible he could first
kill Cicero, because he was the chiefest hindrance and countermine to all his
undertakings.

At this they were all startled, and very dubious what the Event might be. At
length C. Cornelius a Roman Knight, and L. Vargunteius a Senator, resolved that
very night or the next morning to take a few armed men, and go by way of visit
to salute Cicero, and so surprizingly to kill him at his own house.

But when Q. Qurius understood how great and imminent a danger threatened the
Consul, he immediately made Fulvia the happy Instrument of its discovery,
insomuch that when they came to the door, they were denied entrance; and for so
great and noble an Exploit, had only their labor for their pains.

In the mean time Manlius raised the Rabble in Etruria, who were very desirous
of Reformation, because their present Wants and Grievances brought to their
remembrance, that in the Usurpation of Sylla their Estates were sequestered, and
their Goods confiscated.

Besides these, there were a great number of Banditi or Robbers (of which that
Country abounded) and some of Sylla's old Soldiers; though they had such rich
Plunder and large Spoils, yet their Lust and Luxury left them nothing to enjoy.

When Cicero understood this, a dubious fear presently possessed him, lest the
City could no longer be defended from their Treachery by a private Council.
Neither was he sufficiently satisfied how strong the Army of Manlius was, nor
what it immediately designed to do, but makes the Senate acquainted with the
whole matter, which was heightened and aggravated before by the Rumors of the
common people.

Upon this, the Senate immediately decreed (as is usual in matters of great
consequence) that it should be the care of the Consuls, what in them lay, to
endeavor the Security of the Commonwealth, and gave Commissions to the
Magistracy to raise an Army, wage War, to engage Friends and Citizens, and to
exercise full power and authority both abroad and at home.

Not long after, L. Senius (or Servius) read some Letters in the Senate, which
he reported to come from Faesulae; the Contents of which were, That Manlius was
in the Field with a great Army, the 5th of the Calends of November: Some
related several ominous Portents and Prodigies; others, that there were several
private Cabals and Consults, how to send Arms to Capua, and raise a servile War
in Apulia. Therefore the Senate decreed that Q. M. Rex, and Q. Metellus
Creticus, should be sent, the one into Faesulae, and the other into Apulia, and
the neighboring places.

But the Quod praeirent Populo: That judged matters within the City, and had
usually places of Command in the Army; the number at last came to sixteen.
Praetors Q. Pompeius Rufus, and Q. Metellus Celer, were sent the one into
Capua, and the other to the Territories of Picenum, with orders to raise such
an Army as the time and danger did require.

Moreover, the Senate decreed that large Rewards should be given to any one
that would make any discovery of the Conspiracy, (viz.) To a Servant Freedom,
and an hundred Sesterces; to a Libertus: He or she that had served as an
Apprentice, and was afterward manumis'd, was called Libertus, or Liberta.
freed man a Pardon, and two hundred: They decreed likewise, that the Companies
of the Gladiators should be drawn out and sent into Capua, and other municipal
places, as there should be occasion; and that continual Guards and Watches
should be set over the whole City, and some inferior Magistrate should command
them.

Upon this the whole City was in a Consternation, and every thing looked with a
far different Aspect than before; for instead of their excessive Mirth and
Wantonness, (the effects of Idleness) Sorrow and Grief invaded every one;
Terror and Panick Fear so disordered them, that they would neither trust to
the safety of any place, nor the honesty of any man; they were so confused that
they were unfit to make War, or live in Peace, measuring the greatness of their
Danger by the greatness of their Fear.

Moreover, the tender women, whom the unaccustomed fear of War had affrighted,
had regard to the greatness and glory of the Commonwealth, neither ceased they
from being the Afflictors and Tormentors of their own breasts, and with up-lift
hands to Heaven implored its mercy on their poor Children. Often would they ask
confused Questions, and tremble at every shadow. Pride and Delicacy were now no
more, since they distrusted their own Country, and themselves too.

But the cruel and enraged breast of Catiline still persisted in the carrying
on of his Villainies, notwithstanding such strong Watches were set every where.
To dissemble his Hypocrisy, and excuse himself as if justly provoked, he came
into the Senate; Then M. Tullius Cicero, either startled with fear at his
presence, or moved with indignation, made a very eloquent and profitable
Oration for the Commonwealth. When he had done, Catiline, who had the gift of
Dissimulation, with a demure look, and a low voice, requested the Fathers not
to give a rash credit to every idle Report, but should consider, that as he was
descended of a Noble Family, so he ever framed his life from his Youth up, that
he had a prospect of every thing good and honorable; that they should reflect
he was one of their own Order, a Patrician, whose Ancestors had well and nobly
deserved for their many Favors and Kindnesses to the Roman Commonalty; that
there would be no need of conspiring the Ruin of the Commonwealth, so long as
M. T. Cicero, an Inmate, private Citizen of Rome, sat at its Helm for its
preservation.

Soon as he had spoken these and other opprobrious words against the Consul,
they were all startled, and began to brand him with the dishonorable terms of
Enemy, Monster, and Parricide: He, with a furious and raging transport
answered, Since I am thus circumvented by my Enemies, the Fire that I have
kindled shall be quenched by their Ruin. With that he went hastily out of the
Senate to his own house, and there ruminated on many things to himself, that
since all his Snares for the Consul proved ineffectual, and that the City was
so well secured, that there was no possibility left of firing it, he thought
best to increase the number of his Army, and before the Legion should be
mustered, to take several things with him that might be serviceable to him in
the War: so late at night he departed the City, and set forward to the Camp of
Manlius; but gave orders before to Cethegus and Lentulus (in whose boldness and
resolution he had the greatest confidence) that they should what in them lay,
strengthen the Faction, hasten to dispatch the Consul, and get ready the
Instruments of Ruin, and Fire, and other Engines of War, and that he himself
within a few days would meet them with his Ensigns at the City-walls.

In the mean time Manlius sends a Messenger to Q. Martius Rex, with such a
Message as this:

We call the Gods and men to witness, O General, that we took Arms not to the
ruin of our Country, nor to the hazard and detriment of any other; but only
for our own security, that we being made miserable and indigent by the Cruelty
and Exaction of our Usurers, are out of all hopes of our Country, Fame, and
Fortune: for their and the Praetors boundless Extortion has been such, that we
are not allowed (as our Forefathers were) the use and privileges of our own
Laws; and since the loss of our Patrimonies, have not had the liberty of our
bodies. Many times have our Ancestors in compassion to the Roman Commons,
supplied their necessities, and very lately, within our own memories, the
greatness of their Debts being such, that by the consent of all good men, Brass
has passed current instead of Silver.

For the common People being fired with the desire of Command, and justly
provoked by the pride and injustice of their Magistrates, have oftentimes
degenerated from the virtues of their Fathers, and shook off the heavy Yoke of
the Roman Senate.

But for us, we neither desire Command nor Riches, (the unhappy Original of all
the Jars and Discontents of mankind) but only Liberty, which no good man will
ever part with, without life. We conjure you and the whole Senate, to consult
the Quiet and Welfare of the miserable Citizens, and restore them the safeguard
and defense of those Laws which the Injustice and Avarice of the Praetors have
taken from them: for we would not have it said, that you should impose on us
the necessity of requiring by what means and methods we should fall in the
Revenge of our own Blood.

To which Marcius returned answer, That if they intended to have any favor of
the Senate, they should quit their Arms, and return submissively to Rome: that
the Senate and Roman People were ever of that Generosity and Clemency, that no
Petition of Redress of Grievances was ever in vain, or ineffectual.

But Catiline as he was on his Journey, sent Letters to many of the Chief of
the Senate, intimating that he was falsely accused of Crimes he knew not; and
because he could not withstand the faction and malice of his Enemies, he
thought better to submit to Fortune: that he was gone an innocent man to Exile
into Massilia, not because he was guilty of what was laid to his charge, but
only for the quiet of the Commonwealth, whose Peace he more studied than any
seditious Contention, or the vindication of his own Innocence. Several Letters
of this purport Catulus read in the Senate, delivered to him in the name of
Catiline; of which, this was one.

L. Catiline to Q. Catulus, health.
YOur extraordinary love and favor that were ever grateful to me in my
greatest dangers, has given me the boldness for this Commendation; wherefore I
thought fit not to speak any thing in my own defense in a new Senate, nor to
propose any satisfaction out of any self-guilt of what I am accused: which (I
take Heaven to witness) that you may know the truth, being so much provokt by
the continual Injuries and Affronts put upon me, being deprived of the Fruit
and Profit of all my Industry, and not obtaining the state of Dignity I stood
Candidate for, I undertook (as I am wont) the Cause of the Afflicted; not but
that I could make sufficient satisfaction for all the Debts contracted on my
account out of my own Estate, and the Generosity of Aurelia Orestilla can
satisfy the rest out of her own and her Daughters Revenues: but because I saw
men worthy of all Honor not preferred, and my self alienated from the
affections of the Senate by a false suspicion, on this account I prosecuted
very honorable hopes of preserving the residue of the Dignity for my own sake.
I would write more, but news is brought me that the Senate prepares for Arms:
wherefore I commend Orestilla to your care and protection; defend her from all
Injuries, since it is the request of us both. Farewell.


But he himself staid a few days with Flaminius at Rheatium, to supply that
City with Arms; then with the Bundles of Rods carried as a mark of Honor and
Justice before the Consul, and other great and eminent Officers.
Fasces, and other Imperial Ensigns went to the Camp to Manlius.

Soon as these things were known at Rome, the Senate immediately proclaimed
Catiline and Manlius Enemies to the Republic, and appointed a day for the rest
of the Conspirators, and those that were already condemned for capital Crimes,
before they could possibly quit their Arms; decreeing likewise that the Consuls
should have a Dilectum, and that Antonius should hasten to follow Catiline with
his Army, and Cicero be lest for the safeguard of the City.

At that time the Roman Empire seemed to be in a very low ebb of Fortune;
though all their Conquests from the East to the West were at their beck, at
home Pleasures and Riches (the summum bonum of some men) flowed in with a
Spring-tyde, yet there were some factious Citizens of that perverse and
obstinate Spirit, who then endeavored what in them lay the Ruin of the
Commonwealth and themselves too, for the lucre of the Reward promised by the
two Decretals of the Senate, had not that influence on one of so great a
Multitude as to prompt him to discover the least particle of the Conspiracy:
neither did one of Catiline's Soldiers prove a Renegado, so much did the
Witchcraft of Rebellion possess the minds of most of the Citizens: Neither was
it the opinion only of those concerned in the Association, but the greatest
part of the common people were so in love with Reformation, that they favored
and approved of his Undertakings, or at least seemed so.

For always in a great City all good and loyal persons become the Envy of the
poor and factious: whereas on the contrary, wicked Incendiaries are most
extolled; who hating Antiquities, were in love with Novelties, willing to
exchange present Realities for future Uncertainties; being bred and fostered
only by Noise and Sedition, without any care or foresight.

For Poverty is easily obtained without loss, but the common Citizens urged
themselves headlong to their own ruin, especially those who excelled others in
Cheats and Cozenage; secondly, those whose loss of Patrimony was attended with
disgrace and necessity; and lastly, those whom any wicked and nefarious Villainy
had banished Rome: These at that time fled to the City as to a Brothel; and many
calling to remembrance the Usurpation of Sylla, that they saw some from common
Soldiers become Senators; others so opulent, that they lived rather like
Princes than common Subjects; every one hoped that if Victory attended their
Swords, the same or a better fortune: Besides, the Country Youth, who earned
their Bread in the fields by the sweat of their brows, being fired with their
profuse prodigality both in private and public, preferred the idle life and
pleasures of the City before the ungrateful toil and labor of the Country.

Not only these, but all, were infected with the same disease; by which it is
the less to be admired that indigent persons, endued with ill principles,
having such hopes, consulted not so much the good of the Republic, as their
own interests: besides, those whose Parents were banished, and had their Estates
sequestered, and their Rights and Privileges lessened by the Usurpation of
Sylla, expected the Event of this War to be little different from that.
Moreover, those who were of a different Opinion and Party from that of the
Roman Senate, had rather the Commonwealth should be disturbed, than they
themselves be the less quiet. Thus the old Mischief, after the revolution of
some years, returned to infect the City once again.

For when the Power of the Of which there were two sorts, Tribunis militum, who
had only authority in matters military; and Tribuni Plebis, Protectors of the
People, Anglice, Sheriffs.
Tribunes was restored (in the Consulate of Cn. Pompeius, and M. Crassus) the
Roman Youth, having attained the height of Power, their Age and Spirits being
alike sierce and untamed, began to irritate the Rabble by criminating the
Actions of the Senate; and by degrees incensing them more and more by Bribes
and Promises, made themselves very popularly famous. On the contrary, most of
the Nobility of the Senate, for the honor of the Commonwealth, and their own
Grandeur, endeavored what in them lay to oppose them.

But after that Cn. Pompeius was sen^ to the Maritime and Mithridatick War* the
Riches of the common People were diminisht, and the Empire fell into the hands
of a few. These men had al^ Magistracies, Provinces, and every thing else in
their own possession, and were altogether absolute and uncontrollable* leading
their lives without any fear o^ danger, and awed all others by the terror of
their Laws to reduce the Commonalty into a better Obedience: bu^ the first
opportunity that offered any hopes, blew up the Coals of Dissension afresh
within them. But to return.

If Catiline had departed Rome at first, with an Army equal to the
Commonwealth, a mighty Slaughter and Calamity had inevitably befallen it;
neither would those who had been victorious have been long able to retain their
Conquest, but he that had the stronger Party would obtain the Empire from the
more weak and infirm.

Besides those that were now concerned in the Conspiracy, there were some who
sided with Catiline before; among these was one Fulvius the Son of a Senator,
whom being taken in his Journey, his Father commanded to be slain. At that time
at Rome was also Lentulus, who by the instigation of Catiline seduced (either
by himself or others) all, whose Manners and Fortunes he thought rendered them
desirous of Reformation; not only Citizens, but all sort of People that might
aid a War.

To that purpose he employs one Vmbrenus to solicit to Ambassadors of the A
very fierce and Warlike People that inhabited some part of Gallila, and were
tributaries to the Roman Empire. Now Inhabitants of Dauphiny and Savoy.
Allobroges, and decoy them, if possible, into the horrid Association,
supposing (as indeed they were) that they were deeply taxed both abroad and at
home. Moreover he knew the Justinus ex Trogo. Non reges Orientis sine
Mercenario Gallorum Exercitu, ulla bella Gesserunt, tantus terror Gallici
Nominis, sive armorum, invicta felicitas erat, ut alter neque Majestatem suam
tutam, neque amissam recuperare se posse, sine Gallica virtute arbitrarentur.
Gauls were naturally a fierce and warlike People, and might easily be brought
over to such a Design. This Vmbrenus was known to, and well acquainted with
the Chiefs and Magistrates of all their Cities, because he had for some time
been employed in Gallia by the Roman Senate; and therefore he took an
opportunity when he saw the Ambassadors in the Forum has several
significations; but I suppose this to be the place where Orations were made to
the People, and where Controversies in Law were judicially determined.
Forum, asking them a few Questions concerning the state and condition of their
City, and as it were condoling their Misfortunes, he began to inquire of them
what end they hoped to expect of all their Miseries; but when he heard them
complain of the covetousness of their Magistrates, that they accused the Roman
Senate because they afforded them no Redress, and that they expected nothing
but Death to be their Remedy; But I (said he) provided you will show your
^s;elves men, can put you into a method how you may easily avoid these
Extremities.

When he had said this, the Allobroges, big with expectation, entreated
Vmbrenus to commiserate their Condition, and promised that there was nothing so
hard and difficult, but they would to the utmost of their power endeavor to
accomplish, if by any means possible he could deliver their Citie^ from the
rigor of their Taxes.

Presently he leads them into the house of Decius Brutus, because 'twa^ near
the Forum, and was their general Rendezvous, for the sake of his Wif^
Sempronia; (for Brutus was at tha^ time absent from Rome:) to his aid h^ calls
Gabinius, who was endued with the better Art of Persuasion; in his presence he
opens the whole Plot, and to induce them the more, discovers the Confederates
and the rest that were concerned therein: and when they had consented, and
promised what Aid they could afford, they were dismissed.

But the Allobroges were long in suspense what Course to steer; on the one
side, were their Debts and Exactions, desire of War, and a prospect of the vast
Rewards of Victory; on the other, greater Riches and Aids, safe Counsel, and
instead of uncertain Hopes, certain Rewards. Consulting these things, at length
Fortune favored the Commonwealth; upon this they discovered what they knew to
Q. Fabius Sanga, (under whose Patronage their City then was) Cicero being
acquainted with it by Sanga, ordered the Ambassadors still seemingly to favor
the Conspiracy, accordingly to meet them, promise them well, and do their
Endeavor to make themselves acquainted with as much as possible. About the
same time were there Insurrections in both Gallia's, in the Territories of
Picenum, and at Brutium in Apulia; for those whom Catiline had sent away
before, rashly and inconsiderately managed every thing, according to their own
Will, and caused more Fear than Danger by their nightly Cabal^, Conveyance of
Armor and Darts, by their urging and hastening every thing; of which number
Quintus Metellus Celer (being made acquainted with it by the Senate) put many
into Chains and Irons; the like did C. Muraena in yonder Gallia, who was
Lieutenant of that Province.

But at Rome, Lentulus, with the rest of the Chief of the Conspiracy that were
ready with their Forces, so designed it, that as soon as Catiline was come into
Faesulae with his Army, L. Bestia, the Tribune of the People, should in a
select Oration lay the blame of the whole Proceeding upon Cicero, and lay the
Envy of the most unheard of Wars upon the best of Consuls, and by a certain
signal the rest of the Conspirators the next Night should severally prosecute
their intended mischiefs, but in this method, that Statilius and Gabi^ius, with
a small Party, should set fire on twelve chief Places of the City; by which
means they might the better come at the Consul and the rest for whom they had
laid wait; that Cathegus should beset the Gate of Cicero, and assassinate him,
some one way and some another; but the Sons of Families (of which the most part
was of the Nobility) should kill their own Parents. So that every one being
thunderstruck as it were with Blood and Fire, should confusedly run out, and
join with Catiline.

Whilst these things were designing and preparing, Cethegus continually
complained of the Sloth and Laziness of his Companions, that their doubting and
delays had lost them several fair and promising Opportunities, and that there
was more need of Action than Council, in a matter of so great and dangerous a
Consequence, that he himself with the help of a few more (since the rest were
so remiss) would set upon, and massacre the whole Senate. This Cethegus was
naturally fierce and cruel, very dexterous, and successful in what he
undertook, and ever thought the greatest Honor of any Action consisted in
Celerity.

But the Allobroges, according to the Command of Cicero, met Gabinius and the
rest, and required an Oath of Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius, and Cassius, which
being sealed, would be a sure Pledge or Confirmation to their Citizens, without
which it would be very difficult to induce them to favor so great and
hazardous a Design, which they (not at all suspecting) freely gave. Cassius
promised to come thither in a short time, to command what Aid they should
afford, and accordingly departed the City a little before the Ambassadors. He
also sent with them P. Vulturtius, to the end the Allobroges, before they
returned home, should confirm the Association with Catiline, by a mutual
Obligation, himself likewise delivered Letters to Vulturtius for Catiline, of
which this is one.

Who I am the Bearer shall acquaint you, Consider in how great a Calamity you
at present are, remember that you are a man, and a Roman, and what the present
posture of your Affairs require, get what Aid you can from every one, even the
most vile and abject.

He ordered likewise Vulturtius to inform Catiline, that since the Senate had
declared him Enemy to the Commonwealth, by what means he should refuse their
Conditions if offered, that all things were ready in the City, which he gave
Orders for, and that he should no longer delay to advance nearer.

These things done, Cicero being informed of all by the Allobroges, Commanded
the Praetors, L. Valerius Flaccus, and C. Pomptinius, by ambush to seize the
Allobroges, and their retinue on the Milvian bridge. The same night that they
departed, accordingly they appointed some armed Men without any noise or tumult
to beset the Bridge; where, when the Ambassadors with Vulturtius came, the
word given, on both sides the Ambush broke forth, the Allobroges, knowing the
Design, willingly surrendered themselves; but Vulturtius at first encouraging
the rest, defended himself from the multitude with his Sword, but when he saw
himself deserted by the Ambassadors, he entreated many things of Pomptinius,
for his own safety; and fearful, and distrustimg his life, delivered himself
Prisoner to the Praetors, of which thing Cicero had very seasonable notice, and
'twas hard to discern whether his Joy or Care was the greater, he was glad when
he considered, that by the Discovery of so great a Treason the City was secure
from all its threatening Dangers, and was Anxious and Doubtful what to do,
since such great Citizens were apprehended in so dangerous a Design, whose Envy
he must needs incur, and considered that their punishment would be the trouble,
and their Impunity the ruin of the Commonwealth; therefore with a resolute
Courage he commanded Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius, and Gabinius to be called
before him, likewise Ceparius, who was preparing to go for Apulia, to raise
Forces; the rest immediately came, but Ceparius a little before going from
home, happened to understand the Design, and fled the City. The Consul taking
Lentulus by the hand because he was Praetor, led him into the Senate, but the
rest he commanded to attend him in the House of Concord, thither he assembled
the Senate, and several of that Order introduced Vulturtius and the Allobroges,
and Flaccus the Praetor, with the Packet of Letters he found with the
Ambassadors. Vulturtius being demanded several things concerning the Journey
and Letters, what was their Design and Purpose, and on what account he did so,
at first feigned, and dissembled every thing, pretending he knew nothing, and
was only traveling for Gallia, but when he had the Senates faith, and the
Consul's word to fortify him, he made a full discovery of every Particular,
that he was drawn in by Gabinius and Ceparius into the Conspiracy, that he knew
no more than what he heard the Ambassadors say, that they understood by
Gabinius, that P. Autronius, Ser. Sylla, L. Vargunteius, and several others
were Confederates in the Association, the same was Declared by the
Ambassadors, but they proved Lentulus guilty, not only by the Letters, but by
some Speeches which he usually made use of. Concerning the Books of the Of
which there were ten, who all prophesied of the Incarnation of our Savior: The
place wherein their Books were kept, was within the Capitol, under ground, in a
Chest of Stone, where they remained safe till the firing of the Capitol,
wherein they were burned too.
Sybills, that three Cornelii were to reign in Rome, that Cinna and Sylla were
past before, and that he was the third, whose Fate it was to obtain the
Sovereignty of the City that year, the Twentieth from the Firing of the So
called from a man's head sound in the diging the foundation, on the Tarpeian
mount, begun to be built, An. urbis 127, perfected Anno urb: 247, burnt Anno
urb: 670.
Capitol, which by Prodigies, the Sic dict: ab aras Inspiciendo, that divined,
or foretold things by the Entrails of Beasts sacrificed.
Aruspices predicted to be very fatal to the City by a Civil War.

When they had read all the Letters, and every of the Conspirators had
acknowledged their Seals, the Senate decreed, That Lentulus should put off his
Praetorship, and with the rest be committo free Prisons. Lentulus was committed
to P. Lentulus Spinther, who was then Aedile, Cethegus to Q. Cornificius,
Statilius to C. Caesar, Gabinius to M. Crassus, Ceparius (who was taken in his
flight) to Cn. Terentius.

The Plot thus far discovered, the Common People, who before were so desirous
of Novelties, and too much favored the War, changed their Opinions, and began
to execrate the Designs of Catiline, extolled Cicero to the Stars, and
celebrated all manner of Joy and Triumph, as if they had been freed from an
Egyptian Slavery; for they knew that War, undertaken upon any other terms, was
more for plunder than destruction: but this being designed for fire and ruin,
they knew to be immoderately cruel and calamitous to themselves.

The next day after, one L. Tarquinius was brought to the Senate, who was taken
as he was going to Catiline; he, when he promised to discover as much as he
knew of the Conspiracy, had the Public Faith for the security of his Life.
Being commanded to it by the Consul, he related almost the same with
Vulturtius, of the preparations for firing the City, the massacring of the
Loyal Party, and the March of the Enemy.

Moreover, he said he was sent by M. Crassus, to tell Catiline that he should
not be discouraged at the calamitous misery of Lentulus and Cethegus that were
apprehended, but should the rather hasten to approach the City, that he might
put fresh Courage into the Breasts of the rest, and more easily deliver them
from the threatening Danger. But when Tarquinius named Crassus, a Nobleman of
vast Riches, and no less Power, some thought it to be incredible, others, tho
they thought it true, yet thought better that the power of so great a Person
should be rather pacified than exasperated. But many that depended on Crassus,
for their own interest, gave out, that the Evidence was false, and desired that
the matter might be laid aside; and therefore by the advice of Cicero, the
whole Senate decreed, that the Evidence of Tarquinius was altogether false, and
that he should be kept close Prisoner in Irons; Neither should confess any more
till he discovered by whose Advice he should frame so great a Lie on so Worthy
and Noble a Citizen.

At that time, there were not wanting some that imagined this trick to be
contrived by P. Antronius, that Crassus being made a Confederate in the Danger,
the greatness of his Power might protect the rest. Others reported, that this
Tarquinius was sent in by Cicero, lest Crassus should take the Conspirators
into his Patronage, and so disturb the Quiet of the Commonwealth. Not long
since, I heard this Crassus himself declaim, wherein he affirms Cicero to be
the Author of so great a Contumely; yet at the same time Q. Catulus and Cn
Piso, could neither by Favor, Entreaties, nor Bribes, prevail with Cicero,
that C. Caesar should be falsely accused, either by the Allobroges, or any other
Evidence, for both these were great Enemies to Caesar, Piso being by him
accused of Bribery in the open Senate, for the unjust punishment of a certain
So called from the other side of the River Po in Italy where they inhabited.
Transpadanian; and Catulus hated him because in his latter years, having
undergone all Offices and Honors, when he stood Candidate for the
Pontificate, The Pontificate was an Office to have the over sight of a Wooden
Bridge, called Pons Sublicius, being so great that Carts might pass over it,
having no Arches to uphold it, but only great Posts and Piles of Wood, and that
which is most remarkable in it is, that it is joined together only with wooden
Pins, without any Iron at all.
yet young Caesar was preferred before him. But when by no means imaginable
they could make the Consul guilty of so great a Villainy, they themselves by
counterfeiting his Seal, and insinuating what they pretended to understand from
Vulturtius, and the Allobroges, contracted on him a great deal of Envy;
insomuch that some Roman Knights, who were there placed, armed with Darts for a
Defense to the House of Concord, whether out of apprehension of the Greatness
of the Danger, or greatness of Spirit, that their Zeal to the Commonwealth
might be the more apparent, threatened Caesar, as he went out of the Senate,
with their Swords.

While these things were doing in the Senate, and Rewards decreed to
Vulturtius, and the Allobroges for their approved Evidence, the Servants and
Clients of Lentulus were continually soliciting the Tradesmen, and Hirelings
in the Streets, to deliver him by force; others made Interest with the
Ringleaders of the Rabble, who usually for Pay and Reward, made factious
Insurrections in the Commonwealth: Cethegus on the other side sent Messengers
to solicit his own Family, and the Chief of his Liberti, that were trained up
in bold and daring Enterprises, that getting an head, they should rescue him by
force of Arms.

As soon as this came to the Consul's Ears, he set such Guards and Watches over
them as he thought convenient and necessary, and assembling the Senate,
demanded what they intended to do with the Conspirators they had in Custody,
who in a full Senate were found guilty of Treason against the Commonwealth.

Then D. Junius Silanus, because he was next designed Consul, being ask't his
Judgment, not only against those that were already in Custody, but also against
L. Cassius, P. Furius, P. Umbrenus, and Q. Annius, if they should be taken, he
Decreed they should suffer such punishment as the Laws require.

But when Caesar was asked his Judgment he spoke after this manner.

Conscript Fathers,
Sic Demosth. (...), etc.
THose who consult of things dubious and dangerous ought to be free from all
Hatred, Love, Wrath, or Pity; for that Man can never thoroughly look into the
end of any thing when he is by ass'd by any one of these; neither can he at the
same time indulge his own Humor and be serviceable to the Commonwealth; where
once Fancy takes place it is always prevalent, if Lust, it always commands; so
that Reason becomes lost and ineffectual: I could give you large Examples,
Fathers, of several Kings and Nations, who, led either by Prejudice or Pity,
have given wrong Judgments; but I had rather treat of some of the Actions of
our own Forefathers, who against the Current of their own Humors and
Inclinations, have rightly and impartially administered Justice.

In the Macedonian War, which the Roman Empire waged with King Perseus the
Great, and stately City of Rhodes, which grew famous by the Riches of the Roman
People, was very treacherously revolted from us. Our Ancestors, when they were
to give Sentence on the Rhodians, lest any should report he made War for the
sake of Wealth or Injuries, sent them home unpunished. So likewise in all the
Carthaginian Wars, though in Peace, and Cessation of Arms, they committed many
nefarious Villainies, yet they consulted more their own Honor than the Rigor
of the Law. So these, O Conscript Fathers, should be your Examples. Let not the
Treason of Lentulus, and the rest, make your Dignity strike sail to your
Revenge; neither let any immoderate Passion prevail more with you than the
Sense of your own Fame and Grandeur: for, if you could find out any Punishment
equal to their Crimes, I should willingly consent to it; but if the greatness
of their Wickedness is beyond all humane Apprehension, I think such Punishments
are to be inflicted as the Laws provide.

Those who have given their Judgments before, have very accurately and
ingeniously commiserated the sad Condition of the Commonwealth, and summed up
what the inhumane Cruelty of the War would be, and what dismal Extremities had
been the Fate of the Conquered, our Virgins would have been ravished, Children
pulled from the dear Embraces of their frighted Parents, and Matrons suffer all
the base Abuses that the unbridl'd Lust of Conquerours can invent, Temples and
Houses sacked and plundered, Slaughter, and Fire raging in our Streets, and
every thing look with the horrid Aspect of Blood and Ruin. This was the only
Mark they aimed at; but to what Purpose is all this Oration? Is it to incense
you more against their Treason? Or can a fine Oration make it more hated than
its own Nature? Every Man thinks his own Injuries not light and trivial, and
most endeavor to revenge them with greater Passion than they ought; inferior
States and petty Republics may change and alter upon Humor, when if they
offend and punish partially, it is known but to a few, because they are obscure;
for both their Fame and Fortunes hang in an Aequilibrio, and run in one and the
same Channel; but they that are the Masters of the Universe, and live in that
seen and conspicuous height of Fortune, all Mankind become Spectators of their
Actions: so that the more great and honorable they are, the less is their
Liberty: for they must not in the least hate or favor any one, nor in the
least be angry, for what in others is accounted Anger, in Men endu'd with
Command and Empire is called Pride and Cruelty. I think, Fathers, that the most
exquisite Torments are inferior to their Crimes; but most Men have respect to
things past, and on impious Persons, forgetting their Wickedness; they differ,
only concerning the Punishment, if any thing more severe than ordinary. I know
Sylanus, who spoke before me, to be a Loyal and Courageous Gentleman, and what
he spoke to be only for the Good and Honor of the Commonwealth, that he would
not in so great a Business make use either of Favor or Hatred; neither are his
Manners nor his Moderation unknown to me, nor do I think his Sentence cruel or
severe, (for what can be too much so against such Delinquents) but that it is
unusual and hating to the Republic; but indeed, Sylanus (our designed Consul)
fear must certainly poss ss thee, thus to decree ^ new and unheard of kind of
Punishment; but it is superfluous to talk of Fear, when every thing is made so
safe and secure by ^he Diligence and Conduct of so worthy a Consul and such
strong, Guards.

Concerning the Punishment, I can only ^ay what the nature of the Thing
requires; for Sic Cicero, ita vivere, ut non sit vivendam, miserrimum est: mori
autem nemo sapiens misirum duxit, ne beato quidem. Et Eurip. in Theseo, (...).
Death is the end of all Grief and Mise^ies, and is rather a pleasing Rest than
a ^ormenting Punishm^nt; it dissolves all humane Troubles and Afflictions, and
is the only Period to all Pains and Pleasures; but (by the immor^al Gods) Why
did you not condemn them to be scourged? Is it because forbidden by the Portian
Law? But other Laws also command Banishment, and not Death, to condemned
Citizens; or is it because Death seems a greater Punishment than Stripes? For
indeed there can be nothing too cruel and severe on Men convicted of such
palpable and notorious Villainies? Or because it is more tolerable for Men to
fear the Law in a less Matter when you neglect to inflict it in a greater? But
who is there can find fault in any Punishment decreed on Parricides? For
whatever is inflicted on such is just and deserved; but consider, Fathers, that
all ill Examples had their first Springs and Original from good but when base
and undeserving Persons are invested with Command and Empire, the Example too
is altered, and the Empire translated.

The Lacaedemonians, when they had conquered Athens, imposed on them thirty Men
(or rather Tyrants) to manage the Affairs of the Commonwealth; these at first
began to put to Death every base and hated Citizen, which the Common People
commended as just and meritorious; but soon after, when with their Power their
Lust increased, they made no Distinction to put to Death Innocents and
Malefactors alike, and used Threats and Menaces, as the only means to keep the
rest in awe. Thus the City became oppressed with Slavery, and suffered a just
Punishment for their foolish Commendation. Within our own Memories, the Usurper
Sylla, when he commanded A Base Roman, that took part with Marius against
Sylla, and sacrificed Men among Beasts.
Damasippus and the rest of his Accomplices, (who endeavored the Subversion of
the Commonwealth) to be strangled, who was there did not applaud his Justice?
Every one praised it, that wicked factious Citizens, that sowed Seditions in
the Republic had deserved Punishment indicted on them; but that was but the
Prologue to a far greater Ruin; for as then any one that coveted another's
House, Farm, Vessel, or Garment, and could not obtain it, endeavored to put
the other into the Number of the Proscript, so those that then rejoiced at the
Death of Damasippus were themselves made Partakers of his Fate; neither did
their Blood and* Ruin cease till Sylla raised the Fortunes of his own Party to
a considerable height; but we at present have no Reason to fear the like under
the Government of so good a Consul as M. Tullius* but in so great a City as
ours are a multitude of factious and various Humors At another time, and under
another Consul, who has the Command of the Army in his own Hands, what may now
seem impossible may then pass for true and real; and when once the Consul shall
give the first Example of drawing the Sword, who is there will oppose or
control him? Our Ancestors Fathers never yet needed either Courage or Counsel,
neither were so swayed by Pride and Arrogance, as not to imitate the manners of
others, if good and virtuous: They had first their Arms and Military Darts from
the Sammites, the Trophies of the Magistracy from the Tuscans, and wherever
they saw any thing useful and honorable, either in Friends of Enemies, that,
with the greatest Care and industry, they embraced and followed: they had
rather imitate than envy any thing good and commendable; but at that same time
imitating the Manners of Greece, they inflicted Stripes on Citizens, and Death
on other condemned Malefactors; but when ^he Commonwealth grew up, and the
multitude of Citizens produced likewise a multitude of Factions, both the
Innocent and Guilty partak'd of one and the same Punishment; then the Portian,
and other Laws were provided, which Laws ^mpos'd only Banishment on condemned
Citizens; therefore I think the Reasons I have given why they should not dye,
are very weighty; for indeed the Virtue and Wisdom of our Forefathers was the
more eminent and conspicuous, who from such small Aid and Treasures raised the
Empire to so great an height, than in us, who can scarce preserve what they
with so much Labor and Industry have obtained. But do you think I would have
them sent out, and make an Addition to Catiline's Army? No, but my Sentence is,
that their Estates should be confiscated, and they themselves remain Prisoners
in Irons in the Municipal Towns which are most fortified, neither hereafter
shall they have any relation to the Senate, or any thing to do with the Roman
People, which if they have, the Senate should decree it done against the
Republic, and the common Safety of us all.

As soon as Caesar had ended, some applauded, others disliked it; some were of
one Opinion, some of another, but M. P. Cato, being asked his Sentence, spoke
to this purpose;

My Judgment, Fathers, is much different from that of Caius Caesar, when I
compare the Association it self and our own Danger with the Sentence already
given; they dispute what kind of Punishment to inflict on those that have
conspired to make War against their Country, Fathers, and their own Religion,
for we should rather study to beware such, than what to inflict on them; other
Offenses the Laws may prosecute when committed, but this, if ye prevent not
e're it happen, if once happened, whatsoever you decree against it, will be
vain, and to no purpose; for if once they make themselves Masters of the City,
we that are the conquered shall have nothing left us to enjoy, wherefore I
conjure you, that if ever you thought your Houses, Farms, Statues, and your
Attick Tables to he continued, by the Public Peace and Quiet, if you intend
still to continue what you now enjoy, and to have time and leisure to indulge
your Pleasures; now at length awake, and consult the Preservation of the
Commonwealth; for we do not now contend for Stipends, and Tributes, nor
complain of the Injuries of our Confederates, but our Liberty and very Lives
lie almost on the very brink of Ruin. Oftentimes, Fathers, in this Senate, have
I declaimed against the Covetousness and Luxury of our own Citizens, and have
raised many Enemies to me for that very reason: for I, who never in any measure
favored the Offenses of any one, would not now be easily induced to pardon the
many Traiterous Extravagances of others Lusts; but these things, tho you
accounted trivial, made the Commonwealth remain secure and undisturbed, for
their extraordinary Riches gave their Negligence a greater toleration. But the
Dispute is not now whether we should regulate our Lives by good or ill
Examples, nor how to render the Roman Empire more great and Splendid, but all
these things, we at present enjoy, and seem to have in a quiet possession, will
by our own Sloth and neglect, become a Prey to our Enemies. In vain therefore
does C. Caesar.
He use the Names of Clemency and Pity, since long since we have lost the use
of both, because profuse spending another man's Estate has obtained the
specious term of Liberality, and a wicked Impudence that of true Valor; and by
this means comes it that the Commonwealth is in so dangerous a posture. But
allow men to be lavish of other men's Fortunes, since it is the mode, and let
pity be shown to those that rob the public Treasury; but let them not be
prodigal of our Blood, and under pretense of being pitiful to a few lost and
dissolute men, promote the ruin of all the Good.


C. Caesar here has very well and subtly discoursed of Life and Death, as if
he thought those things only fictitious which are delivered to us, of Hell, and
Furies, and the shades below, and of the different ways that wicked men go
from good, to gloomy, dark, and ugly abodes, and therefore decrees that their
Estates should be confiscate, and they kept Prisoners in the free Towns,
fearing, lest if they should still remain in Rome, either by the Confederates
of the Association, or the giddy Rabble, they should have Rescue, as if Rome
was the only Nest and Receptacle of wicked Debauchees, and not all Italy; or
that a daring Impudence would not commit most outrage, where it met with the
least resistance. Wherefore I think his Counsel to be vain and frivolous, and
if in so great a Constersternation he alone stands unfrighted, we have all
reason to fear him. Those things which you decree concerning Lentulus, I would
have you to resolve against the whole Army of Catiline, for by how much the
more severely you do this, the fainter and the more infirm will their Courage
be, but if they see you in the least remiss and languid, the fiercer Assault
must ye expect from them; flatter not your selves therefore with the Opinion,
that your Ancestors raised the Republic to what it now is, from small and
indigent, to so great and famous; for if it were so, we have much the more
reason to continue it in its present Splendor, because we have greater Forces,
of Allies and Citizens, Armor and Horses, than ever they had. But there were
other things that rendered them renowned, which we have not; at home Industry,
abroad, a lawfully acquired Empire, a mind free in Council, not in the least
swayed by Pride or Debauchery: Instead of these, we abound in Luxury and
Avarice, in Discredit and Debts abroad, at home in Ease and Plenty; we commend
Riches, but embrace Idleness, and make no difference between Good and Ill,
since Ambition ingrosses all the Rewards of Virtue; neither is it strange,
since ye all consult the Good of the Republic, only apart and separate, while
in the mean time you are Slaves to your Pleasures at home, and here to
Interest, and the Favor of others. Thence it is that Attempts are made upon
the Naked and unarmed Commonwealth: but I pass this by.

Here the Noblest Citizens have conspired to imbroyl their Country in a
Civil-War, and called to their Aid the Gauls, a People warlike and fierce, ever
envious of, and full of Hatred to the Roman Greatness: the Commander of our
Enemies is just upon us, and you yet still delay to suppress them, and are yet
dubious what Punishments to inflict on Traitors apprehended within our own
Walls. I suppose you are pitiful, since such Young Noblemen have offended only
through Ambition, and you would fain dismiss them armed; yet your Clemency and
Pity would, if they should take Arms, turn to your own Misery. The matter it
self is really dangerous, but you neither fear nor apprehend it: here, through
Sloth and a Womanish Softness, you look one on another, as if you trusted to
the Immortal Gods, who have often preserved the Commonwealth in its greatest
Dangers. No faint Wishes nor effeminate Prayers can draw them to your Succor,
but by Cicero sic de finibus, minime convenit, cum ipsi inter nos abjecti,
neglecti sue famus pestulare, Si diis immortalibus Chari sumus, and ab his
diligamur. Et Gellius, Quid nos a diis immortalibus diuti^s expectemus, nisi
malis rationibus sinem facimus?
Vigilance, Counsel, and Action, you may justly expect a prosperous Delivery:
but, when once you give your selves up to Sloth and Idleness, (which they hate)
all Prayers and Devotions to the Gods are lost and ineffectual.

Amongst our Ancestors, Aulus Manlius Torquatus commanded his own Son to be
slain, because, contrary to Command, he fought for the Republic against their
Enemies. But that extraordinary young Man suffered Death as a just Punishment
for such an immoderate and unseasonable Valor, and yet you differ concerning
the Punishment of the most unheard of Parricides: yet I would have you in some
measure to commiserate the Honor and Dignity of Lentulus. If he had had any
pity for it himself, or any regard to the Honor of the Gods and the Lives of
us all, pardon the Extravagance of Young Cethegus; if ye are so far in love
with Civil War, as to let him make another Attempt; and what shall I tell you
of Gabinius, Statilius, and Ceparius? who, had they any love for the
Commonwealth, and their own Country, had never so dangerously conspired
against them. Indeed, Fathers, (should I not offend in saying so) I could be
easily content the Plot it self should convince you, since my words are so
lightly regarded; but now every where Danger surrounds us, Catiline dares us
with his Army, besides other secret and unknown Enemies within our own Walls,
in the Bosom of our own City, ready for an Insurrection; neither can all the
Preparations we can make, nor all our private Councils imaginable, be too soon
put in practice to prevent it. Wherefore my Sentence is, that since the
Nefarious Plots and Associations of some wicked and desperate Citizens,
threaten so imminent a Danger to the Commonwealth, and the Conspirators
convicted by the Evidence of Vulturtius and the Allobroges, and by their own
Confessions have designed both us and Rome for Blood, and Fire, and other
unparalled Cruelties, it is necessary, by the Examples of our own
Forefathers, they should suffer condign Punishment, as men convicted of
Capital Offenses.

Soon as Cato had ended, all the Consular Order, and most of the Senate
approved his Sentence, and mightily applauded the bravery of his Courage,
branding others with the name of Coward, that seemed to oppose it, and
accordingly passed a Decree for their Execution. As soon as the Senate broke
up, the Consul, thinking it best to take the opportunity of the approaching
night, gave Orders to the Triumviri to make every thing ready for that purpose;
accordingly, after he had disposed his Guards, he conducts Lentulus to the Sic
dict. a Coercendo, from restraining Men of their Liberty: it had two principal
Parts, one called Tullianum, (into which Lentulus was cast) and the other
Ro^ur: these two Places were assigned for Execution; in the Tullianum they only
strangled Malefactors; it had its name from Serve. Tullius, a Roman King, who
first invented it.
Carcer, the rest of the Conspirators were brought in by the Praetors. There is
a place in the Carcer called the Tullianum, a little on the left hand, about
twelve Foot deep, fortified on every side with Walls, and over it a Chamber
built with stone Arches; but exceeding dark, stinking, and of a very horrid
Aspect. As soon as Lentulus was let down into this Place, he was strangled.
Thus that great Patrician of the most honorable Family of the Cornelii, who
had been honored with the Consular Dignity, met a Fate every way just and
equal to the blackness of his Treasons. Cethegus, Statilius, Gabinius, and
Ceparius, took their leave of Life in the same manner.

Whilst these things were thus doing at Rome, Catiline, out of the Forces he
brought with him and those which Manlius led, mustered two So called a
Deligendo. An ordinary Legion consisted of ten Cohorts, containing three
Maniples, each Maniple two Centuries. So that it consisted of sixty thousand
Men.
Legions, and filled up his Troops, according to the number of his Soldiers,
when at first his whole Army consisted but of two thousand; but of all his
Forces, only one fourth part was well disciplined and armed; the rest only
carried small Darts, Lances, and other sharp Clubs, Armor only of Fortune and
Necessity.

But as soon as Antonius began to approach with his Army, Catiline took his
march over the Mountains, and designed to remove his Camp, either toward the
City or Gallia, and so to give no opportunity of Battle at all to the adverse
Armies; for he hoped in a short time to have the Number of his Forces much
augmented, if his Confederates at Rome had but begun the attempt: therefore he
refused the Services of those of whom at first he might have had a considerable
Force; and depending on the Strength and Aids of the Conspirators at home, he
thought it then, beneath the Honor of the Cause to communicate it to every
Slave and Fugitive.

But when News was brought him, at the Camp, that the whole Plot was discovered
at Rome, and condign Punishment inflicted on Lentulus, Cethegus, and the rest,
and that most of them, whom the hopes of Plunder and the desire of Reformation
had inclined to War, were now fallen off, he immediately removed by great
Marches over the rough Mountains into the Pistorian Territories, designing by
by-ways secretly to fly into Gallia. But Q Metellus Celer, commanded three
Legions at Picaenum, and imagined by reason of the Straits Catiline was in,
that he designed some such thing; therefore when the Scouts had given him
notice of his March, he seasonably removed his Tents, and encamped at the foot
of the Mountains, on purpose to stop his Passage into Gallia. Neither was
Antonius, with his Army far off, in the smooth and level Ground, that he might
the better pursue the flight of Cataline; who when he saw himself environed
with the Mountains, and the number of his Enemies, that in the City all his
Undertakings went cross and retrograde, and that there were no hopes of Flight
or Safety, he thought best in such an Extremity to try the fortune of a War;
and therefore resolved to engage Antonius as soon as possible. Calling a
Counsel of War, he thus bespoke them.

Sic Salustius in Jugurtha. Plura dicerem si timidis virtutem verba adderent,
nam strenais abande dictum puto. Et demosth. in Oratione, (...), etc.
I know by Experience, Soldiers, that the greatest force of Words cannot have
the least Influence to provoke Valor, nor can any Army of weak become strong;
or of Cowards, valiant, by the insinuating Eloquence of a Generals Oration; for
every Breast whom Nature has endued with manly Boldness and a warlike
Propensity, should endeavor to render it the more splendid and illustrious in
the dangerous Hazards of a just War: but him whom neither Glory nor Adversity
can incite to Valor it is in vain to persuade, since the force of natural
Cowardice hinders its Operation But I only called you together to advise you a
few things and make you acquainted with my Design; for you all know, Soldiers,
what miserable Calamities the Sloth and Folly of Lentulus have brought both
upon himself and us, insomuch, that whilst I expected Auxiliaries from the City
my Passage into Gallia is blocked up. Now indeed, with what an Aspect our
Affairs look you all know as well as I: two Armies of our Enemies attend us;
one stops our Progress for the City, the other for Gallia, and for us to remain
longer here, (tho we had designed it) yet the want of Provision, and other
Necessaries, constrains us to the contrary; therefore wherever we go, nothing
but the Sword must force the Passage, wherefore I advise you to be resolute and
courageous; and since we must commence the Battle, remember that you carry
Riches, Glory, and Honor, nay Liberty, and Rome it self, in your right hands.
If we conquer they are all secure we shall have Provisions enough, and all the
Colonies, and free Towns will lie open to us; but if Fear and Cowardice should
prevail, we must expect the contrary, for no Place nor Friend will protect him
whom Arms will not: besides, there is a great Difference in the Cause of War
between us and our Enemies; we fight for our own Country, Lives, and Liberties,
they only for the superfluous Power of a few great Men; wherefore that ye may
the more courageously encounter them, remember that you are Romans, and set
before you the old Roman Valor. No one, unless a Conqueror, will ever
exchange War for Peace; and it is the greatest Madness imaginable, to hope for
Safety by Flight, and turn your Backs upon your Enemies, when they are
sufficiently defended by the Armor you carry. Always in fight they that fear
most are in the greatest Danger; but Courage is like Walls and Bulwarks. When I
consider, Soldiers, who you are, and reflect on all your former Actions, I
have sufficient hopes that Victory will attend us; your Spirits, Age, and
innate Valor, and which is more, the prevalent force of Necessity, which makes
Cowards valiant, plainly confirms it. But if Fortune is grown envious of our
Valor, fall not unrevenged, nor be taken, and killed like tame Beasts, but
like true Romans dye fighting, and leave a dear, bloody, and a lamentable
Victory for your Enemies to boast of.

When he spoke this, after a short pause, he commanded them to sound an Alarm,
and leads his Forces into a Plain, and then, to inspire them with the greater
Courage, he himself mustered them on foot for, according to the situation of
the Plain, which was between two Mountains on the left hand, and an huge craggy
Rock on the right, he placed Eight Cohorts in the Front, and the rest in a more
narrow compass, for a Recruit. In the Rear of these, he chose out the most
experienced Centurions, and every the best disciplind and best armed of the
Common Soldiers for the Forlorn Hope, and appointed C. Manlius to command the
Right, and a certain Faesulanian the left wing of the Army, and he himself with
his Freemen and Tenants betook themselves near the The Eagle was the common
Ensign of the Romans, but this was a particular Eagle which C. Marius had in
his Army in the Cymbrian War.
Eagle. which C. Marius was said to have in the Cymbrian War.

Of the adverse Army, C. Antoninus, General, being sick of the Gout, was
rendered incapable of accompanying it, so committed the Charge of it to M.
Petreius, who placed the Veteran Cohorts (which he raised in haste) in the
Front, and the rest of the Army for a Supply in the Rear, and riding round the
Body, calling them severally by their Names, encouraged, and entreated them to
remember they were about to fight against unarmed Thieves and Robbers, for no
less cause than their own Country, Children, and Religion.

This Petreius was a man altogether trayn'd up to War, and had discharged with
great honor and credit the Offices of Tribune, Prefect, Praetor, and Legate.

When they were all prepared, and in a fit Posture, Petreius gave the signal,
and commanded the Cohorts to move forwards, Catiline's Army did the same, till
they approached one another so near, that the These were Ferentarii, a ferendo,
because they wear no Armor, Swords, etc. as others, but only slings and stones.
light harnessed Auxiliaries, armed only with Slings and Stones, could begin
the Battle; immediately with a great shout and a deadly feud, they rushed on
all together, and leaving their Darts, made use of no other weapons than their
Swords. The Veteran Soldiers, fired with the remembrance of their former
Valor, fought hand to hand very vigorously, and met with no less vigorous
resistance. In the mean time Catiline was not idle, but was very often with the
light-harness'd Auxiliaries in the Front, helping and encouraging those that
fought valiantly, bringing in fresh Supplies in the places of the wounded,
providing and taking care for every thing, fighting nobly himself, and killing
many of his Enemies, and discharged at once the duty of a Valiant Soldier, and
an excellent Commander. Petreius, when he saw Catiline behave himself so
valiantly, and fought with greater resolution than he expected, presently
brought the Praetorian Cohort into the midst of the Enemy, and made a very
great and surprising slaughter, and they but very weakly and confusedly
resisted him, then made a very fierce and valiant assault on both Wings of
Catiline's Army; in which Conflict Manlius, and the Faesulanian that commanded
them, died fighting. But when Catiline saw his Forces thus routed, and himself
almost totally deserted, only a few remaining with him, reflecting on the
Nobility of his Family and his former Dignity, scorned to become a prey to his
Foes, and be taken tamely, desperately rushed in among the thickest of his
Enemies, and was slain fighting Sic Florus. Pulcherrima morte si pro Patria sic
cecidisset Catilina.
.

The Battle done, you might then see what resolute Valor and desperate Courage
possessed the minds of Catiline's whole Army, for almost every one, when dead,
covered with their Carcasses the same places, where just before, when alive,
they stood fighting; but these few, whom the Praetorian Cohort had scattered
and put to flight, partook of the same fate, but the Body of Catiline was found
at a great distance from his own Army, in the midst of the whole Body of his
Enemies, just expired, and seemed to retain the same fierceness in his looks
when dead, which he had in his mind when living. Lastly, in both Armies,
neither in flight nor fight was there one Noble and Ingenuous Citizen taken,
but on both sides they valued their own Lives at no dearer rate than the Lives
of their Enemies. Neither had the Roman Army any reason to boast they had
obtained a joyful and advantageous Victory without Bloodshed; for every of the
most valiant and courageous either died fighting, or was severely wounded,
besides many who came out of the Tents, either out of Curiosity, or for the
sake of Plunder, tumbling the dead Bodies of the Enemy. One found a Kinsman,
another a Friend, and some their Enemies; so, promiscuously over the whole
Army, Joy and Grief, Gladness, and Mourning invaded every one.

FINIS.
Books Printed for James Norris at the Kings-Arms without Temple Bar. 1683.
1. MAssinello; Or, A Satyr against the Association, and the Guild Hall Riot.
Quarto.

2. Eromena: Or, The Noble Sranger. A Novel. Octavo.

3. Tractatus adversus Reprobationis Absoluta Decretum, Nova Methodo and
succentissimo Compendio adornatus; and in duos libros digestus. Octavo.

4. An Idea of Happiness, in a Letter to a Friend, Enquiring wherein the
greatest Happiness attainable by Man in this Life does consist, Quarto.

5. A Murnival of Knaves, or Whiggism plainly Displayed, and (if not grown
shameless) Burlesqu'd out of Countenance, Quarto.

6. Haec and Hic; Or the Feminine Gender more worthy than the Masculine. Being
a Vindication of that Ingenious and Innocent Sex from the biting Sarcasms,
bitter Satyrs, and opprobrious Calumnies, wherewith they are daily (tho
undeservedly) Aspersed by the virulent Tongues and Pens of Malevolent Men.
Twelves.


