SMITH'S Experiments, BEING A True Direction how to Prepare several Medicines
that have been daily Experienced; And frequently Sold,

By JAMES SMITH, Practitioner in Physic and Surgery

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1681.

Gentlemen,
I Having Traveled most Parts of this Kingdom, Chiefly to see the variety of
Diseases, and different ways of Practice, that thereby I might be more Capable
of Serving that Part of the Country where I intend to Settle; (for it cannot
be denied, a Person Traveling to, and Practicing in, many places, may see much
more than he who is more Domestic, or Lives altogether at home) thought it a
part of my Duty, now I intend to desist from Traveling, to leave behind me for
your future Benefit, some Receipts, or Ways of preparing some Medicines, as may
be Useful in your Families: And you have here not only Directions how to make
those things which I sell from my Stages; but several other as Useful, and as
much Experienced as they.

I know you have seen many Pamphlets of the like nature, but never any so Real
as this: And though I may perhaps be malign'd by some, who prefer their private
Interest before a public profit; yet fear of Offending such shall never cause
me to wave my Design, or check my Undertaking, in a thing that may be so
generally Useful. And I hope it will be as Heartily Accepted, as Faithfully
Intended, from your Friend and Servant,

James Smith.

1. How to make the Brown Balsom for Wounds, Aches or pain in the Limbs.

TAke Oil. Olive 1 quart, Rosemary, Thyme, Cammomile, Lavender, and Winter
Savory, of each half a handful, break or cut them, and boil them in the oil,
Beeswax and Rozin, of each three quarters of a Pound; Dogs-grease,
Bears-grease, and black Pitch, of each one ounce. Dissolve all these over a
gentle fire, then as soon as it is taken off the fire, add Venice Turpentine 2
ounces, Storax Liquid 1 ounce, Oil of Earthworms, Oil of Melliot, and Oil of
St. John's Wort, of each half an ounce; Oil of Turpentine 1 ounce, Oil of Spike
2 drahcms, stir these together till they are cold.

2. How to make the Green Ointment for Burns or Scalds, Inflammation, or Heat
in any part.

Take Hemlock, Henbane, Nightshade, Grondsill, Housleek, Dwarf-Elder,
Marshmallows, Chickweed, and Plantain, of each a handful: Cut the herbs, and
put them to 2 quarts of Oil Olive: Boil them till the herbs be crisp; then
strain it, and put to the Oil one pound of Virgin Wax, dissolve the Wax, and
then let it cool by degrees.

3. How to make an Excellent Water for any curable Disease of the Eyes.

Take Quicklime 2 ounces, let it steep 12 hours in a pint, of Spring water,
then take off the clear, gently strain it through a thin Rag, that the scum
which will be at the top get not through: Put it into a Brass Pan, and put to
it Sal Armoniack three drachms; stir it with a Brass Spoon till it be* very
blew: Drop of it into the Eye two or three times a day.

4. Another Remedy for the Eyes.

Take white Rose Water, Plantane Water, and Eyebright Water, of each one ounce;
Powder of white Sugar Candy half an ounce, Olibanum one dram: Mix them by
pouring the Water to the Powders in a Mortar by degrees, stirring with the
Pestle all the while. Use this as the former.

5. How to make the Excellent Powder for the Worms, to be taken in Honey or
Treacle in the Morning

Take Tormentil Roots, Coriander Seeds, Coraline, burnt Hartshorn, all
Pulverized, of each one ounce; Salt of Wormwood one ounce; mix them together
very well, and keep it dry. Probatum est.

The Dose for a Man as much as will lie on a shilling.

6. An Excellent Powder for Ruptures, or Broken Bellies, to be taken in Claret,
or strong Drink in the Morning.

Take the Roots of Bistort, Round Birthwort, Tormentil, and the grear Comfry,
of each one ounce, Red and yellow Saunders, of each one dram and half,
Dragons-blood, and Hartshorn, of e^ch 2 scruples, Bole-Armoniack 2 drachms;
Pulverize, and mix them all.

Dose from 12 grains to 2 scruples.

7. An Approved Remedy forth Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness; to be taken in
strong drink in the morning.

Take Peony Roots, Round Birthwort, and Sassafras, of each one ounce; Pellitory
of Spain 2 drachms, Caraway seeds, sweet Fennel seeds, and Rue, of each half an
ounce; Leaves of Betony, and Parsley, of each 2 drachms; Pulverize, and mix them
together.

Dose from 12 grains to 2 scruples.

8. The Powder to purge the Head.

Take Rosemary, and Betony, of each 1 scruple; black Hellebore, of each 1
scruple; Ireos 1 dram and a half: Mix them all in fine Powder, and take of it
at Night, one grain at a time.

9. The Remedy for the Toothache.

Take Pellitory of Spain, mix it with an equal quantity of Wheat Flour, and
with the strongest Spirit of Wine make a paste, Roll it in thin Cakes, and cut
it into square pieces and dry it; hold a bit of it between the Teeth, or in the
hollow of the Tooth: Keep the mouth shut as long as you can.

10 The Composition of the General Purging Pill, being the Only Purge for any
Disease, either Cronical, or Acute, where Purging is necessary.

. Scammonii ss. pulp. Coloquint. v. f. P. Et cum Ol. Caryophill. Chim. q. S. F.
M. Cui add, Pil. Cochiae min. et Aggregativae, an. j. ss. been Contundantur
simul, et fiat massa pro Pilulis. Dos. gr. 10.

An Excellent PILL for the Stomach.

Take of Pill. Ruffi, called Pestilential, and Pill Stomachici with the Gums,
of each on dram: Salt of Wormwood one scruple, Elixir Proprietatis, as much
as will suffice to make a Mass for Pills.

12. A good Remedy to stay Vomiting.

Take Malmsey six ounces, Oil of Vitriol 10 drops; mix them and take an ounce
every morning fasting.

13. Another for Vomiting or Spitting of Blood.

Take 5 or 6 drops of Oil of Mastich in Cinnamon water.

14. A Notable Experienced Medicine to ease the pain of the Gout.

Take one, or two of the foremost sucking Whelps of a Mastiff, or Bear-Bitch,
kill them, and take forth the Guts, fill them with black Snailes, Roast them,
and baste them with 10 ounces of Oil of Spike colored with Saffron; Reserve
that which droppeth from them, and mix it with as much Oil of Wax, And
therewith Anoint the part grieved.

15. A Remedy for a Sore Mouth either in Young or Old.

Take Plantane water, Honeysuckle water, and Barley water mixed with Saccharum
Saturni, and gargarize with it.

16. An Excellent Remedy for Consumption or Coughs.

Take Anniseeds, Carawayseeds, Coriander seeds, Lycorice, and Elicampane, of
each half an ounce, Flower of Brimstone 2 drachms; Mix these with good
Clarified Honey to the form of an Electuary, then add Balsom of Sulphur one
dram, and Oil of Anniseeds 10 drops; stir it well, and take of it Morning
and Evening as much as a Hazel Nut.

17. The way of making Elixir Vitae.

Take Rosemary one handful, Juniper Berries 2 ounces, Angelica Roots, and
Elicampane, of each half an ounce, Zedoary, and Cardamom, of each 3 drachms;
steep all these 24 hours in 2 quarts of strong Spirit of Wine; Then draw off in
an Alembick very gently one quart and half a pint of the Elixir.

18. To Blanch the Face.

Take the Meat of Lemmons, the Kernels being taken away, and a quantity of the
first Sugar: Still these, and keep the Water to wash the Face every Night.

19. A Powder for the Stone, Sand, Gravel or Phlegm, that Obstructs the Urine.

Take Sopewort Roots, and Sea-Radish Roots, of each half an ounce,
Juniper Berries, Bay Berries, and Haws, of each five drachms; Gromel-seed,
Parsly-seed, and Carrawayseed, of each six drachms; Gum Arabic and Sal
Prunella, of each four scruples; Pulverize, and mix these, and put to them oil
of Turpentine one dram, oil of Juniper half a dram.

The Dose from 10 grains to half a dram.

20. To stay bleeding at the Nose.

Take some Lint and make a Tent, dip it in Ink and put up the Nostril, and lay
a Defensitive over the Eyes and Nose made with Sanguis Draco^is,
Bole-Armoniack, and a little Vinegar.

Vale.

