Imprimatur,

Geo. Royse RRmo in Christo Patri, ac Dom. Dom. Johanni Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacris Domest.
Januar. 17, 169^.
Conversation in Heaven. BEING DEVOTIONS; Consisting of MEDITATIONS and
PRAYERS, ON Several Considerable Subjects in Practical Divinity.

Written for the Raising the Decayed Spirit of PIETY.

By LAWRENCE SMITH, LLD. Fellow of St. John's College in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill, 1693.

TO The most Reverend Father in God, JOHN; Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of Their Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Grace,
I Beg your Pardon for my Presumption in Dedicating this Performance to your
Name; but my Experience of your Goodness and Obliging Temper has encouraged me
to this freedom of Recommending it to your Patronage.

My Lord, 'twas not an Ambition of appearing in Print, which induced me to this
Publication; but an hearty Desire (since I am not in a Public Station) to do
all the Good I can in my Private Capacity; and if this Endeavor may but prove
Instrumental to the increase of Piety and Devotion in any, I shall not Repent
my Pains, but acknowledge the Success with all Thankfulness to God's Glory.

May the Almighty long preserve your Grace, and make you a great Blessing to
this Church; which is the earnest Prayer, of My Lord,

Your Grace's most Obedient Son, and humbly devoted Servant, Lawrence Smith.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE Subjects here treated on are some of the weightiest and most considerable
in all Practical Divinity; and being Matters of the greatest Importance to a
good Life, and consequently to our future Everlasting Welfare; were therefore
industriously handled with all imaginable Plainness and Perspicuity, that
Persons of all Ranks and Qualities being nearly concerned in them, they might
accordingly lie Level to the Capacities of all men.

The Author is not Ignorant that several excellent Treatises of this Nature
have been transmitted into public View and Consideration, which though he has
not the Vanity to think he has excelled, yet he hopes this further Help to
Devotion may not be without its proper Usefulness.

The Composer of these Devotions is indeed conscious of his inability to
Gratify the Expectations of a nicely Critical Reader; but however he had much
rather expose himself to the Censures of the Overcurious, than fail of
promoting in the least the Piety and Devotion of ^ruly Religious and
well-disposed People: To such he Writes, who having a Spiritual discerning of
Spiritual things, these Spiritual Exercises of Prayer and Holy Meditation, are
the likeliest to prove Relishing and Acceptable unto them.

Devout and Pious Meditation is that which at once Delights and Profits,
Recreates and improves in Goodness; rendering the Mind by degrees of a Godlike
Celestial Temper: It ennobles the faculties of our Souls, by making them
conversant about truly Great and Noble Objects; things Spiritual, Divine and
Heavenly! It withdraws us from the Noise and Tumult, exempts us from the Cares,
Fears, Troubles and Vexations of this Lower World, and causing us to dwell much
in our thoughts and desires Above, it makes our Spirits too Big and Haughty,
too Nice and Delicate for any impure sublanary Enjoyments; nay, of such an
Indifferency of Affection even to this Worlds Innocent and Allowable
Gratifications, as that no Loss or Detriment which befalls them, no imaginary
Excellency which is in them, is able to Excite our Passions, to Discompose our
Thoughts, to abate our Religious Diligence, to weaken our Faith, impair our
Trust, or so much as Cool our Love for God, Holiness, and Celestial Happiness.

All other things Cloy and Satiate with their often Repeated use, but the more
we exercise this most Excellent Duty, devout Contemplation, the more shall we
desire to be still exercised therein: Its Pleasures will grow upon our Hands,
and we shall find no Sensual Entertainment half so Quick and Relishing; our
Understandings will be hereby Enlarged and Exalted, our Wills Rightly Biased
and Inclined, our Affections Purified and Refined, and our whole Spiritual
Powers Disintangled from the Depraving Profits and Delights of this inferior
Animal Life, and Refreshed with new varieties of a lively prospect into the
Joys Celestial, which are Pure, Sincere, Holy, and Intellectual!

Let us then in frequent Solemn Meditation on the Divine most Amiable
Perfections, (the very Life and Employment of Angels) become more exact
Representations of the Divine Purity and Holiness; Let us Spiritualize our
Minds, Becalme our Passions, Deaden and Suppress our Appetites to all Earthly
Pomps and Vanities, and then neither this World's Honors, Profits, or
Pleasures shall seduce and soften us, nor shall its Changes and Mischances
Grieve and Disquiet us; but being Exalted in our Devout Conversation to Regions
whither the Storms and Tempests of this Lower State never reach, we shall enjoy
an undisturbed Peace and Tranquillity, nay a delightsom Enravishment of Mind
while Living; and when we Dye, shall go whither our Pious Thoughts, Holy
Desires, Zealous Endeavors, Fervent Prayers, and Grateful Thanksgivings went
before to prepare us Mansions, even into the Heavenly Jerusalem: Of which, that
we may be all Inheritors, is the Hearty Prayer of him who earnestly desires thy
Spiritual and Eternal welfare.

L. Smith.

The CONTENTS.
Meditation I.
ON the Vanity, Vexation, and Contempt of the World page 1 The Prayer. p. 14
Meditation II.
On the Redemption of Time. p. 17 The Prayer. p. 28
Meditation III.
On the Folly and Danger of deferring Repentance. p. 32 The Prayer. p. 41
Meditation IV.
On the Malignity and Evil Nature of Sin. p. 45 The Prayer. p. 60
Meditation V.
On Watchfulness against Sin and Temptations. p. 65 The Prayer. p. 73
Meditation VI.
Against the Sin of Pride. p. 77 The Prayer p. 85
Meditation VII.
Against the Sin of Unchastity. p. 89 The Prayer. p. 97
Meditation VIII.
Against the sin of Immoderate Anger p. 101 The Prayer. p. 114
Meditation IX.
Against the sin of Murmuring and Impatience amidst Divine Chastisements. p.
119 The Prayer. p. 129
Meditation X.
On Love to God. p. 135 The Prayer. p. 140
Meditation XI.
On Zeal in the Service of God p. 145 The Prayer. p. 151
Meditation XII.
On Trust in God. p. 155 The Prayer. 162
Meditation XIII.
On the Fear of God p. 166 The Prayer p. 176
Meditation XIV.
On Love and Charity to our Neighbor. p. 179 The Prayer p. 197
Meditation XV.
On Improvement in Grace p. 202 The Prayer p. 211
Meditation XVI.
On Death p. 215 The Prayer p. 225
Meditation XVII.
On the Last Judgment p. 229 The Prayer p. 240
Meditation XVIII.
On Heaven p. 244 The Prayer p. 253
Meditation XIX.
On Hell, and the Eternity of its Torments p. 258 The Prayer p. 271
Meditation XX.
On Prayer, and the Powerful Efficacy thereof. p. 276 The Prayer p. 291 A
Prayer for the Morning p. 298 A Prayer for the Evening p. 311 A Prayer for a
Sick Person p. 320 Another Prayer for the Sick when there appears Small Hope of
Recovery p. 330 A Prayer to be used on the Lord's Day in the Morning,
Preparatory to the Duties of the Day p. 340
Conversation in Heaven. BEING DEVOTIONS; Consisting of MEDITATIONS and PRAYERS.
Meditation I. On the Vanity, Vexation and Contempt of the World.
THE World! How poor, and mean, and empty a thing! Those sure who understand it
well, can never dote upon it; for how should they dote on a Scene of Folly and
Vanity, of sickly perishing Delights, which wither in the use, and dye away in
the Enjoyment? Nay which soon turn into loathing and detestation; we growing
weary of what we have long possessed, and nauseating a frequently repeated
pleasure, though at first it was never so Relishing.

The World! A place of perpetual Snares and Temptations to sinful evil! A State
of interchangeable Joys and Regrets of Mind! Of Felicity in show and appearance
only, and of Adversity in solid Substance and Reality!

The Vanity and unsatisfactoriness of this World, and of all the things which
are in it, is evident from our shifting and changing our Enjoyments; one while
addressing our selves to this object of Gratification, soon after to another:
For had we found satisfaction in former pleasures, what need of our removal and
application to New ones? Certainly this desultory change of pleasure, this
frequent Range from one Earthly Delight to another, even in those who enjoy
most of this World, shows that long enjoyed pleasures tire, and cloy, and
nauseate, that none are truly great and satisfying, that all are vain and
empty; that this our making fresh experiments of sublunary Happiness, is like a
sick Man's turning himself from one side of his Bed to the other, whereby
indeed he demonstrates his great uneasiness, but finds little or no Relief or
Remedy: Vanity is an inseparable ingredient in the composition of all Earthly
Good things, to prevent the vanity of our Affections in inordinately coveting
and doteing upon them.

Alas it is Fancy and high-rais'd Conceit, sets a value upon things Temporal,
more than any Intrinsic real excellency which is in them: We are fain to make
up in gay and pleasing Imagination, what is wanting of solid worth and beauty
in Worldly Possessions; and this way to put a Deceit upon our selves, thereby
to hide the Deceit and Vanity of the Creature.

Our desires are too wide and large for their present Gratifications; and
though we frame to our selves glorious Conceptions of pleasure at a distance,
could we arrive to such or such a wished for Condition, yet our actual
Enjoyment of the same evidences our too great opinion of it in remote prospect,
and our opinion of it decaying, we afterward become as weary thereof, as
before we were eager in its pursuit.

Those men sure must have little narrow Souls, must have experienced and made
proof of little, must have thought and considered less, who can make to
themselves a Portion and Sufficiency out of what they possess here; who can
find any full and lasting Contentment in the things of this World.

For what is our Life, but a tiresome Circulation of mean and trivial
Enjoyments? But the living in a Round of Vanity and Impertinency, of Sins and
vicious Miscarriages? A Repeating the same dull unsavory entertainments;
therefore unsavory, because the same, and often Repeated.

Nay we do not only live a constant Return and Circle of Vanity, but of
vexation of Spirit also; for disappointment proceeds from the vanity and
vexation, from the disappointment of the Creature.

What variety of Sports and Pastimes, of Pleasures and Recreations do men
invent and make use of to cause a wearisome uneasy life to slide away the more
smoothly and undisturbedly? Hereby deceiving time, and forgetting for the
present their former misery and trouble by means of the short Intervals of
forced and artificial Divertisements: We are fain to gild over the bitter pill
of Life with delightsom forethoughts of future Temporal Felicity, to make it
the easier swallowed down at present, and the less ungrateful unto our Palates.

Our Enjoyments here below are seldom pure and unmixt with Sufferings; the very
best of them have an Allay, and to Enjoy with us is only not to be so much
Afflicted: If we have one serene Sunshiny Day with respect to our Minds or our
Bodies, a succeeding lowry and stormy Season comes next to dash our Mirth and
interrupt our Rejoicing; nay, our Cup of Sweets is usually at the instant of
drinking it mingled with Bitters, at least the Consideration of a Wormwood
draught soon following after is enough to diminish much of its present
sweetness and good Relish.

The Pains and Diseases, the Troubles and Calamities of this Earthly Condition
do in abundance of Men share the greatest part of their continuance here, do in
most persons equal and come up unto, if not exceed and overballance their
Enjoyments; so that with them, Being and Misery, Subsistence and Sorrow, are
but several Names for one and the same thing: And considering the large
intermixtures of Affliction and Sorrow in this Valley of Tears, it would not be
worth our while to lengthen out our Lives on Earth, were not this life
principally in order to another, were it not a space of Time wherein to fit and
prepare our selves for an endless Eternity.

O the Deceitfulness of Pomp, of Honor, of Riches, and worldly Pleasures,
those mis-named Felicities! Height and Grandeur of Station, what is it but a
gilded burden, but a splendid encumbrance? A Condition of wakeful Cares, and
threatening Dangers. The usual Object of Envy, covetous Desire, and malicious
Censure while enjoyed, and which leaves a man despised, reviled, and hated when
fallen from its Elevation! A state it is of living in continual noise and stir,
of being subject to the urgency of Business, and tediousness of Ceremony; of
having little time and leisure to our selves, little privacy and retirement
from Company, but being slaves and bondsmen to continual Attendants, to
supplicating crowds and throngs of Addressers, to base fawning Flatterers and
Parasites; all the while we seem the most Free, the most Great, and Absolute
over others!

Next, What is Fame and Honor, but popular sound and breath? A thing so Thin
and Airy, that he must have a very Camelion-like Temper and Appetite, who can
live upon such poor Diet with any great degree of Joy and Complacency; what is
it but a puff of Wind and Vainglorious Applause from the mouths of Mortals, as
fickle and inconstant as the Wind it self? Honor and Praise, a gaudy Flower it
is, often nipt by the Frosts and blights of Emulation, Hatred and Detraction; a
thing whose Foundation lies rather in the Person Honoring, than in him who is
Honored; what no one ought to value himself upon as it is conferred on him by
another, but as it is merited by himself; that which makes a man no better
possessed of it, nor no worse when without it.

Riches; What are they but an heap of bright and shining Clay? Which oppresses
with Troubles, while it should ease and recreate; and usually bends and weighs
down the Soul with Covetousness to the Earth: Riches what are they but
vanishing Treasures? Which if not taken out of our Hands by the Fraud,
Violence, and Injustice of others, may in time make themselves Wings and fly
away from us; which we certainly must leave at the day and hour of our Death.
Riches attended with disquieting thoughts, and brain-cracking Projects in the
procuring them, with anxious Cares and Solicitudes in the keeping them, with
jealous fears and distrusts of loosing or being despoiled of them: The
immoderate Love of which is the Root of all evil. That which puts men upon the
worst of wicked practices, which pierces their Hearts through with many
Sorrows, and finally drowns them in the Gulf of Perdition.

Worldly Pleasures what be they? But the joyous sensations of a few moments
which Decease as soon almost as born; and which tasted straightway loose their
flavor and Relish: Which if dishonest and sinful are likewise hurtful and
prejudicial, and very severely paid for by succeeding shame, sorrow and
repentance; if innocent and harmless, yet carrying vanity in their Nature; they
add also Vexation of Spirit, through a deceit of our Expectations: For how
should what is Finite, as all Terrene Comforts are, afford any complete and
settled Satisfaction? Oh no; Absolute and Durable Contentment is not contained
within the narrow limits of the Creature. Nothing but what is Infinite is
proportionate to an immortal Souls Capacity, which are next to Infinite!

O our God, that such a thing of Nothing, or worse than Nothing, of pain,
sorrow, and disappointment, as is this World, should take up so much of our
Affections as it does; and that Heaven, a Region of the sublimest, sincerest,
ever-durable, and most enravishing Delights, should share so little in our Love
and Approbation! Thither, did we mount our Thoughts, our Desires, our Religious
Enterprises, even to the Celestial Mansions above, oh with what Disdain should
we look down on this vile inferior Earth! How little would it appear in our
sight! Nay, how would it in a manner disappear; our God, our Heaven, our
spiritual and eternal Concerns having pre-ingaged the main of our Affections,
and consequently having left little Room for meaner Objects and Entertainments!

We are Pilgrims here on Earth, and therefore ought to have the coldness and
indifferency of Pilgrims to its most entertaining Gratifications; we are
strangers here on Earth, and ought on that account to be shy of using too much
Familiarity with the World, lest it should ruin and betray us with its wicked
Seductions: For who would trust himself too far, who would live careless and
unguarded in a Foreign, in an Enemies Country? We are Strangers here; it is so
very Little a time we shall continue in this Alien Country, that it is not
worth our while to set our hearts upon it, to learn its Language, or Conform
our selves to its Customs and Manners.

We are Citizens of the New-Jerusalem which is above, Heirs of an Heavenly
Canaan; and shall we basely hanker after the Garlic and Onions of this viler
Egypt? Can we think this howling Wilderness-Condition a Paradise of Delights?
Or do we account Heaven the End of our Hopes, not worth making it the End of
our Pious Labors? Not worth the looking after, or earnest contending for it?

Does a life of Voluptuousness, of too free indulgence unto, or too much
Affection for Worldly Pleasure, Honor, or Profit, suit with the Gospel-Duties
of Mortification and Self-denial? With a being Crucified to the World, and the
World to us in the immoderate Love thereof? With the End of our being sent into
it, viz. to prepare for our happy going out of it, and for a Blessed Eternity?
Does it suit to our profession of a Suffering Religion, suit to the Disciples
of a Crucified Savior? To his Mortified, Poor, and Lowly Example? Who was made
perfect through Sufferings and Worldly Renunciations: Does it suit lastly to
our Baptismal Vow and Covenant, wherein we solemnly engaged to Renounce the
Devil and all his Works, the vain Pomp and Glory of the World, with all
covetous desires of the same, and no longer to follow or be led by them? O what
Perfidiousness, what Perjury is it after all this to be false to our Christian
Profession, false to our Baptismal Vow and Covenant, by becoming Idolaters of
Earthly Vanity, following and being led by it; and preferring the things
Sublunary, before those of Heaven and Eternal Glory!

The Prayer.
O Most Amiable Divine Majesty! Give us a lively Transporting Prospect of the
Glories of Heaven, give us a prospect of the Enravishing Beauties and
Perfections of thine own Nature; and then how will all Sublunary Pomps and
Vanities appear dim, and faded in our sight! How shall we look down with Scorn
and Contempt upon them!

Will Thou, O Lord, allow us to Raise our Thoughts to Thee, to Exalt them above
this World, and shall we still lie Grovelling upon it? Will Thou Admit and
Accept our weak imperfect Affections, and shall we not do all we can to Elevate
our Thoughts, to Spiritualize our Affections for thy Service? O give us that
Victory of Faith whereby we may overcome the World; that Assurance of Hope
whereby we may live above its Corruptions, purifying our selves even as Thou
art pure!

Mortify in us, O Sovereign Excellency, the Love of the World with the
Quickening Enflamed Love of thy self; show thy Self a Loving Father to us, and
it suffices; a Glance of the Light of thy Countenance, is enough to Eclipse
all Earthly Splendor: O make us to see the Vanity of all things here below,
and then we shall soon discern the Vanity of our Affections in inordinately
doteing on them.

Cause us, O Spirit of Divine Grace, to consider how our Blessed Savior, the
Lord of all things, the Lord of Life and Glory, despised and contemned the
World; and certainly after this we cannot continue overvaluing it! Cause us to
have our Thoughts, our Desires, our Conversations more in Heaven, and then
shall we be much less fond of this Earth; for finding our infinitely more
valuable Treasures Above, our Hearts, our Affections will be there also.

Make us, O our God, to evidence daily our contempt of this World, by the
coldness and indifferency of our Love toward it; by wanting its Enjoyments
without Impatience, by possessing them with Temperance and Moderation, and by
Loosing them without murmuring and discontent.

Persuade us, O Lord, effectually persuade us that we can never be happy, till
we have disintangled our Affections from every empty, unsatisfying,
disappointing, and transient Good here below, and till we love Thee above all
things; who alone can fill our desires, gratify all our wishes; till we
despise this World, think lowly of our selves, highly of our God, and are
wholely dead and crucified to all Polluting sensual Lusts and Appetites: O come
Thou then unto us, O our God; come and satisfy our Souls with thy Fullness,
replenish them with thy Likeness in Holiness; and thereby drive out of us all
inordinate love for meaner Objects and Gratifications, Amen, Blessed Lord,

Amen.
Meditation II. On the Redemption of Time.
THere is no Talent committed to our Trust more precious than Time, it being a
season for the making provision for an Happy Eternity, and yet no Trust is
there more abused, more profusely squandered away. We take Time by the
Fore-lock in all our Temporal Concerns, laying hold on the first opportunity of
wellmanaging them; but in Spirituals we defer and delay, and move so heavily
about the good husbanding of Time, as if the wheels of our Chariots, of our
Executive Powers, our Wills and Affections were taken off; and Time was rather
to be shunned and avoided than diligently pursued.

But is This running the Race of Christian Obedience set before us? Is This
giving all diligence to make our Calling and Election Sure? Is This Redeeming
the Time, because the days are Evil? Time lies so dead a Commodity on many
Peoples hands, that they are glad to get rid of it at any rate whatsoever. The
next vain pleasure and divertisement, the next as vain and impertinent
Idle-Companion, the next fruitless, silly, or corrupting Spectacle, shall ease
them of their spare hours as they call 'em, of their leisure and wearisome
seasons: But ah that any time should be accounted spare and vacant, when so
much as our Eternal Salvation depends upon it, and we know not whether we shall
Live till the next Moment! Ah that what is the dying Man's Want, should be the
well Person's Burden!

While Living, Time is thought by us too Long and Tedious, we are hard put to
it to spend many of its Hours, while Dying it is accounted too short and
Transient; which now is likely to be the truest Judgment, that of the living or
dying man? For certain that of the Latter: For at the near approaches of Death
all false disguises which the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, or the
Pride of Life had put on things, are pulled off, and then all things appear in
their proper Colors, and Genuine Native Dress.

When Death Stares us in the face, when Time is nigh at an End with us, then we
shall know the true value of Time, then to our cost and trouble have far
different Sentiments concerning it, than what we have Now; then, oh that Time
could be Recalled, that Time misspent could be lived over-again, and be better
improved; how diligent and industrious would we be in its improvement! But
alas these Good Wishes come then too late to be converted into Good Practices;
Death will not be put off, Time will not be Recalled, and the Man dies
despairingly Disconsolate, if not everlastingly Miserable; not for that he had
no means of Grace, no opportunities of Salvation, but because he made not that
Good Use of them as he both might and ought to have done.

Time passes away swiftly, though we idle and loiter; the Minutes, the precious
Minutes fly, while we are speaking; we are Now a Moment nearer Eternity, than
we were the former one: but are we in a nearer preparation for it? Is there a
nearer Tendency in us to an Heavenly Temper, the nigher we come to the Heavenly
State? Or rather grow we not more Earthly Affection'd, the nigher we draw to
our bed of Earth the Grave?

Alas the Loss of Time is one of the Greatest Losses in the World, and yet how
Light a matter do we make of it? This Life so short, so uncertain, every Moment
of it so valuable, and yet that we should live as if it were never to have an
End, or as if we had nothing of Concern to do in it; How Astonishing is this,
what an Instance of Folly and Inconsiderateness!

Blessed God! That a Pearl of so Great price as an indulged space of
Repentance, as an happy opportunity of Salvation, should be cast before Swine,
before brutish sensual Worldlings; should be put into the Custody of those who
value it not, who know not how to use and improve it!

The Days, the Months, the years of our Lives are violently born away by the
impetuous Torrent of Time; many, many Days of our Years are past and Gone as to
our ever living them over again; but though past, yet are they not wholly lost
and perished: They are Registered in God's Faithful Book of Remembrance; they
are there preserved, they are there charged upon us for a demand of their Good
Use and Husbandry; an Account, an Account of them will one day be required at
our Hands: And it will be but a lamentable Account indeed, when all we have to
offer for the expense of our Life past will be so much Time spent Idly, and in
doing of nothing to any Good purpose; so much spent to a very Bad one, in Riot
and Excess, in Chambering and Wantonness; so much in unnecessary Habitual
Sports and Divertisements; so much spent in the Devil's Service, and so little
in God Almighty's! Ah will such an Account, think ye, pass our Great Auditor's
Examination? Will such an Account procure our Discharge and Acquitment?

What a strange perverse folly is it in us to complain our Life is short, and
yet to render it far shorter, by letting much of it lie Fallow and unimproved?
To complain our day time here is quickly spent, and our Night of Death is near
at hand, and yet to invent Arts to lavish this short Remainder of Life, and
then to lament its being so soon past away and we are Gone? But if we would
lengthen time, let us leave off complaints, and fall to the work of improving
it; let us beside the ordinary Returns of Public Religious Worship at set
appointed Seasons, be frequent and fervent in our private Domestic Devotions;
let us allow to Religion and the exercises of Virtue, some of those Great
shares of Time which we call spare Hours; which we trifle away in vanities and
impertinencies, in pleasures and recreations, in fruitless Visits and
Complements; which we spend viciously in Luxury, Riot, and Intemperance, or
which we suffer to lie waste without any Employment at all: It Is a vast work a
man may do, if he never permits himself to be Idle; it is a huge progress he may
make in Virtue, if he never stops in the way through Carelessness, or never goes
out of his way by wilful and presumptuous sinning: Strive to improve all your
Time, strive to suffer none of it to pass unaccountable; and this will be to
Redeem it, this will be to compensate for its shortness, for its uncertainty,
and Irrevocableness.

We cannot begin too soon to live well, and yet do we demur about it? Had we
set upon the work of Religion much earlier, we should have had none to spare;
all would have been little enough, whereby to have evidenced the sincerity of
our Faith, and Hope, and Trust; of our Love to God and his Commandments;
whereby to have secured an Interest in his Favor and Acceptance, and in his
free Gift, Eternal Life: For Heaven cannot be over-purchased, we cannot do too
much for such a far more exceeding and endless weight of Glory; and the more we
do in Holy Services, the Greater in all Likelihood will be our future
Recompense of Reward.

By instantly beginning to live well we shall render the work the easier, shall
be better disposed to it our selves, and shall have less to Repent of and
Reform; but the longer we delay Redeeming our time, the Greater and more
Difficult undertaking shall we find it when we set about it: Every man has his
Religious Task appointed him at his coming into this World, to discharge before
his Going out of it; and each day has its peculiar Godly work and business
assigned it; wherefore if we imprudently omit the proper employment of this
day, we shall have so much the more to do to morrow; both this days Religious
work, and to morrow's also: Since then sufficient unto its own day is the
virtuous Task thereof, let us not through our present Omissions double and
multiply our future pious Pains and Labors; increase by delays of Redeeming
Time, our work of Salvation, and diminish at the same instant our strength and
ability to perform it with: So much Time as we have lost in the neglect of
Piety and Virtue, so much have we lost of our increase of future Happiness, and
of our weight of Eternal Glory; and can we be content to loose yet more of it?
Can we be content through our mispence of Time to hazard the whole of
Everlasting Blessedness?

Time present is our only state of Trial and Probation; the After-Life
determines our Condition to either Everlasting Happiness or Misery; and
therefore we ought to improve to the utmost instant Opportunities, and to work
out our Salvation to Day, while it is called to Day: For our Religious Work is
large and difficult; the putting off a whole Body of Sin, the putting on the
whole Armor of Righteousness; the subduing old evil habits, a contracting by
the Grace of God in Conjunction with our Endeavors, new Virtuous habits; the
improving them into a Second Nature, into a participation of the Divine Nature
and Likeness: All this we have to do in the short space of our Mortality, in a
Life but a Span long; and therefore ought to supply our Poverty of Time by its
frugal Well-management, and by the Intenseness of our Affections and Services
Godward: Making up in Industry and Zeal, what we want in Time; and obeying God
universally, cheerfully, fervently and constantly unto the End.

But oh the quite contrary Practice of the Generality of the World! who are
forward to improve every thing but Time, which most of all requires
improvement; who pursue eagerly every Advantage, but the Highest one, their
Eternal Salvation: Ah doubtless he is unworthy of Eternal Life, who seeks it
not diligently, as for hid Treasure; who lives not to God and his own Soul:
Certainly he is unworthy to win the Prize of Heavenly Glory, who runs so
carelessly, as if he mattered not whether he obtained it or no! All that Time is
but wasted, whereof no part is spent in the Concerns of Religion.

The Prayer.
O Eternal God, who wast before all Time, and shall continue to be when Time
shall have an End, in whose hands are the Issues and Disposal thereof; seeing
time past cannot be Recalled by us, cannot be lived over again, Grant that we
may Redeem it, by a double diligence and improvement of the Remaining Season.

We improve, O Lord, every thing else, O give us Grace to husband well our Time
also; we put out our Moneys to Interest, we Till and Manure our Grounds, we
watch and make our best of every opportunity of growing Rich; O cause us
likewise to put out the precious Talent of Time to Interest; cause us to Till
and Cultivate our Souls, that they may fructify with saving Graces; make us to
be intent upon and manage to the best opportunities of growing wise unto
salvation, of becoming Rich in Faith and Good Works: Convince us that unless we
Redeem Time, the Redemption purchased by our Savior will nothing avail us;
Convince us that Time is the only season wherein to make provision for a
blessed Eternity. O may the dying man's wish, the dying man's Good Resolution,
more Time, better improvement of it, might it be afforded him, be the study of
us Living men, be our most constant care and exercise.

Give us to consider, holy Father, what one of the damned would give but for
one more of those Probationary days, which we squander away without any due
regard or virtuous improvement! Give us to consider that the abuse or neglect
of Time, will occasion us if persisted in, a sad and mournful Eternity; full of
bitter Regrets, and stinging Self-condemnations!

Ah, gracious God, do we live upon Moments? Is each minute's Preservation a
kind of Creation, and yet do we make light of, and trifle them away? Ah
wretched Triflers with our own safety and Everlasting Salvation!

Convince us, convince us, good Lord, that the Daytime of our Lives is far
spent, that the short Remainder is hazardous and uncertain, that the Night of
Death may be nigh at hand, and let these convictions cause us to walk as
Children of the Day, not in the evil works of Darkness, but in employing well
our Time and other Talents, that we may not fall into the condemnation of the
slothful and wicked Servant. O suffer us not to fold our hands to sleep in the
midst of so many and great spiritual Dangers wherewith we are encompassed; but
make us to be intent on all Religious opportunities: Since our days, O Lord,
are but few upon Earth, cause us by walking circumspectly to Redeem the time,
that they may not be Evil likewise, or unprofitable.

Are, holy Jesu, Death and the Grave, Judgment and Eternity not far from us;
and yet are we far from being ready prepared for them? Live we, as if we were
to live always? As if this was the only life, and no future one to be expected?
O cause us to shake off this our careless security; cause us to give all
diligence to make our Calling and Election sure.

May the time past of our lives suffice (ah far too much was it!) to have been
misspent in sin and vanity; wherefore for the time to come make us industrious
and always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as we know that our
Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. O Grant that every moment of time
present may be precious unto us; because the Interests of our precious immortal
Souls depend upon it; make us so well to improve Time, as that it may be the
securing unto us of an happy Eternity.

Amen, Amen.
Meditation III. On the Folly and Danger of deferring Repentance.
TO delay present Repentance in hopes of future Conversion, is alike imprudent,
as for a sick Man to neglect the present use of Medicines, in hopes of future
Health and Recovery; whenas by his neglect of Remedies, he in all probability
renders his Distemper desperate and incurable!

To delay Amendment and continue in Sin, with intent of quitting it hereafter,
is to wound our Consciences with the stings and remorses of Guilt, on purpose
of healing them again some time hence: It Is to refuse to do what is in our
power, and to defer the doing it till it may be out of our power; it is to make
our future work of Repentance much greater, more grievous and difficult than it
would be at present, and yet to hope to set about it more Advantagiously in
time to come: It Is to increase our Task, to lessen both our Will and Ability to
perform it with, and yet to think to perform it better under these
Disadvantages!

To defer Conversion, is to persist becoming vain in our Imaginations,
erroneous in our Elections, corrupt in our Performances, that afterward we may
become Wise, and retract with Bitterness of Self-condemning thoughts, our
former vain Judgments, wrong Choices, evil Practices; that we may upon change
of Mind, Will, and Affections, call our selves fools a thousand times for our
former wicked goings astray; and may be ashamed of, may abhor and grieve for
our past Impieties, as much as ever heretofore we loved and delighted in them;
all these Absurdities and Foilies Delay of Repentance implies! It Is a refusing
to become well, and safe, and happy at present, and a referring our spiritual
Welfare, our everlasting safety and happiness to the hazardous uncertainties of
Futurity!

But do we act thus imprudently in other Affairs of far lesser moment? No
certainly; when Sick, we delay not the use of means for our Recovery; when
Maimed or Wounded, we apply our selves immediately to a Cure; but when sick
with Sin nigh unto death Eternal, when wounded in Mind by the Rebukes of Guilt
contracted, and maimed in all the Faculties of our Souls by the disorders of
Impiety, so that from the Crown of the head to the sole of the feet there is no
whole part in us; yet here we hug our Distemper, seem unwilling to be cured at
present, and defer the healing remedy Repentance, till some further season: but
ah that we should be so wise and provident in Temporals, and so careless and
inconsiderate in Spirituals! Ah that we should be so much concerned for the
Body, and so little for the Soul!

Oh that men should judge it too early to become instantly secure of endless
Salvation; when they are not secure of living till to morrow, till the next
moment! Vain inadvertent Wretches! That they should be daily a dying, hourly
subject to Death, and yet promise themselves some years hence the making sure
of Eternal Life! Certainly they know not what it means, of what value and
importance it is, that they thus stupidly neglect it!

Ah can they think God will lengthen out that Life which is a designed Course
of Audacious Defiance and wicked Rebellion against him? Ah can they think he
will so unweariedly wait to be Gracious unto them? Alas they consider not what
Bonds and Fetters an Evil Custom puts upon the Soul; how frequent Acts of doing
wickedly improve into a confirmed habit, and an habit of Impiety becomes a
second Nature, almost unrelinquishable; and yet do they imagine they shall be
freer to break loose from Sin after a long-continued Bondage thereunto? That
their Chains of Iniquity will be the easier shaken off, after they are Rivited
by Custom and Inveteracy of wicked Practice?

Can we make too much haste to be Saved? To get out of a state liable to
Eternal Death and Condemnation, into a state of Divine Grace and Favor? Are
our Minds, Wills, and Affections likely to be softer, more melting and
impressible with the sorrows of Repentance, after they are Hardened through the
Deceitfulness of continued sinning? Will God's Grace the more abound toward
us, the more we abound in Transgressing against him? What Surety have thou,
impenitent Delayer, but thy day of Grace may be ended before the day of thy
Life? But that not Believing and Repenting at present, hereafter may be too
Late? He that Believes and Repents not (says our Savior) is condemned
Already. The Irreversible Sentence may be Pronounced on thee here, though
Executed in another World.

Repent Hereafter? Why, do thou consider what Hereafter means? It imports the
utmost Hazard and Uncertainty: In reckoning on Futurity, thou reckonest on a
thing out of thine own Power, and only in God Almighty's Disposal; for the
Grace of Repentance (as all other Graces) is the Divine Gift; and He who has
promised pardon to the Penitent, has no where told us we can be penitent when
we Please: On the contrary God has informed us, that it is his Spirit which
works in us both to Will and to do of his Own Good pleasure; and can thou
think he will work it, though never so long Resisted in the endeavor? That his
Divine Patience will never be tired, the Treasures of his Long-suffering be
never exhausted?

The Holy Scripture indeed tells us God waits to be Gracious, but how Long he
waits we are not acquainted; on the contrary it is written, My Spirit shall not
Always strive with man^ To Day if you will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon hi^ while he is near.
What can be the meaning of these places of Sacre^ Writ, but that if we neglect
thi^ present Accepted time, hereafte^ may be an unacceptable one? bu^ that if
we hear not Now God's Voice calling us to Repentance, he may hereafter refuse
to hear our Voice calling to him for Grace, Mercy, and Acceptance? But that if
we neglect the instant Season of seeking the Lord while he may be found, and
calling upon him while he is near; there may and will come a time when he will
not be found, a season when he will be afar off with his Divine help and
Assistance; and when (as holy David says) in the great waterfloods, in the time
of our bitterest Distress and Calamity we shall not come nigh him. Read
Proverbs the First, the 28 and 29 verses.

God despises that Death bed Repentance, when men leave sin merely because sin
must leave them; because they can keep that and the World no longer; when being
by constraint a going hence, they desire to go unto God, rather than into the
place of Torments prepared for the Devil and his Angels: But no imposing upon
Omnisciency: The searcher of Hearts sees that such a forsaking of sin is
forced, imperfect, flowing from no right Principle, and therefore he values it
not.

Ah there is a time when God leaves sinners to themselves, when they will not
by any means be persuaded to leave their sins; There is a certain measure of
God's Grace and of man's Impieties, after which the Holy Spirit withdraws
himself, and will not any longer be entreated: And how know thou,
persevering Impenitent, but that if thou neglectest Grace and the season
thereof Now, the measure of thy sins may hereafter be completed, and both thy
allowance of Grace, and the opportunity of making use of it, may be over with
thee? Which God grant that it may not be. Amen, Amen.

The Prayer.
MOST Merciful Father, Patitient and Long-suffering, who waitest to be
Gracious, and yet whose Spirit will not always strive with obstinate impenitent
sinners; do Thou, O Lord, call unto us, Behold Now is the Accepted Time,
behold Now is the Day of Salvation, and do we cry to morrow is soon enough,
some Days or Years hence will be as Acceptable a time as this present one? Ah
Madmen that we are! Ah foolish Self-deceiving Creatures! who should know best
the Day of our Salvation, Thou our God, the Author of it, or We? Who should
know best how Long thy Spirit will strive with us? How Long Thou will wait to
be Gracious? O cause us to Day, while it is called to Day, to hear thy voice,
and not harden our hearts against thy Invitations to Repentance.

Convince us, blessed Lord, in order to a present amendment, that it is some
degree of hardening our hearts, not to hearken to thy Voice this Day; That
every continuance in sin is one Advance more toward final Impenitence; a
rendering our future Conversion the more Grievous and Difficult, and our
Confirmation in wickedness the Greater and nearer to irretrievable: And in a
sense of all this, make us we beseech thee, to Retire out of the ways of
Iniquity immediately.

For would we be willing to be surprised by Death, Judgment, and Eternal
Torments in an Impenitent State? Would we be willing to be summoned before thy
Judgment Seat to give an Account of our Stewardship, before our Accounts are
duly Stated and made up? If we would not, O cause us then to give all
Diligence at present to make our Calling and Election Sure; to work the
Religious work for which we were sent into this World, while it is Day, before
the Night of Death comes, wherein it is impossible to work out our Salvation.

Is there, Lord, any one of us but would willingly Repent and turn unto Thee
sometime before he Dies? because otherwise he knows he cannot be saved; but who
of us can be sure he shall Repent before Death, that delays the work till to
morrow? For who can tell what a Day may bring forth? Cause us therefore,
Gracious God, to live every day as if it were to be our last, for that we know
not but it may be such; Cause us to live so at present, as we shall wish we had
done when we come to Dye: O grant we may not Dye with any Guilt upon our
Consciences, or any known sin unrepented of; Grant that we may not put far from
us the Evil Day, and thereby flatter our selves into a state of impenitence and
endless Destruction; but give us Grace to use well the means of Grace, and
improve the opportunities of Salvation, while they are mercifully afforded us;
lest we provoke thee our God to swear in thy wrath, that such obstinate sinners
shall never enter into thy Rest.

Let, holy Father, the uncertainty of the time of our Savior's coming to
Judgment, either to the universal one, or that of each particular person soon
after his Death, make every one of us live in a continual Readiness and
Preparation for it; that we may not have our Oil of Grace to seek, our Lamp of
an holy Conversation to Trim and Replenish, when we should enter in with the
Bridegroom of our Souls, Christ Jesus, into his Marriage Feast: But grant that
at what Season soever our Lord comes to call us to an Account of the Talents
committed to our trust, he may behold all our Debts to his Divine Justice ready
Cancelled, by our Repentance, through the Merits of his Blood; and finding us
perseveringly employed in Good Works, he may say unto us, Well done Good and
Faithful Servants, Enter ye into your Master's Joy. Amen, blessed Jesu,

Amen.
Meditation IV. On the Malignity and Evil Nature of Sin.
O Sin how common art thou, and yet how little understood! How Common, and
therefore how little Dreaded and Abhorred! Did men consider and understand thee
more, they would sure Love and Practice thee Less.

Alas they consider not thy direct opposition to God's Sovereign Authority,
Rectitude of Will, and purity of Divine Essence; thy contrariety to the Laws of
Nature, of Reason, and of Grace: How thou art a Violation of God's Revealed
Will and Pleasure in the Sacred Scriptures; Writings which contain nothing but
precepts Holy, Just and Good; and which consequently it is our greatest Interest
and Advantage, as well as Bounden-Duty to observe; and our greatest
Disadvantage as well as Disobedience to break and violate.

They consider not, Sin, how opposite thou art to their own Personal Welfare
and Happiness, Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal; how Degrading and Defiling to
their Souls and Consciences; what an Ignominy and Reproach to our
Understandings, what a Violence and Affront to our Reasons, what a perversion
and wrong-byass of our Wills and Affections, what a cause of Regret and
Disquietude of Mind to those who voluntarily Commit thee; how offensive to God,
how injurious to Man, how prejudicial to the Common Order, Peace, and
Prosperity of the Universe.

What an ungrateful Return thou art to the Divine Goodness, Patience, and
Forbearance; how thou art an offering despite to the Spirit of Holiness, a
Grieving, a Quenching, a total Driving it away from us; a Crucifying afresh the
blessed Son of God, a Treading him under foot, and accounting the Blood of the
New Covenant an unholy thing; a Rejection of all the Merciful Terms and offers
of Gospel-Reconciliation, a rendering the means and instruments of begetting
Grace in us, ineffectual; a choosing Death, Eternal Death, rather than Life,
Eternal Life; a wilful Treasuring up of Wrath against the day of Wrath and
Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of a provoked offended Deity!

All this, and much more, the Commission of known voluntary Sin implies; and
can we be so irrational, so Vile, and Dis-ingenuous, so even like Beasts before
God, as to continue practicing vicious Impurity with Greediness, after having
thus weighed and considered, how Evil, how bitter, and Lothsom a thing it is?
Oh is there no knowledge, no understanding in the Workers of Impiety, is there
no Shame, no Fear, no Regard in them to their Everlasting Salvation, that they
drink down Iniquity like Water, and Rush into the occasions of their own Ruin,
into the performance of all Wickedness, as the War-Horse rusheth into the
Battle, fearlessly and inconsiderately?

Ah Vice, how stupifying a thing art thou! What a polluter first of our Souls
and Consciences, and after long Custom of sinning what a layer of them Asleep?
what an hardener of our hearts through thy continued and daily advancing
deceitfulness!

Thou Wickedness art pleasurable indeed in the Act, but alas how transient the
Act, how vain and inconsiderable the pleasure! whereas the after-Memory of thee
is tormenting, and much more exquisite, much more Durable a Pain, than thy
vicious Enjoyment was a Delight! Alas! How art thou all over Disorder and
Irregularity, Madness and Unreasonableness, Shame and Disgrace, Depravity and
Corruption! How do thou render the practicers of thee the Objects of God's
curse and hatred, who is otherwise the most kind and benign being; for God who
is Love it self, Love in the very Abstract, does however infinitely hate the
Sinner, hates him even unto Death Eternal!

O the Guilt, the inexpiable Guilt of sin unrepented of, that nothing less than
an Eternity of punishment is its Recompense; that it shall ever be Attoning
for, and yet never be Attoned; that the precious blood of Jesus, as infinitely
satisfactory as it is, can yet never quench the infernal flames to which sin
unforsaken exposes us!

Ah did men but thoroughly understand the Evil Nature of Sin, the baseness, the
turpitude, the Disingenuity and Ingratitude thereof, the Greatness of that
Everlasting Vengeance, to which it renders Sinners obnoxious, the full import
of Damnation, Damnation occasioned through Neglect of so great Salvation as
that the Gospel offers us, no Temptation sure would be big or prevalent enough
to entice them to the wilful commission of Impiety, but they would reject it
with the same holy scorn and abhorrence, as Joseph did the impure
solicitations of his Egyptian Mistress, crying out, How can we do this Great
wickedness, and sin against God, our Heavenly Father? How can we do this great
wickedness, and sin against his Son our Savior's most plenteous and merciful
Redemption? against the Holy Ghost our Sanctifier's most kind, and earnest, and
often repeated Strivings with us to bring us to repentance? who (would we
suffer him to do it, did we not resist him by sinning) would seal, would
Confirm and Establish us in Grace unto the Day of Redemption!

It Is observable that St. Paul describing the odious and heinous Nature of sin,
knew not better what to call it than by its own filthy impure Name, sinful sin;
that Sin, says he, might appear sin; and sin by the Commandment appeared
exceeding sinful: Any other Name than its own had been too Good for it, any
other than its own would have seemed to have Lessened its evil Quality.

There is nothing in the Creation Irregular and Deformed, but as Sin has
defaced and brought a Curse upon it; Sin the Reverse to all that is Great and
Good, Praiseworthy and Honorable; the bane and Disorder of Universal Nature:
That which turned Angels of Light and Glory into Angels of Darkness and
Confusion; changed their once happy and pure Beings into the unhappyness and
impurity of Devils; which expelled Mankind out of Paradise, expelled them at
once out of a state of Innocence and felicity: Sin, that which exposed us to
Sickness, Misery, and Death Temporal of the Body, to Depravity of mind,
Disorderlyness of Appetites, perturbation of passions, and the Spiritual
Eternal Death of the Soul!

'Twas fatal impiety and transgression which turned a fruitful Eden into a
barren Wilderness, turned the Garden of God into a Seed-plot of Temptation for
the Devil; Subjects the Creature unwillingly to bondage and Corruption, makes
it Groan earnestly for a Deliverance, for the Renovation and Restitution of all
things, when there shall be no more pain, Sorrow, Sickness, or Death; because
no more sin the occasion of them; no more Bodily Evil, because no more mental
and moral evil.

Sin, it is the great Malady and Distemper of the Soul; the destruction of its
health, beauty, vigor, and Safety; that which puts it into a preternatural
temper, puts all its powers and faculties out of order, renders it enflamed
with violent passions, Sick with inordinate appetites, tortured with various
and contrary desires; and is it not madness to be in Love with such our
Disease? To hug and Retain so much Spiritual Sickness and infirmity?

Sin is also the Death of the Soul; the Death of it to the Life of Grace and
Virtue; the Death of it to the Quickening influences and Renewing Efficacy of
Gods Spirit; the Death of it to any pleasing sense, and Grateful Relish of
Divine and Heavenly Good things; and is it not the highest imprudence to be
Jocund and Merry amidst a Dying condition? Nay to be Dead, actually Dead
stupid, and benumbed in Sins and trespasses, and yet Alive, delighted in, and
well-pleased with such our calamitous estate?

Sin is likewise the most abject Slavery of the Soul, that which renders us the
Servants of Corruption; a Slavery of it to impure lusts and vices, to Tyrannous
evil customs and habits, to the overruling Temptations of the Devil, who leads
wilful sinners Captive at his pleasure: And is it not folly to be Gratified and
Contented with such a Servile state, with such a base and loathsome Drudgery?

Sin it is opposite to all God's glorious Attributes and Perfections; for if we
consider his Sovereignty of Dominion, Sin is Disobedience and Rebellion; if his
Wisdom, it is Folly and Madness in contradicting it; if his Power, it is
Impotency in vainly defying it; if God's Justice is respected, Sin is Iniquity;
if his Goodness and Forbearance, it is Disingenuity and Unthankfulness; if his
Holiness and Purity, it is the Greatest Pollution and Degeneracy; if his Truth
and Veracity, Sin is Falsehood and Error! So that Sin being contrary to the
pure and holy Nature of God, which is the Original Pattern and Standard of all
good; Sin consequently must needs be the Top, the Abstract and Epitome of all
Evil: And ought such a thing to be the Object of our Choice, of our Love and
Approbation, of our practice and prosecution?

Sin contains in it the very formal Nature of Hell and future punishment; for
what makes Hell? What but the Hellish, that is, the wicked impure tempers and
dispositions of the wretches inhabiting it? which evil tempers of mind would
prove their unhappy owners internal Torment and Disquietude, were there no
External Lake of fire and brimstone, of avenging flames and utter Darkness.

Nay Sin is not only the principal and constituent part of Hell, but also a
much worse and far Greater Evil than Hell it self; for Hell is Good for
something, to take vengeance on the finally impenitent and disobedient, and
thereby to vindicate God's Justice and Holiness, but sin serves only to abuse
his Grace and Goodness; Hell was of Gods making, Sin of the Devils: Nay Hell
was made in pity to Mankind, to deter them from coming into that place of
Torments, but Sin offers violence to Hell, as if it were the seat of Happiness;
forces open the Gates of that Infernal fiery Furnace, dragging men into it much
against the Will and Rescuing Endeavors of their Creator, Preserver,
Sanctifier and Redeemer!

O Sin, where is thy profit? when as thy Loss is that of our immortal Souls!
that of Heaven, of peace of Mind, and Joys in the Holy Ghost unspeakable and
full of Glory! Where thy pleasure? when as thy Torment is that of a guilty
disquieted Conscience, that of continual dread of Divine Punishment, that of
short empty Delights, and after vexatious Reflections on them; that of an
Afflictive sense of having no Lot or Portion in the Love and Enjoyment of God,
an infinite Good!

Sin must needs be the greatest Evil, the worst of any thing which is Enemy to
either God or Man; because it is God's usual method to punish sin with sin, when
all his other Reclaiming Essays of Providence have through the obstinacy of the
sinner proved ineffectual; I will choose their delusions, says God, and give
them over to their Iniquities; he that is unjust let him be unjust still; and
he that is filthy, let him be filthy still: As if to be a Sinner was misery
sufficient; and no vengeance for Impiety like that of being permitted a
continuance therein.

The exceeding Great Malignity of Sin is in nothing more seen than in this,
that it cost God more to Redeem the World than at first to Create it; cost him
but the fiat of his Will, but a Word's speaking to make it out of Nothing, but
stood him at the invaluable Expense of his Son's Blood to Ransom it out of
worse than Nothing, a polluted, sinful, selfundone Condition: At God's Creation
of the World there was only want and absence of previous matter whereout to
make it, no repugnant inaptitude, no contrariety in the subject whereby in the
least to obstruct or retard the Divine Efficacy; whereas in the Redemption of
the lost World, there was the deep rooted Corruption of our Nature, inveteracy
of Evil Custom and Habit, depravity of Affection, and perverseness of Man's
Will to be conflicted with and overcome by God's Spirit, by his holy Word and
Sacraments, before the Ransom purchased could be applied, and made Savingly
Effectual: So much more is there in Sin of inconquerableness and Difficulty of
subjection than in the most difficult and miraculous material product of an
Almighty power!

O let but our thoughts carry us to the places of our Saviors bitter Agonies
and Sufferings, and there let us behold him greatly Amazed and sore troubled,
Sweating great drops of blood, bowing beneath the weight of his Fathers
Displeasure, crying out, Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me;
and at last suffering on a painful and Ignominious Cross those extreme torments
both of body and mind; which the sins of all Mankind had deserved, which none
but the Manhood in Conjunction with the Godhead could have undergone, and which
were abundantly Sufficient to Expiate the Guilt of the whole world, and of
multitudes of worlds, were multitudes really existing: Let us consider our
Blessed Lord suffering all this, though without Sin in himself, only because he
had taken it on him by Imputation, and by becoming our Surety, bore the
iniquities of us all* and then let us, if we can, continue to think so Lightly,
so harmlesly o^ Sin as we do: Here Is a sight, our Redeemers Crucifixion, which
at once shows his inestimable Love to us, and the mighty Malignity of Sin; in
that nothing Less than his precious Bloodshed, that Seal of the New Covenant,
could A^one Divine Justice, and do away the Guilt, the Condemnation of our
impieties!

The Prayer.
O Thou immaculate Purity, Thou perfectly holy and Righteous Divine Being, who
have manifested thy Love to holiness, and thy Hatred against all impiety
chiefly in sending thy Son into the World, by his pure Example and by his holy
Doctrine to destroy the sinful works of the Devil, and to promote a Life of
uprightness; O that those Excellent Graces which shined so eminently in our
Savior may be formed within us thy servants the Hope of Glory; that the life
which we henceforth lead in the Flesh, may be by the Faith of the Son of God:
Conform us we beseech thee to his Image in Holiness, making us partakers of a
Divine Nature.

Ah, blessed Lord, it is not the Guilt, it is not the Condemnation of sin we so
much desire to be delivered from, as the foul stain and pollution, as the
Reigning power and prevalency thereof; destroy then Vice within us as well with
respect to the inward Love and Approbation, as to the outward Act and
Performance: While we are in the World, preserve us, holy Father, from the
Corruptions of the World; suffer not sin to have Dominion over us in any kind,
for we are not under the Law, but under Grace; O may thy Grace be sufficient
for us; Keep us, holy Spirit, by thy power thorough Faith unto Salvation, Let
not Sin Reign in our mortal Bodies, that we should fulfill the lusts thereof;
but Grant that thy good Spirit, thy holy Word, and heavenly Graces may bear
sway in us and abound.

Turn our Eyes from beholding sinful vanity, and cause thou us to make much of
thy Law. O give us to behold more of the malignant Nature of Sin; of the
Turpitude, Folly, Baseness, and Ingratitude thereof; and then shall we more
thoroughly Grieve, Detest, and Resolve on the abandoning of it.

Convince us, gracious God, that Sin it is the greatest of Evils, and then shall
we betake our selves to Thee the greatest of Goods; work in us that Holiness
without which we not only Shall not, but also Cannot see Thee the Lord, by
reason of a natural Incapacity in us: for Seeing Thee, O divine Object of
blessedness, imports Enjoying thee; a seeing thee with Delight and
Satisfaction; and this we can never do unless we first become Like Thee in
Purity, in the holy Tempers and Dispositions of our Souls: O lay in us that
Foundation of future Happiness, Grace; the Hope and Qualification of inheriting
Endless Glory!

Lord we are poor, and blind, and naked; blind as to true saving Knowledge,
operative by Love; poor and naked as to any inherent Acceptable Righteousness
of our own; O let us be clothed upon with the Robes of thy perfect imputed
Righteousness; we are Dead in sins and trespasses, O do thou Quicken, do Thou
Raise us up to Newness of Life and Obedience: Purge our Consciences from dead
Works, that we may henceforth serve more Acceptably thee the Everliving God.

Let our lives be a continual Endeavor of subduing in our selves the Love of
Sin, of becoming Enamoured with the Beauty of Holiness, of becoming Like thee
therein, more Approved of by thee, and every way such as Thou would have us
to be; Cleanse us, O God from all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, and
cause us to endeavor after the perfecting of Holiness in thy fear: And then
Holiness the chief ingredient of Heavenly Happiness being our New-Nature, being
the fixed Temper and Habit of our Regenerate Minds, we shall be both Meet for
Heaven, and our Souls will Tend thither as to their proper place, and most
desirable state of Enjoyment.

Amen, Amen.
Meditation V. On Watchfulness against Sin and Temptations.
THat this is a Duty, our Savior teaches us; Watch and Pray, says he, that ye
enter not into Temptation; that ye come not within the reach or first
Enticements thereof: And St. Peter exhorts, Be ye sober, be vigilant, because
your Adversary the Devil goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. He watches for our Ruin and Seduction, and therefore we ought to watch
for our own preservation; he is diligent to betray us, and therefore it imports
us to be very careful that we avoid his treacherous Snares: He walks about,
is never at Rest from attempting our Corruption, seeks occasions, lies in wait
to offer us Temptations; then when he finds us most unguarded, then when he
finds our hearts most light and vain, and consequently most liable to entertain
his Suggestions: He watches what sinful Allurement is likeliest to take Effect
with us, by means of his observing what our General Temper of body most
inclines us to, or what our occasional disposition of Mind renders us the most
subject to comply with; and he baits his hook with such a Temptation as is most
agreeable to our sinful Inclination, which he has aforehand discovered, or at
least shrewdly Ghest at; and therefore it nearly concerns us to Guard our
selves against him with Watchfulness; to keep us from those sins we are most
inclinable to, that they gain not the Dominion over us; to keep us from
Constitutional Sins, to which our Tempers bias us; from those of frequent
occurrence, from sins of Infirmity, which being Lesser ones, are on that
account less Observable and Dreaded, and consequently the more Dangerous; to be
very careful to avoid the Occasions of sinning, the pre-dispositions, means and
opportunities leading thereunto; to shun the very shows and Appearances of
Evil: In short, to watch against all Sin and Temptation in General.

There is no Condition of life free from its Enticements to sinning; they are
apt to intermingle themselves with whatever we Think, Speak or Act: Wealth and
Prosperity is a dangerous Temptation to the sinful Abuse of Divine Blessings
into Excess and Wantonness, into Pride and Carelessness, into Forgetfulness of
God and our Duty owing to him; and Want and Adversity is a strong (though undue)
Provocative to Distrust and Diffidence of God's Goodness and presiding Care
over us, is an Incitement to Murmuring, Impatience and Discontent with his
Providential Dispensations: So that in every state we are Unsafe and Insecure
in every thing Sin lies at the door to surprise and Assault us; its Snares are
spread for us every where, though we are insensible of them, though perhaps for
the present they have not in any Gross instance Caught and Entangled us: and
when we live thus among vicious Baits and Dangers, always Near, always Exposed
to 'em, ought we not to be extreme wary and vigilant?

Alas, the Partition Line between Lawful and Unlawful is so small and narrow,
that the passage from one to the other is but a Step, or rather (if we advert
not) a sudden and easy Slip; The utmost Freedom in things Allowable, is a
Bordering on the confines of Disallowable; nay, not only a Bordering upon
what is prohibited, but also an hazardous Temptation thereunto: We must not come
Nigh a Pesthouse, if we would not be infected with its Contagion.

Temptation is indeed the Subject Matter and Exercise of Virtue; so far from
Moral Evil in it self, that it is the Trial and Improvement of our Graces; the
Trial of an honest upright Heart, of our sincere Love to God and Goodness, of
our resolved Constancy in the ways of Holy Obedience: But however it is a
perilous proof of our Virtue; and better be without the Proof, than without our
Innocence; better be out of the reach of Temptation, than by coming in its way,
endanger our being overpowered therewith. Yet since we can never be wholely out
of the Reach of Temptation, at least out of a Liableness thereunto, good Reason
have we to be continually watchful and circumspect over our Hearts and our
Behavior, that sin through its Deceitfulness Gain not upon us.

For Satan's wicked Allurements, his vicious suggestions could never take hold
on us, would never find Admittance into our souls, were not the way prepared
for their Entrance by our evil Lusts and corrupt Appetites, those Foes of our
own Household; who like Treacherous false friends in a Besieged Citadel, set
open the Gates thereof in time of Rest and Security, for the Besiegers to enter
in at: Let us chiefly therefore have an observant eye over our own Hearts,
endeavor our utmost to free them of all impurities, and beg of God that he
would cleanse the Thoughts, the Desires of our Hearts, by the Inspiration of
his most Holy Spirit; and then we might bid safe Defiance to all the Devils
wicked solicitations, to all the Worlds enticeing Flatteries.

We are apt to say of Smaller sins, of sins of humane Frailty and Infirmity, of
some Bosom Lust, as Lot did of Zoar; is it not a Little one, and my Soul shall
live? But ah how do we deceive our selves with such vain words! For can any Sin
be Small, which is an offense against an infinitely Great and Glorious Divine
Majesty? which is a violation of an Holy, Just, and Good Law? can any sin be
Small, the wages whereof is Death Eternal? The Price of whose Expiation was the
precious Bloodshed of the Son of God?

The Distinction of sins into Greater and Lesser ones, is made not in regard
that Lesser sins for their matter, are not Great ones in their Evil Quality;
are not great Repugnancies to the Divine Purity, highly displeasing unto God,
equally exposing of us with Greater Vices to the Sentence of Condemnation, and
to a suffering the vengeance of Eternal fire; but for that they are Lesser
breaches of the Established Order and Harmony of things in this World, Offer
Less violence to the checks of our Consciences, are Less offenses against the
welfare of our brethren, or smaller injuries to our own Temporal Interests,
whether of Mind or Body, of Goods, or Good-Name: However in strictness of
speaking Small Sins are of a great Guilt, because more easily Resistible,
because the Temptation to them is Lighter, and therefore a compliance with it,
is an Evidence of great Degeneracy of Spirit, of an evil Heart within, which
chooses sin with Little Bait in great measure for Sinnings sake: The Weakness
of Assaults from Lesser Temptations, adds to the inexcusableness of our
Cowardice, if we suffer them to vanquish us; and therefore they ought the more
unyieldingly to be withstood.

This then being my Duty, watchfulness against all iniquity, against all
Temptations, all Occasions tending thereunto, I will by the Grace of God, be
very diligent in the Exercise of it: And dothou, O God, strengthen my Purposes,
confirm my Resolutions, Assist my sincere Endeavors of Striving against sin,
of Resisting all its Allurements, of being brought under the Dominion of none
of them: O Lord lead me not, permit me not to be led into Temptation, but
Deliver me from all evil, both Moral and Natural, Corporal and Spiritual; for
thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Prayer.
O THOU Divine Supporter of the weak, thou strengthner of such as do stand, and
Raiser up of them that fall, beat down Satan under our feet; we are beset with
Spiritual Enemies, we have no might to help our selves against the Great
Company of Temptations which daily assault us; our eyes are only upon thee,
from whom alone comes our Health and Salvation: Help Lord, or we perish; help,
or we are Ruined Eternally; stretch forth thy Right hand to save us, or we sink
in the waves of vicious Allurements, which so impetuously beat against us; O be
Thou pleased to speak those Tempests into a Calm; do Thou either Restrain the
unruly waters of strife, sinful Assaults, which a^^ ready to come in, even unto
our Souls: or else Assist and bear us up that they may not overwhelm us: Suffer
us no^ O Lord, to be Tempted above that (...) are Able, but together with the
Temptation make a way to escape, that we may resolutely withstand it; and
having done all, may stand.

O make us diligent in all our Duties, watchful against all Temptations, that
they never become a snare to catch and entangle us; but cause us to Resist
manfully according to our Baptismal Engagement, the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil; striving against sin, against al^ wicked Enticements, Provocations, and
Opportunities leading thereunto: And in all our pious conflicts makes us more
than Conquerors through Christ which strengthens us.

O holy Father, Thou Preserver of men, the Prince of this world Satan comes,
he comes to search and to Try us; O Grant he may find nothing in us to close
with his Temptations: keep us from sin, keep us from every evil way of the
Destroyer; Deliver us from all our Ghostly Adversaries, for we fly unto Thee to
secure and hide us: O pluck our feet out of the wicked Net which they have
privily laid for our souls.

We fly unto thee O thou Refuge of all those who put their Trust in thee, we
fly unto thee to Repel and Quench all the fiery darts of the Devil; let him not
have any Advantage over us, but give us strength in the day of battle and holy
Contention; Grant that thy Kingdom may daily Rise, and the Kingdom of Satan
daily fall in our hearts.

Lord, We wrestle not only with flesh and blood, with the Corruptions of our
own Nature, but with Principalities and Powers, with Spiritual wickednesses in
high places; O Give us therefore Power in thee our God; let thy Spirit be
sufficient for us, let thy strength be manifested in our weakness, and make us
in the conclusion mightily to prevail: Cause us to take unto our selves the
whole Armor of God, to watch and pray, to fast and mourn, and strive our
utmost against sin and Temptation; that having fought a good fight, and
finished our course, and kept the faith, henceforth may be laid up for us a
Crown of Righteousness, a Crown which fades not away, Eternal in the Heavens.

Amen, Amen.
Meditation VI. Against the Sin of Pride.
PRide! How incongruous a thing to a poor Indigent, Dependant Creature! To a
compound of Vileness and Corruption, of Misery, and Folly! whose foundation
being in the Dust, ought to humble him thither from whence he was taken.

Pride was not made for Man, says Solomon, it Becomes better any other part of
the Creation; for they still Retain that beautiful Goodness at first impressed
upon them by their Divine Maker; the Stormy wind and Tempest, the Sea and
raging Floods, as boisterous and unruly as they be, are yet Elements fulfilling
God's Word; The Moon observes her certain seasons, and the Sun knows his
going down: All Nature keeps its Regular Course at first ordained it; only Man,
Irregular Man has Deviated from his primitiv^ state of Order and Innocence, an^
thereby has Degraded himself belov^ the very Beasts which perish; so tha^ it is
much more a matter of profoun^ humbling to Man that immortal Corruption was his
Offspring, than the Mother Earth, Natural Corruption was the Parent-principle
of his formation.

To be proud, and yet to be a Beggar, to live upon Alms; what a Sol^cism, what
an inconsistency is it And yet thus it is with us; we a^ Beggars of our daily
Bread from God, or at least should be such, al^ we possess, all we Are, was
Originally from him; we are his Pensi^ners and Alms-People: And how in
sufferable a thing then is Pride (...) Man, how indecorous! What have tho^ says
the Apostle St. Paul, which tho^ did not Receive, and yet boastest th^^ as if
thou had not Received it? Surely all boasting is excluded, where whatever we
have is of Grace, and not (...) Debt, is ours in Trust only, not in Propriety!

Ah 'twas this sin of Pride, which first brought sin into the world; which
first came into it, and which will Last go out of it: Ambition was as early as
Nature, and Adam was little sooner a Man, than he Aspired to be as God, knowing
Good and Evil: But alas, 'twas this his undue Aiming at so Great a height,
which was the occasion of his fall; and he knows now Evil, only by the Loss and
Privation of Good!

Pride, 'Twas this turned the Apostate Angels out of Heaven, which made even
that infinitely Blissful place uneasy to them, while proudly reaching at the
incommunicable Prerogatives of the Deity, that Aspiring sin changed their
Angelick Nature into that of Devils: And it is this Vice of pride which is more
or less an ingredient in all the wickedness committed by degenerate Mankind;
for every wilful iniquity is a rejecting the Divine Authority and Sovereignty
of God, and a Vertual saying within our selves, Who is Lord ove^ us?

It Is this sin of excessive Self-Love^ and too good an opinion of our own
Endowments, which includes in it^ mixture of the greatest folly; for (...)
implies misapprehension and Error Ignorance and Inconsideration; Ignorance of
those Imperfections and Deformities, Sins and Seeds of Misery within us, which
were they discovered must needs humble and abase us.

An how troublesome a Guest (...) Pride in a Man's bosom! it create both
uneasieness to himself and al^ others about him; while it makes him Envy
Superiors, take to Heart the slights of Equals, and even to rage with passion
at the Disrespect of Inferiors. O it is this vice of over-rating our selves
keeps us Strangers at home, makes us unjust Censurers abroad; Causes us to
think too highly of our own worth, too meanly of that of others; it is this
hinders our growing Wiser and Better, our imagining we are wise and good enough
already: But alas did we see all we lack, we should soon fall in our own
Conceit, and wish for much more Wisdom and Goodness than we have.

Pride! nothing more looses a man Friends, and Gains him Enemies; nothing more
renders him an object of universal Scorn and Contempt: so that the proud person
by Pride defeats his own Aims; he challenges Honor as his due, but by unduly
challenging it, he reaps Dis-respect and Derision.

But above all, nothing more than Pride renders us the Scorn and Hatred of God;
the Lord beholds the lowly with an Eye of Love and Approbation, but the proud
he^ knows afar off, Psalm 138. vers^ the 6th. Nothing also more obstructs the
holy Influences of the Divine Spirit upon our Hearts; God resists the proud,
but gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5. 5. He has but two Habitations wherein
he more especially delights to dwell, Heaven, and the Soul of him who is of a
contri^ and humble spirit, Isa. 57. 15. On the contrary, nothing is more
opposit^ to the Nature of the Deity, or to the Humiliation of his blessed Son
Christ Jesus, than Pride and Haughtiness And therefore our Savior thoug^ the
Brightness of his Father's Glory and the Express Image of his Person who
thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, yet took on hi^ the form of a
Servant; came not to be minister'd unto, but to Minister: appeared in a mean
and low condition, that he might teach us Meekness and Lowliness of Heart; the
first Good disposition for the Receipt of his Self-denying Gospel, and of all
Evangelical Graces.

And indeed, What have we poor silly Worms and no Men, to be proud of? What
should hinder our Humility? Alas how do Angels so much Raised above us in
Excellency, Angels who see our Vileness by reason of sinning, how do they both
pity and wonder at our Pride! At our Folly of being exalted in our own Conceits
above Measure!

They though they much transcend us in Knowledge, in Beauty, in Strength, and
all other Endowments both Natural and Moral, yet are they Humble and Modest;
they cover their faces before God, and cast down their Crowns at the feet of
the Lamb Christ Jesus acknowledging him alone worthy to be praised: The sense
they have that their Angelick Excellencies however Great and Glorious, are yet
Finite, and derived from their Creator; their sense of hi^ Divine Perfections
infinitely su^ mounting theirs keeps them meek an^ lowly; and the Abundance of
their Celestial Revelations by this mea^ no way puffs them up, but render them
the more Thankful, the more sensible of God's Goodness unto the^ Let Them
therefore be our Patter^ of Humility; nay rather let the eve^ blessed Jesus be
our Example herein who has directed us to learn of him for he was meek and
lowly, thoug^ the most High God!

Ah it is but comparing our selve^ with the Deity, and then 'twill appear how
there is no comparison between us; what vile Creatures an miserable Sinners we
are, and wha^ an infinitely Glorious Being, and im^maculate Purity is God! and
the^ the sense of his Greatness and Glor^ will lessen and humble us in cur ow^
Conceits. Amen, blessed Savior Amen.

The Prayer.
O THOU King of Glory, who dwell in the Heaven of Heavens, and yet
condescendest to look down from the habitation of thy Holiness on us poor
Unworthy Mortals, whose foundation is in the Dust, and our Soujourning in
houses of Clay; we beseech thee take up thy Glorious Residence in our Hearts,
by banishing thence the sin of pride and Self-conceit; by possessing us with
high Reverential thoughts of thy Divine Majesty, which may make us appear Mean,
and Low, and Despicable in our own apprehensions: O that we may appear such Now
in thy Presence; for that thou Resistest the Proud, but give Grace, an
Increase of Grace unto the Humble; humble us therefore, O Lord, amidst these
our Devotions, that thou may exalt us in thy due season.

Mortify in us at present all Haughtiness of Spirit; for what more incongruous
than Pride, and a Lowly Begging Supplication? What more incongruous than a
Display of our wants, (...) Acknowledgment of our Vileness and Dependence, an
Imploring of Mercy and Relief, (all which import the deepest Humility) and yet
a self-con^ceited, Arrogant, and Lofty temper (...) Mind? O grant it may no
longer bea^^ Sway over us; Grant that we may (...) clothed with Humility, that
we (...) see the imperfections of our best Services Make us pure in Heart, yet
poor (...) Spirit; vile in our own Eyes that (...) may be precious in thy
sight: Strike (...) with a deep and lively sense of our wre^^ chedness by
reason of sinning; and ma^^ us as Humble, as we are Wicked.

What, O Lord, are all the Nation^ of the Earth if compared with Thee, (...)
Creator and Supreme Governor of (...) things? What? but as a drop of (...)
Bucket, and as the small dust of (...) balance? How may we then justly (...)
with shame, when we consider our multiplied heinous transgressions against so
great and glorious a God! when we consider in what manner we lift up our hearts
against Thee the Giver of every Good and Perfect Gift, by arrogating to our
selves the propriety of thy free beneficence! O make us account our highest
Seize in Humane Knowledge, as Dung and Dross for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord; make us Ambitious of being found in him,
clothed with his Spotless imputed Righteousness.

Suffer us not, O our God, to exalt our selves above measure, by placing undue
Confidence in any thing we do, or in whatever we Suffer for thy Names sake;
lest we fall not only from the Stedfastness of our holy profession, but also
into the Condemnation of the Devil sinning according to the Similitude of his
transgression: O let him not Rule in our hearts by the Disobedience of pride;
permit us not to Resemble him in so foul a Vice, which will Deface thine Image
within us; but teach us to tread in the Steps of our blessed Savior, and to
learn of him who was Meek and Lowly, (...) shall we find Rest unto our souls.

Grant, Holy Father, that in Lowlyness of mind we may think meanly of our
selves, in honor preferring each other; that neglecting the praise of men, or
making it a subordinate motive in our practice of things virtuous, we may have
a principal Regard to the Testimony of a Good Conscience, and may seek in the
first place that praise which comes of thee our God; O let us be nothing in
our own account, that Thou may be all in all unto us: Make us to employ all
industry and care in Approving our selves unto Thee, that being Conformed unto
our Redeemer in Humility, (who humbled himself unto Death, even the Death of
the Cross) we may become thy workmanship O God, ready prepared unto every Good
work, and may Abound therein without any vain ostentation. Amen, for thy
Mercies sake.

Amen.
Meditation VII. Against the Sin of Unchastity.
UNchastity! Ah how small is its Temptation, when placed in Equal View with the
deterring evil consequents thereof! For who can be allured with Poverty and
Beggary, with Shame and Ignominy, with Rottenness and Corruption, which are the
usual Attendants of impure Embraces? Ah to burn in Lust is to Anticipate
Hell-flames, and to burn in uneasy Torments of Mind even in this life; for the
eager appetite of Lust is full of Anxiety and disquieting impatience till such
time as it is Gratified: Hence the usual terms of expressing a violent Amor,
are Flames and Darts, are Feavours and Exstatick Raptures: And besides the
Fears, and Dangers, and Dis-Grace of a Discovery in the Unchaste Action, when
the beastly desire is Satisfied then Succeed Dissatisfaction, Shame and Regret
of Mind in a bashful Novice Sinner of this Nature, and worse than Shame and
Regret, an hardened Impudence and confirmed Searedness of Conscience in an old
habituated fornicator.

But alas alas, that Men should buy Repentance of unlawful Satisfaction of
fleshly Appetites, at the Dear rat^ of Disease, Torment, and Unsoundness of
Body, in Conjunction with Disquietude of Spirit! Alas that they should purchase
so high Eternal Miseries, as to incur them for the Dyeing sensual pleasures of
a few moments Ah where is, I say not Religion, but where is even Reason and
Understanding, in such Unclean Persons It shows impure Sense, that the Animal
and Brutish part is uppermost in them.

Ah shall we be Ashamed to Commit Acts of Uncleanness in the sight of Men, in
the sight of but a Child; and yet shall we without blushing Commit them in the
sight of an Omniscient God? Shall not His Excellency make us afraid of any
filthyness of flesh or Spirit? And His dread fall upon us, that we become not
Guilty of the same?

If any Man defile the Temple of God, says St. Paul, him will God destroy, 1
Cor. 3. 17. and he must have little sense either of the Majesty and Purity of
God, who will dare to Desecrate his Temple; or of the Divine Justice and Power,
who will hazard his own Salvation thereby!

Alas Unclean Wretch, one would think thou should have more Reverence for the
Dignity of Humane Nature, for the Awful and Stupendiously beautiful Structure
of thy Body, than to make it the foul instrument of Lust and Uncleanness; that
to take thus the Members of Christ and make them Members of an Harlot; God
forbid Thou should do it: Ah do thou know what a (...) it is to Grieve, to
Resist, to Quench to Drive from thee in this manner the Good Spirit of Grace?
What? Sin did I say? Nay do thou know what a Loss, what a Prejudice it is
unto thee both Corporal and Spiritual?

While the Holy Ghost inhabits the Temple of a Sober, Pure, and Chaste Body,
Angels are its Guardians, the Holy Spirit its Guide, its Defende^ against all
Assaults of Temptations; but when Unchastity has forced him from that Abode,
and sent both Him and our Tutelar Angels Sadden'd away, then Enters the Unclean
Spirit, the Devil; takes possession of an Impure Body as of his own proper
Right and House of Inheritance, and the Man lies exposed to as many other Sins
and Temptations as will please to Assail him: For the Fence of Virtue, Modesty
being broken down; Modesty, that Greatest Restraint on Degenerate Human Nature,
next to the checks of Conscience, and of God's Spirit, being lost, what shjould
hinder Unchaste Persons who have yielded their Members instruments of
Uncleanness already, from proceeding to yield them further Servants of iniquity
unto iniquity, without any stop or forbearance?

Oh Unchastity it is a very Stupisying sin! It Seals a Man up in impenitence,
and renders him usually beyond the force of a Reclaimment; any otherwise than
as Disease and Disability of Body prove his Reformers: The Debauched Mind
within for all that remaining Unreclaimed, but as lasciviously inclined as ever!

Ah for Remedy of Unclean Cogitations and Desires which lead to Corporal
Pollutions, and which defile the Soul, as much as Unclean Acts do the Body, nay
which arrived to a plenary unchaste Consent of the Will, become the Adultery of
the Heart, Matthew. 5. 28. Let us consider how unfitting it is that the Soul and
Body which are both the dea^ purchase of Christ's most precious Blood, should
be Debased and Vilified by any Lustful indulged Desires or Actual
uncleanness, rather let the Remembrance of the blessed Jesus Crucified,
Crucify in us all sensua^ appetites of the flesh; let the Remembrance of
Everlasting burnings Quench and Extinguish in us the fire of Concupiscence! Let
the fear of God make thy flesh Tremble, and so Awe it into Subjection, that thy
fleshly lusts may not at any time war against thy Soul, and gain the Victory.

Think, Think each hour on the mortifying Considerations of Death, Hell, and
the Grave; on Rottenness and Putrefaction therein; and on thy Appearance at the
General Resurrection before the Tremendous Majesty of thy Judge, who is of
purer Eyes than to behold impurity with Approbation; and this will suppress in
thee lustful thoughts and wishes even in their Infancy and first motions: Be
always busied in some lawful Employment, and then Satan when he comes will
find no Share in thee, no Room for his unchaste Temptations to Enter; no impure
matter within for their setting fire thereto, and Exciting it into a flame of
Desire, Consent, or Unclean Action. Observe but Sobriety and Moderation of
Diet, joined with Prayer and occasional Fasting, and thou shall soon observe
how all Carnal Appertites will dye and become vanquished within thee.

Yes, I will endeavor, do Thou O my God, Assist me thereunto; I will endeavor
by the strength of thy Grace, to Conquer all Temptations, all the least
Tendencies to this vice of Unchastity; I will suppress the first unclean Fancy
with loathing and indignation; I will stifle the first impure Desire after
Satisfying my undue Sensual Appetites; I will Fly and not Fight; I will keep
out of the way of Unchaste Allurements, rather than Try and hazard my Chastity
by Resisting them; I will Escape out of the filthy Sodom of impure Cogitations,
without looking back, or so much as Revolving them in my mind: My
Mortifications, my habitual Mortificatious and Temperance shall show, how much
I abhor to Gratify the flesh into Rebellion against the Spirit; I will Quel
Concupiscence in its Primeval Origin; for the very Entertaining of foul
Thoughts, though they proceed no further, is an Abomination before God, a
Repugnancy to his Unspotted Purity, and a dangerous Temptation or
praedisposition to go on to more Advanced degrees of Unchastity: I will
therefore by the help of my God abstain from all manner of Impurity, External
and Internal, Corporal and Spiritual: Amen, Blessed Jesus, Thou Author and
Pattern of all Purity and Holiness, Amen, Amen.

The Prayer.
O Holy Jesu, immaculate Lamb of God, Prince of Purities, Captain of Salvation
to all those who have kept themselves pure and unspotted with the World and the
Flesh, keep us pure, keep us sober, chaste and modest in all our Deportment;
Create clean hearts, O God, and renew right Spirits in thy Servants; that we
may dread all impure Thoughts, all polluting Desires, all ecrrupt
Communication; much more may fly all Actual compliances with fleshly Lusts
which war against the Soul: O let no impure Imaginations pollute our Spirits,
which God has sanctified; no immodest, obs^ere Speech pollute our Tongues,
which God has commanded to be Instruments of his Praises; no unchaste Actions
rend the Veil of those Temples our Bodies, which the Holy Ghost has chosen for
his pla^^ of Worship and Residence: Make (...) such a Remove from all
uncleanness (...) the outer (...) as to hate the very Garment (...) with the
Flesh; as to become (...) of Angelick Purity: as if we were not clothed on
with Raiment of Moriality, as if whether, will St. Paul, we were in the Body,
or (...) of the Body, it was uncertain!

O Divine Spirit of Purity, thou Author and Preserver, thou Beginner and
Finisher of the Grace of Chastity as (...) all other Good and perfect Gifts,
let (...) Consideration of thy unspotted Purity preserve us from all filthiness
both (...) Flesh and Spirit; and may the apprehension of thine All-seeing
inspection who art of purer Eyes than to behold (...) least Speck of iniquity
with Approbation, Awe us into an entire Sanctity.

O our God, how ought we to offer up our Souls and Bodies Living Saerifices,
Holy, Pure, and Acceptable unto Thee, whenas both are the purchases of thy Dear
Son's most precious Blood; both are the Care and Protection of thy Good
Providence, the Temples of thy blessed Spirit; when as both bear the beautiful
impressions of thy Wisdom, Power, and Goodness; both were Dedicated to hy
Service in Baptism, and have frequently since Renewed their Engagement of
Renouncing the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: O keep us to the performance of
this solemn Engagement; keep us to a Reverencing of our Humanity, which God
has Dignified by his susception thereof; keep us undesiled both in Soul and
Body.

And wherefore, O blessed Savior, to what End were we Redeemed by thee? But
that we should be Redeemed from all Iniquity, and purified unto thee a peculiar
peopole Zealous of Good works; O purify us thoroughout by the Spirit, in Soul,
Body, and Spirit: May we live no longer after the flesh, fulfilling the impure
Lusts thereof, having a Name indeed to live, yet being Dead unto the Life of
Grace; but Grant that mortifying through thy Spirit the deeds of the Body, we
may live a life of inward Peace, and Joy, and Freedom from the slavery of
serving diverse corrupt Lusts and Passions.

Enable us, holy Jesu, to take up the Banner of thy Cross against the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil; to Crucify the Flesh, with its corrupt Desires and
Affections; hereby showing that we are Thine, followers of thee as dear
Children in all Purity and Chastity: That so possessing our vessels in
Sanctification and Honor, we may lay them down in a pious Hope, and receive
them again in a Joyful Resurrection, when the Bodies of Saints shall Rise
first, and the Bodies of Virgin-Innocencies with a brighter Luster and Ray of
Revived Glory. Amen, Thou Resurrection and the Life,

Amen.
Meditation VIII. Against the Sin of immoderate Anger.
AH did but a furious Angry Person behold himself in the midst of his unrulely
Passion, and see his own Blood-shot Eyes, his Distorted Face, his wild
Disorders of Countenance, Speech, and Gesture, he would I persuade my self be
so out of Love with the unseemly Picture his Anger drew of him, as to fly and
abhor it ever after: for it is a Passion which for the time is Raging Madness;
which puts a man Besides himself, out of his own power and keeping, perverts
the Order of God and Nature in our Primitive Constitution; causing Reason that
Spark of the Divinity, that at first designed Ruling Faculty of our Souls, to
Crouch and become Obeysant, and headstrong Lust and Passion to be Uppermost and
Domineer!

Ah how does impotent Wrath and Fury debase and vilify Humane Nature;
transforming a man into: Wolf or Bear, into a Lion or Tiger so that with some
show of Reason did the Pythagoreans Fancy a Transmigration of such wild and
savage Souls into the Bodies of as wild and savage Beasts; for how should they
be suitable inhabitants of more cal^^ and peaceable Receptacles?

And upon account of this Tumult and Disorder of Soul, which the Vice of
inordinate Anger and other Passions put us in, the Stolck-Philosopher advises
his Wise Man to a Total suppression and Eradication of all Passion; that hereby
he may live undisturbed and at Peace in his own Bosom: But the Good Christian
abstains from undue Anger upon higher Considerations; viz. for that it is
contrary to his known Duty, and to the Divine Precepts enjoining Meekness of
Spirit; for that it is Displeasing unto God, rendering of us unlike Him who is
Patient and Longsuffering; contrary to our Savior's Calm and Gentle Temper and
Behavior: for that also Anger indisposes a man for Communion with God in
Prayer and other holy Exercises, and makes his Soul an unquallifed Temple for
the Dove-like Spirit of Grace to keep his Residence therein.

For if the Divine Spirit of Prophecy under the Law, (a Law for the Hardness
of Jewish hearts, less strictly restraining Anger and a desire of Revenge)
rested not however on the head of a furious passionate person, at least not
till his Anger was over and dislodged; much less can we think that under the
state of the Gospel, a more meek and Loving Dispensation, the Celestial Spirit
of Meekness and Gentleness will inhabit a passionate malicious, or Revengeful
persons Soul: No, it is Meekness and Humility, it is Good Nature and Slowness to
Anger which consecrate ou^ Souls Sanctuaries to that God, whose Sovereign
Attribute is Clemency and Goodness; and our being in a lower Measure endued
with this, is that which makes us partakers of the Divine Nature, for God is
Love, says St. John:

And furthermore, that a viole^ passion of Anger, or any other inordinate
perturbation of Mind, are utterly inconsistent with the Quiet and peaceable
Spirit of God (which (...) it descended formerly on our Savior in the Shape of
a Dove, descends now only on Meek, Dovelike, Dispassionate persons) the sacred
Scriptures do plainly and abundantly testify; for when the Prophet Elijah was
upon the Mountain Horeb, there came a Great Strong Wind, but the Lord was not
in the Wind; and after the Wind an Earthquake, but the Lord was not in the
Earthquake; and after the Earthquake a Fire, but the Lord was not in the Fire:
Last of all came a Still Small Voice, an Emblem of Meekness, a Cessation of all
former boisterous Commotions, and then was it that the God of Peace, Unity, and
Concord was more immediately present, 1 Kings 19. 11, 12.

A Calm, Joyous, Unmolested temper of mind is a lively Representation of the
Celestial state of Blessedness, a fit Preparatory for it, and which makes an
Heaven upon Earth to the man who possesses it; but a furious Angry Disposition
is all its Contraries.

It Is an Argument of a weak pusillanimous Spirit which can bear nothing to be
in a passion upon every provocation; a sign that the mind is Galled and fretted
within; that the Owner thereof has no Command or Governance over himself, but
is rather at the Disposal of others, who can discompose him when they please:
But a truly Great and Noble Spirit is Superior to many Lesser Affronts, and
not immoderately provoakt by any Greater ones; he is like the Sublimer Regions
of the Air, all Calm and Serene, Quiet and Sedate, while the Lower Orbs, Angry
passionate Persons, are full of Storms and Tempests of Rage and Resentment in
their bosoms.

Intemperate Anger it is the high Feavour of the Soul, the foul Deformity of the
Mind, a Shame and Reproach to our Understandings; That which unfits us for
Humane Society, makes us suitable companions only for Wild BeasTs, unfits us
both for the business of our Civil Employments and also for the Several Duties
of Religion: That which Roils and fires our blood, corrodes and preyes upon our
Hearts, puts into a violent tumult and irregular hurry our Animal Spirits; and
hereby impairs our Health, wastes our Strength, and breaks the firmness of our
Constitution.

Passion, it is a Disorder of Soul which Ruffles the Smoothness, and disturbs
the calm Tranquillity of our Lives; renders us pityed by Friends, laughed at by
Strangers, hated and Reviled by Enemies; the Condolement of the former, the
Merriment and Scorn of the latter.

Impetuous Anger, Oh how Ill-natured a thing it is! How Envyous (as it were) of
Mankinds Happyness! For how unquiet does it render a Person to himself, how
uneasy and unacceptable to others! What Mischiefs does it hurry Men into the
Commission of, which afterward occasion their Sorrowful Repentance? What
foolish Speeches, and unseemly Ridiculous Actions does it draw from those
possessed by it? And no wonder, for it is the Drunkenness, the Intemperance of the
Mind; and as we say of a Drunkard, when the Wine is it with him, the Wit is
out; so may (...) be said of one Drunk with Passion when That is predominant,
then (...) his Understanding suppressed in (...) operations.

How severely was undue passion Reproved by our Lord in his Disciples, who were
for calling down (...) from Heaven on the inhospitable Samaritans! The Son of
Man (says he) is not come to destroy men's lives, (...) to Save them: That is,
the Gospe^ Occonomie which you are under, (...) a Gospel of Peace and
Reconciliation, not a Law allowing Revenge and Retaliation.

Impatient Rage and fierceness! How contrary is it to that God who is Slow to
Anger, who waits to be Gracious; who terms in holy Writ Judgment or Vengeance
his Strange work: As if through Desuetude and unfrequency of Executing it, he
was grown unacquainted therewith! How opposite also, is ungovernable fury to
the Meek and Lowly, the Calm and Dispassionate Example of the Ever-blessed
Jesus! who was oppressed, who was afflicted, yet he opened not his Mouth, Isa.
53. 7. who when he was Reviled, Reviled not again; when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed himself to him that Judges Righteously, 1 Pet. 2.
23. Where was Anger, where was the least Tendency toward it in all our
Saviors Carriage from the time of his Apprehension to that of his cruel Death
and Crucifixtion, though Mocked and Scourged, and in the highest Degree Tempted
to a Discomposure? And shall not we who profess our selves his Disciples, Copy
after his Pattern? Transcribe it in as large a measure as may be into our
Hearts and Lives?

Let us not in Cowardice and Lazyness cry out it is impracticable to suppress
passion, whenas many Old Testament Worthies have done it and Gained themselves
Immortal Renown thereby; whenas we have above all others such an eminent
Instance of suppressing it in our blessed Redeemer; when we have such mighty
Aids and Assistances of Gods Spirit under the Gospel, whereby to suppress it;
when many Heathe^^ who have had no such Illustrious Pattern, no such powerful
Assistance as we, have however been famous for this Command over themselves it
subduing their passions; of all Victories the Greatest and most Noble And shall
not what was praiseworthy and commendable in them, be come a Virtue in us
Christians of much higher Nature? We practicing it according to more perfect
Rules agreeably to a more Transcendent Example, and in an higher measure than
either Jew or Gentile; even to the suppression of the first motions toward
undue Resentment.

Ah what a foolish vice is Excessive Anger, which creates a man trouble in his
mind to no purpose; for what is past and Gone, and therefore cannot be Recalled
or Remedyed; which makes him loose the Enjoyment of what he yet possesses; out
of fretful Discontent concerning what he has Lost: Which turns also another
Man's Sin, his unjust provocation of me, into my own most severe and smarting
punishment; while I fret and fum^, and thereby Gratify my Adversary, in making
his reproach or injury done me, work beyond his Agency, and in mine own hands
and keeping: This (let me consider) was what he Designed it for, to Disturb my
Quiet and Repose, and therefore fool that I am to suffer my provoker to have
his Intent herein; fool that I am, to Set such an high value on my self or any
thing I enjoy, as to violate the Enjoyment of my own peace and Satisfaction,
through Resentments at my Reviler, or through Loss and prejudice of whatever I
had: No, rather let me possess my Soul in patience, Silencing my Discontents
with this Consideration, that an Allwise and Infinitely Good Providence ordered
or permitted things to be thus toward me; and that it is for the Trial, for the
Improvement of my Graces of Meekness, Humility, Christian Patience, and
Charity, that I am in this manner exercised with provocations.

But alas, alas, how utterly inexcusable is indulged fomented passion, though
a Complectional Vice, though our lyableness unto it is owing to Temper and
Constitution of Body; for though it is more Difficultly tameable upon this
account, yet sure not impossible to be tamed by the Aids of Reason, of
Religion, and of Grace: So that I fear those Persons do not Strive against it
as for the Mastery, who habitually fall into Anger, and on whom it Returns
frequently with as much violence as ever: They use not I am apt to suspect the
Means of Conquering, and therefore is it they attain not the End, a Conquest;
They use not Prayer, Meditation, and Fasting, powerful instruments by which
this kind of Evil Spirit, the Angry Devil, Goes out of a Man; but without
Rending and Tearing of him as a violent passion does: Or if they use the means
of Ejection mentioned, they neglect others greatly Assistant; such as fixed
purposes and Resolutions against this furious Vice for the future, flight of
all Occasions and provoking Excitements thereof, a Stifling of the first
Springing Motions of it within our Breasts: Thus would easily-provok't Persons
fight Thus would they Contend, they should be assured of a Victory over their
passions, and become more than Conquerors through Christ who would Strengthen
them.

The Prayer.
O THOU God of infinite Goodness and Clemency, Strong to Avenge thy offended
Majesty on Sinners, and yet Slow to Anger, Patient and Longsuffering, in the
midst of thy wrath thinking on Mercy; we beseech thee to produce in us an
Imitation of thy Slowness to Anger, of thy Patience and forbearance; for how
can we expect to obtain Mercy from Thee, if we Exercise it not first toward
our offending Brethren? O Rebuke in us then the evil Spirit of Rage and fury,
Dispossess and Change it into a Spirit of Mildness; Still the Storms, becalm
the boisterousness of our passions, which otherwise like a troubled Sea will
never suffer us to be at Rest.

Convince us, O Lord, that Immoderate Anger is the Impotency of Reason and
Understanding, the wild breaking Loose of headstrong lust and passion; that
it is a short kind of Madness, an Effect of Pride and Haughtiness, the Discovery
of a weak, impatient, and Effeminate Mind, which can bear very Little: And by
force of these Considerations in Conjunction with thy Grace, cause us to cease
from Anger, to let go wrath, and have a care we fret not our selves in any wise
to do evil.

Convince blessed God, the furious, that by studying Revenge, they Resemble
their Father the Devil; the most Malicious of Beings; that they act quite
Contrary to thy Mercyful and Gentle Nature, who take not Advantage against
sinners, punishing them according to their provocations; but much beneath their
sinful Demerits: Convince Passionate Persons that they are their own Greatest
Tormentors, while they possess not their Souls in Patience, but turn other men's
sins and offenses, into their own both Sins and Punishments.

O that we may therefore walk as the Ever-blessed Jesus did, in abundance of
Love, Meekness, and Patience, and so find Rest unto our Souls; O that we may
put off all Anger, Wrath, Malice, Strife, and every turbulent uneasy passion,
and may put on bowels of Mercy, Kindness, Humbleness of mind, Longsuffering;
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another: If any of us have a Quarrel
against any, even as Christ forgave us, Grant that we may do so likewise.

O Give us Grace to Quench the first Sparks of an Angry Resentment, before they
kindle into a flame; not to suffer our whole Anger to arise, but to suppress
the smallest Beginnings of it, before it Settles on our minds, and grows to a
greater height.

Convince us, holy Father, that we give place to the Devil, when ever we
indulge a furious Passion; that the wrath of man, works not the Righteousness
of thee our God: O thou therefore who Rulest the Raging of the Sea-Still the
madness of our Passions; O thou who command the Winds and the Waves, and
they obey thee, allay the Storms of our enraged Displeasure.

Grant O Gracious Lord, that we may so watch over the least Tendencies to
immoderate Anger, that the Sun may not at any time Go down upon our wrath; that
it may not ranckle into Hatred and a desire of a Revenge, but that it may be as
Soon Dismists, as Excited; Turn we beseech Thee our natural passion of vicious
fury, into the Channel of an holy Zeal for Revenge upon our L^^sts and Vices;
let us be excessively Angry at our selves instead of being Displeased with
others for our weak estate in Grace, and for our abounding Strength in
wickedness: O make us ward to Give an Offense, and as forward to Forgive one
offered us; may a Spirit of Meekness and Gentleness Rest upon us; let the Peace
of God so Rule in our Hearts, that we may Love and show Kindness to our most
implacable Enemies: Cause us to Forgive, as we Desire and Look to be forgiven;
make us Calm and Dispassionate, that thy Dovelike Spirit of Truth and Holiness
may visit us with an Olive Branch of Peace: And then Tranquillity and quiet
Sedateness of mind having been the General temper of our Souls on Earth, we
shall at Death be Removed as Quietly out of our Bodies into Celestial Regions,
where there is nothing but Eternal Calm, (...) the least Disturbance or
Dis(...) of Spirit.

Amen, Amen.
Meditation IX. Against the Sin of Murmuring and Impatience amidst Divine
Chastisements.
IMpatience under Affliction is our punishment as well as Sin; it frets and
corrodes the Mind, and thereby doubles upon us our sufferings; adding to that
of the Body, that of the Spirit also: and most Just and Agreeable is it, that
those who refuse submission to God's Government, should be punished by their
own perverseness.

Ah how foolish a Vice is Discontent with God's Dispensations of Providence
toward us; it can in no wise make our Condition better, but will certainly
render it much worse, both on a Natural account, and likewise by Divine most
just Ordination: For wriggling our Necks under the Yoke of Distress, is the
ready way to make it sit more heavy and Galling; and Repining Discontent at the
Chastisements of Heaven, is so far from Relieving us of them, that they provoke
God both to continue and Aggravate them upon us.

Alas Man, how know Thou but thy Affliction is Designed to thee in Mercy?
but that it is the Greatest Blessing can be bestowed upon thee? by keeping off
the Greatest Plague, Spiritual Sickness, Death, and Destruction! And can thou
think it Reasonable to Repine at thy Soul's Cure or preservative in health?
Can thou think it suitable to murmur at what may be thy highest instance of
Happiness, thy Greatest Matter of Rejoicing?

God sees thou can not be happy Eternally, and free from Temporal Affliction;
and had thou rather (imprudent Creature!) enjoy thy Good things here with
Dives, than Rest with Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom? God foresees that his
Blessings of Earthly prosperity would be Real Curses unto thee, by proving
Dis-advantages to thy Soul; and therefore is it, he in Compassion withholds
them.

Thus he denies thee Temporal Riches, that thou may be Rich toward God;
Rich in Faith and Good Works: He withholds from thee plenty of provision and
fullness of Bread, lest giving it thee, he might send Leanness withal into thy
Soul; lest being full thou might Deny him, and say who is the Lord? He finds
poverty of Spirit, most consistent with thy poverty of Fortune; he finds thy
Dependence upon him the more firmly Established, by dispensing to thee Day by
Day his Fatherly Allowance. Does he deny thee Health of Body and soundness of
Constitution? Why he does it it is likely to a very Good purpose; that thy Soul
may be the more healthy and Thriving in the Graces of his Spirit: in Humility,
in Patience, in Contempt of the World, in Resignation to the Disposals of his
All-wise and Just, and Gracious Providence.

A person who does not consider it is in order to his future ease and welfare,
will be apt to account his Surgeons painful Launcing and laying open the
Ill-affected part in his Body, a cruel unkindness unto him; but he who is
mindful that all the Smart and Anguish he is put to is only in order to his
subsuent Ease, and for Recovery of the unsound part to its accustomed
Constitution; This Man will be ready to Kiss the hand that probes and cuts him,
and will Thank his healer for dealing faithfully with him, though never so
severely.

Yet ah the perverseness which is in most of us! who wound our selves by
sinning, and then complain of the sharp Instruments made use of for our Cure;
who make our Souls Distempered with Iniquity, and then cry out against the
bitter potion prescribed us by God for our Recovery! Who provoke him by
Dis-obedience, and yet murmur under his Corrections for the same! But is this
equal Carriage, and Just dealing? Is it not the most unreasonable? Ought it not
on the contrary to be said unto God, I have born Chastisement, I will not
offend any more; that which I see not, teach thou me; and lead me into the way
Everlasting, though through Briars and Thorns, though through many Tribulations.

Alas that which heightens our Discontent with our present Circumstances, is
our too intent poring on the worst side of our Condition; a pondering chiefly
our Wants, our Sufferings, and Distresses; whereas did we but compare our Wants
with our Possessions, our Calamities with our Enjoyments, we should soon find
the former if not out weighed with the latter, yet certainly much Alleviated by
them: No man in my opinion is so miserable, but he may meet with some cause or
other of Comfort, and consequently of Thankfulness that it is not worse with
him; Thus, did we but look Downward as well as Upwards amidst our Afflictions,
I mean, did we but contemplate what those in a worse condition than we, want
and suffer; as well as what those in a better, possess and enjoy; we should if
not Extremely afflicted, find occasion to turn our murmurings into Rejoycings,
our Discontents into most peaceful Satisfactions.

Fot what though Thou art in Need of several things which others enjoy? Do but
consider how many persons, perhaps better than thy self, are in Need of much
more, of absolute Necessaries; and then silence thy Repineings. What though
thou suffer under great pain and affliction? Ah do but meditate what more
acute dolours and Distresses others feel, which Thou art freed from; and then
see if thou have not more reason to praise God for his Goodness, than to fret
against him for his Disciplining Providence?

Impatience is a most provoking sin, and therefore a very unlikely Remedy of
our Sufferings; it imports a Quarrelling with God for his Allotments toward
us; and consequently a Rebellious Disowning his Sovereignty and Right of
Dominion over us: and is this sort of behavior under Calamities a likely way
to Remove or render them Loss burden some? Is it not rather an Addi^^ sin to
sin, Divine wrath to wrath, an^ punishment to punishment?

Ah why should we be impatien^ why Discontented under God's Chastisements,
whenas the Deity is the Author of the Good we enjoy, (...) well as of the evil
we suffer; an^^ shall we receive Good at the hand God, and shall we not also
receiv^ Evil? especially considering that o^ Mercies far surpass our Miseries,
(...) Receipts our Deprivations; nay our severest Distresses may be, and
usually are sent in greatest kindness unto us: And let them be never (...)
Grievous and distressive, yet (...) they far Less than our Deservings who have
merited Death Tempor^^ and Eternal: And therefore if Go^^ commutes Everlasting
Punishment the due Wages of Sin, for Temporary Afflictions, we have no reason
to murmur at such his kind and moderated Corrections, but to be Grateful under
them, that they are not Larger and more Grievous ones, viz. Remedyless and
never-Ceasing Torments!

And then Reckoning with our selves, That the Sufferings of this life are not
worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be Revealed in us, and which
these our sufferings if Sanctified, make us Meet-partakers of; How can we
Repine? How shall we not rather Rejoice and Glory under Tribulation? as knowing
that Tribulation works Patience, and Patience Experience, and Experience Hope
toward God, and Hope toward him well-Grounded, makes not Ashamed. And can we
look up to yonder Heaven, and Shrink under Calamities? Can we behold by an Eye
of Faith the Glories Above, and think much of Afflictions which Prepare us for
them?

An infinitely Knowing God assuredly knows what is best for us; infnitely Good
God assuredly Consul^^ most our Good and Interest; and (...) infinitely Just
God cannot do us (...) Harm, never acts Unrighteously toward us; and
therefore why should we not entrust our selves and (...) whole affairs in his
hands, and (...) ways reckon that Best which he O^^dains us? Not only quietly
Submiting unto, but also making God Choice for us our Own; cheerfully
Accompanying his Divine Guidance, rather than being forcibly Led by it.

Meekness and Submission to Providence ought to be our practice whenas whether
we will or no it must be so; and therefore when we must bear what God lays on
us, why should we not make a Virtue of Necessity, and bear Affliction
Contentedly? Especially considering that Divine Chastisements are God's
Purgatory-flames (and none other are to be expected;) whereby he melts down our
Pride and Haughtiness, our Trust and Confidence in Creature Comforts; whereby
he Brightens and Illustrates our Graces, and causes us to come out of the fiery
furnace of Distress more Purified and Refined from our sinful Dross and
Corruption.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Lord, infinite in Mercy, abundant in Goodness and Truth; who do
not afflict willingly, nor Grieve the Children of Men, not out of thy mere
arbitrary pleasure, but for their Good, that they may become partakers of thy
holiness; we accept, O God, with all Thankfulness thy fatherly Corrections, we
desire unfeignedly to humble our selves under thy mighty chastising hand, that
thou may Fxalt us in thy due season: Try us even as Silver is Tried, seven
times in the fire, so thou us to come out of the furnace of affliction more
Purified and Refined.

We have sinned O Lord, we have done exceeding wickedly; and therefore should
thou deal with us after our sins, and Reward us according to our iniquities,
these they correcting Rod^ might justly be turned into devouring Scorpions,
these thy Stripes of a Father into the destroying Execution of a Judge
Sentence; yet O God most holy, O Lord most Mighty, O holy and most merciful
Savior, in the midst of Judgment be thou pleased to Remember Mercy; and in the
midst of punishment cause us to remember Turning unto Thee by sincere
Repentance: O suffer us not in our bitterest Distress for any pains to fall
from Thee; suffer us not to cast away our hope, and make Shipwrakc of our
faith, but give us to wait with patient perseverance in well-doing, for:
Deliverance.

We heseech thy Divine Majesty to keep us from murmuring at thy afflictive
Providence, nay even from expressing the least Dislike and Dissatisfaction
under them; for why should we complain of the kind offici^^s hand which cuts
and launceth our Spiritual Sores, in order to let out their corruption, in
order to heal and cure them? Why should we complain of Bodily evil, seeing it is
for a Greater Good that we suffer it, for the health and welfare of our Souls?

O cause us to Justify thee our God in thy severest process of Justice against
us, acknoweldging thee Righteous in all thy Works, Just and True in all thy
ways; and steadfastly believing that in very Faithfulness thou have caused us to
be troubled: Nay, even to Bless and Praise thy holy Name amidst the greatest
(...), that thou do so far condescend to take Notice of us worthless
Creatures, as to punish us with thine own hand, and chasten us with
afflictions, that we should not be condemned with the sinfu^^ World!

O how know we, but we are more indebted to thee for thy Corrections, than for
thy more Apparent favors and Benefits; and shall we then murmur and be
impatient under them? God forbid.

Convince us rather, Good Lord, that whom thou Love thou Chastenest, and
Correctest every Son whom tho^ Receivest; that if we are without Chastisements,
then are we bastards and not Sons; Convince us that 'twas through many
Tribulations that the Glorious Company of the Apostles, that the Noble Army of
Martyrs made their Entran^^ into the Kingdom of Heaven; that it was through
such violences that they took it as it were by force: Remind us that 'twas
through Sufferings that our blessed Savior was made perfect; that He himself
went not up to Joy, efore he first suffered Pain; that He entered not into
Glory, before he was Crucified: O make us in Conformity to him the Captain of
our Salvation, patiently to charge thorough all Adversities, Losses, and
Disappointments till we arrive at the mark for the prize of our high calling in
Christ.

Give us holy Father to lie Prostrate at thy feet whenever thou contendest with
us; let us Repent to the Amendment of our evil ways, and not Repine at those
smarting Sufferings which tend to Rebuke our foolish forsaking Thee the Author
of our Blessedness; let us be dumb with a silent Reverence whenever thy heavy
hand of Chastisement is upon us: O cause us then in all lowliness and Humility
to submit to thyProvidence; to make diligent Search after the Accursed thing
for which thou art Displeased with us; to Kiss thy Rod of Correction, and Learn
that Reforming Lesson which it dictates; lest otherwise it Breaks us in pieces,
and there be none to Deliver us.

O Suppress in us all Repining thoughts, and make us drink cheerfully the cup
of Affliction, how bitter soever it is; we shall have reason to Thank thee, O
Lord, for it, if it proves Medicinal to our Souls; O make it such we entreat
thee: Let this be the use of Temporal Calamities, their weaning our Affections
from the Vanities below their Raising and Settling our desires on the infinitely
more valuable things Above, their rendering us Meek, Humble, Contented,
Resigned; that so our Faith, Hope, and Patience may be found in the Day of our
Lord, Laudable, Glorious, and Honorable; and that being Afflicted for a
season, we may be endlesly comforted. Amen, Blessed Savior.

Amen.
Meditation X. On Love to God.
IT IS our Duty, and it is our Interest and Privilege; our Duty, we being
commanded to Love him with all our hearts, souls, and strengths; and our
Interest, for what greater Love to our selves than to Love the fountain of all
Loveliness? than to Love him, in whom are comprised all those Excellencies in
infinite Degrees, which Scatteringly and imperfectly reside in the Creatures,
and yet render them Amiable and Admired!

Nothing is more Reasonable also than to Love God, a being so transcendently
Good in himself, so Gracious and Loving unto us; for to Him we owe all the
powers of our Bodies, all the noble faculties of our Souls; all that we Are,
all that we have comes Entirely from him; we should be very ungrateful persons
should we Love any thing so well as him, much more, should we Love any thing
Above him; for he has not only created us, does not only preserve, and provide
for us Comforts as well as Necessaries; but he has also dearly Redeemed us
from everlasting Destruction, not with corruptible things, such as Silver and
Gold, but with no Less a Ransom than the precious Bloodshed of his Dear Son,
God Coequal with the Father: He has likewise Sanctified us with the
Regeneration of his blessed Spirit.

Thus has God not only provided us all the Coveniences of this life, but also
all things appertaining to a Better; has given us Spiritual Blessings as well
as Corporal; means of Grace, and hopes of Glory: So that He has laid on us the
Strongest obligations to Love him, and if any thing else in the whole Creation
is Lovely, much more Eminently so is the Divine Majesty, who is owner of all
his Creatures Lovelyness, and of Infinite more!

If Beauty is an object of Love, behold God the most beautiful Being, in whom
dwells perfection of Comelyness! If Riches are attractives of Esteem and
Valuation, behold the Deity the Treasury of all Wealth, and of whatever is
valuable! If pleasure is a thing Lovely and desirable, behold in God's presence
Fullness of Joy, and at his Right hand pleasures for Evermore!

Sure I must hate my self, if I Love not God; for therein consists my Welfare
and Happyness! Shall I love other things, and not Him from whom they Borrowed
their Lovelyness? Shall I Love the Stream, and not the Fountain of blessedness?
What Joy do I deprive my self of, if I Love not God? If I hate not all other
things in comparison of him? He that Loves Father or Mother, says our Blessed
Savior, more than me, is not worthy of me; and he that Loves Son or Daughter,
the most Near and Dear things, more than me; is not worthy of me. O who know
the Enravishing Delights but those who have experienced them, of Loving the
Deity, and being beloved by him! of holding such Sweet Communion with the God
of all Consolation! It is a very Great Favor and Condescension that the
Majesty of Heaven and Earth will Admit of our imperfect Love, will Graciously
Accept it; for it is imperfect, though never so Sincere; it is finite Love,
though never so Seraphical.

What an inconceivable Honor is it to be vouchsafed the Loving our Creator!
It Is certain we can have no better Object; no one so Good; the benefit of
Loving God redounds wholly to our selves, not at all to him: However I will
Love the Lord, not so much for my own Ends, as because he has Commanded my
Love; as because he is a supereminently Amiable Being, infinitely Deserving my
Love; as because it is a Debt due from me a Dependant Creature, to my Maker and
the Author of all my Enjoyments. I will Delight in Loving and Obeying him as
long as I live, and I by his Grace will Evidence the Truth of my Love, by
paying an Universal Respect unto all his Commandments. Amen, Amen.

The Prayer.
O Thou Supreme Excellency, whom to know is Life Eternal, whom to Love is
Heaven upon Earth; Thou Being infinitely Lovely in thine own Nature, Exceeding
kind and Loving unto us; manifest thy self more and more unto us, that we may
Love Thee more and more; and that Loving Thee with increase, we may Enjoy Thee
in a much Larger measure: Wean we pray Thee our affections from the Creature,
which can make no Suitable Return to our Love, which cannot Satisfy the
Longing of our Souls, and win them unto Thee, who by thy Mercies preventest our
Love, by thy Mercies do nourish and improve it, can fully Gratify the Good
desires of our hearts, and will it amply Recompense and Reward them!

O Thou Joy of Angels, and Sovereign Happynes of all thy Saints, Oh that our
Souls cold Love Thee without Limits, as Thou art without Limits Lovely and
Amiable! Oh that we may Love Thee for thy Essential Goodness in Thy self, as
much as for thy Derived imparted Goodness unto us! Let our thoughts, let our
desires and affections zealously Embrace Thee, and may we be embraced with a
peculiar love and favor by Thee; may still new Degrees of thy Love, widen and
enlarge our Capacities of Receiving them, and as they Enlarge, do Thou flow in
with an increase of Divine Communications.

Convince us O Lord, that those Excellencies which are Borrowed, which are
Imperfect, which are variously Dispersed in the Creation, are all concentered
in Thee the Original in infinite Beauty and Perfection; and shall we not Love
Thee the Spring head of Blessedness more than the Derived Streams, than the
lesser Rivulets of felicity? O persuade us that we are unkind to our selves if
we Love not Thee the Author, the Treasury of our Happyness, Temporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal.

Alas we find our hearts Cold, Dead, and Sluggish in thy Service, Lord
Quicken, Lord inflame them; Inflame them with thy Divine Love, Quicken them in
thy Righteousness: They have gone Astray, they have wandered after many other
Lovers, after the pleasures, profits, and honors of this world which have
miserably Deceived them; O fix them upon Thee, who wilt everlastingly Love
them, Everlastingly Conti^^ Lovely, and never Disappoint them: Make holy God,
our Love of Thee, an Uniting, an Assimilating Love, that We may Love what Thou
Love, and hate what Thou hate; that we may do whatever will please Thee,
forbear whatever will offend Thee; conforming our selves to thine Image in
Holiness: O that our Affections could Ever continue such toward Thee as they
are at present! O that we may demonstrate the Truth of our Love to Thee, by our
obeying with all Willingness, Zeal, and Cheerfulness thy Divine precepts; by
obeying them Universally, Sincerely, and Constantly to our lives End.

Then only O Heavenly Father, can we have Confidence toward Thee, shall we be
Assured we Love Thee aright, when we Love Thee for thine Own self; when we Love
Thee Soveraignly and Supreamly; when our Love is so Exalted, as that we may be
said to hate and Despise all other things in Comparison of Thee: O give us thus
Zealously to be affected toward Thee; Grant that the Love of thy Self may
Crucify in us the Undue Love of our selves, the inordinate Love of the World,
or of any our Dearest Relations; and that being Empty of our selves, and of all
Confidence in the Creature, we may be wholely taken up with Admiration, Love,
and Delight in Thine infinite Perfections; and in the Astonishing Expressions
of thy Goodness and Loving Kindness to the Lost Sons of Adam: O may thy Love
Conquer and Overpower our hearts, Melt them into Gratitude and Obedience; may
it Disingage their Affections from every Narrow and particular Good, and Setile
them upon Thee the Universal One; Causing us to Love Thee Above all things;
every created blessing as it bears the impressions of thy Wisdom, Beauty and
Power; and all mankind for Thy sake, and in Obedience to thy Commands: Preserve
(...) us, Good Lord, such Devout flames of a Godly Affection; and let us be our
Beloved's, and Thou our Beloved ours to all Eternity.

Amen, Amen.
Meditation XI. On Zeal in the Service of God.
HOW natural a Consequent is this of the Love of God? Zeal to please him, Zeal
to Resemble him, Zeal to promote his Honor and Glory! Where, if not here, is
Zeal Becoming? Where else can it be so Suitably placed? Nay, our Divine
Services how can they well be Acceptable without it? For where there is
Sincerity of Intention in doing our Duty, (without which no Duty can be
pleasing to Heaven) we can scarce conceive Fervency of Spirit to be wanting;
unless through weakness and indisposition of Body: And for the Service of God,
(the most Glorious and Excellent of Beings) to be a cold and Languid Worship,
how Great an Absurdity, how Great an Inconsistency is this? Certainly the
Service of the Temple, the Sacrifice of the Altar, requires the flame and Fire
of the Altar to render it of a sweet smelling Savor. To perform Duty to God
with formality and indifferency of Spirit, is neither to consider the Nature of
the Work we are about, the Greatness and Excellency of the Divine Majesty, nor
yet what Earnestness and Zeal the Care of our own Salvation exacts from us.

The Love of God demands our whole heart, Soul and Strength; and consequently
the keeping his Commandments, the Genuine Evidence of our Love, demands the
utmost Exercise of our Powers and Faculties both bodily and Spiritual: That is
not a Service of God which is carelessly discharged, but rather an Affront,
rather a Contempt of him; It Is a doing somewhat in Religion to Still and Quiet
the uneasy Reproofs of our own Consciences, but not doing any thing with a
design of pleasing God, out of Obedience and Love to his Commandments, or from
a desire of becoming Like unto him in Holiness: which Regards alone can
consecrate and render acceptable our Services.

Zeal where is it due, if not in the Divine Worship? Than which nothing is of
greater Importance, nothing of greater Worth, nothing more for our Interest and
Advantage! Where the safety of our Immortal Souls, our Heaven and Eternal
Happiness are concerned, there certainly no warmth of Heart, no Diligence of
endeavor can be too much.

Ah did we but consider God's Zeal, the sounding of his Bowels, and tenderness
of his Compassion toward us; we could not sure want Zeal and Ardency of
Affection toward him!

The holy Angels above who best understand the Value of God's Service, who know
best how Exalted a pitch of Love and Duty an infinitely Good and Gracious
Divine Majesty merits at our hands, what a Pattern do They set us of Industry,
Zeal, and joyful Alacrity in Religious worship! And how does their intense and
flaming Affection in God's Service, Shame and Reprove our doing the work of the
Lord negligently? Can we serve either a Greater Master, or a Better? One who
Deserves better our Services, or who is more willing and Able to Reward them
plenteously?

Do we pray thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, with a like
Universality, Constancy, Fervor and Cheerfulness of holy Duty, and yet do we
contradict this our Petition, by a partial, formal, and undelightful Obedience?
Have we that pious Reverence amidst our Devotions, which is answerable to the
Great and Glorious Presence of God, with whom in Prayer we have to do? Have we
that importunity and Earnestness of Supplication, that warmth and Zeal of
Devout Address, which is any way suitable to those pressing Indigencies we have
to be supplied? To those burdensome miseries we have to be delivered from? Or
does not coldness and indifferency of affection, wandering and distraction of
thoughts, Dullness and weariness of mind mix with and deprave our Divine
Worship? Ah how Little fervor of Spirit have we in serving the Lord! how
Little of the true Spirit of Prayer, in our praying unto him!

Do not Gods Sabbaths, his Religious Ordinances seem Tiresome unto us? A very
Toil and Burden does not his Easy Yoke of precept sit Heavy on our Necks? And
(...) Commandments appear Grievous by reason of our want of Approbation, Love
and Affection toward them? which would breed pleasure and Delight in their
performance Ah it is for that we are Ignoran^ how God's Service is perfect
freedom and hat a Slavery there is in serving diverse Lusts and Passions, which
makes us so Dead and Listless in his service; when otherwise we should be all
Spirit and Life whilst Employed in pious Exercises!

Ah had we more Love for God, it would render us more Active, more Warm and
spirightly in his Worship: it would put us upon doing our utmost to please him;
and we should not Endure coldness and flagging of affection in our religious
Addresses: But Lukewarmness of Devotion would appear to us ^igh as distasteful
as perfect Deadness in Duty; and we should never think that flat Lifeless
Service Acceptable to God, which we could not Approve of to our selves.

The Prayer.
BLessed and Glorious Lord God, who infinitely Deservest our most warm and
Zealous Services, who make thy Angels Spirits, and those thy Ministers a
flame of fire; flames indeed of Devotion, of Divine Love and Gratitude, of
Delight and fervor in holy Obedience, O make us also all flame and Spirit in
thy Worship; that we may worship thee with Zeal and Ardour of Affection, as
well as with Sincerity and uprightness of heart.

Produce in us holy, Father, a Zealous importunity in prayer Suitable to (...)
wants we have to be Supplied, suitable to the Dangers and Evils we have to
(...) delivered from, suitable to the wor^^ the Necessity, the Importance of
th^^ Divine blessings, Temporal Spiritual and Eternal which we stand in Nee^
of, and which are only to be derived from thee the fountain of all Blessedness.

O cause us to Evidence our high Value and Esteem of thy Heavenly favors, of
the Gifts and Graces of thy Holy Spirit, by our Zealous Concernment for the
obtaining them; by our coveting Earnestly those best Gifts, and Seeking (...)
such things which are more Excellent.

Give us, Give us, Good Lord, more Love to thee our God, that we may have a
greater Zeal for thy Honor and Glory, that we may boldly Rebuke vice.
Earnestly promote Holiness; be Grieved principally for sin, because thy blessed
Spirit is Grieved thereby: may our hearts burn within us with pious Love,
Reverence and Delight, when we Read and meditate on thy Sacred Word; when we
Pray, when we return Thanksgivings, or are any ways Employed in Religious
Duties; let our hearts be sad, when our Affections are cold and languid in thy
Service.

O Endue us with the burning Love, with the flame and Zeal of holy Cherubims,
that we may Experience also their Transports of Delight, their Ecstasies of Joy
and Satisfaction in thy Worship! make us we beseech thee thus Exceeding Jealous
for Thee the Lord God of Hosts; may the Zeal of thine House well nigh Consume
us; may we account it our very Meat and Drink to be doing thy Will; and let
nothing flat and lifeless mingle it self with our piety and Devotion.

Does Gracious God, our Eternal Salvation depend upon our aright worshipping
thee, and do we worship th^^ with a faint and heartless Service? A^^ cure the
Deadness and formality of thy Servants best Religious performances cure the
indifferency and Earthlyness (...) our Affections: Make s rather tobe on the
wing of Devotion, to be always Zealously affected in a Good matter, (...) be
fervent in Spirit, Serving the Lord that so we may Anticipate much of (...)
Heavenly State and Temper, which shall be completed hereafter; that our lives
at present may be full of inward peace and comfort, our Deaths of Joy and
Consolidation in believing, and our Eternity full of Glory and Celestial
Happyness. Amen: for the sake of our dying Redeemer,

Amen.
Meditation XII. On Trust in God.
TRust and Relyance on God is our Duty and our Privilege; it is our Duty as we
were created frail, impotent, Necessitous Beings, and for that reason Confiding
Dependant ones; as also God our Sustainer is a Self-sufficient and All
sufficient Store of Happyness, whose infinite Perfections render him an object
of our Hope and Trust proportionable to our greatest Wants, of Ability to
Remove or Relieve our most extreme acutest Distresses. And what more Natural
and Reasonable than that we should there place our Confidence and Relyance,
where we have our Support and Dependence? But that we should there found our
Trust, where we cannot be Disappointed* But that a poor, helpless, distressed
Creature should seek abroad for Succor and Relief? And where should he Seek it
so Suitably and Effectually as in God-Almighty? the fountain o^ all Strength,
the inexhaustible Magazine of Relief, the protecting Sanctuary of the
distressed who fly unto him for Refuge: A God as Willing and Ready, as
Sufficient and Powerful to Relieve us!

And that this flying to God for Help and Succor, and reposing all his Trust
and Confidence in the Deity, is the Confiding person's Privilege and Advantage
as well as bounden-Duty is evident; for what can give that Man inward Quiet and
Tranquillity even in his best Condition, who is subject every moment to the
uncertainties and vicissitudes of Human Affairs, to all the Dangers, all the
Hazards, all the Actual Evils and Misfortunes of this mortal life, but a
Relying Assurance that nothing can befall him beside the wise Counsel, gracious
Will and Ordination of that God in whom he puts his Trust? Whose power is of
that extent as to furnish all our Needs, and Satisfy all our desires, as to
secure to us his favors and blessings, and to keep off from us, or else
Sanctify our troubles and afflictions: whose Omnipotence is directed by
infinite Wisdom to Know that is best for us, his Wisdom exercised in Contriving
and Ordering what is best for us, and both his Power and Wisdom vigorously moved
in their operations by infinite Love and Goodness to Do what is best for us: An
humble confidence in God makes us de^^e the worst of the Creature's
Threatenings, frees us from Carking troubles within our selves, preserves a
firm peaceful temper in the midst of Storms and Adversities; giving us an
unbroken Magnanimity of Spirit, a true Dominion of Mind over all outward things
and occurrences.

All our inordinate Care taken without Gods immediately Ordaining, or at least
permissive Providence, will be to no purpose; we cannot, as of our selves, add
on^ Cubit to either our Bodily or Spiritual Stature; we shall be Dwarfs i^
Grace as well as in Natural Growth without the Aids of God's Spirit: (...) we
cast all our Care upon the Deity, this will be an Engagement on him to take
Care of us; if we Trust in God, we need not fear any thing else, He will
mightily Defend or Support us.

All other Objects of Trust are Deceitful, because Vanishing, Empty,
Unsatisfying; either they are willing to help and want Ability; or they have
Ability and want willingness; or else they are Destitute of both, and so
deserve not any Trust to be reposed in them: Thus it is with all Foundations of
Reliance on the Creature; but now God is such an Adequate Object of our hope
and comfortable Expectation, that we may be sure in him to meet with no
Disappointment; for he is willing and Able, and earnestly desirous to supply
all our Wants, to Relieve all our Distresses; to pardon all our Sins, heal all
our Infirmities, Sanctify our depraved Nature: He never yet failed any one who
put his Confidence in him; his Truth, his Goodness, his Justice will not suffer
him to do it.

We shall ease our selves of much Anxiety and Tormenting Solicitude, if we
remove all immoderate Care from our own Breasts, and refer our Affairs more to
God's providential Management: We must Trust our selves with the Deity, and
into his hands commit our Spirits when we are Dying, why not Resign our selves
and our Concernments into his keeping now in our Lifetime? Whe^^ 'twill be
more Acceptable to do so^ because more voluntary; but the^ 'twill be at the
best in some measure constrained.

If we do not now in time of health and prosperity, as well as at the hour of
Death and Day of Judgment commend our Souls and ways to God's Custody as into
the hands of a faithful Creator and most Merciful Redeemer, we Ruin and undo
our selves; for if God keeps us not, the most vigilant Watchman waketh but in
vain; if left alone to our selves the Evil one the Devil will presently bear us
Company: and this one would think should be enough to make us fear being out of
the Divine Charge and Protection.

The Deity has the tender Affection of a Father toward us, and consequently the
Carefulness of a Father concerning us; It Is He alone can deliver us from all
Dangers, and cause that we dwell in perfect peace and safety: why then Stay we
not our Minds on him? Why deliver we not up our persons to his Tuition? Which
is as the munition of Rocks for strength and preservation!

O Lord I commit my self to Thee, I Trust thee with all I have and am; the
Trust is no more than what thou Gave me, be Thou the more careful of it,
because it came originally from Thee: Though Thou should Kill me, yet would
I Trust in Thee; as knowing that thou can bring Life out of Death, Light out
of Darkness. In the Lord have I put my Trust, O let me never be confounded.
Amen.

The Prayer.
O Thou who art the hope and confidence of all the Ends of the Earth, who never
failest them who put^ their Trust in Thee, make us ever t^ have Recourse to thy
Goodness; make (...) ever firmly to Rely and depend o^ Thee in our most
Grievous Difficulties and Distresses: Keep us, O Lord, in perfect peace both of
Body and Soul, whose Minds are stayed on Thee; O suffer us not to Trust in
Creature Comforts, broken Reeds which will deceive us, if we lean upon them:
But make us solely to con^ide in thee the everliving God, who give us all
things Richly to Enjoy. Grant that we may be inordinately careful for nothing,
but in every thing by Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving, may make^
knownour Requests unto Thee our God, the liberal Rewarder of all those who seek
Thee faithfully.

Permit us not, O Lord our safety, to cast away our Trust and Confidence in thy
Mercy, but cause us to Retain it as a sure Anchor of our Souls, firm and stable
unto the End; when all Temporal Blessings seem to fail us, when our Eyes are
even weary with looking for thy Salvation, yet never let our Faith fail, but
give us to comfort our selves in thy word; to look unto the Truth of thy
Promises, and to the Almightiness of thy Ability to perform them: and from
these supporting Considerations, O make us to Receive strength and Consolation.

In the multitude of the Sorrows and perplexities of our hearts, cause us to
cast all our Care upon thee, being assured that Thou carest for us; that Thou
watchest over us by thy Providence, consultest our welfare by thy Wisdom; and
wilt in thy due time effect it by thy Goodness and Power.

O Grant that we may commit the Keeping of our selves, our ways and
concernments unto Thee in well-doing, as into the hands of a faithful Creator,
Preserver, and Redeemer; as knowing in whom we have believed, and being
persuaded that thou art able to keep that which we have committed unto thee
against the Great Day of Redemption.

When our Souls are most cast down, when they are most Disquieted within us, O
give us still to Trust in Thee, who art the help of our Countenance, and our
God; let we beseech thee, that thought of our Relation unto, of our propriety
in Thee as Our God, silence all our Doubts, Root out all Distrust and
Despondency from our hearts, and cause us to adhere unto Thee with a full
Assurance of being either Rescued from our trouble, or else Graciously
sustained under it.

O make us cheerfully to Rely upon thee our God, in all our fears, in all our
wants, in all our Afflictions; seeking first the Kingdom of Heaven and its
Righteousness, and then not doubting but all other things truly needful either
for our Support or Deliverance shall be Added unto us.

Amen, Amen.
Meditation XIII. On the Fear of God.
IT IS our Duty, and it is our Advantage and happyness; fear the Lord all ye his
Saints, there is the Duty; for there is no want to them that fear him, there is
the Happyness, Psalm 30. 9.

We naturally fear any one we know will do us harm, or who has it in his power
to do it; and sure then we have just reason to fear God's Judgments for our
sins, who is able to do us more harm than all the world besides; for he has
power after he has killed to cast into Hell, to pursue us with his Vengeance
into another state; and he ever lives, as to Reward the Godly, so to punish
Everlastingly the impenitent Sinner: And therefore our Savior at the same time
that he reproves our folly of fearing man, forewarnes us whom we should fear,
God Almighty; and he Reinforceth this his Exhortation, with a yea I say unto
you, fear him.

And who would not fear thee O Lord God of hosts, and Reverence thy Name? For
thou only art Holy; Thou only art to be feared: With Thee is power and
Strength, with thee therefore ought to be Dominion and fear.

O who is so much an object of our fear as God? A mighty God, and Terrible!
infinite in Justice, Almighty in Power, Awful in Omniscience and Omnipresence!
And who if we will nor fear him at present, so as to avoid Sin, will one day
force us to fear him, when it shall be too Late to avoid Punishment.

Now this fear of God to which we are obliged, is not so much a fear of him
upon the account of his Exact Justice and Almighty power, as an Aweful Regard
to him mixed with Love, and a wariness of forfeiting his favor; It Is a fearing
him for his very Goodness; that is, not only lest we loose our Share in it, but
it is a letting his Essential Goodness in himself, and his Communicated Goodness
unto us, out of a principle of Ingenuity and Gratitude, be our Chief Motive and
Obligation to a Religious Caution, more than any regard had to the Divine
Punishments and Severities: It Is a fear of Loosing God's Love, more than of
feeling the fore Effects of his Displeasure.

And has this fear of the Lord possession of our Souls? Do we fear him with a
filial Reverential fear? More lest we loose our Interest in his Love and
fatherly Affection, than for dread of incurring the severities of his Justice,
as our Judge and Punisher? Does our Consideration of his manifold benefits
conferred upon us, write in our hearts such an ingenuous Law of Thankfulness,
as that we fear him more out of a sense of Gratitude for what we have Received
of his Divine blessings, than for sear of forfeiting those which are yet in
Reversion?

Ah it is this fear of Reverence, this fear of Displeasing the Deity, this Holy
Caution and Waryness, lest we err from his Commandments, which is the true
Godly-fear, the most Acceptable in our Heavenly Fathers sight with a fear of
vengeance to be executed upon them, the very Devils fear and tremble; but it is
only a Son of God, and Heir of Salvation, who fears God for his Goodness; fear
of Divine Justice and Almighty Power is but the Beginning of Godly Wisdom, the
first step in a profligate Sinners Conversion; but it is a fear of God made
perfect by Love of him, a fear to offend him and loose his friendship, which
crowns the work of Regeneration, and shows our Advance in a state of Grace and
Salvation.

O our God, Thou art Terrible as well as Lovely, but Thou art also Lovely in
thy very Terror; for therefore stand we in Awe of thee, lest we should forfeit
thy good will and favor: O how will Love as well as Abhorrence create a Dread
it us! a Dread of offending our Beloved: How will Gods Mercy as well as his
Justice cause us to fear him! Oh that we may fear and Love him more; and so
much the more fear him, by how much we increased and abound in Love of him!

And certainly it is our wisest way on all accounts thus to fear God; for thy
that fear the Lord, need fear nothing besides! they having such an Almighty
Protector and Deliverer their Guardian: They need fear nothing but sin, and
such a fear as keeps them innocent from wilful offenses, keeps them also calm
and at peace in their own bosoms; preserves them the Favorites of Heaven, and
then they may defy all the Power and Policy of Hell.

The fear of any worldly thing will Lessen men's fear of God, but their true
fear of God will take from them all slavish fear of the World; the Lord is on
our side, will they say, what need we fear what man can do unto us? The
fierceness of man's anger against us God can turn both to His and our Praise,
in causing us patiently to bear it; and the Residue of Wrath will be Restrain.
Men can do us no more harm than God will permit; but who can stop his Ar^ when
he stretches it forth to take vengeance? He can suddenly change our
Adversaries evil minds toward us into thoughts of Love and Beneficence, of
Peace and Good will; or at least, I should have said at most for it is the
Greatest Blessing God can bestow upon us; he can amply Reward our light
afflictions which are but for a season, with a far more exceeding and Eternal
weight of Glory!

The fear of the Lord is our greatest Wealth and Riches as well as Safety and
Protection; they that fear the Lord, both Corporal and Spiritual blessings are
theirs; pardon of sin, healing of infirmities, the Supplies of God's Grace;
whether things present or things to come, all are Theirs; and they are
Christ's, and Christ is God's: God is the Portion, the Lot of inheritance to
all those that stand in Awe of him, and sin not; and in him being hidden all
the Treasures of Goodness, He being the never-failing fountain of Happyness,
those consequently who truly fear and have an Interest in Him, can never lack.

If God is our Father, where is our Son-like Honor of him? If he is our
Master, where is our Obediential Fear?

Ah who knows the power of Gods Wrath, who knows how Great an Object of Terror
he is, like the poor Disconsolate and Despairing Sinner? in whom the Arrows of
the Almighty stick fast, and his hand presses him sore; against whom God
writes bitter things, and makes him to possess the iniquities of his Youth!
Alase to such a one God is fearful and Terrible indeed; he believes God's
Justice and Judgments, and believing that is, viewing them with a Sensible and
more Lively prospect he fear: and Trembles: For thereafter as a Man Fears, so
is God's Displeasure in his account; nay thereafter as a man Loves as well as
Fears, God proportionably Great is his Dread of loosing his favor;
proportionably Grievous is his Sorrow upon Having lost it: Hence we find Holy
David crying out with bitterest Complaints, Thou did hide thy face from me, O
Lord, and I was sore troubled; O turn thee unto me again, and have mercy upon
me; cast me not away from thy presence, neither shut up thy Loving Kindness in
Everlasting Displeasure. Such a Cutting Grief does the loss of the Light of
God's Countenance produce in those who sincerely Love him. This Love indeed
casts out all Servile Despondent fear, which has Torment, and generateth to
Bondage; but it Quickens and improves a filial fear, such as restrains from
offending: O may we fear God more lest we forfeit his Love, than lest we incur
the severe penalties of his Displeasure; may we fear him with a Reverential
Obedient fear as Sons, that we may never fear him with a burdensome Dismaying
fear, as Slaves.

The Prayer.
O Thou the fear of Israel, who only art to be feared with a Sovereign Supreme
fear, so as to Extinguist in us that of all other things besides, when in
competition with our fear of Thee; possess holy Father, our Souls with a pious,
Awe of thy Divine Majesty; that we may serve thee our Lord with fear, and walk
before thee with an humble Reverence: Endue our hearts with a filial ingenuous
fear, mingled with Love and Obediential Respect; make us to fear thee, because
of thy very Goodness, lest we should forfeit thy Love and favor, more than for
dread of incurring thy heavy Vengeance and Displeasure: Cause us to account thy
Loving Kindness better than Life it self, and then we shall dread the Loss
thereof more than Death.

Permit us not, O our God, for fear of man to let fall our fear of Thee; but
give us to fear Thee Religiously, and we need fear nothing else; nay we need
not fear thee Thy self Slavishly, with a Guilty fear: Put blessed Lord thy fear
into our hearts, that we may not at any time presumptuously Depart from thee,
but may with fear and Trembling work out our own Salvation.

Make thy fear upon our Souls to be a True Godly fear, causing us to walk and
behave our selves as always under thy All-seeing Eye and inspection; Trembling
with a fear of holy Caution at thy presence: Ever Obeying thee, because we Love
thee; and ever Obedientially Loving thee, because afraid of Loosing thy Love,
by offending thee.

Give us Gracious God, that fear of the Lord which is clean, Converting the
soul, and Commanding that we depart from all iniquity; give us such a Dread of
thy Divine Majesty, as may make us Careful of pleasing thee, fearful of
offending thee; as may make us inquisitive to search thy Will, Diligent to
perform it, and persevering in the Exercises of a Religious Awe and Reverence
unto our lives end; and then that Constant habitual fear of thee our God which
has perserved us from wilful sinning, or put us upon Clearing the Guilt of it
by Repentance, will afford us upon a Deathbed Peace of Mind, Consolation in
believing; and our fear of God will then be exchanged into Love and Confidence,
into Joy and Delight in him at that hour of Death, and for Evermore, Amen,
Blessed Savior,

Amen.
Meditation XIV. On Love and Charity to our Neighbor.
MUtual Love and Kindness is what the condition of our Nature dictates unto us;
for man being born a Sociable converseable Creature, is for that very reason
born an Amicable Loving one; for to what End and purpose should mankind
Associate and Live together, Converse and hold Correspondence, but to perform
perform offices of Aid and Assistanc, of kindness and beneficence to eachother?
the very Notion and common Acceptance of Humanity imports Courtesy and
Good Will, Loving Kindness and compassion.

We are born also calamitous, infirm, necessitous Beings, and therefore
mutually Dependant Creatures: and Dependence on each other necessarily infers a
reciprocal help and beneficience: For what more Reasonable, than that those who
by Nature are liable to stand in Need of other^ help, should Afford help to
other^ when in want and Adversity?

It Is the Prerogative of God alone to be Self-sufficient and Independent and
therefore God who saw every thing which he had made, and behold 'twas very
Good, yet saw it not Good for man to be Alone, but resolved on making an Help
Meet for him; that they might be mutually comforting and Assistant to each
other: Though in Paradise man was much nearer Self-sufficiency, and further
Removed from helplessness than at present: So that both Nature, Reason, and the
Ordination of God dictate, that we ought to be mutual helps and common
Blessings to those of our kind; as being our selves in the body, Subject to its
wants and infirmities as well as other persons.

A further obligation to mutual Love and Beneficence arises from our being all
very nearly Related, as Kinsfolks and brethren; as all cast in the same mould,
fashioned according to the same General Likeness, partakers of the same blood,
of the same common Humanity, nay of one very Substance, differenced only in
some few Accidental Circumstances unessential to our Nature: And ought not now
this nearest Relation of Consanguinity to make us Loving and Beneficent to all
Mankind without exception? Ought not the Cement of one blood, to unite us in
one hearty Good will and Friendship? Should not Similitude and Likeness beget
Love? Should not one common Nature produce in us one common Natural Affection?
Causing us to love our selves in loving another, to do Good to our selves in
doing Good to another; he being a part and member of our very Substance; flesh
of our flesh, and bone of our bone: And no man, says the Apostle St. Paul, Ephesians.
5. 29. ever yet hated his own flesh, but Loves and Cherishes it, even as
Christ the Church; and as we in conformity ought to Love and cherish one
another.

It Is Natural even among Savage Beasts for those of the same kind to live at a
Loving Agreement, and not to prey upon each other; and shall Mankind whose very
frame has Tenderness interwoven in it, be less Amicable and Loving than
Brute-Creatures?

Reason and Scripture, the Law of Equity, and that of Moses, the Prophets, and
Christ, all urge acts of Kindness and Charity from this very Argument, Whatever
you would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them; Matthew. 7. 12. You
no doubt, were your Circumstances such as to be in Want and Distress, would
that others should Relieve you, have you therefore a ready will and Inclination
to Relieve others, whose Wants and Necessities Challenge your Relief: And since
you know not, through the vicissitude of Humane Affairs, and some sudden turn
of Providence, but that the Now miserable Condition of others, may become your
own some time hence; let the hazard of your falling into want of Charity your
seles, excite your Love and Beneficence toward those who are actually
laboring under Penury and Affliction.

Giving Relief to others is an easeing the troublesome Relentings (...) our own
hearts, which must needs be touched and sorrowfully affected at the sight of a
part of our own flesh, of our common Nature being in Misery and Distress; so
that Love to others is the truest Love to our seles, it relieving us of that
Grief and mental Disquietude which a view of others wants and sufferings
excited in us.

Nay the very Reflection on an act of Charity fills one with Joy and Delight,
Refreshes the Giver's mind, as much as the Almsdeed did the Receier's body; so
that we the Benefactors are in some sort beholden even to the Relieved, for
their yielding us an occasion of so great pleasure and Contentment: For to
Recollect how we have been the Almoners of Divine Providence in distributing to
the Necessitous, how we have rescued a poor miserable man from Extremity of
want, have Triumphed over his misery and misfortune; and caused his refreshed
Bowels in the very act of Relieving him to bless us, and his whole person to
offer up Prayers and Good wishes on our behalfs; and how moreover we have made
God hereby our Friend and Debtor, and have imitated and Gratified in doing Good
the Supreme Majesty of Heaven and Earth: To Review all this after an
Almsgiving, cannot but raise great complacency within us, and cause us to
applaud our selves for having performed so Generous, so Godlike, and withal so
pleasing and Delightsome an action.

Nothing will administer to us so much Joy and Consolation when Dying, nothing
so much strengthen us on a bed of Languishing, and make our bed in all our
Sickness, as the Reflection how we have in our Life past through acts of
Charity and Munificence made to our selves Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness, laid up to our selves Treasures in Heaven, a place of the best
Security, of the largest Interest and Improvement: How we have been Eyes to the
blind, and Feet to the Lame, through our supporting Alms-deeds; how we have
evidenced our Love to God, by Love to our Neighbor; loving him for God's sake,
and at his Injunction: How we have, like wise Merchants in a Foreign Country,
Transmitted our Goods and Effects before us into that our Native Region,
whither we intend and expect shortly to Return our selves.

Indeed I must Confess that Love to our very Enemies which Christianity
enjoins, has at first little of this pleasure and Delight, which accompanies
doing Good to those who never Dis-obliged us; nay that it is an exceeding Irksom
and Difficult Duty, and that we are apt to cry out it is an hard Commandment,
who can bear it? But besides that Returning Good for Evil, Blessings for
Cursings, Kindnesses for Injuries, is the ready way to overcome our Adversary's
Enmity, and to convert it into a reciprocal Love and beneficence toward us;
whereas a Retaliation of dis-kindnesses serves only to multiply, heighten, and
perpetuate Quarrels, and oftentimes ends in the utter Ruin and destruction of
both the contending Parties: Besides this, if we would be Children of our
Heavently Father, perfect as he is perfect, we must be Merciful even as he is
Merciful, who is kind unto the unthankful and to the evil: Who as to his common
favors makes no Difference in their distribution, but causes his Sun to
shine, his Rain to descend on the Good and Bad, on the Just and Unjust person,
Matthew. 5. 45.

And oh how well does it Become us by heaping Coals of Love on our Adversary's
heads, to endeavor to melt them down into Peace and Reconciliation! How well
does it Become us the offended not only to forgive, but to be the first in
suing for a mutual good Agreement with our offenders, whenas God himself by his
Ministers beseeches Sinners to be Reconciled unto him! Whenas his holy Spirit
strives with our obstinacy, woes and importunes us by his Gospel-Profers, and
by his inward Solicitations to give over our Rebellion, and accept of the terms
of Divine Grace and Pardon!

Ah where is our Love to God, if we have little or none to our Brother, who
bears his Image? Where is our Love to the Deity, if we obey not his
Commandments? And this is one of his Commandments, that he who loves God,
should Love his brother also, 1 John 4. 21.

How dwells he in Christ, and Christ, in him, in whom the Spirit of Christ, a
Spirit of Love and Charity dwells not? How does such a Person do what in him
lies to defeat the Prayer of our Savior, that we might be one as he and his
Father are one, we one in Unity of Affection, as they are one in Unity of
Divine Essence; who hates his Brother, or is at variance with him?

He is not a Christian who has no true Faith in Christ, and he has no true
Saving Faith, whose Faith works not by Love, both toward God, and toward
Man.

Has Christ thought thy Brother worth his Dying for, and do Thou Ungrateful
Wretch think him not worth thy Living for, in all Offices of Love and Kindness
toward him? Do thou consider that thou art no further a Christian than thou
art Charitable; and yet professest thou Christianity and continuest
Uncharitable? For Shame Man either Quit thy dissembled profession, or else
Realize it by acts of Mercy and beneficence.

O what a pattern was Jesus unto us of Love and Good Will, of Real Substantial
Acts of Kindness! who went about doing Good, made it his chief business and
Employment; healing all that were diseased both in Soul and body: And who
herein Recommended his Love, most magnificently Displayed and Illustrated it,
in that while we were Enemies he Dyed for us; and shall not this move us to
Live unto him in Obedience to all his Commandments, and particularly to That
which he has Dignified with a more peculiar Recommendation, Calling it His, by
way of Eminency above the rest? This is My Commandment, says He, That ye love
one another; as I have loved you, that ye also Love one another, John 15. 12.
And oh how can we well do otherwise, who have our Saviors so expressly plain,
so frequently inculcated, so pressing and urgent Injunctions of this Duty; who
have his so Illustrious and Transcendent Example for it; who have the so potent
Aids and Assistances of his Spirit of Love unto the performance! Ah can we deny
any thing to the Lord who has so Dearly bought and Redeemed us? Had it been
some Hard thing that so Great a Benefactor had enjoined us, would we not have
done it? How much more when he bids us Love and be kind to one another? The
most Easy, the most Delightsom of all Duties, would we but Try the Experiment!

Ah shall we not do it? Shall not we Christians who have one Faith, one Hope,
one Baptism, one God and Father of us all, one Gracious Mediator and Redeemer;
have also one Heart and Good Will to each other? Shall we who are Brethren,
Heirs of the same hopes, of the same blessed promises, fall out and Quarrel by
the way in our journying to our Home and Father's House, upon the account of
things indifferent and mere Trifles, if compared with the Substantials of
Religion? Shall we violate Charity that most weighty Vital part of
Christianity, for mere Circumstances and Externals of Divine Worship? of no
worth in themselves, but only as made Assistant to Piety and Devotion?

What though we are not all of the same mind in matters un-essential to
Religion, as indeed how should we be, unless of the same size of Understanding?
Does however our Difference of Judgment lay on us any fatal Necessity to Differ
also in Love and Affection? Though we are not all of one Mouth speaking the
same things, yet cannot we be all of one Heart? We shall never be of one mind,
till in Heaven we behold things in one and the same Light, or at least each of
us in a Sufficient one; but we both may and ought to be of one Good Will on
Earth. Ah that our Little Differences in opinion concerning Rites and
Ceremonies, should contribute more to our Divisions, than our General Agreement
in fundamental Doctrines (which we all acknowledge able to make us wise unto
Salvation) does conduce to our Union and Coalition! While our Minds Agree in
Christ in the Essentials of his Religion, let our Wills also be conjoined; for
what an Absurdity is it, that we who are to live together in Heaven, if our
Uncharitableness hinder not, should live at variance here below?

O Heavenly Samaritan, Thou holy Jesu, Prince of peace, Look down, Look down;
behold here a miserably torn and Divided Church; torn with Schism and Faction,
fallen among Robbers and Spoilers, who most inhumanely have Entreated her;
behold with a succouring compassion her bleeding wounds, which are as so many
Mouths importunately begging it: Pour thy suppling Oil and Wine of Union into
her Sores, bind up with the bond of Love and Concord her broken and Disjoynted
Members; Pass not by on the other side of the way, as did the Relentless
Levite, but let the Distressed sight of our misery move thee to compassion, and
thy Compassion produce a Speedy Relieving us.

Suppress in us, blessed Savior, Entirely banish from us that Stingy
Selfishness of Spirit, that narrow Confinement of Love to a Sect or Party which
so much abounds in the Nation, and make us of a more public Generous Temper,
more Consultive of the Good of the Community both in Church and State: And then
the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Love and Unity shall dwell amongst us; Love
shall be our Guide, and Love shall be our Guard and Defense; Love shall fit us
for Heaven, and Love shall Conduct us thither: Nay Love shall bring down Heaven
upon Earth unto us; shall make us live in Peace, in Amity, in a Joyous
Complacency at each others Happyness. Amen, Amen.

The Prayer.
O OUR God, who have taught us that all our doings without Charity are nothing
worth, that he only who dwells in Love, dwells in Thee, and Thou in him;
send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most Excellent Gift of
Charity, the very bond of Peace and of all Virtues; make us Children of thee
our God, Disciples of our Dear Lord and Master, in loving one another, as he
has loved us; in being Merciful, as Thou our Heavenly Father art Merciful.

O that the same mind may be in us which was in Christ Jesus, who went about
doing Good; healing the Diseased, comforting the Afflicted, compossionating the
Distressed; and whose pity did not content it self with a bare saying, Be ye
warmed, be ye clothed, be ye filld, and delivered from your Sufferings; but
which did always Exert it self in Real Acts of Mercy and Beneficence: O make us
also thus followers of our Redeemer's Steps, being Exceeding pittyful and
compassionate, and actually employing all our abilities for our necessitous
Brethrens Succor and Relief.

Give us we beseech thee, O most merciful God, such a Sympathizing Tenderness
of Spirit, that we may be deeply affected with both the miseries and
Prosperities of our Neighbors; mourning with those that mourn, and Rejoicing
with those that Rejoice, as Living Members of our Saviors mystical body, his
Church: O that it may become the Center of Unity and Concord, the very Joy and
Delight of the whole Earth.

Fulfill O Lord, that promised blessing of thine unto the Christian State,
whereby the Wolf is to dwell with the Lamb, the Loeopard to lie down with the
Kid, the Calf and the young Lion together; a little Child to lead them, a
weaned Child to put his hand on the Cockatrice-Den, and nothing to hurt or
destroy in thy holy mountain; but all fury, malice, and bitterness being done
away, Gospel-Love, and Peace, and Gentleness of Spirit is to succeed: O may
this Gracious Promise be near its Accomplishment; may this blessed State, this
Kingdom of thy Dear Son come Quickly.

O thou Composer of differences, thou God of all Peace, Compose those unhappy
Animosities which are too much propagated among Christians, let them not any
longer Dishonor thy Name, bring an evil Report upon our Holy Profession in
General, nor weaken the Interest of the Protestant Religion in particular: But
grant that by Brotherly Love and Concord we may Adorn the Gospel of our
Savior, may win over Converts thereunto, and thereby Enlarge, Strengthen, and
Advance the Kingdom of the Ever-blessed Jesus.

Let the Peace of Thee our God Rule in our Hearts, to the which we are called
in one and the same hope of an Heavenly Inheritance; that as we have one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of us all; so we may henceforth be
all of one Heart, and of one Soul, united in one holy bond of Truth and Peace,
of Faith and Charity.

And being thus Studious of Emulating each other in kindness, provoking thus
one another to Love and Good works, and being in such a manner the Sons of
Peace on Earth, we shall be fitted and made meet for the joint participation of
Heavenly Glory, where may we all Reign Rejoicing in each others Happyness as
Sincerely, if not Equally as in our own. Amen, Blessed Jesus,

Amen.
Meditation XV. On Improvement in Grace.
THe Life of Grace is best evidenced by Growth therein; Spiritual Life no more
than the Natural one can subsist without Activity and progressive Motion;
wherever the seed of God is sown in Truth and Reality, it will fructify and
become prolifick: In the School of Grace, as well as in that of Humane
Learning, not to Go forward and make improvement is to Go backward; and Virtue,
like a tender young Plant, if it does not Thrive and Flourish, is in a Tendency
to Decay and Wither.

The slothful unprofitable Servant who did not improve his Talent, is in the
Scripture-reckoning, in our Lord and Savior's account nigh as bad, and as
severely punished, as the unjust Steward, who wickedly embezzled it; and not to
make use of Grace, is here reputed the same thing as not to have had it; To
have it by Exercise and Improvement is judged by God the only true Possession;
and he who has not the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit in this manner, is said
in Holy Writ only to seem to have them: And instead of increasing their Store,
it is denounced there that he shall loose even those measures of Divine Virtues
which were once afforded him.

Genuine Grace cannot stand at a stay; if it does not Ascend and improve, it
infallibly Declines: And when God gives us this Talent to Trade withal and
increase it, shall we frustrate his End of Giving it by letting it lie Dead and
unexercised? Did Christ purchase us the Graces of the holy Spirit, at the Dear
and inestimable Rate of his own Bloodshed, and shall we Neglect them when so
purchased? Did He by his precious Death, and All-prevalent Intercession procure
the Effusion and sending down of those Graces, and shall we slight them when so
sent and bestowed on us?

Ah what will not obstinate Ingratitude of Sinning do! It will make us turn the
blessed means of Grace into occasions of Damnation; make what was intended
toward us a Savor of Life unto Life, to become the Savor of Death unto
Death; through our mad folly, and supine Negligence!

If we would but cooperate with Divine Grace, would but duly Exercise those
proportions of it we Already have, we should soon find larger ones flowing in
upon us from Above, and we should have more Abundantly of God's Spirit; If we
would but water and cultivate upon his implanting Gracious Dispositions in our
Souls, he would give Increase to them, and perfect them into holy Habits; for
former measures of Grace well complied with, fit and Qualify us for further
Succeeding ones; and the Sanctifying Light of the Holy Ghost, like that of the
Sun, shines in upon every Eye of the humane Understanding which will open to
Receive it.

And therefore whenever we find a Good Motion in our Hearts, let us remember
it is afforded us to improve that Good Disposition into a virtuous Act, and to
Grow thereby in Grace; whenever we find a check of Conscience against Sin, a
Restraining suggestion of God's Spirit, let us carry it on till we arrive to an
Hatred of that Vice; let us proceed from an hatred of it to a Resolution of
Amendment, and from that to an actual Endeavor against the particular iniquity.

We are accountable to God not only for that measure of Grace we have Received
but also for further Degrees thereof, which had we wellmanaged the present
ones, we should have been made partakers of; and therefore not only the
mis-using Divine Gifts we were possessors of, but likewise the hindrance by
that misusage of God's bestowing on us future ones, will be charged upon us to
our Condemnation, if we set not to the work and improve present Gracious
intrustments, And what should hinder us from doing it? The Difficulty of such
an undertaking? Alas this is Lessened by the Divine Aids proffered and which
will certainly Assist us in the performance. And what, I pray, can seem
Grievous, when an Almighty power lends an helping hand to alleviate the Burden?

Ah it argues a weak and Low Measure of Grace to Covet after so much of
Holiness only, as will barely exempt us from Hell, and carry us to Heaven! Such
a mean Spirited person in Religion, shows that Grace is not his desire upon its
own account, upon its pure intrinsic worth, but merely as it frees him from
Divine punishment; It Is not for Love of the former, so much as for fear of the
Latter, that he would be partaker of Holiness at all: but ah how Little do they
deserve Eternal Glory, who are not desirous of the most Essential part thereof,
Divine Grace, in an increasing Measure! Ah be there Different Degrees of
Celestial Blessedness attainable, by different Degrees of Piety, and shall not
this raise in us an holy Emulation, a Godly to Aim at Heroic Extraordinary
Measures of Goodness? At the very Highest procureable?

Let us consider that the Longer the credited Loan of Grace remains in our
Custody unimproved, the Greater daily will Grow its Debt, and the more ample
and enflamed the Reckoning which we shall at the End of all things be called to
give in; and then to whom much was Given, of him shall much be Required; and
whether we have put out our Talents of Grace to Usury or no, yet Interest and
Increase of them will be demanded at our hands: It being that we should have
been busied about the procuring, however we have left it unprocured.

Then at the Day of final Accounts it will not be Enough to say, Lord, here is
what is Thine, what thou committedst to my Trust; but where is the Improvement
of it, where is the multiplying of it will be Enquired? O then rest not
Satisfied with present Seize, with weak unprogressive Measures of
Sanctity, but forgetting the things in Religion which are behind, which are
already arrived unto, let us press forward to the mark for the Prize of our
high Calling in Christ; endeavoring after the perfecting of Holiness in God's
Fear: And then He who is an overflowing Fountain of Grace and Goodness, and who
communicates of it where ever he finds Subjects Capable of his Communications,
will cause us to proceed from Strength to Strength in Holiness, from one Degree
of Grace unto another, till he has completed our Renewed Nature, and fitted us
for Eternal Glory. Amen, Amen.

The Prayer.
O Thou Divine Fountain and Dispenser, Thou Author and Finisher of every Good
and perfect Gift, perfect we beseech thee that Good work of Grace which Thou
have begun to work in us, carry it on to a full Growth and Maturity; Assist us
Holy Inspirer so constantly from Above, that we may be always in our Thoughts
and Affections there; that whatever Good ^houghts are at any time suggested to
our Minds, may Spring up into fixed Principles, and all our heavenly desires may
become a New-Nature, the constant Tenor and ^emper of our Spirits; and all our
holy purposes and Resolutions may Advance into a serious practice and Zealous
Exercise of Godliness; and all our pious Actions may improve into confirmed
Habits, may become more free, cheerful, vigorous, and Delightsome O may we
evidence the Sincerity of Grace within our hearts, by a daily Growth and
Increase thereof may we Evidence our selves to be Alive unto God, to be
Quickened by thy Spirit, by a Religious motion and progression.

Make us, O God, who are thy Husbandry, like unto Trees planted by the Rivers
of water, which bring forth fruit in their due season; O Suffer us not to be
like Trees without fruit, 'twice Dead, plucked up by the Roots; but grant that
our Leaf of holy Profession may never fall, nor our Good fruit wither, but that
whatever pious work we take in hand it may prosper: Grant that the more we
Advance in years, the Greater progress we may make in Grace, that we may bring
forth much fruit of Righteousness in our mature Age, and may then be chiefly
fat and well-liking, as to our improvements in Holiness.

O blessed Lord, give us to become thus more and more Like thee, partakers in a
larger measure of thy Divine Nature and Excellencies; Give us to hunger and
thirst more after Righteousness, that we may in an higher Degree be Satisfied
therewith; Give us to lay up to our selves Treasures of Grace for Heaven,
rather than Treasures of Mammon upon Earth; to multiply and increase our
Spiritual Talents, to Grow Rich in Faith and Good Works, to Rise up to a
fullness of Stature in Christ Jesus, to walk worthy of thee our God unto all
wellpleasing, perfecting of holiness in thy fear; to be filled with all the
fruits of thy Spirit which accompany Salvation: That these things being in us
and Abounding, an Entrance may be administered unto us abundantly into the
Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen, blessed
Savior, for thy Cross and Passion Sake.

Amen.
Meditation XVI. On DEATH.
DEath! the very Thoughts, the very Name thereof, strikes us with Horror and
Affrightment! but alas the first Temporal Death, what is it if compared with
the second Eternal one? which is to be the sad Portion of all finally
impenitent Sinners!

Were the Temporal Death the End of all things with us, did it Determine and
Annihilate our Beings, it would be so far from becoming affrightful to the
Wicked and Impenitent, that they would rather gladly Welcome it, as the Rescuer
of them from what they most seared, a Penal Retribution for all their heinous
Provocations in this Life; but the Consideration that the first Death is only
an Inlet unto, a Beginning of the Second, which is never to have an End; Oh how
must this prove doubly affrighting to the Person unprepared for the Temporal,
and therefore obnoxious to the Eternal Death! both reluctant Nature and Guilt
causing him to Dread it.

The acute Dolours of an expiring Sinner's Body, make him Wish to Dye, but then
the more torturing Terrors of his awakened Conscience, urge him to retract
those Wishes, and to fear nothing more than a Dissolution, which will bring him
to Judgment and Eternal Condemnation; and thus the Dyeing Impenitent is rackt
and tortured between contrary Desires and Choices, the Guilty Agonies of his
Mind pain him more than all the Convulsive Severities of his Disease; so that
they Anticipate his Hell on Earth, and give him to feel some of its Torments,
before he goes hence to Experience them in in the Gross!

But with the Righteous Godly Person it is not so; Death indeed to him may look
at first somewhat affrightful, it being an abhorrence to Nature, a forcible
Separation of Soul and Body, those Dear Companions; but then being prepared for
Death, he living in a continual pious Expectation of it, Faith, Animating and
Confirming Faith, strips in his sight that King of Terrors of all his D^smaying
Gastliness, shows him with his Sting the Guilt of Sin, totally pulled out by
the satisfactory Sufferings of our Savior, bids the Good Man walk through the
Valley of the Shadow of Death, and fear no Evil; Gives him a Delightsome
Prospect beyond the Grave, Admonishes him to look forward to that Immortal
Life, and Joy, and Glory set before him; and in fine, Represents to him a
blessed Reunion of Soul and Body at the General Resurrection, never to part,
never to be separated again.

Death to such a one is as a Welcome Night of Repose after the hard Labor and
Toil of the Day: They Rest from their Labors, says the Scripture: It Is as the
Enjoyment of the Promised Land, after a forty Years wearysome Wandering in the
Wilderness; nay, it is infinitely more; it is the Introduction into an Heavenly
Canaan; and Oh how Transporting must it be to have Shot the peri^lous Gulf of
Death, and to be safely Landed on the Eternal Shore! To look back with Pleasure
on the Wrecks and Dangers we have happily escaped, and to find our selves all
on a sudden surrounded with New unexperienced, unheard of, and before
unconceivable Enravishments! Oh who would not Gladly Dye, to become Possessor
of such an Inheritance? who would not gladly Live in perpetual Mortification
here, to be made Partaker of such Infinite Delights in a Future State? Oh Our
Life which we falsely so call, deserves not so Good a Name; Our Life on Earth,
is but a Death compared with the Eternal Life and Blessedness Above! They only
Live, who being freed from the Fetters of the Body, from the corruptible
Principles of Mortality, are out of a Capacity of Dying any more, and enjoy the
utmost Delights, with a full Assurance of ever enjoying them!

But here in the midst of Life we are in Death; not only ^^^ble thereunto, but
in an Actual Tendency toward it; We draw in Vital Air, only to breath it out
again; and sleep, the liveliest Image of Death, is the best Repairer of our
Life; by reason of which frequent Repairs, our Life seems no other than a
successive Living and Dying: Nay, our very Health, the height thereof what is
it, but the next step to a Declination into Sickness? many times an immediate
Cause and Occasion thereof; for when the Blood runs highest, thence often
proceeds a Feavour; and too Great a Quantity of Spirits may prove fatal, as
well as the want of them: Just as an House may fall oppressed with too much bulk
and weight, as well as through Weakness and Slightness of Building.

Ah then that Men who live in continual Hazard of Dying, should yet demean
themselves with such careless Security, as if they were ever to Live! Ah that
upon this moment, for ought we know may Depend our happy Eternity, and yet we
squander away whole Days, and Years in Vanity! O when shall we become wise, and
consider profitably our Latter End? When shall we so number our perishing days,
as to apply our hearts unto Godly Wisdom? Time passes on, though we mind it
not, improve not its passing; Time passes on, and brings us every instant the
nearer to Eternity: O how ought we to take care that it bring us to an Eternity
of Blessedness: That the end of our Days prove to us the end of our Hopes, even
the Salvation of our Souls!

Alas what Vanity of Vanities, what mere Nothings at the hour of Death, will
all things here below appear unto us, which Now look so charming, and take off
our minds and endeavors from providing for our happy Departures! How then will
all our pursuits, all our possessions of Honor, of Riches, and Pleasure,
appear as a Dream, as a vanishing Shadow; so that we shall at that time account
the wisdom of this world folly and madness; shall wish, wish Earnestly that
with all our other Gettings we had Gotten more Religious Understanding; had
laid up larger Comfortable Treasures of a good Conscience, had been as
industrious for the Concerns of another Immortal Life, as for those of this
vain Transitory one!

Let us therefore take Advice of Death in time of health; Death is a faithful
Counselor, and will not Deceive, will not flatter us; and seeing it is
necessary for us to Dye one time or other, and as necessary unto Dying well,
that we often meditate upon Death, let us make it the frequent Subject of our
thoughts, and in such manner view things Now, as they will certainly appear to
us at our near approach toward Death.

O may we not live in such a state wherein we would be unwilling to be
Surpised by Death, unwilling to be called to Dye, before we have lived to any
good purpose; but may we through the Spirit mortify the Deeds of the Body,
that we may be made Alive unto God; What we would wish were done when Dying,
let us do that Good and virtuous work at present; and what wish were undone
then, let us shun that wicked performance now; or if performed, undo it by
Repentance before our latter End overtakes us: So shall we be Ready for Dying,
so shall the Day of our Deaths appear better to us than the day of our births;
we coming into the world crying, as born to Labor and Sorrow; but going out of
it Rejoicing, as assured to find Rest, and Ease, and Enravishment of Soul. Amen
blessed Savior, Thou Resurrection and the Life, Amen, Amen.

The Prayer.
O Holy Jesu, thou Lord of Life and Glory, who by thy Death have overcome
Death, and opened unto us the Gate of Everlasting Life, at the hour of Death,
and in the Day of Judgment, Good Lord Deliver us; Grant that the End of our
life on Earth, may be the Beginning to us of a blessed Eternity in Heaven; that
the Second Death, the never-ceasing one may have no Dominion over us; but that
when we discontinue Living with men, we may dwell with thee our God, and
Converse with all the blessed Society Above.

Grant, Heavenly Father, that when we come to lie on a Deathbed, we may be
able to look backward with Comfort and Consolation on a well spent Life, and
forward with a bright prospect of Glory and Immortality, beyond the Grave; that
when we are nigh unto Death, and our bodyly strength Languishing, our faith and
hope may Revive and become vigorous; and we may then feel the joyous Approaches
of that Salvation, which we before had wrought out with fear and trembling.

We know, O Lord, that it is appointed for all men once to Dye, and that no one
can rescue his life from the pit of Destruction; and yet do we live as if we
had made an Agreement with Hell, and had an unforfeitable Lease of our lives? O
give us to Dye unto sin Now, that we may sleep in Christ at our Departure; and
be Awakened, be Raised to life again in the Restitution of all things. Afford
us some Refreshing beams of the Light of thy Reconciled Countenance, when
passing through the dark valley of the Shadow of Death; grant that we may then
fear no evil, but may have the Testimony of a Good Conscience which may be a
supporting Cordial to our weak and fainting Spirits: Grant that we may not live
in such an unprepared state of Soul, as that we should be afraid to Dye, and
Appear before thy Judgment seat; but cause us so to Demean our selves, as that
the Sting and Terror of Death Sin may be taken away, before Death it self lays
hold on us; that when it comes, we may welcome it with Smiles and Gladness; may
lift up our heads with Joy at our hastening Dissolution, as knowing that then
the time of our Redemption draws near.

Be Thou present with us at the hour of Death O blessed Jesu, who sufferedst
Death for us upon the Cross; by the virtue of that thy precious Death, Sweeten
we beseech thee the bitterness of ours: When our Eyes shall be Darkened in the
Agonies of Death, kindle in our hearts the Light of saving Faith; when our
Speech shall fail and leave us, O do thou speak Inwardly unto us by the
Comforts of thy Spirit, and grant that we may speak mentaily unto Thee by
Devoul Sighs and Groans which cannot be uttered; when we are nigh unto the End
of our Days, may we be nigh the end of our Hopes, even the Salvation of out
Souls: O give us in our last Exiremities Joy in believing, Hope in our Latter
End, humble Resignation of our Spirits into thy hands, an holy Contempt of this
Earth, an Enflamed Love of Heaven, Longing desires to be with Thee, with our
Savior christ, with Angels and Glorified Saints, which is much better than
being here. Amen, Amen, for thy Mercies sake.

Meditation XVII. On the Last Judgment.
MEthinks I view the Judge of the whole Earth, Terrible and yet Gracious,
coming in the Clouds of Heaven with all his Glorious Retinue of holy Angels;
methinks I hear the Arowzing Call of the last Trumpet; see the innumerable Dead
take the Alarm, Awake, Move, and Rise at its all-powerful Summons.

I behold methinks the Righteous Rising first with Smiles and Exultation in
their Faces; as knowing that their Redemption, that the Reward of all their
Pious Labors draws near: I behold also the ungodly Rising Last, and yet even
then most unwillingly; shaking and trembling for fear of their approaching
Trial and Condemnation; Heaven above Threatening them, Hell beneath Gaping wide
for their Reception. I b^hold too the Court-Book of an Universal Registry
opened, each Man's Indictment and Accusation publicly Read, his own Conscience,
the while bearing Witness, and either Accusing or Excusing him in that fearful
Judgment!

I hear methinks the Decisive Sentence (...) ronourced of either Eternal
Happyness or Misery, of either come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you before the foundations of the World; or else of Depart
from me ye Accursed into Everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels!

Oh the different Effects these different Sentences have on the Persons they
are directed unto! The Righteous receive their Sentence with Joy and
Acclamations, with transporting Thanks and Hallelujahs, with an humble
Admiration that the Recompense of their finite Defective Services, should be a
far more Exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory! The ungodly Reprobates
entertain their Doom with hideous Howlings and Lamentations, with
heart-piorcing Sorrows and Affrightments, with fruitless desires to return
again into their Graves, or to be perfectly destroyed and Annihilated.

Come ye blessed; O Delightsome sound, O welcome hearing! welcome especially
from the mo^^^ of our Judge! Come? There is no need sure of a pressing
Invitation to accept of so much Bliss and Happyness; behold they Run, they draw
near upon the first Intimation of it; they fly with haste into the possession
of their Eternal Inheritance!

They now please themselves in the Remembrance of their former Godly Sorrows,
Mortifications, and Self-denyals, which through the Mercy's of God, and Merits
of their Savior, have procured them such an exceeding Great Rejoicing! All
their former Tears dry up at the sight of their Glorious Redemption, and they
would not for a World but they had Denied themselves in the Life past, that now
in the Resurrection of the Just, they may be owned and Approved of by their
Advocate and Acquitter.

Depart ye Cursed; blessed Lord whither should they depart? Can they Go any
where where thou art not present, who sillest all things? though they descend
into the Deep, and remain in the uttermost parts of the Sea, yet Thou art
there; though they make the Darkness of Hell their hiding place, yet thou art
there also; thine Omniscient Eye shall even there find them out, and thine
Almighty Arm shall punish them!

Depart from Me; A D^parture from thy Beatifick presence, O God, must needs
render the Departed Accursed; for Thou art all that is Good, the Loss therefore
of Thee is an Universal Loss: Thou art the Center and Rest of the Soul; and
therefore to be separated from Thee must be the most unquiet and miserable
Condition imaginable. A Departure from the Joyous Light of thy Countenance, O
blessed Jesu, who only have the words of Eternal Life, can certainly be no
other than Eternal Death. One would have thought indeed that to be Deprived of
Thy Sight, might have been punishment enough, without the Damneds Entrance in
Hell-flames and tortures; but that besides the mental Anguish for their Loss of
the Enjoyment of God, for their Loss of Heavenly Joys unspeakable, and full of
Glory, they should be tormented with the positive sufferings of infernal
Regions; should be banished into fire, into fire Everlasting, into fire
Everlasting prepared for the Devil and his Angels, the worst of Company, the
most Dismal Society; Oh, how Doubly afflictive and vexatious must this prove
unto them!

We believe, O Lord, all this most solemn process of a final Judgment, we
believe and tremble thereat; O make it an ingenuous fear converting our Souls:
We behold with an Eye of faith this thy Judiciary Trial and Enquiry as clearly,
as if it was the Object of our bodyly vision; O Grant it may have such an
Effectual influence upon our hearts, as to make us live in continual
Expectation of it; as if the last Trump were already sounding in our Ears, and
we saw the Graves opened, the Dead coming forth, and the Divine Judge Seated on
his Dreadful Tribunal!

May our habitual mindfulness of this Day of future Reckoning, cause us to
place a watch over our most Secret Thoughts, a Guard over our most Innocently
pleasant words, over our most concealed Retired actions; always remembering that
God is about our path and our bed, and will bring every Secret thought and
purpose of the heart into Judgment, with every Idle word, and most clandestine
performance.

O the brightness of the Discoveries of that time of Trial! How Searching, how
penetrating! No Defense, no Palliation, no Denial, will that Day serve either
to countenance or to cover our unrepented sins; in vain will it be to offer at
either Excuse or Concealment; the Darkness of hidden wickedness shall appear no
Darkness at all, but shall be unto God as clear as the Noonday.

Then shall not a well-dissembled Hypocrisy in Religion, any longer pass for
Sincerity, and the power of Godliness; then shall not habitually indulged
vicious appetites and passions any longer pass for pardonable humane
Infirmities; a bare Negative holiness, the not having done any Enormous evil,
shall not then Satisfy for the want of Real Positive piety, for the want of
having done all the Good we could; neither shall bare Desires after Grace,
without the effectual Endeavors, be reputed Grace it self: But all false
Disguises shall be taken off from both our selves and others, and a Man shall
be accepted only for that he Really has of Virtue and Goodness, not for that
which he seemed to have of it in this World, but truly had not.

The Just shall then be Hardly found Just; the Righteous shall Scarcely be
Saved; O where then shall the Sinner and Ungodly appear? How shall they Stand,
as Justified, when Judged?

O may we in serious thoughtfulness thereon, fancy our selves before the
Judgment Seat of Christ; may we Examine our selves whether we are Ready
prepared for the giving up our Accounts? Whether our Lives are able to bear a
strict Scrutiny at the Day of our Judges Appearance? What holy work we would
then more especially desire to be found Eminent in? And that let us Now more
peculiarly be busied about; what it is we would then be most Ashamed of, and
wish it had never been acted, or sincerely Repented of? And that let us Repent
of Immediately, in this our season of Grace and Salvation: May we think no
Religious pains too Great, no Self-denyals too severe, no Addresses to Heaven
too frequent or too fervent, to render us provided for our future Trials; but
may we enter at present into Judgment with our selves, Accusing and Condemning
our own ways, that when we shall appear before the Great Judge, he may find
that beforehand we are accused and Judged.

Let us often meditate, Lord who can Stand before Thee when Thou art Angry? Who
can be cleared when judged, should not thou in the midst of Judgment remember
Mercy? Woe were it to the most innocent unblameable Life, if Thou O God, laying
aside thy Clemency, should sift and Judge it Rigorously.!

The Prayer.
O Blessed Savior, Thou most Righteous Judge Eternal, ordained by thy Father
to be Judge both of the Quick and Dead, whereof he has given us Assurance, in
that he has raised thee from the Dead; O Raise us from the Death of sin unto
the Life of Righteousness, and hereby fit and prepare us for the Day of
Judgment: Cause us so Effectually to think on it at present, as that we may not
Dread its Terrors hereafter, but may be Justified by thy Sentence, and cleared
when we are Judged; not Trusting in our own Righteousness, which is but as
filthy Rags, but being clothed with the imputed Righteousness which is of God,
through faith in Christ Jesus. O that when we are Judged we may be found in
Him, having an Interest in the Merits of his Death and passion! O that he who
is to be our Judge, may likewise be our Advocate and Acquitter!

Blessed be God the Father, blessed be the holy Trinity, that thou merciful
Jesu art to be our Judge, who by Assuming humane Nature, wast touched with a
fellow-feeling of our infirmities, being in all points Tempted as we are, yet
without sin; that thou might have Compassion on us thy brethren who are
Tempted, and that we might come the more boldly to thy Judgment Seat, finding
Grace to help in that Greatest time of Need: O may we obtain Mercy, when our
Lord enters into Judgment with us! May we be Acquitted, when Tried! May our
Savior look on all he has Done, on all he has Suffered in our behalf, when
making tion what we have done, Spoke, or Thought; and may he for the
Satisfaction purchased by his Blood, be Gracious unto us.

Give us, Gracious God, so to Accuse and Condemn our selves for sin, by a
penitent abhorrence of it, that we may not be Accused and Condemned in thy
fearful Judgment; but may stand in the Judgment, as found upright and Absolved
therein: O that our own hearts may pass that True Judgment on us in this world,
which Thou blessed Redeemer wilt pass on us in the other; and if upon Calling
our selves to an Account at present, we find that our Consciences Condemn us,
Grant that we may make void that Condemnation by immediate Amendment;
considering that if our hearts condemn us, Thou our God art Greater than our
hearts, and knowing all things, will much more Condemn us.

Allay, holy Savior, by the pleadings of thy Mediation and Intercession, the
Rigor and Severity of thy final Sentence; cause us to live as if we ever heard
that arouzing Summons in our Ears, Awake ye dead, and come to Judgment: O make
us in apprehension hereof to Judge and Examine our past Courses, and to Correct
and Reform whatever we find Amiss in them; let the habitual Remembrance of the
last Day of Trial, Quicken us unto a more than ordinary holy preparation for
it: That we may Expect it with comfortable Hope, meet it with an humble
wellgrounded Assurance, be Acquitted in it, pleading our Lord's most perfect
Obedience, and Relying wholely on his Meritorious Expiation; and may we at
length be blessed with the Enravishing Approbation of well-done Good and faithful
Servants, enter ye into your Master's Joy.

Amen, Amen.
Meditation XVIII. On Heaven.
HEaven! A place where God's Honor dwells, where his Honor and Glory dwell in
the most Supereminent Degree! Where is the blessed Jesus in all the pompous
Resplendencies of his Exaltation, Surrounded with infinite Honors of his
perfect Obedience, and most meritorious Sufferings: Where the Reflected Rays of
the Divine Majesty add New luster to the brightest Cherubims; and the
innumerable Host of Heaven, the Glorified Company of Saints and Angels, drink
plentifully of those Rivers of pleasure which are at God's Right hand for
Evermore! Pleasures Refined and Spiritual, Sincere and unallay'd with any
mixture of Sorrow; pleasures fixed and Durable as God the Unchangeable Author of
them; so complete as to Satisfy, and yet so Recreatively Satisfying, as not to
become Dull and Cloying: For in Heaven a Continual fresh Addition of Happyness
flowing in upon the Soul, both Gratifies its appetites, and also Quickens and
New-Excites them.

There the blessed Inhabitants beholding constantly the Beatifick Presence, are
changed thereby from Joy to Joy, from Glory to Glory; Receive incessant
Communications of the Divine inherent Fullness, and have their Desires hereby
the more Enflamed, their Capacities the more Enlarged to receive still further
participations of God's inexhaustible bounty: And thus they spend a Rapturous
Eternity; ever-Loving, ever-Praising, ever-Adoring and Delighting in God their
Savior: And the more they Love, and Praise, and Delight in Him, still they
find more Cause, more Reason, more Desire and Longing of Soul to do so!

Here it is the happy Residentiaries Understandings are wide opened to all the
amazing Lights and Discoveries of Truth, to the Mysteries of Creation and
Providence, of Redemption and Sanctification; to the now puzling Difficulties
of Nature and of Grace, of God's Prescience and Man's Free Will: Here it is the
Wills also of the Glorified are rendered conformable unto, are Swallowed up in,
and made one with God's Holy Will and Pleasure; that their Affections become
Seraphickly pure, Spiritual, and servent; that both the Spirits of Just Men
made perfect, and their brethren Angels burn with Divine Love, are enflamed
with holy Ardours of Devout Gratitude and Thanksgiving to God the Author of
their Beings, and kind bestower and preserver of all their Enjoyments!

Heaven! The bright Abode of all bright, and pure and clarified Souls! Of all
those who have had Heavenly Tempers and Dispositions implanted in them here;
who have Contemned the World, Triumphed over its depraving pomps and Vanities;
who have Crucified the flesh, with the Corrupt Lusts and Affections thereof;
who have vanquished Hell, overcome the Temptations of the Devil, offered a
Grateful violence to Heaven, by the importunities of servent Effectual Prayer,
by the Severities of Repentance, Mortification, and Selfdenyal!

There in the happy Regions Above, they reap the fruit of their pious labors,
with a plentiful Interest and Increase of Glory! There all the Good, all the
truly Wise, all the Just, and Chaste, and Charitable Souls, of whom this World
was not Worthy, who were burning and shining Lights amidst a crooked and
perverse Generation, by their Singularly holy Examples, shine as Scars of the
first Magnitude in the Kingdom of Heaven; they Love God with the Intensest,
most Dutiful Affection, and they Love one another as themselves, without any
Envying or Repining at their Neighbors happyness, who enjoy a Greater Degree
thereof than they; but each Beatified Spirit enjoying as much of God and Heaven
as he is capable of Receiving, is fully Satisfied with his own measure of
blessedness, and derives also pleasure and Contentment from the possessions of
his brethren though more highly Glorified!

There in Heaven they Love, there they Adore, and there they Enjoy for an
Endless Duration; there their United Employ of Loving, Praising, and
Worshipping God, of Returning him Thanksgivings for all the Miracles of his
Stupendous Love, Unite them the more intimately unto God, and Unite them also
more closely in Affections to one another; a Glorified Saint not repining at
the more Advanced Glory of an Angel, an Angel of an inferior Order, not
Grudging at the Happyness of a Superior; nor any of those Morning Stars of the
Creation, Envying the Saints their most Illustrious Honor, in having the
Humanily Dignified with a Personal Union to the Godhead!

O Heaven! The Glorious Receptacle of Heaven-born Souls, of the Favorites and
Sons of God, when shall I come and Appear before him? When shall I be made more
exactly Like unto him, seeing him as he Is? When shall I be joined to the
Devout Adoring Quire of Angels? O Celestial Temple, how my Soul Longs to Enter
Thee the Holy of Holies! One Day in thy Courts is better than a Thousand
elsewhere! Gracious God deny me what Thou will of this Earth, so thou give me
at last an inheritance in Heaven; That will make ample Amends for all my wants
here below; That will fully Recompense all the Sufferings of this Mortal Life!

O my Soul, is such a Glorious prize, as that of thy high Calling in Christ set
before thee, and shall not this incite thee to press forward to that Mark? To
Run the Race of holy Obedience with patience, cheerfulness, and a pious
Contention? Is such an Heaven, such an Exceeding Great and Eternal weight of
Glory, the Object of thy Hopes, and have thou the Stupidity not to let it be
the Object of thine Endeavors also? Have thou the heart to neglect so Great
Salvation? Shall it not encourage and stir thee up to give all Diligence to
make thy Calling and Election Sure? Oh how unworthy are they of Eternal Life,
who will not Exert their utmost power and industry to obtain it! Blessed Lord,
Bring down much of an Heavenly Frame and Temper into our Souls, which may
Qualify us for an Enjoyment of Heaven hereafter; let there be Divine God-like
habits of mind wrought and implanted in us at present, that Awaking up at the
Resurrection after thy Likeness, we may he Satisfied therewith. Amen, Amen,
holy Savior.

The Prayer.
O Sovereign Excellency, and most Exalted Blessedness, whose Delight some
Presence makes Heaven, and the hiding away of whose face in Displeasure, is the
chiefest Constituent of Hell; O grant that having Such an Heaven, such an
Exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory the Object of our Faith and Hopes, we may
labor after an Heavenly frame and Disposition in our Souls, which may Qualify
us for the celestical State hereafter: Grant that we having Given unto us such
Great and precious promises as those appertaining to this Life and a better,
may by the incitement of these become partakers of thy Divine Nature, escaping
the Corruptions which are in the World through lust.

O Holy Father, give us a Lively View of Heaven by an Eye of Faith; and so
Raise up our minds thither, that we may always have our Thoughts, our Desires,
our Conversation there, whence we look for the Savior; O make us such obedient
Subjects of this thy Kingdom of Grace, that we may become capable of thy
Kingdom of Glory: Convince us, blessed Lord, that Grace and Glory differ not in
Kind, but only in Degree of purity; Grace being Glory in its Dawn, in its
progressive light of Sanctisication, and Glory being Grace Ripened into
Maturity, Consummated into perfection; and therefore as we hope for and would
become partakers of Celestial Glory, bring down Holy Jesu much of an Heavenly
Temper and habit into our hearts at present: Make us to conceive of Heaven as
of a pure and holy State of Life, rather than of it as a place and Seat of
Enravishing Enjoyments; to Conceive of it as consisting more in the blissful
frame and pious Qualities of our Souls, than in the fruition of any External
Heavenly Objects; and consequently cause us to be Equally desirous that Heaven
should enter into us by the way of Holiness here, as that we may enter into
Heaven by the way of Happyness hereafter: That considering Heaven as a place
whereinto no Unclean thing can enter, considering it as a City wherein only
dwells Righteousness, we may purify our selves even as Thou the Author of it
art pure, perfecting of Holiness in thy fear.

O our God, make us more and more meet for an inheritance with the Saints in
Light and Glory; more and more Resemblant of such a State in our Spiritual
Tempers and Dispositions of mind: We are as yet in Hail, we are Strangers and
S^journers here, as all our Fathers were; O make us fit for our Fathers House,
for an Heavenly Country, and safely Conduct us thither; whilst on Earth in the
midst of Life we are in Death, O cause us to see the Goodness of thee our Lord,
in that Land of the Living Above, which only deserves that Name; There, I here
will be no need of the Sun by Day, neither of the Moon by Night, for the Glory
of thee our God will Enlighten it, and in the Light of Thy Countenance we shall
be Sure to see Light: O lift up the partial Light of that Countenance upon us
at present, causing us to long after a more plentiful manifestation thereof in
the Life to come.

Enable us Heavenly Father more to Admire those inexhaustible Treasures of thy
Goodness prepared for such as Love and fear Thee, which Eye has not Seen, nor
Ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of Man to conceive; O thy
unmeasurable Goodness, whereby we are not only delivered from suffering the
vengeance of Hell Torments, but also made capable of the Enjoyments of Heaven!
What shall we render unto the Lord for these inestimable benefits which he
Designs to bestow upon us? O give us to conform our selves to thine Image in
Holiness, that we may behold Thee our God in Glory, where certainly we can want
nothing, where all our Desires and Expectations will be completely Gratified;
because Thou our Supreme Happyness will be All in All unto us! O let us be
Thine, and be Thou Ours to all Eternity. Amen, Amen, Blessed Redeemer.

Meditation XIX. On Hell, and the Eternity of its Torments.
WHAT can the Wrath of God do more than punish with an Eternity of Misery? O
the malignity of Sin, whose Short pleasures and Empty profits, whose false
Honors and Transient acts of wickedness have an Infinity of punishment their
Recompense! O who would buy the pleasures of sin which are but for a moment, at
the Dear rate of neverceasing Sufferings? Who would refuse the initial troubles
of a Religious Course, since in the End it srees us from the Torments of Hell,
and instates us in all the Joys and Glories of Heaven!

Hell! the punishment of the Disobedient, and Rebellious; of the haters of God,
Despisers of Goodness, and wilful Rejecters of their own Everlasting Mercies!

Hell! A place where is Variety of torments, Extremity of torments, and
Eternity of torments; not one way, but a Thousand ways to make a poor Soul
miserable, Everlastingly miserable: And who can be ar Variety? Who can bear
Extremity? Who can bear Eternity of torments? And yet all this we must bear, if
ever it be the sad lot of any of us to be cast into Hell.

Here a mixture and interchange of Mercies, allays our Afflictions and
Occasions of sorrow; but in Hell there is nothing but pure unmigled misery;
nothing to be seen, but Objects of Terror and Affrightment; nothing to be
heard, but hideous howlings and Self-Execrations; nothing to be felt, but
utmost pain and torment: Not one merry Day, and one sad; not one hour of Grief,
and another of Ease; not one Cross and another Comfort, as it fares with us on
Earth; but all Crosses and all Curses without any the least mitigation do
concur in Hell, like lines meeting in their proper Center!

And no wonder they do so; for it is the doleful Residence of the miserably
Depraved, and sinfully Degenerate; of the fearful and unbelieving, of the
abominable and Murderers; of the proud, Angry, malicious and Revengeful:
Qualities of mind which are their own torment and Damnation; which render the
unhappy possessors of them Suitable Associates only for Devils and Reprobate
Spirits; Lost to Goodness, Sunk into the very Dregs of sin and impiety.

O Hell, where nothing Good inhabits; where Darkness fills both the place and
minds of those banished from God's Presence; blackness of Darkness for ever
fills the place, blackness of Guilt, horror, and Despair their Spirits!

Oh the Sense of their Loss afflicts more those wretched Souls, than does the
sense of their pain and Anguish! The sense of what the Righteous enjoy, and of
what themselves might have done, had it not been their own fault, afflicts more
the Damned than do all their Hellish Sufferings; for that there should be an
Heaven which they shall never Enter into, that there should be a God whose
blissful sight they shall ever be excluded from: O this is the bitterest
ingredient in Hell! A Consideration which pains more the Objects of Divine
wrath, than all their flames, and fire, and brimstone!

O Eternity, Eternity! A thing which is a Rack to our minds but to Think of it,
even Abstracted from the Notion of annexed misery; how much more Amazing then
and Dreadful must be the joint Consideration of Torment accompanying Eternity!

Ah is it not enough that the Miseries of the Damned are the most Intense and
Exquisite, but must they be Endless also? As Intense, they are intolerable; as
Endless, how much more so?

Alas, Alas, what are the Greatest Temporal Punishments, when compared with
those which are Eternal? No more than painted fires and tortures compared with
the Real Sensible ones, whereof they are Representatives!

To be miserable as Long as God shall continue to be who is Everlasting; what
an insupportable, what an Inconceivable misery is that! And O the Just Judgment
of an Incons'd Deity provoakt by Irreclaimable wickedness! Imp^nitent Sinners
Seek Death Eternal in the wilful Error of their ways, they choosing Sin the
procuring Meritorious Cause of Everlasting punishment; and therefore what
Injustice or want of Goodness can it be in God, to give them their Choice, and
torment them with the Damnation of their own Seeking? Since it is a Received
Maxim, that to him who Wills his own injury, no injury in that respect can be
done.

Besides, the finally Obstinate and Disobedient carry the Foundation. matter of
punishment in their own Bosoms, Viz. their Sinful Unregenerate Nature; and what
a wonder is it that the infernal flames should Everlastingly prey upon
Never-ceasing Suitable fuel? Or what unequal Dealing in God, that Endless
punishment should be the dismal portion of Endless Guilt and Demerit? So long
as there is Sin to be punished in the Damned, so long of Necessity must
Continue their punishment: Nay: should God cease inflicting any Positive
Sufferings, should Hell cease its External Torments, yet would an Habitually
impure and finally wicked person become an Hell within Himself; his corrupt
Lusts and Passions for want of their Suitable vicious Gratifications, would
continually Torture and Disquiet him; So that it is not so much God that
Condemns the persevering Impenitent to Eternal Misery, as his own Evil
Unrenewed Nature; which continuing for ever Unchanged in the other life, must
needs render its unhappy Owner for ever wretched and miserable: Now is it not
Righteous, that Incorrigible Obstinacy should be Endlesly punished? That those
who had they Lived for Ever, would have sinned for Ever, (as it may Reasonably
be Supposed all finally impenitent persons would have done) should be Tormented
also Everlastingly?

God proposes to our free and Rational Choice either an Eternity of Misery or
Blessedness; now if Endless Glory be Despised and Rejected, what Remains but
Endless Misery to be the Sinners just Lot of Inheritance? Eternal Misery sure
is not more Disproportionable to a Vicious Life, than Eternal Happyness to a
Virtuous; and therefore since the Reward promised to our Obedience, is Equal to
the Punishment threatened to our Disobedience, and the Sinner has his
unconstrained Choice of either of these, he acts herein upon the Square or
Level; and if he chooses Endless Misery before Everlasting blessedness, it is his
own most Sottish fault; and he has no one but himself to complain of for it.

Ah in Hell there will be no cavilling Objections against the Justice of God's
inflicting Eternal Punishment for Temporary acts of Disobedience; but the
Sinner standing Selfcondemned, will find such Considerations as these some of
the bitterest Ingredients in his Torments; viz. the Reflections that he might
have been Everlastingly Happy if he would; That Damnation in its Necessary
Causes was his own Choice; that the Commandments of God were both Reasonable
and Possible have been kept; That the Heavenly Assistence offered him, would
have made them Easy; and an inward Principle of Divine Love, Delightsome; that
he had once a Day of Grace and Salvation had he pleased to make Use of it, but
that Now the Saving Benefits thereof are lost, through his Carelessness; that
the Main Constituent of his torments is the wicked, impure, unconverted Temper
of his Mind, and that unless he were Holy, it is Impossible for him to be Happy.
That he sees the way of Heaven Accessible, by the innumerable Have of Saints,
Martyrs, and Confessors which are There; and that he finds Hell was avoidable
by feeling his own, and hearing the hideous Self-Exprobrations of all about
him: And thus will God be Justified, and the Suffering Impenitent Condemned
from his own Mind and Conseience!

Tell me no more then of Gaining the whole World, and Loosing thereby my own
Soul; That is of more worth, cost more to be Redeemed, than that it should be
battered away upon so Slight a Consideration; Tell me no more of indulging my
flesh into Eternal Ruin to my Spirit; I had rather live a Life of
uninterrupted Self-denyals and Mortifications, than be Damned; than be Exposed
to the Death Endless and insufferable!

Oh it is this suffering without any prospect, without any hopes of a Release,
nay, with a certain Assurance that their torments shall have no period, which
is the Hell of Hell to those Despairing Wretches who inhabit it; who are not
only to suffer during all Eternity, but what is more, they suffer the Evils of a
Reprobated Eternity, in every moment thereof; by considering each instant that
what they now fell of most acute torments, must continue to be their sad
portion for Ever; without Allay, without the least Ease or Intermission!

Blessed God, is this the Death which is the Wages of Sin? Is this Endless
misery the Conclusion of Short momentary vicious pleasure? O come Pain and
Anguish, come bodily Distress and Affliction, so that my Soul may be Saved in
the Day of our Lord! Let me but escape Hell hereafter, and Give me my Hell upon
Earth. O the heinous Nature, the mischievousness of sin, which leads to this
place of Sufferings! May we by the fear of Hell be driven to Heaven; by fear of
God's Justice be induced to lay hold on his Mercy. That considering the end of
wicked actions, its being Death Eternal; we may break them off by Repentance,
which leads to Life Everlasting.

The Prayer.
O Most Just and impartially Severe Divine Being, who so hate sin, that thou
punishedst it in thine own Son, that thou pursuest it with Eternal Vengeance
into another World; O Grant that by thy Threatening of Hell Torments, we may be
preserved from ever coming there; may be deterred from those wicked actions
which lead directly thither: May we Answer the end of thy creating an Hell,
which was by the Affrightment thereof improved into Divine obediential Love, to
bring us unto Heaven.

Make us blessed Lord, duly sensible, of thy Equal Mercy and Lovingkindness in
preparing a Tophet, a place of punishment for impenitent sinners, as in
providing an Heaven, a place of Glorious Recompense, for the perseveringly Good
and Righteous; in that thou did intend by those different Objects of our
hopes and fears, to address thy self differently to our various Tempers and
Dispositions; and to Drive those to their Duty and Happyness, by thy
Denunciations of Vengeance, who would not be Led to it by the promises of
future Glory and felicity: O how Graciously have thou hedged in our way to
Everlasting Bliss on every side! Using all means that we should not Err and
Depart from it! What could thou have done for us which thou have not done? We
have an Heaven to Allure to Obedience, we have an Hell to Deter from every
wilful impiety: How utterly inexcusable shall we then be, if we break thorough
all these fences and Sanctions of thy Laws.

Put Gracious God thy fear into our inner parts, and make us to Tremble at thy
Judgments; being Awed by them into an holy Caution that we at no time
voluntarily offend thee: Knowing the Terrors of thee our Lord, O Grant that we
may effectually be persuaded to a breaking off our sins, and an Applying our
selves unto Holiness: Give us Grace to Escape as for our Lives out of the
filthy Sodom of every wicked impurity, never so much as looking back upon them,
with an Eye of complacency, lest the flames due unto them overtake us unawares.

Cause us we beseech thee to flee from sin by the awakening Consideration of
its being the only way whereby to flee from the wrath to come; O may the
Eternity of Hell-punishments, restrain both our Inclinations and Embraces from
the pleasures or profits of sin which are but for a Season!

Give us often, holy Father, to Ask our selves these Startling Deterring
Questions, when about to sin wilfully; How can we do this Great wickedness, and
by sinning against God, provoke his infinite Justice and Almighty power to
punish us? Who of us can dwell with everlasting burnings? Is it not a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the Everliving God, who is a Consuming fire? Is
it not a most horrid misery, to be Eternally a seeking Death, and yet never to
find it in the Regions of Darkness and Despair?

O cause us to Dread and Abhor sin which leads to this place of infernal
torments, as much as the suffering place it self; Cause us to think often on
Hell, that we may thereby be kept from falling into it; Grant O holy Jesu, Thou
who art the Resurrection and the Life, that we may never fall into the bitter
pains of Eternal Death: What else can expose us as sewel to Hell flames but our
Sins? They are the combustible matter which the fire which cannot be Quenched
will ever be preying upon; Give us therefore Good Lord, to burn up that immoral
hey, and straw, and Stubble at present, and then the fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels will have no power over us; neither will so much as the
Smell thereof have past upon us; but we shall be received into Everlasting
habitations of Celestial Glory and felicity.

Amen, Amen.
Meditation XX. On Prayer, and the Powerful Efficacy thereof.
PRAYER, it is a Duty of Natural Religion and Worship; the Obligation thereunto
being founded in the Eternal and immutable Reason of things: In God's
Supereminent Excellencies and perfections, and in our own Dependent Indigent
Condition as Creatures.

We are born infirm and weak, poor and Necessitous Beings, in Condition
Alms-People and Beggars; and therefore to pray always is a Duty incumbent on
us from the state of our Nature, as well as by the Command and Enjunction of
God-Allmighty.

Prayer, it is an Acknowledgemant of God's Awful Transcendent Majesty, and of
our own despicable meanness and imperfection; of his Sovereignty, and our
Subjection; of his Self-sufficiency and overflowing plenitude of Happyness,
and of our own penury, straightness of fortune and impotency; of his immaculate
Purity and Holiness, and of our Vileness and Corruption by Reason of sinning:
And upon these Accounts our Addresses to Heaven ought to be accompanied with
all Lowlyness and Humality, with all holy Dread and Reverence.

Prayer being also a Duty of the greatest Importance to us, an instrument of
bringing down all manner of Blessings, Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal, ought
to be offered up with the most fixed Attention of mind, with the most zealous
Intention and fervor of Spirit; with the most hearty Sorrow in Confession, the
most Earnest Desires in Petition, the most urgent and yet Lowly importunity in
Deprecation, with the most Raised Joy and affectionate Gratitude in
Thanksgiving.

We ought also in Prayer to Exercise an unshaken Faith, Hope, Trust, and
Confidence; but however to wait with Patience and Dependence, with an humble
Submission and Resignation to God's will, whether or no he shall be pleased to
Gratify the Desires of our hearts, to Answer the requests of our lips.

And to induce us with the greater Willingness and Alacrity to set about this
Duty of Prayer, let us consider the mighty Honor and high Dignity accuring to
us therefrom; for is it not an Honor for us Creatures to be permitted to talk
and freely converse with our Creator? Is it not an Honor for us vile worms,
for us sinful Dust and Ashes, to be allowed the privilege of having ready
Access at any time to the Supreme Majesty of Heaven and Earth, thereby to make
known to him our sins, our infirmities, our wants, our calamities and
distresses, and hereupon to obtain the pardon of our sins, the healing of our
infirmities, the Supply of our pressing wants, the mitigation, or entire
Removal of our Distresses?

Consider also the inestimable Benefit of Prayer; it is the Channel through
which are conveyed all our Mercyes, the best Desensative against impendent
Dangers and mischiefs, against Divine Judgments and corrections for sinning:
The great Repeller of Temptations, the powerful Subduer of our vices and evil
inclinations, the fruitful improver of our Graces and virtuous Dispositions.

Lastly, Consider together with the Honor and Benefit the great Delight and
pleasure resulting from a due discharge of Prayer; for what can be more
pleasurable than to maintain a constant Intercourse with the Highest and most
Excellent of Beings? Than to hold Communion by Addresses to the Throne of
Grace, with our Creator, Preserver, Redeemer, Sanctifier, and Continual
Benefactor; and hereby to have the frequent Effects and Emanations of his
Goodness and Benignity derived down upon us, and the Devotional Testimonies of
our Love and Gratitude Ascending up again unto him? What can be a greater Ease
and Refreshing to our minds, than to Disburthen them of the oppressive weight
of Guilt contracted, by a free and ingenuous Acknowledgment thereof, by humble
petitioning for forgiveness of the same, by Deprecation of punishment, and
resolutely promising by the Assistance of God's Grace, never to React the like,
or any other wilful wickedness for the future? In sine, what more Delightful
than to vent our Griefs, our fears, our wants, our Anxieties, and Distresses
into the Ears of our Heavenly Father, one so Tender and Affectionate, so True
to his word, so mindful of his promises, so Large in Bounty and beneficence; so
thoroughly Able, so exceedingly Willing to supply all our wants, to Dry up all
our Tears, to Remove all our Affrightments, to Satisfy our Anxieties, and
Relieve our sorest Distresses?

Prayer rightly circumstantiated what is it it cannot do? It has subdued
Kingdoms, obtained promises, wrought Miracles, Stopped the Mouths of Lions,
Quenched the violence of fire, out of weakness made Men Strong, Raised the Dead
to Life again: It makes at present through the meritorious Mediation of our
Savior, peace both in Heaven and Earth; unlocks the Gates of Divine Mercy,
rifles the Celestial Treasury, brings down much of its rich Stores unto us; has
power both with God and Man, and mightily prevails; Rendering both yielding,
entreatable, compassionate!

Prayer, it is another Jacobs Ladder, which maintains a mutual Commerce and
Correspondency between Heaven and Earth; it is a Burning-Glass of Divine Love,
wherein all the heats and warmths of a servently pious Soul are concentered;
wherein it exercises all its Grace with the greatest vigor and Activity:
Exercises its profoundest Humility toward God, its firmest Dependence on him
for Supplies and Belief, its heartyest Sorrow for Sin, its strongest Faith in
Divine Mercy, it is most assured Hope in a Savior, its most earnest pantings
and breathings after Heavenly Communications, its most ardent Love, entire
Re^ignation, and Expectant p^^ever^^ce in welldoing!

And of all the parts of Prayer, none more Noble and Generous, none more
endearing and Acceptable unto God, because none more Disinterested and
unmercenary, than Praise and Thanksgiving: Petition respects Good things to
come which we stand in Need of; Deprecation Regards the keeping off, or Removal
of those Evils which we apprehend our Sins have righteously deserved; and
therefore Self-Interest as well as Religious Inclination put us upon the
frequent use of these parts of Prayer; but Praise respecting purely an
Admiration and awful Extolling of the Divine perfections, and Thanksgiving
being the making a Grateful Return to God for his manifold favors and Loving
kindnesses past and Gone, Praise and Thanksgiving are hereupon the more
undesigning, the more free and unselfish acts of Devotion; and consequently the
more valuable and worthy in themselves, the more Approved of, and well-pleasing
to Heaven.

And indeed what more Just and Reasonable, what more becoming and Suitable, as
well as Joyous and Delightsome a thing, than to be Thankful for Divine
blessings received? Ah since the whole World is but one large Storehouse, one
Magazine and Treasury of Heavenly Love and beneficence, how ought the World
hereupon to be one large Temple, one Universal Quire of Devout Praises and
Hallelujahs! Of Thanksgivings as Zealous, Fervent, and Affectionate, as the
Divine benefactions which we enjoy, are Great, Prizable, and Important! How
ought our fire of Devotion to be like that of the Vestal Virgins, perpetual and
unexpiring! How ought the Glowing Embers of an habitually Grateful Temper and
disposition to be constantly kept alive upon our hearts, though they are not
ever actually breaking forth into a flame!

And indeed Prayer let it have never so much LIght, never so much Quickness of
thought, and Luster of Expression, yet if it have not also warmth and Zeal of
Affection, it is but as the Glimmerings of a Glowworme, or like those Shining
Exhalations which make Men believe they are Safe Conducted, when they are
leading all the while into Bogs and Rivers, into peril and Destruction.

Devotion if it has not the fire of the Altar, will never prove the Sacrifice
of the Altar, such a Sacrifice wherewith God is well-pleased; for it is the
fervent Prayer alone which is Effectual, and unless Effectual, it is of no Value
and Advantage: But the fervent Prayer of a Righteous Man Avails much; it
pierces the very Clouds, Enters into God's Presence, besieges his Throne and
Mercy-Seat, and will not turn away, will not give over its Soliciting, till
such time as the Almighty hears and gives an Answer, either by a Grant of its
Requests, or by as kind and obliging a Denial!

Importunity at the Throne of Grace, in the Court of Heaven, is not there
accounted Troublesomness and Impertinency, Clamor and Illmanners, as it is in
Earthly Courts; but Heaven willingly suffers violence, the force and power of
Devotion is Delightsome unto it, and the violent importunate Supplicants are
those only who take it by force.

When Jacob wrestled all night in Prayer with God, the Angel of the Covenant,
the Lord Christ Jesus, Such was his Prayers prevalency, Such its holy and
Spiritual Charms, that Almighty God could not or would not free himself from
them, till such time as Jacob ceasing his Prayer, let him Go and Dismissed him!
Gen 32. from 24, to 29. ver.

Since all our Temporal, all our Spiritual Blessings, all our Virtuous
Abilities, all our Virtuous Inclinations, the very Beginnings, the
after-progress, the Entire Completion of our Life of Grace depends so mightily
upon the Aids and Communications of Heaven, and these are only to be derived
thence by Prayer and a Good-Life; how Assiduous, how Diligent, how fervent and
importunate ought we to be in the Duty!

Prayer it is which Lifts us up Above this Earth, lets us into Heaven, Gives us
a Delightsome prospect of the Glories therein, makes us talk and utter things
as if we had been there; Prayer it is which Spiritualizes our Minds, purifies
our Affections, Exalts us above this World's cares, or fears, and Sordid
Concernments; Prayer, which giving us a fore-taste of the Joys to come, thereby
conforms our Relish unto them; makes us Scorn and Despise this world's mean
Empty Entertainments, hunger and Thirst after the Noble Satisfying Delights of
another Life; which renders us also fit Associates for the pure Intellectual
Beings Above, who burn with Devotional Love, Gratitude, and Obedience, and
whose Continual Employ it is to Adore, to praise and offer up Thanksgivings to
the Divine Parent of their Beings, and Author of all their Enjoyments!

By Prayer it is we hold the most Intimate Communion with God, and lie open to
all the propitious influences of his Spirit; then it is when at our Devotions,
that the Sun of Righteousness Christ Jesus arises by his Grace with more
especial Spiritual healing under his Wings; Dissipates our Darkness of
Understanding, mollifies our obduracy of Will, imprints his own most Glorious
Divine Image on our Souls!

Then it is when engaged in Prayer, that holy Men feel their hearts Glow within
them, as if touched with a coal of Devotion from God's Sacred Altar; now it is
that they Disdain sin and every Degenerate action; Disdain even the Appearances
of Evil; nay even Innocent Earthly Delights: And being Enravish'd with the
Divine Love, being transported with Celestial Contemplation, every Virtue in
them becomes the more Sprightly and Vigorous, and every Devout passion arises
the nearer to Rapturous and Seraphical: So that in Devotion, if ever, does the
Soul make its most powerful Sallys Heavenward, and become whilst in the body as
if out of it, having its Affections, its Conversation Above with God!

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, who did instruct thy Disciples in the holy and heavenly
Exercise of Prayer, who not only permittest, but Invitest us miserable and
needy Creatures to present our Petitions unto thee; O give us not only Leave
and Allowance to pray, but also power and Ability to discharge the Duty
Acceptably: What do we mean, O Lord, by praying, if we pray not in the Spirit,
with all fervency of Supplication and Thanksgiving? What do we mean by
offering this Sacrifice of the Altar, if the flame and fire of the Altar a
Zealous Devotion be wanting in us? Ah better were it we were otherwise
employed, if while we now draw near to thee with our lips, our hearts are far
from thee; and so our very prayers become turned into sins: O call then home
our straggling thoughts, fix our Attention, confirm our faith, raise and
inflame our pious Affections; pour forth upon us the Spirit of Prayer and
Supplication, that this petitionary oblation may come up before thee as
Incense, and this lifting up of our hands may be as an Evening Sacrifice; that
this our Religious Address may prove the fervent effectual prayer of the
Righteous which Avails much: Blow therefore holy Spirit of Grace upon the
Garden of our hearts, and the sweet smelling Odours of our Faith and Hope, of
our Reverence, Zeal, and holy fervor in prayer shall instantly flow forth.

Grant, O God, that we may pray with understanding, with a due Regard to thy
Greatness and Majesty; with a prepared, Deliberate, and Devout temper of Mind,
that our prayer may not become the Sacrifice of fools, through our rash
unadvisedness; but that it may prove a Grateful and Acceptable Sacrifice unto
Thee: an instrument of holiness, a Restraintive from sin, a Defense against
Temptation, a procurer of every Corporal and Spiritual Good Gift: Oh that we
might be thus ever worshipping, ever Adoring thee! Oh that we might pray
without ceasing as to the habitual pious frame, and Devout Disposition of our
hearts!

But alas, O Lord, how are our souls possessed with a Spirit of Infirmity! How
are they bowed down with Listlessness and formality in thy Service! O raise
them up by the fervours and elevations of Devotion; Quicken them with thy
Graces, inflame them with thy Divine Love, purify and spiritualize their
corrupt Earthly Affections: Give us to be in earnest amidst these our
Supplications; Give us to ask blessings of thee so believingly, so fervently,
and indesinently, as to Receive them by Asking: Oh that we may set a true value
upon this most valuable privilege of Prayer, that our Souls may be filled as
with marrow and fatness when our mouths thus praise thee with joyful lips!

Have Thou, O Lord, promised to prepare the hearts of thy Servants to seek
thee, and that then thou will Graciously incline thine ear to hear and fulfill
their Requests; and shall not we on our parts contribute what we can to the
preparation, and set our selves to worship thee with an holy worship? Oh suffer
us not to let thee Go, permit us not to give over entreating thee, till thou
have Granted us our hearts desires, fulfilled the Requests of our Lips, and
blessed us with Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

O that thou would be pleased at present to wing our Souls with holy
Devotion; to let down of thy heat, and of thy Light into them; to create in us
upright hearts, and most vehement desires after a fuller Communion with thee in
Religious Ordinances: As the Heart pantet^^ after the waterbrooks, so may our
spirits in heavenly Aspirations, Long and pant after thee, O God! Crying out,
Oh when shall we come and appear before God? When shall we see and experience
of his beauteous, of his comfortable Goings forth in the Sanctuary, as in
former seasons?

Grant, O munificent Jesus, with whom the most urgent importunities are very
Acceptable and Delightful; grant that we may obtain all convenient Temporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal blessings, by the humble violence of fervent uncessant
Supplication.

O thou God of all Consolation, thou foundation of Blessedness, who Delightest
to (...) the ^eek and Lowly desires of thy ^^digent, Dependant Creatures,
Enlarge our hearts in this thy Service; Give us to taste of the sweets of
Devotion, let us experience the mighty efficacy of prayer: O suffer us not to
come down from this holy mount of exalted praise and Adoration, till it has
proved a mount of Transfiguration unto us; till we are made thereby more
Resemblant of thy Divine Nature in Purity and Holiness. Oh may we take such a
prospect of the promised Land of Rest and Happiness above, from the towering
Ascent of Prayer, that we may Anticipate the Joys Celestial, may contemn these
Earthly vanities, and disdain every meanner Satisfaction, than what thou our
God, the things Spiritual, and Eternal can yield us.

Accept, holy Father, of this as a Tribute of Thanksgiving for all thine
inestimable benefits from time to time conferred upon us; Accept of this poor
unworthy Retribution, but however all that our Indigency and Poverty, all that
thy self-sufficiency and fullness will allow us to pay thee: O may we Live and
Dye thus pouring out our souls to thee in humble Supplication and Gratulatory
praises: And when we have prayed, and praised, and adored thee our ut most, our
appointed measure here on Earth, O Grant we may be taken up into Heaven; and
there be joined to the Eternally praising, worshipping, and Adoring Quire of
Glorisied Saints and Angels. Amen, for our Redeemer's sake,

Amen, Amen.
A PRAYER FOR THE MORNING.
MOst Great, most Glorious, and Gracious Lord God; Glorious in Majesty, fearful
in Power, infinite in Holiness; with what holy Awe and Reverence, with what
pious Humility and Prostration of Soul, ought we vile Creatures, we sinful Dust
and Ashes, to approach this thy more immediate Presence!

Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of man that thou so
Regardest him, as to watch over him with thy Good Providence; as to visit him
with thy faithfulness in the Night-season, and with thy Loving Kindness every
Morning: O how indebted are we to thy Goodness and Forbearance, that we are yet
in the Land of the Living, praising thee! We pray thee make this thy Goodness
and Longsuffering instrumental to the leading us, out of a principle of
Gratitude, to a more complete and advanced Repentance.

Blessed be thy Name for the Protection afforded us the Night past, for thy
Renewed Mercies of this Day; O Grant that they may Excite us to a Renewing of
our holy purposes and Resolutions of stricter and better Obedience for the
future; may thy Adding days to our Lives, cause us to Add Diligence to our
religious endeavors: Give us Grace to spend our present continued season in
such a Godly manner, as if it were to be our Last; as Ready prepared against
its being such: Let not we beseech Thee the increase of our years, contribute
to the increase of our Guilt, and Number of our Sins; but cause this further
indulged space of Time to be so well-improved by us, as that it may bring us
the nearer to an happy Eternity.

But, O our God, how have we given thee occasion by our Abuse of former means
of Grace, and opportunities of Salvation, to Deny us any further ones, and to
cut us off in the midst of our Transgressions! How may thou resolve in thy
wrath, having been so Long Grieved, so Long Resisted by our sinful obstinacy,
that thy holy Spirit shall not Allways strive with such Refractory Offenders!

The Number of our Impieties is Great, the Heinousness of them much Greater; we
have forgotten thee too too often, have sinned against thee Days without
Number, tho thou have pardoned, have Spared us days without number; though thou
have given us our Being, though thou have plentifully provided for our
well-being, yet have we forgotten thee; though thou have given us thy Son to
Redeem us, though thou have given us thy Holy Ghost to Purify, Assist, and
Comfort us, yet have we ungratefully Rebelled against thee; in Contempt of thy
Goodness, Patience, and forbearance; in Contempt of thy Astonishing Love
manifested in Christ Jesus; in Defiance of the clearest Revelation of thy Will
and Pleasure by him; in Defiance of thy Great and precious Gospel Promises; of
all the Convictions of our own Consciences, calls of thy blessed Spirit, Sacred
Word and Gracious Providence, admonishing us to be Reconciled unto thee our
God!

And can thou O Lord, will thou after all this Disobedience, after all this
presumptuous offending thee, be yet Reconciled to such vile wretches and
miserable sinners as we are? Is there still Mercy with thee that thou may be
feared? Is there still Hope for us in a Crucified Savior? O blessed Savior
help and deliver us we most humbly beseech thee; by the Merits of thy Death and
Passion, by the Justifying power of thy Resurrection and Ascension, by the
prevalency of thy Mediation and Intercession, have Mercy upon us: Thy
Compassions are always free and ready toward Repentant Offenders; Lord we
Repent, perfect our Repentance; Lord we believe, O help thou our unbelief; we
solemnly promise thee a more Reformed Obedience, a more exalted Righteousness,
O strengthen us to keep this our promise, to perform this our holy Resolution:
Deliver us, O Heavenly Father, not only from the Guilt and Condemnation, but
also from the power and pollution of our sins; Assist us to break off those
Chains of evil Custom and Habit, those fetters of Wordly Cares, and
Temptations, those sensualizing Ties of Corrupt Inclinations or inordinate
Passions in which we have formerly been held Captive: Create clean hearts, O
God, and renew a-right Spirits within us for the time to come; beget in us a
true Faith, a sincere Repentance, an enflamed holy Love toward thee, that we
may Delight our selves in thy Commandments, that we may walk before thee in
uprightness, in an ingenuous fear of Displeasing thee, in a joyous Carefulness
of doing what is Acceptable in thy Sight: Diligently seeking thee, constantly
Depending on thee, cheerfully Submitting to thy Will, and Zealously practicing
it in the Duties of our several Callings, with Godly sincerity and constancy
unto our Lives End.

O Lord keep our feet, order our steps that they stray not out of the paths of
thy Commandments, out of the Paths of Truth, Righteousness, and Peace; O Lord
keep our mouths as with a bridle, that we offend not at any time with our
Tongues; through profane Swearing, through lying, slandering, immodest filthy
Speech, or false-witness-bearing; endue us with the most enlarged and raised
Christian Charity, with Temperance and Sobriety, with Purity and Chastity, with
Meekness and Humility, that we may possess these our Earthly Vessels in
Sanctification and Honor; and being Meek and Lowly, may find Rest unto our
Souls.

Give us, holy Father, to Live more by Faith and Less by Sense; to Overcome by
Faith the World, to live Above its Allurements or Determents, to have our
Conversation in an higher degree in Heaven; to lay up to our selves Treasures
there, that where our Treasures are, there may our Hearts be also: Make us
account it our very Meat and Drink to be doing thy Will; Cause us to Evidence
the Sincerity of our Love to thee our God, by our keeping Universally thy
Commandments; open thou our Eyes that we may see the Delightsome Excellencies
of thy Law, the charming Beauty of Holiness, and then none of thy Divine
precepts shall appear Grievous unto us; amidst all our Temptations whether of
the World, the Flesh, or the Devil, make thou us, O blessed Lord, more than
Conquerors, through Christ who strengthens us: And after we have done all,
after we have Grown in Grace (which we beseech thee cause us to do) after we
have been filled with the fruits of thy Spirit, and endeavored our utmost the
perfecting of holiness in thy Fear, keep us humble, keep us abased under a
sense of the manifold Imperfections of our best and choicest Services.

Neither Pray we This to be added to the Evening Prayer where you see this *
mark.
for our selves alone, but for the whole Race of Mankind; That thy ways, O God,
may be known upon Earth, thy Saving Health among all Nations.

Look down in Mercy upon thy holy Catholic Church; Enlarge its Borders, Unite
more its Members, Purify their Faith where Corrupt, and work a General
Reformation in their Lives and Actions.

Bless, Holy Father, more especially these Nations whereunto we belong; Pardon
our Great and Crying Sins, Avert from us thy Judgments, Increase and Continue
to us thy Blessings, make us an Holy and an Happy People; and Settle us upon
the sure Foundations of Truth, Righteousness, and Peace.

Rule, O Lord, in the Hearts of our Sovereign Rulers, by thy Faith, Fear, and
Love; Protect their Sacred Persons, Assist and Direct their Counsels, Succeed
their Arms, and all their Righteous Undertakings; Make their Government a Great
and Public Blessing to these Kingdoms, and to the whole Protestant Interest;
and after a Long and Prosperous Reign over us Here, Crown them with Glory and
Immortality in the highest Heaven.

Influence in a Peculiar Manner our Spiritual Governors and Teachers; Give
them Wisdom and Prudence from Above: Make them, O God, Faithful and Zealous,
make them also Successful in the Discharge of their Duties: and Grant that by
the purity of their Doctrine and Integrity of their Lives, they may be as
burning and shining Lights amidst a crooked and perverse Generation.

Visit with thy Salvation, O thou Father of Mercies, all the Sons and Daughters
of Affliction; Sanctify their Troubles, Support them with Faith and Patience
under 'em, and in thy due time send them an happy Deliverance out of all their
Sufferings

Forgive, O God, all our Enemies, Persecutors, and Slanderers, and Turn their
hearts. Bless all our Friends and Relations; be thou a God in Covenant with
them, and make them Partakers of all the Benefits and Privileges of that thy
Covenant.

Bless all of us here present; bless us in Turning us from our Iniquities, in
the Sanctifying and Renewing our Depraved Nature; Bless us with all Temporal,
but especially with Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

Put us, O God, in frequent Mindfulness of our Latter End, and Fit and Prepare
us for it; Help us to walk sincerely and uprightly in our whole Conversation;
that Living here in thy Fear, we may Dye in thy Favor; may Rest in thy Peace,
Rise by thy Power, be Glorified by thy Bounty, and Remain with thee for ever
amidst Joys Celestial, Enravishing, Inexhaustible. All which we beg through the
Merits and Mediation of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ, who has taught us
when we pray to say,

Our Father which art in Heaven, (...)

A Prayer for the Evening.
O OUR God, thou Almighty Lord of Heaven and Earth, Thou pure immaculate Spirit
of Holiness, humble us under a sense of our meanness as indigent Dependant
Creatures, of our exceeding Great Vileness, and impurity as Sinners; O with
what pious fear and Reverence ought we to draw Nigh unto Thee, who art of purer
Eyes than to behold the least iniquity with Approbation! With what Joy and
Thankfulness ought we to acknowledge this thine inestimable favor, that thou
who art so highly Exalted, wilt humble thy self to take notice of such
Despicable polluted Beings as we are!

For ever blessed be thy Goodness, who have made Prayer our Duty, which is so
much our Interest and Privilege; O how inexcusable should we be, should we
neglect so Great a means of Grace and Salvation! Will thou, O Lord, Admit and
Accept our poor unworthy Services, and shall not we Gladly Embrace the
Vouchsafement? Since our Righteousness Extends not unto Thee, since we only
are the Gainers by thy Service; which is its own Reward, which is our perfect
freedom: O cause therefore all that is within us to bless thy holy Name; Cause
all that is within us to render thee most willing and Cheerful Obedience.

But O God most Glorious, whose Transcendent Excellency is Exalted above all
Glory and Praise; the more we Speak of thine Honor, the more we become
Sensible how infinitely we fall short of it! O make us to show forth thy
praise, not only with our Lips, but in our Lives, by giving up our selves to
thy Service; by conforming our selves to thy Likeness in Holiness; by ^aising,
Spiritualizing, and Enflaming by thy help, our Affections toward thee in
Prayer.

Yet Alas Alas, how soon are we weary of this most Delightsome, most
Beneficial Duty of Devotion! How much Averseness is there in us unto the
Undertaking! how much Distraction of Thoughts, and Deadness of Spirit in the
performance! What formality, want of Relish, want of Zeal and fervor is there
mingled with the best of our Religious Services! How prone have we been to
Deceive our selves with Shadows of Piety and Devotion, instead of the
Substance! With a form of Godlyness, instead of the Life and power thereof! How
prone to Content our selves with the bare praises of thy Divine perfections,
which we have not had the Godly Ambition, the Sincerity of heart to imitate; O
pardon the sins and iniquities of these our Holy things!

But besides the imperfections of our best performances, how many ways have we
presumptuously offended thee our God! By innumerable Omissions and Commissions;
Omissions of Duty, Commissions of Evil; by many frequently Repeated, and long
Continued acts of wickedness; by sinful provocations in Thought, Word, and Deed
against thy Divine Majesty: O how often have we Stifled the Convictions, the
Reproofs of our own Consciences! How often Resisted the holy motions, the
Restraints of thy blessed Spirit! How long neglected the Great Salvation of thy
Gospel! How many times violated our most Solemn Baptismal Vow and Covenant!

The very Multitude of our sins is Enough to Amaze and Affrighten us, to cover
us with Shame and Confusion of face; but the Heinousness, the Baseness, the
Ingratitude of our mis-demeanours toward so Gracious and heavenly a Father, so
Long-suffering a preserver, so Mercyful a Benefactor, Sanctifier and Redeemer;
O how Grievous is the Remembrance thereof to us, the burden of so much
wickedness how Intolerable!

O our God, Strong and patient, had thou not been God, how could thou have
had patience with such perfidious, such ungrateful, such wilfully Disobedient
Rebels! Well for us is it, that thy mercy and forbearance Exceed that of Man,
are like the self, unlimited! O the Riches of thy Grace! will thou again
Receive such prodigal Children into thy favor? Will thou Still be Reconciled
unto us? Ah let thy Goodness, let thy Reconcileableness lead us to Repentance,
to a more complete consummated one; and our Repentance may it fit us for thy
pardon and Acceptance.

And not merely for the Pardon of our sins implore we mercy at thy hands, but
for a Divine power to enable us to subdue them; Set we beseech thee, O Lord,
our hearts in such a perfect Enmity against all things contrary to thy blessed
Will and Nature, that we may never be Reconciled to them any more; dispose us
to such an Entire Affection to thy Commandments, that they may become our
Choice, our Desire, our Exceeding Great Rejoicing! O that we may walk more
circumspectly, Redeeming the time, because the days are Evil! O that we may
give all Diligence to make our Calling and Election Sure! O that the life, the
pure unspotted life of Christ Jesus may be formed within us the hope of Glory!

Fill us, Gracious God, with the whole Knowledge of thy Will in all Wisdom and
Spiritual Understanding, and Assist us with thy Grace unto the Conscientious
practice of such knowledge; Increase in us that faith which works by Divine
Love, which purisieth the heart and life, and overcomes the wicked world.
Excite in us that ardent Affection to thee, which may make us cheerfully Do thy
Will, or patiently suffer it in all instances; and which will cause us to Love
our brethren as our selves, for Christ's sake, with a pure heart, out of Love
unfeigned; not in Tongue only, but also in Deed and in Truth.

Keep us, O Lord, pure and unspotted with the World; Temperate, Chaste, and
Unspotted with the flesh; keep us Safe and unseduced by our own hearts lusts,
by Satan's wicked Suggestions and Allurements; Cause us to have our Conversation
without Covetousness, to have it more in Heaven, less on Earth; teach us
contempt of Earthly things; teach us to deny our selves, to conquer all
Temptations, to live above the corruptions which so much abound in the Age:
Give us Patience, give us supporting comfort, and quiet submission in
Adversity; let a contented mind be instead of all we want, and a thankful heart
sweeten all our Enjoyments. O that we may mind more the one thing Necessary;
that we may seek in the first place the Kingdom of Heaven and its
Righteousness; and whatever other things we leave undone, we may be still
working out our Salvation with fear and trembling!

Make us, O our God, more careful of pleasing thee, fearful of offending thee,
diligent and industrious in thy Service; more observant of thy Good Providence
in every thing, more grateful for thy benefits Received, more readily disposed
in all conditions to every good thought, word and work.

* Stir us up we entreat thee, to a frequent mindfulness of our Latter End, and
fit and prepare us for it; let our approaching sleep this Night put us in mind
of our last sleep, our Bed remind us of our Grave, and the darkness of the
evening of the days of Darkness which shall be many in the Chambers of Death;
Lighten our Eyes, O Lord, that they sleep not therein, but that we may Awake
with the morning Light unto thy Praise and Glory: Forgive those actual sins of
thy servants which the day past has been witness unto; Lord give us a Godly
sorrow for them, a perfect hatred of them, and more carefulness to avoid them
for the future: and whether we sleep this night in death, or awake to the fresh
Mercies of the following day, O Grant that Christ Jesus may be unto us both in
Life and Death, great Advantage: Grant this for the Merits and Mercy's-sake of
him who dyed for our sins, and rose again for our Justification, and who has
left us this most Absolute form of Prayer wherewith to conclude our imperfect
ones,

Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, etc.

A Prayer for a Sick Person.
O OUR God, full of Compassion and Truth, whose Ears are ever open to the Cries
of the Distressed, who afflictest not, neither Grievest willingly the Children
of Men, but in very Faithfulness Causest us to be Troubled; Chastising us for
our Profit, that we may be Partakers of thy Holiness: We thy Poor Unworthy
Creatures Address our selves to the Throne of thy Grace, in behalf of this thy
Servant Grieved with Sickness. O let his Grief of body move thy Succouring
Pity; behold him with the Eyes of thy Mercy; Rescue him with the
Al-Almightiness of thy Power; however Grant that the Infirmity of his
outer-Man, may tend to the Health and Improvement of his Soul in all Gracious
Qualifications. O make him by means of thy Divine Chastisements Resemblant in a
larger Measure of thy Divine Nature; make him Perfect through Sufferings; Train
him up a Good Soldier of Jesus Christ by such Disciplining Hardships; Teach
him a more Complete Obedience and Conformity to thy Will by the things which he
Endures: Relieve him under all his Distresses; Give him Patience, Repentance,
and Submission under all his Uneasiness. Support him under all Trials and
Temptations; O suffer not his Faith to fail in this Day of Adversity;
Strengthen him in the Inner-Man especially, now he lies on a Bed of
Languishing; O make Thou his Bed in all his Sickness: In the midst of the pains
of his Body, let thine Inward Comforts Refresh his Soul; make all things,
Tribulation as well as Prosperity, work together for his Good; may he Continue
to be thy Servant under all Conditions.

Permit him not Gracious God, for any troubles of Life, or fears of Death to
fall from Thee; but Give him Joy and Consolation in Believing, when encompassed
with the Sorest Distresses* Increase therefore his Faith, Confirm his Hopes,
Enlarge his Contentedness and Resignation; Wean his Affections more and more
from the things Below, and Raise and Settle them on the Good things Above.

Free, Blessed Lord, this thy Servant from all Murmuring and Repining at thy
Afflictive Providence; and Cause him rather to Rejoice and Glory in
Tribulation; as knowing that the Trial of his Faith works Patience, and
Patience Experience, and Experience Hope, and Hope makes not Ashamed: O let
Patience have its Perfect work in him; that he may be Complete and Entire,
wanting no Virtuous Endowment; let thy Grace be Sufficient for him, that he may
not faint in the time of Calamity; O may his Affliction prove an Exercise and
Enlargement of all his Graces: Let it beget in him greater Trust and Affiance
in thy Divine Mercy, less Relyance on, and Confidence in the Creature, a being
Crucified to the World, and the World to him, as to the immoderate Love of it.

Cause Holy Father, this thy Afflicted Son to Humble himself under thy
Correcting hand, that Thou may Exalt him in thy due Season; make him to Cast
all his Care upon Thee, because Thou carest for him; Give him to feel now in
this his Distress, what is the Hope of his Spiritual Calling, and what the
Exceeding Greatness of thy Mercy and Power toward them who Believe in Thee; O
Give him that Saving Faith which works by Love, and Purifieth the Heart, and
Overcomes the World. Give him Repentance unto Newness of Life, never to be
Repented of; Cause him by means of this Affliction to Search and Try his ways,
and turn him unto Thee his God, who in Mercy Chastisest him.

Afford him, Gracious Lord, afford this Sick Person the Comfort of an holy Hope
that thou Acceptest his Penitential Tears and Contrition of heart; Support him
by this Hope under all his Sickness and Distemper; Say unto him by the inward
Testimonies of thy Spirit, I am thy Salvation, Son be of Good Cheer, thy Sins
are forgiven thee; I have heard thee in an Acceptable time, I have laid Help
for Thee on one who is mighty to Save, Jesus Christ the Righteous, He is the
Propitiation for thy sins: O Apply the Merits and Satisfaction of his Dying
Redeemer unto the Soul of this thy Servant, for Pardon and Acceptance; wash it
clean in the Blood of that Immaculate Lamb, which was Slain, to take away the
sins of the world, and through his Savior's Stripes let him be Healed.

Bless and Succeed we beseech Thee those Remedies which have or shall be used
for the Recovering this weak Afflicted Person to his former Health; Command
Deliverance for him; Thou who art the God of Nature, Speak Nature within him
into a due Temper and Composure: Known unto Thee are the most hidden things; O
do Thou therefore adapt suitable Medicines to any unknown Cause or hidden
Spring of this present Distemper; Suffer us, Heavenly Father, to have Power
with thee in Prayer, and mightily to Prevail on this thy Servants behalf: Thou
have Promised that the Prayer of Faith shall Save the Sick, and that the
Effectual fervent Prayer of the Righteous shall Avail much; O make us Pray in
Faith, and Believing, so as to be Heard; make us fervent and Zealous in Prayer,
so as to have our Prayers Answered!

Restore, we entreat Thee, this Diseased Person, that he may be continued a
Blessing and Comfort to his Relations; that he may live to Perform his pious
Vows and Resolutions made in time of Sickness; that he may spend the Residue of
his Life more to thy Honor and Glory. But if in thy Fatherly wisdom thou see
it fitting to Prolong his Corrections, thy Blessed Will be done; and may thy
Afflicted Servant say Amen with an Entire Submission: May he bear further
Chastisement in his Body, so that his Soul be but Saved in the Day of our Lord.

Yet O God most Gracious, O most Holy and Mercyful Savior, Thou most worthy
Judge Eternal, be not Thou Extreme to mark whatever he has done Amiss; Correct
him, O Lord, but with Judgment; not in thine Anger, lest Thou bring him to
nothing; and though thou take not off the Rod of Affliction, yet take away thy
Displeasure we beseech thee far from him: Remember, O Lord, thy tender Mercies,
and thy Lovingkindnesses which have been ever of old; and Cause this our Sick
Friend in Thankful Recollection of former Divine Rescues, to put his Trust in
thee for a Present Deliverance: O suffer him not for any Anguish of Body to let
Go his Faith and Confidence in Thee; but give him to say with the Stedfastness
of holy Job though he Kills me, yet will I hope in him.

Fit, O God, this Languishing Person for whatever Condition thou shall call him
unto, that thy Son Christ Jesus may be unto him whether in Life or Death great
Advantage; O permit him not to Depart hence at any time, but with all
imaginable Preparations for Eternity; with a Soul thoroughly Changed and
Renewed, with a Soul full fraught with thy Divine Love; Humble and Resigned,
Cheerful and Enravish'd with future Expectations: And then whenever this his
Earthly Tabernacle shall be Dissolved, he shall have a building of God, an
house not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens: Which we beseech thee to
Grant both him and us, for the alone Sake and Merits of thy Son our Savior; to
whom together with Thee O Father, and thy Holy and Ever-blessed Spirit, be
Ascribed as is most D^e, all Honor, Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, from
this time forth and for Evermore.

Amen, Amen.
Another Prayer for the Sick, when there appears small Hopes of Recovery.
O Most Glorious and Merciful Heavenly Father, the Lord and Giver of Life, the
Healer and Repairer of our Decayed Nature, who bring down to the Grave, and
then say Come again ye Children of Men; Giving Power to the Faint, and to
those who have no Might increase of Strength: Behold, we beseech thee
Favorably, Visit Graciously, and Relieve speedily this thy Servant, who
stands in Need of thy Pity and Relief; Be Thou a very Present Help unto him,
O Lord, now in the Necessitous time of his Trouble. O let thy tender Mercies
come unto him, that he may Live; Encompass him with thy Favor as with a
Shield; Pity and Purify him, Sanctify and Save him we most humbly beseech
thee: Either Assuage his Pain, or else Increase his Faith and Patience to bear
it: Either Remove his Affliction, or else move toward him with Divine Comfort
and S^pport: Lay upon him, Gracious God, no more than thou shall enable him
with Willingness and Submission to undergo, and then lay on him whatsoever
shall seem Good in thy Sight.

O Give him a Sanctified Use and Improvement of thy Fatherly Corrections; let
them teach him more Humility, Contentedness and Resignation; less Trust and
Relyance on the Creature: Cause him, O Lord, by means of his present Distress,
to see the Emp^iness, Deceit, and Instability of all Earthly Possessions; and
may this Conviction carry up his Mind to the satisfieing Everdurable Enjoyments
of Heaven: O that his Devout Conversation there in Holy Meditations, Fervent
Prayers, and Transporting Praises, may Allay much of his Corporal Pains and
Disquietudes, and render him in a manner Insensible of them: O that thy Word
and blessed Promises may be his sure Trust and Confidence in Adversity; though he
walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, yet let him fear no Evil, may
thy Rod as well as thy Staff Comfort and Sustain him.

Give him, Holy Lord, unseigned Repentance for all the Miscarriages of his Life
past, Steadfast Faith in thy Son Jesus, Complete Pardon and Forgiveness through
the Merits of his Blood, a lively Hope of that Immortal Bliss, which his
Redeemer has Dearly Purchased, and most Graciously Promised to true Believers;
a strong Sense of thy Fatherly Love toward him, and tender Care over him even
amidst his Sufferings.

O cause this Sick Person to Apprehend and be Assured that thou intendest his
Spiritual Benefit and Amendment by these thy Corrections; that they are the
Chastisements of a Loving Father, and not of an Incensed Judge; that they are
the healing Medicines of a Friend, and not the avenging Wounds of an Enemy: O
Convince him, Convince him, that in making him endure Chastening, thou dealest
with him as with one of thy Children; for what Son is he whom the Father
Chasteneth not? That thou seek to Conform him by Afflictions to the Likeness
of his Blessed Savior; O may he be made Perfect through Sufferings: Teach him
we Pray thee more Obedience through the things which he Endures; May his
Chastening however Grievous for the Present, afterward yield him the Peaceable
Fruits of Righteousness; may it turn to his Spiritual Profit and Advantage, and
help him forward in the Right way which leads unto Life Everlasting.

Take, O God, from this thy Servant, all Murmuring Discontent under thy
Disciplining Providence; Cause him rather Quietly to submit to thy Afflicting
Hand, as Considering that Affliction arises not out of the Dust, proceeds
not merely from Natural Causes, but from thy Wise Providence and Appointment,
who Orderest all things toward us for our Good; O Persuade this Sick Person
it is for his Good that he is Afflicted; that of very Faithfulness thou have
Caused him to be troubled: O make him by Searching and Trying his ways to find
out those particular Sins and Failings which thou Aimest at in this his
Chastisement; to Observe and Understand thy Meaning in the Calamities which
befall him; that he may accordingly meet thee in thy Providential Ways and
Dealings toward him; that so the Removal of his Guilt by Repentance, through
the Merits of his Savior, may make Way for the Removal of thy Divine Rod of
Punishment.

And do Thou the God of all Grace and Truth, who have called this thy Corrected
Son to Suffering, by thy Fatherly Wisdom and Goodness; after that he has
suffered a while for his Souls Profit, Stablish, Strengthen, Settle him.

Let we Pray thee thy Merciful Kindness be this Afflicted Person's Succor and
Safety; send him Help from Above, and Evermore mightily Defend him; Defend him,
O Lord, from all Satan's disquietting Assaults, from all his Wicked
Temptations: O let not that Evil one have any Advantage over him in these his
sorrowful Hours; but Rebuke him, Good Lord, Rebuke him; Tread that old seducing
Serpent under this thy Servant's Feet, and make him more than Conqueror through
Christ who strengthens him.

Wor^ Holy Father, D^liverance for (...) whom th^^ Ch^stisest; Heal him, and he
shall be Healed; Save him, and he shall be saved; for thou a^^ the God of his
Praise: O make him to hear again of Joy and Gladness, that the ^ones which thou
have b^oken may ^^joice.

But if thou in thy Wisdom have Decreed that this thy Servants Sickness shall
be unto Death; Fit and Prepare him for it we beseech thee; Give him a more
perfectly Holy and Heavenly Constitution of Soul, an Heart Weaned and Estranged
from this World, a sanctified Meetness to be made Partaker of an Inheritance
with the Saints in Light and Glory: O may his last Hours be his Best Hours; his
last Thoughts his Best Thoughts; and his last Words and Actions his best Words
and Actions: The Nearer he draws to the End of his Days, cause him so much the
Nearer to draw to the End of his Hopes, even the Salvation of his Soul.

For this Purpose, Apply we Entreat thee, all the Benefits of our Savior's
Perfect Obedience and Meritorious Sufferings unto this Dying Person for
Reconciliation and Acceptance: Impute not, Gracious Lord, unto him, his former
Sins, but thy Well-beloved Son's Alsufficient Righteousness; who was Wounded
for our Transgressions, and bruised for our Iniquities: O let the Peace
purchased by thy Son's Chastisements be upon this thy Servant, and by his
Redeemers Stripes let him be healed.

Wash his Soul clean, O God, in Christ's most Precious Blood; Conform him more
and more to the Holy Doctrine and Example of the Everblessed Jesus; Sanctify
him with all the Saving Graces of thy Renewing Spirit: Give him, if it be thy
Will, some Delightful Foretastes and Anticipations of Celestial Blessedness;
Hope toward Thee, an Enravisht Sense of thy Favor, Joys in the Holy Ghost,
unspeakable and full of Approaching Glories: However, if this be too great a
Vouchsafement, make him at least Willing to be Dissolved, Fit for Heaven, Full
of his Savior, Empty of himself, and of all Trust in his own Defective
Righteousness; and whenever thou take him out of this World, take him we
Beseech Thee unto thy self into Everlasting Felicity, Amen, Holy Jesu, for thy
Precious Death and Passions sake,

Amen.
A Prayer to be used on the Lord's Day in the Morning, Preparatory to the
Duties of the Day.
BLessed and Glorious Lord God, Thou Lord and Instituter of the Sabbath, who
allowest us Six Days in Seven for our Temporal and Worldly Concerns, and have
Set Apart the Seventh only for thine own more Especial Service; O how wisely
have thou Provided for both our ^ouls and Bodies! For how would our Outward Man
want Food and Raiment, were not Days of Labor afforded it, wherein by honest
Industry to procure those Necessaries; and how would our Spirit, Pine away, and
Languish as to all Gracious Endowments, were not Seasons appropriated to thy
Divine Worship.

O that therefore at present we may Rest from the works of Sin, as well as from
those of our particular Callings; O that we may be in the Spirit on this thine
own Day; that we may worship thee thereon in Spirit and in Truth; that we may
keep it so Holy and Sanctified unto Thee, as that it may be a Pledge and
Earnest of an Eternal Sabbatisme with thee in Light and Glory. This is the Day
which the Lord has made by his Justifying Resurrection, O may we Rejoice and
be Glad therein with an Holy Rejoicing! This is the Day which was the Birthday
of our Hopes and future Blessed Expectations, O may it prove a Day of Growth
and Improvement in Grace; of holy Ardours, and Devont Enravishments!

Grant Gracious Father, that we may not find our own Pleasure, nor Speak our
own Words, nor do our own Deeds on this thine Hallowed-Day, but may both Call
and Esteem it a Delight, Holy of the Lord, Honorable; O that Heaven, an a
Heavenly Frame and Temper of Spirit may be Begun in us Here, by means of our
pious Intercourses with Heaven amidst the Duties of thy Day!

We are Going, O Lord, unto thy House of Prayer, the Place where thine Honor
dwells; O pardon us, that we are not Prepared according to the Preparation of
thy Sanctuary; that we have not yet put off our Carnal and Earthly Affections;
Considering that the place whereon we are to stand is Holy Ground.

O do Thou, our God vouchsafe to Go along with us into thy Temple, by the Holy
Aids and Assistances of thy Spirit; Cause us to Approach Thee there with
Reverence, and to worship before thee with a Zealous Affection when we
Meditate, let us do it with all Seriousness, Heavenly-Mindedness, and
Edification; when we Pray, let it be with the utmost Attension, Faith, and holy
Fervor; when we Hear the Glad Tidings of thy Gospel, may it be with all
Diligent and hearty Attendance on thy Word and Doctrine; when we Read thy Holy
Scriptures, may they make us wise unto Salvation; may we Read them with
Understanding, with an Affectionate Gust and Relish, with a Reforming Change,
and inward Digestion of them into Spiritual Grace and Nourishment.

O may this Day be added to our Share in an Happy Eternity, by our Religious
Improvement of it; may Thou our God come Down unto us herein by thy Divine
Influences, and may we be Taken up unto thee by Devout Praises and Adorations.

Accompany we beseech Thee, O Lord, with thine own more Especial Presence,
thine own more Especial Ordinances and holy Institutions: Cause us by the
Spiritual food of pious Duties, to Increase in Grace, and to be Nourished up to
a perfect Manhood in Christ Jesus: Being Rooted and Grounded in Divine Love,
and built up through Faith unto a Capacity of Eternal Salvation.

How Earthly, O God, would beour Affections, How Carnal and Sensual our Souls,
were their Thoughts and Desires always busied about the things of this World!
Blessed be thy Name therefore that thou have Enjoined us a Season, wherein to
call off our Thoughts and Affections from things Temporal; wherein to unloosen
our Spirits from Sense and Sensual Concernments, and allowest us a Sweet
Converse and Communication with Thee the Fountain of all Happyness! O make us
more to value this inestimable Privilege; make us at present to Improve it to
the best Advantage; Cause us to hold a pious Harmony of Praises and Hallelujahs
with thy Blessed Saints and Angels now in Heaven: It Is the Employment will be
our Continual Joy and Blissful Recreation in the Regions Above; O give us
therefore to Habituate our selves to it Now, and thereby partake of Heavenly
Satisfactions even on Earth!

Give a Blessing to thy word Preached, and to the Prayers offered to thy Divine
Majesty on this Day; while Paul plants and Apollos ^aters, do Thou, O God, Give
the Sanctifying Increase: That we may be able Experimentally to say, we have
Tasted and Seen, ^ow Gracious the Lord is; we have of a Truth found how it is
Good for us that ^e have waited upon thee in the midst of thine holy
Ordinances: And then by these means of Grace being Trained up and Fitted for
Everlasting Glory, we shall at length be Translated thither, where the
Exercises of Holiness shall Cease, being means of Begetting or Confirming us in
Grace, and shall only be our Delight, and Joy, and Heavenly Entertainment for
an Eternal Duration. Amen, Blessed Lord, Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns near the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1693.
THirty Six Sermons, viz. 16 Ad Aulum. 6 Ad Clerum. 6 Ad Magistratum. 8 Ad
Populum. With a large Preface, by the Right Reverend Father in God, Robert
Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln. The Eight Edition corrected and
amended. Whereunto is now added the Life of the Reverend and Learned Author.
Written by Isaac Walton Folio.

Conversation in Heaven. Being Devotions; consisting of Meditations and
Prayers, On several Considerable Subjects in Practical Divinity. Written for
the Raising the Decayed Spirit of Piety. By Lawrence Smith, LL. D. Fellow of
St. John's College in Oxford.

A Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Gray, Late Vicar of Dedham
in Essex; Preached in the Parish Church of Dedham, Febr. the 2d. 1691/2. With a
short Account of his Life. By


