To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons now Assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of John Smith of Sandwich Draper, in the bebalfe of
himself and the Inhabitants of Margate.
Shows,
THat for near two and thirty years since, until within six years last past,
the Sea-works of Margate in the Isle of Thanet, were maintained by Scots on the
Houses and Lands there, together with part of the benefits of the Peer (the
said peer being a great and continual cause of the devastation of the said
works) which Scots were imposed by the Commissioners of Sewers, who then viewed
and took care of the said works; during all which time, by the blessing of God,
the said Town was preserved, and little or no hurt done by the violence of the
Sea.

That about six years since, diverse persons whose estates lies more backward
from the Sea, and in less danger; aiming more at their private ends, than the
public good, questioned the power of the Commissioners, alleging the said
Seaworks were not in compass of the Statute, on which their Commission was
granted: whereupon the Commissioners wholly rejected the said works: and since
that time the Sea has done above four thousand pounds worth of hurt there; and
threatens the destruction of the Town. That at the time of the rejecting of
their charg of the works, your petitioner was Expenditor of the same works, and
had some estate there in housing, did for safeguard thereof, and the Town go on
in repair of the said works; toward which he was forced to borrow two hundred
pound upon his own band (for which he still paies use for) his Scot granted him
by the Commissioners being denied to be paid him; But after great charges upon
the said works, by the late violence of the Sea, a great part of the
Jetty-works were taken away for want of due reparations, whereupon your
petitioner, finding the burden in supportable for himself alone to undergo,
and considering what the miserable event would be if neglected, did gain a
Certificate from the Mayor and Jurats of Dover, under the Town Seal (in whose
jurisdiction Margate is) of the great danger the said Town was in, with a
Petition subscribed by many of the Inhabitants of Margate, wherein was desired
Timber for the present making up of the said works, and a Scot as formerly
continued; which Petition and Certificate was presented to the right honorable
Committee of Admiralty and Cinque Ports; and thereupon an order was made and
directed to some Knights and Gentlmen near Margate to view the said works, and
to report the danger, and charge of repair to that Committee, as by the Order
annexed appears: who with experienced workmen measured and cast up the charge,
and made report of it accordingly, as by the Report also appears: upon which
report the Committee of the Admiralty (after along and chargeable attendance)
made a further Order: wherein they declared what they conceived fitting to be
done therein. And in regard the same works lay within the jurisdiction of the
Sinque-Ports, they thought fit to recommend the business to both Houses of
Parliament, either to be by them confirmed, or otherwise ordered, as to their
wisdoms should seem meet; as by that Order also appears. But by reason of the
Kingdoms more weighty business, your Petitioner as yet has had no further
order or redress heerin, although the Sea has done above five thousand punds
worth of hurt within four years past, though in the interim, and for these six
years past, your Petitioner has defended a great part of the Town at his own
charge, and expended the sum of four hundred eighty pounds eighteen shillings
and eight pence, as by a particular account under the workmens hands appears;
besides his charges in soliciting of the business, amounting to above three
hundred pounds, and in the neglect, loss and hinderance of his trade, to at
least six hundred and fify pounds, without any penny recompense; which will be
to his sudden ruin and destruction, if not relieved by your Honors.

May it therefore please your honors to consider of the premises, and that a
place of such consequence where Ambassadors and persons of great quality take
shiping, and are landed, may not be quite overwhelmed, and the estate of your
Petitioner, and many others quite destroyed, and their wives, children and
families ruined) to be pleased speedily to Order, that sufficient Timber may be
allowed, so as the present breaches may be timely repaired, and for time to
come upheld, by Scots on the houses and lands there, and by a poundage upon
commodities exported and imported from and to the said Island; That the Peer
Wardens may be yearly accomptable to the Mayor and Jurats of Dover, for the
money by them received and expended about the same, a moiety of the overplus to
be allowed yearly toward the said Works; and that your Petitioner may be
speedily satisfied his said disbursments about the said Works. And Your
Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

Die Jovis, 18. November. 1647. At the Committee of Lords and Commons for the
Admiralty and Cinque Ports
IN reading the Petition of John Smith Expenditor for the Works against
Margate, concerning the deficiency of the said Works, his charg^s in attending
that business of the Isle of Thanet, the delays used by some that have
addressed their Petition to this Committee in opposition of his; by their not
standing to what had been mutually agreed before some of this Committee, and
proposing away for repair of the said Works, and keeping of them for the
future.

Ordered that Henry Crisp Esquire, George Summer, William Coppin, Thomas
Wheatley, Edward Brooks, and Stephen Bishop, do attend this Committee on this
day three weeks, by themselves or some of them, or some other on their behalf,
sufficiently instructed to answer the said Petition, and failing thereof, this
Committee will proceed to settle such resolution upon John Smiths said
Petition, as shall appear most meet, without further delay.

Signed by my Lord of Warwick, and others of the said Committee.

A true Copy of the Agreement which the Island-men, before the Committee of
the Admiralty agreed on, but now fall from, and refused to set their hands to:
Here follows,
UPon debate before the Honorable Committee of Lords and Commons, for the
Admiralty and Cinque Ports, of the matter in difference touching the repairing,
sustaining, and keeping of Jetty-workes against the Sea at Margate, in the Isle
of Thanet, for preventing the destruction and swallowing up of the said Town of
Margate, by the violence of the Sea breaking in upon it. And upon hearing of
John Smith, Expenditor for the said Town, and his council on the one side. And
of Sir Henry Crisp, Henry Crisp Esquire. Richard Hearty, Jeffery Sandwell, John
Broxland, Mark Ambrose, Tho. Smith Senior, George Somner, John Tomblin, Will.
Copin, John Pannell, James Hannaker, and Richard Jenvey, and their Council on
the other side. Upon the whole business there arose two Questions. The first,
How the said Jetty-works might for the present be repaired, and for the future
maintained, so that the Sea might be kept from breaking in, and the said Town
might be preserved? The second, How the said Smith, the Expenditor might be
satisfied and reimbursed the moneys and charges he had laid out, and been at in
this public and common business, for the time past? And as to the first, the
said Sir Henry Crisp, Henry Crisp Esquire. Richard Hearty, Jeffery Sandwell, John
Broxland, Mark Ambrose, Tho. Smith, Senior, George Somner, John Tomblin, Will.
Coppin, John Parnell, James Hannaker, Richard Jenvey, and their Council did
offer, That if the repairing of the said Jetty-workes and the keeping thereof,
might be entrusted to them, they would with 200. Tun of Timber, to be allowed
unto them for the said work for the present sufficiently repair the said
Jetty-works, and make them defensive against the Sea, and safe guard and
preserve the said Town of Margate, and every part thereof, and of the Lands
thereto belonging, against the violence and breaking in of the Sea, as well for
the present as for the future for ever hereafter, without any further tax,
allowance or charge, to be yielded, made, paid or imposed therefore, but only a
scot, or tax of 12. pence in the pound, to be levied and paid out of the Houses
erected against the said works, and to be paid but once in the year and no
oftener. And for the performance thereof in every particular, viz. as well for
the present repairing, as future sufficient keeping the same for ever, upon the
rate aforesaid, and without any further demand. The said parties before
mentioned did by themselves and their Council, make offer, to put in
sufficient Security, as this Committee or the Honorable Houses should approve
and like of; which being accepted and yielded unto by the said Smith the
Expenditor; the Committee thought fit that the same should be subscribed by the
said parties, to remain with this Committee, or be presented to the Honorable
Houses, as should be requisite.

And as to the second Question, touching the charge and disbursments of the
said Smith, for that the parties could not agree upon the same, nor how and in
what manner they had been laid out. It was humbly prayed, That a Commission
might be ordered to issue out of the Court of Admiralty of the Cinque Ports, to
examine witnesses upon such matters, interrogations, and questions, as the said
Smith for his part might see cause for the better ascertaining of the said
disbursments, and charges by him expended; And wherein the said other parties
might join and counter examine likewise if they thought meet. That so
examinations being duly taken, they might be returned to this Committee,
whereupon this Committee might be truly informed of the true state of the
matter; and so give such order for relief of the said Smith, as they should
hold just and equitable.

A certificate from the Inhabitants of Margate, showing the sad and lamentable
condition that the said Town is in, by reason of a late breach which the Sea
made; which might have been prevented, had the Island men stood to the
forementioned Agreement. A true copy whereof here follows.

To the Right Honorable the Committee for the Admiralty and the Cinque Ports.
THese are further to inform your Honors, That whereas the Jetties of Margate,
in the Isle of Thanet, and County of Kent; and the great danger of the said
Town, have many times and late been discussed before your Honors, and whereupon
your Honors out of a commisseration, and due consideration, of the danger of
the said Town and Inhabitants there; have been favorably pleased to grant some
convenient quantity of Timber, for the better defense of the said Town and
Inhabitants there, against that raging and merciless Element, the Sea. And
whereas it has pleased God on Sunday last past, (being the 12. day of this
instant March,) to send a most tempestuous tide, against the said Town, (as at
other places) by reason whereof, a great part of the said works is broken
down, and some part of a House of this bearer John Smith, is demollished; and
whereas not only the estate there of the said John Smith, but of many other the
Inhabitants of the said Town, are (if not very speedily secured) like to come
to utter ruin and decay.

The premises considered, May it yet again please your Honors, to take the
deplorable condition of the said Town and Inhabitants, into your speedy and
mature consideration, and to afford such a quantity of Timber for the defense
of the said Town and Inhabitants; and also to appoint and ordain some able man
(whom your Honors shall think fit) to take care of the said works, as in an
exigence of so much concernment and danger is required.

In witness whereof, we your Honors humble petitioners have subscribed our
hands (Inhabitants of the said Town) the 13. day of March, Non salutis, 1647.
Subscribed by the Inhabitants of Margate.

To the Right Honorable the Committee of the Cinque Ports and Admiralty.
May it please this Honorable Committee:
WE whose names are here under written (Inhabitants of the Town and Port of
Sandwich) do humbly certify (being thereunto requested) unto your Honors in
the name, and behalf of John Smith, (one of our said Town). That (to our
knowledge) he has been a man always well-affected to the Parliament, in their
actings, and proceedings for the public Interest, welfare, and happiness of
the Kingdom; And in order thereunto he has declared his forwardness, (we
believe beyond his abilities) in contributions and subscriptions for Horse,
Plate, and Moneys, and in regard he has (as we are informed, through the
opposition of some ill-affected persons) suffered much in his estate (sundry
ways) by his long attending on his business of Margate, in the Isle of
Thanet; (which if effected we believe would tend to a Public good, and
benefit.)

We, (your humble fervants, considering the premises) do humbly beseech and
request, this Honorable Committee, for to consider his cause, and to answer his
desire, (which we are confident of) as your Honors apprehend them just: and
with what convenient expedition it may be; which otherwise (considering also
his great charges and expenses in prosecuting thereof) may prove to be to the
extreme wrong and damage (if not the utter undoing) of himself, and his
Family.

Humbly represented and subscribed, by the Major and Jurets, etc.

Die Sabba. 27. February 1646. At the Committee of Lords and Commons for the
Admiralty and Cinque Ports.
ON consideration of a Petition presented to this Committee, by John Smith
Expenditor for Margate in the Isle of Thanet in the County of Kent, in behalf
of himself, and the Inhabitants, and owners of the houses and lands lying
against the Sea at Margate aforefaid; the same setting forth the great danger
the said Town is in of being carried to Sea, and the great loss already
befallen the estates of many the Inhabitants; by the carrying of many of their
houses already to Sea, through the decay of certain Jetty works heretofore made
for defense thereof; and praying that Timber may be appointed for repair of the
same; as also that money may be raised for the perfecting thereof, out of the
arrears of a Scot of two shillings per pound, heretofore charged upon the
houses and lands there; and of another Scot of thirty six pound per Annu. laid
upon the Peer of Margate, by the Commissioners of Sewers for the East of Kent,
about twenty five years ago, the paying thereof having been for some years
discontinued: and that for the future maintaining thereof, the said Scots may
be continued; or that in liew of a moiety of two shillings per pound,
reasonable poundage may be set down upon certain commodities going in and out
of the said Island, a list of which commodities, and of rates proposed to be
set upon them respectively was now presented, and upon reading a Certificate
from some Gentlemen of the County of Kent, to whom the State thereof was
referred by the Committee, to be viewed and certified; they thereby setting
forth, That the said Jetty works, being by them surveied, and workmen consulted
with; They found that fifty five Rods of Timber-work is in decay, which
requiring double work will take up six hundred and five Tun of Oaken Timber,
that the workmanship will amount to as much or more charge, than the Timber;
and there will need a continual charge to keep it for the future: And for that
this Committee is informed by some Members of both Houses, that they have
viewed the same, and find the defect and danger of the said Town to be very
great; and for as much as the same is within the jurisdiction of the
Cinque Ports, this Committee does thereby conceive it their duty to represent
it to both Houses of Parliament, and does recommend it to them, that the
present defects may be repaired, and sufficient Timber for that end allowed;
and that the Town may in time to come be secured, by a Scot upon the said
Houses and lands, or by a poundage upon commodities exported and imported, from
and to the said Island, or otherwise, as they in their wisdoms shall think
fit; as also that consideration may be had of the Petitioner John Smith, his
disbursments for the upholding of the said works (which by his Petition is
alleged to amount unto four hundred and twenty pounds) in such a way as they
shall think meet; he having offered (as by the said Certificate is mentioned,
upon allowance of a moiety of the said Scot, and of a poundage on the said
commodities, to perform the said work (being first furnished with timber as
aforesaid) and to engage an estate of a thousand pound value to keep the same
for ever.

And it is lastly Ordered, That a Copy of the said Certificate and of the
Schedule of rates upon the said commodities be annexed to this Report.

WARWICK.

Whereas the Jetty-works of Margate in the Isle of Thanet, according to an
Order of the Right Honorable Committee of the Admiralty and Cinque Ports,
being surveied by us James Oxenden Knight, Major Boyce Esquire Henry Crisp, Esquire;
and we calling three sufficient Carpenters to measure the works, it was found
to be in decay, as following.

1. That there was 55. rods of work measured and found in decay, each of which
rods was conceived would take up 5. Tunns and half of Timber for single works,
and for double works so much more, and the same requiring all double work, it
will take up in the whole 605. Tunns of Oaken Timber.

2. That the workmanship for Carpenters, Sawyers, and other workmen, will
amount to as much or more charges, then the Timber to complete the said works.

3. That it will require a constant and continual charge in repairing,
upholding and keeping the same works.

4. That if the now Expenditor John Smith, may be yearly allowed 12. pence in
the pound upon all Houses and Lands, which for 25. years past paid 2. shillings
in the pound, as appears by Scot. And also if he may receive according to the
rates of, and upon the particular commodities set down and expressed in a
Schedule hereunto annexed, and as this Honorable House shall think fit, and as
is used in other maritan Towns, he is willing to undertake to perform the said
work, being furnished with Timber sufficient as aforesaid, and will engage
1000l. Lands and Houses in the said Island, for performance and keeping of the
said works for ever, he being the fittest man for the same, as being already
entrusted for by the said Town, and the said Town being now in most eminent
danger to be lost, if not speedily helped, as aforesaid.

JAMES OXENDEN.

Having about eight months past, with the Lieutenant of Dover Castle, and Mr.
Henry Crisp, surveighed the dangerous condition of Margate, I did find that
there is fifty five rods or thereabouts, which of necessity must be maintained
against the rage of the Sea, and did also find by the judgment of able
workmen then present, that the premises will require the Timber and expense
here above mentioned.

HENRY HEYMAN.


