THE ART OF PAINTING According to the THEORY and PRACTICE Of the Best Italian,
French, and Germane Masters.

Treating of
The Antiquity of Painting. The Reputation it always had. The Characters of
several Masters. Proportion. Action and Passion. The Effects of Light.
Perspective. Draught. Coloring. Ordonnance.
Far more Complete and Compendious then has yet been Published by any, Ancient
or Modern.

The Second Edition.

-- Pictoribus atque Poetis
Quidlibet audendi -- Hor.
By M. S. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by M. B. for the Author, and are to be sold by R. Bently, in
Russel Street, Covent Garden, and J. Hancock, in Castle-Ally by the
Royal Exchange. Price 2s. 6d. 1693.

TO THE QUEEN'S Most Excellent MAJESTY
ROYAL MADAM,
THE Art of Painting having received Encouragement and Protection in all Ages
not only from the Most Honorable Personages, but also from the Fountains of
Honor Themselves, and particularly (amongst the Number of Kings and Emperors)
from those two, your Majestys Royal Predecessors, King Charles the First, and
King Charles the Second; and likewise in that Honorable Regard your
Illustrious Self has had of the Art, in the Gallery of Beautys at
Hampton Court, done by the Incomparable Artist Sir Godfery Kneller Knight.
Imbolden'd me to lay this small Essay at your Royal Feet sor Protection. And
although it is far beneath your Majestys notice, yet Considering the Sun
disdains not to shine on the low Hysop as well as on the tall Cedar, I rest in
Humble hopes of a Pardon to

May it please Your MAJESTY Your HIGHNESSES Most Obedient and Most Dutiful
Servant and Subject MARSHALL SMITH.

TO THE Right Honorable The COUNTESS of SOUTHERLAND.
MADAM,
DUring the long Conversation you were pleased to honor my Sister with at her
own House, I perceived so much goodness mixed with your Greatness, Illustrated
with the greatest Efforts of Wisdom and Knowledge, that it not only brought me
oftener to that dearest Sisters house then my Affections to her might have done,
to admire the Noble Conduct of your Life, but also imbolden'd me to beg the
Favor of laying this Treatise at her Majesty's Feet. The Honor she was
pleased to do me in the Manner of it is Reception, I must Impute to the great
share you have in her Majesty's Affections, and not to the weak Endeavors of

MADAM, Your Most Obedient Servant. MARSHALL SMITH.

TO THE Honorable Lovers of the Noble Art OF PAINTING: And the Celebrated
PROFESSORS of it.
My LORDS and GENTLEMEN,
I Did not think I should so soon by another Edition have an Oppertunity to
give you Thanks for your kind reception of the former, the Honor her Majesty
has done my Book, with that of diverss Persons of Quality by their kind
Censures of it, puts me above any Concern for the few Enemies I have gotten by
it (if such are worthy to be called so who have only will, but not power to be
so.) Some who have a better Opinion of themselves than (perhaps) they may
deserve from others, have thought me Partial in the Characters, but sure I am,
I have been Impartial according to the best of my Judgment; of what Value that
Judgment is, were impertinent for me to declare, since at last my Book must be
the Test of it: If any could inform me how to please all I would follow his
advice, and -- Erit mihi Magnus Apollo.


That Ingenious Arts have so great Encouragement (which I well perceive by the
kind reception of this Trifle) is no small satisfaction to me, although I have
no Interest in it otherways then as a well-wisher to my Country, being no
Professor only a Lover of the Art of Painting, that it may still more Flourish,
till it makes England more Famous then ever Greece was for the Product of Noble
Arts and Sciences: Is the hearty desire of

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your Most Humble Servant M. Smith.

To the READER.
SInce the Former Edition, I have received the Character of an Ingenious
Gentleman Mr. Guil. de Ryck from those who have long known him, viz. From his
first initiating into the Latin Tongue he was inclined to Drawing, and became
Disciple to Quilenus of whom he learnt Drawing, Painting, Perspective and
Architecture; not to mention his Curious Skill in Enammel, Minuture etc. The
Piece that first remarked him was Mattias in the Cathedral in Antwerp in which
the Veins, Muscles etc. in the Nudities proclaim his Skill in Anatomy,

In the Chancery of Cortray he Painted the King of Spain on Horseback in
Burnisht Armor, the City of Cortray below with a rising Sun; above Fame with
two Angels one holding a Crown, the other a Scepter. On the Trophy's this
Inscription. REGI HISP. CANCEL. CORT. DD. CC.

He was Invited to Brussels to Paint the Marquess de Grana and his Family in
whole Lengths, and several of the first of that Court. At a certain Triumph at
Antwerp amongst diverse Triumphant Arches he Ordered One at his proper expense
adorned with Festoons, at the top Oranges, Pomegranats, Laurels, etc. wherein
were five Capital Pictures, three he made himself signifying Eclesia, Antwerpia
and Rex Hisp. with this Cronicon. HISPANIAE REX, VERA EIDES VIVANT CLAMAT ANT
VERPIA. all boldly Painted.

A Magdelen was carried to Rome and was so liked that he was sent for thither.
He painted a Boy carrying Fruit and one coming behind him to steal some, after
the way of Morelio, and was taken for his hand; he also painted the Judgment of
Paris, for the Emperor after the manner of Possine.

At Dunkirk he Painted a Piece of St. Michael, and another of St. Benedict, and
diverse of his Pictures are now highly valued beyond Sea, for Judgment in Order,
delicateness of Coloring, and a right Consideration and agreablaness through
the Whole.

But why need I go so far from home since we have diverse Pieces in England
which proclaim his Skill, as a Magdelen at my Lady Wincelsea's, and others by
the Life at diverse Persons of Qualities, and Eminent Merchant's in the City,
Remarkable for likeness, fastness of Coloring, not only keeping their Color
but improving their beauty by time.

And his most Ingenious Daughter Mrs. Katherine comes behind none of her Fair
Sex in the Art, her Paintings by the Life very like, soft, Tender, well
ordered, the Figures Gentle and Coloring Beautiful to the great Honor of her
Sex.

And now Reader, I shall not Insist upon Answering what I thought might be
Objected, as in my Former, since it past so well with all its faults, only ask
thy Excuse that the Errata's are continued, as Mr. Vande Bank, for Mr. Van de
Vert, page, 25 etc. The reason being because I had not time to look over it
till it was Printed.

Vale.
The Author to his Book.
Go Slender Pinnace to a Boisterous Sea,
Where naught but Tempests, Rocks and Quicksands be.
Such is the Curse attends this Wicked Age,
Such are the Actors fill this Spacious Stage,
That Impudence must pass for Wit, and they
Who'ave most of Malice, bear the greatest Sway.
Yet when thou meet'st with Real Wit, Strike Sail,
Though they reprove thee sharply, 'tmay Avail;
But every little Bubble of the Town,
Will take the Hint, and tell it for his own:
That Is Hard; -- yet let them baul their Lungs away,
Thy Fate depends not on a Poets Day.
However, in thy Cabin, as they pass,
Tell them thou have a Cap. 17. Paragraph 4.
Sympathetick Glass,
Will show a Fool, a Fool; an Ass, an Ass.
To the most Ingenious and Accomplished Gentleman The Author of the following
Treatise.
NO more let Egypt Hieroglyphics boast
Too Aenigmatical, our Happ'er Coast
You by a more improved way have taught,
T'express each Vice, each Virtue, Passion, Thought.
You teach Mute Logic with far more Success
Then all the Schools, and in a Loftier Dress;
Who would not Emulate to be your Story;
If such your Pen's, then what is your Pencel's Glory?
Long in the Cursed, Obscure Retreat of Night
This Gem has lay'n (though with a Glimmering Light)
Wanting a well Experienced Hand, to show
What wondrous Pleasures from the Pencel Flow:
Tell you in Pity to the Thirst of Man,
Each Notion weigh, and every Beauty Scan:
At length the Charming Phaenix Hatched appears,
Though but few months, the Work of many years.
T. H. Oxon.

To the much Esteemed Mr. Smith.
SInce't would be bold Presumption to deny
That Man, the plastic of the Deity,
Is Draught's great Origin: -- we will only say,
You Draught pursue in'ts just Phenomenon;
As Color, Habit, Motion, Sympathy,
Light, Perspective, Studious Anatomy;
With all Contingences of this great Art,
Which you Improve, and freely t'all Impart.
Thus while thy Awful Pen Proclaims aloud
Our wondrous Art, you make the Astonished Crowd
Amazed stand, to hear how strong't confines
Great Nature to a Cloth, with Shallow Lines:
To hear that Painted Passions can Supprise,
And make Spectators with them Sympathyse;
That all the Learning of the Universe,
Was Couched in Mistick Draught and Characters.
The only Fear is, least the Sordid Fry
Reading, grow Mad, and throw their Craft's-Tools by,
Making the Land but one confuss'd Academy.
To his highly Valued Friend the Author.
PAinter and Poet, in the Noblest Dress
Your Images in both you do Express.
Nor are they 'lone the Quick Results of wit
For to Improve the rest of Mankind writ,
But your own Propertys such as we find
The Ornaments and Beautys of your Mind.
R. T. of Lincoln's Inn.

The Author upon the Art of Painting.
IN vain did Jove with Adamantine Chain
The bold Prometheus bind; in Vain
Does the Rapacious Vulture Gorge his Maw
On's Liver, which he never must destroy.
Whilst Caucasus Groans with the Load
Of the Presuming Demy-God.
And all for's brave Attempt, to Steal Caelestial Fire,
His well-wrought Image to Inspire:
In Vain this Envy of the Gods, the same
Bold Man attempts again, nor fears their Flame.
Nor Fears their Thunder or their Vultures more:
But Counterfits their Vultures, Flames and Thunders Roar,
With all the Artillery of Heaven,
And sends it to their Mansions back again.
This has the Magic Art of Painting done;
Nor only Things Inanimate,
But even the most Occult Resolves of Fate,
And does through all the Labyrinths of Nature Run.
Even Man it can Create;
Nor Organs, for to make him Speak or Move,
Nor Facultys, to make him Hate or Love,
The Artist wants, nor sends his Prayers to Heaven,
Pigmalion- like, to have a Spirit given;
But Snatches the Caelestial Fire,
By which, with the Mysteries of his Art,
And Wonders, which his Pencel-Stroaks impart,
With Active Souls his Bodies does Inspire.
Why will ye Boast. O! why, y' Immortal Gods,
That you alone have got the mighty Ods
Of Making Man, and Vast Eternity?
Since Painters you those fancied Ods do give,
For in their Portraitures you Live:
And they give you your Immortality:
To Jove his Thunder; Venus, Flame;
Diana, Chastity; Apollo, Fame;
Neptune his Trident; Mars his Plumes and Lance;
And t'all, their Attributes, which fill the Lofty Dance.
Nay at their will they Summon you below,
Their Pleasures and Designs to know;
Chastise you for your Veiled Escapes,
Venus for her Adulteries and Jove his Rapes,
In all his Metamorphos'd Shapes.
And when they please to show their Jeers and Scorns,
Make Bacchus, Drunk; and give to Vulcan, Horns.
Then Boast no more your mighty Ods
Of Making Man, since Man it is Makes the Gods.
ERRATA.
The Reader is desired to excuse diverse Errata, as false Pointed, false speld
etc. the Printer falling ill whilst'twas in the Press and dying before 'twas
finished, there could not that care be taken: but these are the Principal. page
6. l. 27. read Egyptians. p. 7. l. 13. r. Geometry. p. 8. l. 17. Amsractuous.
p. 17. l. 11. Diversions. p. 21. l. 17. Rubens. l. 21. Sea-pelces. 23.
Van-Dyck. p. 25. l. 37. Vande-Verr. p. 48. l. 16. Complexion. p. 49. l. 17.
causes. l. 20 cause. p. 57. l. 23. Supplicants. l. 25. Point. p. 66. l. 4 and
6. Copy. l. 29. Statues. l. 32. Contours. p. 68. l. 32. Pleasantness p. 59. l.
8. Perspective. p. 74. l. 7. Brushes. p. ^8 l. 34. leave our, and. p. 79. l. 7.
Tinktures. p. 81. l. 6. white. l. 30. most. 33. Glazing. p. 87. l. 27. take
what. p. 88. l. 25. must be.

INTRODUCTION.
SInce the design of the Following Treatise is not only to lay open the Noble
Art of Painting, to give the best Precepts and Instructions to attain to a
Perfection therein, but likewise to recommend the study of it to the most
Ingenious, as highly conducing (from the many Pleasures and Benefits thence
arising) to a Happy state of Life: give me leave by way of Introduction to show
what I mean by a Happy state of Life, and wherein Painting is highly Accessory
thereunto.

The All-Wise having Created the Soul of Man not only Speculative, but of a
Vast Unlimited Capacity, has likewise Adapted Fruitions thereto as Unlimited;
fixing in him the Standard of Reason to Regulate them thereby, for his Real
Happiness.

And although the Pleasures and Satisfactions of the Mind, Excel the
Gratifications of the Senses, as far as the Soul in Dignity surpasses the
Body, and distinguishes Man from Beasts, yet some there are more Refined,
Spiritual and Extasy'd then others, striking upon the most Harmonious Keys of
the Soul; and such are the Objects of the two Noble Facultys of the Mind,
Conception, and Invention; best Illustrated in Painting, Poetry and Music.

Poetry by the Force of the most Allective Ratiocination, Charms the Mind with
the Real Essences of Delight; not only by pleasing the Ear with Dulcisonant
Numbers, but likewise by Informing the Soul, in the Expansion of the most
Abstruse and Occult Misterys of Philosophy; conducting us thereby through
Feilds of Delight, to the Magnificent Seats of Virtue and Knowledge.

Music Refines and rayses the Spirits, above all the Gross, Mundane Pleasures,
which Attend the Avenues of common sense: Replenishing the Fancy with the most
Beautiful Idea's, and Seraphick Raptures of Bliss, and giving us here a Taste of
those Floods of Immence Delight, Prepared for such Harmonious Souls, (who
despising the Insipid and Imperfect Joys, swallowed down with Greediness, by
the Inconsiderate Herd of Mankind) adapt themselves for those Immortal
Pleasures.

But Painting not only Allures and Delights with the Charming Numbers and
Noble Information of Poetry; with the sweet Unisons and Ravishing Harmony of
Music; but likewise brings from their several Orbs, the Great Monopolists of
these Sciences for us to Converse with, and by every artfull stroke adds to the
Erection of her own Monument, to the Delight and Instruction of the present and
future Ages: thus he who is not Felicify'd with the Fruition of these Three
Beatitudes, enjoys the Perfection of them all, in this one Charming Mistress.

They whose Minds are Fortunate through these Exornations, with what contempt
may they look on those Muddy and Fulsome Pleasures which most of Mankind
Grovel in, and are known to be Pleasures only by the Name, not only being
Narrow, Forced and Feigned, but Proditorious and Exitial instead of being
Benificiall to Humane Existence.

When in the Heat of Bacchanalization, the Virtigious Brain forms to it self
strange Chymera's which never were nor can be, one Notion Crouding on another,
till the Noble seat of the Intellects becomes an entire Chaos, and he the
Ridicule or Pity of the more thinking; how Fond and Vain is he, how Derogatory
to the Noble Character he bears, and his pretensions to the Image of the Deity:
whilst his Purchase is a few dizzy, confused Pleasures, at the Expense and
Ruin of Mind and Body.

Nor more Rational is he who expects an Elysium of Complete Happiness in his
Mistresses Arms, since it is generally experienced that the Fantastic
Pleasure of the Attempt, is more then that of the Fruition, which at best is
but Fleeting and Momentary, whilst the Enjoyments of the Mind are Fixed and
Permanent; Those attended with Remorse, Danger and Disappointment, These with
Tranquillity, security and Certainty; besides how Inglorious is it for Man, to
Prostrate his Affections and most studied Herangues to one Incapable of Return
(perhaps) a Mercenary Gilt, the Product of a Dunghill, who will sell at Cheaper
Rates, or Lavish those Pleasures on a Lusty Groom, which his Master Purchases
with vast Sums and humble Acknowledgements, selling his Prerogative and Health
for a smile and a Disease.

So far from Real Felicity are all Sensual Pleasures, that in them we are but
weaker Rivals to Brutes, who enjoy all their Sensualitys with better Appetites
and quicker Relish; free from Remorse and Scandal.

And although all Humane Happyness is Lodged in the Soul, yet even their we
must be Cautious in our Choice of Affections and Passions, or we may be as
miserable deceived, as if we gave the Reins to Sensuality.

How far does he Deviate, who expects this Blessed State in Honor and
Greatness, since Ambition only begets Ambition, Changing alone the Matter of
their Miseries, without seeking an End of them: and as Seneca says, those
Acquisitions which dazel the Eyes of the Vulgar, are Atchived with Labor, and
guarded with Pain: nor will this Sisiphus's stone ever Rest, till at the Bottom
of the Valley, where the Master is crushed to Pieces thereby.

How miserable the Covetous wretch is, is too Obvious to require Refutation; so
far is Gold from giving Happiness, that Apicius, although he had the Remain of
250000 Crowns in his Coffers, yet he Poisoned himself for Fear of Starving; nor
could Midas be satisfied, till the waters of Pactolus Condensed to a Golden
Mine, in his Belly.

Allthough this spacious Theater affords daily, Numerous sceens of the wretched
Mistakes of Mankind, yet still the Generallity of them give themselves wholly
to the Dictates of Sense, and when they feel the sad Effects, they Fancy is
some Destined Distemper: or if they have thought enough to consider the Cause,
they Endeavor to drive it away by the Repetition of the same: and so pass on,
till a painful Old Age (if Attainable) steals on them; and then when their
Appetites fail, they have leisure to cast a Melancholy Aspect on their
Prestine Folly; seeing their Lamp ready to go out, like a Foolish Tale that is
told; without one Act of Remark or Benefit to themselves, or the rest of
Mankind: and finding no Reason for their Continuation to Old Age, except to be
punished for the Follys of their Youth.

Whilst he who spends his Time in the Noble study of Philosophy; the
Forementioned Sciences, or the like Ingenuous, Beneficial and Innocent
Pleasures, sees Cause enough to Laugh at their Youth and pity their Age: And
finds to his great Comfort, the Munificence of the Deity sufficient, if Man but
makes the Happy Choice, to give him Felicity in both Worlds.

Since then (as we have shown) the Noblest Enjoyment arises from the Choicest
Idea's of the Mind, Especially when they tend, not only to the Delighting, but
also to the Improving of Mankind; we thought it might be no unacceptable
service, to Anatomatize the Art of Painting, from whence such Variety of
Pleasures and Benefits may be reaped.

CAP. I.
The Definition and Qualities of Painting.

PAinting is an Art, which by Draught of Lines and Colors, does not only
Express the Forms of all things, on the superficies of the Earth (according to
Socrates) (...) with the Actions of all Animals, but likewise the Passions of
Intellectual Beings.

It is the Noblest of all Arts, since it immediately Copys after the Miraculous
hand of the Almighty; nor only imitates Created Beings, but the Creation it
self: for out of a Chaos of Colors, which by chance mixture, would perish in
their mutual Embraces, and of themselves are Glaring, or Foul; and thence
unpleasing to the Eye, as ill sounds are Diaphonous to the Ears; the Artfull
Hand, by a Sympathy in Mixture, and the Harmonious Unisons of Proportion, not
only Forms a Beautiful Body, but likewise gives the Expressions of the Soul.

It is the most Expressive of all Arts, and of more General Information then
Printing; for it speaks at once to all Nations and Languages, and they who are
strangers to Letters, may read the story in it felf: therefore the Egyptians
Couched their wisest Morals in Hieroglyphics and Emblems, and the Universality
of the Knowing part of Mankind Improved thereby.

It has more Force of Persuasion then Eloquence, for the Idea of any thing is
more Subtly and Entirely Conveyed to the Understanding by the Eye then by the
Ear, Objects being more Allective to this Sense then the other; and having this
Advantage, that the Visual Rays at once Comprise the whole Story, whereas
Relation is Dilatory and thence more Burdensome to the Memory.

What use the Ancients made of this Art for the Exciting Virtue, may be seen in
these (amongst Numberless) Examples.

The Romans Painted Fortitude in the Example of Horatius Cocles defending the
Bridge (called Sublitius) against a great Troop of Tuscanes: and Marcus
Marcellus, who by cutting of the Head of Britomarte a French Captain,
Discomfitted the Enemies whole Army.

For Love to their Country, Mar. Curtius, who cast himself and Horse into a
Bottomless Gulff: and the Three Decii, the Father in the Roman War, the Son in
the Tuscane and the Nephew in the Battle against Pyrrbus; all which ran into
certain and Eminent Death, for the good of their Country.

And for Military Discipline, Posthumus the Dictator, who put his own Son to
Death for getting a Conquest over his Enemies by breaking his Ranks: with
innumerable more Emblems of Diverse Virtues and pieces of Gallantry.

Certainly these Painted with a great Spirit. Passion and Graceful Action,
must be more Instructive and Exciting then the most Rhetorical Herangue.

It is the most Ingenuous Art, and greatly assisting to Natural Philosophy;
since with the greatest Scrutiny it examines into the very Entity of Nature.

It Argues in the Masters the Finest and Sublimest Invention, to Express many
Times, the most Heroic Actions in the World, with greater Magnanimity and
Beauty then the Celebrated Actors were possessed with.

And those great Men whose Works have been held in such Admiration, both by the
greatest Judgments as well as the Noblest Quality; it shows in them Souls
Capacitated and Adapted for such high Actions as themselves have Expressed so to
the Life: for there must be a Concretion of Idea's into a Form in the Mind
before Action is produced: of Minds to Replete their works are sufficient
Evidence.

CAP. II.
Of the Antiquity of Painting.

THE Omnipotent, whose Divine Pencel Drew all these Wonders which continually
present themselves to our Admiration, and which Man by an Homaeomere endeavors
to imitate, Challenges the Prerogative of this Art to himself, Job 39. 13. and
as his peculiar Gift bestowed it on Bezaleel and Aholiah, Exodus 31. whom, he
filled with his spirit, in Wisdom and Understanding; in Knowledge to find out
curious Works, to Carve, etc. which we shall show hereafter to be the same with
Painting in Essence, but exceeded by it in Perfection.

Minus King of the Assyrians (as History Reports) having Celebrated the
Obsequies of his Father Belus, First King of Babylon; to Mitigate part of the
sorrow for his Fathers Death, and to restore in some measure such a loss,
caused his Image to be Carved.

After the Deluge Prometheus Son of Japhet Invented Plastic, and was in such
Request with the Arcadians, being of a Pregnant Wit and sollid Wisdom that he
brought the Rude and Barbarous People into civil Conversation: he added
Artificial Motion to his Images, whence the Poets since have made their
Fictions.

After this, the Art came to be better known, and with the growing Art Honor
to the Inventors increased, therefore Gyges the Lydian amongst the Egiptians:
Pyrrus amongst the Grecians, and Polygnotus the Athenian, amongst the
Corinthians, were highly Valued, as the first amongst them that found out
Painting.

They first began in Black and White, Plin. lib. 35. cap. 1, 2, 3. etc. the
Authors, Ardices the Corinthian, and Telephanus the Sicyonian, then Cleophantes
the Corinthian, brought up the use of Colors, though principally but One,
whence the Historiographers called it Monochroma.

Apollodorus, afterward, the Athenian began the use of the Pencell: as
likewise Cumanus the Athenian; Cimon Cleondus added much Perfection by
Fore-shortning: after Paneus added farther Perfection, Inventing the Art of
Drawing by the Life.

Parrhasius the Ephesian did farther adorn it, as likewise Zeuxes, who brought
up the manner of Shaddowing.

Appelles added the last Perfection by the help of Geometry and Arithmetic;
without which, as his Master Pamphilus would say, no Man could prove a Painter;
and Bernard Lovinus would say, a Painter without Perspective was like a Doctor
without Grammar.

And indeed it is a Compound of many Arts; as Geomitry, Architecture,
Arithmetic, Perspective, etc. for a Painter cannot perform without Lines,
Superficies, Profunditys, Thickness and Geometrical Figures.

Nor can Churches, Palaces, Amphitheaters, Bridges, Ports and other Buildings
be Represented without Skill in Architecture.

Nor without Arithmetic can he Understand the Proportion of Man's Body, to take
it in any sise; or the Proportion of other Things either Artificial or
Natural.

And without a good Judgment in Perspective, the work will be full of Faults,
it must be used in all Fore-shortnings, all Distances, in Highths, etc. nay,
without a Careful Disposal of the Colors according to Perspective, a simple
Unequal will be Defective in its Orbicularity: but we shall discourse of
Perspective by it self.

So sacred have the Memorys of the Inventers of this Art been of our
Progenitors, that they have carefully Transmitted them down to us, and
Doubtless will be to all Posterity.

And although, not only by diverse Contingences but the necessity of Fate is
such, that the Formation of one Species, must be through the Destruction of
another, that there may be a Circulation to the Termination of Time, by
Consequence the Materials of their Art have perished, yet such has been the
Care of Fame over the Eldest Sons of Art, that she has writ their Names on the
Adamantine Rock, beyond the Power of the Cruel and Remorsless Jaws of Time with
Teeth of Iron to Devour.

CAP. III.
The Reputation Painting has had in the World.

IT is sufficiently Known in what Esteem Painting has been amongst the
Egyptians, under which they Communicated all their Natural and Moral
Philosophy: it was their Treasury where they Accumulated all their Arts and
Sciences: For since the Power-Memorative could not contain all the Similitudes
and Idea's, which by the Labor of the most Ingenious (Infinite in Possibility)
were Produced, here they Reserved all the Occult Riches of their Mystical
Knowledge to all succeeding Ages.

From thence, in Process of time has been Transmitted down to us considerable
Benefit, in Philosophy, by the Hands of Plato, Pythagoras and other
Philosophers, who sailed to Egypt to transport it thence: And though some of
their Hieroglyphics appear Ampfractnous to us, which doubtless is from their
long disuse, yet some I have seen not so Aenigmaticall but might be easily
Understood; and as before was hinted, they had the Advantage hereby to speak in
all Languages, and so of their most precious Wealth were Eleimosynary to the
whole World.

In imitation of them the Ancient Romans set up Emblems in Public places of
diverse Animals, under which their Philosophycal Mysteries were couched, and
from Hieroglyphics and Emblems they proceeded to Paint, the Famous Actions of
Worthy Men, that through the Emulation of their Actions, they might Excite the
Young Noble Spirits to like Performances.

Nor was this Art only Honored, by the Noble Use made of it in this manner,
but likewise by the Study and Practice therein by those of the greatest
Quality; as also by the vast Sums paid for several pieces for the Encouragment
of the Artists, as well as for the future Profit and Pleasure thereby to
themselves, and Posterity.

We read of Francis King of France, and first of that Name that he Practiced
in it to a great Perfection: as likewise Charles Immanuell Duke of Savoy, who
was well Read in all Heroical Virtues as well as in the Liberal Sciences, but
most delighted in Painting.

Quintus Fabius, his Family the Noblest in Rome Sirnam'd Pictores, took great
delight in this Art: and Painted the Temple of Salus with his own Hand,
Subscribing his own Name to his Work as the more lasting Monument of his Glory:
Rutilius in vita Quint. Fab. Pic.

The Emperor Constantine, spent great part of his Youth in the Practice of
this Art; as we find Sigibert in Cronicis.

Likewise Prince Lavinianus, valued himself more on this, then on his Noble
Descent and other Qualifications, Them. lib. 2.

Pomponius Atticus, a Man of Profound Wisdom and Favorite of Cicero,
beautified his own Poems, with Pictures of his own Design and Drawing.

Lucianus also of Imperial Descent, when he retreated from State Affairs, spent
his Time in this Ingenuous Art; declaring it to be the most Princely Exercise,
to Copy the God of Nature in his Works; Sal. lib. 3.

With many more of the Greatest Princes in Europe and ever of the most
Ingenious of them: nor wants it Patrons in the Fair Sex, for Margaret Queen of
Navarre arrived to a great Perfection in it, with diverse others.

In Plinies Time Festival days were appointed at Corinth, for the exercise of
Painting, for Great Pryses and Wagers, and we see at this day they are esteemed
as the most Valuable Jewels, by the Noblest Rank of the Age, in Foreign
Countries, as well as with the most Ingenious of the Nobility in England: this
Art ever being in greatest Estimate with those who have been the most
Remarkable for their height of Fancy and depth of Judgment.

How former Times Esteemed it, may be seen by these few among Numberless more,
by the Sums were paid for them.

Antonius Vesuvius paid for a Piece of Michael Angelo, three thousand pounds
sterling.

Caesar the Dictator redeemed the Tables of Ajax and Medaea for Eighty Talents;
which amounts to twenty four thousand French Crowns according to the lesser
Athenian Talent.

King Attalus paid for one of Aristides Pieces, a Hundred Talents.

Candalus King of Lydia gave as much for a Piece to Bularchus.

Strapbonius Polenus gave to the Value of five thousand pounds Sterling for a
Picture of the Divine Raphiel.

Hortensius the Orator gave for a Table of the Argonants, one hundred forty
four Talents.

The Duke of Millain Rewarded Raphiel Urbane with as many Ducats as would cover
a large Piece which he made for him.

Mnason paid to Asclipiodus for the Twelve Gods, after the rate of three
hundred pounds a Piece.

Pope Innocent the Eighth, so Famous for his Knowledge in all Learning and
Ingenious Arts, bestowed upon Andrea Mantegna in the Belvedore of Rome, two
Thousand Ducats for a months Work.

Polidorus likewise, paid for a Piece of our Saviors Nativity of Rubens,
fifteen hundred pounds Sterling.

Nor is it strange that these great Masters Works should have a higher Estimate
then the most valuable Jewels, since they may be met with again of the same
color Nature and Dimensions, but a great Design may be particular throughout
the World: besides the variety of Pleasures and Benefits hence arriving, of
which the other is wholly void.

CAP. IV.
How far Painting agrees with Carving, and wherein it Excels it.

THere has been a continual Altercation between Painters and Carvers for
Superiority in the Excellency of Art: but that Carvers may not pretend to excel
Painters in the Essential part we will lay down how far they agree and then
wherein the Carvers are Excelled.

It is a General Rule, what agree in a Third agree between Themselves, if it be
objected a Hank and a Hound are the same by this Rule, because both living
Creatures; it follows not, for though they agree in the Generallity of being
living Creatures, yet they differ in Speciality of Kind.

And as there is no Essential difference between two particular Men, both being
Rational Creatures, so there is not between Painting and Carving, for both tend
to the same End, by Representing Individual Substances; and both must observe
the same Geometrical Quantity in what they Represent.

Suppose a Painter and Carver were to Counterfeit the same Person, doubtless
both would conceive the same Idea of him, proceeding in their Minds with the
same discourse of Reason and Art, and (as before) observe the same Geometrical
Quantity, endeavoring to make it as like the Person they Represent as they
could: and so the Draught expressing the Idea's of both the Workmen, would
agree in expressing the true Resemblance, which is the Essence of this Art.

It Is true one Painteth and the other Carveth; but this is a Material Difference
only, which argues no Specisical Difference in Art or Science, and it is the
Essential Difference alone that makes a Distinction of Species and Diversity
of Science.

If it be Objected that the Carver makes more of the Figure then the Painter,
it is answered, more or less makes no Specifical or Proper Difference;
therefore it is the Defect of Matter, and not of Art, thus far the Arts are
Analogical.

Now that this Art far Excels Carving is easily Demonstrated, since on a Flat,
it Represents Roundness and Thickness, exceeding therein the Power of Nature it
self, expressing Life and Spirit far beyond Carving, as in these Instances.

Apelles Painted Alexander the Great so to the Life, that his Horse Bucephalus
brought into the Room, immediately kneeld down supposing it his Master: His
Horse he likewise Painted with such Spirit that other Horses began to Neigh,
when they saw him.

Andreas Mantegna represented a Servant in Porta Vercellina, so Natural, that
the Horses left not Kicking at it till there was no shape of a Man left.

Barnazano Represented Strawberrys on a wall so fine, that the Peacocks
continually pect at them; and Caesar Sestius Painted in a Piece, Birds, so to
the Life, that the Table set abroad, they brought Flocks of other Birds about
them: and it is Reported there was a Dragon Painted with such Spirit in the
Triumvirate in Rome, that made the Birds leave singing.

A Picture likewise was in Claudius's Theater, where the Tiles were so
Naturally Painted, that the Crows offered to fly through the Painted windows.

Zeuxes's story is well Known, by the Grapes which Invited Birds to them:
though himself was afterward deceived, by a Curtain done by Parrhasius in
Emulation of his Grapes.

Live Partridges have flown to the Painted ones done by Parrhasius upon a
Column at Rhodes. A Dog likewise defaced the Picture of a Dog done by
Gaudentius in a Picture of Christ carrying the Cross at Canobium. But these are
all trivial Things in respect of the Passions and Affections, in which it far
Excels Carving: since to most Passions is required a Change of Complexion, as
well as Destortion, Contraction etc. of Features.

A Venus cannot be made with that Allectation in Carving, since the Complexion
of the skin, with Color of Eyes, Hair, etc. are requisite to the Perfection of
a Beauty.

Nor can History be Carved without great Defects, since all Distances require a
Faintness of Coloring, as well as Diminution of Body: with many more
Observations in Nature, only Obvious to Coloring, of absotute Necessity for
the Animating of Figures.

Not that I would the least Detract from those Famous Artists who have obtained
to themselves a lasting Name; but think they more deserve to be worshipped for
Gods, then the Gods which were the works of their Hands.

CAP. V.
That this Art is Requisite to the Education of a Gentleman, from the Benefits
and Pleasures thence arising.

THE more Noble any Science is, certainly the more Essential it is to the
Qualification of a Nobleman; that this is such, is already proved from its
Antiquity, its several Honorable Proffessors, with the Reception it has had
beyond all Arts in the World; and in its own Nature being the most Laudable,
since of all Arts it nearest Imitates (by continual Copying after) the
wonderful Hand of the Omnipotent.

What can become a Gentleman more then to talk Pertinently of so Ingenious a
Science, and which he has continually before his Eyes, when without a Judgment
in it, he shall (by misplacing Proper Terms) be the Jest of those, whose
greater skill will not excuse their ill manners herein. Besides, this being the
greatest Ornament for Palaces and Noblest Seats, it prevents their being
imposed upon in Pieces of Value, which they often suffer to great loss, though
to the Infamy of those Mercenary Men who are guilty of the Imposition.

It is the greatest Complement, Convenience, as well as Companion for Gentlemen
that Travel, to take a Draught of all Remarkable Things and Places, etc. which
would be too great a Charge for the narrow Treasury of the Memory.

It Is of absolute Necessity for all Commanders, for the Designing
Fortifications, Drawing of Lines, etc. and greatly assistant to the study of
the Mathematics.

Here they may see and Learn how their Predecessors Accumulated their Glorys,
and Learn to Emulate the Grandeur of their Actions, that like them they may be
Transmitted (by some Artfull Hand) to Posterity.

The Practice of this Art not only raises the Fancy, but makes it Pregnant to
the Production of still more great Idea's, Pressing on to the Mount of
Perfection, where with pity they behold the rest of Mankind below.

And had not those Celebrated Wits both Painters and Poets, whose Contemplative
heads were Replenisht with a continual Esslux of Notions, by this or Poetry
found a sweet discharge of their Crowded Fancy, either being to big to pass
through the Narrow Avenues of Common Sense, they had burst forth in disorder
without Maturity, and so become but Distracted and Confused Notions; or else
being Forcibly pent in, had stifled in their own Crowd, and so have perished,
shut up in the Urn of the Brain to all Eternity, to the Dishonor of Him who
bestowed these Gifts for the Manifestation of his Glory, and the Benefit of
Mankind.

The Pleasures arising from this Art, are Ineffable, and on that Account
deserve a Gentleman's study, since it is better to be Happy, then simply to Be.
For by this may you Form an Elysium to the height of your Fancy, beyond the
Product of Nature and Equal to the Fictions of the Poets.

Imbroider'd Feilds, Groves Damask'd with bright Beams.
Banks all Enameld, and Transparent Streams.
Hereby within your Chamber may you see Majestic Hills, Humble Vallyes,
Delightful Groves, silent Grotto's, Delicious Plains. Nimphs, Fawns, Satyrs,
Driades, etc. sporting together, the state of Innocence and the Golden Age.

Nor can we only Create Worlds Replenisht with Beatitudes, to the highest
Enjoyment of the Noblest Sense the Sight, but likewise so Potent are the
Charms of this Art, that it often brings the Seraphick and Blessed Souls from
their sacred Mansions to Converse with Mortals below; here to React their great
Sufferings and Martyrdoms, that by observing their Footsteps, we (imp'd on the
wings of Virtue) may mount to their Celestial Thrones, there to Enjoy the
Beatifick Vision in those Feilds of Light.

That after the Contemplation of the Wonderful Beautys here below, we there
may behold the Sacred great Source of them all, there wishing for a Pencel
Omnipotent, as the Hand which Formed those Ravishing Delights, to Copy out
those blessed Abodes, the meanest place whereof is beyond Mortal Tongue to
Express, or the highest Rapture of Thought but to aim at.

Nor only to Encourage to Virtue, but likewise to deter from Vice, this Art
has furnished us with Scenes of Horror, Rapes, Murders, etc. that from the
Terror of such spectacles, we may detest the Actions as Repugnant to Humanity.

Nay sometimes it opens the Adamantine Gates of the Black Abbiss, the seat of
Profound though Fiery Darkness, save that the livid Flames serve to discover
those Souls, whose sins (weighty as the massy Plumets of Eternal Night) have
sunk them to those Stygian Abodes.

Amongst the Number there you may justly express in some Common shore, Replete
with Assa Faetida, a sneaking Tribe of narrow Souls, the Contemners of this
Art, who Murmuring and Repining at the Munificence of the Deity, Grudge that he
should receive any Glory from this his best of Gifts.

But should I sum up all the Benefits and Pleasures according to their vast
Extent it would swell up a great Volume, nor can it be expected I should
Abridge in a few sheets, what lies in a Book (of so Beautiful a Character)
Expanded over great part of the Universe.

CAP. VI.
The Objections against Painting Answar'd.

ONE Objection is, that it is a Mechanic Art, but I think this is made by those
who are little Skilled in Liberal Arts or Read in History; for in Greece it was
ranked amongst the First of Liberal Sciences, and throughout all Greece taught
only to the Children of Noblemen, and altogether sorbidden to be taught to
others.

Aristotle in his Politiques, accounts it amongst those Liberalia Paideumata,
and advises it especially to be taught to the Young Nobles, which after
Eupompus a Famous Geometritian to his Utmost Encouraged, and Pliny not only
allows it a Liberal Science, but of the most Ornamentall for the great
Oeconomists of the World, and excited the Romans to the Embraces of it.

Besides as Painting is subordinate to the Perspectives, Natural Philosophy and
Geometry (which doubtless are Liberal Sciences) and as it has certain
Demonstrable Conclusions, deduced from the first and immediate Principles
thereof, shows of Necessity it must be esteemed a Liberal Art.

That because it is worked with the hand it must be a Mechanic Art, is a poor
Argument, since without equal Labor of the hand, no Mathematical,
Cosmographicall, Hydrographicall, etc. Demonstrations can be performed, nor is
it of more Labor then Writing and several Gentle Diversions: and he that
despises the noblest Product of the Soul, because it requires the Assistance
of the Hands for Demonstration, I think deserves not those useful Members
which he so foolishly Contemns.

Another Objection is, that it has been the occasion of Idolatry, by the
Pictures of Saints, etc. but that the Picture is the occasion of the Idolatry
is a mistake in the Hypothesis, for the cause of all Idolatry is either Error
or Ignorance, and not through the Object of the Worship, for were the Object
the Cause, we should Impeach the Wise Creator, for his best of Gifts the Sun,
because the Pagans Worship it; and Esteem Onions and Garlic unlawful food,
because Adored by the Egyptians.

As for the Pictures of Saints in Foreign Countries, we must imagine them set
up in Commemoration of those Saints, as seeing the Picture of my Friend makes
me immediately Think of him; and I have more Charity then to think any, in this
enlightened Age so profoundly Ignorant as to expect Succor from the Cloth and
Colors, as to the Worship of the Saints themselves, nothing belongs to this
Treatise, and we have Learned Divines enough to discuss the Controversy.

Some have Objected it has been the Cause of much Leudness and Debauchery, by
the many wanton Pictures have been continually Exposed, as likewise Prints
every where Obvious to Youth, and may the more affect them the more they Love
the Art: I answer the Substances are as frequent and obvious in every street as
the Shadows, and the Art of Painting is no more to be censured on a Lewd
Design, then a Chaste, Beautiful Virgin, on the Account of a Beautiful Lewd
Wench.

Others have thought it Unhealthfull because Sedentary, but it is not so
Sedentary as some imagine, for not alone they may, but must walk often from the
Picture, to Observe the Sympathy of the Dsign and Harmonious Union of Colors;
and I have Known few afflicted with any thing but the Gout, which I suppose is
more the Effects of Bacchanalizing then the Painting of Bacchanals.

Their Objection who despise it as a Daubing Exercise is not worth notice,
since it is only a Slovens Argument, for they who are otherwise cleanly may be
so in this, and more then in some Gentle Diversion, the Colors being to be
bought ready prepared to the Pallat; nor of more notice is their Idle
Objection, who say it is only a Fancy, and that there is no Intrinsic value in
it; if what already has been said of the Benefits thence arising will not
satisfy, I shall desist a farther Answer till I hear an Ingenuous Man make the
Objection, for as yet I have not heard any.

CAP. VII.
The Great Masters of this Art, and whereof their Work may be seen.

I Shall mention but one Piece of each Noted Master to direct the Traveller
where he may see of that Hand, for to sum up all the Principal Works in Italy,
would swell up this Treatise to too great a Bulk.

Of Michael Angelo, the Resurrection in the Popes Chapel at Rome.

Of Raphiel Urben, St. Celia in the Church of St. John on the mount, in the
City of Bolognia.

Of Giovanni Lanfranco, several pieces in the Chapel of Tesoro, in the City of
Naples.

Of Dominichino, several Saints in the said Chapel.

Of Guercin da Cento, the Assumption of St. Maria in the City of Lucca.

Of Old Palma, St. Anthony in the Church of St. Piero Samaldi in Lucca.

Of Guido Rheno, Cain and Abel in the Closer of Sig. Manfredo Septale.

Of Timoret our Saviors Last Supper in the Domo of Lucca.

Of Pordenon, the Crucifiction in the City of Cremona.

Of Titian, our Savior Crowning with Thorns, at the Dominicans in Milan.

Of Giulo Romano, the Crucifiction in St. Andrews in the City of Mantua.

Of Leonardo da Vinci, a St. John in the Palace of Fontana.

Of Paini, K. Phillip the 4th. in the Closet of Sig. Manfredo Septale.

Of Pietro Flandro, a curious Country Prospect in the said Closet.

Of Radolpho, K. Priams Palace in Flames in the said Closet.

Of Carolo a Sole, a Noble Landscape in the said Closet.

Of Carolo Battavo, a Battle in the forementioned Closet.

Of Pietro Florentino, two Noble Landskips in the said Closet.

Of Firoli, 3 Heads, Homer St. Jerome and Moses in the said Closet.

Of Hercules Procacini, St. John in the said Closet.

Of Camillo Procacini, the Blessed Virgin and our Savior in the said Closet.

Of Barocci, a Dead Christ in the Domo of the City of Milan.

Of Paris Bordone, an Alter-Piece of St. Girolamo in the said Domo.

Of Ludovico Carache, an Alter-Piece in the Church of the Capuchins in Sassuobi.

Of Hannable Carache, St. Francis in a Trance in the City of Parma.

Of Augustine Carache, Duke Alexander Farnest in the said City.

Of Paulo Veronese, the Transfiguration of our Savior in the City of Padua.

Of Parmeggianino, a Lucuetia in the Chamber of the Amoretti, in the City of
Parma.

Of Correggio, diverse Squares in the Duke of Modena's Gallery.

Of Giacomo Bassano, two Squares in the said Gallery.

Of Giorgone, a curious Head in the said Gallery.

Of Lanfrance, a Chapel Painted in the City of Piacenza,

Of (...) Ferratese, a Lucretia in the Chamber of the Amoretti in the City of
Parma.

Of Frederico Zucccharo, a Madona in the Chamber of Sivetty in the said City.

Of Pietro da Cortino, several Historys in the Palace of the Great Duke of
Florence.

Of Fra: Bartolomeo 3 Pictures in St. Marks Church in the City of Florence.

Of Caravagio, a St. Anthony in a Chamber of the City of Parma.

Of Tadeo Zuccharo, a Psyche in the Palace of Fontana.

Of Civoli, the Lady of Piety in the Church of St. Croce in the City of
Bolognia.

Of Polidoro, the Front of a House in the Mount Cittorio in Rome.

Of Barnardino Luini, the Blessed Virgin Crowned with Glory.

Of Leo Aretini, the Blessed Virgin with our Savior, St. Elizabeth and St.
John.

Of Melchiore Gherordino, two Pictures of St. Jerome and St. Lucia.

Of Andrea del serto, a Christ carrying the Cross

Of Daniel Chrispi, the Picture of Manfredo himself.

Of Vermilji, St. Jerome Accompanied with an Angelical Minst rel

Of Sardini, a Lucretia.

Of Leone Aretini, a Lucretia.

Of Cerani, St. Francis with a Parrot.

Of Bronsino the Picture of Manfredo Septale.

Of Soliano, a Madona, this and the aforementioned in the Closet of Sig.
Manfredo Septale.

Of Camassei, the Creation of Angels in the Palace of Babarini at Rome.

Of Raphiel Bergo, the Baptism of Fattor Bono in the Vatican at Rome.

Of Mutiano, the Presentation of the Blessed Virgin at the Temple at the Church
of Jesus at Rome.

Of Daniel da Voltera, the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin at the Church of
Madouna del Populo at Rome.

Of Chivoli, St. Peter curing the Lame at St. Peter's at Rome.

Of Possine, the Miracle of Erasmus in St. Peter's at Rome.

Of Aurelius Lovinus, a Centurion and Crucifix at Lugano.

Of Bernard Zenale, the Chapel of St. Peter and St. Paul in St. Francis Church
in Millain.

Of Bramentino, a Christ taken down from the Cross in St. Pietro Gressato.

Of Daniel Riccarelli, a Christ from the Cross in the Friars Church at Rome.

Of Episander, Laocoon with his Son in the Belveder at Rome.

Of Caesar Sestius, Birds very fine at Viscount Prospero's at Mtllain.

Of Bernard Buttione, of Chapple of St Ambrose in Millain.

Of Franciscus Matsolino, a piece of our Lady at Millain.

Of Gaudeutius, our Savior Baptized by St. John Babtist in Jordan at Vigeuano.

Of Franciscus Vicentius, the Evangelist, Prophets and Sybells in St. Maria de
Gratia.

Of Arsenodorus, a Laocoon and his Sons in the Belverder at Rome.

Of Trosoda Moncia, several Roman storys at Millain.

Of Austine of Millain, the Vault of the Chapel of St. Mary's de Carmine in
Millain.

The Life of Mary Magdalen in the Chapel being of Bernard Zenale's doing.

Of Andreas Mantegna, the Triumphs of Caesar at Mantua near the Dukes.

Of Rubens, Vandyke, Lyly at several People of Qualitys in England as well as
in Italy..

Likewise upon inquiry throughout Italy you will find of Sebastian, Piombo,
Alexander, Moreto, Girolamo, Bressano, Rosso, Bologna, Massotino, Timotheo
Vita, Fattore, Sesto, Boccaccino, Andra Solari, Touagno, Nibertus Leidamus,
Scorellus, Burgeti, Florus, Pancelli, Theodorus, Mabutius, Dionatense, Lusto,
Maio, Alasto, Gasetto, Frederick Barozzi, Paulo Catiarius, Lucas Cangiasus,
Ambros. Figinus, Albert Durer, Mastardo, Brugill, Grimaldo, Pamphilus, Perino
del Vaga, Peruginus, Francesco. Melzi, Vicentius Foppa, Matsobinus, Bellino,
Frallaivoh, Botticello, Verrocchio, Dominico, Marcus, Scieua, etc.

CAP. VIII.
The Characters of several Masters.

I Shall only give Hints of some Names known amongst us, since the Ingenious
Mr. Sandrart has so well Treated on the Generality of them, which book is
designed to be Translated.

Michael Angelo is allowed the most Famous sor all Bodyly Motions, all
Foreshortnings, etc. as is universally acknowledged in that wonder of the
world, the Resurection in the Popes Chapel at Rome.

The divine Raphael (so usually called amongst the Italians) may be allowed the
Prince of Painters an Excellent Antiquary, his Designs of Lofty and Noble
Subjects with a great Manner and Spirit in his Works.

Titian and Tintoret likewise exercised their Judgments on Great Storys, the
latter whereof was called the Furious Tintoret, from his bold way of Painting
with Strong Lights and Deep Shaddows.

Rubins was an Indefatigable Painter, he had a great Excellency in Coloring
Flesh, which was most Beautiful, Soft, Tender and Clear, and the Nature it
self; and had he had the Italian Measures he had been one of the Greatest
Masters in the World: he was a general Master for History, Landskips,
Sea-piece, Fish, Foul, Architecture, etc

Van-Dyke Painted wonderful Natural, variety of Coloring, delicate Touches,
Soft and Tender, with extreme fine Observations about the Cheeks, Chin, etc. he
Painted Armor to a Miracle, Sattens and other Draperys extreme Fine, Loose and
Gentle in his Postures: he used to Paint after those two Great Masters, being a
Disciple of the latter.

Lyly brought up first the curious Loose-Dressing of Pictures, which most of
our Masters since have followed; he was extreme fine about the Eyes, very
delicate upon the Hands, a Free Masterly Touch in Hair, he was Disciple of the
Incomparable Van Dyke.

Holbin had a delicate Tender soft way in his Flesh, Finished up to a Miracle.

Rembrant had a Bold Free way, Colors laid with a great Body, and many times
in old Men's Heads extraordinary deep Shaddows, very difficult to Copy, the
Colors being laid on Rough and in Full touches, though sometimes neatly
Finished.

Moor had a very smooth neat way of Coloring, which may be one Reason that his
Paintings keep so fresh, because the dirt is not apt to get in, there have
likewise been other Great Masters by the Life as Walker, Zoust, Hales,
Greenhill, Wishin, the late Rily, etc.

Albert Duter generally wrought up his Horison of his Landskips to the Edge of
his Pictures, which is not so Graceful although it may be Natural.

One of the Brugels, Willebeck, Dehem, Seagers, Thewlin, etc. were very fine in
the Stillife, especially Dehem.

Another of the Brugels (generally called Hellish Brugel) was Famous for Scenes
of Hell, St. Anthonys Temptation, etc. his Head was strangely Pregnant of
Chimera's, but very prittily Touched.

Snyder, De Vos, were excellent in Beasts of Prey, Fowling and Hunting in
Large, and Elshamet extraordinary in small, as likewise Roben, Hames and
Tambois for Cattle, Woverman was a great Master, likewise the Elder Barsan.

Stenwick, Masuccio, De-Nef were three Extraordinary Masters in Painting
Perspective.

For Sea-Pieces, the Famous Precellus, Bonaventure, Peter's, etc.

The Great Possene, Paul Brill, Lanier, Vanbots, with many more were Remarkable
in curious Landskips.

For Night-Pieces the Incomparable Dow; Likewise Barsan and Elshamer have done
Famous works in that way.

Brower was the most Famous for Boor-Pieces, for every Touch speaks a Master,
and with a few strokes could put what Passion in a Face he pleased. Teneers
likewise and one of the Brugels did very well in that manner of Painting.

Of Masters now Living.

SIR Godfrey Kneller, Knight. Their Majesty's principal Painter, by Birth a Saxon,
and well descended, was sent very young to Holland, to learn the Mathematics
and other Sciences; amongst which he was most inclined to Drawing and Painting;
wherein he made a beginning by the famous Rembrants direction, at Amsterdam.
When somewhat improved, his Father approving of his choice, sent him to Rome,
and spared for no cost that he might exercise his genuine Fancy without any
constraint or confinement.

In Rome he studied the Antiques, and Copyed very much after Raphael, in the
Vatican, and was in great-esteem with Cavalier Bernini, and by him much
recommended for his Works: But not being satisfied yet, he went to Venice,
where he studied Titians Works, and especially his Portraits, whereby he highly
advanced himself into the Esteem and Respect of most of the chief Nobles of
that Republic, especially the House of Bassadonna, whose Elder Brother being
made Cardinal, had his Picture Drawn by him, and all his Brothers, in several
large Pieces; and one of the first of his Eminences Pictures, was sent with
great Applause, as a present to the Pope. He likewise painted most of the House
of Donado, Garsoni, Mocenigo, and diverse others.

But being called home by his Father, and still desiring to advance his Skill,
and longing to see Sir Anthony Van Dyck's Works, being most ambitious of
imitating that great Master, he therefore at length came into England; where,
by his indefatigable Industry, he got into the extraordinary Favor of King
Charles the Second, who approving of his Ability beyond any other, sent him to
paint the French King, and all that Royal Family, by which King he was very
honorably Presented. Since he was in great esteem with King James the Second;
but more particularly with Their present Majesty's. And his Majesty, to show
his Kingly approbation of his Art and Manners, was pleased to confer the Honor
of Knighthood upon him, on the Third of March, 1692. and as an extraordinary
Mark of his Grace and Favor, Honored him with the Present of a Sword, by the
Hands of the Right Honorable the Lord Chamberlain.

Of his chief Paintings several are at Windsor. K. Charles, in the Bed Chamber
at White Hall. The Gallery of Beauties, at Hampton Court. Likewise Their
present Majesty's Pictures, and that noble Piece of the Duke of Schomberg on
Horseback: also at my Lady Dorchesters at Weybridge, at my Lord Exeters, and at
many more Seats of Persons of Quality throughout England; in which you will not
only read the greatest Thought of the Artist in the very Minds of the Persons
represented, but also the most curious delicacy in Coloring; adapting each
Complexion with Tinctures, like the Hand of Nature itself.

Nor is this Art so Ornamental to him, but he an Equal Ornament to the Art,
being a Gentleman of good Morals, True to his Friends, Affable and free from
the least appearance of Affectation or Pride. Of which, and more concerning his
Skill and Works, you may better read in his Conversation, and the Works of the
learned Sandrart Aca. Pic. lib. 3. cap, 28.

Mr. Varrio, is a Man of vast Design in History, Great and Lofty in his Manner,
witness the noble Work at Windsor, as likewise at several Persons of Qualities
Houses.

The Ingenious Mr. Cook must be allowed in History one of the greatest Masters
of the Age; he was Disciple to the famous Salvator Rose; he has Traveled into
Italy, and studied the great Antique Masters; his Designs show a vast Judgment,
thoroughly Considered, and himself a strict Imitator of the best reputed
Italian Masters.

Mr. Roustrate Paints the still Life with utmost Strength and Beauty as Colors
will reach; his Order and Manner extraordinary good; his mixture of Plate,
musical Instruments, etc. have a great Harmony: his Pictures are very Noble,
Gentle, and Pleasant, and himself allowed in his way, the best Master of the
Age.

Mr. Dubois the Elder is a very great Master in Landscape, and exactly to the
Italian manner; The Younger for History and the Life especially in Small is a
curious Painter, they have by their extraordinary Industry, made one of the
finest Collections (especially of closet Pieces) in Europe.

The Ingenious Mr. Wyck for a Battle-Painter is doubtless not to be imitated in
this Age; his works are extreme Neat, Gentel, and finely Finished; his
Coloring very Beautiful, his Manner and Ordonance full of Judgment.

Mr. William Vande Velde for a Sea-Painter is unparraleld, his work finely
Finished and with a delicate Sky, and his Father in Black and White does to a
Miracle.

Mr. Scalker for Night-pieces and Lamps comes next to Dow himself.

Mr. Murry is a hopeful Scion of that Noble Stock Mr. Rily. He Paints a Face
admirable well, very Gentel in his Manner and Postures, and his work promises
much Reputation to his Country: He neither injures the Likeness by giving
additional Beauty, nor the Beauty and Gracefullness by carefully observing the
Likeness.

Mr. Harman Verelst Paints well by the Life and was in good Repute in Germany:
he likewise Paints Fruit etc. very fine.

Mr. Simon Verelst Paints Flowers extreme fine, beyond any in the former or
present Age, for neatness; likewise Mr. William Verelst Paints Flowers very
well.

The Ingenious Mr. Seeks is a very good Master by the Life, puts Admirable
Tinctures and Carnatiens in a Face, Paints with a very good Body and Durable;
he is one of a sound Judgment in the Art, a diligent Imitator of Lyly and very
Fortunate in his Choice; he is likewise very happy in taking the Likeness.

Mr. Hen is a very good Master in Landscape and Paints nearest of any to the
Manner of the great Possine, likewise Mr. Edema Paints Landscape very well
especially his Waterfalls.

Mr. Hemskirk Paints Boor-Pieces after the manner of Brower and many of his
Pictures may come in Computation with that great Master.

Mr. Vanderbank Paints a Face and Posture very well, Landscape, Foul, etc.
extraordinary fine and is to be Ranked amongst the great Masters of the Age.

Mr. Jacob Wilson has had a Reputation for Painting by the Life these many
years in the City, he Orders a whole Picture himself; putting great Likeness in
the Face, and Gracefullness in the Posture.

Mr. William Wilson is the best Master we have in Painting Foul, Hares, etc.
he has extrordinary good Draught, and Feathers his Birds very finely. He has
been some time in Italy and a strickt Imitator of the greatest Masters there.

Several other good Masters we have which at present are not obvious to my
Memory, but after some time is designed a Treatise containing the Characters of
all the present Noted Artists in Europe, both Painters and others, where each
will be discoursed on according to his Merrits and the Reputation he has
acquired in the World. Those whom I have Mentioned may please to take Notice
that I did not place them in order here according to the preference of one
above another in merit, only as they at present occurred to my Thoughts.

CAP. X.
Of Proportion.

PRoportion is of two sorts either Proper, Expressing the exact Proportion of
the Thing to be Represented, or else in Perspective, in Respect of the Eye,
differing very much from the other, for according to the Distance of the Thing
from the Eye it Judges what Proportion the Head has with the Body.

For should a Carver make a Statue according to true Proportion and place it on
high, he that below beholds it will judge it Disproportionable, by Reason the
upper Parts will come to the Eye in a Sharp Angle, and the lower Parts in a
Blunt.

The Philosophical and Perspective Reason hereof is, because when the Statue
is in the open Air, which being Transparent is filled with certain Visuall
Species, which coming into the Eye meet with those Visuall Lines which come in
a Pyramidal Form, whose Cone touches the Eye.

Therefore the Artist must carefully observe the Height he designs his work,
and accordingly add as much to the Upper Parts as the Distance will loose,
which Rules Phidias and Praxitiles exactly observed in their Statues in Monte
Cavallo in Rome, as likewise did the admirable workman of Trajans Colums, and
by this means the Eye soon judges of the Prototypon whom the work Represents
which is the Intent of Painting and Carving.

It may be inquired what Proportion a moveable Picture should have, I Answer,
it must always be supposed to hang something above the Eye, since that Sense is
most delighted to look upwards and has been observed by all Great Masters.

So great is the Virtue of Proportion, that nothing delights the Eye without
it, since the Grace of all Beautiful Forms consists in a Proportionable
Measure of Parts, and as Vitruvious says, that none can proceed with Judgment
without Acquaintance with the Force thereof, it giving the Majesty and Beauty
to Bodies, whence he calls it Euritbmia.

It has been of great Force in exciting Men's Minds to Reverence and Devotion,
witness the Statue of Jupiter Carved by Phidias; and the great Zeuxe's
persuaded Greece to dedicate their most Majestical and best Proportioned works
to the immortal Gods, as being the works of Men Reputed amongst them as Gods,
and not only represented the works of God, but likewise supplied the Defects of
Nature.

Nor does it only affect Painting but likewise Carving, and all other Arts, and
was the first Pattern of all Artificial Things; yet the Painter (as Baptista
Albertus affirms) more especially considers Man's Body, therefore Antiquity to
Grace Painting above the rest (as chief Mistress of Proportion) named the rest
Handicrafts-Men. Now let us consider the Definition of Proportion.

Proportion is a Correspondency and Agreement of the Measures of the Parts
between themselves, and with the whole in every Work.

This Correspondency Vitruvius calls Commodulation, because a Model is a
Measure, which being taken at first, measures both the Parts and the Whole.

In Former times before this Symmetrical Measure of Parts was Understood and
considered, all Italy could witness what Lame and Preposterous Statues and
Pictures were continually set up, especially about the Time of Constantine the
Great until Giotto in Tuscany and Andrino di Edosia Pauese in Lombardy.

A great Benefit of Proportion is, it wonderfully assists the Judgment in
Judging of the Famous Antique Paintings: it is pity to see how some (absolute
Idiots in this most Essential part of the Art) affect a vain surface of Gaudy
Colors, to the disgrace of the Science and sometimes sinde Buyers of their own
Talent.

CAP. XI.
The Names of the Parts of Man's Body.

BEfore we Proceed, we will give the Names of the External Parts of Man's Body,
for it is Requisite an Artist should speak properly when he has occasion to
name them.

Of the Head the Forepart is called the Forehead; the turning of the Hair, the
Crown; the Root of the Hair above the Forehead, the Center. The Hair before,
the Foretop. The Parting of the Hair beginning at the Foretop, and reaching to
the Crown, the Seame. Women's long Hair is Coma. The long Hair in the Pole,
Cuticagn. The Forehead is the space between the Root of the Hair before, and
the Eyebrows. The Pulse is the highest part of the Forehead. Melone, the
swelling out above the Eyebrows. The Temples, betwixt the Pulse of the
Forehead and the Ears. The Ear is the turning contained between the Temples,
upper part of the Cheek and the Root of the Hair by the side of the Head. The
lower part called the Tip; in the midst is the Hole in Italian, Mirenga. The
Eyebrows are the thick Hairs at the bottom of the Forehead: the space between,
the Italians call Glabella: The Upper Eyelid compasses the upper part of the
Eye: The Eye is the round Ball contained between the upper and lower Eyelid:
The Black of the Eye, the round spot in the middle called the Apple, or Sight,
the outward corner of the Eye, next the Ear called Cornice, the inner that
toward the Nose: the space between the upper Eyelid, the outward Corner, and
the whole turning of the Eye to the upper part of the Cheek and the Glabella,
is called the Hollow of the Eye. the Nose descends from between the Eyes and
ends at the Nostrels, those Prominences hanging out on each side of the bottom,
each having a hole to smell, termed in Italian, Papilla; the lower end of the
Nose standing forewards is called the Point: the Rising in the midst, the Ridge.
The Upper Cheek, is the space between the Ear, the Hollow of the Eye, the Nose
and the lower Cheek, whereof the part rising toward the Eye is named Mellone.
The Lower Cheek is bounded with the upper, the Nostrels the Mouth, the Chin to
the Throat, and the Neck under the Ear; the Upper Lip, the Red Flesh above the
Mouth, also called Virgin. The Mouth is the Division between the Upper and
nether Lip: the Concavity coming from the Bottom of the Nose to the upper Lip,
is called the Gutter of the Nose: the Roof of the Mouth the Palate: the Tongue,
that which moves in the Mouth in Italian Strozza: the passage betwixt the
Lungs and the Mouth through which the Breath passes, is called the Windpipe.
The Gum is the Flesh wherein the Teeth are Fastened: the four first called
Dividers, next unto which on each side are the Dog-Teeth, the other five on
each side with three Roots are the Cheek-Teeth, so that the full number is
thirty two, the Chin, the extremity between the Lip and the end of the Face,
whose beginning is at the root of the Hair; the hinder part under the Crown, is
called the Nape, as also the upper part where the Hairs grow behind, is the
beginning of the Neck, called Cervix. Those Hairs growing under the Chin and
about the mouth, is called the Beard: those on the upper Lip, the Mustachiums:
the Throat is the Part betwixt the Chin and the beginning of the Body: in the
midst directly under the Chin, is the rising called the Throat-Bone; the
Concavity of the Neck before, between the Root of the Hair and the beginning of
the Backbone, which on either side is joined with the Throat, and at the lower
end of the Neck with the shoulders, whereof the Bone in the midst is called
Astragalus; the whole Body before Contains in it, first the Upper Fork of the
Stomach, or Breast, which begins at the end of the Throat-pit: the Breasts
end with the short Ribs, and are also called the Part under the Paps. and in
Women called the Dugs,etc. the Heads or Extuberances whence the Milk is sucked,
called the Nipples. the space between the Breasts at the lower Fork of the
Stomach, is called the Bulk. The Arme-Pits are those Hallows under the Arms. The
Short-Ribs begin at the end of the Paps, and reach to the Flanks near the
Belly: the Flanks begin at the end of the Breast, and likewise are called the
Wast. The upper part of the Belly lies between the hallow of the Breasts, the
wast above the Navil, and the Ribs, and is called Epa: the Knitting of the
Entrals is called the Navil. The Belly lies between the Wast, the Privitys, and
the Flanks: under the Belly, the Privitys, the hallow compass at the Top
Corona: the hinder part of the Body called the Back or Cbine, confisteth first
of the Shoulder Blade, which is the part behind the Shoulders end, which part
of the Chine or Loins; the rest of the Back reaches from the Neck, to the
beginning of the Clift of the Buttocks: the Loins lie between the
shoulder-Blades, the Ribs and the rest of the Chine to the Reins; the Reins
reach from the Loins to the Buttocks, and do properly belong to the part below
the Wast: the Buttocks are the Fleshy part which serves for the Use of sitting:
the Arm contains, first the Shoulder, behind which is the Back, beginning at
the Clavicola, between the Neck and Throat, and reaches to the shoulder blade
behind, which place is properly called the Back. The part of the Arm from the
Elbow upward, is called the upper Brawn of the Arm, the Elbow is the bowing of
the Arm, the inside whereof is the Joint; and here the lower part of the Arm
begins. The Wrist is where the Arm joyneth with the hand in the inside. The
Palm is the inside of the hand between the wrist and the Fingers: the Thumb is
the biggest and shortest, the Fore Finger next, then the Middle Finger which is
the Longest, then the Ring-Finger, the last is the Little Finger which is the
smallest: Cheiromaneers give other Names as the Thumb, Venus; the Forefinger,
Jupiter; the Middle Finger, Saturn; the Ring Finger, Sol, and the Little
Finger, Mercury, the Brawn in the Palm of the Hand, the Hill of Luna; the
Triangle in the midst of the Palm the Hill of Mars.

The Fingers whose Joints are as it were equal in Number according to their
bigness, namely three upon each, except upon the Thumb which has but two. The
hinder part of the Arm reaches from the Shoulder to the Elbow; where the
second part of the Arm begins reaching to the Wrist-Joynt. the Back of the
Hand reaches from the wrist to the first Joint of the Fingers and is called
Pecten. The spaces between the Joints are called Internodi, which are two upon
each except the Thumb, which has but one, in the space between the last Joint
and the top of the Finger is the Nayl, whose bowing (where it touches the
skin) is called Corona the whole Hand begins at the wrist, and reaches to
the extremity of the Fingers.

The Leg consists of these parts: first, the Thigh, which begins at the
Trunk of the Body and reaches to the Knee. The Hallow of the Thigh is the
inner part below the Privitys. the Knee begins at the Round Bone at the end
of the Thigh, and reaches to the beginning of the Shin-bone, which reaches
down clean through the Leg to the Instep, beginning at the end of the Shinbone,
and reaches to the beginning of the Toes, and is called Pecten, or the upper
part of the Foot. The Ancle is that Bone which buncheth out on each side,
between the Instep and the beginning of the Heel. The Small of the Leg, is the
space between the end of the two Calves above, and the Ancle, Instep and Heel
below. the Pit of the Foot is the Hallow under the Hill or highest bunch of the
Foot toward the Sole. The Toes have Joints as the Fingers, though shorter: and
Nails in like manner, but otherwise called, as the First, Second, Third,
Fourth and Fifth; the hinder part of the Leg begins under the Buttock, and
is called the Thigh and ends at the hinder part of the Knee, called the Ham,
or Bending. The Calves of the Legs begin under the Ham, and are two upon each
Leg, the Outward which ends somewhat high, and the Inward which reaches
nearer to the small of the Leg; and diminishes by degrees to the part a little
above the Ancle. The Heel is the part of the Foot, which rises out backwards,
reaching from the end of the Leg to the Sole; which begins at the end of the
Heel, and reaches to the top of the Toes; containing likewise the spaces
between the Joints underneath orderly.

CAP. XII.
Rules of Proportion.

SOme of the Italians were wont to divide the length of the Body, from the top
of the Head to the Sole of the Foot into thirty equal Parts or Degrees,
dividing each Degree into ten Minut's, in all three hundred, which is apt to
confound any young Disciple, nor can such minute parts be measured but by
Osteology.

Therefore we will only (which is sufficient) divide the Face into three equal
parts, and each part into four less Subdivisions.

Ten Faces we count to a Tall Graceful Body and is measured thus: the first
from the top of the Head to the Root of the Nostrels: the second, thence to the
Throat pit: the third, thence to the Pit of the Stomach; the fourth thence to
the Navil; the fifth thence to the Piramidal Muscles; thence to the Knee two
and a half; and to the sole of the Foot two and a half more.

The first part from the Top of the Head and Nose answer to the space betwixt
that and the Chin, in a Triple Proportion, which makes a Diapente and a
Diapason. That between the Chin and the Throat-pit, answers to that between
the Nose and the Chin in a double Proportion, which makes a Diapason: whereunto
the Head answers in the same Proportion, the three Faces between the Throat-pit
and the Piramidal muscles, answer to the second between them and the Knee in a
Sesquialter Proportion; whence arises a Diapente; but with the Leg they are
Unisons, for it has the same Proportion with the Thigh.

The Extent of the Arms has the same Length, beginning from the end of the
long Finger, to the Joint of the wrists one Face: from thence to the bending of
the Arm one Face and a third part; thence to the Joining on the Shoulders, one
and a third part; from the Shoulders to the hole in the Neck, one and a third
part, all which make five Faces: and the like to the extremity of the other
Arm make in all ten Faces.

The Italians Measure thus, from the extremity of the middle Finger, to the
wrist of the Hand, one Face, thence to the Elbow one and a half, so much to the
Clavicola, or Joint of the shoulders; and one to the Throat-Pit.

So that the Hands alone are Unisons, with that between the Shoulder Joint and
the Throat-pit, and the space between the Shoulders and the Elbow, with that
between the Elbow and the wrist; so that these answer to each other in a
Sesquialter Proportion called a Diapente.

A Face is as much as the distance between the Nipples, and so much more from
each of them to the Throat-pit; making an Equaliter Triangle.

The Compass of the Head, from the Eyebrows to the Neck behind, is double to
the length of the whole Head. The Compass of the waste is a Triple Sesquialter
to the Diameter thereof; and is Unison with the Trunk of the Body, which is
three Faces. The Circumference of the Body under the Armpits, and the space
between them and the wrists, answer in a Double Proportion, and is Unison with
any half of the Body.

They who by the Head, mean the length of the whole Head, must make but Eight
Heads in all, as thus, the Head one; thence to the Bottom of the Breast one;
one from thence to the Navil; from thence to the Antipendiums, one; thence to
the middle of the Thigh, one; to the lower part of the Knee, one more; thence
to the small of the Leg, one; and from thence to the bottom of the Foot, one
more; in all Eight.

And thus the Breadth, when the Arms are extended, from the Extremity of the
middle Finger to the wrist; thence to the bending of the Arm, one; thence to
the bottom of the shoulder, one; over to the other shoulder, two more; and to
the end of the middle Finger three more as before.

The breadth of a Figure without motion seen Frontwise is thus measured: the
breadth of the Shoulders crossed at the Dellord Muscle, to the joining on the
Arms, two Faces; about the Haunches where the Oblique extern Muscles are, one
Face, two third parts and three Subdivisions; the Thighs at the biggest place
one Face. The Knee one third part, three Subdivisions; and an half; the Leg at
the biggest is two third parts and one subdivission; the extremity of the
Ancles, one third part one subdivision and an half; the Feet one third part and
a half, and half a subdivision, their length one Face, one third part and one
Subdivision.

CAP. XIII.
Unisons in Proportion.

THE Measures which are Unisons are these: the space between the Chin and the
Throat-pit, is as much as the Diameter of the Neck. The Circumference of the
Neck is as much as from the Throat-pit to the Navel. the Diameter of the wast
answers to the Distance, between the Knob of the Throat, and the top of the
Head, and this is the length of the Foot. The space between the Eyelids and
the Nostrels, is all one with that between the Chin and the Throat-bone: from
the Nose to the Chin is as much as from the Throat-bone to the Throat-pit. The
space from the Hollow of the eye below, and from the Eye-brow to the Center of
the Eye, is the same with the Prominency of the Nostrels; and so much it is
between the Nostrels and the upper Lip; so that these three spaces are equal.
The distance between the top of the Nail of the Forefinger, and the last Joint
thereof, and from thence to the wrist, are equal: the space between the Nail,
the middle Finger and the last Joint thereof, and from thence to the Wrist are
all one. The greater Joint of the Forefinger is the height of the Forehead,
and the space between that Joint and the top of the Nail is equal to the Nose,
beginning at the bottom of the most eminent Arch above the Eyes, where the
Forehead and Nose are divided. The two first Joints of the middle Finger are
equal to the space between the Nose and the Chin: The first Joint whereon the
Nail grows is the distance between the Nose and the Mouth, so that the second
Joint answers unto the first in a Sesquialter Proportion, as also does the
space between the Mouth and the Chin, whence arises the Concord Diapente. The
bigger Joint of the Thumb, gives the wideness of the Mouth, the space betwixt
the top of the Chin and the dint under the lower Lip, answers to the lesser
Joint of the Thumb, and is as much as from the Nose to the same dint:
wherefore, from the greater Joint there is a Sesquialter Proportion and a
Concord Diatesseron. The last Joint of each Finger is double to the length of
the Nail, and makes a Diapason. From the midst between the Eyebrows to the
outward Corner of the Eye, is as much as from thence to the Ear. The height of
the Forehead, the length of the Nose and the width of the Mouth are Unisons.
The breadth of the hand and the Foot are all one. The length of the Foot in
respect of the breadth makes a double Suprabi partient a Diapason and a
Diatesseron.

The breadth of the Foot to its height at the Instep, makes a Sesquialter and
a Diatesseron. The breadth of the Hand is double to the height. The arches of
the Eyebrows are equal to the arch of the upper Lip, at the division of the
Mouth. the breadth of the Nose and the Eye is all one, and either of them half
the length of the Nose. The Navil is the midst betwixt the Nose and the Knee.
From the top of the Shoulder to the Elbow, and from thence to the Hand is a
Diatessaron. The space between the lower end of the Ear, and the Joint of the
shoulder, is half as much as the breadth of the Breast at the Shoulders which
makes a double Sesquialter. The whole breadth of the Body, to the space between
the top of the Head and the Throat-bone, makes a Quadruple Proportion, whence
arises a Diapason: the same Proportion has the Cubite, or lower part of the
Arm, from the Elbow to the top of the Middle Finger with the Breadth of the
Body by the Arms spread abroad. The breadth of the Flanks is double to the
Thigh or a Diapason. The Length of a Man is the same with the breadth. The
breadth of the Back at the Arm pits, of the Hipps at the Buttocks and of the
Legs at the Knees, in respect of the soles of the Feet, make a Triple
sesquialter the like is from the space of the Head to the Brest-pit. The
Diameter of the Head at the Forehead, to the depth thereof (that is between
the Eyes and the Nappe of the Head) is a Sesquioctava: whence arises a Tone.
The Circumference of the Forehead at the Temples, Quadruple to its height, or
a Diapason. The height of the Face, and the space between the Chin and the
Throat-bone, makes a Triple Proportion, or a Diapason and a Diapente. And thus
might we find in the Hand, all other Proportions of the smallest parts.

CAP. XIV.
Proportions of a Woman, Child, and other Observations.

THe Proportions of Man and Woman differ in their height: a Woman has a longer
neck; the parts of the Breast and the lower parts of the Belly by nere a half
part, which makes the space from the Breast to the Navel, less by one Part, and
the Thigh about a third part shorter: as to Woman's breadth, her Breasts and her
Shoulders are narrower, her Haunches larger, her Thighs at the place of their
Articulation, so too; her Arms and Legs are thicker, her Feet streighter. And
Women being more Fat and Fleshy, their Muscles are the less seen: therefore
their Contours are more even and smooth.

A young Maid has a little Head, long Neck, low Shoulders, a slender Body,
pretty big Haunches, Legs and Thighs long and little Feet.

Young Men, their Neck thicker then Woman's, Breast and Shoulders larger,
Haunches and Belly narrower, their Legs and Thighs Slenderer, and their Feet
bigger.

Young Men about sixteen or seventeen, in their length have their Proportion as
Men of forty, but differ in breadth.

At twelve or thirteen, mine Faces to its height, being equally divided, the
breadth about the Shoulders two Faces, about the Haunches one Face, one third
part and a half.

For Four years of Age the height six Faces, and one third part; from the top
of the Head to the bottom of the Belly three Faces and one third part, and from
thence to the Sole of the Feet, three Faces; the breadth about the Shoulders
one Face and two third parts; and about the Haunches one Face and one third
part.

For three years of Age, we count five Faces, from the top of the Head to the
Soles of the Feet. From the top of the Head to the bottom of the Belly, three,
thence to the Feet two; its breadth about the Shoulders, is one length of the
Face and one eighth part; and in the place of the Hips one Face.

Yet not withstanding these certain Rules of Proportion take these
observations: in Common Country-Fellows, as they are People of a duller Wit,
they must have more Heavy and Rough Proportion. The Head big and the Neck
short, the Stomach little, the Shoulders high, the Knees and Thighs thick and
the Feet large.

For more Grave and Noble Storys, the Figure must be well shaped, the Joints
well knit, little and compact, the Haunches high, a small Hand and a Nervous
Neck, not very fat or fleshy. Thighs Muscly, the principal Muscles raised up
and knit together at their Head and Axis. Shoulders large and high; the Body
elevated, the Belly little, with smooth Legs and slender Feet.

In Great Heroic Historys the Figures may be much bigger then the Life, only
observing exact Proportion: but remember (as before) that if they stand high,
(as such always should) the upper parts must be made larger, according as the
Distance Diminishes.

Farther observe, that there is a difference in the Contours in some Parts, as
the Body changes, as the Arm, when bent is bigger then when straight so
likewise of the Feet, Knees, etc.

In Measuring of Figures of the Relievo, great care must be taken of the Parts
Jutting or swelling out, or you will make great Faults.

The Contours of Old Folks must be more stiff, and the Joints sharp, in young
People more easy, the Joints Rounder.

Great care must likewise be taken to observe the greater grace of Proportion
in the Principal Figure in a Picture, which is chiefly designed to take the
Eye, keeping your mind most fixed on that, lest you spend your Conceit on the
other Figures and so the Design wants the Beauty expected as has besell great
Masters.

Euphranor being to draw the twelve Gods in Athens, began with Neptune, which
he had finished so exquisitely both for Proportion and Color, that after
designing to make Jupiter with fat greater Perfection, he had spent his Conceit
so on Neptune that he could not Finish Jupiter or any of the rest of the Gods.

The like besell to Leon: Uincent, who being to Paint our Savior at his Last
Supper in the Refectory of St. Maria de Gratia in Millain: and having finished
the other Apostles he represented the two James's with such Perfection, of
Grace and Majesty, that Endeavoring afterward to express our Savior, with a
more Sacred and Divine Countenance, he was not able to accomplish it, wherefore
advising with Bernard Zenale, he used these words to comfort him; O Leonard
none but God himself could correct this Error, for thou nor no Man living can
bestow more Beauties then in these two James's.

CAP. XV.
Of Action and Passion.

THe Passions of the Mind are certain Motions, proceeding from the
Apprehension of Something: and are either Sensitive, Rational or Intellectual.
Sensitive is, when we consider Good and Evil as Profitable or Unprofitable,
Pleasant or Offensive. Rational, when we Confider good and Evil as Virtue or
Vice; Praise or Disprayse; and Intellectual, when we regard them as True or
False.

The Inferior Powers of the Mind, may be considered under these two Heads
Desire and Anger. The Desiring part considers Good and Bad absolutely, and
thence causes Liking or Hatred, or otherwise Respects Good as Absent, whence
raises Desire. Or Evil as Absent whence is bred Fear, Dread, etc. or both as
Present, and thence Proceeds Joy or Grief.

The Angry Faculty considers Good and Evil as it may with ease be Attained or
Avoided; and from thence arise, Considence and Hope; sometimes it moves to
Revenge, and sometimes excites Audacity, and sometimes causes Distrust and
then Desperation.

By diverse Passions also is the Temperature of the Body altered, in Mirth the
Spirits are enlarged; in Fear contracted. Love breeds sundry Colors sometimes
Red sometimes Pale. Anxiety Causes Draught and Blackness. Mercifullness.
produces a certain Heaviness. and sometimes Injures the Person so Affected.
Fear brings Coldness, Paleness, Fainting of the Voice, the Panting of the
Heart, etc. Heaviness causes Sweating and Paleness. In Bashfullness the
Spirits fly to the Brain; in Joy, the Heart is extended by Degrees; in
Displeasure it is drawn in Gradually.

Bodies are likewise affected with Passions according to their several
Constitutions and Complections.

Those of a Sanguine Complexion are for the most part, Gentle, Merry, Modest,
Gracious, Generous, Affable and are given to Love, Pleasure, Desire, Hope, etc.
which are the Passions of Delight and a Quiet Mind.

The Phlegmatic are addicted to Mercifullness, Simplicity, Humility, Timidity,
their Bodies usually induced to incline downwards and their Limbs to dilate and
of a Heavy motion, and apt to swag; whereas the Sanguine are more Upright and
Move more Firm.

The Choleric, are Usually Bold, Feirce, Boisterous, Violent, Arrogant and
Humerous, they are addicted to Anger and Hatred, their Limbs move upwards, apt
to turn, start, shake, etc. their Parts enlarged with Heat, the Flesh inflamed
with Redness, but more especially their Eyes.

The Melancholy are Slow, Sluggish, Restrained in their Actions, and
Unweildie; given to Disquietness, Stubborness, Anxiety, Sadness, Horror,
Despair, etc. their Limbs apt to hang and decline as if benumbed with Cold.

The Artist is therefore diligently to observe that he is not only to show the
Passion by Contraction, Dilation, etc. of Features, but likewise to adapt a
Complexion suitable to the Character the Figure is to bare in the Design,
whither a Soldier, a Lover, a Penitent, etc. as for Example.

A Martialist should have a Meager Body with large raised and hard Limbs, Great
Bones well Knit with Joints, the Complexion Swarthy with an adust, Red, large
Eyes, Yellowish like a Flame of Fire, wide Nostrels, a wide Mouth, thick and
purplelish Lips, small Ears, a square Chin, White Teeth, a darkish Hair but
tending to a fiery Red, with stiff and Curled Locks, a Violent strong Voice and
Shrill, in some Robust Posture or Exercise.

Thus he that can express the Propertys of one Complexion may easily conceive
of the Rest, since all Natural Things have a Correspondency in Method, Form,
Proportion, Nature, aad Motion; which Philosophically understood bring a
Certain knowledge of all Passion and Action to be imagined in Bodies.

For most Certain it is that those Passions of the Mind, whence these
External Actions flow, discover themselves more or less as the Bodies have
Affinity with any of the four Complections arising from the four Elements.

Yet Ptolomie, the Hebrews, Egyptians, Arabians likewise Albertus Magnus, with
some late Philosophers affirm, that our Passions and Affections proceed from a
Natural Instinct and Inclination of the Superior Bodies (the Planets) but
Sapiens Dominabiter Astris.

CAP. XVI.
Precepts for the Expressing of Action and Passion.

ANger, the Motions of the Body must be strong and quick, all the parts stirred,
the Eye wild and Sparkling, the Nostrels open, the Point of the Eyebrows fixed
toward the Nose, the Corners of the Mouth a little open and Foaming, the
Muscles pust up, the Veins swelled, the Hair standing up.

The Subjects for such Expression may be, Moses when he broke the Tables of the
Law; Tydaeus, who Dying bit the Head of Menalippus; Alexander when he slew
Callisthenes; the Roman Sylla, Valentinian, Hungar, etc.

Cruelty, with Passion and Motion as before, but more Furious and Violent, in
Eager, Importunate and Bitter Actions.

The Subjects, Zenaeheribs Sons, who slew their Father before the Alter;
Abimeleck, who slew his Seventy Brethren; Mithridates who on the Receipt of a
Letter caused 80000 Romans to be slain; likewise Archelaus, Phalaris, Medea,
Scyron, Dionysius, Crion, Cyrus, Herod, Procrustes, Mezentius, Tamberlain the
Tartorian, Attyla, Barbarossa; but more especially in the Jews toward our
Savior, where may be Expressed the Spurning, Buffetting, their Disdain, Scorn,
Contempt, the outrages of their Cords, Crowning with Thorns, their Deriding,
Spitting, Whipping, Pointing, his Carrying the Cross, Peircing his Hands Side
and Feet, Drinking of Gall, Opening his Side with a Spear, the Repulse of the
Blessed Mary; and to make the Cruelty the more Horrid and Detestable, to
observe his Sacred Sufferance, Gracious and Pitying Looks and Divine Patience.

Sadness, their Motions Heavy, Pensive and Sorrowful; the Head Carelessly
hanging aside, the Forehead wrincled, the Eyes half shut, the Mouth a little
open, the Corners downwards, the Nostrels swelled, the under Lip pouting and
drawn back.

The Subjects, Adam and Eve upon their Fall, Agar with Child thrust out by
Abraham; Peter after his Denial, etc.

Envy causes a Man to draw back his Limbs, pluck in and in a manner shadow his
Eyelids, wry his Mouth, grind his Teeth, biting his Finger, turning himself
with a Passionate Look, as prying into other Men's Affairs.

The Subjects Cain seeing his Brothers Sacrifice more acceptable then his;
Culianus, who seeing his Rival in Honor, preferred, caused the Bridge to be
broak as they were passing over though with certain Ruin to himself; likewise
the Devils countenance when he Tempted Eve.

Covetousness has Restrained and Catching Actions, drawing in the Hands and
Arms, Pensive, Clitching the Thumb between the Fingers, etc.

The Subjects, Crassus; Polymnestor, when he Murdered Priams Son, for his
Treasure; Tantalus at the Banquet of the Gods, who served up his own Son Pelops
in stead of Meat; Midas, Aglaurus, etc.

Love causes a Dilation in all Parts of the Face, the Forehead smooth and
even, the Eyebrows to rise in the middle, the Eyes half open and Smiling, the
Apple of the Eye Spark- and Moist, the Cheeks full, the Nostrels a little open,
the Corners of the Mouth turning a little upwards, the Lips red and the whole
Air of the Face Smiling, the Complexion pretty Ruddy, the Head inclining
toward the Object. The Subjects are Infinite.

Pain makes the Patient to draw in the Eyebrows, strain the Lips, show the
Teeth, throwing the Arms abroad, sometimes drawing the Body together, turning
and shutting the Eyes, it causes Tears, Shakings, Burnings, Sweats, sometimes
to stretch the Veins, to Roar out and beat themselves, etc.

The Subjects, Prometheus fed on by the Vulture, St. Sebastian when shot to
Death, St. Stephen Stoned, St. Peter Crucified with his Heels upwards, St.
Lawrence burnt on a Gridiron, St. Bartholemew, with innumerable more Examples
of those who have suffered under Cruel Tyrants.

Despair has Actions betokening a Privation of Hope, it causes to tare the
Hair, Garments and Flesh, sometimes a fixed and resolute Look with a stern Brow,
etc. the Subjects Saul, Cleopatria, Queen Dido, Cato Uticensis, Mithridates,
Nero, Judas, Architophel, Thisbe, Lucretia, etc.

Fury shows Actions of Folly and Distraction with Vehemence in all their
Affections, by Gaping, wrying their Mouths, seeming to Cry out, bewail, Howl,
Lament, Tearing their Limbs and Garments.

The Subjects, Athamas killing his Son, and putting away his Wife; Heliodorus
in his Aethiope: History mentioning this Fury in fair Cariclia, partly for the
Absence of her Theagenes and partly for the Marriage of Cnemon and Nausiclia,
brings her in like a Fury, throwing her self on her Bed, tearing her Hair and
Flesh, and Crying, come let us Sacrifice to the Devil; likewise in Althaea
kindling the firebrand of her Son Maleager, etc.

CAP. XVII.
Farther Precepts for the Expressing of Action and Passion.

IThought to have subjoined Subjects for each Remarkable Passion but finding it
would swell the Treatise too large, I shall of the rest only show the manner of
Expressing them; for Subjects, the Artist may furnish himself out of Homer,
Virgil, Ovid and the rest of the Poets.

Disdain, makes a Man shake the Head, open his Mouth with a scornful smile,
stare eagerly, opening his Hand and wresting it about, lift up his Nose as if
he smelt something amiss.

Injury must have Calumnious, Offensive, and Reproachful Actions, with an
insulting Violence, Threatening, Scorning and looking Feircely.

Vanity produces Light, Aerie and Frivolous Actions, yet a kind of
Contentment, easily given to Laughter and Mockery, Foolish, Insolent, Absurd
and Vain, yet Affected with all they do themselves.

Pride, in the better Sense, has a Lofty, Great and Graceful Carriage, the
Motions Noble and Principal, Aspiring at great Things, full of Resolution and
Confidence, and thence usually happy in Performance; but Pride in the worst
sense, is Imperious, Arrogant and Insolent, causing the Limbs to swell,
carrying the Head aloft, but without Steadiness or Gravity, showing scorn and
contempt to others advice.

Obstinacy has Stubborn, Hasty, Hard, Immutable and Implacable Actions,
Suffering the extremity of Pain rather then Obedience.

Roughness exercises Hard, Cruel, Rough and Stubborn Actions, void of Love,
Pity, Mildness, Civility or Generosity, it makes a Man draw in the Eyelids,
draw his Mouth aside when he speaks, look disguisedly over the Shoulder, move
slowly without any Decorum; Perverse, Obstinate, Harsh, Cruel, etc.

Bounty has Cheerful, Pleasant and Graceful Actions, with Arms open, the
Elbow on the Flank, the Hands held up with Palms forwards, the Body and Head
Inclining, turning his Face to whom he talks (though never so Mean) without
the least show of disdain; his Arms, Legs, Body not moved with the least
violence, but all Expressing an Affable Temper.

Magnanimity (which is a greatness of Mind) must have ready bold and stout
Actions, accompanied with State and Majesty, the Countenance Magnificent and
vigilant, causing Love, Fear and Reverence in the Beholder: his Head disposed
to Worthy and Heroical Actions, Free from base and servile Gestures; Farther
you may Learn in the Lives of Alexander the Great, Pompey, Hannibal, Charles
Loraine, Julius Caesar, Matheus Viconte, and James Trivultius.

Discretion (being properly a Modesty in Things) should have sweet, stayed, and
wise Actions; capable of discerning between Good and Evil, True and False;
Moderate in their temper, severe against the Insolent, but Gentle to Just and
Reasonable Men.

Wantoness should be Expressed with Wanton Looks, the Eyes sparkling, the whole
Face smiling, Dimples in the Cheeks, Kissing, Embracing, Forcing, Striving; the
most Allective Parts Naked, as Breasts, Legs, one Arm, Tips of their Tongues
seen, but covered about the middle with Lawn, to Inflame the desire of
beholding the more, for the Ancients expressed Venus not quite Naked, as some
Remains may be yet seen in Delos and Paphus.

Quietness has actions full of Joy and Mirth, free and easy without violence
or Perturbation; the Countenance smiling without immoderate Laughter, the Eyes
pretty open and Brisk, the Limbs moving moderate and Gracefully, the Forehead
smooth, and all the Actions betokening peace of Mind.

Lunacy must be expressed with torn Hair, squint Eyes or Distorted, swelling Lips
strangely Bending, Fowl Nostrels, Teeth befoam'd and appearing more in one
place then another, shaking their Heads, moving their whole Body; their Arms,
Hands and Legs Trampling, as seeming in continual danger of Falling; their Eyes
Ghastly Staring, their Countenance Pale, Wan, or of a black and blew Color;
there be other sorts called by Hipocrates, Epileptici, of which there be three
kinds, some with their Bodies upright, Streatch out their Legs, others inclining
so forcibly forewards that their Faces touch their Knees, and the last bending
themselves so violently backwards, that their Heads touch their Heels.

Patience has Acts of Humility void of Offense and Defense, which may best be
illustrated in the Passion of our Savior.

Rusticity has Slovenly, Heavy Slow, Clownish and Unreverent Actions, leaning
the Arm or Leg on whomever is next Rediculing (in their uncouth Manner) any
that appear Neat, Gentele, etc.

Wisdom has stayed, Grave and sober Actions, a Cheerful severity in the
Countenance, stroking the Beard with one Hand, which seems a little disordered
in token of Contemplation.

Folly is full of Vain Actions, absurd Dancing, provoking the Company to Laugh
by Apish Gestures of the Body and Hands, turning of the Arm, Head, and Body in
a fond Absurd Manner, Grinning with other foolish Gestures, of Mouth and Eyes,
ever Crossing the actions of Reason and Understanding.

Death has diverse Actions according to the manner of it, if suddenly Slain,
the Eyes must turn up, hiding half the Black and Gape; but otherwise if by the
effects of long Pain. The Painter must distingiush between a Violent Death and
when it comes by a Lingering, Pining Disease, for then the Limbs must be Meagre,
sharp and Lean; likewise they must be Hanging, Limber without the least
Appearance of strength to Support the Body; the Nerves being Relaxed. But all
uncomelyness and Noysomeness must be avoided, still Observing to take the best
of Nature, or at least to correct the Worst.

Wondering is Expressed, by Pointing with the Finger, throwing abroad the Arms,
thrusting out the Belly, biting the Lips, the Eyebrows arch-wise bent, and
fixed on the Object sometimes still, Attentive and immovable.

Simplicity has Fair, Pure and Free Actions, free from Malice, Merry,
Bashful, and proper to be expressed in Young Virgins.

Metcy has Pittyfull and Compassionate Actions, Weeping, bowing down the Head,
turning the Neck, reaching the Hand and spreading the Arms.

Inconstancy has various and uncertain Actions, seldom keeping their Arms,
Legs, Feet or Head in one Posture, Weeping, Laughing etc.

Humility is of two kinds, the better appears in Gentle, Mild and Courteous
Actions, the other in Base Actions, as when Nero carried some of the Earth of
Isthmus on his Shoulders; Sardanapalus, when he sat Spinning in his Palace,
etc.

Dread is Expressed by Paleness and Trembling, Fainting and hard drawing of the
breath, looking over the shoulder in Flight, cold Sweats, etc.

Modesty keeps a Mediocrity betwixt too Fearful and too Pleasant Gestures;
their Actions, Temperate, Moderate, Discreet, Mannerly and Attentive.

Theft opens Men's Eyes, their Hands at Liberty, Musing, looking from the
company as fearing they should read them in their Looks, often changing Color,
and sometimes causing Terrible, Insolent, Feirce Actions.

Deceit is full of kind Usages and Jests, but of Wary, Wise and Malicious
Actions, their Eyes Sweet, steadfast, but sharp upon all advantages.

Malice has Actions of Fraud and Falsehood, looking steddily on other Men's
Eyes, thence to pry into their Secret Affections, to obtain thence what may
serve their Purpose.

Craftiness has Malicious, Wary, Forecasting and Witty Gestures, they are Mild
and Gentle in all Things, full of Meditation and Art.

Adventuring has Bold, Feirce and Courageous Actions, and makes Men Free,
Loose and Vigilent, void of Fear and Sloth.

Rage is a Passion between Anger and Fury, it makes Men Grin, Foam at the
Mouth, Grind their Teeth, throwing away what ever is in their Hands, etc.

Justice as the Platonicks hold is a Masculine Virtue and has Manly,
Magnanimous, moderate and Considerate Actions, inclining rather to Severity
then Pleasure.

Devotion has Actions of Kneeling, lifting up the Hands to Heaven, to plair
the Fingers in each other toward the Chin, with an Inclining Countenance,
sometimes spreading the Arms abroad, with the Head hanging down, and sometimes
Grovelling on the Earth with the Face downwards.

Audacity has Rash, Presumptious, Arrogant and stubborn Actions, desiring to
be feared of all Men, not Regarding others, scorning all with a fearful
Countenance and Gestures full of Threatening and Insolency; and may be expressed
by Nimrod Founder of the Babylonian Tower; and in Goliath slain by David.

CAP. XVIII.
The Last Precepts for the Expressing of Action and Passion.

IN Expression we must Regard the Sex, Man must appear more Resolute and
Vigorous, his Actions more Free, Firm and Bold; but Woman's Actions more Tender,
Easy and Modest.

We must likewise Regard the Age, whose different Times and Degrees carry them
to different Actions, as well by the Agitations of the Mind as the Motions of
the Body.

We must also take Notice of the Condition, if they be Men of great Extent and
Honor, their Actions must be Reserved and Grave; but if Plebeians, more Rude
and Disorderly.

Bodies Deify'd must be Retrenched of all those Corruptible Things which serve
only for the Preservation of Humane Life, as the Veins, Nerves, Arterys, and
taking only what serve for Beauty and Form.

We must likewise observe to give to Man Actions of Understanding; to Children,
Actions which only Express the Motions of their Passions; to Brutes, purely the
Motions of Sense.

Consider also that Man has his Eyes and Ears (which are the Organs of the
Soul) situated in one straight Line, Brutes have one point low on the side
toward the Nose, the other drawing toward the Ear, their Natural Sense
conducting it self from the smell to the Hearing, and from thence to the Heart.

Man can move his Eyebrows, sometimes the Arch elevated and sometimes the
point drawing toward the Nose; but Brutes never move their Eyebrows, their
Points being allways inclined dounwards. Man likewise moves the Apple of the
Eye every way, Brutes cannot lift them upwards.

There are also two Facultys in the sensitive soul to be Observed, the
Concupiscible and the Irascible; likewise two Exterior Motions which express
them, and depend either on the Brain, which draws toward it all the Passions
which proceed from thence, or the Heart which draws downwards all the External
signs that depend on it.

Nor is it sufficient that we observe Action and Passion in their own Natures,
in the Complexion and Constitution; in the Age, Sex, and Condition: but we
must likewise observe the Season of the Year in which we express them.

The Spring; Merry, Nimble, Prompt and of a good Color. The Summer, causes
Open and Wearisome Actions, Subject to sweating and Redness. Autumn, Doubtful,
and something Inclining to Melancholy. Winter, Restrained, drawn in and
Trembling.

Yet notwithstanding the Season, a Laboring Man must be expressed with raised
Limbs, Swelling and standing forth, sweating etc. especially in those who carry
Burdens, or use vehement Leaping, Fencing or other violent Exercises.

Farther observe that in Sleep the Body must be without any Motions of Vigor,
and in such a Posture, as we may not suppose the uneasiness of it may prevent
their Rest.

We must take Notice too of Motions proceeding from Tastes and Smells, Sowerness
and Bitterness cause the bending of the Eyelids, wrincling the Forehead,
drawing down the corners of the Mouth, etc.

Sweet ann Savoury Things cause a Pleasing and Cheerful Countenance; as
likewise Oderiferous Smells. Bad Smells make us draw in the Nostrels, look
aside, turn the Back, with wrincled Eyelids, Eyes almost closed and Muoth
drawn in.

And Lastly, by Hearing and Touching there are diverse Motions caused in our
Bodies; Sharp Shrill Sounds raise sudden Fear and Affright. Grating Sounds cause
Jarring of the Teeth and Shivering. Touching hot Things, Speedy and Quick
Motions; from Touching Cold, as Ice and Snow, Restrained and Fearful Motions.

CAP. XIX.
The Natural Reasons of the Diverse Impressions made on the Body, Ocasion'd by
the Passions of the Mind.

JOY causes a Cheerfullness and Vigor of the Eyes, Singing and Dancing, etc.
sometimes Tears. all these are the Effects of Dilation and coming forth of the
Spirits into the outward Parts. As for Tears, they are the Effects of
Compression of the Moisture of the Brain upon Dilation of the Spirits. Joy has
sometimes caused sudden Death, by the spreading of the Spirits so much that
they could not Retire again.

Shame causes Blushing, which is the Resort of the Blood to the Face, which in
the Passion of Shame is the Part that Labors most.

Grief and Pain cause diverse Impressions, viz. Distorting of the Face, which is
caused by a Contention, first to Bear and Resist and then to Expel; which
makes the Parts first to knit and afterward to open. Grinding of the Teeth is
likewise caused by gathering of the Spirits together to Resist, which makes the
Teeth set hard one against the other. Sighing is caused by drawing in a greater
quantity of Breath to Refresh the heart that Labors. Screaming and Roaring
out, are caused by an Appetite of Expulsion; for when the Spirits cannot expel
the Thing that hurts in their Strife to do, by motion of Consent they expel
the Voice.

Anger Causes Trembling, Sweating, Foaming at the Mouth, Stamping, bending the
Fist, Paleness and going and coming of the Color; which last is caused by the
Burning of the Spirits about the Heart; calling in more Spirits from the
outward Parts to refresh them; But in some there is no Paleness but Redness,
which is by sending forth of the Spirits in an Appetite of Revenge. Trembling
in Anger, is when it is Joined with Fear, caused by a calling in of the
Spirits. Swelling is caused both by a Dilation of the Spirits, by over-heating,
and by a Liquefaction or Boiling of the Humors thereon. Stamping and Bending
of the Fist, by an Imagination of the Act of Revenge. Foaming at the Mouth is
from the same Cause with Swelling, and is an Ebullition.

Wonder causes an Immovable Posture of the Body, by fixing the Mind upon one
Object of Cogitation, whereby it does not Transcur and Spatiate as usual, for
the Spirits fly not as in Fear, but only settle, less apt to move. Lifting up
the Eyes and Hands is a kind of Appeal to the Deity, the Author of strange
Wonders.

Lust causes a Priapism and Flagrancy in the Eyes; the Reason is because the
sight and the Touch are the only Things desired in Lust, therefore the Spirits
fly to those Parts which are most Affected.

Fear, causes Paleness, Trembling, standing up of the Hair, starting,
stretching, etc. The Blood running inward to succor the Heart (as before)
causes Paleness. Trembling, from the Flight of the Spirits inwards, leaves the
outward parts destitute of sufficient to sustain them. The shutting of the
Pores of the skin, causes the Erection of the Hair. Starting, an Apprehension
of a thing feared (in that kind a Motion of shrinking) likewise an Inquisition
in the beginning, what the Matter should be (and in that kind it is a Motion of
Erection) for starting is an Erection of the Spirits to attend. Stretching, is
an Appetite of Expelling what suddenly strikes the Spirits.

Laughing causes a Dilatation of the Mouth and Lips; a continual Expulsion of
Breath, with a loud Noise, which makes the Interjection of Laughing: sometimes
the Eyes running with water; shaking of the sides. The causes of these
impressions are from the Dilatation of the Spirits. And the more, the more
sudden the Object of Laughter is. Yet this can scarcely be termed a Passion,
but has his source from the Intellect, for there ever precedeth a Conceit of
something Ridiculous, and is only proper to Man.

Finally, the Spirits in all Passions resort most to the Parts which Labor
most, or are most Affected, in Fear and Anger to the Heart; in shame, to the
Face; in Lust to the Venerious Parts, etc.

CAP. XX.
Of Light.

LIght has so great Force in Painting, that the Graceful Part consists much
therein, for if the Lights are well disposed, there will be a Beauty in the
Picture (although not a Perfection) notwithstanding the Draught be not
Extraordinary; for it is through the Virtue of that, that the Figures are
brought off from the Flat.

The Force hereof may be seen in the Resurection of our Savior (as has been
observed) in the Covent of the Church of Grace in Millain, by Bernard Zenale
Triviliano; where though the Muscles and other Necessary Complements for a
perfect piece of Work are not seen, yet it gives a great satisfaction, by the
strength and orderly Disposal of the Lights. The Power of it is likewise such,
that it gives admirable Foreshortnings and Perspectives; neither can Form,
Motion, Proportion, Composition, Order or Figure have Perfection without it,
like a Body without Situation or Spirit.

The Paripateticks say, this is the Cause or Formal Reason whereby colored
Things are seen, whose Images pass to the Fancy, especially inlightning the
Eyes, in which the Image is Formed, passing first to the Common Sense, then to
the Fancy and Lastly to the Understanding.

We are to observe three Things concur to our Slight, the Visual Lines, the
Colored Body, and the Faculty of Seeing which is in our Eye. The Visual Lines
Lightened (which are the proper matter and subject of the Perspectives) come to
our Eye in a Pyramidal Form, the Basis of which Pyramid rests in the Object,
and the Conus or Angle thereof comes to the Eye more Blunt and Obtuse, and
hereby we see the Object more plainly and distinctly; but if the Object be far
of, the Angle of the Pyramid comes to the Eye more Sharp which renders the
Object the less Discernable.

It is likewise to be noted that the Object comes not to the Eye, but the
Visible Spirits are diffused through the Clearness of the Air to the Eye; which
Spirits are certain Images, like those in a Looking glass, when any thing is
Represented therein.

If the Colored Body or Object stand near to this Image, it comes to our Eye
in the same quantity and bigness of the Angle of the Pyramid; now because this
Angle comes to our Eye in an Obtuse Form, the Image also seems great and so is
discerned the more distinctly: but when the Colored Object stands afar off,
the Image comes to the Eye, in a small and slender Angle, and therefore fills
not the Eye, but Wavereth in such sort that it cannot be clearly and distinctly
discerned.

And lastly, the Faculty of Seeing is reduced into Act, by the concurring of
the other two, viz. the Uisual Lines and the Colored Body which reformeth the
Eye by reducing it from mere Ability into Act.

From which Grounds for these two Reasons, the self same Body cannot be equally
Lightened in all Places.

First, because Light with all its Brightness does not Illuminate more, then
that part directly opposite to it, not having Power to Illustrate the other
Parts so perfectly, from the nature of the dark, Terrene and Gross Body, which
hinders the Beams from Piercing Inwardly, to perform their Effects so
perfectly.

The second Reason is from the Nature of the Eye, what is nearest coming with a
Bigger Angle is more distinctly seen, what at distance by a less, and is more
Imperfect, so proportionably of a third and Fourth till the Eye can discern no
farther.

Light is twofold Primary and Secondary, the Primary is that which falls on
that part of the Colored Body which is opposite to the Body giving Light,
touching it with direct Beams; a Light Body is that which has Light within it
self, as the Sun, Fire, etc. now that Light which arises from this Primary
Light is the Secondary Light.

Light is divided into diverse other important Branches drawn from the
Physiologicall part of the Perspective, whose chief end is to seek out the
Principles, Causes and Elements of all visible Things, together with their
Species and Essential differences, but ever in General it is divided into three
parts according to the diverse Considerations of Seeing.

The Secondary Light is likewise of three sorts, the Direct, Reflected and
Refracted.

The first Primary Light is that which falls upon and is received in that
Part of a Colored Body which is opposite to the Body giving Light; which
running upon the Bodies, touches them sweetly with a certain Natural Order, not
possessing them in any of the Extremes as other Lights do, and must be observed
in Historys supposed in the open Air.

The Second Primary Light is that which is caused by the Apparitions of Angels,
or Glory, as about our Savior in his Nativity, his Transfiguration, his
Resurrection, etc. and it must be observed in all parts according to their
distance on every side.

The third Primary Light is from Fire, Torches, Lamps, Candles, etc. but must
be less Refulgient then the last. In this we must observe whither it be by Day
or Night, the Matter Burning, etc.

Where there be several Lights there must be care taken how they are placed
that by their Opposition, they take not away all Occasion of Shaddowing, which
will diminish their Beauty, through the want of force and strength; likewise
that they cast not double Shaddows, and confound each other.

The Secondary Light is that which is caused not by Direct Beams but Reflected,
though Direct from the Primary Light: which is the first Species of the second
Division of Light, and is brighter according to the Thickness of the Body it
meets with, but strikes only on the Superficies direct opposite to it.

The Reflected Light is that which arises from the ending of the Direct, it
Lightneth all the Bodies on which it falls, chiefly the hinder parts of such
Bodies as are Lightened before, by the Direct Beams.

The Refracted Light is that (which the Philosophers say) is engendered by the
Direct Light, as it falls on Christals, Armor, Water and such shining Things as
are apt to Engender the same: and is nothing but the breaking of the Direct
Light upon these Bodies, which it causes round about in every place, as may be
seen in clear water toward the bottom, as likewise on the Superficies next the
Eye.

CAP. XXI.
The Effects of Light.

THE Light falling on the Flesh of Young Women and Children causes a Pleasant,
Tender Shadow without much Reflection; but when on old hard and stiff Flesh,
it remains more Harsh, the shaddows being harder: but falling on Plaistick
Figures though round like Flesh, it makes certain unpleasant and too apparent
Reflections; not suffering the Thing to appear round like Flesh, confounding
one Member with another, and the more the more White the Body is. From, the not
due consideration hereof several Painters have run into Errors, by Painting
after Antique Statues and Plaisticks, observing the Light as it falls there,
whence their Flesh appeared Unnatural.

In Drapery it must be observed that those Folds which come nearest to the
Bones, as the Joints of the Fingers, the Shoulders, the Knees and other
Eminences, must be more strongly Touched then the other Parts, and by that
means the Flesh will appear the more soft and sweet.

On Diamonds and other Precious Stones the Light falls more quick and strong
according to the Condensation of their Bodies, next upon polisht Metals as
Silver, Armor, etc. in Armor must be Reflections of all things about it, but
dimmer then the Armor Receives from the Primary Light, otherwise it will show
Ignorance in the Perspectives. So likewise in other Polisht Metals, etc.

Light is strongest upon the Body which has most Correspondency with it, as
Red Sanguine and well colored Complections, which on the balls of their Cheeks,
top of their Noses etc. have a stronger Luster, and sharper shining then those
of Pale and Wan Complections, for there the Light finding no Correspondency, is
Dilated with a more remiss brightness.

Black yeildeth no sharp quickness, except in respect to the Perfection of
Matter, as in black silk in comparison of Woollen Cloth.

In Yellow the Light causes a clear brightness having Affinity with it,
especially in those which are freest from Paleness.

The Light in Green has a Mediocrity, and rather Comfort then Quickneth the
Visual Faculty.

In White it is too much Continued, by reason of the Clearness which has
Correspondency unto Black, whence it receives its shaddows.

We will now show how Light Ingendereth its Effects in Bodies according to the
Eminency or Depression, Restraining or Dilating of their Superficies, from
whence arises the Harshness or Sweetness.

In Infancy the Light on the Superficies is Dilated and not sharp by reason
there is no other impression wrought in the beholder, then a certain Dilating
of a Fat and simple Matter without sharpness and very little shadow.

In Childhood the Lights begin to appear more sharp by reason of the
contracting of the superficies, but with a kind of Variableness answerable to
the Gestures which proceed from the Spirit beginning to distinguish between
Good and Evil.

In Youth the Superficies being Protracted and Restrained makes the Body
seemly, yet soft and tender, neither Fat nor Lean; in this Age second Light
breeds wonderful sweetness, Delightful to the Eye, being dipriv'd of
spreading of the Lights, and with great Decency gives sweet and Firm Shaddows.

In Manhood the Lights run with greater Force, having the greatest Perfection
as ever they will have; not too unpleasant nor too Sweet but much Delightful,
accompanied with a firm Stoutness and in some Parts something more Feirce.

In Constant Age the Body is more compacted and settled, the Lights more sharp
and full of Force.

In Old Age the Lights appear Heavy and full of Majesty and Gravity and so
contrary wise the Shaddows: by reason the Superficies is deprived of that
Quality of Increasing and Vigor, yet not Crude and Hallow without Order, but
in a middle Temper.

In Dotage the Superficies is sharply Elevated and making Acute Angles and
declining Lines, cause the Lights running upon them to appear Sharp being
Encountered with very deep Shaddows, the Eyes wholly shaddowed with the
Eyebrows, the mouth with the Nose, the Cheeks with their Balls, the Forehead
with Pulses, and so through all other Parts, as the Concavities of the Bones
without Flesh by the most Apparent parts of the Bones.

In Infancy, we must therefore express Simplicity; in Childhood, a sharp
Simplicity; in Youth, Amiableness; in Manhood, a Graver Beauty; in Constant
Age, Lustiness and Courage; Gravity, Majesty and Consideration in Old Age.

We must likewise observe that in the Design there be one Principal Light,
which must sall most strongly on that part nearest to the Light, and as the
Superficies is shortened according to the Distance from the Light so the Body
loses as much of its Color as it lacks of the Light, and so the Color
fails by Degrees until the superficies decay together with the Light.

CAP. XXII.
Farther Precepts about Light.

IT is a General Rule that the Lights must be given to Bodies according to the
place through which they pass, and this must be ordered so that the Light do
ever Touch more suddenly on the middle Line, supposing that part of the Body
which may be seen at one view to be divided by five Lines into four Spaces,
equal in Power.

The Painter must suppose one of these four spaces to be lost and the three
other to appear, imagining that these three Spaces which are seen be divided in
four Lines equal in a perspective Semicircle, making the chief Light to strike
more strongly on the second Line, and in the second space Heightened (which is
consequently to be placed in the third Line) he shall put as much shadow as he
sees, and by this means the Figure shall be wonderfully Raised, and more then
if the Ligbt were placed side-long in the first Line, or in the middle on the
space between the second and the third, because that makes too much shadow and
this too much Light.

But in Ceilings the Light is taken from the Window so that it cannot be
avoided but that the Light will sometimes be received in the first Line
according to the aspect of Lively Bodies either side-long, from above or from
below as the Body is tutn'd to the Light.

In the plain Superficies this Rule must be always observed that the Light
given to Bodies must never be Perpendicular over their Heads, for it will breed
this inconvenience, that the upper parts will always shadow the lower, as the
Eyebrows half the Cheek, the Hair all the Face, etc. except where the
Principal of the Picture is in a Scene of Glory above, then the Figures on the
Earth may have a Light Perpendicular from the Glory above, as in a Picture of
Rubens of St. Roche where the Sudplicants below receive such Light.

That part of the Body is counted next the Light which from the first Pointed
extends it self farther out on that side then the rest; especially if it be
from on high, therefore that Light being the Quicker, causes the Superficies
to receive the Light more strongly viz. that Superficies which is next to us,
and that which looks upwards, both which receive it so much the more strongly
by how much the higher they are, because they are nearer the Appointed Light;
and this is the Original and Ground of all other Lights which are orderly
disposed through all Bodies, giving them their Heightning aceordingly to the
Direction of that only Light.

Situations and Climates must also be observed, they who Inhabit the Temperate
Zone the Light casts their shaddows toward the North: who Inhabit the Hot
Zone having a right Sphere, and the Aequinoctial for their Zenith; their
shaddows are under their Feet at noon; because they have the Sun Perpendicular
to their Body: but they who dwell under the Poles, have their shadow carried
round about them like a Wheel.

Nevertheless we must generally consider the best Effects of Nature, immitating
them by proposing unto us their Examples.

And so must we do on the Surfaces of Highways taking the Light from the
East in imitation of the Sun which in that part where it begins to rise
casts the shaddows of Bodies toward the West and to other parts according to
his Aspects.

We will now lay down a few Precepts necessary to be observed and so conclude
this Discourse of Chiaro Scuro.

In Light we must consider the Sun in his Luster, as Rising, Meridionall,
Setting and according to the Vapors he meets in the Air. Clear Air likewise,
through which the Light is spread and is something bluish; and Cloudy Air
which is Darker, but leaves more easiness for Objects to be discerned in their
true Colors, the Eye not being dazzled with too great a Brightness.

We must Consider Lights as Principal falling Perpendicular (without
Interruption) on any Surface or Extremity. Glancing by sliding Diagonally on
Elevated Bodies. And Secondary, for things at distance, according to the
Thickness of Vapors which Intervene, and offer many incidental opportunitys
for giving the more Beauty to the stronger Lights; as likewise loosen the
Lighted parts by the opposition of the deep Teints.

If the Design be in the open Air, the Light is extended and diffused on the
Objects with the greater Tenderness. If in Enclosed Places, it is more
consigned, the Lightnings more strong and Quick.

The Chief Light must be on the Principal Figure of the Group, and must be
extended without the Interruption of little shaddows, that the Relievo may
stand more boldly out.

All Shadow must have a Sympathy with the Lights in their Color as likewise
the Reflections with the Bodies Reflecting Arteficial Lights, if very bright,
give a quick Heightning, and dark and deeply shortened Shaddows.

Lastly it must be carefully observed that betwixt all Lights and Shaddows
there must be such Mediums, as may take of all Hardness, and so Arteficially
wrought in as may not soul either with the other and so take away the Beauty
and strength of the Picture.

CAP. XXIII.
Of Perspective.

PRospective (being a Species of Geometry) is a Science treating of Visible
Lines, and may be divided into three parts, Optica, Sciographica and Specularia.

Optica of two kinds, either Physiological or Grammical.

The Physiological part scearcheth the Universal Principles, Causes and
Elements of the appearences of things which may be considered three several
ways, as Vision is Direct, Reflected or Refracted as when things are seen in
Water, Glasses etc.

The Grammical is the Art of Delineation, and is more Necessary to Painting
then the other. It considers Sight either True or False, and is of three
sorts, Anoptica, Optica and Catoptica.

Anoptica is the Art of Delineating Objects elevated above the Horizon, Optica
designs those extended Foreright, level with Horizon, and Catoptica those
beneath the Horizon, which appear as if they came nearer the Eye below.

Another Species is called Sciogrophica; It handles the Causes, Principles,
Elements, and Properties of Shaddows; giving the Reason of the Variety of the
Apparitions of the Shapes and Images of Things, according as they are elevated
either above, direct against, or beneath; far of or near the Eyes and as by the
Laws of Grammica are distributed the Out lines of the Superficies as they ought
to be, according to their distance and Situation: so this part considers the
Shaddows of Bodies, according as their Superficies are Protuberant, or Depressed.

The last Species is Specularia, and considers the Reflections and
Refractions of Beams, giving Directions for making Glasses, either Plane,
Unequal, Concave, Pyramidal, Angular, Inverting Erecting, etc. which I shall
wave, as not being so Pertinent to this Art.

The Eye is the Foundation of Perspective, because thence the Natural and the
Rational Sight is Formed: Natuaral wherein the shapes of Things seen do come to
it simply, by the Beams of light; Rational, wherein there is farther Considered
the Reason and Effect of the Sight, even where the Eye cannot be otherwise
placed then by supposition, as at an infinite distance, etc.

The Eye is called by some Italian Authors, the Term; because by it all Things
in a Picture are Limited, and any Thing made without the disposition of this
Term, cannot be true, as not being disposed for the Sight, nor ordered
according to the Visuall Beams, coming to the Eye from the whole.

It is called also the Center because all the Lines of the Base and
Circumference of the Object do meet in it, as in a Circle all Lines run from
the Circumference to the Center.

It may be considered also as the Apex of a Pyramide; because all the space
between the Object and the Lines or Beams which pass along, and are extended
from the extremitys of the Object to the Eye end therein, as in the Point of a
Pyramide, and the Eye together with the Intellect ought to judge of the true
Forms of things, to the end it may be able to Imitate them perfectly.

In Distance we must observe that the Object come not too near to the Eye, nor
yet be too far of, for then the Air between will take away too much of the
Color and Beauty.

In too Obtuse and short Distances, Things seem to decline and run too much
backwards, in a preposterous manner; so Things too far of, making Acute and
sharp Angles in the Eye give no grace to the work; it is reckoned a proper
Distance, for the Beholder to stand from the Object, three times the Length
thereof.

Next we will consider the Object which is the Thing that stands before our
Eyes; the first Figure to be observed is called the Natural, and must be expressed
in the first and principal part of the Picture: so that whatever you place
inwards, toward the Eye of the work, must be diminished, according as the
Lines and Beams shall extend themselves.

Now we will consider the three sorts of Sight, and first Anoptica, which is
the Real and Upper Line, by help whereof we consider all the parts of the
Object above the Horizon, and thereby brings them to the Intersection, or Line
of Shortning; whence according to the situation of the Body, the hinder parts
are made to run downwards and the nearest parts to rise upwards, and from hence
the Declinings and Arisings, the Shortnings and Increasings of the parts of the
Body are caused.

This Line has his Original from the Center or the beginning of the Distance,
which is the Eye; so it returns to the same through the midst of the Beams,
which couple all the Extreem Limits of the perfect Body.

Optica is the second Real Sight and Direct Line, and is that which is nearest
the Object, so that the upper parts of the Object belong to the forementioned
Line, and the lower to Catoptica; this is that therefore which principally
touches all parts of the Object both above and below, and therefore it is
called the Direct Line.

For the Beams parting themselves strongly at the Eye and falling on the
nearest parts of the Object, end there, causing the upper and lower parts to be
shortened and diminished and the Eminences to hide the Concavities, and the
larger parts to cover the narrower, making the Object to increase and diminish
according to their respective distances from the Perpendicular, in the due
observance whereof consisterh the chief Difficulty as well as Beauty of the Art.

Catoptica is the third sort of Sight whose beams touch all the lower parts of
the Object, conducting them to the Point of Intersection, so that when the
Object is below the Eye, the farthest parts seem to rise and the nearest to
decline downwards.

CAP. XXIV.
Farther Observations in Perspective.

BEsides these Real Sights there be severl Deceitful Sights, as upper
Perpendicular, middle and lowermost: the upper Perpendicular Considers the
Reasons how the Intersections are carried to the place appointed for the
Shortning, which were ordained in the Perpendicular, by reason of the upper
Parts, and it represents to us Figures in a little space, from below
Perpendicularly on the top of a Vault, perfectly expressing as well the lower
as the upper parts. But those which stand out in length are (for the most part)
so shortened that the Figures seem broader then they are long.

The Oblique Deceitful Sight causes us to see the Oblique Shortnings in their
places viz. such as may be made in the Vaults of Chapels, nor in the Squares,
but in the Semicircles and such like places, as the Tiburij or the Truine,
whence notwithstanding the declining of the Vault where they are painted, the
Figures may be seen to stand upright as on their Legs, as if their were no
Vault at all. So that the arched appearance of a Vault causes no interruption
in the draught. In such sort that a Chapel may seem truly to be open to
Heaven, or in other pretty Inventions, as is usual in such places: but this
part being difficult to be conceived, you may see it better expressed in those
works, in the Chappal of Zenales doing in Millain; another in Parma of Antonio
Correggio, etc.

By the third Deceitful Sight above, all the Figures placed above the Eye are
shown by their Lower Parts more or less according as they stand higher upon the
Wall at the Horizon: wherefore the hinder parts run inwards, and the foremost
fly upwards, whence you shall see wonderful great spaces, stretching forth of
Arms, Shortning of Legs, etc. and in these Figures you cannot see the upper
parts except they bend forwards.

The fourth deceitful middle Sight is that which gives a Body in such sort,
that in the hinder parts the lower Superficies seems to run upwards, and the
upper to run downwards, wherefore our Eye must strike directly on some part of
the Body, as about the middle; this is the least Shortning as can be, and yet
considers all those difficultys as the others do.

The fifth deceitful sight below is that by which, all the Pictures that are
seen from above, placed more or less below the Horizon, are made, which also
teaches the Reasons why they are so made, it causes their rising up on high,
the running down of the hinder parts, and the Increasing of their foreparts:
and below it makes that appear, which on high seems contrariwise to be
uppermost. In the rest it follows the others, and is to be understood after
the same manner, though the Effects be diverse.

The Sixth Deceitful Sight is deep or inward, and represents to us on plains
the Bodies stretched out upon the Earth in Perspective, with the Head one way and
the Feet another, seeming to run into the wall, by performing in this place the
like Effect against the Eye, which a Figure does being wrought in a Vault
Perpendicularly above the Eye, according to the first sight, and this is to be
understood of such which standing on the lower ground, cannot be seen from
above but only directly or below, as such who looking directly downwards, can
only see Peoples Heads.

We will now conclude with some Reasons why of Nescessity Distance must
diminish the Object.

The Air does not carry the Species, which it takes from the Images afar of,
to the Eye, in the same Individual Quantity; but carries them lesser and
weaker.

The first part of the Air, which is next the Image, represents the Species
lesser to the next; and so that to a third etc. till the Image come to the Eye;
which coming (according to the Positions of the Mathematicians) between two
Lines not Parallel, must then of Necessity meet, so concluding in the Point of
the Intersection which is in the Eye.

For should the Species of a Body, be Represented in every part of the Air, in
the same Vigor and Quantity; it must follow that a Finite Thing have an
Infinite Power to excite Vision: for supposing the Air to be Infinite and
without Impediment these Species must be equally seen in every part of the Air
and so a limited Body, would have an Infinite Power.

And did the Form of things at a distance, come to the Eye, in the same
Quantity, as when near, the Multiplicity of Species crouding on the Sight,
would Confound it: therefore since it is of Necessity, that the Figure must
loose by Distance; take this for a General Rule, that how much the whole Figure
loses, the same contraction is to be observed throughout the whole Image.

Yet although in Things at Distance, we must go by the Rational Proportion in
Perspective, and in things near by the Natural; yet we must not so observe the
Natural, but regard must be had to the Grace of the Picture.

For the Power of Painting, not only extends it self, to the Imitation of
Nature, but sometimes to the Correcting of it: rendering Things more pleasing to
the Eye, then they are of themselves.

CAP. XXV.
Precepts about Draught.

DRaught is a Physical Line, or Lineal Demonstration; and has always some
Dimentions, if it be never so slender: and serves to represent Bodies according
to their Forms, Aspects and Situation; Limiting and Determining the surface of
an Object; and Marking out the Several Parts, which are contained therein. For
no Superficies can Exist, without being Terminated by Lines, Straight, Circular
or Mixed.

The Extent of Draught is Immense; for it is not only concerned in all the
Visible Things in Nature, but in all Things which the Fancy or Imagination can
form any Idea of, that can be comprised under the Figure of Body: nay, so vast
is its extent, that it adventures to Dive into the very Soul, and express its
Thoughts; for though Color is accessory to Expression, yet nothing can be
Terminated without Lines.

They that would arrive to the Perfection in the Practick, must dilligently
observe these following Rules.

First he must draw by the Hand, Circles, Ovals, etc. then the several Features
of the Face by themselves, as Eyes, Nose, etc. then the several Members, as
Hands, Feet, Arms, Legs, etc. Observing in the Hands and Feet, to draw the
upper Lines first then the lower; afterward to divide them into Fingers and
Toes. In the Trunk of the Body, first to draw the Contours of each side, then
to place in the Muscles.

When a Facility is gained in the Features and Members, to begin with a Face,
where first draw the Eyes, then the Nose, Mouth, Eyebrows, Chin, and next the
Contours of the Trunk on each side, then Thighs, Legs, Feet; observing the
going down with Each side, not drawing to the Bottom one side first: then
adding the Arms and Hands, and afterward all the Muscles, and the other
Remarks of the Body, and Members as Nails, Hair, etc.

But before he attempts a Body, he must take a Face in all Aspects, as Half,
Three-quarter and foreright: then looking Upwards, Downwards and Inclining,
then all Fore-shortned Faces.

When he attempts a whole Body, he must begin with a Body standing Frontwise,
observing which Foot the stress of the Body rests on, and draw it Perpendicular
under the Head.

Then he must proceed to Bodies in several Postures, as sitting, Kneeling,
Running, Fencing etc. as he will find in diverse Prints.

And lastly proceed to all Foreshortned Bodies, which are the most difficult, in
which he must diligently study the Perspective.

He must first draw with Sallow Coal finely sharpened, till by diverss Essays
and wipings-out, he comes to the Truth.

And although it is usual to finish; either by washing with Indian Ink, or
French red Chalk, yet I think the best is with hatching with a Pen, which
(although it be more tedious) obliges him to that Care, in the Truth of the
Small Strokes, that it insenciblely brings his Hand to exact Draught: but he
must take Care, when he has Hatched one way, to let it dry ere he proceeds for
fear of Blotting; but they who draw with a Pen must propose to themselves much
Time and Patience.

He must take care to Copy after good Originals, and to finish the draught
before he begins to shadow.

At first he must Copy Things, which are negligently finished, such as are in
Fialetty, then Goltzius, next Sadlers Things, after he may proceed to Van Dycks
postures by Vosterman, Pontius etc.

But he must remember to use no Compasses, Rules, Squares and the like; which
stint the Judgment, but he must let his Fancy and Spirit Act freely till he
gets a Habit.

He must likewise Design perfectly after Nature, before he begins the use of
Perspective Rules, that he may keep his Fancy free, and form his Judgment to
Comprehend, and remember all Things in their Appearances.

The principal thing he must be careful in, is, that when the upper part or
Head of the Figure is drawn, to observe by his Eye what part of the Body comes
Perpendicular under any Feature. In the Dilatation of the Members observe how
many parts of the Face, the Original bears, in such member, till with careful
Examination, and dilligent study, you have the Compass in your Eye; which when
you have obtained, you may proceed as follows.

You must take great pains in Designing after Nature and the Life, where you
must observe to make the Figures of a Bigness, to be determined by the Visual
Angle, and of a Proportioned Distance from the Eye to the Model.

You ought to study the fine Antique Features (such as are in the Farnese
Palace) at Rome, that the Idea of them, may be always reserved in your Memory.

Nuditys, are Principally to be studied; the Colors of which you must make in
great Pieces, not having so great regard to the small Muscles and lesser
Observations.

For Rustic and Country Figures, the Contours must be Gross, Equally
Counterhatch'd and Notch'd, without regard to extraordinary Neatness and
Roundness.

But for Grave and serious Persons, they must be rounded, noble and Certain;
not so at adventure as the forementioned.

They must be strong, Resolute, Noble, Perfect and Chosen for Heroes.

They must be Puissant and Austere, full of Greatness and Majesty, for Deifyd
Bodies.

And for young women and Children, the Contours must be Smooth, Round and
Delicate.

They must Design the Nudity, Model, etc. exactly, without Charging or
overburthening any of their Parts; their being no way to obtain an entire
exactness, but by proportioning every part with the first, comparing them
exactly, so that we may be at liberty to Strengthen and go over again the Parts
as we shall think fit, when we make use of this Design; as it truly follows and
represents the Models whither they be Antique or Natural.

They must principally study the Rules of Geometry and Perspective, that they
may use them with ease and exactness in immovable Bodies; for as to Animals and
principally Man, by reason of the various dispositions of their parts and
Motions, it is very hard to design them by Rules.

They must likewise study the Geometrical Part, and first the Ichnography
which is the Representation of the Fundamental Scheme or Draught of any work of
Architecture, etc. on Which is traced out the Form and extent of things in
their true measured Distances and Scituations.

The Profile, which marks out the Parts, Members and Jettings out of Sollid
Bodies, their Heights and Proportions.

The Elevation, which perfects and Finishes the Constructions of Bodies, by
Heights, Lengths, Breadths, etc.

And lastly we must consider the Perspective, which represents the outside or
surface of the Object, where we are to consider these following Things.

That in one View we see the whole Object, whose Rays will meet in a Point.

Next we are to consider that the Eye and the Object ought to be both
Immovable Things.

We must suppose the Outside or Superficies, as Transparant between the Eye and
the Object, through which we may mark all the Appearances of the Object, which
is that we call the Picture; and this may be done by placing a piece of Lawn
before our Eyes, where the Rays that come through will determine all their
Places in the Picture or Table.

The Eye, the Object and the Picture, ought to be placed at a proper Distance,
which is usually computed to be double the bigness of the Picture; such
situation is the Principle on which is founded the way of representing every
Thing in true Perfection.

Lastly we must observe that in the Pictures near Hand, the draught ought in a
manner, Loose it self, after all the parts of the Work are Formed; but in a
Picture for a Distance, we ought to pronounce them like an Artist, that there
may nothing appear in the Draught out of the place where it ought to be seen.

CAP. XXVI.
Of Colors, their Natures and Effects.

THere be Seven Cardinal Colors viz. White, Blew, Yellow, Red, Brown, Green
and Black.

White denotes Innocence, Light etc. the Planet Luna.

Yellow, denotes Majesty, Honor, Nobility etc. the Stone a Topas; the Planet,
Sol.

Blew, the color of the Skys, signifys Devotion, Breathing to Heaven etc. the
stone a Sapphire; the Planet Jupiter.

Red denotes Heroes from their Bloody Acts. The symbol of Fortitude. The Tipe
of Modesty from Blushing, and is the middle color between Black and White. the
stone, a Ruby, the Planet, Mars.

Green is the Color of the Spring and shows Peace and Plesantness of Mind; and
Hope from Tillage; likewise Youth. The stone an Emerald. The Planet Venus.

Brown, from Red and Black, (scarce deserves the Name of a Color) signifys
Mediocrity, Prudence, Frugality etc. The Stone an Amethist. The Planet, Mercury.

Black is opposite to White; and is Obscurity, therefore not properly called a
Color, but the Death and Burial of Colors. It is the symbol of Grief, sorrow
and Damnation; from the Infernal Darkness. Yet denotes Constancy, being the
most durable Color. The stone a Diamond. The Planet Jupiter.

We will now consider the Nature, Propertys, Qualitys, Sympathys, Antypathys,
Greatness and Smalness of Bodies of the Several Colors, which are used in
Painting.

Those of the Greatest Bodies are Umber, Indigo, Indian Red and Vermilion. The
next are Colens Earth; Ivory Black, Light Red, Yellow Oker, Masticots, Orpment
and White. those of a smaller Body are Ultramarine, Carmine (which is the most
beautiful Red) Lake, Pinks, destil'd Verdegreece next Terravert and the
smallest Body of all, is Smalt, which the young practisioner must not adventure
to use except mixed with others.

Vermilion, is apt to change somewhat black when Compounded, but used simple in
Draperys etc. is of a lasting Nature.

Indigo turns Green in Time, and should be chiefly used in Dead-Colouring, but
if boiled, or kept buried some years it will hold better.

Smalt turns black, but holds best in Glasing, in like manner does destill'd
Verdegreece.

Orpment should be used only in Touches by it self in Drapery, Gold, etc. for
if it be compounded it grows foul,

Umber should be used only in Dead-Colouring, or in deep Shaddows, which you
cannot obtain by Brown Pink, Lake, etc. but from its Body, it is of great use
in Dead-Colouring.

Drying Oil must not be used with any Colors (how bad dryers soever) if you
have occasion to mix them with White, Distilled Verdegreece, Vermilion, Umber or
Masticots; except very little of these go into the Composition: never if you
use any Quanity of White.

The forementioned Colors of Greater Bodies, in their Compositions, must deepen
the Lights, till you bring them to your Dark Shaddows; because their Strength
and force is so great, that it will occasion the loss of much Color to bring
them to the lighter, especially Indigo.

Those of lesser Bodies you must Heighten on the contrary and not deepen down.

If yon bring down your Shaddows with the greater Bodyed Colors, you must take
care that you use very little of those Colors, for it will be to great spoil,
of smaller Bodyed Colors, you may use much more according to the Body in your
first Lights.

In the lighter Shaddows which may be obtained without White, you must use no
white in them, for it makes them look Gray and Cold, but more especially in the
dark Shaddows.

Diligently observe what Colors bare a Sympathy or Antipathy to each other,
and order your mixtures on your Palate accordingly, as Blew and Yellow make a
Green but Blew and Vermilion produce a Nigre Color.

In the disposal of Colors on a Picture, consider the whitest Colors are not
always the Stronger, but as they are Luminous or agreeing with the Light, as
Vermilion is stronger then Green brought up to the same Height: and Yellow
Masticot is stronger then White Masticot and will be seen at a greater Distance.

Those Colors must be laid near to one another, that are proper of their own
nature to help one another, and give a mutual help to raise up their Briskness,
as the Red does to the Green, and the Yellow to the Blew, etc.

What Color soever we put in Drapery, etc. and there be a Color by of a near
kind we must bring a different one in between, which may loosen the Drapery,
otherwise they will Loose themselves in each other.

CAP. XXVII.
The Instruments and Materials used in Painting and the preparing Colors to
the Pallat.

WHite Flakes being picked and scraped must first be ground very fine in water,
afterward Tempered on the Stone with the muller with Nut-Oyle: then cover it
with water in a gallipot or it will skin over. But so it must not be kept very
long for the Oil will grow Fat and make it unfit for use. For Dead-Colouring
you may grind white lead in Lynseed Oil.

Vermilion if it have glittering specs in it, or of very light Color, it is
not good as being mixed with Red Lead, the best you may buy at the
Wax-chandlers: it must be first finely ground in Brandy or Urine. Temper it on
the Pallat with nut Oil, if for Flesh: but for Drapery, etc. use a very little
drying Oil.

Red Lead being finely ground in water, and dried; may be Tempered on the
Pallat with Lynseed Oil being a great dryer of it self.

Light Red, Burnt Oker, Indian Red, must be ground very fine in Lynseed Oil;
and tempered on the Pallat with Nut-Oyle if for Flesh, but if simply used for
Draperys, etc. there may be a little drying Oil in it.

Fine Lake must be well ground in Lynseed Oil; if used in the light Carnation
of a Face in Nut Oil; and so tempered on the Pallat, but if used simple in
Glasing it must be mixed with drying Oil or Vernish or nut Oil and Turpentine
mixed.

Masticots not being fine enough as they are bought at the shops, must be finer
ground with Lynseed Oil on a Porphery: reserve them in Bladders but not too
long; There be diverse sorts but the principal are of light Lemmon Color, or
deeper bright Yellow.

Orpment after you buy it, must be finer ground in Lynseed Oil, then laid on
brown Paper to take out what Oil you can, that you may add the more drying
oil, or rather Glase ground to an impalpable powder and then you need not dry
it on a Paper, the Glass being the greatest dryer and will not soul the best
Colors.

Light Pink, Green Pink and Brown Pink, must be ground in Lynseed Oil, and
with the same be tempered on the Pallat if for the Medium Shaddows, but in the
darks a little drying Oil. The several Okers, as Yellow, Brown and Roman Oker,
must be ground and tempered as before.

Terravert must first be beaten fine in a Mortar, or it will hurt the stone,
then ground in Lynseed Oil, and so tempered on the Pallat, except used simple,
then a little drying Oil.

Verdigreece must be ground in Lynseed Oil and so used. Verditer must only be
tempered on the Pallat with Lynseed Oil.

Ultramarine must only be tempered on the Pallat with nut Oil. And Smalt must
be ordered in like manner.

Indigo should be ground in Lynseed Oil and buried eight or ten Years, if you
cannot procure such, grind some and put it in an Earthen vessel, which stop
close that no water can get in and boil it four or five hours, by this means
it will hold Color near as well as the buried.

Colens Earth must be ground in Lynseed Oil, drain the Oil out by laying it
on a brown paper, then add more drying Oil or Glass ground as before.

Umber must be first burnt in a Crucible, till it be of a warm, brown Color,
then ground in Lynseed Oil and kept in a gallipot covered with water, for it
is a great dryer.

For Bone black you must burn pieces of Ivory, (which you may buy at the Ivory
Turners,) in a Crucible, when it has done flaming it is enough: grind it in
Lynseed Oil, and temper it with drying Oil.

Blew-black is made of small coal, but the best of Vine branches, burn it in a
Crucible, grind it in water; if it be used simple it must be tempered with
drying Oil.

For Indian Red the Stone Red is much the better, the smaller will serve for
Dead Color. Fine Lake must be of a warm and Beautiful Color, that which is
of a lighter, cold and Purplelish Color, will serve for Dead-colouring. The
best Pink is of a smart, Clear, Yellow Color.

In Brown Pink make choice of the deepest and warmest Color. in Yellow Oker,
of a bright, Clear and smart Color, of Terravert, the Spanish is the best.

Ultramarine, the right will endure the Fire; if it be put in water and any
thing swims on the Surface, it is mixed; the deepest and finest Powder is
usually the best: though some that is pale will mix deeper. The Ashes will
serve for the blew Shaddows in a Face. The best Smalt is the deepest and soft
like Butter between the Fingers.

When Ivory is burnt you must scrape of all the white and and brownish Color,
reserving only the Jet Black.

Observe in winter to use more drying Oil then in Summer: and Proportionably
as it is hotter or colder; but the lesser the better, for it is apt to foul the
Colors, take great care that none of the skins of the drying Oil come among
your Colors.

For your Powder-Glass, take the whitest Glass, beat it very fine in a Mortar,
and grind it in water to an Impalpable powder; being thoroughly dry, it will dry
all Colors without drying Oil, and not in the least Tinge the purest Colors,
as White, Ultramarine, etc. and is much used in Italy.

If in the hottest weather your greatest Dryers dry too fast, as White, Umber,
etc. and so grow too stiff to work with; you may prevent it by mixing a little
Sallat Oil with the Colors.

You must likewise on your Easel-board, have a little gallepot of Turpentine
Oil to dip your Pencels in when your Colors grow to stiff.

You must have a Tin-Pan, for cleaning your Pencels in, divided in the middle,
and the one end divided into a larger and lesser Dimention; the larger is to
dip your Pencels in, striking them several times over the Partition, and
pressing them with your Fingers, till they be clean then dipping them into the
smaller trough, in which must be Sallad Oil (which best preserves Pencels from
drying) lay them by for use on a ledge, on your Shelf; if by negligence they
grow hard with the Colors in them, lay them in Soap sometime and with water
Scour the Colors out of them.

For the Grinding-stone, the Porphery is the best, next a Pehble, whose
hardness you may try by hacking a knif on it, if it leaves no impression, then
the Stone is good.

When your Colors are ground before the relics dry, you must grind some
Shavings of Leather on the Stone: then to fetch it more clean, some crumbs of
Bread, till there be no Tincture of Color left.

Your Pencels must be Swans Quils, Goose Quills, Ducks, Crows, etc. of which
you must have black and white Fitches, the finest Fitches are Ermine; Pointed
Pencels and Brusles; the best of which you may have at the Black-moores head in
Drury Lane and some other shops.

The Black Fitches must be well bound, full and with a spring in the Hair. The
White, must be soft, the Hair a little spreading and well bound and even at the
end. Before you use them let them lie a little in water to fasten the Hair,
Then let them be through dry, and dip them as likewise your other Pencels in
Nut-Oyle before you use them in Colors, your Pointed Pencels must be likewise
well bound, if good they will come to a Point by wetting them and drawing them
gently on your Hand.

Your Brushes and Black Fitches when they are well worn, reserve them for the
rubbing in of Dead Colors; for in many Cases they are better to use then new
ones.

For your Pallat, you should give order to the Color shops, to let it lie
sometime in a Vessel of Oil which will make the Colors come the cleaner off.

You ought to have two Tempering Knives, one broader for the greater quantitys
of Colors, the other Narrower and coming Taper toward the end for the smaller.
They must be both of good mettle, with their Edges, and thickness of their back
ground of.

Your Mostick is best of a Bamboo, or some other stick that is light and
yielding to the Hand, but not standing bent: with a small ball of Cotton tied
in a Leather at the end, which leaning on the Picture may not indent the
cloth: about four Foot long.

Your Pencel-sticks must be of Cedar, wrought smooth, but thicker in the
middle, that the Pencels may spread in your Hand and not foul each other; and
about sixteen inches long: if for large Landskips, longer; for which likewise
you must have Leafing-Pencels with the Hair twice as long as the other.

Your Cloth must be of an even thread: if any nobs of Colors be on it, take
them of with a Pumice-stone, before you begin to work. If Pannels, let them be
of old Wenscoat, which is not so apt to warp. Before you Prime your Pannels,
there must be a Coat of Whiting and strong Sise six or eight times done over,
to hide the Grain of the wood: when they are dry, let them be plained with a
Joyners Plain, then water plained with a rag dipped in water.

Your Easel must be of a convenient Sise according to your work; with Lead
round the Feet to secure its Fixedness.

The best Light is a North-Light, with a Sash of Pollish'd-Glass as they
prepare for Looking-glasses. Free from any Buildings against your work Room,
which would cause diverss Reflections and by that means change the Propertyes
of your Colors.

It is convenient in winter to have in your Room a round Iron-stove for your
Fire, for the better drying of your Colors and the securing of your Room from
Dust and Smoke.

CAP. XXVIII.
The Art of Coloring.

AFter you have attained to a Mastership in Draught, having got the Compass in
your Eye; so that you can at first sight Copy whatever is before you; not only
Prints, but also Nature it self: having diligently studied Nuditys at the
Academy, so that you can take a Figure of any Age, in all Aspects, Postures and
Foreshottnings; you may begin the great Mystery of Coloring.

And first begin in two Colors as White and Umber etc. after good Draughts or
Prints: which you may do in this manner.

First begin to draw the Head you would Copy in Tripoly (which is bought at
the Ironmongers,) Sharpning it to a Point. For better correction go over the
Draught again with course Lake, having some Turpentine Oil by, to dip your
Pencel in to make the Colors run thin.

Lay on your Pallat White and Umber; for the Heightnings, clear White, then add
a little Umber; then more for the Mediums, till you come to clear Umber.

Take half a dosen Pencels in your hand, one very small for the Eye-stroaks,
and likewise some Fitches: having your Pallat on your hand, holding your
Mostick between your little Finger and Ring-Finger, thus begin.

First with a large Pencel lay on the lightest parts of the Forehead, Balls of
the upper Cheeks, top of the Nose, Chin, etc. then the lightest shaddows on the
Forehead, under the Eyes about the Mouth the sides of the Cheeks, Chin, etc.
and so till you come down to the Darkest: taking care to leave no edges about
the Eyelids, Lips; etc. Observing to keep your Pencels for the same degree of
Coloring, but if they foul, press out the Color on a rag kept in your hand
for that Intent. then with a very Light Hand soften all the work with your
white Fitches. Go over it again in the same manner (when dry) in the
Finishing; but when you have sosten'd the work, Touch over the Heightnings
again.

Thus when you have copied some time in Two Colors, having obtained some
freedom in Pencelling by a light but steady hand: observing carefully all the
Muscles and other Remarks: working all in with much Softness; free from Edges
as well as Flattness in the Rising parts, you may adventure on things of
Diverse Colors in the Stillife, but be sure to Copy after the best Masters,
therefore I would advise all Gentlemen that design to divert themselves with
this Art, to purchase a piece or more of the Famous Roustrate while they are to
be had.

First Practice your Hand in Boylt Plate, not Burnished, and other things of
fewest Colors, then Fruits, Flowers, etc. observing that in your Learning, you
Dead Color things very well, and, take care you do not Paint out your Draught.
Observe amongst Fruit, especial Grapes to finish well in the Dead Color, or
you will not obtain their softness and roundness in Finishing, by Reason, they
must be Finished with Glasing Colors.

Observe in things which require a strong Yellow as Peaches etc. that although
you may obtain much of that Color, with White, Pink and Vermilion, yet you
must use only Masticots, as being of more Force.

In some Beautiful blushes in Fruits, where you cannot Paint up the
Delicateness of Color, you must obtain it by Fitly preparing the Ground to go
over with Touches of Glazing.

In Silver and Gold burnished Plate, with the greatest care and Judgment put
in the Reflections of all things about them, but take care you work them not
into the rest of the Plate, which will make it look rather battered then
beautiful.

When you have attained to a good Knowledge in the Mystery of Coloring, by
Copying after many things in the Stillife that have the greatest variety of
Colors, so that at first sight you can perceive most of the Colors in a
Picture, and Judge whence they are Compounded, you may adventure on the
Profoundest part of the Science viz Painting of a Face.

CAP. XXIX.
The way of Painting a Face.

FOr a Clear and Beautiful Complexion, lay on your Pallat and Temper them by
themselves (cleaning your Pallat well after each Color) these following
Colors. viz.

White Flakes, Yellow-Oker, Burnt-Oker, Vermilion, Red Lead (which some use in
the Lips, though many not at all) Light-Red, Indian-Red, Lake, Smalt,
Blew-Black, Terravert, Roman-Oker, Brown-Pink, Umber and Bone-Black.

For the first Lights, White and a very little Light-Red, sometimes instead
thereof a little Vermilion, though never but when you cannot avoid it, because
in a Complexion it is apt to change; then add a little more Light-Red; lay by
the first of these Colors, and devide the second into two parts; one part
temper down for the Cheeks and Lips in this Manner: add to it a little more
Light-Red and Vermilion, and lay a little of it by; to the rest add a little
more, lay some by: then add to the remainder a little Lake and the least touch
of Indian Red: having laid some by, add a little more. Then cleaning your
Pallat where you tempered them; temper together a little Vermilion, Light Red
and Lake; lay by some, and add to the remainder more Indian-Red and Lake, then
leave out the Vermilion and Light Red and add more Lake, and lastly lay by a
little Lake.

Then take the Second Devident of the White and Light-Red, and for the greenifh
Shaddows, mix a little Terravert with it, and lay some by, then more Terravert
with a little Light-Red and lay a little of that by: for deeper Green, more
Terravert, a little Yellow-Oker and Blew-Black; and so down, always remembering,
as you add Terravert to add a little Light-Red or, some such like to keep the
Shaddows warm.

For the Blew Shaddows under the Eyes and the deeper Blews add to some of the
White and Light-Red a little Ultramarine, and more of Ultramarine with more
Light-Red as occasion serves, but for a dead Color, Blew-Black will serve.

For the Purplelish Shaddows, to the White and Light-Red, add a little
Ultramarine and Lake, then a little more Ultramarine and Lake adding a little
Light-Red, as you have occasion.

For the Yellowish Shaddows, to the White and Light-Red, add a little
Yellow-Oker and more Light-Red, then more Light-Red, Yellow-Oker and Terravert,
then more if occasion require it of the three last with a little Blew-Black.

For the dark Shaddows you must always (as before mentioned) leave out the
White, which makes them Gray and Cold.

For dark Greenish Shaddows, use Yellow-Oker, Roman-Oker, Burnt-Oker, Light-Red
and Terravert; for Bluish, add more Blew-Black, for more Yellowish add
Yellow-Oker and Roman-Oker, and for more warm and Glowing, add more Burnt-Oker.

For Deeper Shaddows, add Brown-Pink, Course and Lake, part laid by, add more
Brown-Pink and Lake, and to them Bone-Black and so on to the Darkest.

Thus must you temper them, till by comparing the Color on the Point of your
Knife with all the Carnations and Tinktures in the Face, you have obtained
every Color.

Note that this Method is to be used by Beginners, but those that are more
experienced in Mixture, are not obliged to compound every Touch of Coloring on
their Pallat, for they will soon understand how to mix great part of them with
their Pencels as they work.

But sure I am that most of those Tinkturs I mentioned will be used in such a
Face as I proposed, and possibly all.

For a more Swarthy Complextiou you must use more Yellow-Oker throughout all
the Lights; and still as you add Yellow-Oker you must for the most part add
Light-Red to keep it warm: but the Nature it self (by careful studying of it)
will soon instruct you better then is possible to be done in writing: nor in a
Swarthy Face will you have so much use of those clear Bluish and Lakey Colors
as in a very Clear one.

Your Colors thus prepared; with a hand of Pencels, which must consist of
about a dosen and a half, of Pointed, Black and White Fitches of all sises, you
may begin to work in this manner (after your Face is exactly drawn in Chalk or
Tripoly and corrected by going over the Draught again with a single Color, and
the little nobs of color scraped of from your Cloth, which must be a very
even thread.)

Take a large Black Fitch (which I hold to be the best for the free delivery of
a Body of Colors) and strike on the large lights, as the Eminences of the
Forehead over the Eyes, the upper part of the nearest Ball of the upper Cheek,
the top of the Chin, and with a smaller Fitch put in the top of the Nose, the
top of the Eyelids, etc.

Then with your Second Lights and other Pencels, go between the Eminences of
the Forehead, and about the other first Lights, each side toward the Bottom of
the Gutter of the Nose, the Ridge of the Nose, the highest part of the upper
Lip, and where you see occasion.

Then with the Lightest Greenish or Bluish Shaddows, go about the Second
Lights of the Forehead, upon the upper Lid of the Eyes, under the Corners of
the Nostrels, the devisions of the Chin, about the Temples, and then with
darker Shaddows of that kind, till you come to the deepest the Face requires.

The Bluish and Purpleish Shaddows are sometimes in the Shadow of the Nose,
little Tinctures about the Chin, in Fresh-Colour'd Men, newly Shaven, and other
places as Nature will best direct you, as likewise the bluish Shaddows under
the Eyes, etc.

Next the Warm, dark Shoddows toward the Corners of the Eyes, the deepest
Shaddows of the Nose, on the Cheeks near the Hair, and about the Chin.

Then the Darkest Shaddows, in the Mouth-stroake, the Nostrels, sometimes in
the Shadow of the Nose, on the dark side of the Face, etc.

After that strike in the Eyebrows, having left space for them, but not to the
whole breadth of them, that you may the better strike the loose Hairs over the
Skin; not too dark, considering that will appear very dark over a Light part,
which is not so in it self.

Next the Eyes, putting in the Lightest part first though some will put in the
Sight first. Then the Lips, observing to put in the lightest parts first (as in
the others) and so down to the deepest.

The Colors being thus all put in, you must begin to work them into each
other, striking them in with a light Hand, taking great care that you strike
not the Shaddows so far, to soul the Lights, nor the Lights so as to Injure the
Shaddows: driving the Colors with the Pencel in the manner of Hatching. When
you have worked all in as well as you can with your Pointed Pencels, then very
lightly and with much Dexterity, run all over with your White Fitches, keeping
them always very clean as you Sweeten.

They being all laid Soft. Touch over the whole Face, as you may see occasion,
and if the least Edge remains, be sure to take it of.

Then rub in the dark places of the Hair with a brush; then the lighter, lay
it soft, and Touch it over slightly with a pointed Pencel for a Dead-Colour.

When your Head is thus Dead-Colour'd, and through dry; having scraped of all
the Crumbs of Colors arising: with a bristle Brush, rub it very thin over with
a mixture of Nut-Oyle and Vernisb, for too much will change the Colors, then
mix up your Colors as before, and accordingly Paint it: but instead of Smalt,
use Ultramarine Ashes, and no Umber, except necessity requires it, to cover in
some deep Shaddows.

Having laid on your Colors, work them up with your Pointed Pencels, and
Soften the whole work with your W ite Fitches, Touch it all over again with a
steady and free Hand; and lastly, where it may require it, Soften of all the
Edges.

But this time you must take more pains with the Hair then before, having rubbed
your Colors hard, but thin in your Darker and Lighter parts; with a little
Turpentine Oil and a large Pointed Pencel, you must strike in the Hair,
carrying your Pencel Circularly as the tendency of the Hair requires, and last
of all Touch up the Lights and the Reflections and Dark Places as you see
occasion.

Then when the whole is through dry, where you have occasion to Touch, rub in
very thin a little Vernish and Nut Oil, if you cannot touch it soft without it.

In Draperys, when your Colors are in, you must give the Sudden Lights with an
extraordinary free Hand, and if possibly, work them in without Fitches; for if
they be not delicately used, they will blunt the Briskness of the Silk which is
the Beauty of it.

As for Color in Drapery, though some have (absurdly) laid down Certain rules
for all Colors, it is a thing impossible to do, by reason the same Colors
from diverse dispositions of Lights and Reflections, have various Tinktures: nor
need the Practisioner be concerned about it, for when he can once apprehend all
the Colors in the Face, he may with great Facility mix all Colors for the
more difficult Drapery, even from Nature it self.

CAP. XXX.
Precepts in Coloring and Glasing.

WHite represents Light and gives the Heightning; Black, Darkness, and Obscures
and effaces the Object, likewise sets of the light parts and makes them appear
by their apposition, and both serve one another to loosen the Object and
distinguish the parts of the Group.

In Carnations, we must avoid the Affectation of too many Clear Red Colors,
which more resemble the Skin when Flead of, then the true Natural Skin.

Nor must we affect the diversity of Sparkling and Glowing Colors, as the
Bright of Diaphanous Bodies, which represent reflections of the variety of
Neighboring Colors; always remembering, that man's Skin how Beautiful soever,
dwells in a delicate down-Colour.

We must observe in the Contrast, or the Opposition which Intervenes in the
Union of Colors; that by a sweet Interruption it may raise up its Briskness,
without it a fading Disagreeableness ensues.

In Landscape we must observe, that the Air being universally overspread, carrys
something of Light with it, and admits nothing Dark in places at distance and
approaching the Horizon.

That which way soever we carry the Wind, the Clouds, Trees and all Things
Subject to its Motion, tend the same way.

That in Clouds for Storms, etc. they be Painted in manner of a Group, and not
to much Scattering by Breaks, which will disturb the Harmony of the Picture.

We must carefully observe all the Squars, as on the Forehead, Chin, top of the
Nose, between the Neck and Breasts, etc.

In great works we must lay the Colors on Full, that we may Empast and
Incorporate them sweetly, and that will make them to hold Firm and be lasting.

We must have regard to the expressions of Matters and Stuffs, whither they be
Polisht or Rough, Shining or Dull, Diaphanous or Solid, Soft or Hard, etc.

Colors must be so laid together, that they may be all sweetly united under
the Briskness of a principal one, that it may participate of the Light which
is chief over all the rest in the Picture; and that all the Colors be
Connected together by an agreeable Union, and likewise so disposed as they may
partake of each other, by the Communication of the Light and help of Reflection.

We must not only avoid all Garrish and Gandy Coloring (the Effects of a poor
Judgment) but likewise a Briskness in the Meaner Parts which may any way hurt
the Eye of the Picture.

We must observe to lay the Colors very strong at first, because it is easy to
weaken what we would put back; but more difficult to give a strength, where it
is weakly put in.

Touches must be Bold, by the conduct of a free and steady Pencel, with all
possible Freedom: that thereby, they may Animate the work with Life and Spirit,
and may appear most Finished at a Proportionable distance.

But in works finished to be seen near at Hand, you must apply each Color
properly in its place, sweetning with a light Hand all their Extremitys,
without Tormenting or Fretting them, that their Purity may be preserved.

In Drapery we must consider, that we have a perfect liberty in choosing the
most proper Colors to produce good effects accordingly we must show our
Judgment therein.

When a Picture is Dead Colored, we must avoid the smeering it to much with
Oil, for the more speedy and easy Finishing thereon, which soon causes the
work to Change.

Take care the Priming of the Cloth or Panel be through dry, before you Paint
thereon; or the foul Priming Colors incorporating with your work will also
cause it to Change; as likewise that a Dead Color be dry for the same Reason.
Where you use Turpentine Oil take care the Color under be hard dry, for it is
of so peircing a quality, it will raise the Colors.

We must have regard to the situation of Colors, where we must observe to put
before the Picture, those which are Naturally the stronger and of the greatest
Purity; that by the Force of their Briskness, we may keep back the Force of
them which are Compounded, and which must appear at a distance; all
Compositions diminishing the Force which is in the Purity of Colors.

In Glazing, the Colors under must be laid smooth and strong, by reason it
takes from their strength, we must also have regard to the Body of the Color
we Glaze with, and accordingly do it oftener or fewer times over.

Note that the same Ground by the diversity of Glazing Colors, produces
diverse Colors in Drapery; likewise the Glazing Colors by the diversity of
Grounds.

For a Scarlet, your Drapery must be in the Heights, Vermilion, and brought
down first with Indian Red, then with Bone-Black; when Finished, Glaze it twice
or thrice thin, according to the Body of your Lake: if it requires more
strength Touch up the Lights with Vermilion, and Glaze it thin over again, then
in the extremest Lights of the Sleeves, Scarf etc. of the Drapery, touch it up
with Vermilion and White, always remembering, that you Glaze not the Heightnings
where there is any White, by reason it will render it Purpleish and take from
the Beauty.

For a Crimson, lay the Ground with White, Blew Black, and Indigo in the deep,
Glaze it with Lake. For a Seagreen, lay the Ground as before and Glaze with
distilled Verdigreece. A Grass-Green, in the Heights Masticot, then Yellow
Oker, Umber and Bone-Black, Glaze with Verdigreece. For Olive Colour-White,
Blew Black and Bone Black, Glaze with Brown Pinck. For a Blew with Smalt, the
Ground as before, Glaze seven or eight times, very thin with a very steady, but
free hand. Glaze with Ultramarine on the same Ground. For the most Beautiful
Red, lay the Ground as in Grass green, but in the Finishing use Pinks instead
of Yellow Oker and Umber, as likewise in Finishing the Grass Green Glaze the
Red with Carmine. You must Glaze with Nut Oil and Vernish mixed, in the Darkes
you may use Dryiny Oil.

And lastly you must take care in the Coloring of the Harmony which makes the
variety of Colors agree, supplying the Weakness of some by the Strength of
others, to sustain them, as by a Consonance well managed, where they must
neglect on purpose certain places, to serve for the Basis and Repose of the
Sight; and to raise up those which by their Briskness keep upmost. And likewise
of the Degradation, where the more easily to Proportion the Degree of Colors
that fly back, we must reserve some of the same kind and entire purity, and
then to compare them which ought to be a far off, according to the Perspective
Lines, to justify the Diminution; observing the Quality of the Air, which being
charged with Vapors, duls them more then when it is Serene.

These are the most General and Principal Rules I could recollect, but the
Practice will insencibly iuforme your Judgment with infinite lesser
Observations; which with diligent study, and a Mind adapted to so Ingenious a
Diversion, will procure you the Happy Fruition of your desired End therein.

CAP. XXXI.
Precepts about Ordonnance and Design. As Likewise for Drawing by the Life.

IN Designing a Piece of History we must have greatest Regard to the Principal
Group, that the Lights fall strongest on it, and more especially on the Chief
Figure that it be of the first Character and most Finished, being the Eye of
the work.

That the Group be sustained by something that seems loose about it, which
serves to extend and continue it to some other Group by, otherwise the
Diminution will be too apparent, and break to much into Heaps, and the Eye not
descend naturally from one to another, which must, beginning at the Principal,
fall according to the Mind of the Story.

Too force Attitudes must be avoided, which cause extravagant Contorsions: but
the boldest Actions are allowed (not exceeding Nature) which may be
advantageous to the Design.

We must avoid an Injudicious Mixture of Passions, which will disturb the
Harmony of the Picture; as the mixing Anxiety, and Roughness, with
Chearfullness, Clemency, etc.

We should never Express a Figure without first examining the Action from the
Life; since in every Action there is some Alteration in the Muscles, Joints,
Contorsions, etc.

Passions must not only be formed in the Features and Actions, but suited,
also, to fit Constitutions and Complections.

We must reserve our greatest stock of Fancy for the Principal Part of the
Picture, least spending it on the meaner parts, we should be exhausted when we
have most occasion to make use of it.

In supplying Lights and Shaddows observe to dispose of the Effects, by placing
all the parts of the Subject, so that at the same time we may see what the
whole Composition produces.

In Designs of Great and Honorable Actions, we must avoid the bringing in any
thing that savours of Rusticity, or Boorishness, but maintain the Character
throughout the work.

Beyond the usual, Actual work of Nature a Painter may describe, but not
exceed the conceived possibilitys of Nature, except the Subjects are Fixions,
as Pegasus, Centaurs, Satyrs, etc.

In very lean Figures we must not expose the Nuditys, least they appear too
Mesquine, but seek some occasion to cover or repress them, that we may render
the parts more agreeable.

Where there be several Figures we must give several Aspects, Habits, Actions
etc, for the eye delights in variety as well as the Mind, and these are said,
Contraster been.

We must observe an Aequilibre in the Design, that when there be diverse Figures
on one side, we must Balance it on the other; the like must be observed in a
single Figure, when one Arm moves forwards, the other or the like must be in a
backward position, to Aequipoise the Figure.

We must observe in the Figures of Man's Body, that the Head be placed well
between the Shoulders, the Trunk upon the Haunches, and the whole upon the Feet
in Just Proportion, and that one Leg may rest firm under the Body.

In all Animals we must proportion their Bigness to their Situation, and
Strengthen their Positions by means of the Aequilibrium.

In Designs of Large Figures, the other things in the Picture must be of a
Large Kind, not only by avoiding things Diminitive from the Natural, but such
as are small in Nature.

In all their differences which can occur in their Positions, we must propose
an even Plane to find precisely their Situation, and settle their place by
sudden Breaks and Distances, conformable to their Perspective, after a just and
exact Situation, according to the diminution of Distance whither placed high
or low.

In all Histores we must have regard to the Climate, and the time in their
Habits, taking care we Dress not Antique Figures in Modern Habits, nor one
Country in the Dress of another.

We must adjust the Drapery so on Figures, that they may appear real Vestments,
and therefore we must cloth the Layman, before we put it in the Action we
design.

The Folds must be disposed in such manner, that they may make the great parts,
in which the Nudity may appear, Free; the little Folds being placed about the
Joints; and taking great care that upon the Relief and Surface of Members, we
do not strain or hurt them, but that the motions may seem disengaged. We must
also raise up the stuff, letting it fall lightly, that the Air sustaining the
Folds, may make them fall more neat and soft.

We must take care to distinguish Draperys; Taffatys and thin Silks must be
full of Breaks and Flickerings; Sattens more Quick Lights, the Folds lying more
soft and round; but Velvet the quickest, the deeps very dark, with Reflections
on the outward parts of the Folds.

Large Figures must be dressed with Folds large and free, more to be regarded
for their Grace and Facility, then for their affected Pains and Industry.

Hair must be touched in large Historys with a full and free Pencel, not nicely
workt up to follow the Nature, for that will be all lost by the distance and
appear Flat.

We may neglect the Nicity of the story for the Advantage of the Picture, as
putting any former Hero in better Grace and Posture (if in a great Action) then
perhaps History has transmitted to us.

In Dead Bodies we must avoid all that appears Noisome and Unpleasant to the
Eyes; ever observing to take the best of Nature: so in the miracles of Curing
Diseases, we may take the what is Acute in pain, omitting what is Loathsome to
the Eye.

We must shun all Sharpness in the Contorsions as likewise all Flatness in the
Body of the Piece.

In Lights, by Night the Artificial must govern the Natural, but by Day the
Natural govern the Artificial.

If the Action be in Uninhabited places, you have liberty to represent the
Extravagant Effects of Nature, but in a well disposed Irregularity; if in
Inhabited places, you have Liberty for Ruins etc. at a distance, but not near
Hand.

If the Buildings be Rustic, you may dispose them to the best advantage of the
Figures, and according to the Idea of the Subject: if Regular, we must have
respect to the several Orders of Architecture. But Regular or Irregular, we
must observe their Geometrical and Perpendicular, according to the Rules of
Geometry and Perspective.

In all Mountains, Rocks, Buildings, Trees, etc. we must Proportion their
bigness to the Plane where they are placed, and hold it for a Maxim, to make
the Ground-plot great enough for the freedom of the Figures, and the meeting of
all the fine Effects.

We must take care to adjust the Land skip to the Figures, not only to its
Manner, but also to the Coloring part, that it may ly quiet, and put the
Figures forwards.

Finally we must observe. that the whole work be of one Piece; all Free, and
nothing Forced or Restrained; a judicious observation in the Perspective;
Actions suiting the Character, whither Noble or Rustic; the Sex, whither
Masculine and Strong; or Tender, soft and Easy; the Age, whither Grave,
Vigorous or Childish: that there be a Principal Eye in the Picture, to which
all the rest have reference. That there be a Harmony of Coloring throughout
the work, that in the Drapery, the Lesser folds descend naturally without
Crossings and Confusion from the greater, that the Figures bare exact
Proportion: and the Fore shortnings be brought to the severest Test of the
Judgment.

But whereas in History the Figures have dependency on each other, a Figure by
the Life (one Figure usually making the Picture) be only agreeable to it self,

We must Consider (by diverse Trials) what Position of Body, Action and Light
best becoms the Person, and when any thing seems forced or affected, we must
Endeavor to divert them by Discourse, etc.

For a Round and full Uisage take a three Quarter-Face, for a Thin and Long,
more Foreright. For a soft Languishing Look, the Face something Inclining, For
a Sprightly, more upright, looking over the Shoulders, etc.

Let Children be playing with Lambs, Birds, little Dogs, Catching water from
Fountains, and with the like Childish Actions, Lads and Young Uirgins
Shooting, Hunting, in Sheepherds and Sheepherdesses Dresses, etc. and so
suitable in all Ages, and Dressed to their Quility, but for all Habits dress up a
Layman and Paint from the Nature. Nor must you only suit the Age and Quality,
but also the Complexion; a brisk, Sanguine bears the Strongest, a Sallow,
weaker colored Drapery. And where you Paint much Drapery, carry backward and
in the Shadow what you can, that you may not hurt the Eye of the Picture.

Put Scars and Defects (as much as may be) in the Shadow; not only taking the
best, but Helping Nature, where it may be done without Hurting the Intent of
the Picture.

If you have several Figures, put them in manner of a Group, with Half, three
quarter and Foreright Faces; not all looking on you as if they were suppris'd.

Landscape must bare a Harmony in Coloring with the Figures: putting them
forward; Shunning the affected Finishing of Trees, Flowers, etc. which show
more of Labor then Art.

Be as quick as may be (without Injury to the work) in a Face, Catching the
briskest Air before it sinks by the Persons growing Uneasy; and lastly, give
all that are by, Liberty of their Opinions in the Likeness, for thence
sometimes you may Correct your work.

Thus have I giving the most Necessary Directions and Instructions throughout
the whole Mystery of Painting: These with a diligent Study in the Theory and a
Careful management in the Practice will Effect an Entertainment, Suitable to
the most Noble Genius.

FINIS.
By Reason some through the prejudice of Education and yet of good Ingenious
Parts, may find some difficulty in Terms of Art, and other Words in this Book,
I thought fit (for their Benefit) to subjoyn the Explanation of them.
ATtitudes. Actions, or Postures. Aenigmatical; full of Riddles. Accumulate; to
heap up. Allective; Alluring. Altercation; Wrangling. Amfractuous; Broken.
Anatomatize; to cut up. Analogical; Proportionable. Anoptica; Looking up. Apex;
the Top of any thing. Bacchanalization; the Drunken Feasts. of Bacchus.
Beatitudes; Blessings. Catoptica; Looking downwards. Chiaro Scuro; Placing of
Lights. Concretion; Joining togather. Unequal; Round. Cosmographicall; writing
of the world. Contours; Out-Lines. Contrast; strengthening togather.
Dulcisonant; Sweet sounding. Diaphanous; Transparent. Diaphonus; Jarring.
Dilatory; Tedious. Diapente; a Fifth in Music. Diapason; an Eight in Music.
Diatesseron; a Fourth. Dilation; an Enlarging. Diagonally; From Corner to
Corner. Expansion; a laying open. Exornation; an Adorning. Exitial;
Distructive. Entity; Being. Eleimosinary; Charitable. Efflux; a Flowing out.
Ebullition a Boiling up. Epileptici; given to the Falling Sickness. Empaste; to
lay well in. Elevation a Lifting up. Group; a Knot of Figures togather.
Homiomaere; a Likeness in Parts. Hydrographical; writing of the Ocean, etc.
Hypothesis; the Argument of a discourse. Hatching; striking strokes as in
Graving. Idea; the Form of any thing. Ineffable Unspeakable. Intersection;
cutting off. Ichnography; ground Plot. Monopolist; one that Ingrosseth all of a
sort or Kind. Monochroma; one Color. Matempsychosis; passing of souls from
one body to another. Occult; Hidden. Oeconomists; Governors. Osteology;
Discoursing of the Bones. Optica; Sight foreright. Proditorious; betraying.
Prototypon; the first Pattern. Paripateticks; Followers of Aristotle.
Physiological; discoursing of Natural Causes. Protracted; Prolonged.
Protuberant; Swelling up. Physical; Natural. Profile; Represeutation of Heights
Depths etc. Ratiocination; Reasoning. Relievo; An Embossed Figure. Refracted;
broken open. Speculative: Contemplative. Superficies; the Surface of any thing.
Symmetrical; Proportionable. Sesquialter; so much and half as much more.
Suprabipartient more then divided in two. Sesquioctava; an eighth part above
the whole. Sciographica; Platform or Draught. Scheme; a Form. Tone; a Tune, or
Harmony. Teints; Tincktures, touches of Colors. Vertigious; Giddy. Zenith; the
point directly over our heads.

