Astraea, Redeunt Saturnia regna, progenies, caelo Demittitur alto.

Bishops and the Co^on pr^^ier Book

^ewarded:

Sectaries rejected:



SALMASIUS HIS BUCKLER: OR, A Royal Apology FOR King CHARLES the MARTYR.

Dedicated to CHARLES the Second, King of Great Britain.

Salus Populi, Salus Regis. LONDON, Printed for H.B. and are to be sold in
Westminsterhall, and at the Royal Exchange, 1662.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THere have been so many Wolves in sheeps-cloathing, and so many Innocents, by
the reviling tongues of their Enemies, robbing them of their good names as well
as of their good estates, made Malignants, in this our worse than iron age,
that I know not what Epithet to give thee; If thou art an Honest man, Rara
avis in terris, I invoke thee to be my Patron; If thou art not, Noli me
tangere. But since St. Austin, once perhaps as zealous a Reprobate as thy self,
was converted by looking on the Bible by chance, I will not prohibit thee from
eating of this fruit: Though, I believe, to think that thy view of my Book will
work the like conversion on thee, is to have a better opinion of thee and the
Book, than both will deserve: For, though an Angel should come from heaven, or
a man arise from the dead, yet could he not persuade our hotheaded Zealots,
but that they did God good service, even when they rebel against his own
Ordinance, transgress his Commandments, murder their Father, the KING, and
pollute their once flourishing Mother, the CHURCH. Before this prodigious
offspring, like Vipers, destroyed the Mother by their birth; The Jews indeed
murdered the Lord of life, because they did not know him, and therefore
thought it was pleasing to God. But woe be to them, who did not only with Ham,
see their Fathers nakedness, and reproach him, but commit Paricide, see his
heart, naked, and call the multitude to laugh at it, -- En quo discordia Cives
produxit miseros? O the miserable effects of seditious men! Who shall now cure
the Kings evil? Or who shall cure the evil of the People? O purblind City, how
long will you enslave yourselves to ravenous woolves? who by their often
changing of their feigned Governments, do but change the thief, and still your
Storehouses must be the Magazine, to furnish them with plunder. You must never
look to enjoy your lives, estates, or Gods blessing, with the fruition of your
Wives, and Children, before your lawful King and Sovereign CHARLES the II.
unjustly banished by Rebels, be restored to his Crown and Kingdom; For what
Comfort can any honest or conscientious man take, in any thing, so long as he
sees his own native Prince, like King David, driven from his own natural
inheritance, by the unjust force of a multitude of Traitors, both to God and
their King? Who Judas-like, acknowledging his Master with a kiss, so they swore
with their mouths, that King CHARLES the I. was their only lawful King and
Sovereign, and had the Supreme power over them all, and then delivered him to
the Swordmen, who came out with Clubbs and Staves against their Sovereign, as
against a Thief: and as the Jews did the Lord our Savior, whom they did not
acknowledge to be their King, otherwise they would not have done it; These men
murdered their dread Sovereign, whom they all acknowledged and vowed to be
their only King; Excelling the Jews only in wickedness. Therefore, since by
the Laws of the Land, there can be no Parliament without the King, what
difference is there between a Protector, and one of their Parliaments, but only
number? For their Protectors are but the head thieves, and their Parliaments
but a headless multitude of thieves: For so long as the Royal Progeny of
CHARLES the I. (which God long preserve) remain alive, all other our Governors
besides them, will be but Rebels, Traitors, and Tyrants, let them call
themselves a Free State, or by what names they please, and continue until the
worlds end. Therefore rouse up Citizens, and take courage; How long will you be
the common Hackney, to be ridden by every one that will stride you? St. Paul's.
How long shall your Sanctuary be made a Stable and Den for Thieves? Shall your
Streets blush with the blood of Prophets, and with the blood of your Cit^zens,
and will not you change your color? where is the reverend Doctor Hewyt, that
Glory of your City? that Glory of all Christians, that Glory of the whole
World? whose fame shall outlive the Sun, and his renown shine longer, and
brighter than the Moon, or the lesser Stars! Caesar the Usurper was wont to
say, Si violandum est jus, regnandi causa esse violandum, That if it is lawful
to forswear one self for any Cause, the Cause of gaining a Kingdom is the most
lawful. But there are those amongst us, who have turned the Supposition into a
Proposition, and confidently by their practice affirm, that it is lawful to
forswear one self for any thing, and most sacred to be forsworn, if by the
perjury a Kingdom may be gained. But I will not touch the Soars which lie raw
before every man's eyes, only this will I say, which every one knows to be
true, that no Kingdom in the World was so happy both for peace and plenty, law
and religion, and all other good things, as our Kingdom of England was, whilst
due obedience was lawfully paid to our Sovereign Lord the King, but now the
King being murdered and all goodness with him, no Nation under the Sun is more
miserable, and so it will continue until King Charles the second be restored
to his Crown. The Sword of Gods word ought only to fight for Religion; the Iron
sword of Rebels did never establish Christian Religion, nor ever will set up
Christ's Kingdom, especially if it be unsheathed against Kings by their
Subjects. And to satisfy all Objections whatsoever against my writing, I
answer, Si natura negat facit indignatio versum: It was not to show my self to
the world (for as in Tempests, so in our days, he is best who is seen least
abroad,) But it was to show and prefer the Truth, which has been laid asleep
by the Charms of our Sins: For to Jo. 18.37.
this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should
bear witness to the truth, and every one that is of the Truth will hear the
voice of the truth; when I saw the many revolutions and turnings of men, like
Weathercocks, being presented, almost every day, with new, strange, and various
shapes and forms of Government, it caused me more diligently to search after
the true reason of our changings, which I found to be our Sins, and the absence
of our King, and also which was the best kind of Government, which I found to
be Monarchy, and that all traiterous Tyrants sine titulo, might most lawfully
be killed by any private hand; but Kings only by God. Truth often gets
hatred, and it is the doom of serious books to be hooted at, by those who have
nothing else to do but to scrible Pamphlets: Every one judging according to his
capacity or affection. And as Men, so Books are pressed to war Ad prelum
tanquam ad praelium; But Nulla fides, pietasve viris qui castra sequuntur,
there is as little credit as piety to be found in Swordmen, and so their
calumny will not prejudice me in any wise man's judgment. The good of my
Country, and the settlement of our Distractions is the thing which I aim at,
(let Momus carp while his Teeth ache) which Settlement will never be until
Right overcomes Might, and every one be established in his own again; For what
man has been secure and immutable since the great and wicked change? Sen. Quem
felicem Cynthia vidit,
Vidit miserum abitura dies.


He that shone like the Sun in the Morning, was clouded like Night in the
Evening; a Protector one hour, and glad to be protected the next. God
oftentimes curses with the same Sins which were committed against him. Pharaoh
hardened his heart the first time for his Pleasure, God hardened it the next
for his Destruction. We changed our Government once to please our wicked Wills:
God has changed it oftener to purge our impious Sins. But Jam satis terris
nivis, atque dirae
Grandinis mifit pater, and ruben^e
Dextera sacras jaculatus arces,
Terruit urbem.
Terruit gentes.
Enough of hail and cruel snow,
Has Jove now showered on us below,
Enough with thundering Steeples down,
Frightened the Town.
Frightened the World.


O thou God of Order, now hold thy punishing hand, cement our Differences, and
unite the lines of our Discord in the true Center. Let Charles the 2d. our
Augustus, and Caesar's Successor, revenge the bloody Murder of Caesar. O most
worthy Augustus, our only lawful Sovereign, be thou a stay to our falling
Kingdom, Patiens vocari Caesaris ultor, do thou hasten to be Caesar's Revenger,
and then Serus in coelum redeas, diuque
Laetus intersis populo Quirini,
Neve te nostris vitiis iniquum,
O^yor aura
Tollat, hic magnos, potius triumphos,
Hic ames dici pater, atque Prin^eps,
Neu sinas Medos equitare inultos,
Te duce Caesar.
Return to Heaven late we pray,
And long with us the Britains stay,
Nor let disdain of our offense,
Take thee from hence.
Love here victorious, Triumphs rather,
Love here the name of Prince, and father,
Nor let the Rebels scot-free ride,
Thou being our Guide.


Which is the continual Prayer of

Your Graces most humble, true, faithful and obedient Subject, and most
dutiful Servant, usque ad aras. Cimelgus Bond.

ERRATA.
THe times are full of errors, Parliaments themselves have erred, therefore
pardon the Errata of the Printer. Some Letters, nay some words are left out,
and wrong ones put in their room: What then? our Nobles, nay our King himself,
has been dis-throned, and wrong ones, The Shrubs, their Servants, have
intruded, and usurped their places: The Rump ruled the whole Body, the Feet got
above the Shoulders: And until the Head fully enjoys its pre-eminence, and
Prerogative over the inferior Members, expect no Amendments either public or
private. But since our Age has more need of a Bit than Spurs, add ( bit) to
the end of the 21. line, fo. 6. line 9. fo. 42. Munera. l. 21. f. 47. of,
instead of for. l. 22. fo. 174. read Could such attempts. In the Latin Verses,
read cujus, and font, in the two last lines.

THe Contents of this Book you may find fo. 1. 20, 28, 40, 54, 65, 73, 86, 106,
119, 132, 192, 204, 210, 219, 267, 361, 376.

And since the last in execution, is the first in the intention: I must request
the Reader to begin with the last part of the Book, and end with the first part
in his reading: And if he meet with any -- Nam quis iniqui Tam patiens orbis,
tam ferreus ut teneat se?
sharp and tart laguage, let him remember the Persons whom it concerns, whose
Actions were more base than the most nipping and satirical pen could rehearse.
For what villainy so great as for Subjects to murder their gracious King? Oh
Heavens! could the Godly do this? Do this? Yes root up our Laws and Religion,
destroy our Church, and murder our Prophets, with many thousands of their
innocent Brethren, and yet be accounted Saints too: But from such Saints good
Lord deliver us, who took away the Kings and Bishops lands, and then voted them
Papistical, and dangerous to the Church and Commonwealth.

It was Naboths Vineyard which made him a Blasphemour: and Jack Presbyter would
never have made a Covenant to extirpate Episcopacy as contrary to the power of
Godliness, had not the Bishops had Land, and the Presbyter much Pride, and more
of the form, than of the power of Godliness in him. But Multa cadunt inter
calice^ Supremaque labra, the Independents stepped between home and him, got the
honor of cutting off the Kings head, and took to themselves the Revenues of
both King and Bishop: So that now John could relish a King, and the Office of
a Bishop: I like his Appetite well, but I pray God he do not spoil the meat in
the chewing it.

But renowned General Monk has now cheared us with the hopes of a A good
Remedy, but a bad Cure.
Free-Parliament, which will put a period to our miseries, that is, they will
bring in our exiled King, without whom, they will be but a Gallimaufrey of
Confusion, increasing, not diminishing our Distractions: for no Parliament,
without the King. And no doubt but our famous General holds the Scripture
Canonical, and will never dissent from his Father Solomon, who thus teaeheth
and commands all of us,

My Son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change, for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the
ruin of them both?

Prove. 24.21, 22.
To the Author of the Royal Buckler, or a Lecture to Traitors.
TO speak what every one desires, and in a strain
That suits with every Hearer, is no pain;
No trouble to profess the bloody Creed
Of Mahomet, among the Turks; no need
To be afraid amidst ones friends; but he
That talks of Virtue, before Villainy;
Who can be Christian, among the Crew
Of Sectaries, and bid defiance to the Jew;
He that in the worst of Times dares to be good;
(Like Capel) seals his Ligeance with his Blood;
Can strive against the impetuous wind, and wave,
And all their joynt-conspiracies outbrave;
In spite of Fortune resolutely stand
To argue with a bloody, treacherous Land;
That Man's a Man indeed; can stoutly cry
Hosanna, when the Throng says Crucify.
Sir, such are you, and such your Lines, to whom
Or to your shrine, Posterity shall come
Laden with Laurels: and the little brood
Of them whose hands were in their Prince's blood;
Shall justify thy Book; and read therein
Their own Misfortunes, and their Father's Sin:
Shall read the Miracles of Providence,
And borrow matter for Romances thence.
Thus (Sir) your Pen shall to your self create
A Monument, beyond the Pageant state
Of breathless Oliver; or those Poor The Rump, etc.
men,
That ruled and died, and ruled and stunk again.
Rebellion for a little moment shines,
But seldom with a brave applause declines:
It Is only Truth, and Loyalty can give
Restoratives, to make a Dead man live.
T. F.

REPENTANCE FOR THE MURDER OF Charles the Martyr. AND The Restoration of
Charles the II. is the only Balm to cure Englands Distractions.
It Is true, our Nostrils lost their Breath; What then?
'Cause we sinned once, shall's never be good again?
We murdered Charles, for which, Infernal Kings
With worse than Aegypt's Plagues have scourged our sins.
The Martyrs Goodness Angels cannot rehearse;
The Rebels baseness Devils cannot express:
Who in their Lower House have acted more
Than Beelzebub in Hell, or the Earth before.
And did not Charles the Son yet shine, I Would say
That, God of Nature, and the World decay.
But God is God, and Satan's Fraud we see.
Charles is our King, and Rebels, Rebels be.
Then since we ken a Traitor from a Saint,
Let Us be for God, our King, and The Rump.
Bell recant.
He Will dry our Eyes, and cure those Wounds which we
Received i'^h' dark, groping for Liberty:
For Liberty, which kept us all in Fetters,
Slaves to the Rump, and to the Rumps Abetters:
Who Freedom and Religion up cried,
When Freedom and Religion they destroyed,
Who killed us with Plasters, and brought Hell,
For Paradise: So Eve by the Serpent fell.
Then if the death of the King caused all our woe,
The life of the King had saved us, all men know:
Behold him, in his Son, whose splendid light,
Shall heal the darkness of his Fathers night.
It Is madness to use Candles in the day:
What need a Parl'ament? when Charles le Roy,
Stands at the door, and to us fain would bring,
Freedom and Laws, instead of Rape and Sin.
The glory of a King is to command,
But Subjects shame to sit, when he does stand.
God save the King. C. B.
Never forget Reader, That the Qui Curies simulant and Bacchanalia vivunt.
Presbyters in their Almighty, scotified, nullified, Solemn League and
Covenant, with their hands lifted up to the Most high God do swear, That they
will preserve and defend the Kings Majesty, his Person and Authority: And that
they have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just Power and
Greatness. Yet they do also there swear, that they will extirpate Episcopacy,
although so to do, is contrary to the Kings Will, Laws, Command, Safety,
Greatness and Authority: As if his Majesty had no just Power, but what their
Faction vouchsafed and pleased to think fit.



On the late MIRACVLOVS REVOLVTIONS IN ENGLAND, etc.
THree Kingdoms, like one Ship, a long time lay
Black tempest-proof upon a troubled Sea;
Bandy'd from wave to wave, from rock, to sand,
A prey to Pirates from a foreign Land:
Exposed to all the injuries of Fate,
All the Reproaches of a Bedlam-State:
The brave Sails torn, the Mainmast cut in sunder,
Destruction from above, and ruin under.
Once the base rout of Saylors, tried to steer
The giddy Vessel, but thence could appear
Nothing but mad Confusion: Then came One,
He sat at Helm, and his Dominion
Frightened the blustering Billows for a while,
And made their Fury counterfeit a smile;
Then for a time, the Bottom seemed to play
IN the wonted Chanel, and the beaten way,
Yet floated still. The Rabble snatched again
It Is mannagement, but all (alas) in vain:
No Anchor fixed, no wished sh^ar appears,
No Haven after these distracted years.
But when the lawful Pilot shall direct
Our wavering Course (and Heaven shall Him protect)
The Storms shall laugh, the Winds rejoice thereat,
And then our Ark shall find an Ararat.
T. F.

THE HISTORY of PHAETON,
Being only a Flourish, or Praeludium, to the sulsequent more solid discourse;
Wherein, implicitly, the temerarious appetite of Subjects to their dread
Sovereigns Crown, is refuted and condemned; The gracious Concessions,
unparalleled goodness, and fatherly indulgence of our late King, to his
over-bold Subjects, manifested, and the sad effects of usurpation laid open,
with the Traitors Epitaph. Phoebus representing the King, and Phaeton the
hare-brained people.

Eloquar? an Sileam? timor hoc, pudor impedit illud.

Shall I speak? or hold my Peace? How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange
Land? And how shall I hold that which is not to be found?


WHen rash Phaeton, being mounted on the soaring wings of arrogance and
presumption, attempted the Kingly Government of his royal Fathers Chariot, fit
for none, but such powerful, and well-instructed Monarch as him^lf. For Ovid.
lib. 2. -- Non est tua tuta voluntas,
Magna petis Phaeton, and quae non viribus istis
Munera convenient, nec tam puerilibus annis.
Sors tua mortalis, non est mortale quod optas:
Plus etiam quam quod superis contingere fas est,
Nescius affectas; placeat sibi quisque licebit.
Non tamen ignifero quisquam consistere in axe,
Me valet excepto. Vusti quoque Rector Olympi,
Qui fera terribili jaculatur fulmina dextra,
Non agit hos curros: Et quid Jove majus habetur?
Thy wish is naught, What Is so desired by thee,
Can neither with thy strength, nor youth agree.
Too great intentions set thy thoughts on fire,
Thou, mortal, do no mortal thing desire.
Through ignorance, affecting more than they
Dare undertake, who in Olympus sway.
Though each himself approve, except me, none
Is able to supply my burning Throne.
Not that dread Thunderer, who rules above,
Can drive these wheels: and who more great than Jove?


Thou seek after that which humane power neither can, nor ought for to
atchieve. Thou art ignorant of my power, and too much presuming on thine own; I
am no Officer of trust, deputed by the common rout, but hold my jurisdiction
from above. It is not for Mortals to aspire, and foolishly to covet such sacred
things. There i^ none but I capable of this dignity. It is I that a^ the
anointed, and crowned King by caelestial decree, and therefore am not to be
dethroned by terrestial innovation.

At tu, funesti ne sim tibi muneris auctor.
Nate cave, dum resque sinit tua corrige vota.
Then, lest my bounty, which would save, should kill,
Beware, and whilst thou may reform thy will.
Be wise my Son in time, and lest thou prove a felo de se, banish from thy
thoughts this desperate and fond appetite of thine, to take my princely reigns
of Government into thine unadvised hands.

Non honor est; paenam Phaeton pro munere poscis. It is not honor, but
disgrace and thy utter ruin, which thou so greedily huntest after.

Scilicet ut nostro genitum te sanguine credas,
Pignora certa petis: do pignora certa timendo.
Et patrio pater esse metu probor: aspice vultus
Ecce meos: utinamque oculos in pectore posses
Inserere, and patrias intus deprendere curas:
Denique quicquid habet dives circumspiee mundus:
Deque tot, ac tantis caeli, terraeque, marisque
Posce bonis aliquid, nullam patiere repulsam:
Deprecor hoc unum, quod vero nomine paena est.
A sign thou crav'st, that might confirm thee mine:
I, by dehorting, give a certain sign:
Approved a father, by paternal fear:
Look on my looks, and read my sorrows there.
O, would thou could descend into my breast
And apprehend my vexed Souls unrest:
And lastly all the wealthy world behold,
Of all that heaven enrich, which seas infold,
Or on the pregnant bosomed earth remain,
Ask what thou will, and no repulse sustain:
To this alone I give a forced consent,
No honor, but a true-nam'd punishment.
Do thou doubt my fatherly indulgence? or that I will not own thee for my
Son? Remove that vain scruple from thy deceived mind, My noursing fear of thee
is an infallable sign, and an inviolable assurance, that thou art my legitimate
Son, and I am proved to be thy Father, by my fatherly care over thee. But if
thy heart be so hard, and thou so void of belief, that thou will not believe
me, unless thou see my heart, Reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my
side, and make way for thy unbelieving eyes, to discover and see those fatherly
cares which stick so close to my troubled heart. It is thy good which I only
aim at, And thy welfare is the only mark at which I level the shafts of my
Counsel, and wholesome admonishment.

-- Consiliis, non curribus utere nostris.
Dumque potes, and solidis etiam nunc sedibus astas,
Dumque male optatos nondum premis inscius axes,
Quae tutus spectes sine me dare lumina terris.
-- While thou may, refuse,
And not my Chariot, but my counsel use.
Let me the world with usual influence cheer:
And view that light which is unsafe to bear.
Make use of my advice, and not of my Chariot, and that in time too whilst
thou stand on sure ground, Lest at length thou art driven to a non putabam,
I had not thought, the Sanctuary of fools, and so become an Idiot by a too late
confession, For post est occasio calva, an after game is never good. Let not
thy jealous heart surmise that these public admonitions spring from any
private ends, or self interest of mine. Behold my Kingdom, and make choice of
what rarity or delight it affords. Ask whatsoever thine eye fancyeth, or thy
soul takes pleasure in, and thou shall suffer no denial. The glorious
structures, the fertile fields, the rich meadows, and the fat pastures, the
fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air, the fruits of the vineyards, and
the immense woods, shall all call thee master, Nay I will clip the wings of my
Prerogative, to feather thy nest withal: Confiteor hoc solum tibi nate negarem,

I profess Son only the government of my Chariot would I keep from thee, which
I deny thee for no other reason, than because it will be thy destruction. If
the horses thou drivest do not destroy thee; Yet every Kingdom in the world
will disapprove thy actions, and account thy attempt fatal to them; Therefore
as well for thy own safety, as the security and pleasure of all Kingdoms, desist
from thy indiscreet resolution, and let me still, whose only right it is, and
therefore only can, rule my Chariot.

Finge datos currus, quid ages? poterisve rotatis
Obvius ire polis, ne te citus auferat axis?
Forsitan and lucos illic, urbesque deorum
Concipias animo, delubraque ditia donis
Esse, per insidias iter est, formasque ferarum.
Nec tibi Quadrupedes animosos ignibus illis,
Quos in pectore habent, quos ore, and naribus efflant,
In promptu regere est, vix me patiuntur, ubiacres
Incaluere animi, cervixque repugnat habenis.
My Chariot had, can thy frail strength ascend
The obvious poles, and with their force contend?
No groves, no Cities fraught with Gods expect:
No marble fanes, with wealthy offerings decked.
Through salvage shapes, and dangers lies thy way.
Nor easy is it those fiery steeds to tame,
Who from their mouths and nostrills vomit flame.
They heated hardly of my rule admit;
But headstrong struggle with the hated.
Suppose thy request granted thee, and thou got up into my Chariot, what
would thou do? Do thou think it will carry thee to Heaven? Or, that thou
shall always reign secure there? Do thou imagine it an easy thing to rule?
or, that the change of Government will bring no danger? Let not thy purblind
policy so abominably delude thee. Labor est inhibere volantes, scarce I, even I
who am their known and lawful Sovereign, can hardly restrain the unbridled
fierceness of the Quadrupedes; But when they perceive they have not their right
and wonted driver, they will cast thee off and break thy neck with the
downfall. They are apt to rebel against me, but they will account rebellion
and treason most just and lawful against thee.

-- Ergo tu sapientius opta.
Nulla fides regni.
Therefore wish more discreetly, for immortality is not to be found in a
Kingdom.

This was the answer of Monarchical Phoebus, to the temerarious request of his
phanatick Son Phaeton.

-- Dictis tamen ille repugnat,
Propositumque premit, flagratque cupidine currus.
In vain dehorted, he his promise claimed,
With glory of so great a charge inflamed.
But so much stupidity had captivated the senses of this prodigal Son, that he
rejected his Fathers Counsel, and flew from it, as if every word had been a
two-edged sword, designed for his executioner. Such is the misery of the
reprobate and jealous Souls, that if an Angel should come from Heaven, or a man
arise from the dead, yet would not they be reclaimed from their wicked errors.
These sweet waters of admonition were all spilt upon the ground, and could not
quench the flagrant heat, of Phaetons blind zeal, for the Government of his
Fathers Chariot. Therefore when Royal Phoebus saw that his fatherly advice
could take no impression, nor by any means prevail, but that his Son was
wilfully bent upon his own ruin, and that he had caught him by a stratagem
into such a straight, that he could not repel his madness by force, O the
venom of a perpetual Parliament
Ne dubita dabitur (Stygias juravimus undas) Quodcunque que optares, He
delivers up his Chariot unto him, and such was his tender care, and
unparallelled goodness, that at that very time (notwithstanding the contumacy
of his rebellious Son, who should have obeyed his Father, in respect of his
duty, as well as for his own good) did not All-seeing Phoebus leave giving of
him Counsel. But that his Son might prosper even in his disobedience, ( Qualis
amor patris, O how great is the love of Parents!) He directed him what course
he was best to take, and how he should perform his usurped authority.

Si potes his saltem monitis parere parentis:
Parce puer stimulis, and fortius utere loris.
Sponte sua properant.
Let not thy Father still advise in vain,
Son, spare the whip, and strongly use the reign.
They of their own accord will run too fast,
It Is hard to moderate a flying haste.
This being done, he implores the Gods that his Sons faults might be forgiven
(for he knew that it was his ignorance that made him so audacious, and that at
last, though too late, he would repent it) Royal Phoebus likewise prayed, that
fortune would be more charitable to his hare-brained Son, than he was to
himself. And so with this farewell ascended up into Heaven.

Inter utrumque tene: fortunae caetera mando,
Quae juvet and melius quam tu tibi consulat opto,
-- In medio tutissimus ibis.
Between these drive, The rest I leave to fate:
Who better prove, than thou, to thy own state.
A lofty course, will Heaven with fire infest,
A lowly, earth, the safer mean is best.
Mourning succeeds rejoicing, many a Sunshiny morning, proves a wet day. The
Be carries honey in her mouth, but a sting in her tail; And those things which
seem glorious at the first approach, do many times prove fatal in the end.

Horace. Quid quisque vitet, nunquam homini satis
Cautum est, in horas. Navita Bosphorum
Paenus perhorrescit, neque ultra
Caeca timet aliunde fata.
Miles sagittas, and celerem fugam
Parthi: catenas Parthus, and Italum
Robur: Sed improvisa lethi
Vis rapuit, rapietque gentes.
No man knows truly what to shun.
The Punick Seaman fears to run
Upon some shelf, but does not dread
Another fate over his head.
The Soldier, shafts, and Parthian sight.
The Parthian, Chains, and Roman might.
But death had, and still will have,
A thousand backwayes to the grave.
No sooner had this unhappy Lad obtained his pleasing wish, and took the
Princely reigns of his Fathers Chariot, into his youthful hands, but that he
was made sensible of his unadvised temerity.

Sed leve pondus erat, nec quod cognoscere possent
Solis equi, solitaque jugum gravitate carebat.
Quod simul ac sensere, ruunt, tutumque relinquunt
Quadrijugi spatium, nec quo prius ordine currunt:
Ipse pavet, nec qua commissas flectat habenas
Nec scit, qua sit iter, nec si sciat, imperet illis.
But Phoebus Horses could not feel the freight:
The Chariot wanted the accustomed weight.
Which when they found, the beaten path they shun,
And straggling out of all subjection run.
He knows not how to turn, nor knows the way,
Or had he known, yet would not they obey.
When the Horses perceived that their Royal Master was gone, and that the
Government wanted that regal dignity and weighty Majesty, which was wont to awe
them, they did what, and run which way they pleased, All of them thinking that
as they had more power, so they had as much right to be Governors, as the raw
Statesman, who was newly mounted on the Kingly Chariot. Which made young
Phaeton that he could not tell how to rule, neither could they tell how to
obey. So that that which even now was the object of his desire, and greatest
cause of his admiration, is now become the greatest cause of his misery. Now
his Fathers instructions like the waters of Tantalus seem sweet, but not to be
tasted by his palate; His preferment is now his greatest torment, and by how
much the higher he is exalted, so much the greater is his punishment.

Vt vero terras despexit ab aethere summo
Infoelix Phaeton penitus penitusque jacentes
Palluit, and subito genua intremuere timore,
Suntque oculis tenebrae per tantum lumen abortae,
Et jam mallet equos nunquam tetigisse paternos,
Jam cognosse genus, piget and valuisse rogando.
Jam Meropis dici cupiens, Ita fertur, ut acta
Praecipiti pinus Borea, cui cuncta remisit
Frena suus Rector, quam diis, votisque reliquit.
But, when from top of all the arched sky
Unhappy Phaeton the Earth did eye,
Pale sudden fear un-nerves his quaking thighs;
And in so great a light, be-nights his eyes;
He wished those steeds unknown; unknown his birth;
His suites ungranted; now he covets earth.
Now scorns not to be held of Merops blood;
Rapt as a ship upon the high-wrought flood,
By salvage tempests chased, which in despair
The Pilot leaves to the Gods and prayer.
Now he does not only wish that he had never usurped his Fathers Government,
but that he had never known his Father. He now wishes that the King had his
own again, which he through foolishness had deprived him of. He wishes that he
had still been a subject to his royal Fathers desires, and it repents him of
his ill-got honor. For why? he sees the Chariot, wanting its lawful
Sovereign, tossed about, like a ship with tempests, and with the rough waves in
the Ocean, whose Pilot has left it, and there is no means but prayers to the
Gods to save it. The Horses rage, every one ruling, and furiously drawing which
way he pleases: and so through the multitude of lawless Governors, the whole
Government is like to fall to the ground, and bring destruction to all.

Quidque agat ignarus stupet, and nec fraena remittit,
Nec retinere valet, nec nomina novit equorum.
Expatiuntur equi, nulloque inhibente per auras
Ignotae regionis eunt, quaque impetus egit,
Hac sine lege ruunt.
Through ignorance, he cannot hold the reigns,
Nor let them go, nor knows his Horses names.
Who like the winds, or tempests, furiously,
With uncontrouled error scour the sky,
Through unknown airy regions; and tread
The way which their disordered fury led.
Amazement struck him dumb, and what to do ^he is altogether ignorant. He
wants the courage, years, and wisdom of his Father, to curb the unbridled
lust of the fiery steeds, and the Chariot wanted its wonted balance; He cannot
go back, neither knows he how to go forward. He is gone so far that he cannot
resign up the Government to the King, neither knows he how to keep it
himself; He now finds that it is better to be a poor subject, than a rich
usurper. The Horses being lawless, run whither their violence does whirry them,
and he not being their rightful owner, has no law to guide them. ( O the
deplorable condition of that Government, where the true Sovereign is an Exul:)
Not only Phaeton, but the whole world had like to have been consumed by this
Disaster.

Dissilit omne solum: penetratque in tartara rimis
Lumen, and infernum terret cum conjuge regem:
Et mare contrahitur, siccaeque est campus arenae,
Quod modo pontus erat: quoque altum texerat aequor
Existunt montes, and sparsas Cycladas augent.
Earth Cracks, to Hell the hated light descends,
And frighted Pluto, with his Queen offends;
The Ocean shrinks, and leaves a field of sand,
Where new discovered Rocks, and Mountains stand.
The Earth groaned, and the news of this usurpation was carried down to Hell;
Which the Devils had no sooner heard, but Pluto himself, his Wife, and all the
rest tremble through fear. For Pluto thought that those who had dethroned
Phoebus, might likewise be wicked enough to dethrone him, wrest the Government
of his Kingdom out of his hands, and take it into their own. But this was not
all, the Sea was dried up, and the fields were scorcht, the Harvests were
burnt, and the Mountains perished with heat, the Moon was amazed, and the
Clouds shone like Comets.

Parva tamen queror, magnae pereunt cum maenib^ urbes,
Cumque suis totas populis incendia gentes
In cinerem vertunt.
But this was nothing: Cities with their Towrs,
Realms with their people, funeral fire Devours.
All the Kingdoms in the world did shake, And all the Kings doubted of their
regal title, They feared that themselves should be destroyed, and their Crowns
with their lives pulled to the ground. And doubtless had not Divine providence
stopped this wildfire, more Kingdoms than were, had been demolished. For this
fire did intend to make Kings and the common people all in one condition;
neither was the King to have any praerogative above his subjects, but all had
like to have been consumed in one and the same sire. Great Cities with their
walls, and whole Nations with their people were turned into Ashes.

-- Circumspice utrinque,
Fumat uterque polus, quos si violaverit ignis
Atria vestra ruent.
-- Behold, the Poles above
At either end do fume: And should they burn,
Thy habitation would to ruin turn.
O Almighty, this usurpation would have taken away thy power. For the Kings
which thou did set to rule over the people, had well nigh been all consumed.
And thy anointed which thou have prohibited any thing to touch, were by this
unwieldy and unlawful Government almost destroyed. The flames begun to lick
the Heavens, and both Poles did take fire, so that all things were hastening
into their ancient Chaos.

Alma tamen tellus, ut erat circundata ponto,
Inter aquas pelagi, contractosque undique fontes,
Qui se condiderant in opacae viscera matris,
Sustulit omniferos collo tenus arida vultus,
Opposuitque manum fronti, magnoque tremore
Omnia concutiens paulum subsedit, and infra
Quam solet esse fuit: sacraque ita voce profatur.
Si plaoet hoc, meruique, quid O tua fulmina cessant
Sum Deum? liceat periturae viribus ignis?
Igne perire tuo clademque autore levare.
Yet foodfull Tellus with the Ocean bound,
Amidst the Seas, and Fountains now unfound,
(Self hid within the womb where they were bred)
Neck-high advances her all-bearing head,
(Her parched forehead shadowed with her hand)
And shaking, shook what ever on her stand,
Wherewith a little shrunk into her breast;
Her sacred tongue her sorrows thus expressed.
If such thy will, and I deserve the same,
Thou chief of Gods, Why sleeps thy vengefull flame?
Be It by thy fire, If I in fire must fry?
The Author lessens the Calamity.
At length, Our Mother Earth being a fellow sufferer in this hot persecution,
lifts up her parched head out of the waters, gathered together for her
defense, and holding her hands as a Fan before her face, Thus powers forth her
doleful grief, O God of Gods! If this be thy pleasure, and my deserts, Why
sleep thy thunderbolts? If I must perish by fire, Let thy fire be my
Executioner. And so credit my death; Thee, O Jove, being the Author.

Dixerat haec tellus, neque enim tolerare vaporem
Vlterius potuit, nec dicere plura suumque
Retulit os in se.
This said, her voice her parched tongue forsook,
No longer could she smothering vapors brook,
But down into herself with drew her head
Near to the infernal Caverns of the dead.
When she had done prayers, she shrunk in her venerable head, for heat would
not permit her to use Complements. Which Oration no sooner came to Great
Jupiters ear, but he presently sends relief.

At Pater omnipotens superos testatus and ipsum
Qui dederat Currus,
Consiliumque vocat, tenuit mora nulla vocatos.
The Almighty calls a Parliament, Summons ^n both Lords and Commons to the
Counsel; For ^lthough none can deny but that the Omnipotent has an absolute
power, without the consent of ^he Inferior Gods, his subjects, both to
abrogate ^ld, and institute new Laws; yet such is his Royal indulgence, that he
will do neither without their consent; Yet search the Catalogue of Antiquity,
and you will never find a President that his Lords or Commons did ever dispute
his authority, much less assume his power, and pluck the Regal Diadem from off
their Sovereigns head. It is his goodness which makes them capable of a
Consent, his Statutes are binding without it. But to return, Jupiter determins
the death of Phaeton, and dasheth him out of the Chariot with a violent
thunderbolt, and re-establisheth Royal Phoebus in his Throne.

Intonat, and dextra libratum fulmen ab aure
Misit in aurigam, pariterque animaque rotisque
Exuit, and saevis compescuit ignibus ignes.
Et Phaeton rutilos flamma populante capillos
Volvitur in praeceps.
He thunders, and with hands that cannot err
Hurls lightning at the audatious Charioter,
Him struck he from his seat, breath from his breast,
Both at one blow, and flames with flames suppressed.
And soul-less Phaeton with blazing hair,
Shot headlong through a long descent of air.
Now have you seen both the ascension of Phaeto^ into the Chariot, and his
descention out of it. M^ prayers shall be, that I may never rise so high t^
fall so low. But the greatest Tyants in the world, have oftentimes the greatest
pomp of the world at their funeral, to complete their earthly happiness.
Therefore Reader take his Epitaph, and consider whether it is not better to
live a faithful subject, then dye a bold adventurous Traitor.

Hic situs est Phaeton, Currus auriga paterni
Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis.
Here lies Phaeton, who though he could not guide,
His Fathers steeds, in high attempts he dyed.
The Entrance of the AUTHOR, who complaining of the times; wherein the good are
ejected, and the wicked kill and take possession, shows that those who
unjustly, against law, are driven out of their own Country, are not banished;
But that those who are unjust, acting against right, and deserve banishment by
law, are banished, though they continue upon their native soil. With an Antidote
out of venerable Petrack, for all, as well Kings as other men, who are illegally
expelled from their Country.

THus ended Phaeton, and consequently the History with him: from whose ruins I
will take my Exordium. And Exemplo monstrante viam, imitating my Mother Earth
in her persecution, shall first lift up my head and hands, to the God o^ Gods,
and begin with a short Ejaculation, though in King David's words, yet the same
in effect with hers: Sum Deum! liceat periturae viribus ignis?
Igne perire tuc, clademque autore levare.
Be It by thy fire, if I in fire must fry?
The Author lessens the calamity.


Let me fall into the hands of the Lord (for very great are his mercies) but
let me not fall into the hands of man. 1 Chronicles. 21.13.
O happy David! O happy Prayer! O happy Success! He Prayed that if he must
perish by the Sword, that he might perish by the Sword of the Lord, viz. the
Pestilence, and doubtless the Pestilence is a harmless dove, if compared to the
raging violence of lawless man. For who can without horror think what cruel
torments and hideous tortures, bloody Tyrants have invented for the punishment
of poor Innocents. I will not stain my paper with their names, being so well
known and so ill practiced. Audax omnia perpeti gens humana ruit per vetitum
nefas. Nothing comes amiss to them. Take a view of the preceding ages, and you
shall find some Caines, some bad, in the best of times, no garden without some
weeds, no roses without some thorns, and no field without some tares; But take
a glimpse of our age, and without the help of Spectacles, you may see, our
scarlet sins swiming upon the red Sea of Martyrs blood in every street. The
whole field is grown over with briers and thistles, and all are become
abominable, there is none that does good, no not one. Vir bonus and sapiens,
(qualem vix reperit unum, Millibus e cunctis hominum consultus Apollo.) If
Diogenes had the Sun to be his Candle, and the eyes of the whole world to be
his Lanthern, he could not find amongst us the man he looked for, so many ages
since. All such are become Exuls, though not exleges. And since we meet with an
Exul in the way, Let us salute him by his proper name; and first describe what
he is not, and then what, and who he is.

Ovidius. Omne solum forti patria est, ut piscibus aequor,
Et volucri vacuo quicquid in orb patet.
Though many good and prudent men, by the fierce Tyranny of others are forced
from their native soil, and hunted from place to place, like the panting Heart,
by the multitude of raging hounds, yet will they not own the name of Exuls, but
Travelers: esteeming it the part of a pusillanimous Spirit, not to make every
part of the world their Country, and account the whole world as one city. Such
was Camillus, and Marcellus, and many other ancients, whom time and paper would
fail me here to Catalogue. But I need not rip up antiquity, for such examples,
enough, and one too many does our iron age afford. But as little birds, though
hatched in as little nests, make all the earth their habitations, so wise and
valiant men account the whole world, as their private dwelling. Fools are
banished in their own Country, wise men are in their own Country though banished,
and by their travels obtain such learning, as if their banishment had been
their University: so much for what an Exul is not. Let Cicero (who best could)
tell you what and who he is, and least you should mistrust that I belie him.

For, -- Fugiere pudor, verumque fidesque,
In quorum suliere locum; fraudesque dolique;
Insidiaeque and vis and amor sceleratus habendi,
-- Shame, truth, and faith depart,
Fraud enters ignorant in no bad art,
Force, treason, and the love of wicked gain


Is the motto of our times, The Father cannot believe his Son, nor the Son his
Father, he is wisest that can forge the most beneficial lies, and lies are
become the ammunition of our age. Therefore hear him in his own Dialect.
Paradox 4.
Omnes scelerati and impii, quos leges exilio affici volunt, exules sunt,
etiamsi solum non mutant; All wicked and impious persons, which deserve
banishment by law, are exuls, Though they continue upon their native Country:
Sure I am they are exleges; But since there are many in the world that are
driven from their own native soil, whose virtue will not suffer them to esteem
it a banishment; but rather a trial to exercize their fortitude: Yet, confident
I am, as an unfaigned lover, whose Mistress has abandoned him from her
presence, whereby he contemns her, because she contemns him, yet if once
she open her pleasant arms to receive him, forgetting all her former injuries,
he presently imbraceth her; and is capable of no greater joy: so they who are
so exiled would willingly return if their hard-hearted Country would once
receive them, For, Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos
Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse sui.


Home is home, though it be never so homely. Therefore let all those who labor
with this disease of banishment, apply themselves to reverend Petrack, de
exilio, where they may find an Antidote, let their malady be of what nature
soever. And since the Physician is so learned, his Physic so good, and the
disease so obvious, behold the Physician and his patient arguing together;
assuming the names of Dolor and Ratio, and first the Physician.

Ratio. Terra patris domus est nostri communis, and inqua
Sedibus a patriis exulat omnis homo.
Dolor. Exilio pellor injusto R. Quid tu igitur justo pelli malles exilio?
Nempe quod ad injuriae cumulum ais, in diversum trahitur; habes enim injusti
exilii solatium comitem Justitiam, quae injustos cives destituens, te sequuta
tecum exulat. D. Injusto exilio pulsus sum. R. An te rex expulit? an Tyrannus?
an populus? an hostis? an tu ipse? Nam si rex; aut injustum exilium non erit,
aut ipse non justus: at que ita nec rex quidem. Si Tyrannus, ab illo te pulsum
gaude; sub quo boni existant, fures imperant. Si populus, moribus ille suis
utitur; bonos odit, and hic quoque multiceps Tyrannus nunquam sui similem
pepulisset. Non te igitur patria, sed malorum caetibus arceri, neque in
exilium, sed in partem bonorum civium cogi putes. At si hostis, agnosce
injuriae levitatem; non hostiliter saeviit, qui omnia cum possit, patriam
abstulit, spem reliquit. Sui tu ipse, mores populi peresus; aut Tyranni abitum
elegisti, non modo te doleas, sed etiam gloriare, virtutem patriae praetulisse;
non tu flebilem, sed honestam, and prorsus invidiosam, bonis atque optabilem,
non jam exilii, sed absentiae causam habes, sponte Pythagoras Samon liquit;
Athaenas Solon; Romam Scipio. D. Depellor and patria. R. Pulsum te pessimi^,
optimis insere, neque te patria, sed patriam te indignam rebus proba. Sentiat
illa, quid perdidit. Tu nihil perdidisse sentias: mali cives tui odio, simulque
praesentis odio ac suspitione careant: boni autem amore absentis ac desiderio
teneantur, sequanturque oculis, atque animis abeuntem, illi se solos linqui
doleant. D. Mittor in exilium. R. Immo in experimentum tui videris, quem te in
exilio praebeas; si succumbis, exul verus; si consistis, exilio clarus, ut
multi olim, qui invicti and fulgidi per asperitates incesserunt, ut sequentibus
rectum iter ostenderent. Sine Tyrannos saevire, sine populum furere, sine
hosts, ac fortunam fremere. Pelli potes, capi, caedi, perimi, vinci autem,
nisi manum extuleris, non potes, neque ornamentis tuis spoliari, cum quibus
quocunque ieris, and civis, and patriae Principum unus eris. Sorrow. I am
unjustly driven into banishment. Reason. What had thou rather than be justly
banished? For as touching the heap of injuries whereof thou speak, it is
taken in the contrary part, and now thou have justice to be thy companion,
which shall be a comfort unto thee in thy unjust banishment, which forsaking
thy unjust Countrymen, has chosen rather to follow thee into exile. Sorrow. I
am banished unjustly. Reason. Has the King banished thee? or a Tyrant? or the
people? or an enemy? or thou thy self? If the King, either thy banishment is
not unjust; or he himself is not just, and so by consequence no King. If a
Tyrant, rejoice that thou ar^ banished by him, under whom good men are exiled,
and Thieves are set in authority. If the people, they use their old manner,
they hate the virtuous, among whom if this many-headed Tyrant had found any
like themselves, they would never have banished him: Think not therefore that
thou art expulsed thy Country, but removed from the fellowship of wicked
persons, and that thou art not driven into exile, but received into the Country
of good Citizens. If an Enemy, acknowledge the lightness of the injury, for he
has not dealt extremely with thee: he that could take from a man all that he
has, and has taken but his Country, has left him hope. But if thou thy self,
the cause is, that falling into misliking of the people, or Tyrant, thou have
chosen to depart, not only because thou would not be sorry; but also vaunt
thy self for preferring the honor of thy Country. So that now thou have not a
miserable, but an honest cause, not of exile, but of absence, hateful to the
wicked, and grateful to the virtuous. Pythagoras voluntarily forsook Samos, and
Solon Athens, and Lycurgus Lacedemon, and Scipio Rome. Sorrow. I am driven from
my Country. Reason. Being driven away of the worst, insinuate thy self into the
Company of the best sort, and make it evident by good proofs, that thy Country
was unworthy of thee, and not thou of thy Country. Let it perceive what it has
lost, and know thou how that thou have lost nothing: Let the evil Citizens want
the wearisomness, and also the hatred and suspicion of thy presence, and let
the good persecute thine absence with love and desire, and with their eyes, and
minds, follow after thy departure; let them be sorry for that thou have
forsaken them. Sorrow. I am sent into exile. Reason. Nay rather to try thy
self. Beware how thou behave thy self in thy exile; if thou faint, then art
thou a very banished wight, if thou stand stoutly, thy banishment will ennoble
thee, as it has done many other before thee, who passed invincibly and
honorably through difficulties, to the end they might show the right way to
them that came after. Let Tyrants rage, let the people chafe, let thine Enemies
and Fortune fret and fume: thou may be driven away, taken, beaten, slain; but
thou can not be overcome, unless thou yield up thine hands, nor yet be
despoiled of thine Ornaments; by means whereof, whithersoever thou go thou
shall be a Citizen, and one of the Princes of thy Country.

The Certain incertainty of Fortune, who crowns Cobblers, and beheads Kings:
Advice to the prosperous, to beware Insolency, and to take heed lest they fall.
Comfort to the miserable, to keep them from despair, with several remedies to
cure the maladies of a troubled mind, being Physic for both, Fortunes good,
or bad.

HAving sheltered the banished, from the tempests of a foreign exile, Let us
arm him against the Changeling Fortune. Constant only in inconstancy,
according to mellifluous Ovid.

Passi^us ambiguis Fortuna volubilis errat
Et manet in nullo certa tenaxque loco:
Sed modo lecta manet, vultus modo sumit acerbos:
Et tantum constans in levitate sua est.
She wandereth about the Earth, making all men Tenants at will of their
possessions, and as a whirlwind blows up dust on heaps and then scatters it
about: so she puffs riches to a man, and then puffs both man and riches
away together. Quem dies vidit veniens superbum, hunc dies vidit fugiens
jacentem. Whom the rising Sun saw as glorious as himself in the morning, the
setting Sun often sees as low as himself in the evening; Therefore let not
them glory in their prosperity, who reign in the palace of Fortune, triumph
over their enemies, and have success to crown their actions, whether they be
just, or unjust.

Nempe dat and quodcunque libet, Fortuna, rapitque
Irus, and est subito, Qui modo Craesus erat.
Fortune deals with men as a wheel with its spoaks, turns those lowest
which even now were highest; She throws down Kings, and sets up Beggars,
he who even now was but a servile Cobbler, is by and by metamorphosed, and
translated, into his Sovereign Master -- Ex humili magna ad fastigia rerum
Extollit, quoties voluit Fortuna jocari. It is her sport to promote fools, to
lift the Peasant from the plough to the Throne, to set the frogg upon the
washing block, and elevate him to the highest point of honor, that she may
break his neck down again. Tolluntur in altum ut lapsu graviore ruunt. They are
lifted up for no other cause, but that their fall might be the greater;
Therefore my advice is to all those (if advice may have the honor to look upon
them) who have their hearts desire in all things, and want nothing of this
world to make themselves completely happy, to remember in the midst of their
prosperity King Craesus (if they will vouchsafe to let a King come into their
thoughts) Who when he was esteemed the most happy of all mortals, both for
riches and peace, was admonished by Solon, Neminem ante cineres beatum
dicendum, quod quoad vivimus, periculum sit, ne instabilis hujus mundi
foelicitas dolor aliquo contaminetur. That no man before death could be said
to be happy, because whilst we live, it is a chance, but that the foelicity of
this unstable world, will be blotted out with the black pen of misery; which
sentence of Sclons, the Calamity of Croesus did afterward declare most true;
For he being conquered by Cyrus, and chained to the stake to be burned,
remembering the wholesome saying of his friend Solon, did cry out Solon, Solon,
Solon; at which Cyrus much wondering, asked him which of the Gods or men he did
invoke, and what was his meaning, Cyrus being informed of the whole matter, and
put in mind of humane vicissitudes, delivered Craesus from the flame, and ever
afterward had him in great esteem, fearing lest the like calamity might fall
upon himself; so when Sesostris King of Egypt being drunk with good fortune,
and lifted too high with his great successes against his enemies, caused four
Kings taken prisoners to draw his triumphal Chariot; wherein one of them looked
back with smiles to the wheel of the Chariot, and being demanded his reason for
it, answered, That he smiled to see the spoak of the wheel, now at the top to
be presently at the bottom, and again, that which is now at the bottom, to be
by and by at the top. Which when the King heard, considering the mutability of
all earthly things, his haughty spirit was not a little mollfiied.

These relations I thought good here to insert, that the mighty and dreadful
men of the world, who have got the power of the Sword into their own hands,
taking Cyrus for their example (whose example will be no disgrace for them to
follow, though he was a King, for he was likewise a valiant Soldier) might not
exercise Tyranny over their vanquished enemies, especially over their own
fellow subjects. Cain purchased little honor by the murder of his brother
Abel. Though the Heathens appeared as glorious as the Sun at their triumphs
after the conquest of a foreign enemy, yet mourning was their habit instead of
triumph, after a victory obtained in a civil war: when two Noble men were
convicted for affecting and aspiring to the Empire of Titus Vespasianus, he
proceeded no farther against them, than to admonish them to desist, and give
over; saying, that Sovereign Power was the gift of Destiny, and Divine
Providence; If they were Petitioners for any thing else, he promised to give it
unto them. For Melius est servare unum quam occidere mill, It is better to
save one, then to kill a thousand, is a saying worthy to be written in letters
of gold, but more worthy to be put in practice. O blessed Conqueror, that is
thus qualifyed! O blessed prisoner that has such a victor!

Having pruned the fortunate, let us now stoop to the miserable, whom fortune
has cast to the lowest stair of affliction, Nemo desperet meliora lapsus
prohibet Clotho stare fortunam; vicissitude o^ Fortune is sufficient argument,
to keep the unfortunate from despair; for though the highest spoak of the wheel
be turned lowest, yet it does not tarry there, but presently returns to its
former height, Non semper imbres nubibus hispidos manant in agros. Though it
rain one day, the Sun may shine again the next. No storm without a calm, nor no
Winter without a Summer. Post tempestatem tranquillitas; The North Wind which
blows cold, may quickly turn into a warmer corner. Weeping may endure for a
night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm 30. verse. 5. But if the brevity of
time, will not give ease unto thy malady, declare thy grief; a disease well
known is half cured.

What art thou robbed of all that thou have? Consider what thou broughtest into
the World, and thou have lost nothing, this thou have got, the means to wean
thee from things below, and if thou will to set thy mind on things above.

Art oppressed with sickness? The sickness of thy body may prove the welfare of
thy soul, Thou learnest to pity others, and know that thy earthly cottage
is not invincible.

Does poverty knock at thy door? Let her in, she will teach thee to be humble,
keep thee from envy, and lock thee up secure; It is better meekly to entertain
her, then proudly to oppose her.

Art born a bondsman? There is no bondage like that to sin, cast of that and
thou art free, it is better to be born a bondsman, and dye free from sin, than
to be born a freeman, and dye a bondslave to Satan.

Is thy fare thine? Thou have avoided two sins, gluttony, and incontinency.
Thou have wydened the way to virtue, Though streightened the passage to thy
belly; Hunger nourishes arts, and a full belly is the ensign of an empty head
Bonae me^tis soror est paupertas.

Art thou poor and over-burdened with children? Children are riches, then how
can thou be poor, amongst so many jewels? acknowledge thy blessing and give
thanks, and He that feeds the fishes of the Sea, the fouls of the Air, and
apparelleth the flowers of the Field, will both feed, and cloth thy children;
It was harder to raise them to thee, than to provide food for them.

Art thou rich and childness? He that created thee, can create thee children.
Sarah had a Son in her old age. In the mean time, make thy self the child of
God, and thou art better than if thou had many children.

Have thou lost thy money? Thou have exchanged fears, and cares, for quietness
and carelessness, liberty is better then golden chains, Thou have but paid
fortune that which she lent thee, For omnia tua tecum portas, Thou can not
truly be called Master of that, whereof fortune is mistress.

Art thou become a surety? Thou art near a shrewd turn, henceforth give away
all that thou have, rather than thy liberty; In the mean time, let thy hand
discharge that which thy mouth has set on thy score; It is no charity to pluck
a thorn out of another man's foot, to put it in thine own.

Has nature made thee deformed? Let the deformity of thy body, put thee in
mind of the deformity of thy soul; Depart from sin, and adorn thy soul with
virtues, as for thy body it is the work of Gods hands. Beauty is at best but a
fadeing vanity, profitable to none, hurtful to many, and perhaps might have
been thy destruction. Pulchrius est pulchrum fieri quam nasci. Si mihi
difficilis formam natura negavit, Jugenio formae damna rependo mea.

Have thou lost thy time? Thou have lost an invaluable pearl, which cannot be
re-called, nor superseded by riches, or honor. But it is never too late to
repent, lose time no more, and thou have made amends.

Have thou lost thy betrothed mistress? He that loses his wife is delivered of
many cares, but he that loses his spouse, is preserved: both of these are
good, but the last is the best. Therefore grieve not too much, lest thou lose
thy self.

Have thou buried thy wife? Thou have buried her on earth, who first buried
thee in the grave of sin, in Paradise; could thou be rid of sin, as thou art
rid of her, Thou had cause to rejoice: and had she not brought thee a
Savior, thou had had cause to repent, that ever thou saw her.

Has Infamy blasted thy name? If it be deserved, lament not the Infamy, but
the cause of the Infamy: But if it be undeserved, contemn the errors of men
with a valiant courage, and comfort thy self with the testimony of a good
conscience, It is better to be innocent and slandered, than nocent and
applauded.

Have thou many enemies? If they profess it openly, thou art armed, if they
keep it secretly, thou lie open to danger; be thou a friend to justice, and
God will be so much a friend to thee, as to deliver thee publicly from thy
private enemy; none are so pernicious enemies as flattering friends.

Have thou lost an occasion to revenge? Thou have let fall a Snake out of thy
hands, take heed thou take it not up again. O happy loss whereby thou have
saved thy soul; vengeance belongs unto God, Forgiveness unto thee, if thou
intendest to be forgiven. From this lost occasion, take occasion never to have
such an occasion of revenge to lose.

Has thy friend forsaken thee? Better he forsake thee, than thee him; for then
thou had been guilty of his fault. The loss of his friendship, perhaps may
make thee seek after Gods friendship, which if thou find thou have made a good
exchange.

Do thy people hate thee their Sovereign? This beast is prompt to injury, and
slow to duty. The Commons love is light, and their hatred heavy. There is
nothing more forcible than the multitude of fools; whereas public fury
pricketh forth the rage of every private person, and the rage of every private
person kindles the public frantickness, and one of them enforces another:
Beware, there is nothing more dangerous than to fall into their hands, whose
will stands for law, and headlong outrage for discretion.

Art thou contemned? Inferiors contemn their superiors, thinking, by casting
dirt upon them, they beautify themselves, and some men have no other way to
patch up their own credits than by picking holes in the credit of others; If it
be justly, thou have cause, I confess, to be sorry, notwithstanding thou must
endure it; but if unjustly, thou may laugh at it. For there is nothing more
ridiculous, nor that happens more commonly, than for a wise man to be contemned
of mad men.

Do thou complain that promises made unto thee, are late in performance?
words are cheaper than deeds; Hence learn punctually to perform thy promises
to others; nothing more debaseth a gift than an hard grant, and a slow
performance; bis dat qui cito dat.

Art thou subject to a Tyrant? Thou fear one, he fears many; God suffers
him like Pharaoh to scourge thee for thy instruction, but for his perdition,
when he has done he will burn the rod. Iniqua nunquam regna perpetuo manent.

Have thou an unruly proud scholar? Pride is an enemy to learning. Whip out his
arrogance, o^ else for wit there will be no entrance; If thou art not able to
remove his pride from him, remove him from thee; Hale in thy sails and go to
shore. Thou nourishest up a Serpent, and tillest a venomous plant, yea thy
utter enemy.

Do thou suffer an hard Father? A hard Father makes a soft and gentle Son,
correction is thy profit, and chiding is thy gain; remember that he is thy
Father, and thou art his Son; It is his duty to chastise thee, and thy duty to
obey him; he that spares the rod spilleth the child.

Have thou a rebellious Son? If thou wast the cause, thank thy self. If thou
wast his pattern, consider what thy Father suffered by thee. Amend him if thou
can, if not, love him, because he is thy Son; If not for that cause, then for
that he is a man; if thou can not love him, pity him; as severity belongs
to a Father, even so does compassion.

Have thou a malapert wife? thou have an evil thing. Chastise her, if
chastisement will avail, but if it be in vain, arm thy self with patience, and
endeavor to love her; There is nothing more comfortable than to do that
willingly, to which one is constrained, levius fit patientia Quicquid corrigi
est nefas.

Has thy dying Mother forsaken thee? She has not forsaken thee, but is gone
before thee, Thou have yet another Mother, who will not forsake thee, if thou
would, from the first thou can, and unto the second shall thou return, The
first gave thee house roomth, the space of a few months, the other shall give
thee lodging the space of many years; the one of these gave thee thy body, the
other shall take it away; but as from the first, so from the second shall thou
arise.

Do thou weep for the death of thy son? If thou would have wept at his
death, thou shoulst also have wept at his birth, for then he began to dye, but
now he has done. Thou knew thou should get a mortal Son, and do thou
now repent it? he stepped before thee, happy were thou if thou had stepped before
him.

Is thy friend dead? bury him in thy remembrance, and so shall he live with
thee for ever; O happy friendship, which continued until the end. Had thou
lost him by any other means, than by death, then had thou not lost a friend,
but a false opinion of friendship.

Do thou mourn because thou did narrowly escape shipwreck? Rejoice rather
that thou did escape, and hereafter, since thou art an earthly creature,
learn to keep the earth, and rather to affect Heaven, than the Sea; though thou
do suffer shipwreck both of thy body and goods in thy voyage to Heaven, yet
if thy sold do safely arrive, thou shall have no cause to mourn.

Did thy harvest miss, and thy land lie barren one year? Let the barrenness of
thy land, put thee in mind, of the barrenness of thy soul; if thou sowest but
one seed, and reapest not ten fold for it, thou mournest; God sows much and
reapeth nothing, what shall he do? It is the plenty of thy fins, which causes
the barrenness of thy land.

Do thou dwell in a narrow little house? great Princes have been born in
small cottages, thy heavenly Soul dwells in a little house of clay; think
upon the narrowness of thy grave, and thy house will seem very large.

Art thou shut up in an unworthy prison? death will set thee free, and we are
all Prisoners till then^ Better is an unworthy prison, than unworthy liberty,
and happier is the innocent prisoner, than the corrupt Judge, who put him there.

Do thou fear thou shall lose the victory? thou art half conquered already;
fear is always an evil guest of the mind, but a much more worse companion in
war; There is no greater encouragement to an army, than a fearful enemy.

Have thou lost a Tyranny? O happy loss! O happy people! where Tyrants are
dismounted, and Thrones lawfully established. Prosperity enters when Tyranny
has it is Exit. It is a burden to the Commonwealth, most grievous, to the
Tyrants dangerous, to no good man profitable, hurtful to many, odious unto all
men, and comfortable only in it is brevity, for violenta nemo imperia continuit
diu.

Have thy subjects betrayed thee? Not subjects but Rebels. They have undone
themselves by doing thee out of thy Kingdom. They have betrayed thee, but cast
away themselves; pricked thee, but they are wounded, and in spoiling thee have
slain themselves. For perchance thou have lost thy Kingdom or thy wealth, but
they have lost their souls, their fame, the quietness of Conscience, and the
company of all good men. The Sun shines not upon a more wicked thing than is a
Traitor, whose filthyness is such, that they which need his craft, abhor the
craftesman, and others, which would be notorious in other sins, shun the
shame of this impiety.

Providence bestows her blessings with blind hands; Prosperity does not
always join hands with goodness, neither is Adversity a true sign of
illegality; Good Kings may perish whilst wicked Rebels flourish. David was
forced by ungodly Traitors, to flee from his Country; Therefore our King may be
a man after Gods own heart, yet wrongfully driven from his own.

HAving given the unfortunate, an Antidote, Let us apply this Cordial, That
goodness is not an unseparable incident to prosperity, success is no invincible
argument that the cause is good. Goodness and greatness are not always
companions.

Though Foxes have holes, and Birds of the air have nests, yet our Savior the
King of Kings had not where to lay his head. King David, though a man after
Gods own heart, was not without his troubles, but had many infoelicities.
Though the subtle Foxes with their deceitful wiles, banish our King from his
Sacra Patrimonia, his sacred Patrimony, (for so the possessions of Kings are
called) and make him wander up and down like a Pelican in the wilderness; yet
this is but like Jobs afflictions, to make him the more glorious; The top which
is most scourged spinneth the better, and the blustering winds make the Tree
take the deeper root; The Camomile the more it is trodden on the better it
grows, and the Palm depressed rises the higher: so the afflictions of our
Sovereign shall extol his renown the higher, and like a ball thrown against the
ground, shall rebound, and fly with more lofty Majesty; For why? his goodness
does increase by his misery, and his Royal virtue, like grass after a shower,
shall flourish more gloriously: God let Daniel be thrown into the Den, to
increase his honor, and chasteneth the Children which he loves, only for
their good. What though cross gales drive us from our intended Haven? And our
hearts fail of all our desired enjoyments, so that blind Fortune only striveth
to make us miserable, in prohibiting us from all our pleasing wishes? Yet is
this no argument, that we are sinful, or that our desires are profane. What
though a man be born blind, and so continue from his birth to his death? Yet
neither may this man have sinned, nor his parents; But that the (John 29) works
of God might be made manifest. Can any one have the impudence to say that the
King is wicked, and that his cause is naught, because the multitude of
reprobates prevail, and through the mightiness of their villainies subdue all
that is good? So may they argue that the Jews were Saints, when they murdered
our Savior, and that the Devil was an Holy Angel, when he spoiled Job. No, God
corrects the pious, that he may preserve them, and permits the designs of
the wicked to coach them to their own destructions. He lets Rebels dethrone
their Sovereign, and pull the earthly Crown from off his head, that he may
crown him in Heaven with everlasting glory. The meanness of the case does not
diminish the luster of the Jewel, and Christ was a King though in the manger.

Seneca in Hyppolito. -- Res humanas ordine nullo
Fortuna regit, spargitque manu
Numera caeca, pejora fovens.
Fortune does not always signally attest the design of such a party, or the
justnes of such an action to be righteous, by permitting it to prosper, and
taper up into the world; the Sun shines upon the bad as well as the good, and
the rain makes their corn to grow oftentimes more plentiful than the righteous
men's, which makes the wicked glory in their actions, and scorn all those as
Atheists, who will not Canonize them for Saints. Honesta, quaedam scelera
successus facit. If success does but attend their enterprises, let them be
never so impiously wicked, all the Logic and Rhetoric in the world cannot
persuade them, but that they are most sacred and righteous; such is their
profound ignorance, and blind zeal, That if the Devil put it into their hearts
to murder their lawful King and Sovereign, and likewise assist them to effect
it, they think they do God good service, and punish all those with an Egyptian
slavery, who will not be of their opinion, although expressly against God his
Commandments, viz. Fear God, honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. They make God to be
even altogether such a one as they are, in crying, that it is Gods cause, even,
when they commit the greatest Sacrilege, Persperum ac faelix scelus virtus
vocatur, a mischief neatly effected, is one of their chiefest virtues. This
indeed made King David to stagger, nay his steps had wellnigh slipped, when he
saw the prosperity of the wicked, when he considered, that they were not in
trouble as other men, nor plagued like other men, Their Eyes stand out with
fatness, they have more than heart could wish. This made him cry out, Verily, I
have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence; But when he
went into the Sanctuary of God, Then understood he their end; For, Surely thou
did set them in slipery places, Thou castedst them down in destruction: How
are they brought into desolation, as in a moment? they are utterly consumed
with terrors, as a dream when one awaketh: So O Lord, when thou awakest, thou
shall despise their image, was his next vote. Prove. 1.30. They would none of my
Counsel, they despised all my reproof; Therefore shall they eat of the fruit
of their own way, and be filled with their own devices, for the turning away of
the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of Fools shall destroy them.
Thus you see that prosperity is sometimes a curse, and no blessing. To those
beasts we intend to kill, we commonly allow the best pasture; And surely those
men are better acquainted with Mahomets Alchoran, than our Saviors Gospel, who
will not be convinced, but that temporal happiness is the true index of Divine
favor. God scatters his outward blessings upon the wicked as well as on the
good, because if Virtue and Religion should only appropriate riches, more men
would become virtuous and religious for the love of money and wealth, than out
of any love they did bear either to Virtue, or Religion.

Maro. O fortuna potens, quam variabilis,
Tantum juris atrox quae tibi vindicas,
Evertisque bonos, erigis improbos?
Nec servare potes muneribus fidem.
Fortua immeritos auget honoribus.
Fortuna innocuos cladibus afficit.
Justos illa viros pauperie gravat.
Indignos eadem divitiis beat.
Haec aufert juvenes, and retinet senes,
Injusto arbitrio tempora dividens
Quod dignis adimit, transit ad impios,
Nec discrimen habet rectaque judicat,
Inconstans, fragilis, perfida lubrica:
Nec quos deseruit perpetuo premit.
Therefore let not those despair whom blind Fortune has kicked into any
mishap, nor measure the justness of their actions by the quantity of success;
Though the voice of the world censure it, For it is not the event which makes
it good or bad.

-- Careat successibus opto
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.
The Authors Resolution, and Reason to write, The wickedness of the times;
Wherein men will have no King, unless they may be Kings themselves, nor no
Bishops, only because they are not Bishops. Tyrants, and Traitors, reign by
force, Kings by the love of the people. The definition of a Commonwealths-man,
with all his properties, and the deceitfulness of a Parliament, be it long or
short. Englands degeneration, and the death of the Laws and Religion, with an
Incitation to solemnize the funeral.

NOw it is time to resolve the Quaere couchant in the Prologue, Eloquar an
sileam; timor hoc, pudor impedit illud; Whether I should speak or be silent.
When I consider the perils of the times, wherein no man can speak his own
conscience without offending those, who will give him blows for words, Then
Timor hoc. But, Jam tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet, when I see my
neighbor his house on fire, and my own next to it, when all men are asleep in
sin, and none to awake them, Then pudor impedit illud. For, Non mihi si centum
linguae sint oraque Centum, Omnia culparum percurrere nomina possum, If I had a
thousand tongues, and so many mouths, I could not vilify our iron age according
to its deserts; Me thinks, as if souls according to Phythagoras his opinion,
descented from one man to another, I see those ancient Tyrants, or their black
souls in worser images, acting their bloody parts upon the stage of the world,
and sounding out their hellish edicts. Here is Caius Caesar Caligula with his
detestable motto in his mouth, Oderint dum metuant, Let them hate me so they
fear me: He forced parents to be present at the execution of their own
children, and after he had well drunk and eaten, took pleasure to cast his
friends into the Sea, from on high from a bridge, which he built. He wished
that his people had but one neck, that he might chop them off at a blow, vox
Carnifice quam Imperatore dignior? A Speech fitter for an Hangman, than an
Emperor; When a prisoner being fearful of the cruel Torments, with which the
Emperor would murder him, had taken poison to prevent him, What says he,
Antidotum adversus Caesarem? Is there any Antidote against Caesar? How many
poor innocents being condemned to dreadful deaths, by the Tyrants of our age
have poysened themselves, to prevent their undesetved punishments? And when his
Grandmother Antonia seemed to give him some admonition; Memento, ait, omnia
mihi in omnes licere. I would have you to know, says he, That I can do any
thing, a true Character of a Tyrant, for what will not he do? But doubtless
the love of the people is the best guard for a King, Magnum Satellitium Amor.
And that which ones natural lawful Sovereign would most look after. For, ^num
est regi inexpugnabile munimentum, amor Civium. It is not fear, and force, nor
Troops of Dragoons, and Red-coats that are the surest holds for Governors; but
the benevolence, hearts, and love of their subjects. Caesar, dando, sublevando,
ignoscendo gloriam adeptus est. Rulers have no greater enemy, than the fear and
envy of the people. For, Quem metuunt oderunt: Quem quisque odit periisse
expedit. Whom we fear, we hate, and whom we hate, we study and desire his
death. But behold, Aulus Vitellius, Bonus odor hostis, melior civis occisi. An
enemy slain has a very good smell, but a Citizen far better: O black
abominable Tragical and Tyrannical speech! And did not our age swarm with such
horse-leaches, we should never suck the blood one of another, so as we do: But
that you may hate the very name of Tyrants, and abhor their actions; Hearken a
little to Flavius Vespasianus and his Council, how impiously they consulted,
and first Vespasian, Lucri bonus odor ex re qualibet, It is gain which makes
the smell so good for a slain Citizen or enemy; No actions so hellish, if it
produce profit, but that it is a virtue to attempt it, and the reason is, Omnis
in ferro salus, because all our hope and health is in the sword: for whilst we
have that in our hands, what law or Religion dares oppose us? no disputant like
the sword. Exeat aula qui volet esse pius: virtus and summa potestas non
coeunt: semper metuunt quem save pudebunt. Let him depart from our Courts and
Counsel, who is so simple that he must nee^ be pious, Godliness is a great
hinderance to o^ profession, and he is a Coward who is ashamed to act wickedly,
Sibi bonus aliis malus, says an other, He is a fool, who thinks that any one
can lose so he gets; Let us be good to our selves, and all is well. There be
some simple innocents, who cry, Melius mori, quam sibi vivere, It is better to
dye, than to live only for our selves: But if such be their Doctrine, let them
get for others, for us if they please, and starve themselves. Let us carve for
ourselves, Proximus ipse mihi, Charity begins at home, and he is an Ass that
carries a burden for another. Others there be of the same stamp, and both
alike simple, who say, Dulce est pro patria mori, It is sweet to dye for ones
Country; let such good natured fools taste of that sweetness, and dye for their
Country; our lives are sweet, and not so to be fooled away; It is sweet for our
Country to dye for us. But Pestis reipublicae literae, says another of the
Counsel; we shall never carry on our affairs handsomely, so long as we have so
many Lawyers, and Gospel men amongst us, the highest step to our promotion,
will be to lay them on their backs, and I think the nearest way to dispel the
cloud of black Coats, will be to throw down their Universites, and take their
tithes and lands away from then; As for the Lawyers perhaps we may bribe them,
but if not, I am sure, they will rather turn than burn; To what we cannot
persuade them with our tongues, we will compel them to with our swords. For
Law, Learning and Religion, are as so many plagues and poisons t^ Commonwealth.
And Qui nescit dissimulare nescit imperare, He that cannot dissemble shall be
no Commonwealths-man; for to tell you the truth, Dissimulation, cogging, and
lying, is the foundation of our government; and if the foundation be taken
away, every one knows the superstructure cannot stand; Therefore to deal
plainly with the world, let us cover our worst actions with the best pretenses,
and ravish the people with the pleasing and specious names of Liberty and
Religion, when we intend the extirpation of both; Let us imitate Tereus, who so
neatly dissembled piety, that when he acted most against it, the people did
Saint him, -- Ipso sceleris molimine Tereus Creditur esse pius; And doubtless
he was no mean Cowmonwealths-man. Let us hold a fair correspondence with all
Religions, but be sure to lead the Van in the most prevalent; it matters not
whether it be true or false, let them look to that, who intend to obtain
eternal advantages of it, we look no further than to enjoy the temporal. A Bird
in the hand is worth two in the bush. It is the greatest obstacle to generous
actions, not to personate that Religion, which will serve ones purpose best, be
it Canonical or Apocrypha; and doubtless that Religion, which brings the
greatest profit and largest incomes, is the most sacred, and most consonant to
Scripture. But why should I blur my paper with the Description of this
deceitful Parliament, the Theory whereof, is become practical almost in every
City? Let us therefore lament at the funeral of our Laws and Religion, and
throw one sprig of rosemary into the grave, where all our Rights and Libertyes
are buried. That Son gives cause of suspicion of his Legitimation, who will
not mourn at his Mothers death: And surely he was never a true born Son of the
Church, or Law, that will not shed a tear when they are both fell to ruin. Some
(though very few) good Eleazors amongst us, have lost their heads and lives,
for our Laws and Religion; And although I am not worthy to dye a Martyr for
them -- -- Haud equidem tali me dignor honor, Yet whilst I live it living
tears shall fall from mine eyes, for them. For -- Q^is talia fan do Mrmidonum,
Dolopumve, aut duri miles Vlyssis, Temperet a lacrymis? Who? what Puritan,
Independent, Anabaptist, Presbyterian, Quaker, etc. Or Red-coat as bad, though
not worse than any of them, can restrain his Adamantine heart from grief, and
his eyes from tears, when he considers the deplorable conditions, which they
have brought upon our Kingdom? Who (as it now plainly appears) had no other
quarrel against King, than because they were not Kings themselves; nor no other
reason against Episcopacy, than because each of them was not a Bishop. They
could never yet produce any argument sufficient, unless the sword, to prove
that King, or Bishop was not Jure Divino. And now behold what the sword has
brought them unto. I remember Cadmus sowed the teeth of a Serpent, which sprung
up armed men, who presently destroyed one the other; I will not determine that
the seed of these men came from a Serpent, but sure I am they cannot deny
themselves, but that they destroy each the other, like Cadmus his men. They
kick the Government of our Kingdom about, from one to the other, like a foot
ball; And it will be marvail, if some of them do not break their shins, a swell
as their consciences, before the game is ended. Res publica, signifies a whore.
They make the Government Proteus-like to turn into what shape they please, a
true Commonwealth indeed, being common to so many Rivalls. And as the unruly
Quadrupedes whirried about the Chariot, ( Phoebus their lawful Sovereign being
absent) until they had set the whole world on fire; so it is to be doubted,
that these headstrong Bears, having cast away the rains of true obedience, will
not leave to wurry us, until they have brought us to utter ruin? O England,
England. Hei mihi! qualis erat! quantum mutatus ab illo! How is thy fame
besmeared! and thy honor laid in the dust! Once the envy of the whole world
for the glory of thy Laws, and Religion, now become a byword, and a
laughing stock to all Nations. Venit summa dies, and ineluctabile tempus. The
Sentence is already past, and the decree is gone forth, and nothing can avert
the wrath of an angry Deity. Tantaene animis caelestibus irae? Can the Almighty
be so passionate? We want a Moses, and we want an Aaron, to intercede and make
an atonement for us, We want a Jonah to preach repentance, And we want the
hearts of Nineveh to entertain it. We have done worse than to touch the Lords
anointed, and have killed his Prophets, all the day long. We have not
reverenced his Sanctuary, But have made it a den of Thieves, and Stable for
Beasts, not altogether so bad as our selves. O God why have thou cast us off
for ever? why does thine anger smoke against the Sheep of thy pasture? O
deliver not the soul of thy Turtle Dove unto the multitude of the wicked;
Forget not the Congregation of thy poor for ever.

-- Fuimus Tr^es, fuit Ilium, and ingens
Gloria Toucrorum.
Remember thy old mercy, and remember our former estate; For though now, like
People, like Priest, The Prophets lie, and the People would have it so; Yet
like Bethlehem, we have not heretofore been the least amongst the Princes of
the World. We have had those who have thought it, Melius tondere qaam deglubere
oves, better to trimm us, than to flea us, and Melius servare unum quam
occidere mill, better to preserve one than kill a thousand; Who have been
Tardus ad vindictam, ad benevolentiam velox, slow to do evil and revenge, but
swift to do good and reconcile; Loving Pax bello potior, peace better than war,
and esteeming it Pro patria mori pulchrum, honorable to dye for their Country.
Which they have done, and all Law, Religion, Justice, and Equity with them: Cum
uno paricidio junxerunt juris divini, naturalis, juris gentium, omnium legum
publicarum privatarumque eversionem, reipublicae perturbationem, libertatis
populi oppressionem, Senatus abolitionem, nobilitatis exterminationem,
innocentium damnationem, peculatum, and aerarii publici direptionem, solennis
conventionis infractionem, perfidiam, jurisjurandi violationem, statuum omnium
confusionem, immo subversionem.

Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis.

Sal. Therefore let no man be offended if I attend the funeral, and say
something on the behalf of the deceased; It is a Christian duty, and none will
account it superstition to give an Encomium at burialls where it is due, unless
those who account it superstition to deserve well themselves. De mortuis nil
nisi bonum, We must say nothing but good of the dead. Therefore behold the
Monument in these ensuing political Aphorisms.

The Monument of the Laws, or Regal and Political Aphorisms; whereby the
Prerogative of the King, and the just liberties of the People are set forth,
and authorized by the Law of God, and the Law of the Land.

KIngs are Jure Divino, by Divine right, to be obeyed, and not by violent force
of subjects to be resisted, although they act wickedly, Prove. 8.15. By me Kings
reign. Dan. 2.21. He removes Kings, and sets up Kings. Prove. 16.10. A
Divine Sentence is in the lips of the King. Prove. 21.1. The Kings heart is in
the hand of the Lord. Job 34.18. Is it fit to say to a King thou art wicked?
and to Princes, ye are ungodly? Prove. 24.21. Fear thou the Lord and the King,
and meddle not with them that are given to change. Eccl. 8.2. I counsel thee to
keep the Kings Commandment. Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not speak evil of thy
Prince, nor detract the Magistrate. 1 Pet. 2.17. Fear God, honor the King.
Prove. 30.31. A King against whom there is no rising up. Eccles. 10.20. Curse
not the King, no not in thy thought. 1 Samuel 24.6. The Lord forbid that I should
do this thing unto my Master, the Lords anointed, to stretch forth mine hand
against him, seeing he is the anointed of the Lord. From which premises none
unless those who deny the Scripture, can deny these Consequences. That the jura
regalia of Kings, are holden of Heaven, and cannot for any cause escheat to
their Subjects. That active obedience is to be yielded to the King as Supreme,
in omnibus licitis, in all things lawful. But if God for the punishment of a
Nation, should set up a Tyrannical King, secundum voluntatem pravam non
rationem rectam regentem, governing by his depraved will against reason, and
commanding things contrary to the word of God, we must not by force of arms
rebel against him; but rather than so, (if not prevailing by Petition unto him,
or escaping by flight from him) patiently submit to the loss of our Lives and
Estates, and in that case, Arma nostra sunt preces nostrae, nec possimus, nec
debemus aliter resistere, Our prayers and tears should fight, and not our
Swords: For who can lift up his hands against the Lords anointed, and be
guiltless? This in Scripture we find practiced by Gods people to Pharaoh: Exo.
5.1. and the same people, to Nebuchadnezzar, a Tyrant, were commanded to
perform obedience, and to pray for him, Though there was no wickedness almost
which he was not guilty of. His Successor Darius, Daniel obeyed, and said, O
King live for ever. Dan. 6.21. For now no private person has with Ehud, Judge.
3.21. extraordinary commandment from God to kill Princes, nor no personal
warrant from God, as all such persons had who attempted any thing against the
life even of Tyrants. Nil sine prudenti fecit ratione vetustas.

2. The King has his Title to the Crown, and to his Kingly office and power,
not by way of trust from the people, but by inherent bigthright, immediately
from God, Nature and the law, 1 Reg. Ja. ca. 1. li. 7.12 Calvin's ca^e.

3. The Law of Royal government, is a Law Fundamental, 1 pars Jnst. fo. 11.

4. The Kings Prerogative, and the Subjects Liberty are determined, and bounded
by the Law. Bracton, fo. 132. Plowden, fo. 236, 237.

5. By Law no Subjects can call their King in question, to answer for his
actions, be they good or bad. Bracton, fo. 5, 6. Si autem ab eo petatur (cum
Breve non Currat contra ipsum) locus erit supplicationi, quod factum suum
corrigat, and emendet, quod quidem si non fecerit, satis sufficit ei ad poenam,
quod Dominum expectet ultorem. Nemo quidem de factis suis praesumat disputare,
multo fortius contra factum suum venire. If any one has cause of action
against the King (because there is no Writ runs against him) his only remedy
is by supplication and petition to the King, that he would vouchsafe to correct
and amend that which he has done, which if he refuse to do, Only God is to
revenge and punish him, which is punishment enough. No man ought to presume to
dispute the Kings actions, much less to rebel against him.

6. The King is the only Supreme Governor, has no Peer ^ his Land, and all
other persons have their power from him. 3 Ed. 3.19. Bracton, li. 1. cap. 8.
Sunt eti^m sub Rege liberi homines and Servi ejus potestati subjecti, and Omnis
quidem sub eo, and ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo. Parem autem non habit
in Regno suo, quia sic amitterit praeceptum, cum par in parem non habeat
imperium. Item nec multo fortius superiorem nec potentiorem habere debet, quia
sic esset inferior sibi subjectis and inferiores pares esse non possunt
potentioribus. Ipse autem Rex, non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo and sub
lege, quia Lex facit Regem. The King has no superior but the Almighty God. All
his people are inferior to him, he inferior to none but God.

7. The King is Caput Reipublicae, the Head of the Commonwealth immediately
under God. 1 Jnst. 73.1. h. 7.10. Finch, 81.

And therefore carrying Gods stamp and mark among men, and being as one may
say, a God upon Earth, as God is a King in Heaven, has a shadow of the
Excellencies that are in God, in a similitudinary sort given him, (Bracton, fo.
5. Cum sit Dei vicarius, evidenter apparet ad similitudinem Jesu Christi, cujus
vices gerit in terris) That is to say 1. Divine Perfection. 2. Infiniteness.
3. Majesty. 4. Sovereignty and Power 5. Perpetuity. 6. Justice. 7. Truth. 8.
Omniscience.


1. Divine perfection. In the King no imperfect thing can be thought. No
Laches, Folly, Negligence, Infamy, Stain or Corruption of blood can be adjudged
in him. 35. h. 6.26. So that Nullum tempus occurrit Regi.

2. Infiniteness. The King in a manner is every where, and present in all
Courts. And therefore it is that he cannot be non-sute, and that all Acts of
Parliament that concern the King are general; And the Court must take notice
without pleading them, for he is in all, and all have their part in him. Fitz.
N. B. 21. H. 25. H. 8. Br: tit. Nonsute. 68.

3. Majesty. The King cannot take nor part from any thing, but by matter of
Record, and that is in respect of his Majesty: unless it be a Chattle or the
like; Because, De minimis non curat, Lex. 5. Ed. 4.7. 4 E. 6.31. 2 H. 4.7.

4. Sovereignty and Power. All the Land is holden of the King. No action lies
against him; For who can command the King? He may compel his Subjects to go out
of the Realm to war. Has absolute power over all; For by a clause of
Nonobstante, he may dispense with a Statute Law, and that if he recite the
Statute; Though the Statute say, such dispensation shall be merely void. 7 E.
4.17.21. H. 7.2. H. 7.7. Calvin's case. Bracton. Rex habet potestatem and
jurisdictionem super omnes qui in regno suo sunt, ea quae sunt jurisdictionis,
and pacis ad nullum pertinent nisi ad Regiam dignitatem, habet etiam
coercionem, ut delinquentes puniat and coerceat. And therefore ought to have
the Militia.

5. Perpetuity. The King has a perpetual succession, and never dies; For in
Law it is called the demise of the King, and there is no Inter-regnum. A gift
to the King goes to his Successors, though not named. For he is a Corporation
of himself, and has two capacities, (to wit) a natural body, in which he may
inherit to any of his Ancestors, or purchase Lands to him, and the heirs of his
body, which he shall retain, although he be afterward removed from his Royal
estate; and a body politic, in which he may purchase to him and his heirs
Kings of England, or to him and his Successors. Yet both bodies make but one
indivisible body. Plowden 213.233.242. li. 7.12.

6. Justice. The King can do no wrong; Therefore cannot be a disseisor. He is
all Justice, Veritas and Justitia, says Bracton, circa solium ejus. They are
the two Supporters that do uphold his Crown. he is Medicus regni, Pater
patriae, sponsus Regni qui per annulum, is espoused to his Realm at his
Coronation; he is Gods Lieutenant, and is not able to do an unjust thing. 4 Ed.
4.25. 5 Ed. 4.29. Potentia injuriae est impotentia naturae. His Ministers may
offend, and therefore are to be punished if the Laws are violated; but not he.

7. Truth. The King shall never be estopped, Judgment final in a writ of
right shall not conclude him. 18 E. 3.38. 20 E. 3. Fitz. Droit. 15.

8. Omniscience. When the King licenceth expressly to aliente an Abbot, etc.
which is in Mortmain, he needs not make any Non obstante of the Statutes of
Mortmain; For it is apparent to be granted in Mortmain, And the King is the
head of the Law, and therefore shall not be intended misconusant of the Law.
For, Praesumitur Rex habere omnia jura in scrinio pectoris sui. 1 Jnst. 99. And
therefore ought to have a Negative voice in Parliament. For he is the fountain
of justice from whence the Law flows.

8. The Opinion of the two Spencers, in Ed. 2. Who held that the oath of
allegiance was more, by reason of the Kings Crown, (that is his politic
capacity) than by reason of his person, Is a most detestable, excreable,
damnable and damned invention, 7 Rep. fo. 11. Calvin's case.

9. High Treason can be committed against none, but the King, neither is any
thing high Treason, but what is declared so to be by the Statute. 25 Ed. 3. c.
21. To leavy war against the King, to compass or imagine his death, or the
death of his Queen, or of his eldest Son, to counterfeit his Money, or his
great Seal, to imprison the King until he agree to certain demands, to leavy
war to alter Religion, or the Law, to remove Counselors by arms, or the King
from his Counselors, be they evil or good, by arms, to seize the Kings Forts,
Ports, Magazine of war, to depose the King, or to adhere to any State within or
without the Kingdom, but the Kings Majesty, is high Treason. For which the
Offender should have judgment. First, to be drawn to the Gallows. 2. There to
be hanged by the neck, and cut down alive. 3. His Intralls to be taken out of
his belly, And he being alive to be burnt before him. 4. That his head should
be cut off. 5. That his body should be cut in four parts. and 6. That his head
and his quarters should be put where the Lord the King pleases.

10. Treason does ever produce fatal destruction to the Offender, either in
body or soul, sometimes in both, and he never attains to his desired end. 3
Par. Jnst. page 36. Peruse over all Books, Records and Histories, and you shall
find a Principle in Law, a Rule in Reason, and a trial in experience, that
Treason does ever produce fatal and final destruction to the Offender, and
never attains to the desired end, (two incidents inseparable thereunto) and
therefore let all men abandon it, as the Poysonons bait of the Devil, and
follow the precept in holy Scripture, Serve God, Honor the King, and have no
company with the seditions.

11. That Kings have been deposed by their Subjects, is no argument or ground
that we may depose ours, A facto ad jus non valet argumentum. Because Children
have murdered their own fathers, is no warrant for us to murder ours. Judas
betrayed his Sovereign, yet should not we follow his example, unless we strive
for his reward. There was never King deposed but in tumultuous and mad times,
and by might, not by right.

12. The King is Principium, caput, and finis Parliamenti, the beginning, head,
and end of a Parliament. The body makes not the head, nor that which is
posterior, that which is prior, Kings were before Parliaments. There were not
in England any formed bodies called the two Houses of Parliament, until above
200. years after the Norman Conquest.

13. The King of England is armed with diverse Counsels, one whereof is called
Commune consilium, the Common counsel, and that is the Court of Parliament, and
so it is legally called in writs and judicial proceedings, Commune Consilium
Regni Angliae, Consilium non est praeceptum, Consiliarii non sunt praeceptores.
It is not the office or duty of a Counselor, to command and make precepts; but
only to advise.

14. The King is the fountain of justice, and the life of the Law. The two
Houses frame the body, the King gives the soul, for without him it is but a
dead carcass. And -- Si componere magnis Parva mihi fas est, If I may compare
small things with great, As in a bond, though one find paper and another write
it, yet if the obligor do not seal and deliver it, it is nugatory and no
obligation: So if the King assent not to an act of the two Houses, it is void
and no Statute, It is the royal Scepter which gives it the force of a Law.
Witness the whole Academy of the Law, and perspicua vera no^ sunt probanda. It
would be foolish to light the Sun with Candles.

15. Originally The King did make new Laws, and abrogate old, without the
ass^nt of any known body, o^ assembly of his Subjects. But afterward by his
gracious goodness perceiving that his people could best know their own soars,
and so consequently apply the most convenient remedy, he vouchsafed so much to
restrain his power, that he would no make any Law concerning them, without
their assent. For at the first, Populus nullis legibus tenebatu sed arbitria
regum pro legibus erant. Which truth i^ so clear, that it shines almost in
every History. The oldest and best style of an act of Parliament is, Be it
enacted by the Kings Majesty, with the assent of the Lords, Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons etc. which proves where the virtual power is.

16. The Commons have no Authority but by the Writ of Summons. That Writ gives
them no power to make new Laws, but only to do and consent to such things,
which shall happen to be ordained by Common Counsel there in Parliament, which
are the words of the writ, and all their Jurisdiction. At a Conference the
Commons are always uncovered, and stand bare, when the Lords sit with their
hats on; which shows that they are not Colleagues in Judgment with the Lords.
Every Member of the House of Commons takes the oath of allegiance and supremacy
before his admission in the House, and should keep it too.

17. It is Lex and consuetudo Parliamenti; The Law and Custom of a Parliament,
That no Arms are to be borne in London or Westminster, in the time of
Parliament, Lest the proceedings in that high Court, pro bono publico should
thereby be hindered or disturbed. For it is more congruous for Red-coats with
their Pikes, Muskets, Swords, and other ammunition to keep a Den of Thieves,
than to keep the Members of so honorable a Court. 3 Jnst. 160. 4 Jnst. 14.

18. When an Act of Parliament is against Common right or reason (as that
Debtors should not pay their debts, etc.) or repugnant or impossible to be
performed, the Common Law shall control it, and adjudge it to be void; And
such is an Act for a perpetual Parliament, or to kill the King, Dier. 313. li.
8.118. Doctor Bonhams case.

19. The premises being rightly and duly considered, if any person be so
impudent, insolent and arrogant, as to deny the King his Negative voice in
Parliament, They may as well deny him his life, and take upon them to frame a
new Law and Commonwealth to themselves. Shall the Commons have a Negative
voice, who are most of them Tradesmen, and not educated in the Law, but in
Mechanic handy-crafts? And shall not the King have this privilege, who is
assisted by the advice of the Judges, his Counsel at Law, Solicitor, Attorney,
Masters of Chancery and Counsel of State, consisting of some great Prelates,
and other great Personages versed in State affairs?

20. The Parliament is actually dissolved by the demise of the King. Quid
prodest tibi nomen usurpare alie^um and vocari quod non es?
For the Individuum Carolus Rex, being gone from whence they derived their
power, consequently their authority is gone likewise. For cessante statu
primitivo c^ssat and derivativus. And Derivativa potestas non potest esse major
primitivo.

The Division of Governments; Monarchy is the most natural and Divine; The King
has no equal in his Kingdom; Sovereignty can not be divided be^ween the King
and the People; Neither can the People, either jointly, or singlely have the
supreme power where the Government is Monarchical. The tenets of our new
Statesmen, yet old Knaves, confuted as damnable. Parliaments have no power but
from the King, neither did ever any Parliament, unless our late Rebels, ever
claim any power but what came from the King, But all Parliaments ever since
they had their being, by the very Statutes which the King made with their
consent, have acknowledged the supreme power to be in the King, and have sworn
it with sacred oaths; So did that Parli^m^nt which murdered their King: swear
that the only supreme power and Sovereignty was in the King, next to God, and
that there was no power on earth above his; which being true, I would fain know
what power they had, not only to remove their King from his evil Counselors,
(which they did in removing him from themselves) but also from the Land of the
living, Quos Deus, sed, etc.

HAving dissolved the Parliament, and set foot on the ground of the Politician,
let us travel a little further, and take a survey of the main Triangle upon
which the art of Government consists, viz. 1. Monarchy, 2 Aristocracy, 3.
Democracy, or popular estate,
which degenerate into 1. Tyranny, 2. Oligarchy, 3. Ochlocracy, or Commonwealth.


And first of Monarchy, For a principalioribus seu dignioribus est inchoandum,
The most excellent must have precedence. Monarchy, which we may call a
Kingdom, is where the absolute Sovereignty lies in the power of one only
Prince, (for so much the word Monarchy of it self imports) who rules either
according to the rule of Law and equity, or contrary. Which form of Government
does as far transcend and excel all others, as the glorious Sun, does the
pale-f^ced Moon, or the Moon the lesser Stars. It is the Emblem of the
Almighty: For behold the blessed Trinity, where there are three persons, but
one God. There is an Archangel; The Angels adore but one Lord and Sovereign.
Take a view of the heavenly Orb, where you shall see the caelestial creatures,
give place to the Kingly Sun, The Moon rules Queen regent amongst the Stars;
Behold the Eagle the King of the Birds of the air; The Lion the King of the
beasts, on the earth; And the Whale the King of fishes, in the sea; Fire has
the majestic pre-eminence above the other Elements; among granes, the wheat;
among drinks, the wine; among spices, the baulm; among metals, the gold. The
Devils themselves will not be so disorderly as not to have a King; for Satan
is their Prince and chiefest Leader. The Members of the Natural body are
subjects to the Head their Sovereign, and the same Congruity and Harmony is
there in the Politic body of Monarchy. And such is the stately pre-eminence
of this Government, that the Monarch can admit of no Peer in his Kingdom, no
more than the Sun can of an other Sun in the Firmament. Si duo soles velint
ess^, periculum ne incendio omnia perdantur. Serinus. If two be equal in power
in a Commonwealth, it is Aristocracy, or rather Duarchy, and not Monarchy. For
one of them has not Sovereignty over the other; For, Par in parem non habet
potestatem, and he only is a Sovereign who commands all others, and can
himself by none be commanded. Then no less foolish than wicked and detestable
is their opinion, who confess their Government to be Monarchical, yet would
have Duo summa imperia, and hold that the Universe of the people are of equal,
if not higher power than their Monarch, and may call him in question for his
actions, and prosecute him even unto death, if they please; who make their
dreadful Sovereign, a Jack a L^nt, a Minister of trust at the best, to be
turned out of his Office at their pleasure, when God and all the World knows,
that by the Law of God (as I showed before, and shall more fully show
hereafter) the Law of Nations, the Law of Nature, and the Law of England, both
Common and Statute, They ought not to touch him, though in truth he were so
wicked as they would have and pretend him to be; No, they ought not so much as
to think an evil thought of him. Quod summum est vnum est. Sovereignty is a
thing indivisible, and cannot at one and the same time be divided between the
King and his Subjects; If the Sovereignty be in the people, then is the
Government either Popular or Aristocratical, and not Monarchical. To mix the
estate of a Monarchy with Democratical, or Aristocratical estate, each having a
share of the Sovereignty, is altogether impossible. For if every one of the
three estate, or but two of them has power to make Laws, who should be the
Subjects to obey them, or who could give the Law? being himself constramed to
receive of them unto whom he himself gave it. Then might the King make the
acting of his people against him treason, and the people make the acting of
their King against them treason, which would bring all to Anarchical confusion.
And although our age had produced such a Monster as to take upon them a power
to depose, and power out the sacred blood of their lawful Sovereign; Yet is
there no such power, in rerum natura, It is the off-pring of the Devil, The
cloak, Sanctuary, and refuge of Treason, Rebellion, and Tyranny, to blind the
people, taking advantage of their ignorance, and lead them hood-winckt, into
everlasting destruction, unless the God of mercy prevent not.

With this new upstart Doctrine, have our Apochryphal Dogmatists in England,
led the rascal rabble of the people about, like a Dog in a string, buzzing in
their ears that the Monarchy of England is composed of three kinds of
Commonwealths, and that the Parliament has the form of an Aristocracy; the
three estates of a Democracy; and the King to represent the state of a
Monarchy; which is an opinion not only false, absurd, fond, foolish and
impossible, but also worthy of the most severe punishment. For it is high
treason to make the Subject equal with the King, in authority, and power, or to
join them as Companions in the Sovereignty. For the power of a Sovereign
Prince, is nothing diminished by his Parliament, but rather much more thereby
manifested; The Majesty of a Prince, consists in the obedience of his Subjects,
and where is the obedience of the Subjects more manifested then in his
Parliament, where the Lords and Commons, the Nobility and Comminalty, and all
his Subjects from the highest Cedar, to the lowest Shrub, with bended knees,
and bare heads, do cast down themselves at his feet, and do homage, and
reverence unto his Majesty, Humbly offering unto him their requests, which he
at his pleasure receives, or admiteth? So that it plainly appears, that if
the Parliament be not extravagant, and leap over the bounds limited by the laws
of God, and our Realm of England, the majesty and authority of our Sovereign is
not decreased by the assembly of Parliament, but rather augmented and
increased. For the Peers cannot assume. Aristocracy, nor the Commons Democracy,
without violation of their Oaths, with which they are tied in obedience to
their Sovereign, as well as with the Laws. Indeed our Prince does distribute
places of command, Magistracy, and preferments to all his Subjects
indifferently, and so the Government is in a manner tempered with Democracy.
But yet notwithstanding the State does continue a pure and simple Monarchy,
because all authority flows and is derived from the King, and the Sovereignty
does still continue in him, as the fountain from whence those streams of power
run, and the Parliament is so far from sharing in this Sovereignty, that the
whole current of our acts of Parliament acknowledge the King to be the only
Sovereign, stiling him Our Sovereign Lord the King. And the Parliament, 25 H.
8. says, This your Graces Realm, recognizing no superior under God, but your
Grace, etc. And the Parliament 16 Rich. 2.5. affirms the Crown of England, to
have been so free at all times, that it has been in no earthly subjection, but
immediately to God, in all things touching the Regality of the said Crown, and
to none other. And without doubt these Parliaments, and many others had as much
might, and right, though not so much Knavery, as our Anabaptists, and Puritans
and other Sectaries have now, who pretend that the Government originally
proceeds, and habitually resideth in the people, but is cumulatively, and
communicatively derived from them, unto the King, and therefore the people, not
denuding themselves of their first interest, but still retaining the same in
the collective body, that is to say in themselves suppletive, if the King in
their Judgment be defective, in the administration, or neglect the performance
of his duty, may question their King for his misgovernment, dethrone him if
they see cause, and resuming the Collated power into their own hands again, may
transfer it to any other whom they please.

These men would make themselves extraordinary wise, or else our Ancestors
extraordinary fools; for surely if there had been such a power residing in the
people, as these men blab of, it would have been preached up before these
newlights ever saw the light, some busie-head like themselves, would have
awakened it, and not let it sleep so long. But it is impossible and a mere
foppery to think that such a power should be; for suppose that the people had
at first Elected their Governor, and gave him Sovereignty over them, could
they with justice and equity dethrone him again? Surely no. For, sive
electione, sive postulatione, vel successione, vel belli jure princeps fiat,
Principi tamen facto, Divinitus potestas adest. Let the King be made by
election, lot, succession or conquest, yet being he is a King, he has Divine
power. And therefore they have no power to take away that which God has given.

The Conceit of a mixed Monarchy, that the supreme power may be equally
distributed into two or three sorts of Governors, is merely vain and
frivolous, because the supreme power being but one, must be placed in one sort
of Governors, either only in Monarchy, or only in Aristocracy, or only in
Democracy; Our Parliaments of England never until now claimed either
Aristocracy, or Democracy; Therefore, as hitherto it has been granted, so the
Government must of necessity still be Monarchical: And the gracious Concessions
of our Sovereign, not to make Laws without a Parliament, do not make the
Parliament sharer, or his equal in the Sovereignty, because, as I showed
before, the Parliament has no power but what is derived from the King. His
limitation of his Prerogative, does no way diminish his Supremacy; God himself
who is most absolute, may notwithstanding limit himself and his power, as he
does when he promises and swears that he will not fail David, and that the
unrepentant Rebels should never enter into his rest; so a man that yields
himself to be bound, has his strength restrained, but not lessened; neither is
any of it transferred to them who bound him; So our Sovereign does limit his
power in some points of his administration, and yet this limitation neither
transferreth any power of Sovereignty unto the Parliament, nor denies the
Monarchy to be absolute, nor admits of any resistance against him.

Monarchy is either Lordly, or Royal. Adam proved to be the first King, and
made by God in Paradise, not by the people. All Kings are made by God. The Son
has more right, and it is more pleasing to God for him, to murder his Father,
the Wife her Husband, and the Servant his Master, than it is for the people to
kill their King, Though in truth he be wicked. The Kings institution, and
authority declared by Divine and Humane Writers. The Horrible Labyrinth of sins
which Regicides plunge into, with their guilt. The most famous Nations in the
World have, and do live under Monarchy, Englands glory and love to Kings in
times past, and her Apostasy in times present. Pater familias were petite
Kings, and how little Kingdoms, grew great Kingdoms. The Kings power is from
God, not from the People; neither did the people at first choose Kings, but they
were born subjects by nature.

MOnarchy is either Lordly, or Royal; Lordly is where the Monarch by the Law of
Arms, in a lawful war becomes Lord of the goods and persons of the Conquered,
governing them, as the Master of a family does his slaves, how he pleases; And
it is concluded by all that Nimrod was the first Lordly Monarch.

Royal, is where the Monarch makes the Law the Rule of his actions, permitting
his subjects to enjoy their Meum and Tuum, as well as himself; the Law being the
Arbitrator between them both. I am not ignorant of the infinite sorts of
Monarchies, which many men make by the different means of the obtaining the
State; but all of them may be comprised in these two (unless Tyrannical of
which hereafter I shall speak) be they haereditary by succession, by election,
by gift, or by devise; For the difference of Monarchs, is not to be gathered by
the means of the coming to the State, but by the means of governing.

Among the many Prerogatives, which the State of Monarchy may challenge above
other Governments, it has none so glorious as it is Author, and Antiquity; For
he that denies that the Almighty was the founder of Monarchical Sovereignty,
may as well deny that there is a God, being himself the Monarch of all
creatures; Therefore to this Almighty Monarch, will I lift up my head and
hands, and humbly implore his sacred Majesty, to guide my pen in the road of
truth, whilst I travel to the head of this river, for I will dive into the
depth of it, and make a scrutiny in the very foundation.

-- Primaque ab origin mundi,
Ad mea perpetuum deducam tempora Regem.
The first caelestial King which made Heaven and Earth, and all things therein,
was the Almighty; The first terrestial King which was made for Heaven and of
Earth, and Governor of all things therein, was Adam; If thou art so much a
Basileu-mastix, as to doubt this truth, behold his Patent by which he was made
Lord and King over all, Genes. 1.28. Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish
the Earth, and subdue it, and have Dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over
the foul of the Air, and over every living thing that moves upon the Earth.
This royal Commission did the King of Kings give to our Father Adam, which is
so much the larger by reason of the word Dominare, which is more than regere.
Which may serve to re^ell that absurd opinion, and worse than humane invention
of those men, who impudently as well as ignorantly, call Kingship, humanum
inventum, a humane ordinance, and say that Kings were originally instituted by
the suffrage of the people, and so may be deposed by the people, whereas it
plainly appears, that there were no people when the first King was ordained;
and doubtless (let the opposers of Royal Government spet what venom they will)
it is an undoubted truth and an irrefragable axiom, that Children have as much
right by the Law of God, and nature, to depose their natural Father, and choose
another, as the people have to depose their natural haereditary Sovereign, and
make choice of another; For the King is the Father of the people, the Husband
of the Commonwealth, and the Master of his subjects; and suppose him to be
evil, can you find any warrant in Scripture, that Children should murder their
Father, the Wife her Husband, or the Servant his Master, because they were
wicked? surely not, no more can you find any authority for Subjects to murder
their Sovereign: but our age has created such a power, or rather a Monster,
and clothed it too with such piety, and Religion, as if they did intend to
bind it up with the Bible, and make it Canonical; but without doubt they will
be so far from making future ages to take it for Gospel, as they will hardly
have Rethorick enough, to make them believe that ever such a wickedness could
be committed.

Let us now look into humane Writers, and see what their Histories afford us,
which we will make rise of, only as an illustration to what we have said, not
as an authority, because there is no greater authority than Scripture, although
Historia non est vilis authoritas, great is the authority of History.

Principio rerum, gentium, nationumque imperium penes Reges erat, says Justin.
li. 1. From the beginning of things, that is, from the beginning of the world,
the rule and Government of the people, and of all Nations, was in the hands of
Kings; which Learned Cicero does with no less truth Confirm, saying, Certum
est omnes antiquas gentes Regibus primum paruisse, which is the same in effect
with Justin. That Monarchy is most natural, and as it were instituted by the
laws of Nature, is a Conclusion by the common consent of the best Philosophers
and Historians; Let Tacitus, and Seneca speak for them all: Vnum imperii
Corpus, unius Animo regendum videtur, the whole Commonwealth makes but one
Body, and it is most natural for one body, to be ruled by one Soul. Seneca,
Natura certe commenta est Regem, quod ex aliis animali^us licet cognoscere,
surely Nature found out Kings, which we may learn even of the brute beasts. And
Multitudes of ancients preach Monarchy to be Divine. Callimach. (...): Ex Jove
sunt Reges, Kings were instituted by their Gods. Plato in Polit. (...): Rex,
Deus quispiam humanus est, The King is, as one may say, a God upon Earth. Live.
lib. xxvi. Regnum, res inter Deos hominesque pulcherrima. Therefore let none so
stupidly deny, that Monarchy is not Divinum institutum, a Divine institution.
If they do, blind Homer will prove them blinder than himself, For, (...): a
Jove educatos Reges, says he, The Gods constituted and educated Kings;
therefore let every one use his uttermost endeavor, and make these
supplications with Homer, to his lawful Sovereign, -- (...) -- herus unicus,
esto unicus and Rex, Be thou our only Lord, and our only King. O most legal and
dreadful Sovereign.

-- Rege incolumi men's omnibus una,
Amisso rupere fidem.
Let us all be of one mind, to establish our King, for he being unsafe, we are
all unsafe and perjured. I know not of what constitution thou art, who perusest
these lines, But be thou Note Reader that this Chaos of Religions, has justed
the true Protestant Religion out of doors, so have I seen a flower killed by
the multitude of weeds, and a Lamb destroyed by a number of Woolves.
a Puritan, Presbyterian, Brownist, Independent, Anabaptist, fifth Monarchyman,
Quaker, Millenarie, Arminian, Socinian, Antitrinitarian, Theaurau John,
Antinomian, Adamite, Familist, Jesuit, Ranter or what thou will, Learn this,
though perhaps it agree not with thy constitution; That Kings are ordained by
Gods constitution, and by Gods constitution, we are commanded and ought for to
obey them, as out of holy Writ I have already, and shall farther prove; and as
that man who makes a question, whether there is a God or no? ought to be
answered with Stripes, rather than verbal instructions, so he that denies
this truth, ought with the oratory of the sword, and not of the mouth, to be
persuaded into his due obedience. For it is an uncontrolable Maxim, that he
does not honor, and serve God as he should, who does not honor and serve his
King as he ought; God will not own him to be his subject, who will not be a
subject to his Sovereign the Lords anointed; Therefore since by the Law of God
(for nothing is more frequently commanded in the Scripture, and our Kings are
of like institution with those Kings in Scripture, and ought to have the same
honor and obedience) by the Law of Nature, by the Law of Nations, by the
Common, and Statute Law of England, we are commanded to honor our King: Let no
man be so much an Enemy to God, to Religion, to his Country, to the Church, to
the Law, and to his own soul, as to Rebel against his Legal Sovereign; For he
that does it, transgresses against the ten Commandments of the Law, the new
Commandment of the Gospel, he commits the seven deadly sins, the four
crying sins, the three most detestable sins, to the soul of man, viz.
Profaneness, Impudency, and Sacrilege; In a word, he commits all sins, is the
Emblem of the Devil, and unless he repent, he will have his Lot with Beelzebub
the great Rebel and Traitor against Heaven. If punishment cannot compel them,
me thinks the beauty of Monarchy might allure men to love it. Surely there is
no generous spirit who does not; for the most renowned and famous Nations in
the World have lived under Monarchical Government, as the Scythians,
Ethiopians, Indians, Assyrians, Medes, Egyptians, Bactrians, Armenians,
Macedonians, Jews and Romans, first and last, and at this day the French,
Spaniards, Polonians, Danes, Muscovites, Tartars, Turks, Abissines, Moors,
Agiamesques, Zagathinians, Cathaians, yea and the Salvage people lately
discovered in the West Indies, as being guided thereto, by the rules of nature;
and rip up Antiquity, and search Histories both ancient and modern, and thou
shall never find our Realm of England so much an Enemy to virtue, as to hate
Royal Government, until these latter and worst of days, wherein it is
accounted a sin to be noble, and virtuous: Nay so much did our Nation love
Kings in former times, that we had seven of them in England at one and the
same time, viz. 1. The King of Kent, 2. Of the South Saxons, 3. Of the
West Saxons, 4. Of the East Saxons, 5. Of Northumberland, 6. Of Mercia. 7. Of
the East-Angels, which ruled and shined like the seven Stars, each absolutely
reigning in his Country, not under the subjection of other, until at length by
the Law of Conquest, one became Monarch over all, ruling like the Sun, and
acknowledging none on Earth his Superior, so much that it is amongst us a
common adage, viz. The King holds of none but of God. But it seems God has
now granted away the Seigniory to the House of Commons, and the King must hold
of them; But from hence arises a point in Law, whether they are absolutely and
legally seized of the Seigniory, without attornment of the tenant: In my simple
opinion the Seigniory does not pass before attornment; but I leave it as a
quaere to the House of Commons, who are best able to resolve it, because they
have all the Law in their own hands.

Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites. From what has been said, it is
apparent that Adam was the first King on Earth, and that Kingdoms have been
ever since Adam haereditary; for a family which was before Commonwealth, is
nothing else but a small Kingdom, and a great Kingdom is nothing else but a
great family, for the Pater familias were, petite Kings, and had royal power,
and potestatem vitae and necis, even over their own Children, as Abraham and
others. But when the family increased, and the numerous off-pring of their
first parent multiplied, built Villages, Towns, and Cities, and so became a
great people, so long as their first parent lived, their love and duty toward
him, would not permit them unnaturally to strive with him, for the superiority;
but to acknowledge and obey him as their Sovereign and lawful King, from
whence they had their being: And this is the reason that Kings are called
Patres Patriae, Fathers of their Country. Sal. 1. Inde enim origo regum
regiique regiminis petenda est. Haec cum primo homine and cum solo novo cepit,
quoniam primum parentem numerosus ex eo descendens natorum, and qui ex ^is nati
sunt populus, pro rege habuit, and observavit, ut primum sui generis auctorem.
So much for Monarchy, the best of all Governments. No man can serve two
Masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or else he will
hold to the one and despise the other; ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Math.
6.24. If any Anti-Royalist think himself wiser than our Savior, and that he
can serve two Masters, and love them both, let him hate Monarchy, and set up
his two headed Master, and let experience the mistress of fools correct him, as
it has many already.

But since our age is given to nothing but vain imaginations, there be some who
do Imagine, and will object that Adam was no King, because he is not styled so
in Scripture. I answer (though this frivolous objection does not deserve an
answer) that neither do you find Adam styled in Scripture, my Father, or thy
Father, yet Adam was the Father of all flesh; Si res apparet, Cur de nomine
certas? He that has the supreme power is a King; But Adam had the supreme
power, Ergo, Adam was a King. Rex comes from Regere to rule, and Adam was sole
Lord, Ruler, and King, and so continued until he died. Adam was created by
God, the Monarch of the World, before he had any subjects, And by right of
Nature it was due to Adam to govern his posterity, even before his subjects
were born: So that, though not in act, yet in habit Adam was a king from his
creation; Neither could Eve, nor her Children ever limit Adams power. It was
God that gave the power, therefore no Mortals could ever diminish or increase
it. For, Quid Jove majus habetur? They must be above all that which is called
godliness, who go about to put asunder, that which the Almighty has joined
together. This Paternal power continued Monarchical, to the Flood, and after
the Flood, to the Confusion of Babel, at which time God scattered the people
abroad from thence, upon the face of the whole earth, as you may read, Genesis 10,
and 11. Yet they went out by Colonies of whole families, over which the prime
Fathers had the Sovereignty, and were kings, deriving their Fatherly and Regal
power from Noah, whose Sons or Grandchildren they were all. And although I
think there are but few Kings in the world, who can prove their title to their
Crown hereditary, ever since Noah's Flood, or the Confusion of Babel, yet it is
as true, that there is a Regal right, continuing in the Father-hood, even
until this day, and that the next heir to Adam ought to have the Supreme
power, as it is true, that the father has right, and ought to govern his
Children, or as that it is a rule, Qui prior est tempore potior est jure; He
that is eldest, by Law ought to rule: For God told Cain the eldest brother,
Genesis 4.7. That unto him should be the desire of his youngest brother, and that
he should rule over him, which continues a Law until this present time: But
though we know not which is the next heir to Adam in any convention of the
people, (which is the fault of our ignorance, not of nature) yet since God has
told us in his Holy Word, that he only disposes of Crowns, as he pleases;
Therefore they can not go out of the right line, so long as he directs and
guides them, though the right in the Father-hood lie dormant. Every King is a
Father, therefore every subject must be obedient to his fatherly power,
otherwise he will break Gods Commandment, viz. Honor thy Father, etc. God only
had right to give, and take away Crowns, and thereby to adopt subjects into the
allegiance of another fatherly power.

Therefore no less false than execrable is their opinion, who promulge that all
men whereby nature born free from subjection, and that they had no Governor,
but by the peoples assent, and choosing, when it is most apparent, that God gave
the Supreme power to Adam, and that all men since were born subjects by nature.
Our Savior was subject to his Parents will, Luke 2.51. And doubtless those men
are free from all goodness too, who profess themselves born free from
subjection to their Prince, or their Ancestors before them.

But suppose all men were born free by nature, and that the people originally
by nature had power to choose a King? after what manner, or how is it possible
for them to make their choice? it must be by the joint consent of every
reasonable creature, Male and Female, Old and Young, Babes and Ancient men,
Sick and Lame, all at one time Nemine Contradicente: for if natural freedom be
granted to all, the Major part of the whole people in the world, or the Major
part of the people of a Kingdom, have no power to bind the lesser part to
their consent, and agreement; Every one being as free by birth, and having as
much power as any other: For the Major part never binds, but where men at
first either agree to be so bound, or where a higher power so commands: Now
there being no higher power than Nature, but God himself, where neither Nature
nor God appoints the Major part to bind, The consent of the Major part is not
binding to any, but only to themselves who consent; Those who are born
afterward (according to the tenets of natural freedom) are not bound by their
consent, because by nature they are likewise born free. But if it should be
true, (as it is false) that men are all free born by nature, yet have not they
power jointly or severally, to alter the Law of nature. Now, by the Law of
nature no man has power to take away his own life; How then can the people or
any single man give that power to another, which he has not in himself? If he
kills himself for any offense, he is a murderer. Therefore if any man
claiming no other power but what he has from the people, do take away the life
of any man, though in a way of public justice, he is a murderer, and the man
so killed, is a felo de se. Because the man slain had no power to kill himself,
and so consequently he which killed him had no power neither; For, Nemo potest
plus juris in alium transfer quam ipse habet: No man can transfer to another,
a greater right and power, than he himself has.

Tyrants are either with a Tittle or without a Tittle; Their qualities. Kings
have their power immediately from God, not from the People, proved in Adam, and
by Gods own Word in several Texts of Scripture, by the suffrages of the Fathers
and other Writers, and by the Lords Prayer and Doctrine. The several sorts and
degrees of power instituted by God, and the Commission, whereby God gave power
to Adam. The honor which God has bestowed on Kings, and his special care, and
owning them. How Kings are said to be instituted immediately by God. The
Israelites did not sin in desiring a King; and his power and praer^gative set
forth by the Prophet Samuel; Saul was chosen for his virtues, and was not
vicious at his inanguration. Proved from Adonijah, and Solomon that God only
makes Kings, not the People. The Arrogance and presumption of the pragmatical
People of England, in claiming power to make and unmake Kings, condemned, who
will have none Kings but themselves. Monarchy the best of Governments.

LEt us now set upon this Monster, a Tyrant who is either cum titulo, vel sine
titulo, with a title, or without a title; A Tyrant cum titulo or Exercitio, is
he who being a legal Sovereign, rules by his depraved will, and treading under
foot the Laws of God, and his Realm, enslaveth his free born subjects, and
uses their goods as his own. A Tyrant sine Titulo is he who usurpeth the
Sovereignty without the Authority of the Law, and subverteth all Rights, and
Religion, making what Laws he pleases, or else squareth his actions according
to the rule of the known Laws. For he that has no Title to the Sovereignty,
but usurpation, is a Tyrant, though he live so piously and religiously, that to
the world he seems a Saint.

Here I could willingly cast Anchor, and stop the progress of my pen, from
sailing any further into this rough Ocean of Tyranny; But when I see the Sword
and Scripture so much at variance, the one fighting against the other, then am
I forced to put this question, Whether a lawful Sovereign perverting the Laws
of God and man, and metamorphosed into an absolute Tyrant, may by his subjects
be called in question, and punished at their pleasure? The Sword says he may,
and proves it by experience. The Scripture, though not with so much violence,
yet with more Reason, and Religion, both says and proves it that he may not,
Mulciber in Trojam, pro Troja stabat Apollo.

For the better decision of which question, it is first necessary to be known,
whether the institution of Kings be immediately from God, or whether they be
creatures made by the people, receiving their power from their subjects, and so
to be dethroned when they vouchsafe to think convenient. For art thou only a
stranger in England, and have not known the things which are come to pass there
in these days? That there are new Statesmen, who have found out a new
discovery, and hold forth these Sophisms for true doctrine, That Royal authority
is originally, and radically, in the people, from them by consent, derived to
Kings immediately, mediately only from God; that the donation or collation of
the power is from the Community, the approbation only from God, and that
Sovereignty and power, in a King, is by conveyance from the people, by a trust
devolved upon him, and that it is Conditional, fiduciary and proportioned,
according as it pleases the Community to entrust more or less, and to be
weighed out ounce by ounce, and that the King may be opposed, and resisted by
violence, force, and arms, and the people resume their power; which we deny,
and shall prove by the law of God, of Nations, of Nature, of the Common and
Statute law of England, that the Royal power, and Sovereignty of Kings is
primarily, formally, and immediately from God, and that the people through
pretense of Liberty, Privilege, Law, Religion, or what Color soever, ought not
to oppose, imprison, resist, much less Murder their King, though he be
wicked, and subvert Law and Religion; much less when he is pious, upholdeth
and maintains both.

First, I conceive that there is no man so impudently wicked as to deny that
there is a God who created all things, Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men; the
power of Angels, and the power of Men; there is one power of Angels, and
another of Men, so there is a difference of powers amongst men, the power of a
King, inferior to no power on earth but only Gods, the power of the Subjects
inferior to the power of the King; the power of a Father over his Children; and
the power of a Husband over his Wife; and so every power limited by God; and
as one Star does excel another in brightness, so one power does excel another
in dignity and glory. There is nothing more plain and evidently asserted in the
Scripture, than that Kingly power is the most Sacred, Divine, and glorious of
all powers, immediately from God, peculiarly owned by him, as a power wherein
his Nature and Majesty is most manifested; and as I have already showed, has a
shadow of all Divine Excellencies. Man was made, Genesis 1.26. and God said, let
us make man in our Image: But man had no power or dominion, until God further
said, And let them have dominion over; so that it is from hence most clear,
that man had no power or Sovereignty, until God gave it him, and the first man
to whom God gave it, was Adam a King, the sole Monarch of the world. Then let
not our new Sectaries fondly and wickedly conceit, that royal authority is
originally, and radically from them, and that it is by their consent immediately
derived from them, to Kings; Since the Kingly power and office was before they
were born, or had any power, from whence such authority could be derived. By me
Kings reign says God, not only particular Kings, as Kings of the Jews, etc.
but all Kings, Prove. 85.1. Qui succedit in locum, succedit in jus. Therefore
whosoever claim unto themselves, that power which is universally and
perpetually peculiar unto the God of all power, do Blaspheme and rob God of his
honor, and what lies in them, do make God no God, and themselves the only
Almighty: But the people which challenge unto themselves, the original power of
earthly Dominion, do challenge unto themselves that power which is universally
and perpetually peculiar to the God of all power; Therefore those people do
blaspheme, and rob God of his honor, and what lies in them do make God no God,
and themselves the only Almighty. There is no power but of God, The powers that
be are ordained of God, Romans 13.1, 5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Doubtless our superintendants did
never learn their Doctrine, from this Text; but they may as well learn it from
hence as from any other place in Scripture, for I find nothing in my Bible
contrary to this, but every text in Scripture, does harmoniously agree with
this, and unanimously resolve, that Kings are of God, they are Gods; Children
of the most high, his Servants, ^ir public Ministers, his Deputies, his
Vicegerenis, his Lieutenants, their Throne, their Crown, their Sword, their
Scepter, their Judgments are Gods, their Power, Person, and charge are of
Divine extract, and so their authority, and person are both sacred, and
inviolable. God removes Kings and sets up Kings, Daniel 2.21. Thou settetst
a Crown of pure Gold on his head, Psalm. 21.3. I gave thee a King in mine anger,
and took him away in my wrath, Hos. 13.11. Which proves that God, not the
people, did institute Kings, and that God not the people should take them away.
God has spoken once, yea twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto
God, Psalm. 62.11. By him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that
are in Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers, Col. 1.16. And now, O Lord my God, thou have made
thy servant King, instead of David my Father, 1 Kings 3.7. I have provided me a
King, says God, 1 Samuel 16.1. Whole heaps of Scipture might I gather to confirm
that Kings are solely, and immediately dependent from God, and independent from
all others, which truth the suffrages of the Holy Fathers, (which are but as so
many Commentaries on the Scripture, and therefore not so necessary here to be
recited) do affirm and maintain.

But some may ask me, how Kings in these days can be said to be immediately
from God, when sometimes they are elected Kings by the people, sometimes they
come to their Crowns by Conquest, and sometimes hereditarily by succession, and
never by extraordinary manifestation and revelation from Heaven, as did Moses,
Saul, David. To this I briefly answer, That (as Divines hold) a thing is
immediately from God several ways. 1. When it is solely from God, and
presupposes nothing ordinary or humane, antecedent to the obtaining of it. So
was Moses made captain over Israel, and so had Joshua his authority. But
Sovereignty now to our Kings is not so conveyed, but some humane act is always
intervening.

2. When the Donation and Collation of the power to such a person, is
immediately from God, though some act of man be antecedent, as Mathias was an
Apostle immediately from Christ, though first the Apostles put two a part, and
cast lots, yet neither of these two acts jointly or severally, did virtually or
formally, collate the Apostolical power upon him. When an Attorney makes
livery of seisin, according to his letter of Atturny, the Feoffee is in by the
Feoffor, and not by the Atturny, though his act was interposed. Is is not the
Feoffment of the Attorney, but of the Feoffor, and the Feoffee his Title is
only from the Feoffor, though he had not had it but by the means of the Atturny.

In the second sense, Sovereignty is conferred on kings immediately from God,
though some created act, as Election, Succession, Conquest, or any other
ordinary act intervene; For the interposed act contains not in it power to
confer Sovereignty, but that power comes formally and virtually from God, and
so relates to him as the proper Donor, and immediate Author; As when a king
gives power to a favorite, to make a Lord, or a Baron, yet who is so stupid
as to averr that the honor of a Lord, or a Baron, comes immediately from the
favorite, and not from the king? So when God puts into the hearts of the
people to choose a king, the Sovereignty comes from God, and not from the
people, The people cannot produce so noble an effect as Royalty, Nemo potest
transfer in alium quod non habet in se, No man can give that to another,
which he has not himself. The Sovereign has power over life and death; No
single man has power to kill himself, nor the people jointly; For if no man
has power over his own life, much less over his neighbors; Therefore
Sovereignty is not derived from the people. The people have potestatem
designativam personae, but not potestatem collativam potestatis regiae, they
have power to design, and depute the person, But not the power to join the
Royal authory to the person; for that is immediately from God. As the
designation of the person to an holy function is from man or men, but the
collation of the power is immediately from God. I may have power to throw a man
into the Sea, but it is the water which drowneth him. There is a great
difference between the applying of the person to the authority, and the
applying of the authority to the person, the one may be the act of the people,
the other can only be the act of the Almighty, Licet communicatio potestatis
quandoque sit per consensum hominum, potestas tamen ipsa immediate est a Deo,
cujus est potestas, Though the power be sometimes conferred by the consent of
men, yet it is immediately given from God, whose power it is, says R^ffensis,
de potestate Papae. fol. 283. Et Communitas nihil sui confert regibus, nisi ad
summam personam determinet, and potius personam applicat divinae potestati,
quam divinam potestatem personae, The Community has no power to confer on
Kings, but only to depute the person, it may apply the person to the divine
power, but cannot apply the divine power to the person, says Spalet. tom.
2.529. Constitue supra nos Regem at judicet nos sicut and universae habent
nationes, Make us a King to rule over us (not we over him) that he may judge us
(not that we may judge him) as all other Nations have, Cry the Elders of
Israel. From whence it is apparent, that Sovereignty comes from the Heavens,
not from our earthly Cottages, we are rather Passive, than Active, it is God
which makes Kings, we receive and should obey them. There is no society without
Government. We should destroy one the other unless we had a Governor. Thou O
Lord have made and given a King to the little Bees, who follow him as their
leader, and honor him with a throne in the midst, and safest place amongst
them; the Cranes do follow one as chief, and flocks and herds have their
Captain to lead them; the Fishes of the Sea do follow one as King. Therefore
let not us men only be independent, and since thou have told us that power
belongs to thee, we will not rob thee of it; Obedience is that which we are
only capable of; Sovereignty is a Creature of thy making, not of ours,
Therefore make us a king to rule over us. The Prophet Samuel seeing their
urgent resolution for a king, lest they should afterward plead ignorance, told
them the power of a king. Vosque eritis ei servi, If you have a King, you must
be his Servants, he will take your Sons, and appoint them for himself, for his
Chariots, he will take the tenth of your sheep, and of your seed, he will take
your Daughters to be confectionaries, ^e will take your Fields, your Vineyards,
your Olive-yards, even the best of them, and give them to his Officers and
Servants, he will take your Menservants, and your Maidservants, and your
Goodliest young men, and your Asses, and put them to his work, This is the
power of a king; and from whence is this power derived? doubtless not from the
people, for they are never so willing to part from what they have. But
notwithstanding they persisted in their Petition, and would have a king,
saying, Rex erit super nos, and erimus nos quoqu^ sicut omnes gentes, and
judicabit nos Rex noster, Nay, but there shall be a king over us, that we also
may be like all the Nations, and that our king may judge us, and go out before
us, and fight our Battles; by which it is perspicuous, that all Kings had the
same power, as this King here described, by the Prophet had. The Israelites did
not sin in desiring a King, neither did God give them a King purposely for
their punishment in his wrath; For as the best Divines hold, when God says
Hos. 13.11. I gave them a King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath,
(which proves that God only gives, and takes away Kings) wicked Jeroboam is
meant, and not Saul. For Samuel prayed for Saul, God commanded Samuel to
hearken to the voice of the people in all that they said, 1 Samuel 8.7. and did
choose them a pious King, for cap. 10.24. Samuel said to all the people, See ye
him whom the Lord has chosen, that there is none like him among all the
people, and all the people shouted, and said God save the King. So that it is
apparent that Saul was chosen for his virtues, and was no Tyrant at his
inauguration. Moses Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. did prophecy of their King, Thou shall in
any wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose. Where Moses
relates what is decent, and meet for a clement and merciful king. But Samuel
describes what a king may do, if he will use his summum jus, which is to do
what he pleases; Therefore Samuel sets forth the greatest and largest power
of Kings, not to deter the people from desiring a Kings, but to prepare their
hearts to obey him; for God commanded Samuel to grant the people their request,
according to the prophecy of Moses, and therefore Samuel would not be
unwilling to perform Gods command, Neither was Samuels displeasure for any
other end; but that the people might be pleased with the king whom they so
earnestly desired, and knowing his power, and remembering their fervent suit for
him, they might more willingly and cheerfully obey him. For Saul's wickedness
did spring from the Corruption of his Nature, after he was made king, and not
through any default in God, for he was a man of excellent qualities when God
chose him, and many pious and religious kings were given to the people
afterward, as David, etc. But be they good or bad the people must not resist
them, because, as Samuel shows, the manner of kings is to do what they will.

Principi summum rerum arbitrium Dii dederunt, subditis obsequii gloria relicta
est, To Princes God has given the highest power, to Subjects only is left the
glory of obedience, says Tacitus, which indeed is the greatest glory can be
conferred on them, if they had but hearts to receive it: for what is more
glorious in Subjects than obedience to God and their King? Super imperatorem
non est nisi solus Deus qui fert imperatorem, The King has no superior but
only God, says Optatus Bishop of Milivis. Generale pactum est societatis
humanae obedire Regibus, It is a Natural, a General, a Universal Compact,
Covenant of humane society, to obey their Kings, says St. Austin. li. 3.
Confess. cap. 8. But since optimus Legum interpres praxis, practice is the best
interpreter of the Law, Look into the Scriptures and learn what our Ancestors
have done before us, I am confident you cannot find in all the Scripture where
God appointed any people to be the chusers of their Kings, but rather to accept
of them and submit themselves to them, whom the Lord had chosen and placed over
them, Nusquam invenio Regem aliquem Judaeorum populi suffragiis creatum, quin
si primus ille erat, qui designaretur a Deo, vel a prophetae ex Dei jussu, vel
sort, vel alia ratione, quam Deus indicasset, I never find any Jewish King
made by the suffrages of the people, but whom God did first by some means
appoint, says Piueda de rebus Solo. li. 1. c. 2. neither did the Children of
Israel choose any unless Abimelech, the Bastard son of Gedeon, and (as some
say) Jeroboam who made Israel to sin, and of the evil success of their reigns,
the Scripture will give you an account; Would not the people have established
Adonijah in King David's throne, crying out before him, 1 Kings 1.25. God save
the King Adonijah? But God whose property it is only to make Kings, rejects
Adonijah, and makes Solomon to rule in his Fathers stead, although Adonijah
his title was by birthright, as well as by the consent of the people, For, 1
Kings 2.15. says he to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon, Thou know that the
Kingdom was mine, and that all Israel set their faces on me, that I should
reign, howbeit the Kingdom is turned about, and is become my Brothers, For it
was his from the Lord. In this verse you may see the title of Adonijah, and the
title of Solomon, to their Fathers Crown; Adonijah claimed it by birthright,
and the power of the people, But Solomon claimed it from the Lord. It is no
marvel that Adonijah put in his title for the Crown, for God has appointed the
right of primogeniture, by which the Patriarchs and all the rest of the
posterity of Adam enjoyed their royalty. The elder is to rule over the younger,
by the Law of Nature; Suppose Adonijah to be more wicked than Solomon, yet does
not that take away his Birthright; For God says to Cain, though he was never
so wicked an Hypocrite, unto thee shall be the desire of thy Brother, and thou
shall rule over him, though Abel was never so Godly and sincere a server of
God; which made Jacob so earnest to purchase his Brothers Birthright, Genesis
25.31. And Jacob said, sell me this day thy Birthright. But Adanijah his Title
was not only by birthright, but also the people would have made him King, and
if those people had had as much power as the people of England pretend to have,
Adonijah would have wanted no other title than their power; for the people of
England are not afraid to say like Gods, By us Kings reign, we throw down Kings
and set them up again, there is no power but what comes from us, they provide
themselves Kings, they have spoken once, yea twice have I heard this, that
Power belongs unto them, and that their Kings are only Derivatives from them,
O monstrum, horrendum, ingens, cui lumen ademptum. Did ever the world produce
such blind prodigious Monsters? Was ever God and Christ robbed so much of their
Power, Honor and Majesty as by these Vipers? Adonijah no sooner saw his
Brothers Title, but he released his own, and quitted the Crown, woe be to them
who usurp the Crown, and have no Title of their own. The Title of King Solomon
was from the Lord, he only set the regal Diadem on his head, the people stood
by as Ciphers, Solus verus Deus dat regna terrena bonis and malis, says St.
Austin de Civit. Dei, li. 4. cap. 33. It is God alone who disposes of Crowns,
he crowned Adam a King in Paradise before his fall, and before the rise of our
M^so-Monarchical Statists, and therefore Monarchy is no Creature of the
peoples, which makes them confess and believe (the Devils do the same) that
Monarchy is the best of all Governments, which perhaps is the reason that they
would so fain have it to be a Bird of their own hatching; But me thinks their
Tenets prove the contrary, for if all Supreme power were originally in the
people, and derived from them to the King, then without doubt Democracy were
the best of all Governments; for that form of Government which comes nearest
to its Original is the best: But Democracy comes nearest to its Original,
therefore Democracy is the best, for the nearer the Fountain the purer the
stream. But change the Supposition into a true Proposition, and then the
Conclusion will be found, as thus, All Supreme Power is originally derived from
God, That Government which comes nearest to its Original is the best: But
Monarchy comes nearest to its Original, therefore Monarchy is of all
Governments the best. And that Monarchy is the best form of all Governments is
the conclusion of all Politicians. Omnes vero palmam dant regno, all give the
palm to Monarchy, Praestantiam autem Monarchiae, non ex vetustate cum Lipsio,
nec ex naturae ductu, cum Hieron. ad Rastic. Mona. probo, sed ex
commoditatibus, quibus caeteras species antestat, I do not only prove Monarchy
to be the most excellent, because it is most ancient, and most natural: but
also because it is most profitable, says Henningus Arnisaeus. As it is the
most beautiful, so it is the most profitable government: Therefore none but
mad men will dart forth the weapons of their Tongues and Hands, against
Monarchy, or else those who would be Commonwealths-men only for their own
private ends, or else those men who will not have a kingdom, unless it be their
own, and Reges abominantur nisi ipsi sint, think kings abominable, unless they
may be kings themselves. And these men think they may the easier attain to
kingship by preaching this new Doctrine with the Jesuits, that the kings power
is derived from the people, and so fool the ignorant multitude into an act of
joining with them to take the Regal Diadem from off their pious Sovereigns
head, and place it on their own fanatic Coxcombs, and so become our good
Lords, and Masters of all that we have; for never was king illegally dethroned,
but a hundred Tyrants came in his room, Regem quidem apparet eos sustulisse,
sed nec minus manifestum est Regnum sibi retinuisse, dum quod sub uno erat in
plures diviserunt, and triginta ac septem socios tyrannidis adscivere qui
imperium secum tenerent, gravique and intollerando servitio cives suos
premerent, nam sub specie libertatis tyrannidem saevissimam velle eos exercere
vel caecis clarum est, says Sal. But caveat emptor, let them take heed they do
not purchase their vain glory at too dear a rate, their counterfeit dissembling
may find a real Hell, Nec est diuturna poss^ssio, in quam gladio inducimur,
this world will not last always. Let them assure themselves the people did
never give nor ought for to take the power of their King, Non tribuamus dandi
Regni potestatem nisi Deo vero, Let us not attribute the power of disposing of
kingdoms to any but to the true God, says St. Austin, de Civit. Dei, li. 5. c.
21. Nemo enim ante infelicissimam hanc nostram tempestatem, non fassus est,
Principem populo dominari, Principi vero Deum, For no man before these most
unhappy times of ours, did ever deny but that the King ought to govern the
people, and the King to be governed by none but God, says Barclay. Had I not
known that our Regicides have voted the Lords prayer, as well as kings useless,
(for uno absurdo dato mill sequuntur, over Shoes, over Boots) I should have
wondered with what face they could conclude their Prayers to the Almighty,
saying, For thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory for ever, Amen, yet
claim the same power to themselves: for if theirs be the kingdom, the power and
the glory, if they have power to make and unmake kings when they please, then
what or where is Gods power? Surely if their Doctrine be true, then our
Saviors is false, and he did ill to teach us to pray, and command us to say,
Thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory for ever and ever; But let God he
true, and every man a Liar. Our Savior is the Truth and the Light, and if
these men had been enlightened by our Saviors doctrine, the darkness of these
errors would never have so damnably blinded them, who make God a Parenth^sis,
thinking themselves perfect and complete without him, and profess that the
king, (whose ^oodness, like their wickedness is incomparable,) is but a Brat of
their own begetting, and that they like God may take him away as occasion shall
serve.

These Antimonians (who pick out places of Scripture only to destroy Scripture)
that they may be Canonical in all things, and do nothing without the Bible,
say, that the people make the King, and that they are so taught out of Gods
word, For, 1 Samuel 11.15. All the people went to Gilgal, and there they made
Saul King, before the Lord in Gilgal, which (say they) is an invincible proof,
that the people made Saul their King, and not God, and so consequently all
Kings are made by the people; but if these men will tie themselves up so
strictly to the letter of the Scripture (because it makes for their purpose as
they suppose) that they will not hearken to the true meaning, and
interpretation, let their own weapons kill them, for, 1 Samuel 12.1. Samuel said
unto all Israel, Behold, I have harkned unto your voice in all that ye said
unto me, and have made a King over you. This verse says that Samuel made the
King, which is the very next verse to theirs, which says, that the people made
the King, so that literally, one of these verses must needs speak falsely, for
if the people made the King, then Samuel did not, but if Samuel made the king,
then the people did not; so that this Dilemma must needs confute our new
Doctors. But let Scripture interpret Scripture, and the interpretation will
tell you that God only made the king. For though the people say, We will set a
king over us, Deuter. 17.14. Yet they must in any wise set him king over them
whom the Lord their God shall choose. The Lord must, who only can give their
king Sovereign power, he must make and give the king. The people have only
power to receive and set him over them. 1 Samuel 10.1. Samuel took a vyal of Oil,
and poured it on his head: But the Lord anointed him King, he is the Lords
anointed, not Samuels: For why? Is it not because the Lord has anointed thee
to be Captain over his Inheritance? Says Samuel. Paul may plant, and Apollo
may water, but God only gives the increase; God is Master of the Substance,
and only gives regal power, Samuel, etc. and the people are but masters of the
Ceremony; and the Coronation of Kings is only a Declaration to the people that
God has given them a King; Outward Unctions, and Solemnities used at
coronations, are but only Ceremonies, which confer no power to the King, For it
was his from the Lord. 1 Ki. 2.15. The Elders of Judah and Israel chose David
to be their King, and anointed him over them, 2 Samuel 5.3. But they did not give
him power, or right unto his kingdom; For says God, 1 Samuel 16.3. I will show
thee what thou shall do, and thou shall anoint unto me him whom I name unto
thee. The people make the King, not by giving him Sovereign power; for that
feather does not grow in their wing; but by receiving him, and approving that
which God has done. For the Lord, the King of all the Earth, rules in the
Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. Psalm. 4.7. Dan. 4.25.

Old Horace, more a Divine than most of these new Sectaries, the incendiaries
of all mischief, could teach them this truth.

Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis,
Clari Gigantaeo triumpho
Cuncta supercilio moventis.
Feared Kings command on their own ground;
The King commanding Kings is Jove:
Whose arm the Giants did confound,
Whose awful brow does all things move.
Which Sentence, lest it should seem too light, and savor too much of Poetical
assentation; Let our Antichristians (for those who by their practice, though
not which their mouths deny Christ's Doctrine, deserve no better name,) hearken
unto the Words of our Savior (if they will vouchsafe to debase themselves so
much) and behold, what Doctrine he preached to Pilate, which is the more
remarkable, because it was his last. John 19.11. Jesus answered, Thou could
have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above. For,
Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, illius jussu reges constituuntur. He who made
men, made Kings.

That Kings have the supreme power over the people, is proved in Adam, and
testified by the Law of God, the Law of Nations, The Law of Nature, The Law of
Reason, The Law of the Realm, and by the Oaths of all English men, as well
Parliament men as other Magistrates, (though since broken) by our Savior, by
the Apostles, by all the Fathers of the Church, and by all Christian People,
and Religion. The glory of the Martyrs, which have sacrificed their lives in
this just cause, shall live for ever; and the Rebels shall go out with stink,
like the snuff of a Candle. The Majesty, and power of the King described, Good
subjects commended, and the punishment of Traitors, with Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, manifested. The sad effects, if the people should have the supreme
power, and proved by reason that no Government could stand, nor any man
whatsoever live, if the people had power to question the King or other their
Governors. Two supreme powers cannot stand together; Traiterous Tyrants,
always pretend Liberty and Religion, with which they blind the ignorant
people: The Oath of Supremacy, by whom taken, and by whom broken, with all Gods
Commandments with it. How the People of England deal with their King.

HAving satisfied all, but those whose profit it is to believe the contrary,
who have no other grounds for their belief than other men's grounds and estates,
that Kings receive their power from God, and not from the people, and are
independent from all but the Almighty. I shall now show, 1. That they have the
Supreme power over the people, 2. That they are above the Law, 3. That they are
not to give account of their actions to the people, but only to God, and so
conclude that there can be no just cause for the subjects, either to take up
arms against their Sovereign, to call him to the bar, to accuse him, to
condemn him, or to kill or murder him.

First, with the first, That the first King was made in Paradise, your have
already heard, and that there he received his dominion and power; but from whom
did he receive his power? from God; has not God therefore greater power than
the King^ he has; From whence do the people derive their power? from the King;
Has not the King therefore more power than the people? he has, Constituens
Constituto potior, The Constituent is better and higher in place and dignity
than the Constituted; But the power of God Constituted the power of Kings,
Ergo, the power of God is greater than the power of Kings, And quod efficit
tale magis est tale; that which makes any such or such, is in it self much
more such or such; But the King gives power to the people, Ergo, the power of
the King is higher than the power of the people; The King is the only fountain
from whence all the streams of authority flow, to the people, It is he that is
the Magazine, from whence they derive their power, And Derivativa potestas non
potest esse major primitiva, a Derived power can not be greater than the
primitive; Therefore those men who place Sovereignty in the palace of the
peoples breasts, must needs be more knaves, than fools, for so great ignorance
cannot roust in their pates, who are so worldly wise; But let them gloss the
text with what false Commentaries they please, make white black, and black,
white, and muster up dark clouds of juggling riddles, to dazzle the purblind
sight of the Rascal rabble of the people, who think the Gown makes the Lawyer,
That that must needs be Law which the Judge says, esteem all things by their
exterior apperances, and only know how to be ignorant; whose deceived
foolishness, is the Chariot on which our men of war ride triumphant, from one
degree of wickedness to another; Yet notwithstanding Legibus eversis rerum
natura peribit, the Law of nature shall perish, and the Heavens and Earth shall
pass away, before Lex Terrae, the Law of the Land, shall deny this Oracle,
Omnis sub Rege and ipse sub nullo nisi tantum sub Deo, All men are under the
King, and the King is under none but God, this is that Divine sentence -- quod
nec Jovis ira nec ignes, Nec poterit ferrum, necedax abolere vetustas, which
neither angry Jove, nor fiery Vulcan, neither devouring age, nor the bloody
sword, a worse devourer than that, shall ever expunge out of our Law Books, or
explode out of the memory of every pious man. This is that which many worthies
have written with their bloods, and sealed with their lives; To this have many
died Martyrs, whose fame shall outlive the Sun, and their memories be engraven
upon the marble of everlasting monuments, whilst others their opposers, would
be glad to have the stench of their ignominious names, buried in the grave of
oblivion; where leaving them, let us return to our King, For nullum tempus
occurrit Regi, It is always seasonable to do allegiance to the King, whose
power, like the Ocean, is boundless, and his authority, like the wind, goes
where it lists; he only can proclaim war, and he only can conclude peace; he
only can call Parliaments, and dissolve them when he pleases; he appoints
what Magistrates he pleases, and turns out whom he pleases; all Laws,
Customs, Privileges and Franchises, are granted and confirmed to the people by
him. He raises men that are dead, to life again, for those that are condemned
to die by the Judges, are dead in Law, but the Kings pardon reviveth them
again. He has the sole power of ordering and disposing all the Castles, Forts,
strong Holds, Ports, Havens, and all other parts of the Militia. He is the
breath of our Nostrils, the life, head and authority of all that we do,
Supremam potestatem, and merum imperium apud nos habens, having the Supreme
power, and mere empire over our bodies, members, lives and estates; he does
whatsoever he pleases; to be short, he is our King, And where the word of a
King is, there is power, and who may say unto him what do thou? Eccle. 8.3,
4. But so greedy is humane nature of dominion and covetous to rule, that we
have some amongst us, who profess themselves to be born Kings, they are Kings
by birth, nay greater than Kings are here; For Par in parem non habet Dominium,
one King cannot command another King; But these men use Kings as Children do
birds in a string, give him what Liberty and Authority they please, clip his
wings lest he should fly too high for them, put pins in his eyes to make sport
with him, and clip off his head too, to make known their authority. But
doubtless, these men were never bred in Christ's University. Did they ever hear
of him? If they did, it is the worse for them; For they, which know the will of
God and do it not, will fare never the better for their knowledge. It is better
to be an ignorant fool, than a cunning knave. Reddite quae sunt Caesaris
Caesari. Render to Caesar, that which is Caesar's, says our Savior. Quot
verba, tot argumenta, His words should be to us commands; his actions our
instructions, and his obedience should be our pattern; shall the Lord of life
submit himself unto the King? and shall not we? shall he give Caesar his due?
and shall not we? shall he suffer himself to be murdered by the King? and
shall we murder the King? This is the Popes Doctrine, to take away the lives of
Princes; and ^re not we his true Disciples, when we put his words in practice?
His Disciples did I say? nay we scorn that, for every man now is a Pope, and
exercises the fame authority. But let us forsake the Pope, and learn the
obedience of true subjects, from the subjects of Joshua, chap. 1.16, 18. And
they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou command us, we will do, and
whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go; Whosoever he be that does rebel
against thy Commandments, and will not hearken unto thy words, in all that thou
command him, He shall be put to death, only be strong, and of a good
courage. Behold, here the Kings Sovereignty to command, the Subjects duty to
obey, and the punishment of a Rebel is death; If the King has not the supreme
power, how can he command? If the subjects are not his inferours, why should
they obey? If the people have a power coordinate and equal with the King, then
must there be duo summa imperia, two supreme powers, which the Philosophers
tell us cannot be, Nam quod summum est unum est. Sovereignty cannot be divided,
diverse supreme powers are no more compatible in on State, than two sunns are
in the firmament: -- Omnisque potestas
Impatiens consortis erit --
Non been cum sociis regna, Venusque manent.


Kings and Lovers admit of no Rivals, Sovereignty being an individual, must be
in one sort of Governors, either in one man, as in Monarchy, or else in one
specifical kind of men, as the optimates, as it is in Aristocracy, or in the
people, as in Democracy, says Aristotle. Necesse est aut unum esse penes quem
summum sit imperium, aut paucos, aut multos: But the Government of England is
Monarchy, and therefore the people have no supreme power, It would be a
monstrous body if the inferior members were equal in power, or could command
the head. But suppose there should be such an Vtopia, as our Novelists feign,
where the prople might call their King in question for his actions, when they
thought he offended, we should then have a new King, every new moon or oftener,
and would any man be so mad as to be their King? For my part, I think he had
betrer be hanged; for what beast is more Salvage and uncertain, than the
headless blind multitude? Virgil. Scinditur incertum studia in contraria
Vulgus.

Discord is the only Ensign of a multitude, and sooner will the Stars gather
into one body, than a multitude unite themselves into one mind, Quot homines
tot sententiae, and would not a man have a rare place of it, to be servant to
all these bears? The Cynical Puritan would hang him if he was not in all
things so pure a Saint as himself, and the Independent would pende him if he
did not solely depend on him as on God almighty; the rigid Presbyterian would
bend his knotty brows at him, if he was not as obedient to him, as a water
Spaniel; and the dreadful Anabaptist would hang both Puritan, Independent,
Presbyterian, and King and all, if they would not be Baptized according to his
sacred tenet, the Quaker would make him quake; and Theaurau John would crack
his crown, unless he did esteem them as the greatest part of Christ's kingdom.
And can any wise man think that this kingdom thus divided can stand? A man
cannot serve two Masters, says our Savior, but that he will love the one, and
hate the other, and Jove himself cannot please this many headed monster.
Therefore if the almighty God had not put the bridle of Government into the
peoples mouths, and the reigns into the hands of their Superior, like the
unruly horses of Phaeton, or the masterlesse winds of Eolus let loose, they
would have torn the world asunder, and brought all things with themselves into
Confusion. Tanta est discordia Fratrum, So great is the discord, even of
Brethren. No King can be so well accomplished as to please all men, neither
indeed is it a sign of an honest man to be so flexible, as to please every one,
Populo placere non potest cui placet virtus, the just love him, whom the wicked
hate; and the wicked love him, whom the just hate; what King so pious, just,
religious, and mild, as Moses the meekest of all men? and what greater treason
was ever hatched and plotted against any man than him? Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, with two hundred and fifty Princes of the Congregation, lead the people
to Sedition, and then to Rebellion, telling Moses to his face, he took too much
upon him, and had not God Vindicated the sacred Sovereignty which he had placed
in Moses, even Moses himself had become a prey to the blood-thirsty, and
Rebellious appetite of these Traitors; For it came to pass, that the ground
clave asunder that was under them, and the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their Houses, and all the men that appertained unto
Korah, and all their goods, they and all that appertained to them, went down
alive into the pit, and the earth clozed upon them, and they perished from
among the Congregation; and all Israel that were round about them, fled at the
cry of them, for they said, l^st the earth swallow us up also; And there came
out a fire from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and fifty men that
offered incense, as you may read in Numbers 16. A fearful example, one would
think enough to deter the hearts of all Traitors from rebellion. This was the
first rebellion we read of in the Scripture, and how God approved of it, does
appear by the exemplary punishment. These Traitors did but only murmur, and
rebel with their tongues, yet see how God rewarded them; then what punishment
is reserved for them, who do not only murmur, and rebel with their reviling
tongues, more sharp than a two edged sword, but also murder the Lords anointed,
and power out his sacred blood like water upon the ground? Doubtless they have
just cause to fear, that although they flourish here like the green grass, yet
at the day of Judgment, Hell it self will open it is mouth, and swallow them up
both bodies and souls into everlasting fire, and damnation, where there shall
be nothing but weeping, and wailing, and guashing of teeth. Lento gradu ad
vindictam sui divina procedit ira, and tarditatem supplicii gravitate
compensat; The longer the blow is a fetching, the heavier it will be when it
falls, Divine vengeance comes, though with a slow yet with a sure foot.
Though King David was a man after Gods own heart, yet could he not please the
people, for Absalom his own Son made a conspiracy against him, and forced him
to fly for his life; But mark the end of this Traitor, though the earth did
not open her mouth and swallow him up, yet the very Trees took vengeance, and
caught him up by the head, so that he hung between heaven and earth, as
unworthy to go to heaven, or to live upon the earth. 11 Sam. 18.9. Then how
dare these Pulpit Hunters blaspheme God, and profane his Word, and Sanctuary,
so much, as to preach that Rebellion is obedience, nay a necessary duty
commanded of God, and a great means to carry on the work of Salvation, inciting
the people to cry out for justice, accounting all things injustice, unless that
they have their wicked ends? So Absalom did steal the hearts of the people who
had controversies, telling them, that there was no man deputed of the King to
hear them. 11 Sam. 15.4. And Absalom said moreover, O that I were made judge in
the Land, that every man which has any suit, or cause, might come unto me, and
I would do them Justice. A true Lecture of a Traitor; for you shall never find
Traitors without Law and Justice on their sides, to color their actions; The
King has not deputed a man (say they) to distribute Justice. He is popishly
given, and would bring into the Kingdom the popish Religion; He infringeth
your Charters, breaks the Laws, and destroys your Rights and Liberties. But
O that we were made Judges in the Land, how equally and impartially would we
give justice to all men? we would not take away your Charters, nor encroach
upon your Liberties; The preservation of the Law and Religion is the only
cause, for which we take up arms; But when with their charms and sorcery they
have intoxicated the people, got the hilt of the sword into their own hands,
and a power to do what they list, then down goes both Law and Religion, and
the King too, like Jonas, must be thrown down from the stern of Government, to
appease the tempest of the multitude; And then, and not until then, like the
head of a Snail, or a Tortoise out of it is shell, not seen before, does appear
their own cause, and indeed the only cause for which they took up arms, which
is their own private interest, and the destruction of the whole Kingdom, with
their own bodies and souls hereafter.

Hor. Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit.
And Englands own Sword, destroys poor England.
But let Traitors pretend what they will, yet this is a Principle, whose
original is the Bible, confirmed by our Savior and the Apostles, by all the
Fathers of the Church, and by all Christian people, by all reason and Religion,
That Kings have the Supreme power over their people, and consequently the
people no power to resist them, either to save their Laws, Religion, or for
what other pretense soever. For, Rex si supra populum optimatesve agnoscat
proprie non est Rex, He cannot be a King, which has not the supreme authority
and Sovereignty; Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet, It is God and the King
to whom Sovereignty belongs, the people are their Vassals, and not sharers in
so high a dignity. Our Savior alone was both God and Man, and it is a thing
impossible, for the people to be both king and Subject too, at one time. But
why should I seek stars to light the noon day? or press that with arguments to
be true to them, who with their oaths have confirmed it for a truth, swearing,
I William Lenthal do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the
Kings Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all spiritual, or Ecclesiastical
things, or Causes, as Temporal: And that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Sp^ritual, within this Realm. And
therefore I do utterly renounce, and forsake all foreign Jurisdiction, Powers,
Superiorities, and Authorities; and do promise that from henceforth I shall
bear faith, and true allegiance to the Kings Highness, his heirs and lawful
Successors, and to my power shall assist, and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Pre-eminences and authorities, granted or belonging to the Kings
Highness, his heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of the Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book. What
greater exemplification, confirmation or demonstration of the kings
Sovereignty, can there be than this Sacred Oath of Supremacy? For this is the
thing which the Lord has commanded; says Moses, Number. 30.1, 2. If a man Vow a
Vow unto the Lord, or swear an Oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not
break his word, he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth.
And is there any Englishman so impudently wicked and profane, as
presumptuously to break Gods Commandment, break his own vows, and impiously
turn perjured Traitor? vix ipse tantum vix adhuc credo malum: scarce I, even I,
who have seen it with my own eyes, can yet hardly believe so great a villainy
can be perpetrated. Haec facere Jason potuit? Could the betrothed do this? Heu
pietas! Heu prisca fides! Alas the ancient piety! Alas the fidelity of old
time! Debuit ferro obvium Offerre pectus, I would have dyed first. -- Quid non
mortalia pectora cogis Auri sacra fames? What does not gold, more sacred to
them than their oaths, compel mortals to atchieve? Vid. 1. Eli. cap. 1.

That the Kings power is above the Law, is demonstrated by reason, and proved
by authority. In the beginning were no Laws, but the Kings will and pleasure.
Adams absolute power. The King can do no wrong. It is better and more
profitable that one King, than many Tyrants do what they lift with us. The King
has no Judge but God. That place in learned Bracton, which Bradshaw and others
used as an authority to kill the King, explained, and their damnable opinion
and false Commentary upon him confuted. The King is bound to observe Gods Law,
yet absolute King. That God not the people instituteth kings, and that the
House of Commons which is but the tail of the Parliament, nor any whole
Parliament, can have power over the king, or disinherit him.

HAving made it evidently manifest, that the King has the supreme power and
Sovereignty over the people, I will now ascend a step higher, and make it as
manifest, that he has the supreme power and Sovereignty over the Laws, as
well, as over the people. Quidvis facere, id est regem esse, says Salustius,
To do what one will, is to be a King; Cui quod libet, licet, Qui legibus
solutus est, Qui leges dat, non accipit, and proiude, qui omnes judicat, a
nemine judicatur. To whom it is lawful to do what he lift, without punishment
by the people. Who is freed from the fetters of the Law, who gives Laws, and
receives Laws from none, who judges all men, and himself is judged by none,
and this is the true definition of a king, warranted in holy writ, by the
example of all kings, by the Prophets, by the Apostles, by the holy writings of
multitudes of men, by the Fathers of the Church, by the true Orthodox Clergy,
by the Law of Nations, and of Nature. In the beginning, says Justin. Populus
nullis legibus tenebatur, sed arbitria regum pro legibus erant; The people were
kept under by no Laws, but the will of their kings was the only Law they had;
which I find verifyed in the first king which God made, Adam, Whose power was
absolute, for in his Commission he had from God, there is no limitation, Genesis
1.28. Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it. And
have dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over the fowl of the Air, and over
every living thing that moves upon the Earth. Here is no command, that he
shall not make a Law without the consent of a Parliament; that he shall receive
so much tribute of his subjects, and no more; the king is not here prohibited
to have a negative voice, or tied up with any Law of his subjects; He is to
give Laws, not to receive them; what his will leads him to, that may he do,
which is all included in this word, Dominare, have Dominion. But go a little
further, and see his Majesty upon his royal Throne, where (with reverence be it
spoken) you may behold the Almighty doing more obedience to the King, than his
vassals do in these our days, Genesis 2.19. And out of the ground the Lord God
formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air, and brought them
unto Adam, to see what he would call them; And whatsoever Adam called every
living creature, that was the name thereof. The Lord God formed every living
thing, but Adam must give them names; The Lord God brought them to him, but it
was but to see what he would call them: For whatsoever Adam was pleased to call
every living creature, that was the name thereof. So that hitherto, there was
no Law, but the will of Adam the King to govern every living creature, Ad
libitum Regis sonuit sententia legis. What Adam pleased to command, that was
presently obeyed. But let us make a further progress and explicate the
Sovereignty of king Adam; For as yet there was not found an help meet for him,
But the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he took a^ rib out
of his side, whereof he made a woman, and brought her unto the man; And Adam
said, this is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called
woman, because she was taken out of man. The Lord God made the woman, but it
was of one of Adams bones, and Adam must give her a name; Nay Adam must make a
Law concerning her, For, Therefore shall a man leave his Father, and his
Mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh; which Law
continues still, and shall do for ever; For there shall be marrying, and
giving in marriage until the end of the World; Therefore Justine does prove a
true Historian, when he says, in the beginning, Arbitria Regum pro legibus
erant, There was no Law, but the kings will: for you may read of many kings
before Moses his time, as of nine in one chapter, Genesis 14.1, 2. But Moses was
the first that ever writ Laws, or invented letters as we can find; then what
Laws could those nine Kings use, and all the Kings from Adam, until Moses, but
their own wills? And God gave Moses the power of Governing the people, before
he gave the law, and Moses administered Justice to every one, according to his
pleasure; so did Joshua, and Saul, and all the Kings after them; and if the
King governs with the law, which is derived from him, which is most certainly
true, then undoubtedly the King is above the law. For propter quod unumquodque
tale, ipsum magis tale, that by which any thing is made such or such, is in it
self much more such or such. But the King makes the Law; Ergo, the King is
much more above the Law. The Laws are the reigns with which the King governs
and guides the people; how can the Charioter rule his horses, if he has not
the free use, and power over the reigns? and by what means can the King rule,
and direct his people, if he has not the supreme power over the Laws? with
which he is to guide them, not they him.

If the Law be equal in power with the king, then why does the king pardon
those, whom the Law condemns, alter the old Laws, and make new Laws? For par
in parem non habet imperium, every boy can tell that a man has no power to
command his equal; but suppose the Laws should be equal or above the king, who
should put these Laws in execution? The people cannot, because (as I have
already shown) they are Inferior to the king, and Contra rationem est
contraque naturam, superiorem ab inferiore judicari, says Barclay, It is
against reason and nature, that the Superior should be judged by the
Inferior. Therefore though nothing can be so true and plain, but that subtle
Sophisters, by Sinister and false interpretations, and glosses, will make it
obscure; yet it is an inviolable truth, that the king is above the Law, and
therefore Rex non potest facere injuriam, the king can do no wrong, for ubi non
est Lex, ibi non est transgressio, quo ad mundum, where there is no Law there
is no transgression, as to the world. Quisquis summum obtinet imperium, sive is
sit unus Rex, sive pauci nobiles, vel ipse populus universus, supra omnes leges
sunt, Ratio haec est, quod nemo sibi feret legem, sed subditis suis, se legibus
nemo adstringit, says Saravia, de Imperand. author. li. 2. c. 3. Every
Governor, let the Government be Monarchy, Aristocracie, or Democracie, is
above all the Laws; for no man can impose Laws on himself, but on his subjects,
and no man can bind himself to keep his own Laws, because as Barclay says,
Quod neque suis legibus teneri possit, cum nemo sit seipso superior, nemo a
seipso cogipossit, and Leges a superiore tantum sciscantur, denturque
inferioribus; No man can be bound by the Laws he makes himself, because no man
is above himself; neither can any man be compelled of himself; and Laws are
only made by superiors, and given to inferiors. Cujus est instituere ejus est
abrogare, He which makes any Law may abrogate it when he pleases. It is not
possible for any Government to be without arbitrary power; most men of a late
edition allow it in Aristocracy, and Democracy, Why then not in Monarchy? If it
be Tyranny for one man to govern according to his will? Why should it not be
far greater Tyranny for a multitude of men to govern, how they please, without
being accountable, or restrained by Law? But though silent leges inter arma,
Yet Rex est viva Lex, as our books say, The king is a living Law, Indigna digna
habenda sunt, Rex quae facit, Those things which are unlawful for the subject,
are lawful for the king to do. Imperatorem non esse subjectum legibus qui
habet in potestate alias leges far, says B. Augustine. The king cannot be
subject to the Laws, because he has power to make other Laws. What then? after
he has established a Law, That his subjects shall quietly enjoy their estates,
may the king legally without offending God, take away their estates, and break
that Law; Because his will is a Law? I answer he may. But distinguenda sunt
tempora and causae. The King has a Conscience as well as another man, which
must be ruled according to Gods Law and Equity; otherwise God to whom vengeance
only belongs, will judge him. It is lawful for the king ad supplendam reipub.
necessitatem, and supportandam regiam majestatem, to supply the necessity of
State, and to support his Royal Majesty, notwithstanding any former Law, to
take away the estates of his subjects, without their leave, and that legally
too, because in that case his will makes a Law. And therefore does the common
Law of England allow him many prerogatives, which to explain would require a
volume of it self, and are very copiously in our Law books demonstrated. But
the sum of them is, The king upon just cause may do what he please, both with
his subjects, and their estates, and no body is to be judge, whether that cause
be just or no, and take vengeance, but only God and his own conscience, If it
be unjust, Habet Deum Judicem Conscientiae, and ultorem injustitiae, He has
God the Judge of his conscience, and the Revenger of his injustice. And satis
sufficit ei ad paenam, quod Dominum expectet ultorem, It is punishment enough
for him to think that God will take vengeance on him, says Bracton; does
Bracton say so? Why there are some a amongst us, a Bradshaw, when he tempted
the King alias, at the Kings trial, but rather his Temptation.
who make Bracton the only instrument, and authority to kill kings. But to
vindicate the Law, and Reverend Bracton; I will make bold to tell them (for
veritas audentes facit, truth makes a man bold) that they belie Bracton, and
scandal the Law, and their profession; And that it may appear, it is not my
opinion only, I will recite that warrant out of Braston, li. 2. c. 16. fol. 34.
which they build upon, and the answer to it of the Lord Bishop of Osory, a man
worthy of eternal renown, both for his Law, Learning, and Religion; for says
he, Yet because this point is of such great concernment, and the chiefest
Argument they have out of Bracton, is that he says, Rex habet superiorem,
legem, curiam suam, Comites, Barons, quia Comites Dicuntur, quasi socii Regis,
and qui habet socium habet Magistrum; and ideo si Rex fuerit sine fraeno, id
est, sine lege, debent ei fraenum ponere, nisi ipsimet fuerunt cum rege sine
fraeno, And all this makes just nothing in the World for them, if they had the
honesty, or the learning to understand it right. For what is above the King?
the Law, and the Court of Earls and Barons; But how are they above him? as the
Preacher is above the King, when he Preaches unto him, or the Physician when
he gives him Physic, or the Pilot, when he sayleth by Sea, that is quo ad
rationem consulendi, non cogendi, they have superioritatem directivam, non
coactivam. For so the teacher is above him that is taught, and the Counselor
above him that is counseled, that is, by way of advice, but not by way of
command, And to show you that this is Bractons true meaning, I pray you
consider his words; Comites dicuntur quasi socii, they are as fellows or Peers,
not simply, but quasi; And if they were simply so, yet they are but Socii, not
superiors; And what can Socii do? not command; For par in parem non habet
potestatem, that is praecipiendi; otherwise you must confess, habet potestatem
consulendi; Therefore Bracton adds, qui habet Socium habet Magistrum, that is a
Teacher, not a Commander; and to make this yet more plain, he adds, si Rex
fuerit sine sraeno, id est sine lege, If the King be without a bridle, that is,
says he, (lest you should mistake what he means by the bridle, and think he
means force and arms) the Law, they ought to put this bridle unto him, that is
to press him with this Law, and still to show him his duty, even as we do both
to King and people, saying, this is the Law, this should bridle you; but here
is not a word of commanding, much less of forcing the King; not a word of
superiority, nor yet simply of equality; And therefore I must say, hoc
argumentum nihil ad rhombum: And these do abuse every Author.

So much the Bishop, and I think this answer will satisfy every reasonable man;
And I add further, that it would be very strange that Bracton should say in
this place that the King has a Superior, when he denies it in several other
places of his book, and presses it with arguments that he has not, saying,
Omnis quidem sub eo, and ipse sub nullo nisi tantum sub Deo, All are under the
King, and the King under none but God. Rex non habet superiorem nisi Deum, The
King has no superior but God, Nemo quidem de factis suis praesumat disputare,
multo fortius contra factum suum venire, Let no man presume to dispute against
the Kings actions, much less withstand his actions with force and arms, and
rebel against him, fol. 6. Ipse autem Rex non debet esse sub homine, sed sub
Deo, The King is under none but God, Exercere Rex debet potestatem sicut Dei
vicarius in terra and Minister, quia ea potestas solius Dei est, The King ought
to exercise power, as the Vicar and Minister of God, because he receives his
power from God only. Therefore they who would fain have Bracton say that the
Law and the people are the Kings Superiors, would make him as uncertain as
themselves, and do very much abuse that venerable Author; and no man can find
so much as scintilla legis, a spark of Law in all the Law books, that ever the
People or Law were above the king, so as to punish him; and doubtless if there
had been any such thing, the learned Lawyers would have reported it to
posterity; And A non usu valet argumentum. But they all unanimously resolve and
report the contrary.

Reader,

I Would not have thee imagine, as some men through malice, or ignorance, do
most impudently assert, that when we say, The King is absolute and above the
Law, that thereby is intended, that the King is freed from, and has power to
act against Gods Laws, when he pleases. No, this is but their false gloss and
interpretation, For, non est potentia nisi ad bonum, hability and power, is not
but to good; There is no power but what is from God, and therefore no mortal
man can have a power to act against God; To sin, and break Gods commandments,
is impotency, and weakness, no power; For the Angels which are established in
glory, do far excel men in power, yet they cannot sin. The Law of God is above
the King, and he is bound to God to keep it; yet nevertheless he is an
absolute King over men, because God has given him the Supreme power over them,
and has given no power to men to correct him, if he transgress: But God only
whose Law only he can transgress, can call the King to an account. Hoc unum
Rex potest facere, quod non potest injuste agere, the King only is able, not to
do unjustly, is a rule in Commonlaw, and the reason is, because the people do
not give Laws to the King, but the King only gives Laws to the people, as all
our Statutes, and Perpetual experience has taught us. Therefore how can the
King offend against the Laws of the people, or be obnoxious to them, when they
never gave him any Laws to keep, or transgress? and then how can the people
punish him, who never offended their Laws? Therefore the King must needs be
absolute over the people, and only bound to God, not to the people, to keep
those Laws, which God, not the people gave him; and as God is above the Laws,
and may alter them at his pleasure, which he gave and set over the king, so is
the King, above, and may alter at his pleasure, those laws which at his
pleasure he gave and set over the people; still observing that he is free from
all Laws, quo ad coactionem, in respect of any coaction from the people, but
not quo ad obligationem, in respect of obedience to God, by his obligation.
Therefore well might Solomon counsel us to keep the Kings commandment, saying,
Eccles. 8.2. I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard
of the Oath of God. Be not hasty to go out of his sight, stand not in an evil
thing, for he does whatsoever he pleases. Where the word of a King is, there
is power, and who may say unto him what d^st thou? These words are the words of
God, which King Solomon did speak by infusion of the Spirit; In which you may
see that the King does what he pleases. And we are commanded not to stand in
an evil thing, that is according to Iunius and Tremel: translation;
perturbatione and rebellione, quae tibi malum allatura esset, ageret tecum
arbitratu suo, sive jure, sive injuria. We must not murmur, and rebel against
the King, though he deal with us unjustly. He may be just, when we think he is
unjust; The Kings heart is in the hands of God, the searcher of all hearts, as
the Rivers of Water, not in the hands of the people; Therefore God, not the
people, can turn it whether soever he will. Prove. 21.1. King David was, filius
Dei, non populi; The Son of God, not of the People, Psalm 89.26. It was God who
made him higher than the Kings of the Earth, verse 27. not the People. He was
neither chosen of the People, nor exalted of the People; For I have exalted one
chosen out of the people, says God, verse 19. The exaltation was Gods, and the
choice not of, but out of the people; For I have found David my Servant, with
my holy oil have I anointed him, says God, verse 20: Kings are the Children of
the most high, not of the people, Psalm 82. "Therefore who can say unto the
"King, what do thou? If the people of England have power to depose and make
Kings, Why are they usurpers, who by the power of the people destroy the
lawful King, as did Richard the third, and by the consent of the people,
established himself in the Government? They are Kings, de facto, but not, de
jure, as all our Books agree; For the people have not the Sovereignty, but the
King. Surely the people of England thought so, when by act of Parliament they
ordained that none should be capable to sit in Parliament, before they had
Sworn it, vide 1 Eliz. 1.5 Eliz. 1.1 Jac. 1. And I am sure that the breaking of
the Oath, can give the Parliament no new Authority. It is declared by the Lords
and Commons in full Parliament (rot. Par. 42 E. 3. nu. 7. Lex and consuetudo
Parliamenti. 4 Inst. 14.) upon demand made of them on the behalf of the King,
that they could not assent to any thing in Parliament that tended to the
disherison of the King, and his Crown, whereunto they were Sworn. And it is
strange to think that the House of Commons, which is but the tail of a
Parliament, should have that power, which both Lords and Commons had not. But
since there can be no Parliament without the King, 4 Inst. 1, 2.341.356. We may
conclude, that these men being Traitors, Rebels and Tyrants, will take upon
them to do any thing.

Defensive War, against the King, is illegal, or the Great question (made by
Rebels, with honest men no question) Whether the people for any cause, though
the King act most wickedly, may take up arms against their Sovereign, or any
other way by force or craft, call him in question for his actions; Resolved,
and proved by the Law of God, the Law of Nations, the Law of Nature, the Laws
of the Realm, by the rules of all Honesty, Equity, Conscience, Religion, and
Piety; by the Example and Doctrine of our Savior Christ, all the Prophets,
Apostles, Fathers of the Church, and all pious Saints and holy Martyrs, That
the people can have no cause either for Religion, or Laws, or what thing
soever, to levy War against the King, much less to murder him, proved in
Adam. The manner of the Government of the King, Gods Steward, and Stewart, when
he comes described, The Bishops, Lords Prayer, and Common Prayer Book, must
then be restored, with their excellencies now abused. He will lay down his
life, before he will betray his trust, and give his account to any but God, as
did our last great Stewart, his Father. The blessedness of the people, when
the King shall come and rule over them declared; his Majesty. The Christians
duty toward their King laid open, and warranted by the Death and Sufferings of
Christ, and multitudes o^ Christians. The madness of the people in casting o^
the Government of a gracious King, and submitting to a Multitude of Tyrants;
and the dreadful events, if the Tyrants do not restore the King to his own
again. The murder of the late King Charles, is proved to be most illegal; and
how the Rebels use the liberty of the people, only as a Cloak for their
wickedness, and their Knavery discovered, in pretending the supreme power to
be in the people, whereas they use it themselves, and so Tyrannize over us. The
Laws of England described, and proved that our Sovereign Charles the 1. was
unjustly killed, against the Common Law, Statute Law, and all other Laws of
England.

WE have already clearly proved, that Kings are by Divine institution, that
they have their power from the Heavens, and not from terrestrial men, and that
their power is above the people and Laws; We are now come to see whether the
people the Kings subjects have power to destroy and put assunder, that which
God has thus created and joined together. It is a sound conclusion, which
naturally and of necessity flows from the premises, that they have not, and
having showed, 1. That God made the first King Adam, in Paradise. 2. That there
he received his regal power from God, not from the people. And 3. That there he
arbitrarily made Laws, according to his will, where he had reigned a Monarch
for ever, as Divines hold, had not he transgressed. Let us now see what became
of him after his transgression; for King Adam did transgress, and he must give
an account of his Stewardship. But to whom must he give his account? To man he
cannot, for the King has no superior on earth. Therefore he must to God, who
in the 19 th. verse of Genesis cap. 2. challenges his praerogative; And the Lord
God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou? No sooner did Adam
hear God call, but he presently gave an account of himself, saying, verse the
10. I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked, and
I hid my self. Where note, That God takes an account chiefly of the king for
his subjects offenses; The king is Gods Steward, and God will reckon with him,
God sent him from Paradise, out of the garden of Eden, to till the ground;
Therefore that he may make a good account, he must Parcere subjectis and
debellare superbos, cherrish the flowers, and root up the weeds; He must be a
nursing Father to his loyal subjects, but he must batter down the swelling
pride of Traitors. The true Protestant Religion must flourish as the best flowet
in his Garden; But the Anabaptists, Independents, Presbyterians, Papists,
Jesuits, and other wicked Sectaries must be pulled up as weeds, lest they
overspred, and choke the good flower; They must be extirpated by the root
whilst they are young, lest the^ grow up and seed, and their seed be sown up
and down in the whole World. He must set the Bishops again in their natural
soil, which is now grown over with these weeds, and rubbish, That, that stone
which these new builders refused may become the head stone of the Corner, and
the Bishops Lands, which they did not refuse, must be given to the Church
again. The Common Prayer Book, now rejected as fit for none, but the use of
Papists, He must bring in, and make those Papists read it, who now reject it,
as Popery, for no other cause, but that there is no Popery in it. He must turn
the Horses, and other unclean beasts out of his Sanctuary, now made a Stable, [
St. Paul's, etc.] and put in holy Bishops, and reverend Pastors in their room;
And since our Savior has commanded it, He must make the Lords Prayer current
amongst us; That our Ministers may leave off piping what they list, and pipe
the true tune, which the Lord of life, the best Musician taught them that all
Gods people may dance; For how can we dance when the instrument is out of
order, and the wrong tune is piped? Good God! what a superstitious and
Papistical age do we live in? when we account it superstition and Popery to say
the Lords Prayer, and the Common Prayer, the ordinary means of our salvation? O
blessed Jesus! Have not thou commanded us not to use vain repetitions; But when
we pray, to pray thus, Our Father, etc? Do not thou know what we want better
than our selves? and have thou not prescribed us a set form of prayer to ask it
with? And shall we cast thy prayer behind our backs, and presume to come before
thee without it? are we wiser than the Lord of life, or is there any nearer way
to Heaven, than that which he has taught us? shall we present the Lord with
our own husks, and trample on the Manna which he has prepared for us? Is there
any other spirit to teach us to pray, than the Spirit of the Lord, which taught
us in his Gospel? When we petition to any of our superiors on earth, then we
premeditate, and cull out filed and curious words, worthy of his personage: But
when we should pray to the Almighty, then any thing which lies uppermost is
shot out at him, like water out of a squirt, and what pleases our foolish
fantasies, that we pretend to be the Spirit of the Lord. O God arise,
vindicate thy own cause; Let not the soul of thy Turtle Dove be given into the
power of the wicked, For how is the Mother reviled by her Children? and it
grieveth thy servants to see her stones lie in the dust. But, rege venienti
hosts fugierunt, It is Gods Steward, otherwise called Stewart, with must
remedy all this, He must turn our spears into pruning hooks, and our swords
into plow-shares, and so consequently our swordmen into plow-men; The love of
his Subjects must be the Magazine of his Artillery, and their Loyally, and
obedience, must be their chiefest good and honor. O fortunatos nimium sua s^
bona norint, O happy multitude, if they did but know their summum bonum, their
chiefest good; which is loyalty and due obedience to their Sovereign. For he
will not break the Charters of their Corporations, nor invade their rights, and
liberties. He will not distrain for excessive Taxes, nor impose great burdens
on his Subjects. The Law shall be to him as the apple of his eye, and the true
Protestant Religion, as his dearest heart. Learning shall flourish, and the
Universities shall not be destroyed. He will not murder the Prophets, nor
massacre the Citizens before their own doors. He will not contrive plots with
his Impes, and Emissaries, to catch honest men with their estate. Justice shall
run down the streets like streams, and peace shall make the Land flow with milk
and honey. Every man shall eat the fruits of his vineyard, under his own vines:
and enjoy the presence of his family, with the absence of a Soldier. He will
not build up his throne with blood, nor establish his royal state with lies,
and dissembling. Flatterers will he abandon from his Court, and those who keep
other men's estates, will he banish from his Realm. But suppose that he should
eat of the forbidden fruit, do what was right in his own eyes, and evil in the
Lords, To whom shall this great Steward give an account? shall he give his
account to the Inferior servants of his Lord? That would be an audacious and
wicked attempt of them. A high prejudice to the Lord, and a great dishonesty
and disgrace to the Steward in his Office. For the Lord would be extremely
offended. The Inferior servants severely punished, for exacting an account
which only belonged to their Lord; And the Steward would be dismissed of his
Stewardship as dishonest, and unfaithful. Therefore every just and pious
Steward will dye, before he will so much wrong his Lord and Master of his
right, as to give an account of his Stewardship to them, to whom it does not
belong: and although they are so unjust and dishonest to require it; yet he
will give them his He will first suffer himself to be murdered at his own
door, as was Charles the I.
life, before he will be corrupted. For he is accountable to none but unto the
Lord, who will require it as his due; For the Lord called unto Adam, and said
unto him, where art thou? And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I
was afraid, because I was naked, and I hid my self. But what, is this all? Must
the King give an account only of himself? No, he must answer for his subjects
too. Of him to whom much is given, much shall be required. For Adam said, The
woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
Where note, that the subject may cause the Sovereign to sin, and the sin of the
subjects often times pulls down judgments on their Sovereigns head, as well as
on their own, and the King must be their Accomptant. Eve first sinned, But Adam
must be first called in question. Yet he was a King, and therefore none must
call him in question but God, who only was his Superior. But when Adam fell,
did not his Sovereignty fall with him? No, Adam was a King after his fall, and
had his Sovereignty confirmed to him by God for ever. For Genesis 3.16. And thy
desire shall be to thy Husband, and he shall rule over thee, so that Adam did
still retain his superiority. But was not this Sovereignty personally fixed in
Adam, and so dyed with him? No, God did declare it transmissible from Adam, to
the first born. For Genesis 4.7. God said to Cain the first born, speaking of his
younger brother Abel, sub te erit appetitus ejus, and dominaberis ei, Unto thee
shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him.

So that from Adam it does appear, 1. That Kings are ordained by God, not by
the people. 2. That God gave them their regal power. 3. That that power is
above the laws. 4. That they have no Superiors but God. And 5. That God only
has power to call them in question, and punish them if they offend. For --
Crimine ab uno Disce omnes: From that one great offense which Adam the King
committed, and was not accountable, neither did he account with any, but with
God, lea^n all, that the King cannot commit any offense so great, as to give
his Subjects just cause to call him in question, or to take up arms, and with
force to resist him. Which I shall prove with luculent authorities, and
pregnant examples, both human and divine.

I think it is received by all for a truth, That the King is Pater Patriae, the
Father of his Country, Maritus Reip: the Husband of the Commonwealth, and
Dominus Subditorum, the Master of his Subjects. I remember that Roffensis de
potestate Papae, asks this Question, An potestas Adami in filios ac nepotes,
adeoque omnes ubique homines, ex consensu filiorum, ac nepotum dependet, an a
solo Deo ac natura profluit? Whether the power of Adam over his Children and
nephews, and so over all the men in the world, does depend on their consent, or
whether it does not flow from God and Nature? I have already made it clear,
that his power does not depend on their will and consent, but is instituted by
God and Nature. If so? then I ask this Question, Whether the sons of Adam have
any power either from God or Nature, violently to resist and oppose the King
their Father? Which Question, I conceive, may be as truly resolved, that they
have not. For first, there is nothing so fairly written, and so deeply
impressed in Nature, as Obedience: You may see it in every creature; every
brute beast will teach you the obedience due from children to their parents,
and the sovereignty of the parents over their children. Vipers indeed will
destroy their parent; but it is a monster in Nature, and therefore not imitable
by any, but those of a viperous brood. Behold the natural love and obedience of
the pious Storks toward their parents, who feed their feeble and impotent
parents, when they are old, as they fed them being young: And lest Obedience
should lose a reward, the Ae^yptians so esteemed this bird, that they laid a
great penalty on him that should kill it. You may read of many beasts and
fowls, that with bloody strokes will beat away and banish their young from
them; But so great is the natural love and allegiance of their young, that (as
if it had been high treason for them so to do) they will not so much as resist
their parents, but fly from them; teaching every subject his true obedience
toward his Sovereign, and that in this case only when the Sovereign would
unjustly punish him, it is most honorable, and the greatest argument of a
valiant man, to run away. Would not it be a most hideous and detestable thing
for a son to murder his own Father? Nay, suppose the Father should draw his
sword at his Son, would that be a just ground for him presently to run in upon
his Father and stab him? surely I think every man's nature will teach him to
speak better things than these, and to be so far from approving it; that he
will account nothing more horrible, and worthy of so much punishment, Pater
quamvis legum contemptor, quamvis impius sit, tamen pater est. Patri vel matri
nullo modo contradicere debemus, dicant, faciant, quae volunt, says Origenes,
We ought to contradict our Father or Mother by no means, let them say or do
what they please; for be they good or bad, they are our Father and Mother. But
behold a greater than thy Father is here, It is thy King: whose Sword
commands fear, whose Crown imports honor, whose Scepter requires
obedience, whose Throne exacteth reverence, whose Person is sacred, his
Function divine, and his Royal Charge calls for all our prayers. O quam te
m^morem virgo? namoue haud tibi vultus Mortalis, nec vox hominem sonat, O Dea
certe! O King, with what terms of honor shall I style thee? Is it lawful to
call thee a Man? The Almighty has said, that ye are Gods, and I will not say
that ye shall die like men. The radiant beams of your Countenance declare you
more than mortal; For in the light of the Kings countenance there is life,
says Solomon, Prove. 16.15. Neither is their voice like the voice of other men,
For A divine Sentence is in the lips of the King, and his mouth transgresses
not in judgment, Prove. 16.10. Therefore I will conclude, that the King is a
sacred Deity.

A day in his Courts, is better than a thousand, I had rather be a doorkeeper
in the house of the King, than be a Protector, etc. and reign in the tents of
wicked Traitors. For the Kings Throne is established by righteousness and
mercy, but Traitors reign by their Villainies, and raise themselves up by the
blood and downfall of their superiors. Psa. 72.1.
But God has given his judgments to the King, and his righteousness unto the
Kings son, and he will judge the people with righteousness, and the poor with
judgment. Therefore kiss the son lest he be angry, Psa. 2.12.
and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed
are all they that are trusty and faithful unto him. Eccles. 8.23.
I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment, and that in regard of the Oath
of God; Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil thing, for he
does whatsoever he pleases. Zecha. 9.9.
Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion, shout O daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy
King comes unto thee, he is black, but comely, he is just, Isa. 49.23.
and will be a nursing father to the people, and his Queen shall be a nursing
mother, For God has made him our King; Rev. 1.6.
And our King cannot be made glad with our wickedness. But our lies and
hypocrisy, Hos. 7.3.
grieve him to the heart. Prove. 29.4. Prove. 16.12. Prove 31.4.
The King by Judgment shall establish the Land. It is abomination to Kings to
commit wickedness, neither is it for Kings to drink wine, Mercy and truth
preserve the King, and his Throne is upholden by mercy. Therefore thrice happy
would the people be, if they did not rebel against the Lords anointed, who is
righteous and pious, For when the righteous are in authority, Prove. 29.2.
the people rejoice, but when the wicked bears rule, the people mourn.
Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and stubornnesse is as Iniqvity, 1 Samuel
15.23.
and Idolatry, and an evil man only seeks Rebellion. Prove. 17.11. Isa. 1.2^.
Therefore a cruel M^ssenger shall be sent against him, For if ye rebel, ye
shall be devoured. Therefore Rebel not against the Lord, nor the King. But when
he comes, salute him, Josh. 22.19. Mark 15.18.
Hail King; but not of the Jews, for you profess yourselves Christians;
Therefore learn of Christ obedience to the King. But s^ppose you were Jews, the
Jews abound with reverence to their King, and loath to be so wicked, as to
murder their King. John 19.15.
For when Pilate said, Behold your King, shall I Crucify your King? They
answered, We have no King but Caesar, accounting it a most barbarous and worse
than Jewish act, for any people to crucify their King, though in a way of
public justice. Therefore even of the Jews let Christians learn their duty to
their King, and rejoice at his coming, as the Bribe does, at the approach of
the Bridegroom. The Husbandmen indeed, Mat. 21.38.
in the Gospel, killed the servants, and when the son came to demand the fruits
of his Fathers Vineyard, they conspired against him, and said, This is the
Heir, come let us kill him, and the Inheritance shall be ours. But they were
wicked, and their Judgment and doom was, miserably to be destroyed, to have
their Vineyard taken from them, and to be let out to others who would yield
better obedience, and render the fruits in their seasons: Therefore let all men
take heed, that they do not perish in the gainsaying of Core, and with those
wicked Idolaters, Isa. 8.21. Curse their King and their God, and look upwards.
Whose reward is Hell, where the Devil shall curb them, and rule over them for
ever, because they would not let their King whom God placed over them be, as in
truth he was and is, their only lawful Sovereign.

It is so well known to every one who knows any thing, how the Heathens did
honor their Kings as Gods, not only when they were dead, but also whilst they
were living, that it would not only be loss of ink and paper, but also
expense of time, which is better, to relate the particulars. But ( pudet heu)
their obedience and allegiance may shame, as well as be a pattern to the
Christians of our age, who wander so far from the path their Lord and Master
went in. And if any one be desirous to know how God has always esteemed of
Kings, and with what reverence Gods people have always obeyed them, I refer
him to the Bible; Where (I may with confidenee speak it) there is no duty more
commanded, and pressed upon the people, than obedience, and no sin so much
punished as Treason and Rebellion. And the chiefest end of their obedience to
the King, is not only for God his glory, and the Kings honor, but also for
their own good, praise, and profit. For, for this cause did the Apostle exhort
the people, to pray for Kings, and all that are in authority, That we may lead
a quiet and peaceable life, for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God
our Savior, 1 Timothy 2.2. O Melilaee, Deus nobis haec otia fecit. Virgil could
tell that the welfare of the King brought Tranquillity, and Peace upon the
Land, and therefore he calls him a God; Nay, he will therefore honor him as
a God, Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus, says he; And I fear his allegiance
and due obedience will rise in Judgment, to condemn many who profess
themselves Christians, yet by their actions are worse than Infidels, who Judas
like pretend loyalty to their Sovereign, whilst they plot and contrive with a
kiss to betray him; But Judas hanged himself, and if these men do not hang
themselves, It is a great mercy beyond their deserts, if some body else do not
do it for them, before they live out half their days. For in the fifth
Commandment, which as Divines hold is most obliging, We are commanded to honor
our Father and Mother (by which words are meant Kings, Princes, and other
Magistrates,) That our days may be long upon the Land which the Lord our God
gives us, which is the first Commandment with promise, as St. Paul observes,
Ephesians. 6.2. But this promise is not absolute, lt is upon this condition, that
we honor and obey our Sovereign, and if we do not perform our parts, God is
not tied to perform his. If we break his Commandments, he may well break his
promise, which was made only on that condition that we should obey, and if we
had loved him we should have kept his Commandments; But whosoever breaks one
one of them, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. Therefore he who gets a
kingdom by the breach of Gods Commandments, has no cause to bragg of his
gettings; For what will it profit a man to lose his own soul, and to gain the
whole world?

Let every one be subject unto the higher powers; For there is no power but of
God; The powers that be are ordained of God; Whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive
damnation, says St. Paul, Romans 13.1. Behold here, the duty of a Subject, and
the reward of a Rebel. There is no power hut of God, says the Text; Therefore
he that resists the King, resists the Ordinance of God, for which he shall
receive damnation. What then? if an unjust King robb us of all we have, ravish
our wives before our eyes, dash out our Childrens brains against the wall, set
up Idols, and command us to worship them? May we not resist him? Nonne oportet
Deo magis obedire, quam hominibus? Ought we not to obey God rather than man? I
answer, That ye ought to obey God, rather than man; Yet may you not with
violence resist your King. We must not do evil, that good might come thereon.
God has in many places commanded us to obey, and pray even for the worst of
Kings. Yet you cannot find so much as a spark of warranty, for any subject,
either Magistrate or private man, to rise against his Sovereign, in the whole
Bible, or to call him to an account for any of his actions; God has reserved
that to himself, as his own peculiar prerogative, Magistratus de privatis,
Principes de Magistratibus, Deum de Principibus judicare, says M. Aurelius,
Magistrates are to judge private men, Kings are to judge Magistrates, but none
are to judge Kings but God. The only means which subjects have to reform
Kingdoms, is that which the Apostle prescribes, 1 Timothy 2.1. Let prayers, says
he, and supplications be made for Kings, and all that are in authority, that we
may lead a Godly life. Prayers must be the only weapons of Subjects against
their Kings; Let them look into their own breasts, and reform their own hearts,
which many times are the only causes of a Judgment on the Nation; Let them
amend their own lives, and with fervent supplications implore him, (who has
the Kings heart in his hand, and turns it whithersoever he will) to reform
the King according to his desire. Christiani hominis esse patienter far
potius, quicquid injuriarum ac molestiarum infertur, quam ut adigi se sinat ad
peccandum contra Deum, It is the part of a Christian, rather to suffer
patiently what injury or persecution soever is laid upon him, than to offend
God, says Stephanus Szegedinus, Interea tamen non esse illicitum, si quis vim
injustam, vel avertere, vel fugere, vel aliquousque mitigare possit, modo id
fiat rationibus haud illicitis; Quod si id fieri non potest, Cavebit
Christianus, ne illatam vim contraria violentia retundere conetur, sed
tolerabit potius omnia, nec de vindicando se cogitanit, sed vindictam j^sto
Judici permittet, says the same Author; Yet it is not unlawful if a man can,
to avert an unlawful violence, to fly from it, or otherwise mitigate it, so
he does not do it by unlawful means; But if he cannot do it by lawful means, a
Christian will take heed, and not endeavor to repel an unjust violence
offered, with an unjust force: No, he will rather suffer all things first;
neither will he so much as think of revenge, but will leave that to God, the
just Judge, to whom vengeance belongs. O vocem vere Christianam! O speech
most worthy of a Christian. If Herod be wroth, and send forth, and slay all the
Children that are in Bethlehem, and in all the coas^s thereof, so that there be
lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children
and will not be comforted, because they are not; yet will he fly into Egypt
with our Savior, and stay there until Herod be dead, rather than he will
rebel against his Sovereign, resist Gods Ordinance, and so damn his own soul.
If Saul send messengers to bring him up to him in the bed that he may slay him,
or pursue him with 3000. chosen men of Israel, yet will not he put forth his
hand against his Sovereign, for he is the Lords anointed: Nay if it be in his
power, and he is counseled to kill him, yet with holy David he will cry out,
The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my master, the Lords
anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the anointed of
the Lord. His heart will smite him if he cut off his skirts, but he will suffer
all things before he will cut off his Kings head; Mat. 10.23
for who can do that and be guiltless? If the King persecute him in this City,
he will fly into another. He has learned of his Master to be subject to his
Sovereign, not only for wrath, Rom, 13.5.
but also for conscience sake. He is good, and the rulers are not a terror to
him. The evil and wicked will murder their Sovereign, for fear his justice
should reward them with death, according to their deserts; But he will not like
those filthy dreamers, speak evil of dignities, Jude 1.8, 10, 11. 2 Pet. 2.10,
11.
and despise Dominion, his tears are his arms, and patience his revenger. --
Levius fit patientia, Hor. Ode 24.
Quicquid corrigi est nefas: Though it be unlawful for him to gather Soldiers
with force and arms to correct, and take his Sovereign from his evil
Counselors, yet patience shall both assist, and give him the victory. St.
Ambrose and he are always in one time, Ambrosius in Orat. contra Auxen. Tom 5.
saying, I have not learned to resist, but I can grieve, and weep, and sigh,
and against the weapons of the Soldiers, and the Goths, my tears and my
prayers are my weapons: otherwise, neither ought I, neither can I resist. If
the King says, God do so, and more also to me, 2 Kings 6 32.
if the head of this follow shall stand on him this day, and likewise send a
Messenger to cut it off: yet, with Elisha, he will only shut the door against
him, and offer no other violence, though it lie in his power. If a multitude
come out with swords and staves against him, lay hold on him, and lead him away
to the Rulers who condemn him, and deliver him to the wicked soldiers to be
crucified; yet in imitation of his Lord and Master, he will say nothing, rather
than revile them; though they spit upon him, he will meekly wipe it off; If
they crown him with thorns, he will patiently suffer it; If they give him
Vinegar mingled with gall to drink, he will taste it; If they crucify him, he
will voluntarily spread forth his humble hands to be nailed on the Cross, and
will not resist the higher Powers, for the Lords sake. If they saw him in
pieces, he will remember that Esaias suffered the same punishment. If they cast
him into a Dungeon, so was Jeremiah the Prophet. Solamen miseris socios
habuisse Doloris. There is nothing so comfortable as to have companions in
misery. If he be cast in to Lions, so was Daniel. If he be thrown into a fiery
Furnace, so were the three Children. If he be thrust through the Temples, so
was Amos. If he be slain in the porch of the Temple, so was Zacharias. If he be
cast into the Sea, so was Jonas. If he be killed with the Sword, so was Vrias
the Prophet. If his head be cut off, so was John Baptists. If he be fastened to
the Cross, with his head downwards, so was St. Peter. If he be crucified, so
was St. Andrew. If he be murdered with the Sword, so was St. James, the son of
Zebedaeus. If he be thrown into a tun of boiling oil, so was St. John the
Evangelist. If he be beaten to death with clubs, so was St. Bartholomew. If he
be slain with a Dart, or Javelin, so was St. Thomas. If he be beheaded, so was
St. Matthew. If he be crucified, so was St. Simon. If he be slain, so was St.
Jude. If he be put upon a pinnacle of the Temple, thrown down, and after his
fall, having breath, be knocked on the head, with fullers clubs, and brained, so
was St. James the son of Alphaeus. If he be first stoned, and then beheaded, so
was St. Mathias. If his head be cut off, so was St. Paul's. If he be burned to
ashes, by furious Idolaters, so was St. Mark. There is no punishment so
dreadful to his body, that shall cause his soul to break Gods ordinance, to
lift up his hand against his King, and so bring damnation to his own soul.
Occidi licet, occidere non licet, It is honorable to be martyred an innocent
Subject, But it is infamy to live a victorious Rebel. Preces and Lacrimae sunt
arma Ecclesiae, Churchmen must use no other weapons against their Sovereign,
than prayers and tears. He that uses the Sword, shall perish by the Sword,
and he that fights against his King, sighteth against God. For they have not
rejected thee, but they have rejected me. says God, that I should not reign
over them: 1 Samuel 8.7. And if God does not rule over them, then the Devil, who
goes to and fro in the earth, and walks up and down in it, will puff up the
heart of every sectarie, with the Pride of ruling, and ever the prevailing
faction, will set up an Idol to worship, until Satan does make another faction
stronger than that, and then down goes the former Idol, and the Idolaters with
it, and up starteth another, altogether as wicked and uncertain as the other.

Christ never taught it, neither did ever any of the Prophets or Apostles, by
their doctrine or example, give the least liberty that could be, to any Subjects
to levy war against their Sovereign: But have forbid it, as a most detestable
wickedness, both by their Doctrine, Precepts, Persuasions, Arguments, Commands
and Examples; most of them suffering themselves to be most cruelly tortured,
and ignominiously murdered, before they would resist the higher powers; Nay,
they have forbiden all evil words or thoughts against them, commanding and
instructing the people to pray even for the worst of Tyrants. What Tyrant more
savage and cruel than Nebuchadnezzar? Yet with what earnest expressions did the
Prophet Jeremiah exhort the people to obey him, threatening them with utter
destruction for their Rebellion? What Tyrant more bloody than Nero? that
Monster to the world, and Idolatrous Persecutor; Yet St. Paul bids the Romans
obey and serve him for Conscience sake. Saul commanded the Amalekite to kill
him, who when he had performed the Kings command, brought word thereof to
David, which when David heard, although Saul was a wicked King, He said to the
Amalekite, Wast not thou afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the
Lords anointed? and commanded him to be slain for his pains, and said, thy
blood be upon thy head, for thy mouth has testified against thee, saying, I
have slain the Lords anointed, 2 Samuel 1 16.

Innumerous are the precepts of loyal obedience, to which fot brevity sake, I
refer you to the Bible, which is an Iliad of such examples. Could not our
Savior have had more than twelve Legions of Angles, to have repelled the fury
of his persecutors? But he was so far from resisting, that he bid Peter, who
had drawn his Sword, put it into his place, and moreover told him, that they
that use the Sword, shall perish with the Sword. Could not David have cut off
S^uls head, when he cut off the lap of his Garment? Yet his heart did smite
him, and he was not able to perpetrate so great a sin. How many glorious
Martyrs, both ancient and modern, as those in Queen Mary's days, have been
burnt alive, racked and torn in pieces, yet never would resist any of their
persecutors? How dare the men then of our age, blaspheme God, even in their
pulpits? teaching the people to rebel, and making God the Author of all their
villainies, telling the multitude, It is Gods cause, even when they are acting
the most damnable works of the Devil. How justly may they expect the punishment
of Sodom and Gomorrah, the plagues of Egypt, and all the Curses in Hell to fall
upon them and their posterity for ever? If they have any special command from
God, or be immediately inspired of him to kill their King, then may they be
justified, as in the cases of Eglon, Zimri, Jehu, etc. who did nothing but what
was just, when they killed the Lords anointed, because they had Gods will to be
their Commander, and no man can sin in performing Gods will: For, sin is
nothing but an obliquitie from Gods will. But when they know that it is Gods
will, to honor and obey their Sovereign, yet notwithstanding trample him in
the dirt; What Judgment can they expect but that of their Master Lucifer, to
be chained in everlasting Hell fire?

Qui disputat de potestate Principis, utrum been fecerit, est infamis, says
Marginista. He which disputes of the Kings power, or whether he does well or
no, deserves the most infamous punishment. For, Tibi soli peccavi, against
thee, thee only have I sinned and done this evil, O Lord, says holy David,
when he committed adultery, and, Psalm. 51.4. Murder, as if he should have
said, I am a King, and therefore cannot be brought to the bar of Justice by
men; They can give me no Laws to bind me, therefore I cannot offend them. 2 Samuel 12.7. But against thee, thee only, O Lord have I sinned, and done his
evil, against thee, who did raise me out of the dust, and liftedst me needy
out of the dunghill, and did ^noint me King over Israel, and deliveredst me
out of the ^and of Saul, and gave me my Masters house, and my Masters wives
into my bosom, and gave me the house of Israel and Judah, and if that had
been too little, thou would moreover have given unto me such and such
things. Against thee, who have made me Judge over all, and loaded me with so
many prerogatives above my brethren, have I sinned, and for the Judge to offend
makes the offense so much the more grievous. The people did not call David in
question for his wicked acts, but only God. Deus suam omnem in reges
authoritatem contulit, caelum sibi retinuit, terram agendam, ferendamque pro
libito tradidit, All the whole Heavens are the Lords, the Earth has he given
to Kings, to dispose of as they please. Therefore says Solomon, Prove. 30.31. A
King is he against whom there is no rising up. And therefore Job might well ask
that question, 34.18. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked, and to
Princes, ye are ungodly? For presumptuous are they, and self-willed, who are
not afraid to speak evil of dignities, 2 Pet. 10. Render to Caesar, the things
that are Caesar's, Mark 12.17. Render therefore to all their dues, Tribute to
whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom
Honor. For Rulers are not a Terror to good works, but to the evil; will thou
then not be afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and thou shall have
praise of the same: For he is the Minister of God, to thee for good. But if
thou do that which is evil, be afraid: for he bears not the sword in vain;
for he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does
evil. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
Conscience sake; For, for this cause pay you Tribute also. For they are Gods
Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing, Romans 13. Submit your
self to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as
Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well; for so is
the will of God, that with well-doing, you may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men, As free, and not using your liberty for a Cloak of maliciousness,
but as the servant of God. Honor all men, love the brotherhood; Fear God,
honor the King.

We are commanded to obey the King, whether he be good or evil, Propter Deum,
for the Lords sake; Not only because it is the will of the King, but because it
is the will of God, that we should do so, he has commanded it, and therefore
for his sake we must do it; If we resist the King, we resist God, and he that
resists God, shall receive damnation. For when we pretend that we are free
born Subjects, that the Kings commands entrench upon our liberty, and that for
the freedom of our liberties, we may rebel against him, This is to make Liberty
a Cloak to cover our maliciousness, and wicked designs against the King, Which
is forbidden by the Apostle; for not to serve the King is bondage, and to rise
up against him to preserve and keep our liberties, is to enslave our selves to
the Devil, and to make us his servants to perform all wicked actions; For we
must needs be Subject to the Kings precepts, not only for wrath, but also for
Conscience sake. Et si plures sunt quos corrigit timor, tamen meliores sunt
quos ducit amor; Although they be most whom fear makes obedient; Yet they are
best who out of true love obey their Sovereign. We must not obey the King only,
that we may avoid giving of him offense, and so not incurr punishment; But it
is a duty laid upon our Consciences so to do, and if we love God, we must love
as faithful Servants to be obedient unto the King, not as eye servants, who
only do their duty when their Master looks over them; But all our actions,
either public or private, must savor of obedience to him, For he is our
Master, and we are his Servants, and the Servant is not greater than his
Master, but ought always to be diligent in his Masters service. And although
the King do recompense good with evil, and punish them who like faithful
Servants have not deserved it, Yet they being good, even in their sufferings
shall receive praise from the power, as did our Savior and the Apostles, when
they were most wickedly murdered. For do we not until this day praise and
honor their Martyrdom? Although the power which destroyed them, did not give
them praise; yet by their obedience, and patience in their unjust punishments,
did they receive a Crown of everlasting glory, and renown from God and men. Who
can sufficiently celebrate the fame of those worthy Martyrs, who unjustly
suffered for Religion, under the Government of Queen Mary? Have not they by
their unjust punishments received greater rewards of praise, than if they had
unjustly rebelled? Surely yea, for if they had rebelled, although it was to
save their Religion, their Epitaphs would have been Rebels and Traitors,
instead of pious and Godly Martyrs. The wicked only are afraid of the Kings
power and punishments, to whom he is a Terror; But a conscience void of
offense toward God and toward man, makes the courage of the righteous like
Lions, to contemn all earthly misery.

-- Hic Murus aheneus esto
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa,
Be this a wall of Brass, to have within
No black accuser, harbor no pale sin.
Non est fas Christianis, armis, ac vi, tueri se adversus impetum persecutorum,
says Cyprian, Epist. 1. It is not lawful for Christians by violence to defend
themselves against Persecutors; Therefore surely they ought not to murder
their King, and again Cyprian, Epist. 56. Incumbamus gemitibus assiduis, and
deprecationibus crebris, haec enim sunt munimenta spiritualia, and tela divina
quae protegunt; Let us apply our selves to daily sighs, and continual prayers,
for these are the spiritual bulwarks, and divine weapons, with which Christians
should only fight, These, not guns and swords, will only defend us. Ambrosius
adversus reginae (Justinae Arianae) furorem, non se manu defensabat, aut telo,
sed jejuniis, continuatisque vigiliis sub altari positus, Ruffinus li. 2. c. 6.
Ambrose did not defend himself against the fury of the Queen, by the force of
the hand, and of the sword, but by fastings, continual watchings and prayers;
And shall we offend our gracious Sovereign, with clubbs and axes? Who by his
sufferings showed us the example of a true Christian, whiles we like Jews
triumph in his murder, crying out, crucify him, crucify him. Tertulian Apolog.
c. 37. says expressly, that the Christians might for strength and number have
defended themselves against their Persecutors, but thought it unlawful; Yet we,
because by our wicked plots and devices, we have got a numberless company, of
those who like our selves, will do any thing for gain, think it a sin, if we do
not perform any wickedness, which our power will assist us to effect.

[Sen. Medea.] Tremenda caelo pariter, ac terris mala
Men's intus agitat, vulnera, and caedem, and vagum
Funus per artus. levia memoravi nimis;
Haec virgo feci.
Homicides, Paricides, Mauslaughters, murders, oppressions, deceits,
extortions, briberies, and such like offenses, we committed in our youthful
years, when the Gospel was first planted in England, but now we are become
great proficients in Christianity, we are now high, and mighty Christians, not
fit to be fed with milk, as babes and sucklings, but with the blood of Kings,
Regicides are our passetimes, and to murder the King, is holden to be one of
the chiefest Principles, and proofs of a sound Christian: whole Nations gather
together, and make a Covenant, to murder their Kings, which they hold to be as
sacred, and as beneficial, as the old or new covenant in the Bible; but, Quae
scelere pacta est, scelere rumpetur fides, That Covenant and trust which is
made by wickedness, by wickedness may be broken, which does most evidently
appear in the transactions of the English and Scottish Rebels; For they most
wickedly swore, and made a Covenant against the King, like those Traitors of
whom King David complained, Psalm. 102.8. And after they had murdered the King,
then they swore, and made Covenants one party against another, so that, like
those wicked men in Hosea 4.2. by swearing, and lying, and killing, and
stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, blood touches blood,
because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land;
verifying the Proverb of King Solomon, Prove. 26.27. Who so diggeth a pit, shall
fall therein; and he that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him: for
Rebellion, by which they murdered the King, is returned upon them, and they
now rebel one against the other: so that we may truly say, their own
iniquities have taken the wicked themselves, Prove. 5.22. and they perish by the
devices and imaginations of their own hearts; fulfilling the Scripture, Prove.
11.21. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished, but the
seed of the righteous shall be delivered. For notwithstanding all the wicked
plots, and inventions of the bloody Rebels, yet is our King C. 2. the seed of
our most righteous Sovereign whom they destroyed, delivered out of their hands,
as the bird out of the nets and snares of the fowler, or as the innocent Heart,
out of the mouths of the bloody hounds, Whilst they rage and are madd one
against the other. O the goodness and providence of the Almighty God!

Where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what
do thou? Eccles. 8. 2, 3, 4. The fear of a King, is as the roaring of a Lion,
who so provokes him to anger, sins against his own soul, Prove. 20.2. What
sins then are we guilty of, who not only provoke our King to anger, but quench
his anger with his own blood? St. Peter teaches us another lesson, which you
cannot hear too often, 1 Pet. 2.13, 17. Submit your selves to every ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto
Governors, as unto them who are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers,
and for the praise of them that do well, for so is the will of God. Honor all
men, love the Brotherhood, Fear God, and honor the King. And to see the Civil
Law, and the Divine Law go hand in hand, harmoniously agreeing, and consenting,
to lead a loyal subject into due obedience, and allegiance to his Sovereign, is
no less delightful to the Royalist, than envyed by the Rebels, which Barclay
does out of the best Civil Lawyers, sum up together, cap. 14. saying, Principem
ex certa scientia, supra jus, extra jus, and contra jus, omnia posse. Et esse
crimen sacrilegii instar, disputare de potestate Principis. Et Principem esse
legem animatam in terris. Et Principem solum posse condere statuta; licet
humanum sit, quod consilio Procerum utatur. Denique Principem posse tollere
leges positivas, quia illis non subjicitur, sed illae sibi. Et Deum Principi
leges subjecisse, and nullam Legem ejus Celsitudini imponi posse. Et licet de
jure aliquid non valeat, si tamen Princeps de facto mandat servari, perinde
est, ac si de jure valeret, quoad subditos. Et solum Principem soli Deo habere
de peccato reddere rationem, and soli Caelo debere innocentiae rationem. Et
temerarium esse velle Majestatem regiam, ullis terminis limitare. Et Principem
re vera esse solutum Legibus. The Latin is so elegant, that I will not cloth
it in English rags. None but blind Sodomites who grope for the wall at noon
day, will not here see the door which opens to obedience, and go in;
concluding, That the King is free from the Laws, and cannot be limited by any
humane invention; may do what he please, and if he be more a Tyrant than
Phalaris, or Nerone Nerouior, degenerate from all humanity, and prove a Wolf to
his People; Yet by the Law of God, by the Law of Nations, by the Law of Nature,
by the Law of the Land, by the example of all Saints, by the rule of Honesty,
and by all equitable considerations, It is not lawful for his Subjects, nor any
man, or any degree, or sort of men within his Dominions, upon this pretense of
Tyranny, to rebel against their Sovereign. For if any cause should be allowed
to be just for the Subjects to rebel, then that cause would always be alleged
by the Rebels, though in truth they had no such cause at all; For whom one man
and his Company did esteem a good, Pious, and Religious Prince, another party
would proclaim him wicked, Tyrannical, and Idolatrous; And who shall be judge
between them, but the sword? and then Excessit medicina modum, The remedy would
be worse than the disease. For it is an undoubted truth, that Subjects did
never despose their Prince, although he was a Tyrant, But that a multitude of
Tyrants, far worse than they pretended their Prince to be, did rise up in his
room. By the cutting off the head of one snake, twenty snakes grow in the same
place; Therefore it is not profitable as well as not lawful for subjects to
resist their King. For hear what Bodine says, O how many Tyrants should there
be, If it should be lawful for subjects to kill their Sovereigns though
Tyrants? How many good and innocent Princes should as Tyrants perish, by the
conspiracy of their subjects against them; he that should of his subjects exact
subsidies, should be then (as the vulgar people account him) a Tyrant. He that
should rule and command contrary to the good liking of the people should be a
Tyrant. He that should keep strong guards and garrisons, for the safety of his
person, should be Tyrant. He that should put to death Traitors and Conspirators
against his State, should be also counted a Tyrant; And indeed how should good
Princes be assured of their lives, if under the color of Tyranny they might be
slain of their subjects by whom they ought to be defended? Then what madness is
that Nation intoxicated with, who throw down a pious, good, and religious
Prince, to promote a multitude of lawless Tyrants, whose little finger is
heavier than the whole loins of their Lawful native Sovereign?

The King, as I said, is the Husband of the Commonwealth; and the Wife is not
greater than her Husband, because she had once power to choose whom she would,
and because the man could not have been her Husband, without her consent. It is
no argument that she has power to turn away her Husband, because she made him
her Husband. No, it is God who gives the Marital power; he gave her the
Husband, and gave him power over her, so that she cannot t^rn him from her,
though he prove never so wicked. So though the people choose them a King, and
are the cause, sine qua non, yet it is God who is the author of his royal
power; And the people can no more dethrone him, and elect another, than the
wife can her Husband. And it is as good an argument, to hold that the wife has
power to put away her Husband, and choose another, because she made him her
Husband; As it is that the people may cast off their obedience to their
Sovereign, and set up another, because they made him their King. The Cardinals
make the Pope, and the Clerks the Bishop; but it would be a strange thing to
them, if one should tell them, that therefore the Cardinals and Clerks might
degrade them, when they pleased. Suppose the Soldiers should choose them a
General, would not the General think it strange Logic, to argue, that
therefore the Soldiers might turn him out of his office when they pleased?
Indeed, where the superior makes an Inferior officer, he may deject him at his
pleasure. As in a Prineipality (which is nothing else but an Aristocracy or
Democracy) where the people create a Magistrate to rule so long as they please,
they may turn him out at their will, because they always tetain a power of
Constituting, and rejecting him when they think fit. So the King may turn out
Parliaments when he will, because they depend upon him, and their power is
inferior to his. But when the woman has taken a Husband, when the Commonwealth
is married and subjected to a King, then the Commonwealth has no power, but
all her power is ttansmitted to her Husband the King. For, Omnia quae sunt
uxoris sunt ipsius viri, non habet uxor potestatem sui, sed vir, All that the
wife has is the husbands, and the wife has not power over her self, but the
husband. The people by their election, denude themselves of all their power,
and transfer it to the King, so that he is the only fountain, from whence they
draw every drop of power they have. As when Valentinian was desired of his
people to admit of a consort in his Empire, he answered them, In eorum fuisse
potestate priusquam eum ad imperium vocarent, id non facere, jam vero vocato
imperatore eos non posse, nec ab eo impetrare quod nefas crederet illis
concedere, That before they had elected him, it was in their power, either to
elect him, or another, but now he being elected, they had no such power,
neither ought they for to ask that, which he thought not fit to grant them. It
is a prejudice to a royal mind, to be compelled to any thing, compulsion
diminishes the worth of a voluntary goodness. It is against the nature of
Royalty to be restrained, which makes Kings say, Licet Legibus soluti sumus,
attamen legibus vivimus, Though no man has power to compel us to live
according to the Laws, Yet we will. For Decet tantae Majestati eas servare
leges quibus ipse solutus esse videtur, It is the part of a royal Prince, nay
very decent and becoming so great Majesty, voluntarily to observe those Laws
from which he is free.

German. vates. -- Nihil ut verum fatear, magis esse Decorum
Aut regale puto, quam legis jure solutum,
Sponte tamen legi sese supponere regem.
But if our Prince should not rule his life according to the Laws, yet it is
our duties so to do, and we are commanded to obey him, and acknowledge him our
King, though he be never so wicked; For we are his Servants; Nay, his Servants
by birth, and therefore enjoined by a command to serve him, 1 Pet. 2.18.
Servants be subject to your Masters, with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, But also to the froward. For this is thanks worthy, if a man for
Conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. Nullus nascitur liber
ab imperio; No man is born exempted from the subjection of Government. Our
Savior himself, as man, was not free from this; for he was subject to his
Father and Mother, Luke 2.51. and also to the King, though he is the King of
Kings, and all earthly Kings are only dependent upon God and Christ, whose
vicegerents they are. I admire with what impudence our terrae filii, these
screeching Oules, the men of our pale-face'd times, can blasphemously give the
Almighty the lie, and say, per nor reges regnant, by us Kings reign, we give
Kings, and take them away, When God plainly tells them and all the world, per
me Reges regnant, By me Kings reign, I give Kings and take them away; and
doubtless these Quacksalvers have as great authority and warrant from the
Scripture to say, By us the Sun rules the day, and the Moon the night, and we
gave the heavens and the earth their being, as they have to maintain this their
detestable opinion, viz. that the Kings power is radically in the people, and
derived from them to him; For nemo est Dominus suae vitae, no man has power
over his own life, and therefore none can give that to another, which he has
not in himself; God only has power over life, and death, and he has given
this power to Kings, as he has evidently declared in his holy writ; And I am
sure, God who has said that by him Kings reign, is true, Romans 3.4. And every
man who says the contrary is a Liar. Then if God only instituted, and gave
Kings, God can only take them away; For Eodem modo quo quid constituitur,
diss^lvitur, Things are dissolved as they are contracted; Therefore every man
should say with the French Bishop, mentioned in Greog. Turon. Hist. 4. lib. 5.
Si quis de nobis, O Rex, Justitiae tramites transcendere voluerit, a te corripi
potest, si tu vero excesseris, quis te corripiet? loquimur enim tibi, sed si
volueris, audis, si autem nolueris, quis te damnabit, nisi qui se pronunciavit
esse justitiam? If any of us offend the King, thou may correct us, but if
thou shall exceed, who shall correct thee? we may speak unto thee, and if thou will thou may hear us, But if thou will not, none can condemn thee, but he
who is Justice it self; Therefore every one should endeavor to be that true
obedient described by St. Bernard, Verus Obediens, non attendit quale sit quod
praecipitur, hoc solo contentus, quia praecipitur, He that is truly obedient,
regards not what is commanded, being content only with this, that it is
commanded. We should be as diligent to obey, and preserve our King, as the
apple our eye, and take as much delight in him, as we do in the light, for he is
worth ten thousand of us; Therefore the Israelites would not let David their
King adventure himself in the war against his rebellious Son, and their reason
was, Thou art worth ten thousand of us, so in the war against the Philistines,
They swear, Thou shall no more go out with us, because they esteemed him as the
light of the Kingdom, and say, 2 Samuel 18.31. That thou quench not the light of
Israel; if he should miscarry, they accounted themselves to be but in
darkeness; And if we were true Israelites indeed, in whom there was no guile,
we should have the same estimation of our dread Sovereign, nulli pietate
secundus, who is a second David. But suppose he was (as he is not) a Tyrant,
were it not better for us to serve one hard, yet honorable, Master, than a
hundred domineering, yet base ^red Tyrants? Si pereo, manibus hominum periisse
ju^abit, If we must be killed and made slaves of, let the King, who is our
superior do it, and not our servants, who have no greater pedigree, than
an^ient servants, and no other cause of their promotion, than their wickedness,
Praestat timere unum ^uam multos, It is better to fear one than many, Better
one woolf than many, to put our lives in continual hazard. It is a Maxim in
Law, that the King shall have the estates, and protection of their persons who
are non compos mentis, Idiots, etc. May not the King then justly and with good
title, by this rule, challenge both our estates, and our persons? Surely he
may, for if we were not worse than mad men and fools, we should never expel a
gracious and merciful Sovereign, and subject our selves to a company of the
Lord knows what, A monster without head or tail, more wonderful than Chimaera;
they would, and they would not, they themselves cannot tell what to make of
themselves, neither can any man tell where to have them, like empty clouds and
foggy mists they are blown about with every wind; But it is to be feared that
the Devil will catch them at the long run, who now drink blood like sponges,
and only know how to be wicked, oppressing both Law and Religion. Did the King
demand Ship-mony, (as by the witness, the resolution of all the Judges in
England, in the reign of Charles the I. etc. For suppose that the Parliament
turn Traitors and Rebel against the King, as did the long Parliament, Is it not
profitable for the people, and lawful for the King alone, to command money and
assistance of his subjects, to subdue the Rebels, and oppose a foreign Navy, who
are coming to destroy, and swallow up both King and people? Surely none but a
madman will deny, but that it is most lawful, just, and the only safety of the
people, and their estates. Indeed, as it is the best way for a thief to bind
the honest man, he does intend to robb, so it is the safest, and best way, for
that Parliament (who do intend to murder the King, and take away all that he
has) to bind the King as fast as they can, to take away his Negative voice,
and all his just praerogatives, to make all his legal power, whereby he might
withstand their violence, illegal; Nay, it is their best way to tie the King up
from his meat to, make him stand for a Cipher, a mere nothing, that so they
being the predominant figures, may chop off his head, or do what they list with
him, as did the long Parliament; who from trespass to high Treason against God
and the King, have omitted no offense undone; But their soundest Doctrine, will
prove but Apochrypha, to all honest Parliaments. I do confess, that except it
be in cases of necessity, the King can lay no tallage upon the people, without
their consent in Parliament; and so not shipmoney, which in truth is condemned
by the Statutes of 25 E. 1 and 34 E. 1. de Tallagio non concedendo, Dangelit,
Englishty, because the King has restrained his power, by his Statutes. But if
the King could not tax the people with shipmony, and other impositions in
extrao^dinary cases of necessity, aa when a foreign Enemy does suddenly invade
the Land, being invited in by a prevalent faction, in a refractory Parliament,
who would ruin themselves and the whole Kingdom, so that they might ruin
their King, and fulfill their wicked wills, who will not grant shipmoney, or
any thing else to the King, lest he should be provided to oppose them, and
defend himself, and the people in safety: I say, that if in this and such like
cases, the King may not lawfully lay tallages on the people, and command their
assistance, I had rather be a slave, than a King, and should account my self
the Vassal of the people, not their King. But in truth, the King cannot denude
himself of this power, nor by any Statute or Law, tie himself from it: For it
is inseparable from the Crown, Et quod sceptro inhaeret non potest tolli, nisi
sublato sceptro, And therefore cannot be taken from the King, unless the Crown
with it: which rule the long Parliament have truly verifyed. For when they had
taken away his chiefest praerogative, they could not forbear, but presently
took off his Crown from his head, and then his head from his shoulders. Sic
transit gloria mundi.
Law in extraordinary cases he might,) and was he condemned, and vilifyed, as
unjust, and a breaker of the peoples liberty? What are they then, who against
all Law and Equity take away all that we have, only to satisfy their own
ambitions, Atheistical appetites, and to maintain themselves in their most
wicked, devilish, and incomparable villainies? Did the King demand five
treacherous Members of the Parliament, whom the Law would have condemned guilty
of high Treason? And was he adjudged an Enemy to Parliaments, and an Infringer
of their freedoms? What are they then to be adjudged, who do what they list,
hang or draw, our Members, and persons, and play with Parliaments, as Children
do with Rattles, or as Butchers, their slaughtering axes, throw them away when
they have done with them, and dismount, and thrust out that * what do you call
it? [* Quondam Parl.] which first gave them their being? O viperous brood, who
destroy that viper which engendered them! But since by the Law of the Land, Mad
men shall not be punished for committing of Felony or Murder, Lest we (being
madmen and fools as I have said before) should murder our King, and think to
excuse our selves, by pleading, non compos mentis, Let me tell you, that though
one that is not of his right mind, shall not be punished if he commit Felony,
Murder, petite Treason, etc. Yet if he kill, or offer to kill the King, it is
high Treason, and he shall suffer punishment as other Traitors ought to do; let
Cook the Oracle of the Law, give the reason, li. 4. fo. 124. Car le Roy, Est
Caput, and salus Reipublicae, and a Capite bona valetudo transit in omnes, and
pur cest cause lour persons sont cy sacred, que null doit a eux offer violence,
mes il est, Reus criminis laesae Majestatis, and pereat unus, ne pereant omnes.
For the King is the head, says he, and health of the Commonwealth, upon whom
the safety of all does depend; and for this cause, the Kings person is so
sacred, that no man can offer violence to the King, but he is guilty of high
Treason, for which he shall die; For it is better that one perish, than all.
And since it lies in my way, this will I speak for the credit of the Common
laws of our Realm, That though the Law of God, the Civil Law, and all other
Laws, do as it were strive to excel each other, in maintaining and defending
the Prerogative of Kings, yet does not our Common Law (which is founded on the
Law of God) come behind any of them; For I should want words to express, and
Paper to contain the many privileges, and just immunities, which the Law gives
its Sovereign the King; and if the Judges had been as just to execute the Law,
as Dunn the Hangman is, The head and feet had still enjoyed their proper
Functions, and there would (as there ought) still have been a difference
betwixt the Servant, and the Master, the Subject, and the Sovereign. But silent
leges inter arma, our law books, like broken Vessels, are laid aside; and our
Laws, like Cobwebs, are not taken notice of, except it be to wipe and sweep
them away; that the Corruption of one thing, is the perfection of another, is a
rule in Philosophy, And do not the Sophistical Philosophers of our times, prove
and approve this rule by practice, who perfect themselves by the ruin of the
Laws? The Sword is their pruning-hook, by which they lop others, to make
themselves grow the better; they bait all their designs with Liberty and
Rellgion, and so catch the people into Hell, when they think to go to Heaven.
The principal end of Government is the advancement of God^ honor, but these
men, make the safety of the people, the sole and only end of Government, only
that they might murder their King, the Shepherd, make a prey of the sheep,
his subjects, and so feed the cruel appetite of themselves, the Woolves, with
the destruction of the Innocent. I need no other proof for this, than every
man's experience.

Virgil. Tantane vos generis tenuit fiducia Vestri?
Jam caelum terramque Dei sine numine, venti
Miscere, and tantas audetis tollere moles?
Aposiopesis est.
Quos Deus, at motos praestat componere fluctus,
Post sibi non simili poena commissa luetis,
Maturate fugam Regique haec dicite vestro.
O ye Empty Clouds, and raging winds of Ambition, could Attempts enter into
your Dunghill thoughts, as to assassinate your King, provoke Heaven, and molest
the Earth? Durst you encounter the Almighty, pitch battle, and sight against
his Deity? Are your Commandments above his? and can your Statutes repeal his?
Has not he in his Vpper-house constituted a King, and commanded you to honor,
and obey him? and can your Mortal nothings in the Lower House (next door to
hell) vote him useless? Can you put asunder, that which Jehovah has joined
together? and take away not only the Crown, but the life also of your dread
Sovereign? Can you do these things and look upwards? [Aposiopesis.] But God
will, that he will. -- Ah rather repent of your villainies; It is better for you
(I think, though not your deserts) to go peaceably to Heaven, than to be thrown
headlong into hell; For there you will be murdered with the Devils, and you
cannot murder any more Kings; death lies at your door, and after this life
ended, you shall not be punished with the Sermons of holy Ministers, or with
Gods Word, which is now odious unto you* But with the Scorpions of the Devil,
Beelzebub and his Angels shall execute Tyranny over you, in the infernal pit,
as you and your Angels have done over the Lords anointed, and his innocent
subjects, in the open air before God, and man. Therefore Repent, for Repentance
is your nearest way to salvation, Maturate fugam, Regique haec dicite vestro,
Make haste, and go and tell your King these things, That you are sorrowful, and
that it gnaweth and biteth your seared Conscience, to think that you should be
the Authors of so great a wickedness, beg his gracious pardon, restore his
sacred Patrimony, which you have torn in pieces, and cast lots for; his
pardon, and peace with him, will do your Souls more good than all his Lands, or
Royalties. Acknowledge his Sovereignty as ye ought, and set the Crown again
upon his head, which you did injuriously pluck off, or else the time will come,
that one drop of the many tears and waters, which you have caused to flow from
the eyes of the Royal party, their Widows, and Orphans, shall be more desired
of you to cool your tongues, than ever their estates and honors were. If a
Thief should set upon you, or any other subject to rob him, It is lawful for
the honest man to draw his sword, and kill him if he can: How dare you then
with violence set upon your King to rob him, not only of his goods, but also of
his life, yet because he defended himself, and so some of the Rebels slain,
Therefore you impeach him of high Treason and murder? O monstrous, did you
ever hear of any Law in the whole world, that ever the King could commit high
Treason? Be dumb, for you did not.

The Laws of England are divided into three parts, viz. 1. Common Law, which is
the most ancient Law of the Realm, 2. Particular Customs, 3. Statutes or Acts
of Parliament.

There is no offense punishable by the Laws of England, unless it be against
one of these Laws. He that does not offend against the Law, is no sinner, for
where there is no Law, there can be no transgression, I had not known sin,
says St. Paul, but by the Law, Romans 7.7.

Then cannot the King be guilty of Treason to the people, or of any other
offense punishable, unless he offend against one of these three Laws: And that
he did not offend against any of them, nor was guilty of those offenses laid to
his charge, by any one, or all of those Laws, is as clear as the Sun, and a
Maxim with all honest men. For

1. The Common Law is nothing else but the general custom, and common usage of
the Realm. Finch. 77. Plowdens Com. 195. Therefore the King cannot be an
offender, or guilty by the common Law, nor the people have power to call him in
question for any of his actions; because it is so far from being the general
custom, and common usage of England, for the King to be punished by the
people, that before this first, and last, great, and monstrous, distractive and
destructive, wicked and abominable murder, of the last most gracious and
merciful King, such a thing was scarce ever heard of, or entered into the
thoughts of any English man. Therefore the Rebels are cast by common Law, and
the Chancery will never give relief against the common Law. li. 4.124. D. and
St. So that take them which may you will, this Dilemma will hang them. Amen.

2. Customary Law, is where a particular custom grounded upon reason,
differs from the general usage, and common custom of the Realm. Now to
prove, that the King is not an Offender against this Law, would be a thing
altogether frivolous and ridiculous, it being known to every one that he cannot.

3. Statute Law, is a Law positive made by the King, with the assent of the
Parliament: And there is no Statute or Act of Parliament in England, which
makes any offense in the King high Treason, or that gives the people power to
call the King to an account, accuse or condemn him. But there are many offenses
committed by the people, made high Treason against the King by several Acts of
Parliament: But that the King could commit Treason against the people, is such
a novelty, that Heaven nor Earth never heard of before perditious England
hatched it.

But since our age is much given to fictions, Let us for once feign with our
false Republicans, That by the ancient fundamental Laws of the Realm, The King
might commit Treason against the people and be a Traitor to the Commonwealth,
for which the people might lawfully question him* Yet since, (Leges
posteriores, priores contrarias abrogant, The Statute Law may alter and abridge
the common Law,) The King cannot now commit Treason against the people, nor be
a Traitor to the Commonwealth; Because by the Statute made 1 H. 4.10. and
several others, It is enacted by authority of Parliament, (who as the common
people think may do any thing, vote Heaven Hell or, Hell Heaven) That in no
time to come any Treason be Judged otherwise, than it was ordained by the
Statute of 25 E. 3.2. In which Statute I am sure there is no mention made of
any Treason, but only against the King, as any one may read at large which
Statute, being it was made by Benedictum Parliamentum, a blessed Parliament,
(for so it was called Co. Inst. 3.2.) I commend it to the perusal of every
English man, as the best lesson he can learn, by which he will see the error of
the times, and what changes the wicked have wrought amongst us.

Therefore since several Parliaments have made Statutes, That the King can
commit no Treason, nor no Treason be committed but against the King, Ex ore tuo
te Judicabo, we may conclude from their own mouths, that by no Law, but against
all Laws, they murdered their King, the meekest and justest of all men.

For, whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the Law, for sin is the
trangression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. Then how could the King sin, when there
was no Law for him to transgress? By the common Law (as I have already showed)
he could not be an offender; neither could he by any Statutes; For at that very
time, when the Parliament (the peoples representatives) charged the King with
Treason, they had made many Statutes, That those things which they themselves
acted against the King, should be high Treason against the King; But they had
made no Law, whereby the King might become a Traitor against them. Therefore
the King could not offend against that Law which was not. Adam had not sinned
in eating the forhidden fruit, had he not been first forbidden; Neither had St.
Paul known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not sin, Romans 7.7. And for
the King to commit Treason, when there is no Law which makes any offense in
the King whatsoever Treason, but all laws both Common and Statute, both Divine
and Humane resolve the contrary, is such a Chimaera, which passes the
understanding of every reasonable creature. But forsooth, our new upstart
pragmatical Lawyers (as they call them) such as Cook was, witness his King
Charles his case, fol. 22. (A Cook, (but rather a Scullion) I am sure of no
affinity in judgment, nor comparable in learning, with our great Master and
Oracle of the law Sir Edward Cook) do say and profess, that they have a Law
written in their hearts, whereby they are enabled and authorized to kill the
King, if he offend; But I wonder holy David had not this Law written in his
heart to kill wicked King Saul, when it lay in his power so to do? The question
is easily answered, for God said, that David was a man after Gods own heart,
and therefore could not do so great a villainy; But I am sure, if the Scripture
be true, Neither God nor man will say, that these men, are men, either after
Gods heart, or any honest man's heart; And divide the Kingdom, and you will
find a thousand for one, in whose hearts this law was never written; Therefore
if it be written in some few men's hearts, yet since it is not written in the
hearts of the Major part, according to their own tenets, that law is not
binding. You may read in 1 Samuel 24.6. and cap. 26.11. That it was in David's
power, and he was admonished to kill his enemy wicked King Saul, once in the
Cave, where he cut off the Kings skirt indeed, but his heart smote him, as if
he had committed Crimen laesae Majestatis, high Treason against the King; And
then in the Trench where Saul lay sleeping, 1 Samuel 26.7. So David and Abishai
came to the people by night, and behold, Saul lay sleeping within the Trench,
and his Spear stook in the ground at his Bolster; But Abner and the people lay
round about him. Then said Abishai to David, God has delivered thine Enemy
into thine hand this day: Now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the
Spear even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the second time; And
David said to Abishai, Destroy him not. For who can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? David said furthermore, As the
Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he
shall descend into battle and perish: The Lord forbid that I should stretch
forth mine hand against the Lords anointed: but I pray thee take thou now the
Spear that is at his bolster, and the Cruse of Water, and let us go. Here you
may see how grievous a thing it is to lay hands upon the King, though he be
wicked, and persecute you. For by holy David's own confession, no man can do it,
without committing an high and woeful offense. Therefore better it is for all
men with King David to commit the punishment of their King to God, (who most
assuredly will punish the King, as well as the Beggar for his offenses,) and not
violently oppose, or stretch forth their hands against him, for none can do
that, and be guiltless.

It is true the law of England in many particulars is lex non scripta, and when
our law books are silent, we must repair to the law of Nature, and Reason; But
when a law is established by the law of God, declared by many Statutes, and
reported by multitudes of reverend Judges in their Reports, as it is, that the
King can commit no offense so great, as to be punished by the people, Then sit
liber Judex, We must Judge according to the written Law, though it do not agree
with our own private reason; If the King before the descent of the Crown be
attainted of Treason, felony, or any other offense, yet by the descent of the
Crown, The Attainder eo instante is void, as it fell out in the case of Henry
the seventh, 1 H. 7.4. Jnst. 1.16. Then if the Coronation of the King
prohibiteth the punishment of those offenses which he committed before he was
King, only because he is King, and so not punishable by any earthly power, how
can he commit any offense after his Coronation, for which the people may call
him in question? It being a Maxim in Law, That the King can do no wrong, that
is, no wrong for which the people may punish him; And to say that the King is
an Officer of trust placed by the people, is a mere foppery, and against the
express letter of a principle in Law, viz. That the King is not capable of an
office to use, but to grant, Co. Jnst. 1.3. But why should I speak of Law, to
those who God and all the World knows Act all things against law? For is there
any Law which makes it high Treason in the King, if he commit such or such an
offense? or is there any law to enable the people to call their King to an
account? I appeal to the whole World, and even to the Consciences of our wicked
Folarchical upstarts, Whether they ever read any such Law in the old or new
Testament, in the Statutes or Reports of the laws of our Realm? or whether they
ever heard of any such law in any Kingdom or Nation under the Sun? No they did
not, The Devil brought it (if any there be) out of the infernal pit, whither it
will bring them all, unless God most high prevent not; can a posteriour Law
make that an offense, which was lawful at the Commitment? without doubt it
cannot; But these men with their practice most wickedly affirm it. King Henry
the 7.^ h and many Burgesses and Knights of the Counties, being first attainted
by Act of Parliament of high Treason against Richard the 3d. The question was
in H. the 7 ths. Parliament, How this Act of Attainder should be reversed, and
made void; It was resolved by all the Judges, That those Knights and Burgesses
which were attainted, should not sit in the House, when the Act of Attainder
was to ^e reversed; But when that Act was reversed, then they might come again
and sit in Parliament: But as for the King, it was unanimously agreed and
resolved by all the said Judges, that ipso facto, when he took upon him to be
King, that he was a person able, and discharged of the Attainder; for (said
they) the King has power in himself to enable himself without a Parliament:
And an Act for the reversal of the Attainder, is not at all necessary. See 1 H.
7.4. Com. 238. Parliament. B. 37. and 105.

In which case you may see the power of a King, of a King that was attainted of
the greatest offense, viz. High Treason. Here likewise you may view the power
of a Parliament, of a Parliament, who had as much right to dethrone their King,
as ever the long Parliament, or any other had. Here likewise you may hear the
voice of the Law, of the Common law, not since repealed by any subsequent
Statute. But as it was then, so it ought to be now the Resolution of all the
Judges in England, That the King has power to take pardon, and ought not to
crave pardon of the people for his offenses.

The Crown once gained takes away all defect, is the Sentence of the Law, and
an Adage amongst all honest Lawyers; If the people had the Supreme power, why
was not the Attainder of the King (in this precedent case) reversed by Act of
Parliament, as were the Attainders of the other Members? If the King be but an
Officer of trust, deputed by the people, and receives his power from them, Why
was not the King (in this case) freed from his offense by the people? What
would they entrust a person attainted of so great an offense as high Treason,
with the highest place in the Commonwealth, And yet not permit others guilty
and attainted of the same offense, not so much as to fit, and Act as Members of
the Parliament, without they were first purged of their offense? It does not
stand with reason, that the highest Offender should exercise the highest
office; And doubtless if the people had had power, the Parliament would have
cleared King H. the 7th. from his crime, before he should have Officiated his
Office of Kingship.

But that Parliament well knew, that the feet were not higher than the head,
and that the Inferior Members could not impose Laws on the King their
Sovereign; They knew with Bracton, that the King (Parem non habet in Regno suo)
had not in his Kingdom, any single man, or the people, his equal. Therefore
since it is the Law of the land, Magna Charta, 29. That no m^n shall be judged
but by his Peers, and being the King has no Peer, or Peers, in his Dominions,
They resolved not to judge their King, nor to commit so great a vanity, as to
reverse the Attainder: For can a King be attainted? or can the people, who have
no authority, but what they have from him, have authority to correct, and
revise their King? O foolish imagination! Horac Caelo tonantem credidimus Jovem
Regnare: praesens Divus habebitur
Augustus; adjectis Britaunis Imperio.
Jove governs Heaven with his Nod:
King Charles, he is the earthly God:
Great Britain being his lawful Inheritance.
Our King Augustus, high and mighty, Solus Princeps, qui est Monarcha and
Imperator in Regno suo, Davis Irish Rep. fo. 60. Our only Prince, who is both
Monarch and Emperor in his kingdom, has only authority and the only right to
govern the Britains, who, though long since, have been accounted, Rigidi and
hospitibus feri, rigid, and cruel to strangers: yet, that they should ever so
much degenerate, as to be rigid and cruel to their own natural King, and kill
their natural Sovereign, is such a wonder, and murder, that never entered into
the thoughts of former ages, and will be a bugbear, and scar-crow to all
succeeding generations: for by robbing their King of his Crown and Life, they
have robbed the Turk of his cruelty, Judas of his treachery, and all the Devils
of their malicious wickedness: For the Turks cruelty, Judas his perfidious
treachery, and the Devils malicious villainies, do all conjoyn to make up, and
center in an English Rebel, one of those beasts, who like the Enemies of King
David, Psalm. 102.8. Have sworn together against their King, are mad upon him,
and revile him all the day long: Yet, that they may seem religious even when
they commit Sacrilege, they (like the Devil when he tempted our Savior, taking
him up into an exceeding high mountain, and showing him all the kingdoms in the
world, and the glory of them, saying unto him, All these things will I give
thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, Mat. 4.9.) will promise fairly;
and, as if they were resolved diametrically to oppose St. Peter's Doctrine, who
commands them, 1 Pet. 2.16. Not to use liberty for a cloak of maliciousness,
they use the liberty of the people (as a Wolf does the Lambs skin, to destroy
poor Lambs) as the only cloak and cover for all their malicious, wicked,
prodigious, and damnable actions. For, if you ask them, for what cause did they
murder the King? Their answer is, for the liberty of the people: For what cause
do they make themselves Governors, and Lords and Masters over all that we
have? For the liberty of the people: For what cause do they subvert the Laws,
expel and throw down the orderly and holy Clergy, and all Religion with them?
For the liberty of the people: For what cause do they enslave the whole Nation?
For the liberty of the people.

Nay, these men are so well furnished with godly pretenses, and wicked
intentions, that even whilst they cut the peoples throats, they make them
believe they give them a blessing: And as the man, who swore that the Coat of
the true owner, was another man's, only because he might have the use of it
himself; So these men have the impudence to swear (though not without perjury)
that the Supreme power is in the people, only because they might throw down our
royal Government, with all goodness with it, and use that Supreme power
themselves, which they protest is in the people. O delusive Mountebanks! Was
there ever such a juggling deceit acted by any Jugglers or Quacksalvers in the
world? Surely there was not. And did not every one, nay they themselves, very
well know the truth of what I have said, I might easily make it clear and
evident, even to the blind, with multitudes of Examples. For who was it that
murdered the King? Was it the people? Every man knows that it was neither
the people nor the Parliament, But a Company of Jesuitical treacherous Rebels,
and damnable Usurpers, Who flaming the people in the mouth with a tale, that
the supreme power was in the people, made use of this power themselves, against
the wills of the people, as an Engine to perform and bring to pass all their
wicked and horrible designs.

But say they, we are the peoples Representatives, chosen by the people, and so
what we do, they do; Catch a Knave without a Knaves answer, and he will give
you leave to hang him. I must confess, if this were true, they might have
somewhat the more color (though not the more honesty) for what they do: But
this is as false as themselves: For the people chose them to sit in Parliament,
and act according to the Kings Writ, as part of the Kings Parliament, according
to the Laws of the Realm; But since the Parliament is destroyed (for what
Parliament can there be, without a King and House of Lords? such a headless
Monster was never seen until of late) Consequently their power which they
derived from the people, is gone also. Neither are the Commons in Parliament
the representative body of the whole Kingdom or people; For they do not
represent the King, who is the head, nor the Lords, who are the nobler and
higher part of the body of the Realm; the Commons only represent the Inferior
and lower sort of the people: but if they did, as they do not, represent the
whole body, yet did not the people ever give them any power, to cut off their
Kings head. For the Lords voted it unlawful, all the honest Commons forsook the
House, and the people were all displeased (except a few of their own hatching
up) and every one else murmured against it. The Nobility mourned, The Gentry
were amazed, The Common people wept, and men women and Children did cry, The
Heavens clothed themselves in black, And the Sun hid his face. The Lion King
of Beasts died at the ^ight of his royal blood, And the wild fowls came
wondering to see this execrable fact, on the Scaffold, And if the Thundering
and Lightening of the Almighty be a true sign of Gods Angry Deity, Then even
from this we may conclude, that these Regicides took too much upon them, and
very much provoked his wrath. For, -- Diespiter
Igni coruseo nubila dividens,
Plerumque per purum tonantes
Egit equos volucremque currum.
The Heavens roared with thunder, which made the earth shake, and the darts of
fiery lightening threatened the ruins of both. And who can think upon this
worse than Gunpowder-Treason plot (for then was but intended, that which now is
put in Execution) viz. The murder of our gracious King, and the subversion of
all Laws and Religion with him, and not justly expect all the Plagues of
Egypt, and the punishment of Sodom and Gomorah, to fall upon him and the whole
people? For, Hor. Hoc font derivata clades
In patriam populumque fluxit.
From the death of the King, as from a fountain, did flow the slaughter of the
Nobility and people, with the ruin of the Glory and freedom of the English
Nation. Tantae molis erat perversam condere gentem, Such, and so great
villainies were perpetrated, to raise this generation of Vipers. Yet forsooth,
they will tell you, that the supreme power and Sovereignty, is in the people,
and that they act under them. O grand Delusion! Did the people turn out the
long Parliament? Did the people set up Oliver Protector? Did the people turn
out Dick his son? Did the people foist up again the Rump of the long
Parliamene? Or did they hunt them out again? Did the people sanctify the
Committee of Safety over them? Or did they hunt in the Rump again? Or have they
made all the Revolutions and Choppings, and Changings amongst us? No, neither
the people nor their Representatives, But the Devil and his Representatives
have been the cause of all our subversions. For as the people have not, so
neither did the twentieth part of them, ever challenge, or claim the supreme
power. But have always acknowledged the Sovereignty to be only in their King,
and only Sovereign, only under God.

Reader, take notice, that in many places of this Book, by the word Parliament,
is meant those Traitors, the House of Commons, who have unjustly usurped the
name of Parliament: For by the known Laws of the Land, there can be no
Parliament without the King.

Therefore, let every one of the Regicides repent, and pray to God, to open his
eyes, and that the scales of blindness may fall from them, that he may see his
duty, which is so evidently written in the Scripture, and all other pious
Writers, which is, to fear God, and to honor his King, which is acceptable in
the sight of the Lord. And so I shut up my discourse, with these verses, which
I would have the Reader get without book for his Edification.

Astra Deo nil majus habent, nil Caesare terrae,
Sic Caesar terras, ut Deus astra regit.
Imperium regis Caesar, Deus astra gubernat,
Caesar honor suo dignus, amore Deus.
Dignus amore Deus, dignus quoque Caesar honor est,
Alter enim terras, alter and astra regit.
Cum Deus in coelis, Caesar reg^t omnia terris,
Censum Caesaribus, Solvile, vota Deo.
A Tyrant without a Title, set out in all his Colors; and proved by the Laws
both of God, and man, by the sentence of all honest and wise men, by the vote
of Antiquity, and several Examples, That it is most lawful and glorious for
any man, either public or private, to fall upon Tyrants, and kill them,
without Examination, according to the usual forms of Judicature. Where the
consent of the people after Usurpation, makes an Usurpers Title good, and where
not. That the assent of the people, cannot ratify any Government without him,
so long as their King lives, though banished, but all their acting is Illegal.
How Tyrants pretend the safety of the people only for their own safeguard; and
how they delude the people with specious names, for their Magna Latrocinia,
their great villainies, and robberies. The Devil was a Rebel, so are they, and
like Satan they have their power only by permission; with an incitement to all
men, to execute them, for these are not the Dignities we should obey.

LEt us now take our Swords in our hands, and arm our selves to encounter with
this Tyrant, sine Titulo, a Tyrant without a Title; That bird of prey, that
beast of the game, Orbis flagellum, that scourge of the world, that Devourer of
Mankind, Fulmen belli, that Thunderbolt of war, that Maule of the earth,
Poli^rcletes, that destroyer of Cities, that Hangman, that Murderer, that
great Robber, whose might is his only right, whose multitude of thieves makes
him formidable, builds himself up with honest men's blood, feared by all men,
and fears all men, an enemy to every honest man, and every honest man an enemy
to him, a monster more hideous, than ever the Poets could feign, and more
noisome and destructive to humane kind than any beast the world ever bred, a
Devil in humane shape. If you do not yet conceive his nature, I will give you a
further description of him. A Tyrant without a Title (who indeed is most
properly called a Tyrant) is he who levieth war against his King, kills him,
and takes the Government upon himself, or who of his own authority against the
will of the people, without election, or right of succession, neither by lot,
by will, by gift, by just war, nor special calling of God, does take upon him
the Sovereignty. Take notice, Reader, by he way, That the Subject can have no
just war against his King. A foreign Prince may have a just cause to levy war,
and if he conquer, his Title is good and just by the Law of Conquest. So if
ones own natural Prince be kept out of his Country by the Rebellion of his
Subjects, and he afterward come with a foreign Army, nay with fire and sword
(as we say) that is, putting all to the sword who resisted him, and burning up
all that they have, yet if he subdue the Traitors, he is no Tyrant. But if any
man without any right or title usurpeth the Government and aspireth unto the
Sovereignty, though afterward he squareth his life according to the rules of
moral honesty, and lives (as one may say) according to the Laws, Yet
notwithstanding he is a Tyrant for all this. A Thief when he has taken a man's
purse from him, will in company stand upon his Terms of honesty, as much, if
not more than an honester man. Yet this after sanctity will not purge a Tyrant
from his former sin. He must restore home that which he wrongfully and unjustly
keeps, before he can be a true penitent, and nothing but true Repentance can
wash away the guilt of former sins. Therefore Equo ne credit Teucri, trust him
no further than you can see him, before he has cast off the unlawful robes of
Sovereignty, and put on the honest habit of a true Subject, Eor Latet anguis in
berba, Let his outside be never so Religious, he is a knave in his heart, his
pretentions and his intentions are seldom of affinity.

But may any private hand stick this wild boar? may any public or private man
stab, or otherwise destroy this Tyrant before he be tried according to the
Common course of the Law? Grounding upon the Law of God, the Law of Nations,
the Law of Nature, and the Common Law of the Realm, I give judgment against
him, that as a stroyer of humane kind and society, every man may lay violent
hands on him and execute him, For which according to the Laws and writings of
ancient Fathers, he deserves perpetual honor, propounding to every one who
should kill such a Tyrant most ample rewards, viz. honorable Titles of
Nobility and prowess, arms, statues, Crowns, and the goods of the Tyrant, as
to the true deliverer of his Country. By the Law of God, Whosoever sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9.6. And what Tyrant ever was
there who did not shed man's blood? Nay by the Law of God, That man who will do
presumptuously and not hearken to the law, is to be cut off, that the evil may
be put away from the Land, Deuteronomy. 17.12. Exodus 21.14. All the Civil Lawyers do
unanimously give judgment against him, and esteem that man as one, who does
God and his Country good service, who shall rid the world of this viper. By
the law of nature every man is obliged to preserve himself, And what better
means can he use for his preservation, than to destroy this elf, this Wolf
amongst men. For who can say any thing is his own? who can say his life, his
goods or estate is secure, so long as a Tyrant reigns? By the Common Law of
the Realm, if any one set upon me to rob or take any thing away from me, I may
lawfully pistol him, stab him, or otherwise destroy him. and by the same
reason and law; for ubi eadem ratio, ibi idem jus, I may destroy a Tyrant; for
the only difference betwixt a common highway man, or Burglar, and he is their
strength and might, the one is a little thief, the other a great one. As when
Diomedes a pirate was taken and brought before Alexander, says he, Ego quia
uno navigi^ latrocinior, a^cusor pirata, tu quia ingenti class id agis,
vocaris imperator: si solus and captivus esses, latro cris, st mihi ad nutum
populi famulentur, vocarer Imperator, I because I rob with one poor ship, am
accused as a Pirate, thou because thou robbest with a great Navy, art called
an Emperor. If I had as great and strong a company of robbers with me as thou
have, and thou wast alone, and a Captive, as I am, then thou would be the
thief, and I the Emperor. So may every common thief, highway man, cutpurse, or
Burglar say to the Tyrant when he is brought before him, For mutato nomine
Fahula de te narratur. When the Tyrant murthereth any honest man and takes
away his estate, he pretends it is for the safety and good of the
Commonwealth, calling him Traitor to the State. So it is for the safety of a
thief to kill the man he intends to rob. But the Tyrant he dazles men's eyes
with new invented names; for his magna latrocinia, his great thefts having
nothing honest in them, but the very names. For when he exercises his
robberies, and sends some of his messengers (who are indeed no better than
thieves) to rob men, that he calls Excise. So when he sets upon the whole
Nation, he compels them to make a purse for him, that he calls Taxes. And
this kind of thievery is so much the more remarkable, because he makes the
owners like fools gather the moneys for him themselves. Nay such is the
stupidity of these Dromedaries, that if they have scarce money enough to buy
themselves bread, or to pay their Landlord his just Rents, yet they will trot
about to gather moneys for this Tyrant; their common enemy, before they will
lift up a hand against him. They will let their Churches drop down for want of
repair, and Law and Religion and all fall to the ground, before they will let
the Tyrant miss of a farthing of his demands -- Tanta est insania mundi. So
great is the madness of men.

And the reason why the Law allows every man to kill a Tyrant, and take that
vengeance which in other cases is reserved to God and the Magistrate, is,
because there is no other remedy, and Gods Laws cannot be otherwise executed;
for the Tyrant makes himself above all law, possesses himself of all Forts,
strong Holds, Garrisons, and the Magazine of all Armor, so that by the
greatness of his villainies he is secured from the power of the Magistrates,
and so consequently cannot be punished by the ordinary Court of Justice.
Therefore Extremis morbis, extrema remedia, Extraordinary diseases must be
cured by extraordinary means, Receditur a placitis juris, potius quam
injuriae, and delicta maneant impunita, We may go a little out of the Common
road of Justice to punish those crimes who make bypath their high ways, and
cannot otherwise be met with. For Lex semper dabitremedium, The Law will
always give a remedy, and -- immedicabile vulnus ense recidendum est, that
ulcer or sore which cannot be cured by medicines, must be cut off with the
sword, and it is a rule in Law, that aliquid conceditur, ne injuria remaneret
impunita, quod alias non concederetur, The law will dispense with some grounds
of law, rather than crimes and wrongs should go unpunished it is a Maxim, that
no private man may kill another, Exodus 22.2. Yet if a thief set upon a man in
the high way, or come to rob his House, he or any other man may lawfully kill
him, and deserve well of the Commonwealth. So a Tyrant who continually lives
upon the spoils of the people, and is continually robbing the Commonwealth;
for he has nothing but by robbery, though he pretend nothing but the good and
safety of the Commonwealth, may be killed by any man, and that man who
executes him deserves perpetual renown, and ought to have his name written in
the Chronicles of everlasting memory, and consecrated to eternity.

Object. But it may be objected, that a Tyrant who usurpeth the Government by
force, and afterward gets the consent of the people, may not justly be
killed by any man, because this future approbation, and election of the
people, is a true ratification of his power.

Sol. To which I answer, That notwitstanding the peoples consent he may
lawfully be slain; for that which is done by duresse cannot be binding, and
that cannot be thought to be the true consent of the people which they do by
constraint. Indeed if the Soveraigntie continues in the Children and
posterity of the Tyrant for the space of an hundred years or more, so that
they have a title by Prescription, which must be without the least ^nterruption
or Rebellion of the people, then ought not any man to slay them, because they
have a title by Prescription. As in the Government of Rome. Julius Caesar
usurped the Soveraigntie, aand wrested the power out of the Senates hands, but
was afterward stabbed with twenty three wounds, and all men rejoiced and
esteemed his murder a most worthy act. But when Tiberius Caesar came to the
Government, he reigned unquestioned without any competition of the Senate, and
therefore no private man could justly slay him. For our Savior did
acknowledge allegiance due to him. But where a Tyrant rebelleth against his
lawful Sovereign, dethroneth, him banisheth him, and establishes the Supreme
power on himself, though the people all of them continually consent, and the
Tyrant and his posterity reign for a thousand years, or more, yet may any man
lawfully slay him; for the people cannot give away Sovereignty from their
lawful King, and he may demand it when he pleases, and regain his own when
God has made him able; For Dormit aliquando jus, sed moritur nunquam. Right
sometimes sleeps, but never dies.

Out of the Magazine of autorities which might be brought to confirm what I
have spoken concerning this firebrand, a Tyrant without a Title, I shall only
select some flowers to lay upon his stinking corpse, and so wind up my discourse
with his winding sheet.

Bias being asked which was the most pernicious of all beasts, he answered,
Sylvestrium Tyrannus, Domesticorum adulator. Of forest beasts a Tyrant was the
worst, but of domestic a flatterer, Plut.

Antisthenes always preferred hangmen before Tyrants, and being asked the
reason, he answered, a A Car nifice quidem homines injusti interimuntur, a
Tyranno autem etiam insontes, A Hang man only hangs the unjust and evil men,
but a Tyrant also hangs the most just and most pious, Ludovicus 12 Gall. Rex,
was wont to say, Plehem and rusticos esse pascua Tyrannorum, and militum:
Tyrannus autem and milites, pascua esse daemonorum, That the Common people and
Country Farmers, were the food of Tyrants, and their Soldiers; but the
Tyrants and the Soldiers were the food of Devils, Annal. Franciae.

Democritus being asked of Dionysius what kind of metal was the best, answered,
That whereof the Athenians made the statues of Harmodiu^, and Aristogiton, in
honor of their killing Pisistratus the Tyrant. Intimating by this answer, that
all Tyrants ought to be destroyed, and to those who killed them ought to be
erected statues of brass in honor of their noble attempt, after the manner of
the Athenians Plut.

Euphron the Lacedemonian having made himself a Tyrant in the City of Cicyon,
was shortly after murdered by the Senators, as he sat in counsel with them,
who defended themselves by this Apology. Quod qui manifesti sceleris,
proditionis, and Tyrannidis rei sunt, non sententia aliqua damnandi videantur,
sed ab omnibus hominibus jam ante damnati sunt, and quod nulla Graecorum lex
ostendi possit, quae proeitoribus, ^ut tyrannis securitatem praestet, That
those which are guilty of treason and tyranny, need not to be proceeded
against in a legal way; for that they are beforehand condemned in all men's
judgments, neither was there any Law amongst the Grecians that gave security
to traitors and tyrants, Plut.

Insidiatori and latroni non potest afferri injusta nex, says Cicero pro
Milone, A traitor and a tyrant cannot be killed with an unlawful death; for
every man may be both Judge and executioner of them, and non se obstrinxit
scelere, si quis Tyrannum occidit quamvis familiarem. 3. Offic. Nulla nobis cum
Tyrannis societas est, sed summa potius distractio, neque est contra naturam
spoliare eum, quem honestum est necare. It is the part of an honest man to kill
a tyrant, although he be his familiar friend; for no man should keep company
with a tyrant, and it is most natural and honest for a man to kill him; Cicero
likewise says, Phil. 13, Quem discordiae, quem coedes civium, quem bellum
civil delectat, eum ex numero hominum ejiciendum, ex finibus humanae naturae
censeo exterminandum, Whom discord, slaughter of the Citizens, and Civil War
delights, I would have him cast out of the Society of men, and thrown down
headlong into Hell. And Contra publicos hosts and majestatis reos omnis
homomiles est, says Tertullian, Against common enemies, and those that are
traitors to their King, every one is an Ebud with his dagger, and may most law
fully kill them. Therefore though Christ has taught me to forgive my enemies,
nay to love them, and not to speak evil Of Dignities, and for my part I hate
not the person of any Tyrant. Pax ^um hominibus, bellum vitiis, but I hate his
Tyyrannie, I freely forgive them all the injuries they have done to me, or any
of my friends, and for their good I have written this Treatise; but they are
Gods enemies, and God would be offended if we should let them sleep in their
villainies. Our Laws and Religion ought to be more dear to us than all things in
the world; for without them we should be worse than beasts; and who more
subverteth our Laws and Religion than Tyrants? Vt imperium evertant libertatem
preferunt, cum perverterunt, ipsam aggrediuntur, says Tacitus, That they may
pervert the legal Government they pretend liberty for the people, and when the
Government is down, they then invade that liberty themselves. Auferre,
trucidare, rapere, falsis nominibus imperium, atque ubi solitudinem faciunt,
pacem appellent, To rob, to murder, to plunder, Tyrants falsely call to
Govern, and to make desolation, they call to settle peace. These are they which
God says, Hosea 8.4. Ipsi regnaverunt, sed non ex me, They have reigned, but
not, by me. They have made Princes, and I knew it not. and have cast off the
thing that is g^od. There is no power indeed, but of God, but the abuse of
power is from the Devil. These men do not rightly use, but abuse the power, and
as Satan is called the Prince of the world, so these men are called Governors
of the Realm, not because they are so by right, but by Treachery, Rebellion,
and Treason, their power is by Gods permission, not by his Donation, Therefore
these are not the Dignities and higher powers which the Apostle commands us to
be subject to; for then we must be subject to the Devil too; for Tyrants and
Devils have powers both alike lawful, and both by Treason and Rebellion: No,
we should resist and arm our selves against these enemies, it is Disobedience
to obey them, Rebellion not to rebel against them, and Treason not to plot
Treason against them: Therefore let every one be ready with his dagger like
Jodes, to stab this devourer of mankind. Bad Kings must be converted only
with prayers and tears; but Tyrants must be subdued with clubs and swords; for
Quis constituit te virum Principem and Judicem super nos, Exodus 2.14. Who made
them Princes and Judges over us? the King we know and the Kings son we know,
but who are they? They are not of Gods making, but of Beelzebubs their Master,
and their own making: Therefore let every good Christian arm himself against
these Caterpillars, devotion and action must go together, let him not bribe his
Conscience with self interests, but take courage and fight the good fight, that
so he may deliver himself, and his Country from slaverie, and bring the
Tyrants to the Rope, their best winding sheet.

All other Governments are but the corruption and and shreds, of Monarchy,
which is the most glorious and most profitable of all sorts of Governments;
when, and how Aristocracy and Democracy begun rather by Gods permission than
institution. The proper Character of a Commonwealths man, or the Definition of
an English Changeling, with his flexible, and mutable qualities. The absence of
our King is the cause of the presence of our many sins and divisions

IF you remember, in my Division of Governments, I made mention of Aristocracy
and Democracy, etc. which indeed had their first Original from the corruption
of Monarchy, and are but shreds of Monarchy, as all Politicians hold: Therefore
I will not spend time and paper to abuse your patience with any thing, but a
Description of them: For Virg. Verum haec tantum alias inter caput extulit urbes
Quantum lent a soleni inter viburna cupressi.


Monarchy does as far excel all other sorts of Government, in glory, profit,
conveniencie for the people, and in all other good qualities, as the Sun does
the Moon, or the Moon the twinkling stars, and is like the lofty Cedar amongst
the servile shrubs. Hence it comes, that even the Republicans who hate a King
because he is their Sovereign Master, are compelled to suffer and use Petite
Monarchies (as one may say) under them: as one Master over every Family, one
Mayor over every City, one Sheriff over every County, one Rector over every
Parish Church, one Pilot over every ship, one Captain over every Troop, one
Admiral over the Fleet, and many other Offices of trust and places wherein
Plurality of persons would prove most obnoxious: But Monarchy is and always
has been proved and approved the best and most absolute lie good.

Aristocracy is the Government of a Commonwealth by some select number of the
better sort of the people, preferred for their wisdom and other virtues for
the public good.

Oligarchy is the swarving or distortion or Aristocracy, or the Government of a
few rich, yet wicked men, whose private end is the chiefest end of their
Government; tyrannizing over Law, Religion and the people.

Democracy or popular estate is the Government of the multitude. Where the
people have the supreme power, and Sovereign authority.

Ochilocracy or a Commonwealth is the corruption and deprivation of Democracy,
where the rascal Rabble or viler sort of the people govern by reason of their
multitude.

These kinds of Government were not heard of a long time after Monarchy began,
and the impulsive causes of them were contention and confusion, and were rather
permitted than ordained by God, as the bill of Divorce was by Moses; For non
erat sic ab initio, there was no such Government at the beginning; for God did
not create it, as he did Monarchy when he made all things; but the people being
stragled up and down in the world, and so in process of time became out of the
knowledge of their lawful King, rather than they would endure the miserable
effects of Anarchy; for Plebs fine Rege ruit, there can be no family, no
society, indeed no living without rulers, they, re^igned up their whole power
and liberty to some few select men, or else to many, who made Laws for them,
and so tied up the hands of the unrulie and wicked, and defended the just from
the violent tempests and storms of the unjust, to which before they lay open
and naked: which God seeing that it was better for them to have such a
Government, than none at all, did allow of it, but it has no comparison with
Monarc^y, becuase that was instituted by Gods primarie Ordinance, and the
further men go from Gods original institution they have the more corruption,
Nay, if compared to Monarchy it is a curse; for Solomon says, Prove. 28.2. For
the transgressions of a Land, many are the Princes thereof, but by a man of
understanding and knowledge the state thereof shall be prolonged.

-- summo dulcius unum
Stare loco, sociisque comes discordia regnis.
How sweetly does the Poet sing, when he says, that it is most sweet for one
to govern; for a company of Governors have always discord to be their
companion. Monarchia nihil habet durum praeter nomen, populare contra regimen
nihil lene praeter nomen. Monarchy has nothing harsh but its name, but on the
contrary, a popular estate has nothing delightful or taking but its name.
Our times are so full a Commentary, and so plain an Exposition of the evil
events of a popular estate, that I will not, neither need I recite the opinions
of the Ancients, wherewith they have contemned it, as the worst of Governments,
most subject to dissension and change, and most obnoxious to the people. And I
think, no Nation under the Sun could ever produce a more notorious example than
mutable England, where every man as if he had served an Apprentiship to
novelty, forgeth new invenions every day: he changes his mind as often as
children would change their clothes, and fitteth his conscience to every
opportunity and purpose. His heart (though hollow) will bend like a flexible
osier, and incline to any thing that is profitable, though never so wicked,
his resolutions will break to pieces like ropes of sand, and like the Moon are
always changing. He never stands to any thing so fast, but that he can slip
away from it when he pleases. Neither did he ever love any Religion 'so well,
but that he could love another as well at any time, and for a need entertain
tw^ntie together, twenty did I say? Nay, it is his fashion to change his
Religions every day, if no every hour, and so, much Religion makes him an
irreligious changeling.

But for brevities sake take his Epitome, viz Constant only in inconstancy.
And this man thu^ qualified is one of the main pillars of the Government of
England; for you must know too, that h^ has sometimes a great mind to be a
Governor, nay, he is so hot upon it, that sometimes he will do any thing rather
than fail. If his own father stands between the Throne and him, he will make
him stand by, or else make him go into another world. He can pull off Kings
Crowns, as often as he can pull off his own Hat. He can break a great Oath as
easy as he can break a little ^hreed, and Perjury with him is a Cardinal
virtue, if it do but add any thing to his Design. And you will make it a
miracle, if this man should not make a good Commonwealths man, if not a good
one, however one would think that he might keep his place long enough, being so
well furnished with all these sweet, flexible and easy conditions, but no, he
cannot, and the reason is, because there is a great Litter of these Whelps
gathered together of the same kind with himself, and being so many, they often
snarl one at another for the bone: so the Government Proteus like changes it
self into what shape they please, sometimes one of them is promoted to the
Government, just like a Malefactor on a Wooden Horse, whom they pull down when
they please, and them run open mouthed with a full cry after it again, Omnibus
esse Lupos licet in regione Lupoporum.
until that at length one being nimbler footed, or quicker mouthed, catches
it into his paws, by and by all of them like Acteons dogs fall upon him, and
although he cries out Actaeon ego sum, Dominum cognoscite vestrum. I am he
which use to hunt with you, and be your master Huntsman, yet such is the
furious madness of these Animals, Gal. 2.18. If I build again the things which
I destroyed, I make my self a transgressour.
that they tear him in pieces, and hang the Government on another, and so they
toss it about from one to the other, as children do a three half penny ball,
thinking it is no sport, if the ball lie long still in one of their hands.
Regni sacra fames quid non morialia pectora cogis? What does not the thirst of
ruling compel these mortals to do? Every one cuts his fellows throat if he
thwarts him in the Government; they make the people swear to be faithful to a
single person one day, and to swear against a single person the next. It is
high Treason to speak against one kind of Government one hour, and high Treason
or worse not to speak against it the next; and what is the reason of these
turnings, and twinings, and various alterations? Because in these days there
is no King in England, and every man does that which is right in his own eyes,
Judge. 21.25.

Velle suum cuique est, nec voto vivitur ^no. An Advertisement to the
Enthusiasts, and Crown-hunters of this overruling age, admonishing them, since
their lives are so short, and so wicked, that they would not expect Eternity in
their ill-got-estate, and that from hell there will be no Redemption, because
the Devil will not be deluded with bribes, Cares and fears do accompany Crowns
lawfully gotten, but curses and damnation do attend them and their possessors,
which have gotten them by the Murder of their King, or by any other illegal
means, as did our English Rebels.

QVis furor O populus, quae tanta licentia ferri?
Discite justitiam moniti and non temnere Divos.

What madness O people, O people what licentious fury possesses your earthly
Cottages? Can fish live in the air? Or can fowls live in the Sea? Can you scale
the heavens, and subdue the Almighty?

Hor. Coelum ipsum petimus stultitia, neque
Per nostrum patimur scelus
Iracunda Jovem ponere fulmina.
The disposing of Crowns belongs to God, and not unto your frail Quidlibets,
When you go to wrest the Crown from your Sovereign, you go to fight against
God: And through your foolishness pull down his wrath upon you. Why preach you
up your selves the maintainers of the Law so much? Alas, thieves cannot live
without a Law; for if they do not distribute their stolen goods equally, and
according to Justice (as they term it) Divisions and quarrels will soon arise
amongst them. But I hope this is not your case, if it is, The strifes and
divisions now amongst the Rebels do further the Kings Restoration to his own,
of which they robbed him.
honest men will come by their goods: Therefore being admonished Do not despise
your lawful King and Sovereign.

Si genus humanum, and mortalia temnitis arma,
At sperate Deos memores fandi atque nefandi,
But if you do, and with your vaunting power, and raging violence overruled all
humane strength and ju^tice, Yet remember, that the gods remember you, and when
your villainies are past and rubbed out of your brittle memories ( For nothing
is more pleasing than to forget ones evil actions) yet then they are most
fairly written in Gods book, and shall never be blotted out until your names
are razed out of the book of life. What sweetness is there in Crowns, which
makes you so earnest to wear them? It is your fond conceits to think they are
delightful, there is nothing in them which has not plus fellis quam mellis,
more gall than honey. Deformis facies non est deformis amanti. It is only your
love which makes them beautiful; for Crowns are not without cares and fears,
crosses and losses; and high seats are always slipperi^. O vilis Pannus, said
one King, throwing down his Royal Diadem, Were it but known how many miseries
and molestations do attend thee, Nemo foret qui te vellere tollet humo.

No man would stoop to take thee up. Antonius the Philosopher, Emperor of Rome,
was wont to say, That an Empire was malorum Oceanus, an Ocean of miseries: and
surely the time will come, that every one of you with him will say, Felix si
non imperassem, Happy had I been, if I had never reigned: but suppose the
Crown to be your own, and you every day to sit upon the Throne of Majestle,
triumphing over all perils and dangers, fare deliciously every day, and with
those wicked men which King David speaks of, have what your heart could wish or
desire? Yet Hor. Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas
Regumque turres,
Death knocks as boldly at the Rulers door,
As at the Cottage of the poor.


When you think your selves most secure, then destruction may be nearest at
hand, and when you feast your pampered bodies, crying seria cras, then may the
sword which must be your executioner hang over your head, but by a hair. Vitae
summa brevis spem nos vetat inchoare longam. The shortness of our lives
forbids us to expect Eternity here. Where is Alexander the great? Where is
Julius Caesar the Usurper? Or where is Oliver the Tyrant? is he not gone out
like the snuff of a Candle, even loathsome to his own Parasites?

Juvenal. Et cui non totus sufficit orbis
Sarchophago contentus erat, Mors sola fatetur
Quantula sint hominum corpuscula.
And him whom a whole world of villainies could not satisfy, was at length
overcome with a little Coffin, and contented with a span of ground, Death only
making him stand to his Principles. And although you like mistie fogs going
against the Sun which raised them, rebel against him from whom you have your
being, making Hoc volo, sic jube^, stat pro ratione voluntas, Your will's the
only reason of your Laws, and your Laws like traps, only to catch honest men,
yet Nemo malus felix, There is no wicked man happy.

-- Facilis descensus averni,
Noctes atque dies patet atri janua Ditis,
Sed revocare gradum, superasque evadere ad auras,
H^c opus, ^ic labor est.
It is easy for you, nay it is very pleasant to plunge your selves into Hell,
but if you should join all your heads together, nay unite all your hearts and
forces into one entire body (which it seems is a hard matter for you to do) yet
by all your strength and juggling tricks, ye cannot juggle your selves out
again, nay, the Devil himself cannot get you from thence, but there you shall
burn like wisps, which have done scouring the better vessels, or like the rods
which have chastised Gods children. Your rejoicing shall be turned into
mourning, and your deceitful prating into gnashing of teeth.

O curas hominum! O quantum est rebus ina^e! How men are taken with their own
shadows? and Narcissus-like grope after that which is not. What will it profit
a man to enjoy the whole world to day, and lose his own soul to morrow? David
taxed them with foolerie, whose inward thought was that their houses should
continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations, and call their
lands after their own names. How much more then may they be taxed with foolery,
who call other men's Lands after their own names and think they shall enjoy them
for ever? This their way is their folly, yet their posterity approve their
sayings, yet this night shall their souls be taken from them, they shall be
laid in the grave, death shall ^eed on them, and the upright shall have
Dominion over them in the morning, and their beauty shall consume in the grave,
from their dwelling; though while they lived, they blessed themselves, yet when
they die they shall carry nothing away, neither shall any thing but their
villainies descend with them. The same voice which came to Nebuchadnezzar
whilst he was boasting of his great Babel, shall come from heaven to these
Babylonians, saying, To you be it spoken, your Kingdom is departed from you.
And Pompey-like you shall die, and have no mold to cover your carcases.

Nudut pascit aves, jacet en qui possidet orbem
Exiguae telluris inops.
They who living made men run from them through fear, shall now make men run
from them by reason of their stink. And I pray God that I may not have cause to
say of this City of London, as once Seneca said of a City which was burnt to
ashes, Vna dies interest inter magnam Civitatem, and nullam, There is but one
days difference betwixt a great City and no City; for what City in the world
so full fraught with sins and villainies, as ours?

Horace. Eheu cicatricum, and sceleris pudet,
Fratrumque. Quid nos dura refugimus
Aetas? quid intactum nefasti
Linquimus? unde manus juven^us
Metu Deorum continuit? quibus
Pepercitaris? O utinam nova
Incude diffindas retusum in
Massagetas Arabesque ferrum.
We blush at scars received, sin, brothers fall,
Vile age what mischief do we shun at all?
What youth his hands for fear of gods contains?
Or who from sacred Altars spoil refrains?
Ah rather our dull sword new forge and whet
Against the Arabian, and the Massaget.
How do our houses burn with lust? and our Chambers with pride and wantonness,
whilst the streets blush with the blood of Prophets? to see the Children
murder their great, yet loving Father, before his own door. O Almighty God
pardon our infamous Paticides, and Regicides, and cloze up those wounds which
our sins have made so wide that none but thy right hand can cure them. --
Miserere laborum
Tantorum, miserere animi non digna ferentis.
Relieve the distresses of thy Saints, and take pity upon those who are
wrongfully persecuted; turn rather than confound the hearts of all men, and
open the casements of our ignorant (yet zealous) minds, that by the true light
of the Gospel we may walk in faithful obedience toward thee our God, and
toward our lawful King and Sovereign, whom thou, not men and Satan have placed
over us: and let all men learn that which a Divine and honorable Poet has
left us.

The world's a bubble, and the life of man less than a span,
In his conception wretched, from the womb so to the tomb;
Cursed from the cradle, and brought up to years, with cares and fears:
Who then to frail Mortality shall trust,
Bu^ limnes the water, or but writes in dust.
Yet since with sorrow here we live oppressed, What life is best?
Courts are but only superficial Schools to dandle fools.
The Rural parts are turned into a den of savage men;
And where is a City from all vice so free,
But may be termed the worst of all the three?
Domestic cares afflict the husbands bed, or pain his head;
Those that live single take it for a curse, or do things worse.
Some would have children, those that have them moan or wish them gone.
What is it then to have, or have no wife,
But single thraldom, or a double strife?
Our own affections still at home to please, is a disease.
To cross the sea to any foreign soil, perils and toil.
Wars with their noise affright us; when they ceas^ we are worse in peace.
What then remains? but that we still should cry
Not to be born, or being born to die.
The King of Englands Sovereignty proved and approved by the Common Law, to be
above both Parliament and people; inferior to none on earth, but God Almighty:
and that neither the people of England, nor any other his Subjects, either
distributively, or collectively in one entire body, ought to call the King in
question for his actions, though they be never so wicked. The sweet harmony and
concordance of the Law of God, and the Law of the Realm in maintaining the
Royal Prerogative of our Sovereign, manifested. The Kings Coronation is only a
Ceremony, no part of his Title. How the Changeling Statesmen of our times, (who
will not endure that the King should have Sovereignty over them his vassals,)
make themselves absolute Kings over the Scripture, and Law books, and make the
Law and the Gospel speak in what sense their wicked wills and lusts vouchsafe.
Resistance of the power unlawful. The Subjects duty to their Sovereign. Their
Reward and remedy if they be punished wrongfully. Reverend Bracton cleared from
Mr. Pryns false aspersions, Mr. Pryns Character, his Book entitled the
Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, arraigned, convicted and
condemned, and his confident averment therein. That it was not Saint Paul's, nor
the Holy Ghosts meaning to inhibit defensive wars of the Subjects against their
King, proved to be Apocriphal, and that Saint Paul like an honest man) spoke
what he meant, when he said, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers,
though Mr. Pryn would have his words and his meaning two things. How Mr. Pryn
worshipped the long Parliament heretofore as a Sacred Deity, when it acted
wickedly, and now despises it, as idolatry; and an Advertisement to him to
write a book of Retractations.

To go about to prove, that the King of England, etc. has the Supreme power
over the Parliament and people, deserves as much derision, as to go about to
prove that the Sun shines at noon day, or that the heavens are above the
earth, yet since there are those amongst us, who like the Sodomites grope for
light in the clearest day, and have the i^pudence to publish for truth, that
which their conscience tells them is false, I will give you a taste of our
Lord the Kings Sovereignty, which lies dispersed and scattered about in our
Law books.

Jus C^ronae, The Law of the Crown is the principal part of the Laws of this
Realm, Co. Lit. 11. b. 15. b 344. a 25 E. 3 cap. 1. Register inter jura Regia
61, etc. For since the Common Law of the Land, is common usage, expressed in
our books of Law, and judicial Records, Co. Lit. 344 a. Plowden 195. Finch 77
a. The Government of this Kingdom by a Royal Sovereign is become a Fundamental
Law, being as ancient as history it self, and used from the time whereof the
memory of antiquity is not to the contrary.

And since that the ligeance, faith and obedience of the Subject is due unto
the King by the Law of nature, Co. l. 6. fol. 12. as well before, as after the
municipal and Judicial Laws were made, our Law Books like faithful Subjects
(being the Magazine of law) from their Alpha to Omega could preach no other
Doctrine than Allegiance, faith and due obedience to their Sovereign the King,
whom they all confess and testify to be the Supreme lord and head of the
Commonwealth, immediately under God, above all persons, in all causes. Finch
in French, fol. 20. in English 81. Co. lib. 2.15. Le Roy est caput and salus
Reipublicae, and a capite bona valetudo tranfit in omnes, lib. 4.124. the King
is the fountain of Justice, tranquillity and repose, Plowden 242. Therefore Nil
desperandum Rege duce, and Auspice Rege, Nothing can come amiss to us, the
King being our guide and Sovereign. Reges sacro aleo uncti spiritualis
jurisdictionis sunt capaces, Kings being the Lords Anointed are nursing Fathers
to our Church. The King of England est Monarcha and Imperator in Regno suo,
Davis Irish reports fol. 60. the Almighty has said, that they are gods, and
our common laws of England being founded on the laws of God do likewise
attribute to them a shadow of the Divine excellencies, viz. VVingates Maxim
fol. 301.
1 Divine perfection. 2 Infiniteness 3. Majesty 4 Sovereignty. 5. perpetuity
6. Justice. 7. Truth. 8 Omniscienc
Of which I have already treated; Nay as God is a King in Heaven, so the King
is styled, a God upon Earth. Finch 81. He is the Head, Father, Physician, and
husband of the Commonwealth; He is Gods Lieutenant, Deputy, Vicegerent,
receiving his Commission from God, not from the people. These are the titles
which the Common Laws of England give to the King. A Divine sentence is in the
lips of the King, his mouth transgresses not in judgment, Prove. 16.10. says
Gods word, Therefore the Law receives it for a Maxim, That the King can do no
wrong, Co. Lit. f. 19. He is Rex gratia Dei non populi, King by the grace of
God, not of the people, The most high rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives
it to whomsoever he will, Dan. 4.17. Therefore all the Lands and Tenements in
England, in the hands of Subjects, are holden mediately or immediately of the
King, but the King is Tenant to none but God, 8 H. 7:12. Co. Lit. 1. For,
Praedium Domini Regis est Directum Dominium, cujus nullus author est nisi Deus,
Only God is the author and Donor of the Kings Dominions. Therefore the
possessions of the King are called, sacra Patrimonia and Dominica Coronae
Regis. The King is the Lords anointed, 1 Samuel 10.1. Therefore the Law gives
reverence to his Person, and makes him supreme in Ecclesiastical causes. The
villain of a Lord in the presence of the King cannot be seized, because the
presence of the King, is a protection to the villain for that time, 27 ass.
Pla. 49. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked, and to Princes, ye are
ungodly? Job 34.18. Therefore no Civil (much less Criminal) action lies
against the King, if he does unjustly, the only remedy against the King is by
petition and supplication, for who shall command the King* Stamford Praer. fol.
5. Bracton fol. 5. Flera fol. 17. Finch 13. The Prerogative which the
Common Law gives the King is so large, as Sir Henry Finch says, that you
shall find that to be law almost in every case of the King, that is law in no
case of the Subject, Finch fol. 85. And therefore Sir John Davis in his preface
confidently averreth, that the Common Law does excel all other laws, in
upholding a free Monarchy, which is the most excellent form of Government,
exalting the Prerogative royal, and being tender, and watchful to preserve it,
and yet maintaining all the Ingenuous liberty of the Subject. Nay so careful
is the law of the Kings Sovereignty, that in all cases from the highest to the
lowest, it demonstrateth the Kings supreme power and dignity. The law will not
permit any Subject to come so near the King, as to be jointenant with him, for
if Lands are given to the King and a subject, or if there be two Jointenants,
and the Crown descend to one of them, the Jointure is severed, and they are
Tenants in Common; for no Subject is equal with the King, Co. Lit. 190. Plowd.
Com. in Seig. Barkleys Case. Nay rather than the Su^^ect shall be equal with
the King in any thing, he shall lose all; for the King being Tenant in Common
of entier Chattel personal, he shall have the whole, as if an Obligation be
made to two, or two possessed of an horse, and one is attainted, the King shall
have the whole duty of the Obligation and the horse, 13 El. pl. 322. Finch.
178. To instance all particular cases, is endless and impossible, all land is
holden of the King immediately, or by means, himself not having any higher upon
earth of whom to hold, 50 Ass. pl. 1. 18 Eli. Pl. 498. For it would be against
Common right and reason, that the King should hold of any, or do service to any
of his subjects, says Cook, lib. 8.118. Because he has no Superior but God
almighty, Cook Lit. 1. Escheats of all Cities appertains unto the King, all
mines of Gold and silver, or wherein the gold and silver is of the greater
value, appertain unto the King, 8 E. 3. Escheat 12. 1 El. Plo. 314. The King is
Anima legis, he governs and defends the law, all Writs and Process run in
his name, and receive authority only from him; and all persons have their
power from him, and by his Writ, Patent, or Commission. The King has the sole
Government of his subjects. The body Politic and the natural body of the King
make one body, and not diverse, and are inseparable and indivisible, Plo. 234
242.213. lib. 7.12. Rex tuetur legem, and lex tu^tur jus. We mu^ be for God and
the King, because by his laws we are protected, and it is a miserable case to
be out of the Kings Protection, Co. Lit. 129.

All Jurisdictions and the punishment of all offenders against the Laws,
belongs to the King; And Treasons, Felonies and other Pleas of the Crown, are
propriae causae regis. For why? The King is viva Lex, a living Law, who only
has power to give Laws, and therefore he only ought to punish those who break
them: Not the Parliament as it is called, viz. the two Houses, or either of
them singly, because they without the King can make no Law, and therefore they
are murderers, because they have put to death many worthy Innocents, having no
other Law, but their own wicked wills.

And for my part, if any one should tell me that the Law of England, is nothing
but the will of the King, I could not disprove him; for what are the great
volumes of our Statutes, but the Monuments and Repertory of the Kings will?
What is the reason, that it is a Law that the King cannot make new or alter old
Laws, but in Parliament with the consent of his Lords and Commons? Because the
King was pleased to will it so, for it was not so from the beginning. The King
was long before Parliaments, and therefore did most certainly make Laws without
them. What is an Act of Parliament, but the will of the King, Nay what is Magna
Charta, but a Roy le veilt? All our Rights and Liberties we enjoy, are by the
gracious concessions of our Sovereign Lord the King, who esteems our good,
and freedom, his best praerogative and happiness; Omnium domos, illius vigilia
defendit, omnium otium, illius labor, omnium delitias, illius industria, omnium
vacationem, illius occupatio: The King by his watch, and diligent care, does
defend, and keep every man's house in safety: his labor does maintain and
defend every man's rest and quiet, his diligence does preserve and defend every
private man's pleasure and delight, his business does maintain and defend every
man's leisure; So that (as Manwood has it) even as the head of a natural body
does continually watch, and with a provident care still ook about for the
safety, and preservation of every member of the same body: Even so the King
being the head of the body of the Commonweal, does not only continually carry a
watchful eye for the preservation of peace, and quietness at home amongst his
own Subjects, but also to preserve, and keep them in peace and quietness from
any foreign invasion: Therefore if the Rebels since the murder of our gracious
King Charles the first, have taken the freeborn Subjects of this Nation, and
imprisoned them like Slaves without any just cause or due process of Law; If
they have violently driven us from our Lands and Livelyhoods, possessing
themselves of them, and taken away our free Customs and Liberties; If they have
unjustly deprived us of the benefit of the Law, banished us out of our Country,
and destroyed us with their high Courts of Injustice, without the verdict of
our equals, contrary to the Law of the Land; if they have delayed Justice and
Right, denied it to all men, and granted it to no man, but to those who would
buy it, Bless God for Charles the first, and pray for the restoration of
Charles the second. Praise God for their noble Praedecessours, who have been
our Nursing Fathers, and their Queens our nursing Mothers, who have willed and
enacted Magna Charta, ca. 29. Nullus liber homo capiatur, vel imprisonetur, aut
dissisietur de libero tenemento suo, vel libertatibus, vel liberis
consuetudinibus suis, aut utlagagetur, aut exuletur, aut aliquo modo
destruatur, nec super ibimus, nec super eum mittemus nisi per legale judicium
parium suorum, vel per legem terrae, nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut
differemus justitiam, vel rectum. That no man should be arrested, imprisoned,
disseised of his Freehold, of his Liberties, or free customs, or outlawed,
b^nished, or otherwise destroyed, but by the verdict of his equals, and the Law
of the Land, neither should Law and Justice be delayed, sold or denied to any
man, but the King in judgment of Law, is present in all his Courts of Justice,
repeating these words, We will sell, deny, nor delay Justice and right to no
man, Inst. 2.55. O Magnificent, blessed, and golden Oration! It proceeded from
the lips of Kings, and we shall never hear such Doctrine preached again in any
of our Courts of Justice, until our King be restored to his own, and sit Judge
amongst us. It was King Charles the first who granted that the burden of
excise should not be laid on the shoulders of his Subjects, but the Rebels with
their intolerable and monstrous Excises, new found impositions, and other
unspeakable grievances, have beggered the Subjects, and undone the whole
Kingdom both in their Estates and Reputation; To be short, whatsoever they
voted unlawful for the King to do, they have done that, and ten thousand times
worse: so that though we want not bodies to feel the miseries, which they have
brought upon us, yet we want tongues to express the woefulness of our
Condition, and the incomparable wickedness of these Traitors.

And what greater pretense have they had for their actions, than to say, that
the King was not the Supreme Governor over his Subjects? A contradiction in it
self; but we will proceed further to manifest their error. Sir Thomas Smith in
his commonwealth of England, says, cap. 9. By old and ancient Histories that
I have read, I do not understand that our Nation has used any other general
Authority in this Realm, neither Aristocratical, nor Democratical, out only the
royal and Kingly Majesty, who held of God to himself, and by his Sword, his
People and Crown, acknowledging no Prince on Earth his Superior, and so it is
kept, and holden at this day; which truth is sufficiently warranted in our
Law Books. The state of our Kingdom (says Sir Edward Cook li. 4. Ep. ad
lectorem) is Monarchical, and from the beginning by right of inheritance has
been successive, which is the most absolute and perfect form of Government;
excluding Interregnum, and with it infinite inconveniences, the Maxim of the
common Law being Regem Angliae nunquam mori, That the King of England never
dies; then doubtless the Rebels could not by Law mortify both the natural
and politic capacity of the King. And in Calvin's case li. 7. The weightiest
case that ever was argued in any Court, than which case (according to my Lord
Cokes observation) never any case was adjudged with greater concordance, and
less variety of opinions, and that (which never fell out in any doubtful
case) no one opinion in all our books is against that judgment, In this case it
was resolved amongst other things, Fo. 4. etc. 1. That the People of England
etc. were the Subjects of the King, viz. their Sovereign liege Lord King James.
2. That Ligeance, or obedience of the Subject to the Sovereign, is due by the
Law of Nature. 3. That this Law of Nature is part of the Laws of England. 4.
That the Law of Nature was before any judicial or municipal Law in the world.
5. That the Law of Nature is immutable, and cannot be changed. From which
resolutions we may conclude, that the Subjects of the King of England (unless
they like God Almighty could alter the Law of Nature,) They could not alter
their obedience and subjection to their Sovereign Lord King Charles. For if by
the Law of Nature obedience from them was due to the natural body (as I shall
further prove) of King Charles; and if the Law of Nature is immutable, (as most
certainly it is, Bracton lib. 1 ca. 5. D. and Stu. ca. 5. and 6.) then could
not they have any cause whatsoever, (as altering their Religion, banishing, or
killing of them) a sufficient ground for them to take up arms against him, and
put him to death. For by this they go about to change the Law of Nature, which
is impossible for mortals to do: But say some, by the Law of Nature we may
defend our selves, and therefore leavy war against the King for our own
defense; I answer, that by the Law of Nature we are bound to defend our selves,
yet must we use no unlawful means for our defense; for the Subjects to levy
war against their Sovereign, is forbidden both by the Laws of God and Nature.
Therefore vain and foolish is that excuse, as well as all others which the
Rebels make use of to defend their Rebellion.

Ligeance is a true and faithful obedience of the Subject due to his
Sovereign, It is an obligation upon all Subjects to take part with their Liege
Lord against all men living, to aid and assist him with their bodies, and
minds, with their advice and power; not toft li up their arms against him, nor
to support in any way those who oppose him. This ligeance and obedience is an
incident inseparable to every. Subject of England; and in our Law Books, and
many Acts of Parliament, as in 34 H. 8. cap. 1. 35 H. 8. cap. 3, etc. The King
is called the liege Lord of his Subjects, and the people his liege subjects.
Every Subject of England takes the Oath of ligeance, which is only due unto
the King, yet does not the ligeance of the Subject to the King begin at the
taking of this Oath at the Leet; For (as it was resolved in Calvin's Case) so
soon as the Subject is born, he owes by birthright ligeance and obedience to
his Sovereign Lord the King. Because ligeance, faith and obedience of the
Subject to the Sovereign, was by the Law of Nature written with the Finger of
God in the Heart of Man, before any municipal, or judicial Laws were made: 1.
For that Moses was the first Reporter or writer of Law in the World, yet
government and subjection was long before Moses. 2. For that it had been in
vain to have prescribed laws to any, but to such as ought obedience, faith and
ligeance before, in respect whereof they were bound to obey and observe them,
Frustra enim feruntur leges, nisi subditis, and obedientibus. You may read
likewise in Calvin's Case, That the King of England has his title to the Crown
by inherent birthright, by descent from the blood royal, from God, Nature, and
the Law, and therefore not by way of trust from the two Houses of Parliament,
or from the People; Neither is his Coronation any part of his Title, but only
an ornament, and solemniation of the royal descent; For it was then resolved,
that the title of King James was by dessent, and that by Queen Elizabeth's
death, the Crown and Kingdom of England descended to his Majesty, and he was
fully and absolutely thereby King, without any essential ceremony, or act to be
done Ex post facto. So in the first year of the same Kings reign, before his
Majesty's Coronation, Watson and Clarke, seminary Priests, and others, were of
opinion, that his Majesty was no complete and absolute King before his
Coronation, but that Coronation did add perfection to the descent, and
therefore (observe says my Lord Cook their damnable and damned consequent)
that they by strength and power might before his Coronation take him and his
royal Issue into their possession, keep him prisoner in the Tower, remove such
Counselors, and great Officers as pleased them, and constitute others in their
places, etc. and that these, and others of like nature, could not be treason
against his Majesty, before he was crowned King. But it was clearly resolved by
all the Judges of England, that presently, by the descent, his Majesty was
completely and absolutely King, without any essential ceremony or act to be
done Ex post facto, and that Coronation was but a royal ornament, and outward
solemniation of the descent. And this evidently appears by infinite
Presidents and book cases, where such execrable opinions have been no sooner
hatched, than destroyed; and if the Judges of our age had been so honest, as to
have cropped in the bud such like opinions broached by the Rebels, Charles the
first had still been our King, and we a flourishing and happy Kingdom.

Although the King of England has two Capacities, the one by Nature, the other
by Policy; yet ligeance is due to the King in his natural capacity, and his
natural and politic body make but one indivisible body, Plo. 213. The Oath of
Alligeance is made to the natural person of the King, so is the Oath of
Supremacy, and all Inditements of Treason, when any do intend, or compass
mort^ et destructionem Domini Regis, the death, and destruction of the Lord our
King (which must needs be understood of his natural body, for his politic body
is immortal, and not subject to death) the Indictment concludes, contra
ligeantiae suae debitum, ergo, the ligeance is due to the natural body, vid.
Fit. Justice of Peace, 53. Plo. Com. 384. in the Earl of Leicesters case; It
is true, that the King in genere dies not; but no question in individuo he
dies, as for example Charles the first dyed, yet the King is not dead, because
Charles the second (whom God preserve) is still alive. For by the Laws of
England, there can be no interregnum within the same, lib. 7.11. And to affirm,
(as the Traitors now do) that the Kings power is separable from his person, is
high Treason by the Law of the Land; hear the Oracle of the Law tell you so,
lib. 7.11, In the Reign (says he) of Edward the second, the Spencers, the
Father, and the Son, to cover the Treason hatched in their hearts, invented
this damnable and damned opinion; that Homage, and Oath of Ligeance, was more
by reason of the Kings Crown, (that is of his politic capacity) than by reason
of the person of the King, upon which opinion they inferred execrable, and
detestable consequents. 1. If the King do not demean himself by reason in the
right of his Crown, his Lieges are bound by Oath to remove the King. 2. Seeing
that the King could not be reformed by Suit of Law, that ought to be done by
aspertee, that is by force. 3. That his Lieges be bound to Govern, in aid of
him, and in default of him. All which were condemned by two Parliaments, one in
the Reign of E. 2. called exilium Hugonis le Spencer, and the other in Anno 1
E. 3. cap. 1. If the opinions of the Spencers were so wicked, and detestable,
what then are the actions of the Rebels of our age? who have put in practice,
what was but intended by the Spencers, and that they might reform the King
according to their minds, cut off his head, because he was a headhigher than
they. O Monstrous Reformers.

Did I not know that the Euthusiasts of our times, do by their diabolical
interpretations, subvert even the Holy word of the Almighty, making themselves
absolute Kings over the Scripture, to do what they please with it, though they
will not permit their King to have Sovereignty over themselves his Vassals;
And, like the raging torrent of the foaming floods, which running down the
lofty Hills, demolisheth and carries away all opposites in its roaring
Streams; or as the violent fury of a Masterless, headstrong multitude, who hew
down Kings, as well as Royal Subjects, in their tempestuous fury: so these men
set upon the Bible, and stretch every Text of Scripture to their own meaning,
although there is as great a distance between their meaning, and the Scripture,
as there was betwixt the Glutton in Hell, and Lazarus, in Abraham's Bosom in
Heaven, else should I wonder, how they could seem to make the very Letter of
the Law speak against the very Letter, and like the Philosophers stone, which
turns all things into Gold, so the tongues of these men turn the sense of all
the Lawbooks into their golden meaning, and cite those books as authorities on
their sides, which are so contrary, and opposite against them, as if they had
been purposely prepared to encounter and confute them; For where is the Kings
Sovereignty more fully demonstrated, and evidenced, than in Reverend Bracton?
and what book so much abu^sed as his? For lib. 2. cap. 24. speaking of
Liberties, and who had power to give them, Quis? says he, who has power? he
answers that the King has. For, Sciendum, quod ipse dominus Rex, qui
ordinariam habet jurtsdictionem, et dignitatem, et potestatem super omnes qui
in regno suo sunt, habet enim omnia jura in manu sua, quae ad coronam, et
laicalem pertinent potestatem, and materialem gladium, qui pertinet ad regni
gubernaculum, habet etiam justitiam, et judicium, quae sunt jurisdictiones, ut
ex jurisdictione suae, sicut dei minister, and vicarius, tribuat unicuique quod
suum fuerit. Habet enim ea quae sunt pacis, ut populus sibi traditus in pace
sileat, and quiescat, and ne quis alterum verberet, vulneret, vel male tractet,
ne quis alienam rem, per vim and roberiam auferat, vel asportet, ne quis
hominem Mahemiet vel occidat. Habet enim coercionem, ut delinquentes puniat,
and coerceat. Item habet in potestate sua leges, and constitutiones, assisas in
regno suo provisas, et approbatas, et juratas, ipse in propria persona
observet, et subditis suis faciat observari, nihil enim prodest jura condere,
nisi sit qui jura tueatur. Habet igitur Rex hujusmodi jura five jurisdictiones
in manu sua; And again in the same Chapter, ea quae jurisdictionis funt and
pacis, and ea quae sunt justitiae, and paci annexae, ad nullum pertinent, nisi
ad coronam, and dignitatem regiam, nec a Corona separari poterunt cum faciant
ipsam Coronam. The sum of which in English is this, the King has supreme power
in all civil causes, the Law flows solely from him, he is super omnes, above
all men in his Kingdom, all jurisdictions are in him, The material Sword of
right belongs to him, and whatsoever conduces to peace, that the people
committed to his charge may live peaceably and quietly. The power of holding
Assizes is derived from him, and of punishing Delinquents, for it would be in
vain to Enact Laws, if there was not some body enabled to protect us by
defending them etc. And the same Author says lib. 2. ca. 9. Potentia vero
omnes sibi subitos praecellere, parem autem habere non debet, nec multo fortius
superiorem, and a little after in the same Chapter, Exercere Rex debet
potestatem juris, sicut dei vicarius in terra et minister, quia ea potestas
solius Dei est. The King does excel all his Subjects in power, He has no
Equal, much less a Superior, because his power is from God only, he is Gods
Vicar, Therefore not the Peoples. And again, li. 1. ca. 8. Item in temporalibus
sunt Imperatores, Reges, et Principes, in hiis quae pertinent ad regnum, et sub
eis Duces, Comites, Barons, magnates sive Vavasores, et Milites, et etiam
liberi et villani, et diversae Potestates sub rege constitutae. And a little
after, sunt etiam sub Rege liberi homines, et servi ejus Potestati Subjecti. Et
omnis quidem sub eo, et ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo; Parem autem non
habet in regno suo, quia sic amitteret praeceptum, cum par in partem non habeat
imperium. Item nec multo fortius superiorem, nec potentiorem habere debet, quia
sic esset inferior sibi subjectis, et inferiores pares esse non possunt
potentioribus, ipse autem Rex non debet esse sub Homine sed sub Deo, et sub
Lege, quia Lex facit Regem. Dukes, Earls, Baronets, Knights, the Worthies of
the Land, Freemen and Villains, all are under the King, and the King under
none but God, He has no Peer in his Realm, because then he would lose his
command, for amongst Equals there can be no Empire, therefore much less has
he any Superior, or more powerful than himself, because then he would be
inferior to his Subjects, and Inferiors, (as the Subjects are,) cannot be
equal with the more powerful, (as the King is.) But the King ought not to be
under man, but under God, and the Law, because the Law makes him King.

But what if the King should swerve from the Rules of the Law, destroy his
Subjects and their Estates without a cause, May the Subjects take up arms
against their Sovereign, and compel him by force to do that which they cannot
persuade him to by fair meams? No, says Bracton, li. 1. ca. 8. Si autem ab eo
petatur (cum breve non currat contra ipsum) locus erit supplicationi, quod
factum suum corrigat, et emendet, quod quidem si non fecerit, satis sufficit ei
ad paenam, quod dominum expectet ultorem. Nemo quidem de factis suis praesumat
disputare, multo fortius contra factum suum-venire, No Enditement of high
Treason etc. lies against the King, our only remedy is to Petition his sacred
Majesty, but if he will not hearken to our just and reasonrble requests, satis
sufficit, Nay his punishment is more than enough, for he must render an account
one day to him who judges righteously, who will give us all a hearing, the
Beggar as well as the King. But let not men (in the mean time) presume to
question the deeds of the King, much less Rebel against him, and undo by
force, what the King shall do though not according to right. And that you may
know that Bracton fully meant that the Subjects ought not to rise against the
King though he acted unjustly, He repeats his mind in other places, li. 5.
Tract. 3. de defaltis, cap. 3.3. where he puts the case, that if the King
should do injury, and will not suffer the Law, but his will to take place, Quo
casu cum dominus Rex super hoc fuerit interpellatus, in eadem perstiterit
voluntate, quod velit tenentem esse defensum injuria cum teneatur justitiam
totis viribus defensare, ex tunc erit injuria ipsius domini Regis, nec poterit
ei necessitatem aliquis imponere, quod i^la^ corrigat, et emendet, nisi velit,
cum superiorem non habeat nisi deum, et satis erit illi pro paena quod deum
expectat ultorem. If the King who is bound to administer justice to his utmost
power, being Petitioned, will not recall, and amend the wrong he did, he
injures his Subjects, but no body can force him to do right, because he has
the Supreme power, he has no Superior but God, and it is punishment enough
for him, to expect that God to whom vengeance only belongs, will take
vengeance on him. To every point which I have cited out of Bracton, does Fleta
unanimously agree.

What man then, so impudently wicked? What hand so wilfully audacious? what pen
can there be so repugnant, and contradictory to all truth? as to affirm and
publish to the world, that Bracton writes, and is so to be understood, viz.
That the people have the Soverainty over the King, and may call him in question
for his actions, and so punish him for his offenses. O Traitor to the King, and
Sycophant of Bracton.

Mr. Willian Prynne of Lincolns-Inne is the man, who with his Hand and Pen (I
cannot say Heart) has promulged this false Doctrine to the World, in his Book
called The Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms: Wherein (according to
Mr. Sandersons expression, in his History of King Charles the 1st. fo. 117.)
Prynne pretends to overthrow all Scripture proofs against killing Kings and
Princes. For my part I bear not the least grudge or animosity to the man's
person; But his book is such a rapsody of nonsense, a bundle of Rebellion, and
Treason, a Pamplet so Seditious, Pernicious, Sophistical, Jesuitical,
Traiterous, and Scurrulous, that I want Mr. Prynnes Epithites, to give his own
book, its deserved Odium; Wherein (as Mr. Fuller in his Church History, lib.
11. fol. 152. well observes) he delights more to be numerous with many, than
ponderous with select quotations, which makes his Books to swell with the
loss of tentimes of the Reader, sometimes of the Printer, and his pen
generally querulous, has more of the Plantiff than of the Defendant therein.

I mention Mr. Prynne, and his book here, only to put him in mind of the wrong
which he has done both to our Sovereign the King, and the whole Kingdom; He
being the greatest, (if not the only Champion,) who rook upon him, to
vindicate, and applaud, those treacherous, damnable, and rebellious
proceedings, and unchristian, inhumane, and unnatural War against the King, of
that Monster, called the Long Parliament, whom, now he labors as much to
vilifye, as he did then to promote. O Traiterous Offspring, which kills his
Mother only, because she will not give him, suck! If he repent, why does he not
write a book of retractations? If he looks upon his book entitled, The
lawfulness of the Parliaments necessary defensive War, both in point of Law
and Conscience, I am sure, he will have cause enough to repent of his writing,
if he has any Law or Conscience in him. And he has no way better to redeem
his credit, than by a public Confession. God may pardon him, and the King may
pardon him, if he repents; But without repentance, he must expect nothing but
a Traitors reward in this World; I leave him to Gods mercy in the World to come.

But since it is the manner of Worldlings to set the best side foremost, the
purest grain commonly lies in the mouth of the Sack, and a fair Apple many
times has a rotten coar; Therefore behold the specious Title of Mr. Prynnes
book, and the cunning Sophistry, in his Mental Reservation, by which he has
deceived the common people, befooled himself, and undone the whole Kingdom; the
Title of his book is, The Parliament and Kingdom are the Sovereign power. Any
man would think, that by the word, Parliament, Mr. Prynne meant the King, the
House of Lords, and the House of Commons, because by the Law of the Land, there
can be no Parliament without the King, neither can the two Houses by Law act
any thing without him, and then if he means so, no man will deny, but that the
Parliament has the Sovereign power; But alas he has no such thoughts, he
means (as by the stuff of his book is manifest) that the two Houses, or the
major part of them, have the Sovereign power, and that they may enact any thing
without the King, as well as with him: Thus by lifting up the Legs and Feet too
high, he has given the Head a fall, and battered the whole Body into pieces, O
unhappy Member, who would have the Heels execute the Office of the Brains, and
maintain the War of the inferior Members against the Superior, to be legal,
and conscientious! In his Epistle Dedicatory to the Lords and Commons, whom he
calls, Eternally Renowned Senators, and most cordial Philopaters (he will not
now tell you, they were eternal) Mr Prynne terms all contrary opinions to his
(though they be the opinions of Bishops, and far better Lawers than himself)
to be but the vain, empty, brainsick, lying fancies of a few illiterate,
impolitick Court Chaplains, Lawyers, Sycophants, etc. How irreverently, and
discourteously, he has dealt with his Gracious Sovereign, Lord, and Master the
King, let his book judge, where he can scarce speak of the King at any time,
without taxing him with perjury, lying, popery and murder.

He raileth against the treachery and disloyalty of Popish Parliaments,
Prelates, Lords, and Subjects to their Sovereign, and so concludes, that they
have made greater innovations, and encroachments on the Crown, and in an higher
degree, than ever did the long Parliament, which he hopes will for ever silence
the clamorous tongues of all ill Counselors, Courtiers, Royalists, Malignants,
Papists and Cavalliers, against the proceedings of that Parliament, (see the 1.
part of his Book, fol. 33.) as if the excessive abundance of other men's sins,
would justify the sins of the long Parliament. And indeed, the most of his
arguments are a facto ad jus, which (especially in the Kings case) is no
argument at all. The books of the Royalists to maintain the Kings just
prerogatives, he calls anti-Parliamentary Pamphlets, and the Authors of them
he calls Malignant, Popish Vipets, illiterate, ignorant, injudicious Court
Doctors and Lawyers, and Anti-parliamental Momusses: But is not Mr. Prynne the
Anti-parliamental Momus and viper? who sets the body above the head,
maintains that the two Houses, or the major part, have the Sovereign power,
may act without the King, levy war against him, and kill him too, by
defending themselves; which as he tells you, he will justify both in point
of law and conscience. O unhappy law! O the no Conscience! which teaches men
to kill Kings, and the Subjects to levy war against their Sovereign; David,
the Lords anointed, cried, The Lord forbid that he should do this thing: But
Mr. Prynne a Presbyterian, cries, The Lord forbid that it should not be done.
Oh, the difference between a holy David, and a rigid Presbyterian!

He makes the ignorance (as he terms it) of other men, the greatest ground
of his arguments; He calls all Divines and Lawyers, a company of seemingly
scient, Vid. Epist. 2 part of Sovereign power.
though really inscient, self-conceited, Court Doctors, Priests and Lawyers;
Doctum genus indoctissimorum hominum, vix ad Doroberniam usque docti; who hold
an opinion contrary to his, (truly so named, by himself Vid. Epist. 1. part of
Sovereign power, etc.) dangerous Paradoxes, and upstart Enthusiasmes. He
endeavors to make us, all our Ancestors, and all Kingdoms fools, himself
the only omniscient. He revileth the King and all his royal party, by the names
of Murderers, Popish cutthroats, ignorant Momusses, and an unnatural
generation of popish and malignant vipers; But, To his ever honored, noble,
kind friends, the right Honorable Lord, Ferdinando Fairfax, the right
worshipful Sir William Waller, and Sir William Bruerton, Knights, Commanders
in Chief of the Parliaments forces, (which is the superscription to his Epistle
of the 3d. part of the Sovereign power, etc.) These he calls in the Vocative
case, Deservedly renowned worthies. So that, as none but Homer could express
the praises due to Homer, so none but Mr. Prynne can express the aspersions
which Mr. Prynne has cast upon his Master, the King, and his betters, the
loyal Royalists; for who can come after Mr. Prynne in railing, where he lets
his pen fly out?

You must take his own interpretations for true Maxims, and his own meaning
both of Scripture and Law Books, must go for current Doctrine; otherwise you
spoil his whole building; and that which he recites for him, will be most
against him. Nay, his averments must pass for undoubted axioms. But you will
ask me then, How can Mr. Prynne be clear from the guilt of blasphemy? who in
his 3d. part of the Sovereign power of Parliaments, fol. 6. declares himself
in these words, viz. I dare confidently aver, it was never the thought, nor
intention of Paul, or of the Holy Ghost, to inhibit Subjects by defensive arms
to resist Kings themselves, under pain of damnation. For my part I will not
invectively censure Mr. Prynne, as guilty of Blasphemy, nor scold at him as a
Subverter of Scripture, Parasite, etc. as he has done at others who are
contrary to him in opinion, but let me tell him, that if he had averred, that
it was never the thought, nor intention of St. Paul or the Holy Ghost to
inhibit Subjects, by offensive arms, to resist Kings themselves, under pain of
damnation; I should have as soon believed him, for Saint Paul says, Romans 13.1,
2. Let every Soul be Subject unto the higher Powers, for there is no power but
of God, the powers that be are ordained of God, whosoever therefore resists
the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation. Now if St. Paul's thoughts and intention be not
according to his words, then Mr. Prinns confident averrment, perhaps may be
true; but if St. Paul's thoughts and intention be according to his words (as
most certainly they are) then Mr. Prinns averrment, is but a false allegation,
and a belying of St. Paul, and the Holy Ghost; for by Saint Paul's Doctrine, he
which is not subject too, but resists the power, shall receive damnation; but
whosoever with defensive arms resists the King, is not subject to, but does
resist the power; Therehe which with defensive arms resists the King, shall
receive damnation, The Major no man can deny, the Minor is inviolable, and the
Conclusion is perfect, and sound. There be those indeed who do confidently
averr (and have written a book too,) that there were men before Adam, but I
could never see any Scripture, but their own interpretations and meanings to
warrant their averments. And until Mr. Pryn can produce Texts of Scripture, to
warrant, and maintain his confident averment, he must excuse me, if I still
hold St. Paul's Doctrine Canonical, and his averment mere Apocripha. For
suppose the King subverteth both Law and Religion, yet does not that take away
his supreme power, he is still a King, and Gods ordinance; Saul was a King,
though an impious sinner, and there have been wicked Kings as well as wicked
Subjects; to do evil (says one,) is no power, but impotency, therefore if the
King command me to murder my self, my Father, to destroy my Country, or to do
any other wicked act, I will not do it, but obey God, not him, because it is
his corruption, not any power he has, from whence his commandment proceeds:
and therefore I am not obliged to obey him, because I must be a Subject to his
power, not to his sins; yet if he should run after me with a naked Sword to
kill me, my Father, my Mother, ruin my Country, Laws, and Religion, Yet would
not I with defensive arms, lift up my hands against him, to resist, hurt, and
destroy him, because he is still my King, and has still that supreme power,
which God placed in him, although he does not then execute it, and therefore if
I should with defensive Arms lift up my hands to resist, hurt, and destroy him,
I should with defensive Arms lift up my hands to resist, hurt, and destroy the
Ordinance of God, and so receive damnation for my reward; Not to perform the
Kings command, is a resistance, although we suffer death; Therefore if it be
the Kings power and not his wicked will which commands me to do an evil
thing, if I did not perform his evil commandment, I should resist his power and
so be liable to damnation, although I patiently and meekly suffered death. But
doubtless the Kings power cannot command me to do any evil, but it must
proceed from his sinful will, for God is not the Author of any
unrighteousness, and there is no power but what God is the Author of;
therefore according to venerable Bede, the Apostle does not say, Non est
cupiditas nisi a Deo, est enim mala cupiditas quae non est a deo, nocendi autem
voluntas potest esse a suo quoque animo pravo. That there is no concupiscence
but what is of God, for there is an evil concupiscence, which is not from God,
and the evil will of sinning proceeds from our own depraved minds; therefore
if the King command me to do an evil thing, I ought to obey God, not his wicked
will, but rather than to lift up my hands against him, though in my defense, I
ought cheerfully and meekly to suffer a thousand deaths, for by dying unjustly
here, I shall live eternally in Heaven; and since the Glory of a Christian is
the Cross, by suffering and dying a Martyr, I shall obtain everlasting Glory,
and by my thus doing well, I shall get praise even of the Power, which the
Kings wicked will made use of to destroy me; but defense against the power of a
King is offense, therefore if with defensive arms, I should fight against him,
I should resist Gods Ordinance, and so receive damnation, for by Gods Ordinance
the King has the power over all, and his Actions ought not to be questioned or
resisted by any but the Almighty.

But for my part, I hold clearly, that when the King executes Tyranny, takes
away the Lives, or Estates of his Subjects unjustly, that he does it not only
by reason of his wicked will (according to the precedent distinction) but by
force, and virtue of his power, which God has given him, and that this is the
power, which St. Paul commands us to be subject unto, which if we resist, we
shall receive damnation, and that for several reasons.

It is most certain that there is no power but of God, the powers that be are
ordained of God, for by him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and
that are in Earth visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions,
or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by him, and for him, Col.
1.16. (Which expressions in the Abstract, do express existents in the
Concrete) from whence it follows, that bad Kings have their power from God,
and are Gods Ordinance, as well as good; And it is manifest in Scripture, that
wicked Kings are often sent for the punishment of a Nation, as in Hosea 13.11.
I gave them a King in my wrath, and took him away in mine anger; And God
commands us to pray for, and be subject, not only to the good, but also to
the bad Kings. I exhort you that Prayers, and Supplications, and Thanksgiving
be made for all men, for Kings, and such as are in Authority. 1 Timothy 2.1. Thus
Abraham prayed for King Abimeleck, Genesis 20.17. And Jacob blessed the King of
Egypt, Genesis 47.10. Yet the Kings of those times were Infidels, and most
notoriously wicked; No man is ignorant, that Nebuchadnezzar who destroyed
Jerusalem, was a great spoyler and oppressor, yet the Lord tells us by Ezekiel,
that he had given unto him the Land of Egypt, for the good service he had done
in laying it waste on his Commandment. And Daniel said unto him thus, Dan.
2.37. Thou O King art a King of Kings; for the God of Heaven has given thee a
Kingdom, Power, and Strength, and Glory, and wheresoever the Children of men
dwell, the Beasts of the Field, and the Fowls of Heaven, has he given into thy
hand, and has made thee Ruler over them all. Again to Belshazzar his Son, Dan.
5.18. The most high God gave unto Nebuchadnezzar thy Father a Kingdom, and
Majesty, and Glory, and Honor, and for the Majesty that he gave him, all
people, Nations, and Languages, trembled and feared before him; And again, Jer.
27.6. I have made the Earth says the Lord, the Man and the Beast that are upon
the ground, by my great power, and by my outstretched Arm, and have given it
unto whom it seemed meet unto me; And now have I given all these Lands into the
Hands of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon my Servant, and the Beasts of the Field
have I given him also to serve him, and all Nations shall serve him, and his
Son, and his Sons Son, until the very time of his Land come: And it shall come
to pass, that the Nation and Kingdom which will not serve the same
Nebcchadnezzar King of Babylon, and that will not put their Neck under the Yoke
of the King of Babylon, that Nation will I punish, says the Lord, with the
Sword, and with Famine, and with the Pestilence; Wherefore serve the King of
Babylon, and live. And St. Peter says, Servants (all the Kings Subjects are
his Servants) be subject to your Masters (the King is our Sovereign Lord and
Master) with all fear, not only to the good, and gentle, but also to the
froward; For this is thanks worthy, if a man for Conscience toward God, endure
grief, suffering wrongfully. From which it is most evident, that we ought, and
are commanded to be Subject to evil Kings, who are degenerated into Tyrants.
Inde illis potestas unde spiritus. Tertul. Apol. pa. 6.5.
If then the power of evil Kings comes from God, if God commands us to pray
for them, and to be subject to them, and if they are Gods ordinance (as most
certainly they are) it consequently follows, that he which with defensive or
offensive (I can make no distinction, for ubi lex non distinguit, non est
distinguenda,) Arms, resists an evil King, resists Gods ordinance, and
shall receive damnation; What then, if the King command us to do Evil, must
we do it? God forbid, nay God has forbidden it, therefore we must obey God,
not the King; yet must we not unjustly resist him, but rather, resign up our
lives and estates into his hands: For we must needs be subject to the King, not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake, says S. Paul. But our objecter
says, that if it be the meaning of the Apostle, to inhibit the resistance of
the Kings unlawful commands, then, to fly, or to die, rather than obey, is
likewise inhibited, because the not performance of the command, is a
resistance. To which I answer, that I may confidently aver, that it was never
the meaning of St. Paul, nor the Holy Ghost, to inhibit this kind of resistance
under the pain of eternal damnation: it being the Doctrine and practice of our
Savior, and all the Apostles, when they were persecuted in one City, to fly
into another, Matthew. 10.23. and all of them willingly suffered death under
wicked Kings: but you shall never find that they resisted with defensive arms,
but both with their lives, deaths and doctrine, set forth the contrary. But if
this kind of resistance be inhibited by the Apostle, you must understand, that
the penalty is temporal, not eternal damnation. The word in the Original is
(...), which signifies judicium, and so it is used in several places in the
New Testament, as in Matthew. 7.2. Luke 24.20, etc. for temporal damnation and
judgment. So that we may conclude, that the intention of the Apostle was, that
whosoever resists the lawful commands of the King, shall receive damnation
both from God and the King; and he which does not perform the unlawful commands
of the King, shall receive temporal judgment, and damnation from the King, but
salvation, and life everlasting from God: but whosoever uses unlawful
resistance against the Kings unlawful commands, as defensive arms, etc. must
expect temporal judgment and damnation from the King, and eternal judgment and
damnation from the Almighty.

But what, does God give power to Kings to take away men's lives and estates
unjustly? I answer that he does; the Devil himself has no power, but what God
gives him. It is the wisdom of the Almighty, oftentimes to scourge his people
for their sins, with the power which he gives to wicked Kings: The King is a
minister of God (says St. Paul) a revenger, to execute wrath upon him that
does evil: and sometimes to try them, that he may make them the more happy and
glorious; God gave power to the Devil to afflict Job, who had not his like in
the whole earth, a perfect, and an upright man, one that feared God, and
eschewed evil, Job. 1.8. and what made Job so famous, as his miseries? Had not
Job had sore boyles, we should never have heard of Job's glory, and good
fortunes; and was it not the Lord which authorized the Devil to afflict him? It
was, for the Devil had not power to touch him, until he had desired God to put
forth his hand, and touch his bone, and his flesh; which made holy Job to cry,
the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, not the Devil, for he was but the
instrument: so God oftentimes by the power which he gives to Kings, afflicts
his dearest children, both in their bodies, and estates; yet cannot
unrighteousness be imputed unto God; because he does it for their good: but
the wicked wills of Kings, which use the power which God gives them, so
unjustly, are unrighteous, and shall by the Almighty be punished, according to
venerable Bede, Injustum enim non est ut improbis accipientibus nocendi
potestatem bonorum patientia probetur, and malorum iniquitas puniatur. It is
not unjust in God, that the patience of the good be proved, and the sins of the
wicked punished, by the power which is given the wicked to offend; for by the
power given to the Devil, Job was tried, and appeared to be just; St. Peter was
tempted, that he should not presume too much upon himself; and Judas was
condemned, that he hanged himself. But it is unjust in the King to use it. Will thou then not be afraid of the power? (says the Apostle) Do that which is
good, and thou shall have praise of the same. A good man will have praise of
the power, let the King be good or evil: If the King be good, he will cherish
the good, and reward their piety and goodness, with praise and dignity: But if
the King be evil, yet shall the good receive praise from the power. It is the
Glory of a Chrstian to suffer wrongfully, his unjust miseries are his best
herauldry to ennoble him; and every injury offered to him, is as a Crown of
gold set on his head; he had rather be punished for a thousand faults
wrongfully, than for one justly; For what glory is it if when ye be buffeted
for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer
for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God, 1 Peter 2.20. Non
dicit ab illa, sed ^ex ea (says reverend Bid) quia etsi potestas humana non
laudat, immo si etiam persequitur, si occidit gladio, ut Paulum, si crucifigit,
ut Petrum, habebis ex illa laudem, dum ex eo quod illa malefacit in te, justum,
et innoxium, tuae virtutis patientia Coronam laudis meretur. All the Apostles,
and Martyrs received a Crown of Glory by their sufferings under Tyrants, and so
will every good Man. For they are the Ministers of God to them for good, though
they oppress, nay kill the Innocent, and Righteous, they do not hurt them, but
do them good; as the best Gold is purified in the fire, so the best Christians
are discerned from the dross, by their afflictions. That mettle is never good
which turns again, and the good Christian will suffer himself to be broken in
a thousand pieces, before he will turn again with resistance, against his
persecuting King; for why? He knows that though he suffer here on Earth, yet
God will glorify him in Heaven, though he be contemned by the King, yet he
shall be exalted by God, and though he dye by the Kings unlawful command, yet
his comfort is, that his dead body shall arise, by the eternal Decree of the
Almighty, and so the good will always receive praise of the Power.

Neither are the Rulers a terror to him, because he always abounds with good
works.

Hor. Integer vitae, scelerisque purus,
Non eget Mauri Jaculis, neque arcu^
Nec Venenatis gravida sagitis,
Fusce, Pharetra.
Who lives upright, and pure of heart,
Oh Fuscus) neither needs the Dart
Nor Bow, nor Quiver fraught with store
Of Shafts envenomed by the Moor.
Innocence is the only buckler which protecteth a loyal Subject from the
terror of his Sovereign; But Traitors, who have rebelled against their king,
and deserved death by the known Laws of the Land, These men must preach up Mr.
Prynnes Doctrine to cover their malice, hold the truth in unrighteousness, and
when with offensive Arms, contrary to all Law and Religion, and against their
allegiance and oaths, they set upon the Kings sacred Majesty, and with an
innumerous multitude of unhallowed Rebels, they fight against, and strive to
murder their dread Sovereign in the open Air; They must have the impudence
with Mr. Prynne, to excuse themselves, may think it a glorious Apology, To
averr confidently that it was never the meaning of St. Paul, nor the Holy
Ghost, to inhibit Subjects to take up defensive Arms against Kings themselves;
And thus they invoke St. Paul himself, and the Holy Ghost, to patronize their
wicked Treasons, and unparalled Rebellions, and belch out Blasphemy, to
defend their injustice, and themselves from the justice of their injured
Sovereign. The Apostles did not only teach us with their Doctrine, that
resistance of the power was unlawful; but also suffered themselves to be
wickedly massacred, and murdered, before they would resist an unjust power;
Nay all the primitive Christians (which Mr. Prynne confesses) although they
were many in number, and sufficiently able to defend themselves against their
Persecutors, by force, and Arms, yet did refuse to do it, yielding themselves
up to any tortures, punishments, and deaths, without the least resistance of
the power, either in word, or deed; Nay our Savior himself, acknowledged that
Pilate had power given him from above to Crucify him (as you may read in St.
John 19.10.) Then says Pilate unto him, Speak thou not unto me? know
thou not that I have power to Crucify thee, and have power to release thee?
Jesus answered, Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were
given thee from above: Therefore he which delivered me unto thee has the
greater sin. Yet Mr. Prynne with his confident averrment (for he cannot bring
one word of Scripture for what he says) goes about to maintain the defensive
War (as he calls it) of the Subjects against their Sovereign Lord the King,
lawful, both in point of Law and Conscience; -- Tantumne potest suadere malorum
Religio? --
Could his Religion do this? His surely, and only his, for it is against the
foundation of Christian Religion, and Mr. Prynne must publish a new Gospel, or
else rectify the Bible at the Presbyterian Oracle, before his King-killing
books will be Canonical.

He brings his arguments from the time that never was, nor ever will be, for
says he (2d. p^rt of his Sovereign power of Parliaments, fo. 82, 83.) Kingdoms
were before Kings, ergo, the King has no absolute negative voice, etc. I
always thought that Kings were before Kingdoms, they being correlativa, and
doubtless if Fathers were before Sons, and Masters before Servants, then Mr.
Prynne speaks nonsense; but for his Apology, you must understand that he means,
Countries and people were before Kings; but I think that is false too, for the
first man Adam was a King, and Mr. Prynne cannot show any time, before England
was governed by Kings: And the word Kingdom in the Reports of our book cases,
and in Acts of Parliaments also, is oftentimes taken for the King himself, as
you may read in Calvin's case, lib. 7.12.

Therefore, since by the Laws of the Land there can be no Parliament without
the King, and that the word Kingdom is often used for the King himself; who can
deny the truth of the Title of Mr. Prynnes book, which says, That the
Parliament and Kingdom are the Sovereign power. But, latet anguis in herba;
Open the leaves of his book, and you will see the mystery of iniquity clouted
together.

If the King (says Mr. Prynne) dye without heir, then the people might make
what laws they should think fit; Ergo, the Members at this day have power
without the King to make Laws, and are the most absolute supreme power, and
lawgiver, not the King. If the Sky fall, we may perhaps catch Larks; but it
does not therefore follow, that we may catch Larks presently. Mr. Prynne
knows, that it is a Maxim in Law, that the King never dies: But admit the
King should dye without heir, and that then the people had power to make Laws;
yet gross it were to conclude, that the members of the two Houses might so do,
because they are dissolved, and are extinct when the King dies. Therefore with
more reason (as a Royalist observes) the King might argue thus; All the lands
in England are holden mediatly or immediately of the King, Co. Lit. 1.12. l.
7.20.
and if the owners dye without heir, by the laws of the Realm, their lands
escheat to the Crown, and so become at the Kings disposal. But every man may
dye without heir, Ergo, All the lands in England, at this present, are the
proper inheritance of the King. No Lawyer can deny Major or Minor, yet the
Conclusion thereupon is absurd.

The Court of Parliament (says Mr. Prynne) has power to avoid the Kings
Charters, etc. made against law; Ergo it has the Sovereign power, and is above
the King; and why not, Ergo, the Court of Chancery, or any other of the Courts
of Law at Westminster, have the sovereign power, and are above the King; for
they have power to nullify and avoid the Kings Charters, etc. made against
Law? But I am sick of Mr. Prynnes impertinence, and nonsense, if any one be
desirous to drink more of it, I refer him to the Ocean, his Book: I will only
give you a taste of the abuses which Mr. Prynne has cast on Venerable Bracton,
and how Mr. Prynne endeavors to make Bracton speak Mr. Prynne's own sense,
against Bracton's own sense, express words, and meaning. And since Mr. Prynne
can make the Gospel, and Holy Ghost speak what he pleases, no wonder, if he
has the Law Books at his beck.

Bracton says (as you have already heard) That the King has no Peer in his
Kingdom, for so he should lose his Empire, since Peers (or Equals) have no
command over one another, much more then ought he not to have a superior, or
mightier; for so he should be inferior to those who are subject to him, and
inferiors cannot be equal to superiors. Now says Mr. Prynne, (according to
the old Jesuitical distinction) The meaning of Bracton is, That the King is
above every one of his subjects, and has no Peer, nor superior, if they be
taken particularly and distributively, as single men: but if we take them
collectively in Parliament, as they are one body, and represent the whole
Kingdom; then the Subjects are above the King, and may, yea, ought to restrain
and question his actions, his Maleadministrations, if their be just cause. By
which meaning of Bracton, (as he calls it, but in truth only his own) Mr.
Prynne would prove the Parliament to have the Sovereign power over the King and
Kingdom. Truly I think, the very recital of what Bracton has written, and
what Mr. Prynne writes is Bracton's meaning, is enough to convince, and make
appear even to the blind, that Mr. Prynne is worse than a false Commentator,
and an absurd deceiver. But howsoever I will examine them, and let the world
judge how they agree. The King has no Peer in his Kingdom, says Bracton, But
the Parliament and people (the Kings Subjects) are in his Kingdom, Ergo,
neither the Parliament nor people, (collectively, or distributively) are the
Kings Peer (or equal.) But why has the King no Peer in his Kingdom? Because
then he should lose his Empire. So he should if the Parliament was his Peer;
and Bracton did never intend that the King should lose his Empire; for he
says, the King ought by no means to have a superior, or mightier, (Mr.
Prynne says, he ought by all means to have the Parliament his superior and
mightier) But wherefore ought not the King to have a Superior? because (says
Bracton) so he should be inferior to those who are subject to him: The
Parliament and People confess themselves to be the Kings Subjects, yet Mr.
Prynn would have them to be the Kings Superior, Expressly against Bractons
words and meaning, and a mere nonsensical Contradiction. And the reason why Mr.
Prynne says, Bracton did only mean that any single man, was not the Kings
Superior, or Equal, not the Parliament, is, because Bracton says, Rex non
habet parem, nec Superiorem in regno suo, seeing Parem, and Superiorem? in the
singular number; I pray what Latin would Mr. Prynne have Bracton speak, could
he have expressed himself better: and too, Mr. Prynne pretends the Parliament
to be only the Kings Superior, not Superiors, Therefore does not the singular
number fully answer Mr. Prynne in all points, but Mr. Prynne may hear Bracton
confute him in the plural number too, if he please, (as I have already showed)
saying, Rex habet potestatem, et jurisdictionem super omnes qui in regno suo
sunt, and again, Potentia vero omnes fibi subditos praecellet. Where is Mr.
Prynns almighty Parliament now? Bracton tells him, if they be in the Kings
Dominions, that the King has power over and above them, and Mr. Prynne must
find out some Utopia for them, in the air, to inhabit, before he can prove
either by Law, or Gospel, that the Parliament is above, of has Sovereign power
over the King, Ipse autem Rex non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo, et sub
Lege, quia Lex facit Regem, says Bracton, but the King himself ought to be
under the Parliament, (says Mr. Prynne) and why not under the women? for if
Mr. Prynne will say that the Parliament is not comprehended in the word Homine,
so likewise may he say that neither are women: Bracton says that the King
ought to be under none but God, and unless Mr. Prynne can make his Parliament a
God Almighty, he can never make out that the King is under it. For according to
Bractons Doctrine the King is under none but God, Omnis quidem sub rege et
ipse, sub nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo. Which is sufficient testimony that the
King is under no mortal man, or men, yet he is sub Lege, under the Law, because
the Law makes the King: Ergo says Mr. Prynne, The Parliament makes the King,
and Governs him with the Laws which the Parliament first made. O Grand
Imposture! Can any man but Mr. Prynne forge such a consequence? Rex solutus a
Legibus quo ad vim coactivam, subditus est legibus quo ad vim directivam
propria voluntate, The King indeed is under the Law because he will be ruled by
the Law, but if he will not, no man has power to compel, or punish him,
according to the opinion of Thomas Aquinas, The King is free from the Coercive
power of the Law, but he may be subject to its directive power, yet according
to his own will and inclination, that is, God can only compel and command him,
but the Law and his Courts may direct and advise him. Every honest man is bound
to perform and fulfill his word, and the King is so much under and subject to
the Laws which he makes, that he will perform and fulfill them, but if not,
Dominum expectet ultorem, which is the only punishment for Kings; And satis
sufficit, that is enough too, according to Reverend Bracton: But that the
Parliament therefore makes the King, and may question his actions (according to
Mr. Prynns Sophistry) is a mere non sequitur. The Law indeed makes the King,
for he has a legal Title to his Crown, he is made our King by the Law of God,
and the Law of the Kingdom, which cannot be without a King; but that the Law of
the Parliament, or that the Law by the Parliament, made the King, is such a
Chimaera, that is no where to be found, but in Mr. Prynnes unsettled brain: For
the King of England was made a long time before Parliaments were invented, or
thought on. The King indeed first made Parliaments, and gave them their being,
who now have unmade their King, and took away his living. O ungrateful Servants
who rob their Master! O ungracious Children who murder their Father which
begot them!

So much for Mr. Prynne, and his pestilent book, the prodigious offspring of a
revengeful head, whom I would not have mentioned, but to vindicate the truth,
for which I will both live and dye.

One thing, Reader, I recommend to thee, worthy of the observation of all
Christians, and as a just judgment of the Almighty God, Psalm. 33.10. who
brings the Counsel of the Heathen to naught, and makes the devices of the
people of none effect, Which is, that Mr. Prynne who was the only Champion, to
fight against the truth with his pen (as the Rebels did with their Swords) to
maintain and applaud the long Parliament, in their Treason and Rebellion
against their Sovereign, was afterward ill entreated by his own stipendaries,
and cast out of the pack as an unprofitable Member; He encouraged the Soldiers
to fight against the King, dedicated his Volumes to their chief Commanders,
loaded them with high Commendations, and incomparable praises, and made them
believe, that they could do God no better service, than to go on vigorously in
their Rebellion. So that it may be truly said, that his paper pellets did more
harm, than the roaring Guns, or cutting Swords; He labored night and day to
glorify and vindicate the Parliament, in their wicked proceedings at home, and
(as his books will manifest) he spared many hours from his natural rest, to
promote the unnatural Wars abroad. Yet now ( nec invideo) he prosecuteth them
with reproaches, as much as he did then with praises, himself being become
hateful to them all, verifying the Proverb of Solomon cap. 24.24. He that
says unto the wicked thou art righteous, him shall the people curse, Nations
shall abhor him. Therefore I once more advise him, (as a friend) to write a
book of Retractations.

The Lord be merciful unto us, the men of our times would make one believe that
there never was a King in the World: Nay, they would seem to make the Kings, so
highly esteemed of by God, all the Prophets and Apostles in Scripture, but mere
white walls, the empty shadows of the people, and the Bible, but a bundle of
Fables, as if God never took no more notice of a King, than of an ordinary
Porter.

How Judas, surnamed the Long Parliament, betrayed and murdered Charles the
first, The best of all Kings, and contrary to all Law and Religion, and the
common interest of the people. Banish Charles the 2d. our only lawful King and
Governor. The mystery of their iniquity laid open, and that they are the
greatest and most wicked Tyrants, that ever dwelt upon the face of the Earth;
and the Child which is unborn, will rue the day of their untimely birth. Of
what persons a Parliament consists. No Parliament without the King. The
Original institution of Parliaments, and that the House of Commons (which now
make themselves Kings over King and people) were but as of yesterday, have no
legal power, but what is derived from the King, and never were entrusted with
any power from the people, much less with the Sovereignty, which they now
Tyrannically usurp. The Kings Sovereignty over Parliament and people,
copiously proved. King Charles his Title to the Crown of England, To him only
belongs the Militia, the power of choosing Judges, Privy Counselors, and
other great Officers, etc. He is head in Ecclesiastical causes, and our sole
Legislator. Our Ancestors always found and accounted Monarchy, to be the best
of Governments, and most profitable for us, yet these 40 or 50. Tyrants,
contrary to all Antiquity, and common sense, and feeling, sit and vote Monarchy
dangerous and burdensome. That all persons put to death since the murder of
Charles the Martyr, by the power of our new Statesmen, have been murdered,
and their Judges Murderers, and so it will continue, until they receive their
power and authority from Charles the 2d. and that we shall never enjoy peace or
plenty, until our King be restored to his Kingdoms, which a pack of Tyrants and
Traitors (not the People) keep from him. How the Law abhors to offer
violence to the King, and how these Rebels transgress all Laws both of God and
Man, to uphold themselves in their unparalled Villainies. A History which
commands the serious contemplation of our age, and worthy of the observation
of all the people in the World, and of all future Generations, not that they
might imitate, but detest and loath these Perfidious and Rebellious
transactions. Perlege, deinde scies.

HAving sufficiently proved out of our Law books that by the Common Law of the
Realm, the King has the Sovereign power over Parliament and People, and ought
not to be questioned for his actions by any of his Subjects, taken either
distributively, or collectively in one entire body, because he has no
Superior on Earth, but God Almighty; Let us now take a brief view of the
Statutes and Acts of Parliament, which have from Age to Age confirmed what I
have said, as an undoubted, inviolable, and indisputable truth. And since there
are those amongst us, who talk much of a power in the Parliament (as they call
the two Houses) which they pretend to be above, and Superior to the King; Let
us examine what this high and mighty Creature is, whence, and when, it had its
original, what is its true, natural, and legal power, and of what persons it
does consist.

The Kings high Court of Parliament, consists of the Kings Majesty sitting
there, 4 Inst. 1. 1 Inst. 110
as in his Royal politic capacity: and of the three Estates of the Realm, viz.
1 Of the Lords spiritual, Archbishops, and Bishops, being in number 24, who
sit there by succession in respect of their Counties, or Baronies, parcel of
their Bishoprics, which they hold also in their politic capacity. 2. The
Lords temporal, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, who sit there
by reason of their Dignities, which they hold by descent, or creation, being in
number 106. And every one of these when the King vouchsafes to hold a
Parliament, has a Writ of Summons. The third Estate is the Commons, of the
Realm, which are divided into three parts, viz. into Knights of Shires, or
Counties; Citizens out of Cities, and Burgesses out of Borroughs. All which the
King commands his Sheriffs to cause to come to his Parliament, being
respectively Elected by the Shires, or Counties, Cities and Buroughs, and in
number, 493.

It is called Parliament, because every Member of the Court, should sincerely
and discreetly Parler la meant, for the general good of the Commonwealth. This
Court of Parliament is the most high and absolute, the supremest and most
ancient in the Realm, it Makes, Enlarges, Diminishes, Abrogateth, Repealeth
and Reviveth, Laws, Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances, concerning matters
Ecclesiastical, Capital, Criminal, Common, Civil, Martial, Maritine, etc. to be
short, so transcendent is the power, and jurisdiction of the Parliament, as it
cannot be confined either for Causes, or Persons, within any bounds: Of this
Court it is truly said, Si antiquitatem, spectes est vetustissima, si
dignitatem, est honoratissima, si jurisdictionem, est capacissima. Yet
notwithstanding this Almighty power (as I may say) of the Parliament, do but
cut off the Kings head, or any ways take away the King, and it is nothing: Then
a petty Court of Pypowders has more power and jurisdiction than that. The King
is the Soul of the Parliament, and without him it is but Putre Cadaver, a
stinking Carcass, for as my Lord Coke observes of this Court, the King is
Caput, principium, et finis, And it is a baser and more odious part, then the
Rump of a Parliament, which wants all these; and as in a natural body, when
all the Sinews being joined in the head, do join their forces together for the
strengthening of the body, there is Ultimum Potentiae; so in the politic body,
when the King and the Lords Spititual, and temporal, Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, are all by the Kings command assembled and joined together, under
the head, the King in consultation for the Common good of the whole Realm,
there is Ultimum Sapientiae: But it was never known in any age, that the
Members without the head, had either power or wisdom; and it would be
prodigious, if our age should produce such a Monster.

No man can tell the contrary but that our Realm of England has been Governed
by Kings ever since the Creation of the World; clear it is by all Historians,
Bodin de Rep. l. c. 8. Camden in Britan. descript.
that ever since we heard of any Government in England, it has been a Royal
State, and although our Governors have been often changed, yet our Government
was never turned out of the regal road, and it is as easy to pull the Sun out
of the Firmament, and make the Stars to rule the day, as it is to abolish
Monarchy, and establish Aristocracy, or Democracy, in our Kingdom; For that
which is bred in the bone, will never out of the flesh. As Monarchy is the most
divine, and most natural kind of Government, so it is most natural to, and
esteemed most divine by all true born English men; For such is the Courage, and
so great is the Loftiness of English Spirits, that they disdain to be ruled by
any, but by his sacred Majesty, our Sovereign Lord the King: For as it was long
before King William the Conqueror, so did our Government continue still
without interruption a Royal Monarchy, until the chief Priests, and the
Scribes, and the Elders (as they call them) of the People, to wit,
Presbiterians, Independents, Mat. 26.34.
Anabaptists, Jesuits, etc. assembled together, and consulted that they might
take Charles the first (whose undeserved sufferings have made him immortal on
Earth, as well as in Heaven) by subtilty, and kill him; But they said, let us
not kill him suddenly and openly, lest there be an uproar among the people,
night time is the only day for wickedness. The Gunpowder Treason was hatched in
darkness, and these Godly Villains thought that the best way to catch their
prey, was to beat on the dark side of the hedge. They cut the Throat of
Religion, when they seemed to lay a plaster; and they murdered their
Sovereign, when they swore they intended nothing, but to make him a Glorious
King.

Then entered Satan into Judas, Luke 22 3, 4, 5, 6.
surnamed the House of Commons, being one of the two Houses of Parliament; And
these Judasses went their way, and communed with the chief Priests, and
Captains, how they might betray him unto them: And they were glad, and
covenanted to give them money; who then promised, and sought opportunity to
betray him unto them in the absence of the multitude. And since the innocent
Birds are oftentimes easier caught with silent and gentle snares, than roaring
Guns, at first these Judasses thought to betray their Master with kisses,
courting his Majesty with highflying Complements of Obedience; Ovem in front,
vulpem in cord gerentes.
and that they might make him believe them to be, what indeed they were not,
they made many Oaths, Protestations, Vows and Covenants, that they were his
Graces most dutyful Subjects, and desired to live no longer, than to do his
Majesty service. But it seems they did but play the Fox, speak fair, only to
get their prey, for by these sophistical insinuations, they charmed his
Majesty, and wrested from him diverse marks of his Sovereignty; they were
entrusted with the Navy, obtained a Triennial Parliament, were acquitted of
Ship-mony and other impositions, and at length made themselves perpetual, for
his Majesty passed an Act, not to Dissolve them without their consent. So that
they now wanted nothing but his Majesty's life which to obtain, they procured
by their wickedness, the Earl of Strafford's head to be cut off, The Nobles
which were faithful to the King, they called Evil Counselors.
and many other Nobles which stood in their way; which props being removed,
they thought they might with more ease pull down the Sovereignty of the King:
and that these Negroes might make themselves complete Devils, they got the head
of the Earl of Strafford, and others cutoff, for committing Treason against the
King, whose head they afterward intended to cut off, for committing treason
against them. O incomparable villainy! What they made a capital offense in
others, they esteemed more than a Cardinal virtue in themselves. It was High
Treason in others, to think to do the King any harm, but it was a high piece of
Godliness in them to cut off his head. The Earl of Strafford must dye as a
Traitor, because they said he intended to levy war against the Kings will:
But these Saints raised Armies to fight against his Majesty's own person,
Levied war against the King and Kingdom, murdered the King, and destroyed
the whole Realm; Yet forsooth they must be canonized as the only true servants
of Jesus Christ, and all those who speak against them they kill and massacre,
as if they had committed Treason, and Blasphemy against the Almighty. Nay, the
great offense against the Holy Ghost, they esteem more pardonable, than the
least against them.

And as it now plainly appears to the world, all their oaths, vows, and
protestations of obedience to the King, and performing of their duty toward
him, were but preparations for their great wickedness of murdering the King.
For as the Gunner, when he labors to kill the innocent bird, walks gently,
and treads softly, holding down his gun, as if it was the least of his
thoughts to shoot, when he minds nothing more; or as the greedy Huntsman
steals upon the Hare, or Deer, looking another way, until he is gotten close
by, and then lets out his bloody hounds, to take and kill his prey: So these
Vipers, more wise than Serpents, (only to do mischief) did steal upon the King,
and undermined him, by cutting off his Nobles, whom they knew would be true and
trusty servants to him; and then when they thought they had him within their
reach, They let fly their dogs, the bloody soldiers: for this Judas (the
House of Commons) then having received a band of men, and officers, from the
chief Priests and Pharisees, John. 18.3. who first set them on work, came forth
with a great multitude, with swords and staves, Matthew. 26.47, 48. to take and
kill their Sovereign. Now they that betrayed him, gave the soldiers a sign,
Witness their Oath of Supremacy.
saying, Whomsoever we have sworn to be the only supreme Governor in all
causes, and over all persons, That same is he, hold him fast. In that same time
said the King to the Multitude, Are ye come out as against a thief, with swords
and staves, for to take me? I sat daily with you in the Parliament House,
making many good laws, and ye laid no hold on me. But all this was done, that
their wickedness might be fulfilled, John 18.12. Then the band, and the
Captain, and the Officers of these Jews, took the King, and led him away to
their Council, and contrary to all legal proceedings, and the due course of
Law, smote the Shepherd, and so the sheep of the Protestant flock were all
scattered abroad; Bradshaw, indeed, (that Pontius Pilate) pressed the King very
earnestly; and by subtle and crafty inventions, thought to have wrought upon
the King, to have submitted to their ( summa injuria) their Arbitrary High
Court of Injustice, and pleaded: So that his Example might have been urged as
an irrefragable precedent, against the lives and liberties of the whole
Kingdom; and that after ages might cite King Charles his case, as an authority
to kill Kings. But the King foreseeing their delusive and abominable
intentions, rather than he would betray the lives and liberty of his free born
subjects, to the Arbitrary Lusts of these Tyrants; told them of the great
wickedness they were about, and showed to his people, how these Traitors
endeavored to inslave the whole Realm; and so patiently suffered himself to be
murdered, dying a most true Martyr, both for our Laws and Religion; but for
plea, he said nothing. So Bradshaw (more wicked than Pilate, for instead of
washing his hands, he impudently bathed them in his Masters innocent blood)
gave the sentence of their wicked wills against him, and delivered him over to
the blood-thirsty, to be crucified, who spit upon him, threw Tobacco pipes at
him, mocked him, cried out, Away with him, away with him, Crucify him,
Crucify him, cut off his Head with their wicked Engines, and then cast lots
for his Garments, and Estate, giving each Soldier a part; But instead of
writing over his head, This is Charles the King of the Jews, (his true Title,
or rather the King of the Devils) they writ over his head, Exit Tyrannus Regum
ultimus, anno libertatis Angliae restitutae primo, (although in truth, the best
of Kings then went out, and the greatest Tyranny under the Heavens then entered
into our England) coming far short of the Jews in all that is good, but
exceeding them in all wickedness, treachery, perfidiousness, and villainy.

Now all this impious Council sought false witness against the King, to put
him to death, but found none; Therefore that they might do nothing without
wickedness, but proceed in all their Actions contrary almost to the very color
of Justice, and make themselves the greatest, and most illegal Tyrants that
ever the world heard of, they made themselves both Judges, Jury, Witness,
Party, and Accuser, in their own quarrel against the King: For whereas by the
Laws of the Land, our gracious King always made the Judges of the Land,
Arbitrators between his Subjects and himself in all cases, from the lowest
offense, and trespass, to the highest offense, Crimen laesae Majestatis, High
Treason; This Amalekite the House of Commons, made part of themselves the
Judges of the King, who had committed the greatest Treason against the King,
and by the Laws of the Land deserved rather to hang at Tyburn, than sit in the
Chair of Justice; likewise they made the Soldiers his Judges, who professed
themselves to be the Kings inveterate Enemies, by their Remonstrances, and
Speeches, and that they desired nothing more than his Blood and Life, fought
against him with their Guns and Swords. Yet forsooth of this Hotchpotch of
Traitors, was their high Court of Justice made up; Most of them being Colonels
of the Army, and other Soldiers who fought against him abroad, and others
Parliament men, who conspired his ruin at home. By the Laws of the Land, it is
a just exception to any Jury man, who is to try the basest or poorest Felon,
and a legal challenge for which he must be withdrawn, That he is a professed
Enemy, and Prosecutor, who seeks his life, and therefore no lawful nor
indifferent tryer of him for it; yet these bloody Butchers, who professed
themselves to be the Kings greatest Enemies, and Prosecutors, seeking after
nothing so eagerly as the Kings life, were both the Judges and Jurymen too, to
try the King: Perjured O. Cromwell (who then intended, and afterward effected
to have the supreme power over these three Kingdoms,) was one of the Tryers, to
judge whether the King, or himself with the rest of his brethren in iniquity
deserved death, and whether the King and his Royal Progeny ought not to be
distroyed, and Oliver and his stinking stock take possession; O unparraleld
lump of impiousness! Aliquis non debet esse Judex in propria causa, It is a
Maxim in Law, that no man ought to be Judge in his own cause; Yet these
villains made themselves the only Judge whether they committed Treason against
the King, or the King against them: Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum, No man is
bound to accuse himself, and it would have been a wonder indeed, if these
Rebels should have spoke the truth, and said that they had committed high
Treason against the King; Therefore for fear the Law should punish them
according to their deserts, they thought good to prevent that mischief, and
punish the King as they pleased according to their lusts: And that they might
make themselves the greatest Tyrants, and the people the basest Slaves in the
world, they took upon them the Governing power, which by Law only belongs to
the King. 2. The Legislative power, which likewise belongs to the King with
the concurrence of the upper and Lower House. And 3. The Judicative power,
which belongs to the Judges, who are known Expositors, and Dispencers of Law
and Justice in all Causes brought before them; So that these Traiterous Tyrants
by their boundless and arbitrary wills, put us to death when they please, for
what cause they please, and take away our Estates when they see occasion; And
yet they have the impudence to tell us, and many the sottishness to believe,
that the Parliament having the Supreme power, does all these villainies by Law;
O Abominable! How these Tyrants mock the people with the name of a Parliament;
the Parliament consists of the King the head, and about 600 of his Subjects,
and there were not above 50 or 60 of the Parliament who caused the King to be
murdered, and ruined his people, yet these Schismatics call themselves a
Parliament, and so having nothing good but their name, Tyrannize over us. They
may as well say that the parings of the nails of the toes are the whole man
and have the power of all the other members, as say that they are the
Parliament, or have any lawful power, they being nothing but the dregs and
lees of the inferior House, from whom we must never expect any thing pleasing
to any honest man's palate; If the Parliament had power to depose the King, yet
what power can these few Gaol-Birds have, who are scarce the tenth part of the
Parliament, and no Representatives of the People, but only of their own
Devilish ambitions? By what authority do these Ignes fatui abolish Kingship,
and the House of Lords as dangedangerous and useless, which all our Ancestors
have found most profitable, Dangerous and useless only to their villainy.
and glorious for our Kingdom? These Currs have several times been kicked out
of the House, by the martial violence of the Soldiers, their Masters, whose
Journy-Men they are, yet no sooner do they find the door open, but in they slip
again, like Dogs into the Buttery, where they sit and eat the fat of the Land,
and the fruits of our labors, for which they now and then shite us an Act of
Parliament, whereby they destroy our fundamental Laws, and Liberties, and
invent new high Treasons against them, (such as our Law Books nor Statutes
never told us of,) by which they maintain themselves in their Robbery, and the
people in their Slavery. As for the oath of Supremary, Vows, Protestations, and
Covenants, which they made in the presence of God, with hands lift up to heaven
for vengeance if they did not perform them, and all other oaths of Homage,
Fealty, and Allegiance, which the People took to be true and faithful to the
King, These they discharge themselves, and the People of, by an Act of
Parliament, as if these Caterpillars could discharge debts due to the Almighty;
But to make God amends, they passed another Act, that the People should swear
to be true and faithful unto them. To go about to number their villainies,
deceits, treacheries, perjuries, and other their wicked Actions, were to go
about to number the sands of the Sea, or the fraudulent devices of Beelzebub
their Master, they being the Genus generalissimum of all Treason, Rebellion,
Murder, Blasphemy, Hypocrisy, Lying, Swearing and For-swearing, abounding in
W^oredom, Drunkenness, Leachery, Treachery, Covetousness, Pride Ambition, and
all other detestable vices. They are a pack of rotten, putrefied Members, glued
together in the stinking body of sin: And if I should give you a Character of
each Simple wherewith this Compound is contracted, it would fright you out of
your wits; Witness all their actions.
for I speak really, I think they are the very Quintessence of all the Devils
in Hell. And although this beast cannot well agree, which horn or leg shall
go foremost, they being somewhat troubled in dividing the spoil, and their
usurped authorities, which is caused by their pride and covetousness, and
although they differ in Ceremonies, and Ci^cumstances, yet they make it one of
their Fudamentals upon which themselves and all their proceedings are builded,
to murder Charles the second* as they did Charles the first, when they can lay
their unhallowed Claws upon him; and although they hate, and bark, and snarle
at one another like dogs, yet in the great work of their Salvation, like Pilate
and Herod, they all agree to be Traitor, and Rebels against their King. And so
long as these Mastives Lord it over us, we must never expect peace, but always
live like dogs, fighting, and biting for what we have. We must (with them)
account vice virtue, and virtue vice: we must hold their words more canonical
than Gods word, and say that is law, which they say is law, though it be
neither law, truth, nor reason. Unlawful wars set them up, and we shall
always have wars, and rumors of wars amongst us, until they are pulled down.
To be short, we must resolve to forsake God, and serve the Devil, if we intend
to keep any thing safe, so long as this Phalaris, the Tail of the House of
Commons domineereth over us; For the Children of this world being in their
Generation wiser than the Children of Light, Luke 16.8. These Worldlings are so
wise and subtle to do mischief, that when they commit the most deadly sin, They
make it pass to the world, as the best service done to God; and when they
themselves make plots to murder honest Royalists, then they get some of their
hirelings to discover it, and swear that the Royalists invented the plot
against them; and presently (forsooth) they vote and command, that their three
Kingdoms give God thanks for their great deliverance; ascribing that which was
done by their own providence, to the Providence of the Almighty. Nay, they have
their Lillies, and other lying Astrologers, whom they consult with, before they
commit any great wickedness, and make them publish to the world, that the
Heavens ruled, and voted what these Beagles please to perform.

It is as natural for their Judges to judge unjustly, if it be for the profit,
or pleasure of their Masters at Westminster, as it is for them to live: For how
many innocent Gentlemen have they condemned to death, for doing their duty in
defending the King from unjust violence? which we are all bound to do by the
law of God, Nature, and of the Realm.

They have their Balaam Prophets and Priests too, almost in every parish, and
pulpit, which they make the Organs to sound forth their own praises; so that
the ignorant country multitudes, who scarce know that there is a God, but that
they heard their Minister tell them so, thinking that he does God the best
service and credit, who has the finest ribbond on his hat, or that wears the
best clothes on his back at Church: these Momusses believe that the Saints at
Westminster, are the only supreme power on Earth; and that no men in the world,
(for some of them think that the sea side is the end of the world) are to be
compared to them, either for wisdom, learning or honesty: and the only reason
of their thoughts is, Ipse dixit, their Minister said so but last Sunday. And
this was the chiefest reason, wherefore the country Peasants flocked in so
fast, to the Armies of those Neroes at Westminster, raised against the King;
who always made the ignorance of the people, their greatest Champion. And lest
we should see the superiority of the King, above, and over the Knaves, and
other Cards, they abolish, and prohibit Card-playing, as a great sin in their
Commonwealth. Why did they not give the superiority to the Knaves? How these
godly Villains stumble at strawes, and leap over blocks! They prohibit innocent
recreations on the Sabbath day, purposely because they would have the people
esteem them zealous in Religion, and stricter observers of Gods Commandments,
than the King. But in truth, they served God, only to serve themselves; In
nomine Domini, incipit omne malum; acting all their wickedness in the name of
the Lord. For when they have got a good name amongst the people, they think
under that shadow, to act any wickedness, and yet to the world seem saints;
Murder their King too, and yet be accounted good Christians; nay, Reformers of
the Christian Religion. O Religious Impostors! To these Quacksalvers belongs
two Speakers, alias dictos, Liars, viz. the private Speaker Lenthall, (now
called by the common soldiers, the Father of their Country: Can you blame the
little Thieves, if they applaud the great Thief?) and the public Speaker
Needham; the one rough hammereth lies, at the forge, the House of Commons; the
other fashioneth them in his Mercurius Politicus. Thus they fill our ears with
as many lies, as their breasts be: yet forsooth none must dare not to believe
what they publish by authority.

Now the Presbyterian Judasses, when they saw that the King was condemned,
repented themselves, saying, We have sinned, in that we have betrayed Innocent
blood; and were all of them ready to hang themselves. But it was not out of any
love, or allegiance they did bear to the King, but because they could not have
those ends upon the King, which they intended. They would have had the King
buckled to their bent, and it grieved them to see the Independents, etc.
out-knave them: for the greatest part of the religion of these factions,
consists in their animosities one against the other; not only the
Presbyterians, but also the Independents, Anabaptists, etc. are both almost,
and altogether such as the proud Pharisees were. Therefore their greatest care
and study is, to domineer, and master it one over the other; which makes the
prevalent faction always outrageous, and that which sinketh, always envious.
So that the Presbyterian being at this time undermost, he would fain insinuate
himself into the favor of the honest Royalist: and because he has not force
to be so much Knave as he would be, therefore he is compelled to be honest
against his will, and would have his injured King to rule over him again. But
get thee behind me, Dagon, what have thou to do with peace? Did thou not in
thy youthful age revile thy Innocent King with thy mouth, and persecute him
with thy bloody hand, and would thou now in thy old age serve him? Thy
service is Hypocrisy, and thy words but the vapors of a deceitful head: Let
the Presbyterians rigid actions, judge the rigid Presbyterians.

Having related of what persons the Parliament does consist, viz. of the King
above all, and the three Estates, sharing no more with the King in the
Soveraignity, than the body does with the head, and how King Charles the first,
was most traitorously murdered by those who have the impudence to call
themselves a Parliament, though in truth they are nothing else but a den of
Tyrannical Traitors and Rebels; I will further proceed to explicate the
Soveraignity of the King, and the legal power of the three Estates, with their
first institution and creation.

Sapiens omnia agit cum consilio, says Solomon, a wise man does nothing
without counsel, Pro. 13.16. Therefore the King of England Ex mero motu et
speciali gratia, out of his mere good will and special favor, has vouchsafed
his Subjects that honor as to make them his Counselors, not only concerning
Ardua Regni, but also arcana imperii, even in his most privy affairs,
wherefore As my Lord Cook observes, the King is armed with diverse Councills,
one whereof is called Commune Concilium, and that is the Court of Parliament,
and another is called Magnum Concilium, this is sometimes applied to the upper
House of Parliament, and sometimes out of Parliament time to the Peers of the
Realm, Lords of Parliament, who are called Magnum Concilium Regis, Thirdly, (as
every man knows) the King has a privy Council for matters of State, The
fourth Council of the King are his Judg^s of the Law, for Law matters, as
appears in our Law Books.

This word Parliament was never used in England unti^l the time of William the
Conqueror, who first brought it in with him. For as King David called a
Parliament when he intended to build an house for the name of the Lord, 1 Chro.
28. and assembled all the Princes of Israel, the Princes of the Tribes, and the
Captains of the Companies that ministered unto the King by course, and the
Captains over the thousands, and Captains over the hundreds, and the Stewards
over all the substance and possession of the King, and of his Sons, with the
Officers, and with the mighty men, and with all the valiant men unto Jerusalem,
And when they were assembled the King himself showed the cause of calling that
Parliament, for then David the King stood up upon his feet, and said, Hear me
my Brethren, and my People, as for me, I had in my heart to build and House of
rest for the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, and for the footstool of our God,
and had made ready for the building etc. Whereupon all the people offered their
Gold and Silver willingly toward the work, which made the People and David
their King rejoice exceedingly with great joy, as you may there read: So the
Kings of England from the beginning, in all extraordinary cases, when they
intended to make new Laws, or abolish old, have always convoked an assembly of
their Subjects, what persons, and of what number they thought fit; Not because
they could not do what they pleased without their Subjects consent, but because
their Subjects best knowing what shoes would fit their own feet, might (as
they often did) by Petitions humbly supplicate his Majesty, to grant what they
showed him was most convenient and necessary for them by their requests, which
he refused or granted at his pleasure. Which Councils and Conventions they
called, Witenage Mote, Conventus sapientium, Michael Smoth, Michael Gemote,
etc. that is to say, the great Court, or meeting of the King; To which the King
convened only the Nobles and Bishops: The Rustic Commons were not then
admitted into the presence of the King. And doubtless they had then small
hopes, and less thoughts, that they should ever take the Regal Diadem from off
their Sovereigns head, and become Lords Paramount, ruling both King and People,
by no other Law, than Hoc volo, sic Jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas, by their
own lusts, and unstable (except to do mischief) wills. But I have seen servants
upon Horses, and Princes walking as Servants upon the Earth, says Solomon; And
pray who has not seen as much as Solomon of this? For behold Tinkers, Tailors,
Spicket and Fosset makers, and those who were Servants even to the basest of
the people, having murdered their Sovereign Lord the King, do take possession
of his sacred Patrinomy, and now sit Lords over all, ruling and domineering in
his Palace at Westminster. Feign that the people did entrust the King with his
Royal Office, yet why should it escheat to these Hypocrites? why not to the
people? And if his Office with the Lands which he held Jure Coronae, yet by
what Law do they seize upon those Lands, which he held in his natural Capacity,
and those Lands which he purchased? For if a man forfeit an Office, he only
forfeiteth those Lands which belonged to the Office. But if all his Lands
escheat, by what Law do they detain and keep the Queens Dower from her? By what
Law, did I say? By that Law whereby they subdue all things to themselves, to
wit, their own wicked Appetites, Ambition, and Covetousness, which is all the
Law they can show for any of their Actions, to which we must be Slaves so long
as they command over us. Pro. 30.21. For three things (says Solomon) the earth
is disquieted, and for four, which it cannot bear: For a Servant when he
reigns, and a Fool when he is filled with meat: For and odious woman when she
is married, and an Hand-mai^ that is Heir to her Mistress: Is not our Englan^
disquieted with all these? Oh who can bear it yet these Tyrants rejoce at it,
Delight is not seemly for a Fool, much less for a Servant to have ru^ over
Princes. Pro. 19.10. Yet these Slaves triumph over their Prince, and scoff at
his Miseries And as the Jews in a deriding manner said of o^ Savior, This is
Jesus King of the Jews, So these Jews scoffingly call their Sovereign Lord, The
King of Scots, yet keep his Kingdom from him, jee^ing him out of his Estate. O
Heavens! As perpetually afterward, so always before the Conqueror, the
legislative power did continue in the King, tanquam in proprio subjecto, as in
the true and proper subject of that power; and the Kings Edicts, were the only
positive Laws of the Realm; and indeed who can be a King without this power?
for what difference is there between the King, and Subject, but that the one
gives the Laws, the other receives them? And most clear it is by all
Historians, that the Common Council of our ancient Kings, were composed only of
Prelates, and Peers, the Commons were not admitted to any Communication in
affairs of State. Camden in his Britannia tells us, that in the times of the
Saxon Kings, and in after Ages, the Common Council of the Land, was Praesentia
Regis Praelatorum, Procerumque collectorum, The presence of the King with the
Prelates and Peers; Ingulphus (who dyed before 1109) says, Rex Eldredus
Convocavit Magnates, Episcopos, Proceres, and Optimates ad tractandum de
publicis negotiis Regni. He did not call the Commons. So Edward the Confessor,
that great Legisl^tor, made all his Laws, without the consent of the Commons.

Now when the Norman Conqueror, one of the Praedecessors of Charles the Martyr
came in, who had a triple title to this Kingdom, to wit, by Donation,
Conquest, and by the Consent of the people: for (as it is well known) when
Edward the Confessor lived in Normandy, he gave this Kingdom, after his
decease, to William Duke of Normandy, as he was his kinsman, and near of blood
so that the Conqueror was heir of the Crown to the Confessor by adoption.
Which title, if it was invalid, you must know he was a Conqueror; and no man
will deny that Conquest makes a legal title, Bodin li. 2. ca. 5.
Jure Belli. But, suppose both those titles were (as they were not invalid, yet
by the Law of Nations, the Consent of the people makes an inviolable title,
even to an Usurper, in continuance of time, (if they have no other lawful
King;) much more to a lawful Sovereign. And his people, our Ancestors, ever
since the Conquest, for the space of about six hundred years, have all done
allegiance to, and unanimously resolved, that the Conqueror and his
Successors, were our only true Kings, Liege Lords, and Sovereigns, having the
supreme power over us, and never did the people claim power to depose the King,
until those Monsters at Westminster, King Charles his title had been good to
the Crown of England, though he had borrowed no part of this Claim from the
Conqueror. See reverend Heylin's life of King Charles.
under pretense of such a power, murdered Charles the first, and against all
Law, Justice and Equity, and against the wills of the people, make themselves
masters of our lives, and fortunes, and of all that we have, taking them away
when they please.

It would make a man cry, and it would make a man laugh, to see what fools
these fellows make of us: Royal Government by Kings, has been used here, time
out of mind, and approved by all our Ancestors, to be the best of Governments,
and most natural, and profitable for us; yet these few stinking Members at
Westminster, made an Act ( March 17. 1648. contrary even to their own Oaths and
Protestations) to abolish the Kingly Government, as unnecessary (I use their
own words) burdensome, and dangerous to the people: as if this small company,
consisting of fifty, or sixty at the most, of the Scum, and tail of the people,
were wiser, and knew what was better for us, than all our Ancestors, both noble
and ignoble, in all ages. But what was their reason to abolish Kingship? To
make each of themselves Kings, nay Tyrannical Kings over us. So may the slave
say, that the government of his Lord over him, is unnecessary, burdensome and
dangerous; and therefore he will murder his Lord, and make himself Ma^ter:
changeing the name, and execute the office worse. So may Highway men take away
the true owners purse, and tell him it was unnecessary for him to keep it: or
by the same law, may thieves murder, and rob the Master of his house, and then
vote the Master burdensome, and dangerous to his family. Yet notwithstanding,
while these Tyrants destroy our fundamental Government, Laws, Religion,
Freedoms and Liberties, making of us absolute slaves and villains, only to
satiate their lust and pleasure; yet even then they style themselves The
Keepers of the Liberty of England, by Authority of Parliament. Close, and
trusty keepers of our liberty, indeed, for we can come at none of it, they keep
it from us, not for us: so Wolves may call themselves keepers of the Lambs
which they have caught; or by the same law, may a Cutpurse be called the
keeper of the purse, and be said to have the same care of it: for they are
heepers of our liberty, only to keep themselves. For by what authority was this
Individuam vagum, the Keepers, erected? By what authority? why they will tell
you by authority of Parliament. Cunning Curres! How they take the people with
this word Parliament! when God knows, they themselves were all the Parliament
by whose authority the thing called Keepers (I know not what they be, for I
never yet heard them named) were invented. So may Adulterers vote themselves
keepers of Chastity; or so may I murder a man against his will, and then call
my self keeper of his life, by his authority. For they destroyed the
Parliament, when they destroyed the King; and there has been no Parliament
since. Vide 1 H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 1.14. li. 4. Coke 4 Inst. p. 46. and 4 C. 4.
f. 440. Therefore they most falsely call themselves a Parliament: Neither are
they the Representatives of the people, (as I showed before;) but a company of
Ungracious Tyrants, acting against the wills of the people. Yet, forsooth, they
tell us, that the people have the supreme power, and that they act for the
people, being their Representatives. Just as if I should take away all that
another man has, against his will, and then tell him, that he has the supreme
power over his goods, and that I took them away by his authority and power; or,
as if I should take away his money, without his leave, and tell him, that I am
his Representative. So these Foxes cozen the people with nonsensical cheats;
and in all things, are Representatives of the Devil, not of the People: for
they all well know, and some of them have declared so, that if the people might
choose their Representatives, those Representatives would restore the King to
his own again, which these most unjustly keep from him. We cannot serve God and
Mammon, both at one time, Good and evil cannot stand both together. If the King
come in and rule, these men must fall; If we serve the King as we ought, we
cannot serve these at all; If God re-establisheth his Anointed, Lucifer must
call down his Children; wickedness must be abolished, when righteousness
takes place; therefore the Gaolers of the Liberty of England must down, when
Charles the Second, our only lawful Sovereign, is restored to his Crown, and
Kingdom. Which they very well know, therefore they would fain keep as long as
they can, their Empire, which cost them their Souls, and Reputation. But let us
return to our King.

When the Conqueror came in He got by right of Conquest all the Land of the
Realm into his own hands, the whole Kingdom was his direct and proper
inheritance in demeasn, so that no man can at this day make any greater title
than from the Conquest to any Lands in England, for the King being owner and
sole Lord of the whole Land and the People therein, did (as he lawfully might)
dispose of the Land, and people, according to his will and pleasure; he gave
out of his hands what Lands he pleased, to what persons he pleased, and
reserved what tenures and services he pleased. So that in the Law of England we
have not properly Allodium, that is, any Subjects Land that is not holden. Co.
Lit. 1.
We all hold our Lands mediately or immediately of the Crown, neither have we
any right to our Lands any longer than we are faithful, and loyal to the King,
who first gave us them upon that condition; for by the Laws of the Realm, if we
take up arms against the King, imagine his death, or commit any other offense,
which is high Treason, we forfeit our estates to the King, so that they return
from whence they were first derived; the greatest and highest title or property
which a Subject has to his Lands, is Quod talisseisitus fuit in dominico; suo
ut de feodo. Now though this word Feodum does (as Littleton teaches) legally
signify inheritance, and so Feodum Simplex, signifies a lawful or pure
inheritance, yet it is apparently manifest, that Feodum is a derived right, and
does import with it a trust to be performed, which trust broken forfeiteth the
Estate to the King, who only has (as Camden observes) Directum imperium,
cujus nullus est Author nisi Deus. For all the Lands within this Realm, were
originally derived from the Crown, and therefore the King is Sovereign Lord, or
Lord Paramount, either mediate or immediate, of all and every parcel of Land
within the Realm, 18 E. 3.35.44 E. 3.5. 48 E, 3.9.8 H. 7.12. Therefore though
in other places he which finds a piece of Land, that no other possesses, or
has title unto, and enters into it, gains a property by his entry; yet in
England property to Land cannot be gained any such way, for the Subject can
have no property, but what was first by the Kings grant; therefore those Lands
are still appropriated to the Crown, which the King did not give away to his
Subjects; as if Land be left by the Sea, this Land belongs to the King, and
not to him that has the Lands next adjoining, or to any other but the King.

Caelum Caeli Domino, terram autem dedit filiis hominum, All the whole Heavens
are the Lords, the Earth has he given to the Children of men, for which he
only reserved their service, as an acknowledgement of his bounteous liberality:
so the whole Kingdom is the Kings, but the Land therein he has given to his
Children the people, for which he only reserved their allegiance and service,
as a remembrance, and recognition, of his Royal bounty; in which reservation,
the King (as my Lord Bacon writes) had four institutions, exceeding politic
and suitable to the State of a Conqueror.

First, Seeing his people to be part Normans, and part Saxons, the Normans he
brought with him, the Saxons he found here, he bent himself to conjoyn them by
Marriages in Amity, and for that purpose ordains, that if those of his Nobles,
Knights, and Gentlemen, to whom he gave great rewards of lands, should dye,
leaving their Heir within Age, a Male within 21, and a Female within 14 years,
and unmaryed, then the King should have the bestowing of such Heirs in Marriage,
in such a Family, and to such persons as he should think meet, which interest
of Marriage, went still employed, and does at this day in every Tenure called
Knights service.

The Second was, to the end that his people should be still conserved in Warlik
exercises, and able for his defense, when therefore he gave any good portion of
Lands that might make the party of Abilities, or strength, he withal reserved
this service, That that party and his Heirs, Who then ought to have the Militia
but the King?
having such lands, should keep a Horse of service continually, and serve upon
him himself, when the King went to Wars, or else having impediment to excuse
his own person, should find another to serve in his place, which service, of
Horse, and Man, is a part of that Tenure called Knights service at this day.

But if the Tenant himself be an Infant, the King is to hold this land himself,
until he come to full Age, finding him Meat, Drink, Apparel, and other
necessaries; and finding a Horse and a Man with the overplus, to serve in the
Wars, as the Tenant himself should do if he were at full Age.

But if this Inheritance descend upon a Woman that cannot serve by her Sex,
then the King is not to have the Lands, she being 14. years of Age, because she
is then able to have an Husband that may do the service in person.

The Third institution, that upon every gift of Land, the King reserved a Vow,
and an Oath, to bind the party to his Faith, and Loyalty; that Vow was called
Homage; the Oath, of Fealty; Homage is to be done kneeling, holding his hands
between the knees of the Lord, saying in the French tongue, I become your Man
of Life and Limb, and of earthly honor. Fealty is to take an Oath upon a Book,
that he will be a faithful Tenant to the King, and do his service, and pay his
Rents according to his Tenure.

The Fourth institution was, that for Recognizance of the Kings bounty, by
every Heir succeeding his Ancestor in those Knight service lands, the King
should have Pr^mer seisin of the lands, which is one years profit of the lands,
and until this be paid, the King is to have possession of the land, and then
to restore it to the Heir, which continues at this day in use, and is the very
cause of suing livery, and that as well where the Heir has been in ward, as
otherwise.

Many other Tenures with services did the Conqueror institute, as Grand
Serjeanty, Petit Serjeanty, Tenure in Burgage, Soccage, Escuage etc. which
being holden of the King, are called Tenures in capite, which is as much to
say, as Tenures de persona Regis, because the head is the principal part of the
body, and the King is the head of the body of the Commonwealth; Which Tenures
brought many profits, Co. Lit. 108.
and commodities to the Crown (which would be too tedious here to
particularize) and are a clear testimony of the Kings Sovereignty. For no man
can alien those lands which he holds in Capite, without the Kings License, if
they do, the King is to have a fine for the contempt, and may seize the land,
and retain it until the fine be paid.

By example, and in imitation of the King (For Regis ad exemplum totus
componitur orbis) Did the Nobles, and Gentry, of this Nation (to whom the King
had given large portions of land) grant out parcells of their land to their
Servants, and under-Tenants, reserving such services; and appointing such like
Tenures, as the King did to them, as Homage, Fealty, etc. whereof you may read
plentifully in Littletons Tenures; But their Tenants in doing Homage and Fealty
to them, did always except the Faith which they did owe unto the King; As in
their making Homage appears, viz. Co. Lit. 64.
I become your man from this day forward of Life and Limb, and of earthly
worship, and unto you shall be true, and faithful, and bear you faith for the
Tenements I claim to hold of you (saving the Faith that I owe unto our
Sovereign Lord the King) Though they Swore to become the men of, and be true
and faithful to, their Lords, yet not so, but that they still were the men of,
and ever would be true and faithful to, the King their Sovereign, who was Lord
over their Lords, and over the whole Realm, Omnis homo debet fidem Domino suo,
de vita and membris suis, and terreno honor, and observatione consilii sui,
per honestum, and utile, salva fide Deo, and Terrae Principi, Lib. Rub. cap.
55. We can oblige our selves to no men so deeply, as to take away our
allegiance and fidelity toward the King; We must be for God and the King in
all things, all our actings, and undertakings, should tend to their Glory,
which would prove our greatest good and comfort; Homagium Ligeum is only due
unto the King; the Law prohibiteth us to do Homage to any, without making
mention of this Homage due unto the Lord our King; therefore we must not be
opposite to, or armed against him, but both our lives and members must be ready
for his defense, because he is Sovereign Lord over all. Co. Lit. 65.

As the Conqueror did make all his Subjects Feudaries to him, so likewise did
he change our Laws and Customs at his pleasure, and brought in his own
Country fashions, which is the Common use of Conquerours. He caused all Laws
to be written in his language, and made what Laws he thought meet, Quod
Principi placuerit, legis habet vigorem, whatsoever the King willed, was the
only law; His fiat, was as binding, as an Act of Parliament; and what he voted,
no man, no not the whole Kingdom, had power to dispute. There was no question
then made, but that the King ought to have the Militia, neither did any one
think of, much less, deny him a Negative voice. The Commons then thought it an
high honor, to look upon the Kings Majesty a far off; To sit, and rule their
families at home, was all the Jurisdiction which they had, or claimed; They had
not power to condemn one of their servants to death, much less their Sovereign
Lord the King, from whom they then, and we now, have our being. The King had
not then made them so much as the Lower House, nor ever did admit them to his
Counsel; The Lords, their Masters, were only deemed wor^hy of this dignity; for
why? Tractent fabril^a fabri, Let the Shepherd keep his sheep, and the
Hogheard keep his hogs, and not meddle with the tuning of musical Instruments.
Though the Plowman can drive, and guide his horses well, yet he would make an
ill Pilot to steer a ship; The Blacksmith may have skill to make a horse-shooe,
but he would rather mar, than make a watch; The Commons may make good
Subjects, but experience teaches us, they will rather destroy both King, and
Kingdom, than reform, or rectify either. Therefore the Kings of England did
never admit the Commoners into their Counsels, much less, entrust them with
the Legislative po^er. For it is a Meridian truth, that as before, so from the
Conquest, until a great part of the Reign of Henry the third, (in whose days
(as some hold) the writ for election of Knights was first framed) the Barons
and Prel^tes only made the Parliament, or Common Council of the Realm, whom the
King convoked by his Royal Summons, when he pleased. Neither did the Council so
convened, consist of any certain number, but of what number, and of what
persons the King vouchsafed. Nay clear it is, by the Laws made in the Reign of
Edward the first, (which was above two hundred years after the conquest) that
there was no certain persons, or formed body, whose consent was requisite to
join with the King in making an act of Parliament; but when the King conceived
it fit to make a Law, he called such persons as he thought most proper to be
consulted with. Indeed, at the Coronation of Henry the first, all the People of
England were called by the King, and Laws were then made, but it was per
Commune Concilium Baronum. And that King and his Successors, did not usually
call the Commons, but made Laws with the advice of which of their Subjects they
pleased; and as Sir Walter Rawleigh and others write, the Commons with their
Magna Charta, had but bastard births, being begotten by Usurpers, and fostered
by Rebellion, for King Henry the first did but usurp the Kingdom; and therefore
to secure himself the better against Robert his eldest brother, he Courted the
Commons, and granted them that Great Charter, with Charta de foresta, which
King John confirmed upon the same grounds, for he was also an Usurper, Arthur
Duke of Britain being the undoubted heir of the Crown, Mr. Howels Philanglus.
so the House of Commons and these Great Charters had their original from such
that were Kings de facto, not de jure.

But it matters not which of the Kings first instituted the House of Commons,
certain it is, that long after the Conqueror, its name was not so much as
heard of in England, but (as it is apparent) one of his Successors did form
them, and grant, not to make Laws without their consent, and by a Statute made
7 H. 4. the Writ of Summons now used was formed, and by an other Act made 1 H.
5. direction is given who shall be chosen, that is to say, For Knights of the
Shires, Persons resiant in the County, and for Cities and Boroughs, Citizens
and Burgesses dwelling there, and Freemen of the same Cities, and Boroughs,
and no other. So that now by the Kings gracious Concessions, each Member of the
house of Commons ought to be respectively elected, out of the Shires, or
Counties, Cities, or Boroughs, by the Kings Writ, ex debito Justitiae.

Now would it not strike a man with admiration, and make his hair stand an end,
to hear, that the House of Commons should claim the Legislative power, and
protest to the world, that they were greater in authority and Majesty than the
King, who raised them from nothing? surely it is but a dream, which troubled the
head a while, with strange Chimaeras, and then vanished; it is but a Phantasm,
which fanatic distempers raised in lunatic brains, and so perished; after
ages will account it but an Ovids Metamorphosis, or as a Fable, told more, for
mirth, and novelty, than for any truth or reality; for why? are the pots
greater than the Potter? or does he who ought for to obey, give Laws to him
whose right it is to command? The King says to the House of Commons, come,
and they come, and he says to them go, and they go, whatsoever the King
commands, that they cannot choose by Law but do; Nay the Lords their Masters,
are but the Kings Servants, the King is the head, and they are but the servile
Members; it is the property of the Head, not of the Members to command; the
inferior Members are all at the will and nod of the Head, the feet run, the
hands work, and the whole body moves at the pleasure of the head, but without
the head the whole body is but a dead trunck, and neither hands nor feet have
power to move: so the Members of the Parliament without the King their head,
have not power to sit, much less to Act: there is no body without a head, nor
no Parliament without a King, they cannot move, nor convene together, without
his Royal Summons, neither can they dissolve themselves, being convened,
without his command, the King assembles, adjourns, prorogues and dissolves the
Parliament by Law at his pleasure, and therefore it is called in our Statutes
and Law-bookes, Parliamentum Regis, Curia Regis, et Concilium Regis, and the
Acts of Parliament are called the Kings Laws; and why not the Kings Laws? does
not he make them? The whole body and volumes of the Statutes proclaim the King
the sole Legislator. What is Magna Charta but the Kings will, and gift? The
very beginning of it will tell you it is no more, viz. Henry by the grace of
God, etc. Know ye that we of our mere and free will, have given these
Liberties: In the self same style runs Charta de foresta.

In the Statute of escheates made at Lincoln, 29 Edw. 1. are these words, At
the Parliament of our Sovereign Lord the King, by his Council it was agreed,
and also commanded by the King himself, That etc.

The Statute of Marlebridg 52 H. 3. runs thus. The King has made these Acts,
Ordinances, and Statutes, which he wills to be observtd of all his Subjects
high and low.

3. Edwardi primi, The title of the Statute is, These are the Acts of King
Edward, and afterward it follows, The King has ordained these Acts, And the
first Chapter begins, The King forbids and commands, That etc.

6. Edw. 1 It is said, Our Sovereign Lord the King has established the Acts,
commanding they be observed within this Realm. And in the 14 Chap. the words
are, The King of his special grace grants, That etc.

The Statute of Quo Warranto, says, Our Lord the King at his Parliament, of
his special Grace, and for affection which he bears to his Prelates, Earls,
and Barons, and others, has granted, that they who have liberties by
prescription shall enjoy them.

1. Ed. 3. To the honor of God, and of holy Church, and to the redress of the
oppression of the people, our Sovereign Lord the King etc. At the request of
the Commonalty of his Realm by their Petition made before him and his Counsel
in the Parliament, by the assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great
men assembled in the said Parliament, has granted for him and his heirs etc.

But wherefore evidences to prove that which no man can deny? The styles of the
Statutes and Acts printed to the 1 H. 7 are either, The King wills, the King
commands, the King provideth, the King grants, the King ordains at his
Parliament, or the King ordains by the advice of his Prelates, and Barons, and
at the humble Petition of the Commons etc. But in Henry 7 his time the style
altered, and has sithence continued thus: It is ordained by the Kings Majesty,
and the Lords spiritual, and temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled; And why do the Lords and Commons ordain? Is it not only
because the King does? It is so, they do, because the King does, which only
denotateth their assent, for the Kings Majesty gives life to all, as the Soul
to the Body; for did ever the Lords or Commons make an Act without the King?
Never; they cannot; the Lords advise, the Commons consent, but the King makes
the Law, their Bills are but inanimate scriblings, until the King breaths into
their nostrils the breath of life, and so that which was but mould before,
becomes a Law which rules living Souls, and as Sr. Edward Coke observes, ^
Inst. 25.
In ancient times all Acts of Parliament were in form of Petitions, which the
King answered at his pleasure; now if it be the duty of the Parliament to
Petition, and in the power of the King to receive or reject their Petitions at
his will, judge you who has the supreme power. Neither does the King only make
the Laws, but he executes them too, for all executions (which are the life of
the Law) receive their force and vigor from the King. Car la ley, le roy, et
les briefes le Roy Sont les chooses per que home est Protect et aid, says our
Father Littleton, Sect. 199. There be three things whereby every Subject is
protected, Rex, Lex, and rescripta Regis, The King commands, his commands are
our Laws, and those Laws are executed only by the Kings Writs and Precepts; and
although the King Moses-like deputeth subaltern Judges, to ease himself of some
part of the burden of administering Justice, yet what they Judge, are the Kings
Judgments; the Law is the rule, but it is mute, the King judges by his Judges,
and they judging are the Kings speaking Law; The Judges are Lex loquens the
Kings mouth, the Commons are his eyes, and the Lords his ears, but the Kings
head is Viva Lex, the fountain of Justice, to whom God has given his
Judgments, and we have none but what the King Gods Vicar gives to us; and why
not the Kings judgments? Quod quisque facit per alterum facit per se, The Kings
Patent makes the Judges, the power of pardoning offenses only belongs to the
King: He may grant conusance of all pleas at his pleasure within any County or
Precinct, to be holden there only, and remove the Courts at Westminster to what
place he pleases, and adjourn the Terms as he sees cause, this is book-Law, 6.
H. 7.9.6 Eli. Dier 226. Summum jus summa injuria.
But I pray what Law set up the new slaughterhouse in England, viz. the high
Court of Justice? Doubtless it was not the Kings Law, and if not his Law, it
was no Law, for England never heard of any other but the Kings Laws.

You have already heard that the King was before Parliaments, that the King
first instituted Parliaments, not Parliaments the King, that the House of
Commons is but as it were of yesterday, and that both Houses are nothing else
but what the King made them; Let us now see what the King did make them, and
with what power this Idol the House of Commons is invested, and since they have
nothing else to show for what they are, than the Kings Writ, that being their
Basis, and only legal authority, Take a view of the Writ.

The King to the Vicount or Sheriff Greeting.
WHereas by the advice and assent of our Counsel, for certain arduous and
urgent affairs concerning us, the State, and defense of our Kingdom of England,
and the Anglican Church, We have ordained a certain Parliament of ours to be
held at our City, (...) the (...) day of (...) next ensuing, and there to have
conference, and to treat with the Prelates, Great-Men, and Peers of our said
Kingdom; We command, and strictly enjoin you, that making Proclamation at the
next County Court, after the receipt of this our Writ, to be holden the day and
place aforesaid* you cause two Knights girt with Swords, the most fit and
discreet of the County aforesaid, and of every City of that County two
Citizens, of every Borough two Burgesses, of the discreeter, and most
sufficient, to be freely and indifferently chosen by them, who shall be present
at such Proclamation, according to the Tenor of the Statute in that case made
and provided, and the names of the said Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, so
chosen, to be inserted in certain Indentures, to be then made between you and
those that shall be present at such Election, whether the parties so elected be
present or absent, and shall mak^ them to come at the said day, and place, so
that the said Knights for themselves, and for the County aforesaid, and the
Citizens, and the Burgesses, for themselves, and the Cominalty of the said
Cities, and Buroughs, may have severally from them full and sufficient power,
to do and to consent to those things, which then by the favor of God shall
there happen to be ordained by the Common Counsel of our said Kingdom
concerning the business aforesaid; So that the business may not by any means
remain undone for want of such power, or by reason of the improvident election
of the aforesaid Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses; But we will not in any case,
that you or any other Sheriff of our said Kingdom shall be e^ected: And at the
day and place aforesaid, the said Election, being made in a full County Court,
you shall certify without delay to us in our Chancery under your Seal, and the
Seals of them which shall be present at that Election, sending back unto us the
other part of the Indenture aforesaid, affiled to these presents, together with
the Writ. Witness our self at Westminster.

This Writ is the foundation of the Parliament, Decl. of the Treaty; p. 15.
upon which the whole fabric of their power and proceedings is grounded. It is
that which sets up a Parliament Man, and is the only Commission which
distinguishes him from another man; for without that, every man in the Kingdom
has equal right and authority to sit and vote in Parliament: Now by Law, no
man ought to exceed his Commission; Therefore if the Lords or Commons act
beyond the bounds of their power limited in this Writ, (their only Commission)
they are transgressors, and incur the punishment of Malefactors. The Writ
tells you, that both Houses are but as it were the production of the Privy
Council, for though the King ordains the Parliament, yet it is, by the
advice, and assent of his Council: why then may not the Kings privy Council
(being prius tempore) lay claim to the Sovereignty, as well as his Common
Council? surely both have like right. The Lords are only enabled by their call,
t^ Conferr and Treat, and that not without, but with the King. It is their
Counsel to advise, not their power to authorize, which the King requires; For
why? had not the King ordained a certain Parliament to be, and there to ^ave
Conference, and to treat with them, they ^ad not come, to give him Counsel; and
as they cannot come but when the King commands them, ^o neither can they choose
but come when the King ^oth command, except the King excuse them. and being
come they are but (as Judge Jenkins ^ith) Consiliarii, non Praeceptores,
Counselors, ^or Commanders, for to Counsel, is not to Com^and; They are only
to advise, not to control, ^r compel the King. The Parliament is ordained ^y
the ^ing (as appears by the Writ) only for ^ertain arduous, and urgent
affairs, 1. Touching ^he King. 2. The State of the Kingdom. ^. The defense of
the Kingdom. 4. 4 Inst. 9.
The ^tate of the Church. And 5. The ^efence of the same Church. Though it ^e
arduous, yet not urgent occasion, to destroy ^ingship. To condemn the King to
death, and ^unishment, is not touching the King but a Male^ctor. To kill the
King, is to destroy the kingdom, ^ot to defend it, and his death, is the death
of ^e Church and Religion. O how have the Long ^arliament swarved from the true
ends for which Parliaments were ordained!

Indeed the Lords (not as the upper House of ^arliament, but as a distinct
Court of the Kings Ba^ns) have power to reform erroneous judge^ents given in
the Kings Bench; But there is first Petition of Right made to the King, and his
an^wer to it, viz. Fiat Justitia. The Court of Parliament is only the House of
Lords where the King sits, and they are his common-Counsel, it belongs to
them to receive all Petitions, to advise his Majesty with their Counsel, and to
consent to what Laws the King shall make by their advice.

Not to speak of the qualities of the persons of the House of Commons, Yet
forsooth these the Lowest, set up the Highest Court viz. The high Court of
Justice. So Servants may set up a high Court, to try and condemn their Mastets.
Asperius nihil est humili cum su^git in altum.
being most of them (to wit Citizens and Burgesses) Tradesmen, brought up in
their Shops, not in any University, or Academy of Law and Learning, and as fit
to Govern and make Laws, God wot, as Cows are to dance; The rest of them being
Knights of Shires, chosen commonly rather for their Money than their Wit, having
greater wealth than head-pieces. I pass from their education to the authority
which the King vouchsafed to bestow upon them, which is only what is contained
in the Writ, viz. facere and consentire, to do and consent, but to what? Not
unto such things which they shall ordain, but unto such things which are
ordained by the King and his Common-Counsell, they are but only Ministerial
Servants, and by the Writ it is clear that they are no part of the great
Counsel of the Kingdom, they are but the grand Inquest, and general Inquisitors
of the Realm, 4 Inst. 11.
to find out the grievances of the people, and Petition to the King for
redress, the Burgesses, and Citizens to present the defects in their Trade, and
the Knights of the Shires, the burdens and Sores of their Counties, 5 Eli. ca-
1.
they ought not, nor are not admitted into the House before they have sworn,
that the Kings Majesty is the only and supreme Governor over all persons in
all causes. This oath did every Member of the long Parliament take, before they
set foot into the House of Charles the Martyr, whom they afterward murdered,
and took possession themselves of all that he or his royal progeny, had or
should have; let the world judge how faithfully these Keepers kept their
Oaths, and Covenants. Now forsooth none must come into the House but those who
first swear, that the King (who is) is not, but that they (who are not) are the
only supreme Governors over all persons in all causes. And will these oaths be
kept? It Is perjury to keep them. Thus they join hand in hand, and oath to oath,
but it is but to do wickedness, for like King David's Rebels, they make a
Covenant against their King, and would murder him, as they did his Father, if
they could catch him: but nulla pax malis, the wicked cannot hold together
long, though they unite their forces into one entire body, yet it is but like
Samsons Foxes, by the tails, only to set the world on fire.

When the Commons have taken the oath of Supremacy, and met together in a body
collective, in the house, they have not so much power as a Steward in his Leet,
or a Sheriff in his Tourn, for they cannot minister an oath, imprison any body
but themselves, nor try any offense whatsoever, (much less try their King, and
assume the Legislative power;) At a conference the Commons are always
uncovered, and stand when the Lords sit, (surely these are no marks of
Soveraignity) They indeed choose their Speaker, but after their choice the King
may refuse him at his pleasure, 4 Inst. 8.
and make them choose another, and Lenthal himself (as all other Speakers do)
did, when he was presented to the King, disable himself as a person unworthy to
speak before the King; yet now he is styled the Father of our Country. (How the
world is turned up-side down!) These Parliamentiers heretofore were wont to be
arrested by any common Person, and liable to all Suits, and punishments, as
other men, until the King graciously passed an Act for their indemnity, 4 H.
8. ea. 8. So that they are nothing but what the King made them, nor have
nothing but by his grant; and all that the King did make them, appears by the
Writ, which is to do and consent to such things as the King with his
Common-Counsell should ordain.

Then stay Reader, and behold, stand still, with thy head and hands lift up to
the heavens, and admire, with what impudence, and oppression, tyranny, and
usurpation, the long Parliamentiers are fraught with, who never had any other
legal power than by the Kings Writ, and have lost that by the Kings death; yet
tyrannize over three kingdoms, calling themselves the Representatives of the
whole Kingdom, and that they were entrusted by the People, with the Supreme and
Legislative power, which God and all the world knows is as false as the
Almighty is true. For first they do not represent the King the head, nor the
Peers who are the higher and nobler part of the kingdom, 4 Inst. 2.
therefore they are not the Representatives of the whole kingdom, neither were
they ever entrusted by the People with the Supreme and Legislative power, Nay,
the people did never confer any power on them at all, for by their Election the
people did but design the person, all the power the Commons have, proceeded
from the King, which is contained in the Writ, by which they were called. As
Freeholders worth forty shillings a year, and freemen of Cities, and
Borroughs, would make very unfit Electors of Supreme Magistrates, so never did
they, they cannot make any Election of their Commons, until the King
commands, and gives them power, they have no power so to do of their own,
much less to authorize supreme Legislators. The King gives liberty to Towns
and Cities, to make choice of Burgesses, which had no such power before the
Kings grant, so that all the power which the Commons have flows from the
King, not a drop of it from the people.

Therefore, if the Commons exceed their commission, to wit, the power given
them by the Kings Writ, it is illegal, and their actings void in Law; and since
the power given them by the Writ, is extinguished by the Kings death, the Long
Parliament is by Law dissolved, and all the power which they take upon them
since, is usurped, illegal, and Tyrannical, and contrary to the Laws both of
God and man. And to make their Tyranny the greatest under the Heavens, they
protest to the world, that the Representatives of the people, ought to have the
Legislative power; yet they give Laws (as they call them) to Scotland and
Ireland, not having so much as one Member from both Kingdoms, in their
representative body; nor the eighth part of the Representatives chosen by the
Counties, Cities, and Buroughs in England. So that no Tyrants since the
Creation of the world, did ever equallize these, either in cruelty or
absurdity, wickedness or foolishness: yet forsooth, in 1649, they made an
Act, that it should be High Treason, for any one to affirm the present
Government to be Tyrannical, Usurped or Unlawful; or that these Commons are
not the supreme Authority of the Nation. So thieves may murder the Father, and
take away the inheritance from his Children, and then make a Law, that it shall
be high Treason for any one to call them thieves or usurpers, or to say, they
had not the supreme Authority. Thus they defend Tyranny with Tyranny, and one
sin with another. Unumquodque conservatur, eodem modo quo fit. Things impiously
got, must be impiously kept. They got their authority by blood, and by blood it
must be kept; they juggled themselves by lies into the supreme self-created
authority, and we must lie, and say they are the supreme authority, only
because they do, otherwise we shall be executed for high Treason, against this
infamous conventicle; So that of necessity we must displease God, if we please
them, and live no longer, than we sin, for they have made it a capital offense
to speak truth. I must confess, most men amongst us, are frighted with this
scarr-Crow, not only to lie, and affirm the long called Parliament to be the
legal supreme authority, but also with St. Peter, forswear, and deny their
persecuted Lord and Master the King, accounting no weather ill, so they be by
their warm fire sides, and esteeming all men indiscreet, who publicly own
their King, and thereby incurr the displeasure of these domineering Tyrants. But
for my part, I had rather be a Servant to God, and my King, than a Master
amongst the unrighteous; I am a Member of the body of the Commonwealth, and
therefore cannot see my head the King cut off, without crying, They are dead
Members who do not.
Lord have mercy upon us. It is the duty of all his Subjects both with pens and
hands, to help their King out of the mire, into which these Rebels have cast
him; not only the law of God, but the law of the land injoyneth us thereto: And
I cannot see our Laws and Religion rooted up, without groans and sighs; It is
no time to be silent, when the fabric wherein our whole treasure and happiness
consists, is set on fire: Neither can silence, or innocence, protect one from
the unjust violence of these Wolves; Sleeping, or waking, we are always their
prey: Some of us they murder for our Estates, some for their pleasure, but all
according to their wicked wills, not law. Therefore God knows whether I may be
the next who must come to their pot; Howsoever, I had rather be taken, doing
God, my King, and my Country service, than in a drowsy Lethargy: I commit my
Soul and Body, to the protection of the Almighty, who dorh not let a sparrow
fall to the ground without his divine providence, therefore will not let me
fall into the power of their lust, without his permission. The King fell, and
why should not I? The Lords will be done, who when he has corrected his
Children, will burn the rod. They can destroy only my Body: him only will I
fear, who can destroy both Body and Soul. Give Cerberus a sop cries some men,
and speak fairly to the Monster now in power: But it is but to go into Hell;
Therefore I will neither flatter, nor dissemble with them.

Not to speak of the Modesty of the House of Commons in former Ages, scarce
adventuring to do what they might, for fear they should arrogate too much; As
in 21 Ed. 3. When their advice was required concerning the prosecution of a
War with France, They answered, That their humble desire of the King was, that
he would be advised therein by the Lords, being of more experience than
themselves in such affairs. The like president of their Modesty may you find in
the 6 R. 2. and in the 3 E. 3. They disclaimed to have Cognizance of such
matters, as the Guarding of the Seas, and Marches of the Kingdom. We may
conclude, that unless it be the property of the Servant to command, and the
Master to obey, or of the Soldiers to march before their Captain, that the
King has the supreme power, and is the sole Legislator, not the House of
Commons: For the King represents God, the Commons only the ignoble People. As
for both Houses jointly together, they are no Court at all; therefore can have
no thoughts of having the Legislative power. And as the two Houses have no
power but what the King bestows on them, so neither have they any title of
honor and dignity, but by the Kings gift. For as all the lands in England, and
all power and authority, is derived from the Crown; So by the laws of England,
all the degrees of Nobility, and Honor, are derived from the King, the
Fountain of Honor, and Majesty it self, 4. Inst. 363. What then? have the two
Houses jointly, or the House of Commons singly, the Sovereign power, because
they have none but what the King gives them? Have they the Majesty, because
they have no honor or dignity but by the Kings gift? Surely this is all the
reason: The King made the Lords, not the Lords the King: a Peasant to day may
be a Lord to morrow, if the King pleases; and is the Pesant therefore the
Kings master? surely no, it is the King who creates Barons, and so makes them
capable to sit in the House of Peers; but they are made but Peers, not Kings;
nay they are but Peers of the Realm, not of the King: They are under, not above
the King; For sunt and alii Potentes sub Rege qui dicuntur Barons, hoc est,
robur belli, says Bracton l. 1. c. 8. Though they are Potentes, yet they are
sub rege. As for the House of Commons, they are so far from being our keepers,
or the masters of our King and kingdom, that there is not a Noble man amongst
them; They receive their being from the breath of the Kings Writ, and having
their being in a collective body, they are but the Lower House, whose name
imports subjection. But if the Commons when they sit in the House have the
Sovereign power, where was it before their Sessions? and where is it when they
are dissolved? What does it hang in the Clouds, and drop on them when they sit,
and dissolve like the Snow with the VVinter, when the King dissolveth them?
Sovereignty is permanent, and always continues waking: The House of Commons
are, and they are not, according to the Kings pleasure, he assembles and
dissolves them at his will. And what? does the Sovereign power sleep or die,
during their interregnum? one would think it belonged to the King, because he
never dies. O ridiculous Commons! I am weary of their absurdity in claiming
the Sovereignty.

But as once it was demanded of an Oraaor; speaking very much in the
commendation of Hercules, Quis vituperavit? So it may be demanded of me,
treating of the Kings Sovereignty, who has brought arguments against it? Truly
for my part, I never saw any reasonable argument against it; many cavils, but
no reasons. Evasions are the best proofs used by the Anti-Royalists: And when
they shift a Question with foreign matter, or a foreign meaning, They think they
have not only made a good answer, but also proved the point in question to be
on their side: As when our Books say, Every man in the kingdom is under the
King, but the King is under none but God, They answer, the meaning of the book
is, That every single man in the kingdom is under the King, but not the whole
people collectively, for they are above the King. Just as if the Book should
say, every man in the world is under the Heavens, but the Heavens are under
none but God: And they should answer to evade it, The meaning of the Book is,
That every single man is under the Heavens, but not the whole body of the
people; for they are above the Heavens. O miserable invention! such absurdities
are most of their Arguments. Therefore we may conclude, that since Club-Law set
them above reason, it must be Club-Law which must pull them down. Let the Sword
argue them out of the Kings possessions, which they have gotten by Rebellion,
and it will be easy then to convince them, that Rebellion against the King is
unlawful. Had the King had no Revenues, he had still enjoyed his Crown. It is
the profit which makes King-killing honest; And it is the sweetness of the
Bishops Lands, which makes the Office of a Bishop so bitter, and odious, to our
new Statesmen; The Law would have them ejected from their ill gotten Fortune
and Estates; therefore they persecute the Law, as their utter Enemy, And say,
that they will have it no more coached in the City of London, but carted in the
Country amongst the Swains; But they must likewise send the City with it into
the Country, otherwise the Body will dye when the Soul departs, and the City
will perish, when the Law and its Retinue bid it farewell.

As Histories both foreign and domestique, ancient and modern, and the whole
Accademy of the Common Law, so it is apparent by many Records, and Judgments
in Parliament: And both the Lords and Commons, in diverse Acts of Parliament,
Davis Irish Rep. so. 90.
through many successions of Ages, have declared that the King of England is
Monarcha and Imperator in regno suo, a Monarch and Emperor in his Realm, above
all the people in his kingdom, and inferior to none on Earth, but only the
Almighty, holding his Crown and Royal dignity, immediately of God, and of none
else.

By the Statute of 28 H. 8. ca. 2. enacted in Ireland, it is declared, that the
Kings of England are Lawful Kings and Emperors of the said Realm of England,
and of this Land of Ireland.

So by the Act of 16 R. 2. ca. 5. It is declared, That the Crown of England
has been so free at all times, that it has been in no earthly subjection, but
immediately subject to God in all things touching the Regality of the same
Crown, and to none other. And what is the House of Commons, a God? if they are
but men, the Crown is not subject to them, for the Statute tells you it is in
no Earthly subjection. But perhaps they are Devils; neither will that serve
their turn, for as it appears by the Act, The Crown is immediately subject to
God, and to none other.

So by the Statute of 24 H. 8. cap. 12. it is declared, Where by diverse sundry
old authentic Histories, and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared, and
expressed, That this Realm of England, is an Empire, and so has been accepted
in the World, Governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the Dignity and
Royal Estate of the imperial Crown of the same, unto whom a body politic
compact of all sorts, and degrees of people, divided in terms, and by names of
Spiritualty and Temporalty, been bounden, and ought to bear next God, a natural
and humble obedience, he being also institute and furnished by the goodness
and sufferance of Almighty God, with plenary, whole and entire power,
pre-eminence, authority, prerogative, and Jurisdiction, to render and yield
justice, and final determination, to all manner of Folk, and Subjects within
his Realm, and in a^ causes, matters, and debates whatsoever. Behold here, and
consider the Judgment of the whole people, both Lords and Commons. Who can
contradict what they said? None but the Antipodes of our Age, who contradict
all Truth, Justice, Law, and Honesty. I heard it affirmed, that they were about
to explode out of the new Testament* the 13th. Chapter of the Romans, and other
Texts in Scripture, which commanded subjection to Kings. Truly I believe they
did not want knavery, but only convenience to effect it. If the Bible had had
but one Head, off it had went as sure as the Kings*

In the Statute of 1 Eli. cap. 1. and in several other Acts of Parliamen^, the
Crown of England is called an Imperial Crown, and the Parliament, the Kings
h^gh Court: And that you may see, that the Murderers of Charles the Martyr,
pretended to want water when they were in the Sea, read the Act of Parliament 1
Ia. cap. 1. wherein the Lords and Commons made this joyful Recognition, viz.
Albeit, We your Majesty's loyal and faithful Subjects, of all Estates, and
Degrees, with all possible and public joy and acclamation, by open
proclamations, within few hours after the decease of our late Sovereign Queen,
we declared with one full voice of tongue and heart, your Majesty to be our
only lawful and rightful Liege-Lord and Sovereign, yet as we cannot do it too
often, or enough, so it cannot be more fit, than in this high Court of
Parliament, where the whole Kingdom in person, or by Representatives is
present, upon the knees of our hearts, to agnize our most constant faith,
obedience, and loyalty, to your Majesty, and your Royal Progeny, humbly
beseeching it may be (as a memorial to all Posterity) recorded in Parliament,
and enacted by the same, that we (being bounden thereunto by the Laws of God
and Man) do recognize and acknowledge, that immediately upon the death of Queen
Elizabeth, the imperial Crown of this Realm did by inherent birthright, and
lawful and undoubted succession, descend, and come to your Majesty, and that
by lawful right and descent, under one imperial Crown, your Majesty is of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, the most potent and mighty King, and
thereunto we most humbly, and faithfully submit, and oblige our selves, our
heirs and posterities for ever, until the last drop of our bloods be spent,
and beseech your Majesty to accept the same, as the first fruits of our
loyalty, to your Majesty and Royal Progeny, and Posterity for ever; Which if
your Majesty will adorn with your royal assent (without which it neither can be
complete and perfect, nor remain to all Posterity,) we shall add this to the
rest of your Majesty's inestimable benefits. But now Tiber runs backwards, and
the Moon gives light unto the Sun, the Servant rules the Master, and the
Peasant is mightier and greater than the King: Nay in stead of walking on our
feet (as our Forefathers did,) we walk upon our heads, and as for the old
paths where is the good way, Jer. 6.16.
we will not walk therein. Our Ancestors have attested the Kings Soveraignity
with their lives and sacred oaths, but we attest the contrary, so that if we of
this age are not, our Ancestors of all ages past were ignorant perjured fools.
Our Fathers (as you see in the foregoing Statute) did humbly submit, and
oblige themselves, and us, their heirs, and Posterity, to be constant and
faithful in subjection to the King, and his Royal Progeny: But we (undutyfull
to our Parents, as well as Rebellious to our King,) oblige our selves, and bind
our souls, with many sacred oaths, to expel him from his Crown, rob him of his
Revenews, and extirpate his Royal Progeny, being constant, and faithful to
nothing but our own lusts and ambition. They would spend their bloods to
maintain, and defend the King: but we spend both our bloods and Estates, to
offend and destroy him. They esteemed their Act void and imperfect, without the
Royal assent; But we esteem and vote the Royal assent, void, imperfect, and
useless. But wherefore do I say we? Lay the saddle on the right horse. It was
neither Lords, nor Commons, Parliament, nor people, who perpetrated all these
villainies; but it was fifty or sixty rotten tainted Members of the lower House,
small in number, but great in transgression. So may the Tail, nay a piece of
the Tail, destroy the whole body, and reign sole Lord Paramount. Oh what
multitudes of impieties can the wicked accomplish in an instant.

Seneca. Nullum ad nocendum tempus angustum est malis, In no longer space than
betwixt the Father and the Son, did these Horse-Leaches subvert our fundamental
Government, destroy King and Kingdom, Parliament and People, and all our Laws,
and Religion; so that the question is not whether the Parliament be above the
King, but whether a little company of great Traitors and Usurpers, (the Dregs
and Lees of all Tyranny,) be above both King and Parliament: For the Parliament
(as you see by the joyful recognition made to King James etc.) enacted, and
most humbly acknowledged the King to be above both Parliament and People, and
the Crown to be hereditary to the King and his Royal Progeny; but these men,
and only these who by violence make themselves above both King and Parliament,
defending their persons from the Justice of the Law, with Armed Red-Coats, and
the greatness of their villainies, These are they who deny it, though the Laws
of the Realm, and all Histories, and all Kingdoms teach them otherwise.

God calls himself a King in several places of the Scripture, to note, and
signify his Soveraignity, Psalm. 10.16 29.10.47.2.7.44 4.
which surely he would not do, was the King the Peoples vassal or under
Officer, as the Bedlam franticks of our age feign. Thou art my King O God,
(says David) Command del^verance for Jacob. The King and the Power to command
are Individua, He is a Clout, no King, which cannot command; And who should be
under his command? What? The People, taken particularly, and distributively, as
single men, and not collectively as the whole Kingdom, according to the
fanatic opinion of our Lunaticks? Why is he not then called King of single
men? If he be King of a Kingdom, then all the People jointly or severally in
his Kingdom are under his command, and if under his command, then he only has
power to give them Laws, be they in one collective body as in Parliament, at
the Kings house, or simple bodies at their private dwellings. Le Roy fait les
leix avec le Consent du Seigneurs, et Communs: et non pas les Seigneuns, et
Communs avec le consent du Roy, is the voice of the Common Law, The King makes
Laws in Parliament, with the consent of the Lords and Commons, and not the
Lords and Commons with the consent of the King.

Virg. 7 Eneid. Hoc Priami gestamen erat, cum jura vocatis
More daret Populis --
And 5 Eneid. -- Gaudet regno Trojanus Arestes,
Indicitque forum, and patribus dat jura vocatis.
The Lords and Commons have power only to propound, and advise, it is only the
Kings Le roy le veult, which makes the Law, their propositions and advice
signify nothing, if the King says Le Roy se avisera; They have not power to
grant him any subsidies, until the King says, Le Roy remercieses loyaulx et
ainsi le veult. Therefore much less the Soveraignity. It would be strange, if
the assembling of the Subjects together should make them Masters over the King,
who gave them power to assemble, and has power to turn them home again when he
pleases. Legum ac edictorum probatio, aut publicatio, quae in curia vel Senatu
fieri solet, non arguit imperii majestatem in Senatu vel curia inesse, says
Bodin. de Rep. li. 1. ca. 8. The publishing, and approbation of Laws and
Edicts, which is made ordinarily in the Court of Parliament, proves not the
Majesty of the State to be in the said Court, or Parliament; It is the Kings
Scepter which gives force to the Law, and we have no Law, but what is his
Will. The King surely would never call his Subjects, to bind him with Laws
against his will, much less to take his Dominion from him, and make himself a
Vassal, and Officer, to his two Houses, or either of them, who were not capable
themselves of any Office without his Gift and License. The Kings of England
have called many Parliaments, yet the Government has always continued
Monarchical, and the King not under, but above the people, inferior only to
God; even Foreign Politicians will tell you so. Let famous Bodin (who tanketh
our Kings amongst the absolute Monarchs) speak for all, lib. 1. cap. 8. Habere
quidem Ordines Anglorum authoritatem quandam, jura vero Majestatis and imperji
summam, in unius Principis arbitrio versari. The States (says) he of England,
have a kind of authority, but all the rights of Sovereignty, and command in
chief, are at the will and pleasure of the Prince alone. Learned Cambden in his
Britannia, fo. 163. teaches us, As touching the division of our Common wealth,
it consists of a King, or Monarch, Noblemen, or Gentry, Citizens, freeborn,
whow we call Yeomen, and Artisans or Handicrafts-men. The King whom our
Ancestors (the English Saxons) called Coning and Gining (in which name is
employed a signification both of power and skill) and we name contractly King,
has Sovereign power, and absolute command among us, neither holds he his
Empire in Vassalage, nor receives his investure, or enstalling of another, ne
yet acknowledges any superior but God alone. Now if Reason, and the Judgment
of our Ancestors, would satisfy our frenzy upstarts, what greater authority
would they have? But that they are troubled with so many visions, and false
revelations of their own, I would commend to them a true vision, in the Reign
of Edward the Confessor, viz. One being very inquisitive, and musing what
should become of the Crown, and Kingdom, after King Edwards death (the blood
Royal being almost extinguished) he had a strange vision, and heard a voice
which forbade him to be inquisitive of such matters, resounding in his ears;
The Kingdom of England belongs to God himself, who will provide it a King at
his pleasure. But now forsooth it belongs to the people, and they will
provide it a King at their pleasure: It is the people now which make the King;
if so, why ever had we any Kingdoms? why were they not called Peopledoms? The
Kings of England, with them of France, Jerusalem, Naples, and afterward
Scotland, Cambdens Remains.
were anciently the only anointed Kings of Christendom. And as the Kings in
Scripture (as Asia, Jehoshaphat, Hezechiah, See 2 Chro. 15, and 17, and 29, and
30, and 31.
etc.) so the Kings of England have always had the supremacy in Ecclesiastical
causes: Reges, sacro oleo uncti, sunt capaces spiritualis jurisdictionis. 33
Ed. 3. Rex est persona mixta cum Sacerdote, habet ecclesiasticam et spiritualem
jurisdictionem, 10 H. 7.18. And although Kings ought not to be Ministers of the
Chutch, so as to dispense the word and Sacraments, For No man takes this
honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron, Hebrews 5.4.
Yet since they are called of God to be Kings, as his Vicegerents, they have
power to look to, and have a care of the Church, that the word be preached, and
the Sacraments administered, by fit persons, and in a right manner, else how
should Kings be Nursing Fathers to the Church, Isa. 49.23.
had they not a Fatherly power over it? Therefore many Acts of Parliament, in
several Kings Reigns, and the whole Current of Law Books, resolve and affirm
the King to be head, and have Supreme Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical causes. In
the first year of Edward the sixth, a Statute was made, That all Authority and
Jurisdiction both Spiritual and Temporal, is derived from the King. So in the
Reign of Edward the Confessor, was this Law, ca. 17. The King, who is the Vicar
of the highest King, is ordained to this end, that he should Govern and Rule
the Kingdom, and People of the Land, and above all things the Holy Church, and
that he defend the same from wrong doers, and destroy, and root out workers of
mischief. But since Reverend Coke in the fifth part of his Reports, De jure
Regis Ecclesiastico, has with luculent examples, and impregnable laws, made
it so clear, (that no man can gainsay it) that the King ought, and the Kings of
England ever since before the Conquest, until the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, (at
which time he writ) have had the supreme power and jurisdiction, in all
Spiritual, and Ecclesiastical causes, I refer you to his Book, only reciting
part of his conclusion, viz. Thus has it appeared, as well by the ancient
Common Laws of this Realm, by the Resolutions and Judgments of the Judges, and
Sages of the Laws of England, in all succession of ages, as by authority of
many Acts of Parliament, ancient, and of later times, that the Kingdom of
England is an absolute Monarchy, and that the King is the only supreme
Governor, as well over Ecclesiastical persons, and in Ecclesiastical causes,
as temporal, within this Realm. And in another places, fo. 8. he says, And
therefore by the ancient Laws of this Realm, this Kingdom of England is an
absolute Empire, and Monarchy, consisting of one head, which is the King; and
of a body politic, compact and compounded of many, and almost infinite
several, and yet well agreeing Members. All which the law divides into two
several parts, that is to say, the Clergy, and the Laity; both of them next,
and immediately under God, subject, and obedient to the head. Also, the Kingly
head of this politic body, is instituted, and furnished with plenary, and
entire power, prerogative, and jurisdiction, to render justice and right, to
every part and member of this body, of what estate, degree, or calling soever,
in all causes, Ecclesiastical or Temporal, otherwise he should not be a head of
the whole body. Now he that looks upon these Authorities, and yet says, that
the King is not above both Parliament and people, nor has sovereign power over
them, will likewise look upon the sun in the Heavens, and yet say, that it is
not above, but below the earth; and when he is in the midst of the sea, say,
that there are no waters in the world. If then the King has the supreme power
over Parliament and people, (as most certainly he has) how then could the
Parliament or people, (much less, sixty of them) question, or judge their
King? For no man can deny, but that the greater power ought to correct, and
judge the lesser, not the lesser, the greater. How could they, did I say? Why,
vi and armis, by violence and injury, not by law. So may I go and murder the
King of Spain, or the King of France, and then tell them, that their people
have the supreme power over them. The case is all one, only these Rebels
murdered their natural Father, and King, to whom nature, and the Laws of God
and man, had made them subjects; but I should murder a foreign King, whom I
ought not to touch, he being the Lords anointed.

It is easy to prove the Sovereignty of the Kings of England, by their Styles,
(unless our anti-monarchical Statists will say, they nick named themselves.)
Their several styles, since the Conquest, you may see in the first part of my
Lord Coke's Institutes Fo. 27. Therefore I will not trouble you with a recital
of them; as for the styles before the Conquest, take one for all, which you may
find in the Preface of Co. li. 4. and in Davis his Irish reports Fo. 60. In a
Charter made by Edgar one of the Saxon Monarchs of England, before the Danish
Kings. viz. Altitonantis dei largiflua clementia, qui est Rex Regum, and
dominus dominantium, Ego Edgarus Anglorum Basileus, omniumque rerum, Insularum
Oceani quae Britanniam circumjacent, cunctarumque Nationum quae infra eam
includuntu^, Imperator et dominus, Gratias ago ipsi Deo omnipotenti Regi meo,
qui meum imperium sic ampliavit, and exaltavit, super Regum patrum meorum, Qui
licet Monarchiam totius Angliae adepti sunt a tempore Athelstani, qui primus
Regum Anglorum omnes Nationes quae Britanniam incolunt sibi armis subegit,
nullus tamen eorum ultra fines imperium suum dilatare agressus est, mihi tamen
concessit propitia Divinitas cum Anglorum imperio, omnia regna Insularum Oceani
cum suis ferocissimis regibus usque Norvegiam, maximamque partem Hiberniae cum
sua nobilissima Civitate de Dublina, Anglorum regno subjugare, quos etiam omnes
meis imperiis colla subdare dei favente gratia coegi. By which you may observe
the first Conquest of Ireland, and that the Kings of England are Emperors, and
Monarchs in their Kingdom, constituted only by God, (the King of Kings and Lord
of Lords,) not by the people. And so did many other Kings of England style
themselves, as for example: Etheldredus totius Albionis, Dei Providentia,
Imperator: and Edredus Magnae Britanniae Monarcha, etc.

But that our preposterous Commonwealths men might make themselves most
ridiculous, as well as impious in all things, they would argue the King out of
his Militia, and have him to be their Defender, yet they would take away his
sword from him. O Childish foppery! What? a Warrior without arms? a General
without soldiers? why not a^ well, a Speaker without a mouth? such Droller^
was never heard of in the world, until the Infatuation of these infandous
Republicans hatched it* Nay, but there shall be a King over us (cried the
Israelites) that we also might be like all the Nations, and that our King may
judge us and go out before us, and fight our battles, 1 Samuel 8.19. An^ what?
should he fight without the Militia? should the King be over the people, judge
them, and go out before them to battle, yet ought the people t^ have power to
array, arm, and muster the souldier^ at their pleasure? ought they to appoint
wha^ Officers and Commanders they thought fit? surely no: For he will (says
Samuel, verse 12.) appoin^ him Captains over thousands, and Captains ove^
fifties. So 11 Sam. 12.29. David gathered a^ the people together, and went to
Rabbath, and fough^ against it, and took it. But why do I cite David Had not
all the Kings in the Scripture, nay, have not all the Kings in the world the
chief power over their Militia? Surely, nothing is more certain; otherwise,
what difference would there be between the King and Subject? Militarem autem
prudentiam, ante omnia necessariam, Ego Principi assero, adeo ut sine ea, vix
Princeps. Quomodo enim aliter se tueatu^, sua, ac suos, says Justus Lipsius.
No Militia, no King; For how can he defend himself and Kingdom without it? The
Puppy dogs would master the Lion, were it not for his paws; the cowardly Owls
would conquer the Eagle, if he had no talons; and the King would be a laughing
stock, both at home and abroad, were it not for the sword, which God (not the
people) has girded to his side. The King bears not the sword in vain, says
St. Paul, Romans 13.4. But surely he would bear it in vain, had he not power of
himself to draw it, or sheath it, but when the people pleased; he would be but
a poor revenger, to execute Gods wrath, had the people, (as our Novists feign)
not he, the sole disposing of the Militia. Unges eum ducem, 1 Samuel 9.16. Thou
shall anoint him to be captain over my people. Which shows the Kings right to
the Militia, being Captain over his people. Unum est Regi inexpugnabile
munimentum, amor civium. I must confess, the Citizens, and Peoples love is the
best fortress, and bulwork for Kings; but Charity grows cold, Loyal love, and
Citizens, are not always companions; whole Cities, nay whole Countries, may
prove perfidious to their King; and whilst the King discharges the office of a
loving father, his people may turn Traitors, Test Anglia.
and rebel against his goodness. Therefore it is good walking with a horse in
ones hand, and ever safest for Princes, even in the greatest peace, to have a
well-disciplin'd Militia in a readiness; for the affection of the people, like
the wind, is never constant, In Rege, qui recte regit, necessaria sunt duo
haec, arma videlicet, and leges, Bract. fo. 1. Justin. Institutes, Fleta.
quibus utrumque tempus, bellorum and pacis, recte possit gubernari: utrumque
enim istorum alterius indiget auxilio, quo tam res militaris possit esse in
tuto, quam ipsae leges, usu armorum, and praesidio possint esse servatae. Si
autem arma defecerin^ contra hosts rebels and indomitos, sic erit regnum
indefensum: si autem leges, sic exterminabitur justitia, nec erit qui justum
faciat judicium, The Law, and Arms, are so necessary, and requisite in a King
that without both, he can have neither; for how could he execute, and maintain
his laws, without arms? and how could he levy war, without laws to direct,
and guide his Arms? He could neither proclaim war, nor make leagues, or peace
without them. The King is Custos totius Regni, and by law ought to defend,
Davis Irish Reports, fo. 58. Fitz. n. 6.113.233.
and save hi^ Realm. But surely he would b^ but a poor keeper, if the people
had power to keep his weapon from him at their pleasure. Custodes libertatis
Angliae, The Keepers of our liberty, could not keep it from us, without the
force of the Militia: and how should the King maintain his Realm in peace, and
defend our lives, liberties and estates, from the foreign, and domestic Tyranny
of Traitors and Rebels, had he not the sole power, and strength of Arms? The
Subjects of England are bound by their liegeance, to go with the King, etc. in
his wars, as well within his Realms, Calvin's case, so. 7.
as without, as appears by the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 11. and by a Statute
made 11 H. 7. c. 1. The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, declare it
to be the duty, and allegiance of the Subjects of England, not only to serve
their Prince, and Sovereign Lord, for the time being, in wars, but to enter,
and abide in service, in battle. and that both in defense of the King and land,
against every rebellion, power, and might reared against him. But wherefore
should I make my self ridiculous, in attempting to prove that which no age has
denied? It has been the Custom of all Kingdoms, the practice of all times,
and the Common Law of the Realm of England, ever since it was a Realm, that the
power of the Militia did always belong unto the King* nay it is proper to him
quarto modo he has an inherent, and inalienable right to it. Which right has
been declared, and affirmed by many Acts of Parliament, in all succession of
ages, which in a case so clear, need not to be recited. It belongs to the King
only to make leagues with foreign Princes. 2 H. 5. ca. 19 E. 4.46.22 E. 4.
And as it is resolved in our Law Books, if all the people of England should
break the league made with a fo^e^n Prince, without the Kings consent, yet the
league holds, and is not broken; Nay so far are the People, or House of Lords,
or Commons, from having the power of the Militia, that (as you may read the
express words, 3 Inst. pa. 9.) If any levy War to expulse strangers, to
deliver men out of Prisons, to remove Counselors, or against any Statute, or
to any other end, pretending Reformation of their own heads, without Warrant,
it is high Treason; For no Subject can levy War within the Realm, without
Authority from the King, for to him it only belongs. O then admire at the
impiousnesse, and impudence of the long called Parliament, who murdered their
King for committing Treason against them, whereas by the Laws of the Land, they
were the only Traitors against him. So may the offender punish the offended,
for the offense which he himself committed, and so may the Prisoner condemn,
and execute the Judge, for the Crime whereof himself is only guilty. The only
reason why they demanded the Militia of the King, and said that it only
belonged to them, was not, because the King ought not to have it, for they well
knew, that by the Law of all Ages, it did only belong to him, and not to them;
But how then could they carry on, and accomplish, their wicked design of
Murdering him, if they still let his Sword hang by his side? Therefore they
first laid hold on that, and wrested the Militia out of his hands, arguing that
it did not belong to the King, but to them. So Murderers may say, that the
Sword of him whom they intend to murder, does not belong to the owner, but to
them, to the end, they may with the more ease and safeguard, perpetrate their
wickedness. And that they might have a shadow to hide all their filthynesse;
They first got several Counties to Petition for the Militia, which they
afterward took by violence, nay they themselves did first Petition the King
for it. So sturdy Beggars first beg for an Alms, and by and by knock their
Benefactor on the head, and make themselves Masters of what they before
entreated for: And indeed the most part of their Villainies did commence with
Petitions, for in driving on their wicked designs, they always got the Rascal
rabble of the People, to heap in Petitions, for what they themselves set them
upon, as if these Godly Villains did nothing, but what they were driven to
through commiseration of the people, when God knows, they did nothing, but what
was for the satisfaction of their own wicked Lusts, and Ambition. For when the
Soldiers, and other baser sort of the people, cried out for Justice and
Privilege of the Parliament; Even then was the Injustice of these Rebels most
promoted, and the Parliament did not then only lose its privileges, but its
very life and being. Thus Barbers may cut off the Head, when they pretend to
trim the Hair, and so may Physicians destroy and kill the Body, when they
pretend to apply Medicines. For, as now it appears even to the blind, their
pious pretenses, were but a Color, for their wicked intentions, to destroy
both King and Parliament, and root up all our Laws and Religion, when they
seemed to act most to preserve them.

Now since the power of War only belongs unto the King, it must of necessity
follow, that the King has power to levy Taxes, and impose Subsidies on his
people to maintain the War, otherwise it would be in vain to think of waging
War: for all Soldiers must have (Vectigalia) Food, Apparel, and Arms, and
where should the King have this but in his own Kingdom? To be short, it is a
duty laid upon the Consciences of all Subjects, to supply their King with all
necessaries, both in time of War, and Peace; And a thing commanded both by our
Savior, and his Apostles, Render unto Caesar, the things which are Caesar's.
And 13 Romans Render therefore to all their due, Tribute, to whom Tribute is due,
Custom, to whom Custom, Fear, to whom Fear, Honor, to whom Honor. But our
Antipodes subverting all Scripture, render to no man their dues, and that they
may act contrary to the very words and meaning of every Text, They do not
render Tribute, Custom, Fear, and Honor, to the King, to whom it is only due,
but forsooth to themselves, to whom it is not due. So may the Servant murder
his Master, and take all his Revenues, and Honor as due only to himself. He
which argues that the King has not right to choose his Privy Counselors,
Great Officers, and Judges, etc. will likewise say, that the Master has not
right to choose his Servants, it being the practice of all Kingdoms, as well as
of England, and due to him by the Law of Nature; Thou shall provide out of the
People able Men, says Jethro to Moses, when the 70. grand Senators of Israel,
the Great Sanhedrim of the Jews were to be chosen; By which you see, the great
Officers, etc. are to be chosen out of, and not by the people, but by the King.
So Pharaoh, not the people, made Joseph Ruler over all the Land of Egypt, and
Nebuchadnezzar, and not his people, made Daniel Ruler over the whole Province
of Babylon. And since our Lawyers are so forward to take Commissions, and be
made Judges by every power, which gets uppermost, be it right or wrong, Let
me tell them, that it is an undoubted truth, that every person, who has been
since the murder of Charles the Martyr, or shall hereafter (without the
authority of Charles the second) be condemned and executed for any Crime
(whether guilty or not guilty) in the Kings Bench, or at the Assizes, or
elsewhere, is murdered, and all the Judgments, acts and proceedings of those
nominal Judges, or Commissioners are void, as things done Coram non judice. So
that it consequently follows, that these lawless Judges are principals in
every murder, so committed. Vengeance only belongs unto God, Deu. 32.35. The
King is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does
evil. Therefore whosoever prosecuteth in the Kings Courts against the life of
any man (as in an Appeal etc.) or sueth for recompense for any wrong done unto
him, he does not take vengeance, but God, who executes his wrath by his
Minister the King. But if any private man, or the whole people take upon them
to make themselves their own Carvers taking what recompense they think fit,
either against the King or any of their fellow Subjects, in this case they make
themselves their own Revengers, and rob God of his rights, for vengeance
belongs to him, not to them. Therefore if any man, though in a way of public
Justice, take upon him to condemn and execute any man, without authority and
power from the King, he is a Murderer, and malicious Revenger, upon whom the
vengeance of God (whom he endeavors to cheat and rob) will fall. Oh then
admire, and bewail the Infandous Murders, and Murderers of our age, wherein
the good are destroyed for performing their duty toward God and their King,
and the wicked flowrish, only because they are sinful, for whosoever will not
be a Rebel, must not be a Commonwealths-man amongst these new Republicans. Yet
forsooth they have such a form of Godliness amongst them, that whosoever does
not approve of their wickedness, but speaks of their actions according to
their deserts, they call such men the ungodly, and flatter themselves, saying,
the Saints of all ages have been spoken evil of by the wicked, holy David, nay
our Savior and his Disciples were reviled by the Reprobate, therefore no wonder
if the Malignant Cavaleers do reproach, and vilify our piousness, and
brotherly love and charity one toward the other. So Beelzebub may call them
impious, who do not account him the only good Angel. How these men would be
esteemed most Religious, even when they commit Sacrilege, and seem righteous
even in the very act of wickedness; They murder many, and take away the
Estates of all Royalists, yet if the Royalists whom they have thus spoiled,
tell them according to Gods Commandments, that they ought not to be swift to
shed blood, nor covet their neighbors goods, these Saints presently tell them,
that they have not the Spirit of Godliness in them, but that they are the
abusers of Gods word, and his Children, as if Gods Spirit gave them authority
to act wickedly, and that none but they were the children of God, who had got
their wealth by murder, rapine, and sacrilege: O Monstrous! If you call their
ill gotten Government, Tyranny, or Usurpation, they number you amongst those
filthy Dreamers, who speak evil of Dignities, and will no^ submit to lawful
authority. Yet these Antipodes could revile their Sovereign the King, with
multitudes of scurrilous Pamplets, cut off his head and banish his Royal
Progeny, taking away their Lands, and the Estates of thousands more, yet they
would make one believe, that they never spoke evil of Dignities, nor ever
resisted lawful authority. O pious Rebels!

So far are our Laws of England from allowing Subjects to take up arms against
the King, or to condemn and execute him, that it is high treason for any one,
25 E. 3.2.
or all of his Subjects, but to imagine the Kings death, which the wisdom and
Religion of our Realm has from age to age so much hated and abhorred, that an
offender therein, by the Laws of the Land, shall be hanged, and cut down alive,
his bowels shall be cut off, and burned in his sight, his head shall be severed
from his body, his quarters shall be divided asunder, and disposed at the Kings
pleasure, and made food for the birds of the air, or the beasts of the Field,
and his wife and children shall be thrust out of his house, and livings, his
seed and blood shall be corrupted, his Lands and goods shall be confiscated,
and (as by the Statute of 29 H. 6.1. It is ordained of the Traitor John Cade)
he shall be called a false Traitor for ever. But the Traitors against Charles
the Martyr have prevented this punishment (most due to them) by the greatness
of their villainies. Yet though they are got out of the reach of Justice, and
trample our Laws and King under their feet, let them remember that God is above
Earth, and will give them their reward, if not in this world, yet in the world
to come.

The aforesaid Statute of 25 Ed. 3. (as you may read in Pulton de pace Regis,
and Regni, fo. 108.) does confirm it to be high treason, for any person to
compass, or imagine the death of our Sovereign Lord the King, the Queen, etc.
by which words, it does approve what a great regard, and reverend respect, the
Common Law has always had to the person of the King, which it has
endeavored religiously, and carefully to preserve, as a thing consecrated by
Almighty God, and by him ordained, to be the head, health, and wealth of the
Kingdom, and therefore it has ingrafted a deep, and settled fear in the hearts
of all sorts of Subjects, to offer violence, or force unto it, under the pain
of High Treason: Leges Auredi. ca. 4. Co. Lib. 4.124. See 3 Inst. page 4. and 6.
insomuch as if he that ^s Non Compos Mentis, do kill, or attempt to kill the
King, it shall be adjudged in him High Treason, though if he do commit petit
Treason, homicide or larceny, it shall not be imputed unto him as Felony, for
that he knew not what he did, neither had he malice prepensed, not a felonious
intent. And this law does not only restrain all persons from laying violent
hands upon the person of the King, but also by prevention, it does inhibit them
so much as to compass, or imagine, or to devise, or think in their hearts, to
cut off, by violent, or untimely death, the life of the King, Queen, etc. for
the only compassing, or imagination, without bringing it to effect, is High
Treason, because that compassing, and imagination does proceed from false and
traitorous hearts, and out of cruel, bloody, and murdering minds.

Thus you see with what reverence our Laws do adore his sacred Majesty our
King, detesting nothing more, than the violence, or damage offered to him: yet
forsooth, the Rebels affirm, they killed the King by the Common Law, and why by
the Common Law? what, because the Commons made it? surely that is all the
reason, for there is no law under the Heavens, which warranteth Subjects to
kill their King: but all laws both humane, and divine command the contrary.
Many are the public oaths, (as you may read in Mr. Prynne's Concordia discors)
protestations, leagues, covenants, which all English Subjects, (especially
Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Mayors, Ministers, Lawyers, Graduates, Members of
the House of Commons, and all public officers whatsoever) by the Laws, and
Statutes of the land, have formerly taken, to their lawful hereditary Kings,
their heirs, and successors, to bind their souls and consciences, to bear
constant faith, allegiance, obedience, and dutiful subjection to them, and to
defend their Persons, Crowns, and just royal Prerogatives, with their lives,
members, and fortunes, against all attempts, conspiracies, and innovations
whatsoever. But since, all those sacred oaths have been traitorously violated,
and broken by the Rebels against Charles the Martyr. I will only present you
with the effect of the Oath of Allegiance, which every one is to take when he
is of the age of twelve years, and this oath was instituted in the time of King
Arthur. Calvin's Case, fo. 7. Co. Lit. fo. 68.172. You shall swear that from
this day forward, you shall be true and faithful to our Soverain Lord King
Charles, and his heirs, and truth and faith shall bear, of life and member, and
terrene honor; and you shall neither know, nor hear of any ill, or damage
intended unto him, that you shall not defend. So help you Almighty God. The
substance and effect of this oath (as it is resolved, and proved in Calvin's
case) is due to the King, by the law of Nature, and is called Ligeantia
naturalis, being an incident inseparable to every Subject; for so soon as he is
born, he owes by birthright ligeance and obedience to his Sovereign, and
therefore the King is called in his Statutes our natural liege Lord, and his
people, natural liege Subjects. But Ligeantia legalis, is so called because the
Municipal Laws of this Realm have prescribed the order and form of it. None can
deny but that obedience is due from the Son to the Father by the Law of Nature,
yet may the Municipal Laws of the Realm prescribe formality and order to it,
not diminishing the substance. So likewise may they to the Allegiance due by
nature to the King.

Thus have you seen how the English Traiterous Rebels, contrary to all the
Laws of God, the Law of Nature, the Law of Nations, the Laws of our Realm, and
against the foundation of Christian Religion, have by an unheard of example,
most wickedly murdered, and as a common Thief, and vile vassal of the people,
condemned their gracious King, whose name from the very beginning of the world
has ever been esteemed amongst all Nations great and holy; whom the Prophets
and Apostles, nay our Savior himself, and all the Primitive Christians, both
with their lives, death, examples, and Doctrine have taught, and commanded us
to reverence and pray for, and to be subject to, not violently to resist him
though he violently persecute us; whom God himself in his old and new Testament
has declared to be constituted by him, and reign by him, (not by the People,)
and particularly whom our Forefathers of this Realm of England, have always
accounted sacred, and ever found by experience Kingly Government to be most
glorious, and profitable for them, yet these forty or fifty Tyrannical Rebels,
contrary even to common sense, and feeling, upholding themselves by Force, and
Arms, Treason, and Usurpation, do sit and Vote Kingship dangerous and
burthensom to the good people of this Commonwealth, when in the mean time, out
Merchants turn Bankrupts, our Tradesmen break, Food grows dear, Trade dies,
thousands of Families are ready to starve, Millions of men are ruined and
undone, the whole Realm groaneth under the burden of excessive Taxes, and
Wars, and rumors of Wars, continually plague our Kingdom, which has lost its
glory both abroad and at home, and become a mere laughing stock to all Nations,
and all this misery arises from the Tyranny of these Rebels, who unjustly
banish our lawful haereditary King Charles the second, and take possession of
his three Kingdoms, making themselves absolute Tyrannical Kings over us, and so
I believe they intend to make their Heirs: for (being accustomed to lie) they
declare in their Declarations, that the People shall be governed by their
Representatives in Parliament, Yet (their actions contradicting their words,)
they will not suffer the People to choose their Representatives, or come into
the House, The People declare for a free Parliament, but these Rebels only for
themselves.
but they tell us, that they will choose men of fit qualities. So one Thief
chooses another, Similis simili gaudet, We may be sure never to have an honest
man amongst them, if they have the choosing. So that we may conclude, that
unless we arise, and destroy these self-seeki^g self-created Tyrants, and
restore our gracious King to his Crown, both we, and our heirs, shall be Slaves
to the worlds end; for no legal Government can be established without the King.

I have sufficiently proved, that it is unlawful for Subjects to rebel against
evil Kings: How much more then is it unlawful to rebel against a pious, and
merciful Sovereign, which adds to the bulk of the sins of our English
Rebels? For the whole world knows, that Charles the Martyr (whom they so
traitorously murdered, Read his incomparable heavenly Book, which will make
thee weep for our loss, but rejoice and admire at his piety.
) was the best of Kings, and meekest of men: He was Charles le bon, and Charles
le grand, good in his greatness, and great in his goodness. Some have said,
that a good King cannot be a good Christian, but it is proved manifestly false
in him, for to the admiration of the whole Earth, he was the best of
Christians, and no less to be admired as a good King: So that his misfortune in
his Government did not proceed from his deficiency in the art of Governing, but
from the excess of the Rebels sins, who transcended all Traitors since the
creation of the world, in sin, and treachery, as far as Hell is distant from
the Earth. Wherefore we may most truly say, that he was murdered, only because
he was good: For every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to
desolation, Luke 11.18.
if Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his Kingdom stand?
Therefore if the King had been evil, these evil Traitors would never have cast
him out, but seeing he was a pious and Religious King, (and so an evil Member
to their evil Commonwealth, See their charge against him.
) They all united their hearts and hands to cut him off, and lay to his charge
all the Treasons, Murders, Rapines, Burnings, Spoils, Desolations, Damage and
Mischief to this Nation, which they themselves committed. So Thieves and
Murderers may spoil, burn, and make desolate all places, and Massacre, and
kill many Noble, and trusty Servants, to the end they might take their Master
and kill him, and then having taken him, lay all to his charge, and execute him
as the only Author of all those villainies which they themselves acted and
occasioned. O heavens! Could the Almighty suffer this? Why not? The Lord made
all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of evil. Pro. 16.4.

As for our rising Sun Charles the second, though hitherto obscured by the foggy
mists of Treason, and Rebellion, in his own Kingdoms; yet do the rays of his
sacred Majesty shine throughout the world beside, and his renown ecchoeth in
every part of the Earth, to the admiration of foreign Kingdoms, and to the envy
and hatred of the Rebels in his own. Yet cannot their malice but marvel at the
virtues, and patience of their King, whom they so much wrong: And it grieves
them to see that royal progeny (whose ruin they so greedily hunt after)
flourish with such glorious splendor amongst the Kings, and Princes of the
Earth, growing in favor both with God and Man; Whilst they (odious to all but
themselves) by their Tyranny and Rebellion, incurr the displeasure both of
Heaven and Earth, and become a Ridiculous Rump, The object of the scorn and
derision, both of Old and Young, Rich and Poor. And had not these infatuated
Rebels, brazen faces to deny what their own Conscience tells them is true,
They would presently declare, that the only way to settle our distractions, and
restore our Nation to its pristin happiness, and glory, were to call in the
King, and re-establish him in his own, which they unjustly pocket from him: For
so long as there is one of the race of the Stewarts (which God long preserve)
and any foreign King, or People, remain alive, we must never look for peace, or
plenty, but (as public Thieves) always live in a posture of War, and ever
expect foreign Nations to come in, and swallow us up, Who account it (as indeed
it is) the greatest piece of Justice under the Sun, to revenge (with our
bloods, and utter destruction) the bloody Murder of Charles the first, and the
unnatural Banishment of Charles the second, our only lawful Sovereign. Therefore
let all English Spirits (who have not washed their hands in the Innocent blood
of Charles the Martyr) join their prayers to God, and their Forces to one
another, and lance this Ulcer, and cut off this proud flesh, whose growth
destroys our King, Laws, and Religion. Behold the Duke of York will be your
leader, whose very name strikes terror to the greatest men of War, and our
Rebels tremble to think of his Martial achievements; It is he who will be our
Champion, to hunt out these treacherous Foxes, who Rebel against his King and
Brother; and then make our Nation dreadful to the Pope, and other foreign
Invaders. Therefore let us not dream like Goats, whilst we have this Lion to be
our Captain, but follow him, and destroy these Wolves, who make us their
continual prey, keeping us in Slavery, under a false pretense of Liberty; and
let us obey our King, and Father, Charles the second, who will bless us with
the blessings of Jacob, and weed out of our Church, and State, those Jesuits,
and Popish Blasphemors, who now under the color of a free State, are working,
and contriving, the ruin both of our Laws and Religion. And then we shall
prosper into a Kingdom, Ezekiel 86.13. and once more be a glorious people,
under so glorious a King: which God Almighty speedily grant, for the glory of
his Holy Name, and for the welfare and happiness of all Christian people.

Every one knows that in 1648. after the long tempest of a horrid War and
Rebellion, raised by the Refractory and Treacherous House of Commons, under a
pretense of removing evil Counselors from the King, (but in truth only to
promote their own private Interests, and factious designs) The Currish Army,
who had for a long time hunted the distressed King, and his Royal party,
pretending to be set on only by their Master Rebels the Commons, but it seems
they had a game to play of their own, which on the sixth of December 1648. they
begun to show; And therefore when the Traiterous Commons had obtained what they
could ask, or desire, of their Sovereign, then their Prisoner at the Isle of
Wight, being such Concessions, which never any King before him granted, nor
Subjects ever demanded, So that shame compelled them to vote them satisfactory,
Then the bloody Soldiers thinking themselves lost, if the King and Parliament
should find a peace, went up to the House of Commons, and by force kept out and
imprisoned those who voted the Kings Concessions satisfactory, Vulgarly called
the Secluded Members.
which the militant Saints pleased to call purging of the House, (so that body
is purged which has poison left in it, and nutriment taken out of it by the
purge) yet this purge would not do, the Lords must be turned out too, and only
40. or fifty packt Members of the House of Commons, So he which plays at
Knave out of doors, gets the Knave, to beat all the rest of the Cards.
who had sworn to be as very (if not worse) Knaves than the wicked Soldiers
would have them to be, were only left in the House, who presently took upon
them, what power their own lusts could desire, or the overruling Sword help
them to, Murdered the King, and the chiefest of the Royal Party, and yet to
color their Tyranny, called themselves a Parliament; by which name blowing up,
King, Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and all our Laws, and Religion with them,
they still Domineer, and Rule over us, yet not so, but that the Army Rule them,
(as the Wind does a weathercock) turning them which way, and how they please,
sometimes up, and sometimes down, and no doubt but that shortly they will be
cast down for altogether, for the wicked shall not last, but vanish as a shadow.

Blessed art thou O Lord, when thy King is the Son of Nobles: Eccles. 10.17.
But alas, Servants have ruled over us, and there is none that does deliver us
out of their hands. Lamen. 5.8. The Crown is fallen from our head: Woe unto us
that we have sinned. Verse 16. For now they shall say, we have no King, because
we feared not the Lord; What then should a King do unto us? Hosea 10.3.

ENGLANDS CONFUSION,
OR A True Relation of the topsy turvy Governments in mutable England, since
the Reign of Charles the Martyr. The Tyranny of the Rump further manifested. And
that we shall never have any settled State, until Charles the second (whose
right it is) enjoy the Crown. Though frantic Fortune in a merriment, has set
the Heels above the Head, and gave the Scepter unto the Shrubs, who being proud
of their new got honor, have jarred one against the other, during the
Interregnum: Yet Charles the second shall put a period to this Tragedy, and
settle our vexed Government, which has changed oftener in twelve years, than
all the Governments in the whole world besides. Oh the heavy Judgment when
Subjects take upon them to correct their King!

AS a distracted Ship (whose Pilate the rage^ng violence of a tempestuous storm
has cast down headlong from the stern) staggereth too and fro amongst the
unquiet waves of the rough Ocean, sometimes clashing against the proud surly
Rocks, and sometimes reeling up and down the smoother waters, now threatening
present Shipwreck, and Destruction, by and by promising ^ seeming safety, and
secure arrival, yet never settled fast, nor absolutely tending to the quiet and
desired Haven: So the vexed Government of frantic England, ever since the
furious madness of a few turbulent Spirits beheaded our King and Kingdom,
threw down Charles the Martyr (our only lawful Governor) from the stern of
Government, and took it into their unskilful and unlawful hands, it has been
tossed up and down, sometimes falling amongst the lawless Soldiers, as a Lamb
amongst Wolves, or as a glass upon stones,) and sometimes happening amongst
Tyrants, calling themselves a Parliament, who are so much worse than the
Soldiers, by how much wickedness covered with a color of Justice is worse,
and more dangerous than naked villainies. Yet in all our Revolutions (although
many gaps have been laid open that way,) has not the Government steered its
course directly to Charles the second, its only proper right, and quiet Haven;
to which until it come, we must never expect to have the Ship of our
Commonwealth so secure, but that Tempests and Storms will still molest and
trouble (if not totally ruin) it. Though it stand so fast one day, that it
seems impossible for humane strength to remove it, yet the next day it
moultereth away to nothing. I vouch every man's experience to warrant this
truth; And were not our blind Sodomites intoxicated with Senseless, as well as
Lawless Counsels, They would never gape after preferment, nor hope for
continuance in their imaginary Commonwealth, where the greatest one hour is
made least the next, and they themselves swallow up each the other, never
having rest or peace, no not in their own House. And can this divided Monster
(which is the cause of all our divisions) cloze up our divisions, and settle
our Nation in peace and happiness? It Is madness to think it. So fire may
quench fire, and the Devil who was the first Author of wickedness, put an end
to all wickedness. Examine the condition of the times, since the Reign of
Charles the first, and you may see what times we shall have, until the Reign of
Charles the second. Tyranny and Usurpation, Beggary and Slavery, Wars and
Murders, Subversion of our Laws, and Religions, changing the Riders, but we
must always be the Asses, Hunger and Famine, Guns and Swords, Drums and
Trumpets, Robberies and Thieveries, Fornication and Adultery, Brick without
Straw, Taxes although no bread, These must be the voices which will always
sound in our Ears, until we cast off this old man of Sin, viz. The Long called
Parliament, and submit (as we ought) to Charles the second our only lawful King.

We may read of many Kings who have been suddenly killed, by the rash
violence of an indiscreet multitude, who in the heat of Blood, do that which
they repent of all their life after, (mad Fury being the only cause of their
unjust Actings;) But to commit sin with reason and piety, to kill their King
with discretion, formally and solemnly, is such a premeditated Murder, that
the Sun never saw, until these Sons of perdition brought it to light; For a
long time before the fact, they machinated, and plotted, the Kings death, and
contrived how they might with the best color and show of Justice effect it; At
length (as if their Votes were more authentic than all Srcipture) they passed
(amongst others) this Vote, Die Jovis, Jan. 4. 1648. viz. That the People,
under God, were the original of all just power; This was the foundation upon
which the superstructure of all their murders and villainies (which they call
just Judgments) were built; which granted, it consequently follows, that all
the power which they then and now exercise over these three Kingdoms, is unjust
and Tyrannical, because not derived from the People. There are no
Representatives amongst them for Scotland nor Ireland, nor the greatest part of
England, neither did they ever receive any power at all from the People of
either England, Scotland, or Ireland, and now all the People publicly declare
against them as the greatest Usurpers and Tyrants in the world; yet contrary to
all the Peoples wills, they sit, and Rule, and will admit of no Member of the
Peoples choosing to come amongst them, unless they first qualify and fit him
for their own purpose; therefore it plainly appears, that this Vote, that the
People had the supreme power under God, was but a mere juggle to gull the
people, and to bring their wicked designs to pass. So that as A whip for the
Horse, or a bridle for the Ass, have the People made (of this quondam
Parliament,) a rod for their fools-backs, Pro. 26.3.

The King being murdered by these Tyrants, and all our Laws and Religion
totally subverted, (a time wherein every one did what was right in his own eyes,)
Oliver Cromwell (who for his excellency in wickedness and villainies was made
General of the long called Parliaments unjust Forces,) the twentieth of April
1653. entered the House, attended with some of the chief Commanders of his Army,
and delivering his reasons to them in a Speech, why he came to put a period to
their siting, as judging it a thing much conducing to the public welfare of
the Nation, dissolved them. And why might not he turn out them by force, who by
force had already turned out the King, Lords, and all the Commons, besides
themselves? Surely if he had taken and hanged them all, it would have been a
glorious Act, pleasing to God, and the whole people, and a Cordial to heal the
miseries of our long-distressed Nation. But his ambition was to make himself
Great, not to give relief and take away the Tyranny, therefore he summoned a
certain select number of his own creatures to appear at Westminster on the
fourth of July next, which he called a Parliament, and none could deny but that
they had the Sovereign power, because Cromwell said so, yet not so but that he
made them resign up their power to him, and make him (the Lord protect us) Lord
Protector, not a King, because a King might do nothing but by Law, but the
Protector did nothing but according to his will and pleasure; yet in this were
we happy, that in his reign, one Tyrant Lorded it over us, but in the long
Parliaments, many. It is worth the observation, that notwithstanding a
Parliament had newly abrogated the very name and being of a King, Our Sovereign
Charles must be no King, because pious, but Oliver must be a King, because a
Rebel. Oh the mystery of their iniqui^y^
as dangerous and burthensom to the Commonwealth, yet a Parliament (summoned
by Cromwell in July 1656. to meet on the 17 of September,) Petitioned and made
many humble addresses to Cromwell that he would take Kingship upon him, and be
anointed King, which old Nolls mouth watered at, yet because some things did
not fall out according to his expectation, he declined it, and refused to be
what he eagerly (though not openly) persued. Though the Kings Nobility might
not, yet Cromwels might be a House of Peers.
Cromwell likewise created a House of Lords, which was called the other House:
but the high aspiring thoughts of this turbulent Scorpion, were at length blown
down, and extinguished by a high and mighty, wondrous and unparalleld wind,
which out raunted Old Nol, and whirried his black Soul down ad inferos. So that
after this storm, we had a Calm; and as the Sheep are at quiet ease, when the
bloody Woolf forsakes them, so the People did rejoice and solace their hearts,
when this Tyrant made his Exit; yet no sooner were we rid of this crafty Knave,
the Father, but we were troubled with a simple Fool, his Son. Richard his
eldest Son was proclaimed (by the new Courtiers, and Army Officers) Lord
Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and so tumble down Dick thought to
have risen, and Reigned in his Fathers room; But a Fools bolt is soon shot,
Richard was quickly up, and quickly down: No sooner had he called a Parliament,
but the Soldiers (who feared that his Parliament should be honest, and disband
them, as the only instruments to execute all Villainies) went to the Mushroom
Protector, and by dnresse, made him dissolve the Parliament, and divest himself
of all his Power and Authority. And in this respect, it is better to be a
Knave, than a Fool; For crafty Noll kept the rude Soldiers in due obedience;
But simple Dick let them be his Masters, whereas he might easily have made
them, and the whole people, have been his Servants to this day. When Richard
was dismounted, the Soldiers could not well tell where to hang the Government,
to secure them in their Rebellion, and Roguery: At last they pitched upon the
old rotten Rump ( viz. the fagg* end of a worn-out, Tristius haud illis
monstrum, nec saevior ulla Pestis, and ira Deum Sly^iis sese extulit undis.
perjured Parliament) who had formerly dissolved themselves, (witness the
Entry in their own Journal Book, April 20.1653.) although they pretend to be
interrupted by Cromwells force; So these Knaves (the worst of Tyrants) cemented
together again, like a Snakes tail, and for color called themselves, the
Revivers of the Good Old Cause, and were as busy, as if they had had another
King, and 3. Kingdoms to destroy. So these infamous wicked Traitors returned to
their wickedness, as a Dog to his vomit, to the great grief and grievance of
all sorts of People in the Land, who groaned and murm^red, as if they were
entering into a far worse than Egyptian bondage and Slavery under these
taskmasters. To say that the people (not they) had the Sovereign power, was
now high Treason, although they themselves had voted so formerly, and to talk
of a Free Parliament, the ancient birthright of the people (as they themselves
likewise formerly affirmed) was now made a greater offense than Crimen lae sae
Majestatis. These Custodes filled all the Prisons in the Kingdom, with those
persons who desited a Free Parliament, and in that respect, they may be called
The Keepers of our Liberty, as Gaolers do Thieves in Chains, or as the Cage
does Birds in grates; For they keep us so much from our Free Liberty, to do
well, that they will not so much as give us leave to speak, or think well. But
there is no peace with the wicked. when these Tyrants had beaten down Sir
George Booth, and other Assertors of a Free Parliament, and made themselves as
secure, as Force and Violence could make them, One Lambert (a Chip of the old
Block) newly made General of their Forces, displaced the Rump, and with his
Soldiers inhibited their usuped sitting; which made the whole people not only
rejoice inwardly, but break out in open laughter for joy: But nullum commodum
sine incommodo, there is no pleasure without a displeasure: No sooner did the
Rump leave riding of us, What pretty names these State Thieys have for their
Robberies and Tyranny.
but up gets the Committee of Safety into the Saddle, who made account that
they were so absolutely our Masters, as if we had all sworn allegiance to them.
They rid furiously, but in a short time (the Breech being too heavy, viz. The
titular Parliament.
for this new Head) they moltered away to nothing. Though the Rump had for a
time hung down its tail betwixt its Legs, yet at length it begun to wagg it,
and whilst the Safety of the Committee of Safety was marched into the North
under its Father Lamberts Conduct, the Currish Rump stole into the House again
by night, seven times a Devil worse than before; where now they ride
Triumphant, and without the peoples consent, or liking, make what Laws they
list, and Assesse what Taxes they please, send their mercenary Soldiers (who
would fight for the Devil, if he would give them money) into the City in the
night time, and take the Citizens money away from them, pretending that the
Citizens provide it for Charles Stuart, but when the Citizens prove the
contrary, Alas not for so good a use.
then they tell them they will secure it for them. So Burglars and Thieves take
away men's purses from them, and then tell them they will secure them for them.
These are the Keepers of our Liberty: These are they who stood so much for the
privileges of Parliament, and for the peoples free election of their
Representatives. Now they account it a great Breach of Privilege of Parliament,
to petition to them for a free Parliament, and imprison them that are for it.
So Robbers may account it dishonesty for those who are robbed, to ask for their
own, and imprison them as disturbers of the Commonwealth. Although these
Tyrants have built themselves great houses, and filled their baggs and coffers
with the estates of their Masters, whom they murdered, and with the
unparalled impositions which they have laid upon the people, yet do they
still resolve to rob the spittle; and have newly made an Act for the
Assessement of six hundred thousand pounds. Oh that the English should provide
moneys, to maintain their devourers! Though we have not bread to suffice our
own hunger, yet must we find dainties, and moneys to fulfill their lusts;
though they take away our straw, yet we must still provide a greater tale of
bricks: so that of all the Tyrants in the world, which History, or men acquaint
us with, these are the greatest. There was Justice in Phalaris his bull, but
these men have only the color of Justice. Other Tyrants were but shadows,
these are the Quintessence of all Tyranny and perdition. I will not plunge my
self into such a bottomless Labyrinth, I commend you to the History of
Independency.
as to attempt to particularize all their villainies; Non opus est nostrum, I am
not able; nay the quickest pen of a ready writer, would come far short of so
great a task. The Histories of after ages will resound with these Turpia Dictu,
the people of our age have only time to feel, and endure the miseries of this
Tyranny, subsequent generations will have leisure to tell the story, Et haec
olim meminisse juvabit. Methinks I already hear the Postnati, those who will be
born thousands of years hence, relating one to the other, the mavelous
Tyranny which happened to our Nation, after the Reign of Charles the Martyr,
and in what manner the King was murdered, and how Charles the second was
afterward driven into an un-christian Exile, and likewise rehearsing what
persons they were which acted all these villainies; and so end with a Te Deum
laudamus, blessing God for the tranquillity peace and plenty; which they enjoy
under their Gracious Sovereign Lord the King.

The Persian Law commanded, that at the death of their Kings, there should be a
suspension of the laws, a lawless liberty for the space of five days, that
the subjects might know the necessity of Government, and learn to prize it
better, by being bereft of the benefit of it for a time. Sure I am, a lawless
liberty has reigned amongst us ever since the murder of Charles the first:
therefore I hope, our present torments for want of a King, will sufficiently
prohibit all future ages, to think of offering violence to their Kings: and
teach them to know, that a bad King, (much more a good King, as was Charles the
Martyr) is an unvaluable blessing, if compared to the Government of that many
headed Monster, the People, or their Representatives in Parliament.

The peoples eyes were all fixed upon General Monk, as their Moses, to deliver
them from this iron yoke of Egyptian bondage; But, Omne malum nobis, ex
Aquilone venit.
From the Cold North,
Comes all Ill forth.
Monk proved worse than Pharaoh himself, and instead of relieving of our
distressed Jerusalem, (which he might have done in the twinkling of an eye,
without one drop of bloodshed, and thereby have gotten eternal renown and
glory, as well amongst all Nations, as in his own native Country) he heaped
misery to misery, and executed such a grand piece of Tyranny, that none in the
world (unless those Harpies, his Master Rebels at Westminster) could invent.
On Thursday the ninth day of February, 1659. In perpetuam rei memori^m, he drew
up all his soldiers into the City, with their matches lighted, in a warlike
posture, doubled his guards, and tore down all the gates, and posts of the
City; neither did his intoxicated malice stay upon the gates, but leapt upon
the Aldermen, and other Citizens, whom he present^y cast into prison, so that
now he is become odious, and stinks in the nostrils of all the Citizens and
People: and whereas he was the common hopes of all men, he is now the common
hatred of all men, as a Traitor more detestable than Oliver himself; who,
though he manacled the Citizens hands, yet never took away the doors of their
City, whereby all manner of beasts, (as well the Wolves at Westminster, as
other out-lying Foxes, and Birds of prey) may come in, and destroy them when
they please. So that now iniquity follows iniquity, and the wicked join hand
in hand, and oath to oath, to persevere in their Rebellion. And although no
sacred Oaths, Protestations, Vows or Covenants, could keep them in lawful
subjection to the King, they now think with unlawful oaths, to tie one the
other fast to their usurped Tyranny. So that the Kings righteous cause, is now
in a seemingly worse condition than before; and he may complain with Holy King
David, That the Rebels have cast their heads together with one consent, and are
confederate against him. But why art thou cast down, O my soul, or why art thou
disquieted within me? Cannot God who permits these Rebels to reign, as
easily cast them down? Know thou not this of old, since man was placed upon
earth, that the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite
but for a moment? Though his Excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head
reach unto the clouds, yet he shall perish for ever, like his own dung: they
which have seen him shall say, where is he? He shall flee away as a dream, and
shall not be found: yea he shall be chased away, as a vision of the night: The
eye also which saw him, shall see him no more, neither shall his place any more
behold him, because he has oppressed, and has forsaken the poor, because he
has violently taken away an house which he builded not. Job. 20.

ENGLANDS REDEMPTION.
OR The Peoples rejoicing, for their great deliverance from the Tyranny of the
long called Parliament, and their growing hopes for the restoration of Charles
the second, whose absence has been the cause of all our miseries, whose
presence will be the cause of all our happiness. The prosperity of Rebels, and
Traitors is but momentary. As Monarchy is the best of all Governments, so the
Monarchy of England is the best of all Monarchies: Therefore God save King
Charles the second, and grant that the proud Presbyterians do not strive to make
themselves Kings over him, as they did over his Father, by straining from him
Antimonarchical Concessions, and by Covenanting to extirpate his Bishops etc.
that they might set up themselves, which was the primary cause of our late
unnatural and inhumane wars. Mr. Prynne commended, Episcopacy is the best form
of Church Government. The Votes of the Clergy in Parliament. The Arrogance of
the Presbyterian faction, who stand upon their Terms with Princes, and make
Kings bend unto them as unto the Pope.

OH the inscrutable judgments of God! Oh the wonderful mercy of the Almighty!
Oh ^he Justice of our Jehovah! No sooner had I written these last words of the
momentary prosperity of the wicked, 11th. of February 1659. Cressa ne careat
pulchra dies aota.
out immediately the same hour, news was brought me, that General Monck and the
City were agreeed, and resolved to declare for a free Parliament, and decline
the Rump, Obstupui, stetteruntque comae, and vox faucibus haesit, I was
stricken with amazement, joy made me tremble, and the goodness of the news
would scarce permit me to believe it; when I considered the crying sins of our
Nation, (which deserved showers of vengeance, not such sprinklings of mercy,)
then all such conceits seemed to me as vain, and empty delusions; but when I
considered the infinite mercy of the Almighty, then why might not God spare our
Nineveh, and send joyful tidings into our discorsolate City? Surely his
mercies are greater than our great Sins. Therefore to resolve this doubt, I
went up into the City, where instead of Tears (as formerly) I had like to have
been drowned with the Streams of joy, and rejoicing; The Bell rung merrily, the
Streets were paved with mirth and every house resounded with joyful
acclamations. I had do need then to ask whether the new^ (I heard in my
Chamber) were true or no, both Men, Women, and Children, Old and Young, Rich
and Poor, all sung forth the destruction o^ the Long called Parliament, the
whole City was as it were on fire with Bonfires for joy; And now those who
formerly threatened the firing of the City, were burnt at every door, for all
the people cried out, let us Burn the Rump, let us roast the Rump: A sudden
change! History cannot tell us of its parallel. No less than thirty eight
Bonfires, were made between Pleet-Conduit, and Temple-Barre. To be short, there
was scarce so much as one Alley in the whole City, wherein there were not many
Bonfires; so that, so great and general joyfulnesse, never entered into the
Walls of the City, since it was built, neither will again, until Charles the
second be restored to his Crown. The hopes whereof only caused the fervency of
those joys. The Pulpits on the morrow (being Sunday) and all the Churches
ecchoed forth Praises and Thanks to God, and private devotion was not wanting;
neither was this joy confined only within the walls of the City, but being a
public mischief was removed, a public rejoicing overspread the whole
Kingdom, and all the people with one heart and voice, shouted, clapped hands,
and poured out joyful thanks for this great deliverance; So the wearyed Hare is
delighted, and cheereth her self, when she has shook off the bloody Hounds,
and so a Flock of Sheep are at rest, and ease, when the Ravenous Wolves have
newly left them.

Oh therefore let our distracted England be a warnin-gpiece to all Nations,
that they never attempt to Try and Judge their King, for what cause soever; And
let all Traitors and Tyrants in the World learn by the example of our English
Rebels, that their Prosperity and Dominion (though it seems never so
perpetual) is but momentary, and as the wind which no man sees; For who so
much applauded, and looked upon, as the Long Parliament, when they first took
upon then to correct and question the King? and who now so Ridiculous, and
Scorned? They were them admired by the People as the Patrons, Vindicators,
Redeemers, and Keepers of their Liberty; Nay I may most truly say, that the
people did worship and adore them, more than they did God: But now (although
they were as wicked then, and did as much destroy our Laws and Liberties, as
they do now) they are become a byword, the Scorn and Derision, both of Men,
Women, and Children, and hooted at by every one, as the greatest, and most
shameful laughingstock in the World.

Who then can think upon our late most graciour King Charles the Martyr, without
Tears in his Eyes, and contrition in his heart? who can remember his patient
Sufferings without Amazement and mourning? who can look upon his Prophetical,
and Incomparable Book, without Admiration, and Weeping Rejoycings? especially
upon that Text in the 26 Chapter of his book, viz. Vulgar compliance with any
illegal and extravagant ways, like violent motions in nature, soon grows weary
of it self, and ends in a refractory sullenness: Peoples rebounds, are often in
their faces, who first put them upon those violent strokes. This needs no
Commentary, for every one knows with what zeal the Rabel of the people did at
first stick to the Traiterous House of Commons in their Grand Rebellion, and
how they are now weary of them, and with refractory sullenness rise up against
them, and are ready to fly in their Faces, who first taught them to Rebel, and
fight against their King. Nay the Apprentices of London, whom formerly these
Rebels made instrumental, to carry on their wicked designs against the King,
are now most vehement against them; For why? a noisome House is most obnoxious
to the nearest Neigbours, and the stinking House of Commons, that sentina
malorum, does most annoy this neighboring City. It is the nature of foxes to
prey furthest from their holes: but these unnatural foxes, in sheeps clothing,
make all their prey, both at home and abroad. All is fish which comes to their
net.

And that these Rebels may still have freedom to persevere in their villainies,
they cry up a Free State, as the best of all Governments, yet (mark the nature
of the beast,) a Free State (say they) is most beneficial for the people, yet
not so free, Brave for thieves, if they might qualify their Judges. But I
think they can scarce pick out men enough in England, to fill up the House, who
will admit of their wicked Qualifications.
but that they may, and will qualify, and engage the persons chosen by the
people, according to their free will and pleasure. So that the peoples
Representatives must represent these Traitors, in all their wickedness;
otherwise they shall be no free-Statesmen: for they account that Government
most for the liberty of the people, wherein themselves may have liberty still
to continue in their Treason and Rebellion: and that they call slavery, and
oppression of the people, which would suppress their wicked and infandous
Tyranny. All the reason which they can give against Monarchy, is, because (say
they) many of the people would lose their interests in their new purchased
estates; and we should be turned out of our possessions, and perhaps lose our
lives too. (A good argument indeed, if maintained by the Logic of the sword.)
So thieves and murderers may argue against the Sessions, because then perhaps
they should lose their stolen goods, and be hanged for their murders and
robberies. O abominable, that English men should degenerate into such impious
impudence! for this is the truth of their case, might they but still have the
Kings, and Bishops lands, which they have gotten by their horrible Treason and
Rebellion, and be sure to live secure from the punishment which the Law of the
Land would inflict upon them, they would easily confess (if the Devil have not
made them contradictors of all manner of truth) that Monarchy is the best of
all Governments, especially for the English Nation; where (as one may say) it
grew by nature, until these destroyers of the Laws of God, Nature, and the
Realm, rooted it up; and endeavored to plant their fancied Commonwealth in its
room: which will grow there, when plums grow in the sky, or when rocks grow in
the air, not before; as you may see by the small root it has taken, ever since
the reign of Charles the Martyr. Dig and delve they may, yet they will never
set it in so fast, but that (if the right heir do not, which God grant he soon
may) the wind and ambition of some one of their own sect and faction, will
quickly blow it down: as did Oliver the wicked, etc.

As Monarchy is the best sort of all govetnments, so the Monarchy of England,
To be short (says Comines) in mine opinion, of all the Seigneuries in the
world, that I know, the Realm of England is the Country, where the
Commonwealth is best governed, the people least oppressed, and the fewest
buildings and houses destroyed in Civil war, and always the lot of misfortune
falls upon them that be the Authors of the war.
is the best of all Monarchies; and has in it, the perfection, and all that is
good, either in Aristocracy, Democracy, or Free State. For every one knows,
that Charles the Martyr, though a King, yet always made himself a subject to
his laws; accounting his prerogative safer, being locked up in the custody of
the law, than in the absoluteness of his own will. And what laws of any
Nation in the world, did ever maintain the liberty and freedom of the people,
more than the Kings Laws of England? I may most truly answer, none more, nor
so much: for what greater freedom can the people wish for, than not to have
any laws imposed on them, than what they please and desire? The Kings of
England never make any law, but what the people consent to; the Lords and
Commons have a Negative voice, as well as the King. Although the inferior
Members receive all their authority from the head, yet cannot the head act
without their consent and privity; so neither ^oth the King impose any laws on
his subjects, without their concurrence and approbation. The House of Lords
resembles Aristocracy, and the House of Commons Democracy or a free State, yet
the King (like the Sun which does not diminish its own light by giving light to
others) continues still a royal Monarch and without any Solecism in State, I
may truly say, that the House of Lords did excel Aristocracy, and the House of
Commons Democracy, in preserving the Peoples rights and welfare, because the
necessity of their joining votes each with the other, and both of them with the
King, in making of a Law, did inhibit either of them from having an unlimited
arbitrary power, which either of them without the other would have, and so
enslave the People, as the House of Commons now do, according to their lusts,
having destroyed their Master the King, and the House of Lords their
Moderators. Whilst the King, Lords, and Commons, like the three Graces joined
hand in hand, in passing votes approved by this triple touchstone, then were
our Laws like Gold seven times refined, which made our Nation most glorious
abroad, and to overflow with peace and plenty at home; we were then feared, not
derided, by all foreign Kings and Princes; Religion, not Faction then reigned in
our hearts, and our industry was then to preserve, not to destroy Gods
Sanctuary.

But now since the hand has said to the eye, I have no need of thee, Magnae
discordia pereunt concordiavalent
and the feet to the head I have no need of you, the whole body of our Kingdom
has groaned, and every Member thereof as with a Consumption is wasted and
grieved. The Crown is fallen from our head, and we are become a reproach, and
hissing amongst all Nations. Oh therefore (to redeem our credit, and long lost
happiness) Let us all unanimously agree to be loyal Subjects to Charles our
King, and let all his loyal Subjects pray for, and earnestly desire, his safe
arrival into our England, that we may once more eat the Manna of our old Laws
and Religion, with the sweetness whereof we surfeited, in the reign of Charles
the Martyr. Then shall we beat our Swords into plowshares, and our Spears into
pruning hooks, faction shall not rise up against faction, neither shall we
learn war any more, For if we be willing and obedient we shall eat the good of
the Land, Isa. 1 19. Hor. Concines laetosque dies, and urbis
Publicum ludum, super impetrato
Fortis Augusti reditu, forumque
litibus orbum
Tum meae (si quid loquor audiendum)
Vocis accedet bona pars, and O Sol
Pulcher, O laudande, canam, recepto
Caesare falix.
Tuque dum procedis, Io triumph,
Non semel dicemus, Io triumph,
Civitas omnis dabimusque divis
Thura ben^s
Then shall we sing the public plays,
For his return, and holy days,
For our Prayers heard, and Law's restored,
From Rebels Sword.
Then I (if I may then be heard)
Happy in my regained Lord,
Will join 'ith' close, and O! (I Will say)
O Sunshine day!
The City leading, we will all sing,
Io triumph! and agin,
Io triumph! at each turning,
Incense burning.


Thus when we have received our gracious Sovereign, from his long unnatural
banishment, what then can the Lord do more for us, that he has not done?
Wherefore when he looks that we should bring forth good grapes, let us take
heed that we do not bring forth wild grapes, let us fear God and honor the
King, and meddle not with them that are given to change, as God has commanded
us, for if we refuse and rebel, we shall be devoured with the Sword, for the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and so our last rebellion will be worse for
us then the first.

General Monk has amply repaired his honor which he lost by pulling down the
City Gates and Perculisses, and in stead of proving a Keeper to the Traiterous
Keepers, he has approved himself a glorious D^^ender of our Liberties, for
which Trophies of honor shall be erected to his eternal renown; neither will
our King spare heaping of rewards, upon his so memorable merits, at his return
to his own house, which the General has swept for him, and turned out them who
made it aden of thieves.

On Tuesday the 21. day of February, 1659. (a day which deserves more
solemnization, than Gunpowder Treason day; for then we were delivered from
those who only intended to destroy King and Parliament, but now we are
delivered from those, who actually did destroy both King and Parliament, and so
consequently the whole Kingdom) General Monk (our famous Patron) conducted the
secluded Members to the House of Commons, You may guess with what a
countenance the Rump looked upon them.
where (according to their former agreement with the General) they voted
themselves in a short time to be dissolved, and a free Parliament to be
elected. Now I hope no man will presume to conceive the General so insipid, as
to think there can be a free Parliament, without the King, and House of Lords.
No, it is ridiculous to think so; for a free Parliament without the King, would
be but like salt which has lost his favor, thenceforth good for nothing, but
to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men. Mat. 5.13. It would be but
a Rump fatned, and grow bigger. For we are all sick of the Kings Evil,
therefore nothing but the touch of his Sacred Majesty's hands can cure us. And
I may with confidence, and truth affirm, that every one of that infinite number
of people, which so much rejoiced at the destruction of the Rump, and at the
voice of a free Parliament, would mourn, and cry at their sitting, if they do
not bring with them the good tidings of restoring their King, the hopes whereof
only made them rejoice. And indeed, they would have more cause to bewail a free
Parliaments sitting, without the King, than the sitting of the Rump; for this
we may be sure of, that the King will come in either by fair means, or by soul;
if by soul, that is by war; then the war will be greater with a free
Parliament, (and so consequently more grievous to the people) than with the
Rump; because a free Parliament will have greater force, and power to levy a
war, than the Rump, and so the combustible matter being more, the flame will be
the higher. But it is Atheism, to think that a free Parliament will withstand
the King: therefore I will not taint my Paper with such detestable words.

I let fall a blot of ink, upon Mr. Prynne's Soverain Power of Parliaments and
Kingdoms, a Book which I am sure deserves a greater blurre. But Mr. Prynne
has since repaired his credit, and got the applause of the people, by writing
for the King, and against the Rump, and other sectaries. Therefore to give him
his deserts, there is no man in the Nation, has so much merited as himself, in
pulling down the many Tyrannies over us, since the murder of Charles the
Martyr. He has been our Champion, whose pen has fought against the
scriblings, and actings of the Traitors and Rebels; for which I shall ever love
and honor him, and without doubt, our Gracious King will sufficiently reward
him, if he continues constant in his loyalty; which God grant he may.

And although the Presbyterian held the head of Charles the Martyr to the
block, by his hair, whilst the Independent cut it off; yet now I hope the many
evils which we have sustained by that royal fall, (for which he showed the
first play) will teach the rigid Presbyter moderation; and make him confess
(notwithstanding his violent Covenant against that Apostolical constitution of
Bishops,) that Episcopacy is the best form of Church Government, and the only
way to extirpate and keep down those infinite number of s31y'sects and
factions, which have taken root, and budded, since Episcopacy was rooted up and
blasted. No Bishop, No King, was the Symbol of our Solomon, King James, who I
think was as wise, and as much a Christian, as any of our Lay Elders; therefore
in vain do the Presbytery think of enjoying Monarchy, unless they first
resolve to lay aside all their schismatical Tenets, and stick to Episcopacy:
For (as the same King says) A Scottish Presbitery, and Monarchy, agree as God
and the Devil.

Our Sovereign Charles the Martyr in his sacred writings, has so clearly
approved, and vindicated Episcopacy from the false aspersions of the
Presbiterian faction, and also laid open the absurdities of Presbitery so
fully, that it would be arrogance in me to say any thing after him, and not
only ignorance, but impudence, in any man to look upon his writings, and still
remain a Presbiterian. Therefore O Heavenly Father assuage the pride, and open
the Eyes of these rigid Zelots, that in seeing, they may see, and in hearing,
they may hear, and understand; and not profess themselves wiser than our
Savior, that great Bishop, and his Apostles which were Bishops, and appointed
successive Bishops, as you may read in the Epistles of St* Paul to Timothy and
Titus etc. And the Government of Bishops has been the universal and constant
practice of the Church, so that (as Charles the Martyr writes) ever since the
first age, for 1500 years not one example can be produced of any settled Church,
wherein were many Ministers and Congregations, which had not some Bishop above
them, under whose Jurisdiction and Government they were. Therefore let not the
aspiring, currish Presbiterian (who would pull down a Bishop in every Diocese,
but set up a Pope in every Parish) no longer spet venom against the Reverend
Bishops; And truly I think their grounds are so slender against Episcopacy,
that if the King would but make them Bishops, they would then be as violent for
Episcopacy, as they are now against it: Therefore rest content Presbiter, for
though not thy deserts, yet State Policy, may in time make thee a Bishop.

The Antipodes indeed, viz. the Long called Parliament, who acted all things
contrary to all Law and Religion, voted that Bishops should never more vote as
Peers in Parliament; But why? was it not because the Religious Bishops should
not withstand their Irreligious and Blasphemous proceedings, in Murdering the
King, Destroying the Church, and all our Laws and Religion with them? Surely no
man can deny but that was the only reason. Que enim est respublica ubi
Ecclesiastici primum non habeant locum in Comitiis, and publicis de salute
Reipub: Deliberationibus? For which is that Commonwealth, where the
Ecclesiastical persons had not the first place in all meetings, and public
consultations, about the Welfare of the Commonwealth? Surely none but the
Utopian Commonwealth of these Rebels; For it is the practice of all Nations,
nay the Rebels themselves, who voted it unlawful for Bishops, and other grave
Prelates of the Church, to meddle the least in Civil Affairs, could approve it
in their new inspired Prophets, whom they admitted to have the chiefest voice
in their meetings, and consultations, concerning War or Peace. Pope John in
his Chair, never thought himself so bigg, as a Cymical Presbiter amongst his
Lay Elders, or as an Independent in a Committee of Tryers, etc. Neither did
Pope Joan in her State, ever think so well of her self, as a Sanctified
Presbiterians Wife, dressed up in her best Attire. The Lords Prayer, and the
Common Prayer, is held profane by these Saints because Christ (not they)
taught and commanded us when we pray, to pray thus, etc. And because the Common
Prayer is for the most part Texts of Scripture, which learneth us to pray for
Kings and Bishops, more than for their Presbiterian faction; The Reverend
Bishops forsooth must have no voice in Parliament, that Taylers, Tinkers, and
Cobblers, might have a full cry in every Pulpit; The Clergy must not meddle with
Civil Affairs, but every Tradesman, nay those who were scarce their
Crafts-master in their own Trade, might handle Spiritual matters as the best
proficients; But from such Sacrilege, and Blasphemy, good Lord deliver us. Let
us therefore pray for the rising of the Son in our Lebanon, whose glorious
Rays of his Sacred Majesty, will soon dispell these foggy vapors of misty
factions. It was the Presbyterians who first Clouded? our Sun already set, And
it is now in their power to drive away this long night of our Afflictions, and
usher in the ^oyes of our hearts, in the youthful morning of the Royal
Progeny, which God of Heaven sanctify them to do, as I make no doubt but he
will, For Vox Populi, vox Dei, and the whole People cry to have it so.

The Presbyterians fought so ^ong for King and Parliament, Episcopacy was a
bulwork against Popery, and other factions, Therefore the Papists and the
Factions did batter down that, to make way for their Sects, which they call
liberty of conscience.
that they destroyed both, and by their Solemn League and Covenant to extirpate
Episcopacy, have fomented Popery, and brought in Sects, Heresies, and Schisms,
which are ten times worse.

Therefore let the Cries of thy People come unto thee O God, and restore our
Gracious King Charles the second to his Haereditary Crown: Whose Youth thou have
seasoned with the Afflictions of King David, and Clowded the Morning of his,
and our happiness, with the Misery of an Unchristian Exile, which has made
him the fitter for his Throne, and thy Mercy. Restore our Ancient Liturgy, and
our Lords Spiritual and Temporal, to their undoubted Rights and Privileges in
Parliament. Restore the Commons to their right wits, and learn them to know,
that the Hea^ is above, not below the Feet: So the our King only, with the
assent of the Lords and Commons, may make, and giv^ us Laws, as it was in the
beginning; u^ till which time I will pull down my Sai^ and keep close unto the
Haven, being su^ to have nothing else but Tempests, an^ Storms, and no clear
settled weather until then, either in Church or Common wealth, let our
Republicans boast of the^ Free State, or of what else they please for a Bone
out of joint will never b^ settled right, but in its proper place.

FINIS.
Pastor Vitae suae mediocritatem commendans, queritur cum Coeli, caeterarumque
rerum, cursus certo regantur consilio, non tamen res humanas, just ac certe
cedere, cum bonis male sit, malis been.
ILLe ego qui fraenis animum vinclisque domand^
Latius imperito, quam si mihi Paenus uterqu^
Serviat, and Lydiam Phrygiae Libiamque remotis
Gadibus adjungam:
Paupere sub tecto contentus pane secundo,
Mollia securae traduco tempora vitae.
Non opus est nostrum, clangunt ubi classica, ad arma
Currere, and atroci spectacula ponere Marti.
Non tentare levi (vetitum scelus) aequora ligno,
Quid vero vetitum nos culpae fertilis aetas
Fugimus? anne parum dii percivilia bella
Flumina and arva pio procerum tinxisse cruore?
Quin etiam Caroli rubefecit tela nefanda
Dirus post genit is sangnis? proh jura timenda!
Cedit lex armis, discedit laurea terra.
At quo cymba? decet parvis te currere rivis,
Non inter scopulos Tyrrhenum urgere minantes.
Ergo ubi nox ignes contraxit victa silentes,
Et sol regalis placidum caput extulit undis,
Armatus baculo, and saccum post terga ligatus,
Pabula nocturnis grege misso cana pru in is
Carpo, gravis medio, cum splendet Phoebus Olympo,
Gramina and aestivis resonant exusta cicadis.
Ad fluvios, aut alta greges ad stagna reduco,
Expletasque sequens ad frigus amabile cogo:
Qua sucra fagus, amant, and candida populus umbran^
Consociare comis, texuntque umbracula quercus.
Ut juvat argutis quae vellem ludere avenis!
Cespite sub viridi nunc stratum carpere somnos,
Quos mihi furta gemens Progne scelerata mariti
Suadet, and alterno modulamine turba volucrum.
Nunc and in arcanis agnam Pani immolo lucis,
Carmina qui calamis fingens sacra fontis ad ora
Illice sub patula tendit gregis ubera lacte.
Tethios at gremio properat requiescere Titan:
Hesperus atque monet (certum pastoribus astrum)
Ducere oves stabulis pastas numerumque refer,
Ne prato in viridi, segete aut quis capta virenti
Praeda fit agricolis: pecudes aut forte sequutam
Pastor ad insolitum vicinus ovile coegit.
Sic o sic positae spatium breve transigo vitae:
^on sitis imperii nullo satiata cruore
^ccendit fauces, non regni caeca cupido.
^eu quid sancta fides? pietas quid caelica prodest?
^i pede calcantur justi florentque nefasti:
^egia, caelicolae, terrarum sceptra tenetis?
^gnea constanti volvuntur sidera cursu:
^alest is solitum reparat Latonia damnum;
^ynthius atque vias superas agit aetheris alti,
^t nudent sylvam gelidae nunc frigora brumae,
^uae decorata comis nunc fundit montibus umbras.
Nunc fervore coquunt Cererem fera colla leonis.
Deinde suas vires autumno temperat annus.
^rdine cur nullo mortalia pectora vivunt?
An fortuna regit manibus dans munera caecis?
^ira libido bonos vincit, frans regnat in aula,
Tristis iniqua (nefas) Rex.
Virtus fert premiarecti,
^mperat atque O Cromwell.
Lupus sub ovilla pelle Britannis
At Ironice.
Pius heu frustra, rigidos properavit ad Indos.
Non aurum in sacris aut gemmas numina poscunt.
Heu quis primus, adhuc gemmus latuisse volentes,
Pondera and (illecibras vitiorum) protulit auri?
Ante novae insidiae fuerant caedesque nefandae,
Non furor in regem civilis cuderat enses,
Incorrupta fides sacra comitata sorore
Sincero populum regi jungebat amore.
Bellica terribilis, siluerunt classica martis,
Nec cruor effusus crepitantia tinxerat arma.
Aequora non audax invisa subegerat Argo
Quisque Mydas parvo tantum sua littora norat.
Jam maria and tellus humana mente minora:
Saevior aetneis flammis amor ardet habendi.
Si pretium mortis, vel reges morte petuntur:
Talis honor regum? proh jussa tremenda deorum!
Vana ut nunc video, simplex ego justa putabam.
Caesar par caelo civum scelere occidit atro,
Divus at Augustus multorum caede piavit.
Quis divum Caroli dicetur principis ultor:
Ah venias tandem divorum dive precamur,
Nil sine te vires nos vanae possumus armis:
Sit fatis Caroli tibi tradita cura secundi,
Serves in rigidos Anglos te praeside iturum,
Fulmine and insontem patris ulciscare cruorem.
At quo musae Procax? quo tendit rustica musa?
Me decet arbustis humilem tractare myricam,
Non inter cedros petere astra corusca superbos.
Fulgor permultos generosae convocat aulae.
Hic leviore notis populi stupefactus honor,
Monstratus digito claras cupit ire per urbes.
Evehit ad superos pugilem labor Isthmius illum.
Hic complere famen gazis cupit. Indiae and auro,
Nec tamen Europae pars omnis sufficit uni,
Messibus aut Lybicis quicquid terit area fervens:
Crescit edendo fames sic nullus finis edendi.
Hic caudam populo, pellaci, vu lpe benignor
Iactat, ut incautum trahat in sua retia piscem.
Ornatum hunc foliis visent capitolia festis,
Quod retulit praedas contuso victor ab host.
At mihi precunctis ridet pastoria vita:
Rara Iovis patitur convallis tela tonantis,
Praepete sublimes tremuerunt fulmine montes.
Menstrua non epulis mensam vinoque tributa
Implent, non multo stipatur milite somnus.
Rustica securum praebet mihi casa soporem,
Non clamore virum, tremulo aut clangore tubarum
Ruptum, nunc musco circumlita ripa tenaci.
Fraga cibos faciles dumetis vulsa ministrant
Poma and amaena famem relevant (procul ense remoto)
Solicito potant auro gemmaque potentes,
Me delectat aquas manibus captare fluentes.
Sic mea per tacitum fluit aetas, noxia nulli,
Insidias tantum novi struxisse volucri.
Sin populo ignotus, manes mihi notus adibo.
Sol agit ast curru fugienti tempus amicum,
Et polus invitat somnum rediuntibus astris.
LECTOR,
FRronte precor p'acida bullatas accipe nugas,
Quas tenui filo duxi, crassaque minerva,
Et mihi Phoebus eris vires animosque ministrans:
Ut majora canam graviori carmine tandem.
Lingua velut gustu vario, sic gaudet habere
In studiis men's nostra vices: mutabile quid non?
Nec juvat assidue tractare volumina juris,
Sive tua O legis COOK gloria, lausque, paterque.
Sive tua O PLOWDEN, quamvis mihi magna v^ dent^
Sed libet ad doctas animum convertere musas.
Dumque alii ^ugis transmittere tempora gaudent,
Atque diem BACCHO, vel pictis perdere chartis
Dexter APOLLO mihi (ejus perculsus amore
Sacrafero) Aonia lymphas de front propinat.
depiction of shepherd with sheep.

The Shepherd commending the meanness of his life complains, that since the
Heavens and all things else are Governed by a certain rule of Providence, yet
that humane affairs go not on in so settled a course, because Good men go
backward, and Vice only is rewarded.
I am the Man that curbing my desires,
And checking passions, which my mind requires,
Command more largely and more freely sway,
A Scepter, than if Carthage did obey,
Or I joined Lydia to the Phrygian shore,
And that to the Indies, hardly known before.
Under a little roof with household bread,
Securely I a life contented lead,
I care not to approach when Trumpets sound,
Calling to arms, on rigid Mars his ground.
His Plays to me are misery and woe.
Nor dare I on the rugged Ocean go,
In Ships; (a thing forbid) but Ah! our times
Do run more fircely to forbidden crimes:
Is It nothing think you, thus to stayn the flood,
And fields, through civil War, with noble blood?
But you must add the sacred blood of Kings?
Fatal to after ages: hoydagings!
Of Law, dread Law! which yielding now gives place,
To arms, and Virtue meets with foul disgrace.
But whither now my Boat? you must contain
Your self in Rivers, not run to the Main,
Where threatening Rooks with their obscured head
Swallow you up, when danger least you dread,
When therfote night is vanished, and the day
Appears, inlighten'd with the glorious ray
Of regal Sol, armed with my Sheep-herds crook,
With Bag and Bottle hanging by, I look
My Sheep, and to the Fields, whose Green is lost
Under the texture of a morning Frost,
I drive them: when the Sun advanced more high,
In his Diurnal course through the arched sky,
Makes Grass-hoppers to sing, in the parched grass.
Then to the Rivers or deep lakes I pass,
Driving my Flocks to water, which I lead
Panting through heat, thence to the loved shade.
Where the tall Beech and thicker leaved Oaks
Clashing their friendly arms with mutual strokes
Make cooler coverts, under which Lambs please
To eat; to sport, to play, and take their ease,
How it delights now on my Pipes to play!
Anon my body on the grass to lay,
Seeking to take a nap, while in her song,
Pr^^ne bewailing her so grievous wrong
In mournful notes, and all the woody Qui^re,
With warbling strayns, would perfect my desire.
Then, duskish when it grows, I quick arise,
And give to Pan a Lamb in sacrifice,
Who taught me sacred rimes which while I sing,
And lead my Sheep unto the Crystal spring,
Their Dugs grow full of milk; but now the Sun
Ready to set, the evening Star is come,
Lo you, (to Shepherds so well known) whose sight
Bids us to fold our Flocks and count them right,
Lest some perchance strayd out into the Plain,
Or broke into the Fields repleat with grayn;
Where being taken they become a prey,
To the rude Clown who makes them soon away
Or else perhaps they wandering to the Sheep
Of some near neigbouring Shepherd, where they keep
Among the rest, till now through custom bold,
They Are driven to some strange and unknown fold.
Thus, thus I spend my life, and in content
Retired from the world my days are spent:
I thirst not after Rule, nor do I swell
With lusting after Kingdoms, I can tell
That such ambition's void of all that is good
Stand out for naught, but gorge themselves with blood
Ah! who will Faith or Piety approve,
If good men be condemned, and such as love
Mischief, and Vices, be the only men
Set by and raised by Fortune from the den
Of unknown Stocks?
Ye Guardian Angels of this once blessed Land
Have you still for our good the same command?
It Is true the glistring Stars and heavenly trayn
Do still in one continued course remayn
The Moon does still increase and wax and wane,
The Sun keeps on his yearly course whereby
The Winter frosts denude the Tree's grown dry;
Which being lately beautified with green,
Yielded a shade most pleasant to be seen,
The Summers heat ripens the corn, and then
It Is heat by Autumn is allayed again.
But wretched man lives without rule or square,
Without proportion all his actions are;
Is Fortune regent that does blinded go,
And with unequal hands her gifts bestow?
Power acts by will, and will without restraint
Does what ambition teaches, and the Saint
Is banished from the Court: Oh horrid times!
When The King. O. Cromwell. etc.
Virtue bears the punishment of Crimes:
And Wolves pretending harmlesnesse bear sway.
Forcing the Britains blindly to obey;
But pious Ah in vain for Gold they have
To the Indies: True Religion is not placed
In Wealth or Fortune (surely Heaven denies
Goodness to bad, though prosperous treacheries.)
Who were the first that brought their private wealth
For public Treasure, and as 'twere by stealth
Made that the lure to sin? Who first found Gold?
And Pearls? not willing to be known from Mould.
Before that time, no jealousies and fears,
No daily Plots appeared, no widows tears,
Were seen for staughter'd Husbands, no mad rage
Of civil war corrupted had the age.
No Sword was sharpened yet against its King,
But uncorrupted Faith did duly bring
The People to the Prince with loving zeal
(Blessed Omens of a happy Commonweal)
The warlike Trumpet was not yet, no blood,
The Wearer, or his Arms had yet embrew'd
The Sea was rugged, free the shore,
All were contented with a little store
They did possess: the greatest of their boast
Was to have seen and known their proper coast:
But now both Sea and Land are grown too small
To feed our base ambitious minds withal
Desire to have and get burns now more fierce
Then Aetnae's flames, (renowned by Virgils verse)
Stands ought in the way? death shall remove the stock
We can bring Kings themselves unto the block
If such may be their fate? O dearest God,
Ironice.
How dreadful are thy Laws! how sharp thy rod!
Alas! fool that I was! I once had thought
That just, which now I see is vain and naught.
Caesar though often forewarned at last was slain
By his own Subjects, a rebellious trayn.
But great Augustus on the factious head
Of most, revenged Caesar murdered.
But Ah! for Martyred Charles what man or State
Will vengeance seek before it be too late?
O come Great God, we pray thee at the length,
For without thee, vain is our help or strength.
Let Charles the second in thy care be chief,
Guard him, and give to his Affairs relief;
Preserve him safe, and when he will demand
His right from English Rebels, guide his hand,
Make them to know that thou do Rule on high,
Strike them with Lightning from the thundering Sky.
Revenge his Fathers guiltless death on them,
While there remains or Root, or Branch, or Stem.
But whether now my Muse, where will thou crowd?
Among the Shrubs it fits me best to shroud:
And not to climb the Cedar proud and tall,
Lest while I seek to rise, I climb to fall,
Honor or Hopes calls most men to the Court,
Where one being wrought on by the great resort,
Is straightway struck, and shortly hopes to be
Seen in the City in full Majesty.
Another with much labor, toil, and pain,
Would fain climb high, but all his labor's vain.
This courts Gemmes and Gold, nor th'Indians can,
Nor Europe sat the hunger of this man,
Nor fertile Lybi^s plentifullest store,
But as he gets, so still he covers more.
Another to the people shows his tail;
Boasts his descent, that so he may prevayl,
To draw the Fish into his Net: and there
Another for his valor does appear,
And in the Public place himself presents,
Spoils of his Foes, his new got Ornaments.
A rustic shepherds life does laugh on me
More sweet, than all the lives that be.
I, in my meaner way, great things deride:
For why, I know the vales have seldom tried
The force of thundering Jove, when mountains high
Have trembled at his threatening Majesty.
The meat and drink purchas't by me, is not
Bought with the treasure of much goods ill got,
My sleep's unguarded, I fear not to dye,
But in my little cot securely lie:
Not troubled with the noise of men, or drums,
No trumpet there or horseman ever comes.
Often when I rife, I sit a little while
Upon my fragrant bed of Camomile;
The Strawberries that in the thickets thrive,
My faintest hunger serve away to drive:
And pleasant apples (as my Grandsire first)
So do they serve to quench my greatest thirst:
While Great ones drink in gold, poison and blood,
I drink clear water out of wholesome wood.
Thus do. I pass my time, harmless to all
But birds, for whom I make some new pit-fall.
Thus stranger to the world, yet to my self
Known, shall I dye, and leave this worldly pelf.
But, Sol withdrawing, the approaching night
And Stars appearing, do to sleep invite.
READER,
ACcept these lines, which I have plainly writ
Though not adorned with curious Art or wit
And thou shall be my Patron, at whose beck
My Muse shall hoist her sails, or give them check
So may I chance hereafter to relate
Some things more solid, and of greater weight.
And as our Palat's pleased with various fare,
So is our mind with studies choice and rare:
All things have changes: even the Law it self
May lie and gather cob-webs on the shelf,
Though they be thine (grave Cook) who did revise
And mend the same, or Plowden grave and wise:
But I love various learning, and so do
Make it my study, and my pastime too:
And thus while others play at Cards, or Drink
Away their time, I on Apollo think,
And pray his favor, that he will admit
Me from the Muses fount to sip some wit.
1659. Yours in all officiousness and Love most obliged

FINIS.

