The Fruits of UNRIGHTEOUSNES AND INJUSTICE. Brought forth by John Bulkley, and
Thomas Bowrman, and the rest of the Rulers in Hampshire, against the innocent
people of God called QUAKERS. Who in words and Writings have often declared
their unjust ^^ff ^ings; As also at two Sessions, and two General Affizes
holden at Winchester, requiring Justice and Equiry, and their Right and Liberty
in the Nation; of the which being still most unjustly deprived, it is now
publicly declared, that they and others seeing their deeds of darkness
brought to light, may be warned, and learn to do Justice, and relieve the
OPPRESSED. Also the sounding voice of the dread of Gods mighty power to all the
Judges and Rulers of the Earth, who rise up against the L A M B, and to all the
Host of the powers of Darkness who fight against God. By the Servants of
Christ who suffers for his Truth, in the common Gaol and House of Correction at
Winchester, called

Humphrey Smith. Anthony Melledg. George Henderson. James Potter. Will: Baily.
Daniel Baker. John Day. Winifred Newman.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1658.

His in plain and sober words, would I have the Reader to understand, that what
is hereafter written, is not published for the denial of any righteous
government or Governors, nor in contempt of any that rules for God, neither
yet in envy toward the person of any man, but that the wickedness, in them
called Justices and Rulers, and the oppression which is daily brought forth, in
them who are set to do justice, might appear; and more especially some of them
in Hampshire, who have oppressed the just and let the guilty go free, therefore
it is both meet and right and faithfulness toward God, and plainness and love
toward the souls of them, who have combined together against the innocent, to
declare openly against that evil principle in them, which moved in their dark
minds in secret, whereby the works of darkness, has been brought forth, into
public view, which will now turn back upon that, which is head in them, for a
perpetual shame.

And it is but right and reasonable, that what oppressions by them is laid upon
us who daily suffer, the inhumane crulties of unreasonable men, in our own
Nation should be written and recorded, or at least wise part of it, in plain
and simple words, as was also the sufferings both of the Prophets and Apostles,
and likewise that was written, which the Martyrs suffered, by the Bishops,
ungodly Rulers and Popish Tyrants, whose unrighteous Laws, Edicts and Decrees
they could not obey, and that which is unrighteous is also now by us denied,
though it be a Law, or a decree which is unjust, proceeding from the Priests,
the unclean seed of the Bishops, and ungodly Rulers, the crooked seed of all
the former persecuters, by which Priests and Rulers, we have suffered so much
already in England, that it is very like before they have filled up their
measure of blood thirsty Practices, and but part thereof gathered up, and
recorded, that it will exceed (in the manner and cruelty of it) all the
persecution that yet has been at any time, in so few years, considering the
number, harmlesness and innocence of them who suffer, with the manner thereof,
and the long imprisonments.

And secondly the small causes or accusations which the Persecutors have
against them, as wearing their hats, or traveling in the high way, or
reproving sin in the gate, market place, Idols Temple, or Steeple-house, which
was the practice of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, which is even a
shame unto Rulers, to lay snares for, and seek to entrap a harmless people
about such things.

And thirdly considering there unreasonableness therein, by inflicting such
great punishments, large sums of money, and long imprisonments, even without
limit, until their wills are satisfied, only for such small things, as they
call contempt, or transgression of their Law, which they made to guard the
unclean Priests, and sometimes without any cause or any thing at all, to cover
their cruelty, but only because we are called Quakers.

And fourthly it may appear that these Persecutors, have already exceeded many,
in that they Persecute us for practicing that which they themselves profess,
and practice not, and for living in that which they hold in unrighteousness,
Romans 1: 18. Which is the Truth of God declared in Scripture, and in that they
persecute us, for doing that which they say and do not, and for being faithful
to that, of which even the Priests themselves have long talked, and wear wont
to bind people by promise, that they should forsake the Devil and all his
works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful lusts of
the flesh (then must they needs forsake all sin) and to believe the Christian
Faith (and ^respects no man's person) and to do Gods holy will (and that is man's
sanctification) and commandments, (and that is written in the heart) and to
walk in the same all the days of their life (then must they needs walk with
God and be perfect) and be in this World as he is, 1 John 4. 17. the which things
by the powerful opperation of the immortal word in us, are brought in our
measures to do, practice, and live in and therefore even because we do that,
which the blind Priests did once teach (and now deny;) Are we now persecuted,
and openly reviled, by those coveteous Pharisaical Priests, who say and unsay,
and say and do not, and preach up a thing one year, and preach it down another,
and are of them that Christ cried w^ against, Math. 23. and herein does their
blindness, and cruelty, and the Magistrates persecution, exceed many in former
ages.

And also in that we having the Scriptures (which they call their Rule) as a
cloud of witnesses for us, but against them, and by the power of the Spirit
which gave forth the Scriptures, are we ready both public and private, to
prove our doctrine, faith, principles and practices, to be according to plain
Scripture, but the Prophets and Apostles of Christ, had not a Scripture to
prove many things which they did and said, And if this generation, do exceed
those that persecuted them, in persecuting us, who have the Scriptures, what
then, would this generation have done to the Prophets, if they had been in
there days, who had not the Scriptures? all which being considered, and many
things more, which might be mentioned, whereby it may appear, that these
persecuting Priests and Rulers, have already exceeded all that went before them.

Again, the Reader may consider, that the members of Christ, are not of the
World, but are hated and persecuted by the World, and by our sufferings, and
what is after written, it may appear, that we are not of the World, but hated,
reviled and oppressed by the World, and by all Sects and Opinions, and all
sorts of People in the World, out of which we are called, by him who was
before the World, whose day Abraham saw, and by his Spirit are we brought to be
of Abraham's seed, who wandered up and down, and had no certain dwelling place
and were persecuted, afflicted, tormented, sometimes not expecting deliverance,
Heb. 11. But following him, who laid down his life, and gave it a Ransom for
many, and off red up his soul, and was made perfect, through sufferings, and he
is a perfect example unto us who are called by his grace, and have believed in
his name, to whom by the Spirit of the Father, we have been drawn, and his love
in our hearts constrayneth us to follow him, through great tribulations, though
he had not where on to lay his head, Neither are we ashamed to confess him
before men, who by the Priests, Rulers and People, was esteemed a Deceiver, a
Transgressor of the Law, and a Blasphemer, and went about to kill him, because
he said God was his Father, unto them who said God was their Father, and
therefore crucified him for making himself the Son of God, and yet they said
God was their Father, and Abraham was there Father, and yet did they not do the
works of Abraham, but said, he had a devil who did the works of God the Father,
which they themselves could not do, whom afterward they did not one'y seek to
kill, but Lazarus also; Least all the world should follow him, who is the light
of the World, in whom there is no sin, and in whose mouth there is found no
guile, who was led as a Lamb dumb, and by the Priests, Rulers and Professors,
was crucified, who said, I am the Light, by whom the world was made, who is the
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, and the Light of the Lamb which
lights every man the comes into the world, is by the Priests, and Rulers
denied, and in them all lies slain, for in Sodom and Egypt our Lord (who is
Light) was (and is) slain, and are not the Priests the Sodomites, being found
in pride, idleness and fullness of bread, who can deny it, being they deny and
crucify him, who is the Light, and have many poor in their Parishes in want of
bread? And are not the persecuting Rulers the Egyptians, oppressing the Israel
of God, saving to them, ye are idle, ye are idle, and keep poor people in
slavery to their corrupt wills, and is it not so? do not rich men oppress you
and draw you before the judgment Seats, and is not the name of God, who is
Light, blasphemed by them that do, so? read and see whether the richmen who
cause to be drawn before the judgment Seat, be not Blasphemers, James 2. 6, 7.
And do not they openly blaspheme his name who is the Light? and are not the
mouths of Priests, Rulers and People, filled with blasphemy against him that is
the Light? Revel. 2. 9. and 13. 6. And be not they Blaspemers who deny him that
makes an end of sin, and hale them out of their Synagogues, and before Rulers,
and their judgment Seats, who profess his name? John 16. 2. For in spiritual
Sodom and Egypt, he is slain, who is our Lord, even Christ the Light, whose
grave is with the rich, and in the wicked is he buried, whose Light in the
World reproves the World of sin, and begins to preach repentance to them that
are in it, and teaches the way of God perfectly, not respecting the persons of
men, but shows all things plainly unto them that keep his sayings, who said
believe in the Light and learn of me, which Light is in the heart, the which
the Priests and Rulers with one consent do strive against in themselves, and
with much force and fury, seek to stop the shining forth of it in others, and
so stop that which gives the knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 6. 6. Resisting that
which is holy in them, for that in them is holy, which in secret reproves for
sin, and all that is not holy, the which they still resisting are found such,
who crucify the Son of God a fresh, and put him to open shame, even denying
the very end for which he came, which is to condemn sin in the flesh, and destroy
the works of the Devil, which is sin, and to make an end of sin, and bring in
that righteousness which is everlasting.

And this is he, against whom the Rulers with the Hireling Priests, take
council together, and against his anointed ones, Psalm. 2, 2. 1 John 2. 20. And
will not have him to reign over them, who saves his people from their sins,
Math. 1. 21. But all these his enemies must be slain before his face, in this
the day of his power, in which he will thresh all these Heathens in his anger
that know not him, (who finisheth transgression) and obey not his Gospel, which
is Gods power, these be will vex in his sore displeasure.

Therefore we unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and write
grievousness, which they have prescribed to turn aside the needy from
judgment, and take away the right from the poor of the people, that Widows may
be their prey; and that they may rob the fatherless; Consider the Rulers that
made unrighteous decrees, wear robbers, men-stealers. 1 Timothy 1. 10. And the
Priests who consented together, were Murderers, Hosea 6. 9. and what will
these do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from
far, to whom will they fly for help? and where will they leave their glory?
Even thus shall it be, with them who are without God in the world, opposing his
Son, and imprisoning his members, they shall bow down under the Prisoners, and
fall under the slain, Esaiah 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.

And this is he, even Christ the Light of the world, against whom the Rulers
and Priests of Hampshire have risen up, many of them, with much rage and fury,
especially John Bulkley, justice Hilsley, (so called^) Thomas Bowrman, and his
Priest Thomkins, who said Christ swore, and Robert Dingly Priest, and Priest
Bental, and Ellis, with others smote with the tongue, who hearing how the rest
of their brethren, in other counties have with stood the way of God, and not
entertained strangers, but evil entreated the Servants of the living God,
therefore did that in them rejoice which is contrary unto God, and John
Bulkley, and especially Hilsley did much glory and vaunt themselves, because of
the cruel tyranny which their brethren (the seed of evil doers) inflicted upon
my body (and others of the friends of Christ) in other counties by
imprisonment, and cruel whipping of the which I am not ashamed, though they
thereby were exalted in that fleshly glory which lusts to envy, and in pride
and arrogance of spirit, from the wrathful nature which rules in them, and
all persecuters, who neither believe in, nor receive him that is the Light, but
rebel against him, and them who preach his Name; for John Bulkley has declared
often, public and private, and also at the general Affizes before all the
people, that he would not that I should come to preach near unto him, and the
she Jailer has often said, that it was because I should not preach, that I was
kept in Prison, and truly I preach none other Savior, but Christ Jesus who
saves from sin, and my words, practices, and sufferings are according to
Scripture, and so John Bulkley was so far from entertaining strangers, Hebr.
13. 2. that he sought by force, cruelty, imprisonning and whipping, to cause me
and others to depart out of his coasts; (but I am near unto him, and my witness
is within his walls) though not a swine or a dog of his, by me did Perish,
whereby he is manifest to be far worse then the Gadereens who came and
beseeched him to go out of their Coasts, who is the Light; and also to be of
them who crucified him that preached repentance; and John Bulkley keeps the
swine alive, within his dwellings wallowing in uncleanes.

And seeing that he, and them before named, and others after mentioned, have
let the power of darkness so blind their minds, and harden their hearts, that
they have not only lifted up their hands, against the innocent, but also
continued their cruelty, and let their hearts increase in hardness, like
Pharaoh, whereby the Servants of God are still retained in cruel bondage and
long inprisonment, from one sessions to another, and from one affizes, to
another, and also kept from that liberty in the Prison, and that Justice, which
wandering persons, and thieves and many transgressors of several sorts have had,
who were committed to the same prison, and house of correction since we, and
also released long before us, and that not withstanding many complaints, and
even as it were cries for Justice and Equity have been laid before them, both
in words and writings, several times, both in private and public, both at
assize and sessions, whereby many of them in the county that should do justice,
have been convinced with the Light in there consciences, (though they strive
against it) that our sufferings have been unjust, and unreasonable, and yet to
keep up their own glory, have not done justice in releasing them, whom they
knew were oppressed, because we could not be subject to their wills.

Wherefore let their glory which is to Perish be defaced, and let their Names
be recorded among the rest of the enemies of the Lamb, and let the ages to come
read them with the Light, to be under the power of darkness, they having been
warned and left without excuse, that both their Actions and our sufferings
might the more plainly appear, and that they and all others who are set to do
justice, might take heed of rashness, in justice and envy, or smiting with the
fist of wickedness, that they might come to know something meek, lowly,
upright, just and sober in them, by it to be guided, in the fear of the Lord,
to execute true justice, and to do unto all men as they would be done unto.

Therefore are some few of their unjust actions, and some Copies of our papers
after written, passing by much of what has been already printed, (in a Book
titled the true and everlasting Rule) and citing some few things among many,
which may signify much of their injustice and cruelty, the which that they and
others may turn from, and do that which is just and right, let them feel Gods
witness in them, and read that which follows.

South Haumpton. A Copy of a Mittimus. To the keepers of the common Goal for
this County of Winton, or to his Deputy.
I send you herewithall the bodies of Humphry Smith, of Cowhorn in the County
of Heriford; Anthony Melledge of Lime, in the County of Dorset, and William
Bailey of for that they have been charged before me, with several misdemeanors
by them committed at Poulnar in the Parish of Ringwood, and for that they
refused to find sureties for their appearance at the next general Assizes, so
be held for this County, and in the mean time to be of the good behavior.

These are therefore to require you to receive them, the said Humphry Smith,
Anthony Melledge, and William Bailey, into your custody, them safely keep in
your common Goal, until they shall from thence be delivered by due course of
Law, and hereof fail you not.

Given under my hand and Seal the 27. day of February, 1657. John Bulkley.


William Baylys answer to the Mittimus.
HEre the ground of our commitment to prison was founded upon a lie, and so
from that of the father of lies in John Bulkley, for at the present time, there
was many people who can yet witness, that not one of them in the least, did
accuse or charge me of any evil in the least, nor any one misdemeanor by me
committed, neither was ^ at Poulnar at the time intended, in the mittimus.

W. B.


A Copy of a Letter to John Bulkley.
THis I say before thee, in the presence of the Lord God, who will plead the
cause of the oppressed, and in due time will clear my innocence before thy
eyes, and all the world, and that witness of God, the righteous Judge that is
in thee will make thee know that I now suffer without cause, and whether it be
according to equity and righteous Judgment, to commit a man to prison, or
cause him to suffer, without transgressing any just and righteous Law, I leave
to that of God in thy Conscience to judge, to take up a man who was going in a
journey and in and about honest employment, in the sight of God and man; but if
thou art not caused by that of God in thy Conscience, to free me of my outward
bonds, and innocent sufferings, I am content to lay down my life, for his sake,
who in due time will arise and clear my innocence, in this my faithful
suffering.

Called William Bailey.


John Bulkleys answer.
WIlliam Bailey, I take no delight in your imprisonment, but shall be ready to
take your friend Harris, or any fit persons security for your abode at home,
without wandering abroad as a Teacher, to which you have no warrantable call,
but only to follow your honest and Lawful occasions, which you have a freedom
to do; touching your commitment, your refusal to give a ready and free account
of your place of abode, accompanied with terms of high disrespect, and
contempt to. Authority, brought you under commitment, when others of your
Company carrying themselves civilly, were dismissed, if you belong to God, I
trust in due time he will rescue you from the Spirit of error, you lie under,
to which shall be contributed my prayers, and Christian endeavors.

Yours John Bulkley.


A Reply.
THou say I have a freedom to follow my Lawful occasions, the which I was
traveling about, and had continued in, if thou had not sent me to prison, and
called it wandering abrad, and keept me in prison, from my Lawful occasions,
which are abroad, unless I will give security for my abode at home, from whence I
came but the day before to the Parish where I was born, out of which Parish,
thou sentest me to prison, with others as a wanderer; and now thou would
have me give security to stay at home, and so to stay from the Parish in which
I was born; and I did give thee an account, that I was born in that Parish, and
so thou can not cover thy self, with saying, that I refused to give thee an
accu^^, and then thou mentions terms of high disrespect, brought me under
commitment, and in the mittimus thou said it was for several misdemeanors done
at Poulnar, though both are false, and then wherein art thou to be respected?
and then to cover thy own respecting of persons, thou said others carrying
themselves civilly were dismissed, which others were John Fry and William Fry
who may be men of hundreds a year who with us, did not respect thy person
though thou aidest respect theirs, and said to John Fry, thou would show him
all the civil respect as may be, and then though thou say, I lie under a
spirit of error, yet thou writ yours John Bulkley, which if true, then thou art
his that is in error; but being not true, it turns back upon thee, and as for
thy prayers, I say as he did whose Eyes Christ opened, to see beyond all the
Hypocrites, who cast out him, who said we know that God hears not sinners.

W. B.


It may be observed that William Bailey was born in the Parish that John Bulkley
dwells, and sent him to prison from, whereby his folly and madness to all men
may appear, and that he requires security of him to stay from that Parish where
he was born, and several people at the same time acquainted him that he was
born there; wherefore J. B. was ashamed to write the Parish name in the
Mittimus, but left it with a blank, as may be seen.

And in the Mittimus mentions his commiting to be for several misdemeanors, and
in his next paper he says it was for refusing to give a ready account of his
place of abode, with terms of high disrespect, and at the assizes, he said it
was because he would not tell his name; and the fourth time he said it was
because he would not speak, that he sent him to prison, (which was all far from
Truth) and if he did not speak, how is it that he gave terms of high
disrespect? may not all people see the madness and folly of John Bulkley, who
was somewhat offended, because it was told him (though not by William Bailey)
that he was a silly man when he began this blind persecution, with unfound
words and actions? the which if his words, writings, and unjust actions, has
not already made manifest, it may farther appear, when his inside is farther
discovered.

A Copy of a Letter to John Bulkley.
WHat can thou have more then our lives? having first deprived us of our
right and liberty in the Nation, and taken men up from their Lawful business,
which they were going upon, for the maintenance of them and their families, and
send them to prison without the least ground of offense, according to Law, or
any Law transgressed, and in prison keep them, until their bodies had suffered
so much (in a little time) that thou thy self took notice, that their bodies
were altered, and countenances changed, and then thou promised to speak to the
judge for them, who did not seek it of thee, but gave up their bodies as a
living sacrifice, and then in stead of speaking to the Judge, thou did vent
forth what thou could against them, and that which was false to (at the
assize) whereby now they who (are incent) are cast into Bridewel, and liable to
whipping, blows, nakedness, lowsiness, and the want of all necessaries, and
what ever may be inflicted upon our weak bodies, by most unreasonable and
ungodly men, who before we were thus committed to their power, did inflict so
much upon us that we were sometimes hardly able to bear it, as thy own man was
something sensible of, and the Light of Christ in thy own conscience will let
thee see the same, though we were not apt to complain, but leave it to the
Lord, who will plead our cause, and clear our innocence in the day of his power.

And this would I lay before thine eyes, that thou may be left without excuse,
that William Bailey having had an ague long, and not forth of the town (he dwelt
in) a long time, and now hardly able to go, though with us about his Lawful
occations, and since he came to prison taken much cold, with what was before,
and if he or either of us perish under thy cruelty will not his blood be
required at thy hand, in the day when the woe will come upon all them, that
offend the innocent Lambs of Jesus Christ? and what is it now, that thou seeks
after, but only our lives, or imprisonment, until death? being thou have got
an order, to keep us in Bridewel until we promise to go (or stay at) home, thou
knowing from us, that we cannot make that promise, and if thou would make
men's own houses their Prisons, by confining them thereunto, and not go forth
upon their occasions, then should we lose that right and liberty which we long
fought for.

Therefore consider thy actions, and bring not innocent blood upon thy head,
for by the zealous professors did Christ suffer, and sufferings is our portion,
but woe to them by whom the offense comes, for the Lord God of life and power,
will plead our cause, and a witness we have for us, in thy own Conscience,
which when thou art alone will plead our innocence and in secret reprove thee
for having a hand against the members of Christ, of the which we are, who now
suffer under thy will, though not by the transgression of any Law of England,
in the which we are free born, and known by the Names of

H.S. A.M. W.B.


A Copy of John Bulkleys Letter to the (woman) Jailer.
Mrs. Hobs.
I Am informed that the three Quakers, are often punished by whipping, which
though I suppose it done in obedience to the Judges last order, whereof I am
ignorant, being then absent from the bench, or else that you would not do it,
yet in regard of their weak and sickly condition, as I am informed, I desire
you to forbear any farther corporal correction, and to afford them convenient
accommodation, till the approaching sessions, when perhaps they may satisfy the
bench, that they will return home* and forbear rambling abroad; this from your
Friend

John Bulkley.
March the 26. 1658

We having made it appear that we are no wanderers, thy own hand writing will
stand a witness against thy self, and for the innocence of our suffering, under
thy corrupt will, who having no evil to charge us with, do keep our weak
bodies under affliction; until we give security or promise to stay at home, and
we do not read of any such blind persecutors as thee in all the Scriptures and
here all people may see the fruits of thy wickedness, who have caused the
harmles Lambs of Christ to be so afflicted, being sick and in prison, and the
hypocrite might well be afraid, least we should be persecuted to death, and
our innocent blood come upon his head, but though thy heart was somewhat judged
at the time, when thou write thy Letter to that unclean beastly Woman thou
calls Mrs. Hobs^ yet soon after thy heart was hardened again like Pharaoh.

At the Sessions following, John Bulkley sent his Clark to us, to see if we
would promise to go home, and so to release us; if we could but only have
spoken some such words to satisfy their wills, the which we durst not do; And
therefore being retained in Prison, we writ to them concerning such a promise,
as follows.

WE are not only freeborn of England, but we have also purchased our freedom
in the Nation, and the continuation thereof with many years hard service, the
loss of the lives of many hundreds, the spoiling of much goods, and the
shedding of much blood in the late war, by which at last the Lord overturned
them, who then sought to enslave our persons, and infringe our liberty in the
Nation, in the which liberty now, we do expect to worship God in spirit, and in
truth, according to the Scriptures, and to speak the word of the Lord as any
one of his servants is moved by his spirit; and we also expect liberty to
follow our employments, which are honest in the fight of God, and all men that
fear his Name, and the Magistrate to be a praise unto such, and by the wholesome
Laws of the Nation, us herein to defend; England being as an English man's
house, or home; and wherein any of us are deprived of these things, we are
deprived of our Rights, and infringed of our Liberties in the Nation; the which
done, and continued, will be an evil example unto other Nations, amongst whom
also sometimes I had, and have business, I having been much at Sea, for almost
twenty years, and have some occasions at, and beyond Sea at this present; and I
have also several lawful occasions in diverse parts of the Land; about which I
now traveling, was taken up, and sent to Prison, and my horse lay at charge by
me, my goods which I had with me being sent up to London, whether I should also
go, to make sale of it, or pass my self with it; and more over Sea, some such
business at Sea and Land, being my present employment, for the maintenance of
my self and family, all which I am now deprived of, and kept in Bridewell,
because I cannot promise to go home, and so leave my employment and business
undone, which is the way to ruinate men and their families.

And as for William Baily, he was traveling but to Southhampton, upon several
lawful occasions, but before he came there, was taken up with me, and brought
to a Prison which is further off his home then he intended to go, and in it
kept from his home many weeks longer then he did intend to stay, and there yet
kept from his business, because he cannot make a promise to go home, and is
not this the way to make us servants and slaves to men's wills?

And as for Humphrey Smith, though his Wife came (to the Sessions) many miles
from her habitation, and brought two men and a horse for her Husband to ride
away with her, yet is he also kept in prison, because he cannot promise to go
home; and which of you is it that can promise what to do on the morrow?

Therefore out of all these promises, we stand in submission to the will of the
Lord, Knowing that they who will live godly must sufler persecution: And seeing
we have broke no Law, nor intend any evil against any man or woman, but abide
in all watchfulness, to keep a conscience void of offense toward God and man,
etc.

Anthony Mellidge.

This Paper being little regarded by them that are set to do Justice, for they
still kept us in prison, because we durst not make a promise, which is more then
they themselves can well do, if they stood in the fear of God, as may appear by
him who was called Justice Cobb, who sat as Judge at the Sessions, whose heart
was then and there, and afterward hardened against us like Pharaoh, refusing to
let us go; but suddenly in a moment, not long after, the Lord cut him off, and
then what promise could he himself perform? Oh! that this might be a warning
to all oppressing Rulers who are as grass.

A Copy of another Paper.
You who are set to do Justice, and to be Ministers of known Laws, and are to
relieve the oppressed, and do that which is just in the sight of God, and all
men that fear his name, and should be a terror to such as do evil, and a
praise to such as do well, which is according to that of God in all
consciences.
THis we say unto you, that since we have been taken from our Callings and
Employments, and imprisoned, and also caused to be kept in outward bonds by
some of you; we have seen such as have been accused of diverse manners of Theft,
Witchcraft, and Murder, receive their sentence, or punishment according to
your Law, or otherwise quit, released, and freed out of outward bonds.

And we have seen a man whom we have known to be an idle person, and a
drunkard, and so a transgressor of the Law, committed to the house of
Correction for wandering or idleness, and received his punishment, and released.
Likewise a Tinker committed to the house of Correction, received his
punishment, and released. Also two men and a boy that came out of Ireland, who
appeared to be wanderers, and suspective persons, who said they had no money,
and were transgressors also of the Law by fighting, if they were not Papists,
and these also (as the other) were committed since we, and released in short
time, though we still kept prisoners.

And this also we say unto you; that if we have broken, or transgressed any
Law, or if any evil is, or can be proved against us, then our bodies are
ready, and we are willing to suffer the punishment according to the Law, for
any such offense if charged upon us, that the Law being satisfied, we might
have our liberty again (as others) to travel about our lawful occasions.

And this would we know of you: First, by what Law of God or man, we are herein
deprived of that right and liberty which Thieves, Murderers, Witches,
Wanderers, and other known transgressors have.

Secondly, what Law you have to keep us in the house of Correction, until we
engage or promise to go home. If you have any such law, let us know it, that we
might submit thereunto, for we are ready to submit unto all your Laws, either
actively by obedience thereunto, or passively by suffering under it, for a
testimony against that which is unjust; but where there is no law there is no
transgression.

Thirdly, whether you do intend to keep our bodies in prison until death,
unless we purchase our liberty by speaking words, of promising to go home,
seeing you hear already that we cannot make such promises, knowing no law
requiring us thereunto.

An answer to these things would we willingly receive in writing from some of
you, that both your ground and your end might from you be known, wherefore
we are deprived of our right and liberty in the Nation, and kept in long
imprisonment.

At the Assizes, when the Judge was about to send us away, a Justice (so
called) spoke to him that we might be put in the house of Correction: And the
same day when George and Christopher Darby were examined by the Judge, the
youngest of the Darbies could not then give a ready answer; then one called a
Justice bid him say that he was going into the Country to see friends, and so
joined with a high-vvay Robber, and before all the Court would have taught
him to make lies his refuge, who was afterward (with his brother) condemned
for high way robbing; but being reprieved since, with others, have much abused
us, and so they neither suffer according to your Law, by which they were to
dye, neither yet do they suffer according to the righteous Law of God, which is
to restore four fold. And moreover, they and such as them have liberty to act
even almost all manner of desperate wickedness in the Prison night and day, by
which our souls do suffer, and such as these, one called a Justice spoke as
for, and we who fear the Lord, another called a Justice spoke as against,
whereby we were put into, and kept in the house of Correction, and so cause us
to suffer beyond the extent of any law: And is not this according to them, who
said, and did release Barabbas, and crucify the Just?

Wherefore ye men, mind the witness of God in all your consciences, and come
into his fear, that you may love mercy, do justly, and walk humbly, that the
just in every one of you may have dominion, and then the imprisoned members of
Christ will not need to cry unto you for justice and equity. Your answer to
them you may return, who certainly are the servants of God in outward bonds.
(but the Darbies are since released.)

Now let all peoples mouths be stopped for ever, from saying we that are called
Quakers are not subject to Authority, nor obedient to the Law; for if we for
conscience sake cannot actually be obedient to an unjust Law, yet if passively,
we willingly suffer the punishment, which that Law says is to be inflicted
upon him that does not keep it, then therein is that Law also by us fulfilled,
and has no more power over us, who herein are obedient to Authority, and
submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake: But our souls are subject
to the higher power, which rules over all them who are in the persecuting
powers of darkness, who though they be set to be Ministers of a Law, and
acting without a Law, contrary to the Law, are found themselves transgressors
of the Law, being out of the fear and Law of God, and out of the Law of the
Nation; And so they are far out, and from that of which Authority consistech,
and indeed out of all power both of God and man, in their own wills, ruling
with cruelty over others in the power of Darkness.

We having thus endeavored by using all means, which is just in the sight of
God, for our right and liberty, and having remained close Prisoners many
weeks, without convenient place to work, though we were committed to the
workhouse, we then endeavored to get room and liberty to work with our hands,
and therefore one of us did write unto him, by whom we were unjustly committed,
as follows.

John Bulkley,
THou alone art the cause of my imprisonment almost these nine weeks, in which
I have almost suffered to the death of my body, being also sick when I was
brought to prison among those, in whose company were thou but one night, it
would make thy flesh to tremble, and grieve thy soul (if thou feared God) to
hear and see the filthy conversation of the wicked from day to day, the like
wickedness I do believe was not found in Sodom, nor in the old World whom God
destroyed with an utter overthrow. Oh! consider a little in the fear of the
righteous God, who is the righteous Judge of all mankind, whether thou have
done unto me, as thou would be done unto, who am a sufferer under thy hand of
oppression (for righteousness sake) both in body and soul, being grieved and
vexed with the abominations that I daily hear and see, and the injustice and
unreasonableness of them by whom we suffer, where also we are deprived of all
outward liberty without cause, which in the day of visitation the witness of
God in thee for me shall witness, and this action of thine against the
innocent in that day will be as a millstone about thy neck, and as a fiery
flaming worm to eat thy flesh: Yea, and if thou proceed in the evil that is
in thy hands, and repent not speedily, when thou will think peace to thy self,
then will thy sudden destruction come as in a moment from the Lord God, who is
a swift witness against all iniquity and unrighteousness of men without
respect of persons.

Therefore once more consider, and weigh thy actions in the just balance, even
by the light of Christ in thy conscience, which will let thee see, by what
measure thou metest, it will be measured to thee again. And this is right, and
according as God will judge and reward every man, to which that of God in thy
conscience do witness, though for a time thou may strive to hide and veil
it, for the honor of the worlds sake, and the love of the praise of men; but
what will this avail or profit thee in the day wherein thou will be justly
weighed, and tried, then to be found by the Judge of all the Earth to be a
persecutor of his people, and anointed ones, for whose sake he will rebuke
Kings, and will fight our battles, and plead our cause in righteousness:
Therefore do we stand still in quietness to see his salvation, and a freedom
from the oppression of all wickedness, and wicked men, under whom for a time
the just do suffer. I do not write to thee, as to complain to thee, but am
contented in my sufferings (for my God hears the sighing of his prisoners)
neither do I expect any thing from thee but equity and justice, of which thou
bear the name, but actest not in the lifethereof, so in the day of try all
vvilt be found among the hypocrites, bearing the name of that thou neither art,
nor live in. I must deal plainly with thee, though under thy power I
should suffer death, this I can say, I have no envy to thy person, nor to any
man upon the earth, God is my witness; neither dare I give flattering titles
to any man, for in so doing I should be condemned by the witness of God in my
conscience, whose peace is more gain to me, then all the riches and glory of
this perishing World; but this I lay to thy charge justly (who art out of the
state of Gods elect, to which that of God in thy conscience eternally shall
witness (to wit) my sufferings unjustly by thy means, with the rest of my
dear brethren, whose dear life in innocence is hid from the wise of the world)
in that thou took us who were about honest and lavvfull occasions, and sent
us to prison (who intend no harm to any) and afterward sent me word in
vvriting, that to follovv my lavvfull occasisions I had a freedom, of which
before thou had deprived me; but this will not hide thy deceit and envy
against Gods people. For I was in the Town in which I naturally was born, who
there was neither found acting nor speaking any thing that was unlawful or
dishonest (for such things I hate) but thou acted toward me that which is
dishonest, and unlawful in sending me to prison, without the breach of any
Law; and is this a small thing to send a man from his honest and lawful
employment (by which he has his subsistence) to a wicked and ungodly place, to
be kept Prisoner in the common Gaol, where we are deprived both of our outward
liberty and employment, for the maintenance of our bodies (which by thy means
has greatly suffered) neither do we know of so much liberty as to send for
work to work at my Trade, where it may be had, and sent for to Prison, where I
being kept, and like to remain, am willing to work with my hands, if room and
liberty I might have. Therefore I would know from thee, if thou will send me an
Order in Writing under thy hand, for me to have room and liberty here to work
at my lawful calling, and also that some friend of mine may have liberty to
come in and out with my work, and not be abused; and to this thing I do expect
a speedy answer from thee; for it is unreasonable that I should be kept from my
work, and my work from me, who have done no evil, who am of the world called

From the House of Correction in the common Gaol of Winchester the 3d day of
the 3d month, 1658. William Baily.


William Baily also, having endeavored, though with charge and trouble, to
have Wool bought and made ready, and to have all things needful for him, and
more of us to work at his Trade, and having hereby obtained an Order to the
Jailer, that he might have room and liberty, and things convenient suffered to
be brought in unto him, yet did the Jailer hinder him of having coals, without
which he could not work, and thereby for a time, his work (being in all things
ready) lay still and suffered loss; and so she that should keep idle persons
committed to the House of Correction on work, does neither do that, but also
hinder him from his lawful labor, contrary to her place, and also contrary to
two Justices Orders, and hereby many may be satisfied also concerning things
that false Accusers have cast upon us, called Quakers, that we are idle, or
refuse to work at our lawful Callings, yet to be set on work as idle persons,
and transgressors are, at their wills, or their work belonging to their house
of Correction, we deny for ever.

Here follows a Relation of Daniel Bakers sufferings, lately a Captain in the
Service for Liberty, but by a filthy Priest is now cast into the same Bridewell
with me, whom he came from London to visit (and George Henderson with him) who
has written something of their unjust imprisonment, with his own hand next in
order.

IN the third month, 58. it came into my heart to travel from my Family to
visit the suffering members of Christ in Winchester prison; but when according
to the will of the Lord I came to the Prison door, both I and my friend G. H.
were not only long kept out of the Prison, at the door, but also there much
abused by John Grove a Turn-key, Christopher Darby, and others, and afterward
was I moved to pass into the Ise of Wight, contrary to my own will, and it
came to pass on the 19th, of the same month, the fourth day of the week
(which was set apart (as the hypocrites and profane said) for a day of
public Humiliation) that for my love was I then evil entreated, beaten, and
haled forth of the synagogue, and before a Ruler; but it is no new thing
(especially in these days) for Priests, Rulers, and people (cursed children)
who obey the powers of darkness, to smite the innocent and guiltless with
the fist of wickedness, even upon the days of their Fasts, buffetting and
halling such, whose pure consciences are exercised toward God, out of their
Idols Temples, Synagogues, or Steeple Houses, before Magistrates, and cast them
into prison, where they are thrust into holes and dungeons, even as it has
been fulfilled upon this body of mine, whose blood much has been shed, with
my bones shattered to pieces in the late Wars, for the just right and liberty
of such who fear the Lord God, and of this Commonwealth; but behold O ye
sober-minded ones! how the ravenous Beasts of the field, the enemies of the
most High seek to devour, persecute, destroy, and make a prey upon the servants
of the Lord, who is now arising as a Gyan^ refresht with wine, to confound,
overturn, and dash in pieces as a potters vessel, his enemies, as in the days
of old.

A Copy of a Writing sent to Robert Dingly, Priest of Brixton in the Isle of
Wight.
Robert Dingly,
SEeing there there are many Deceivers in the world, and especially in this
Nation of England, I being one who am a friend to the Truth (and sound
Doctrine) and a lover of peoples souls, even of thine (amongst the rest) who
have been a Teacher of the people many years.

It lies upon me for the Truths sake, to desire thee (if thou be a Minister of
Christ) to appoint a meeting either public or private, but if it be possible
in public, that there it may be truly proved by plain Scripture, (without
adding or diminishing, in the audience of all people) who are the deceivers,
and who are the true Ministers of Christ.

I desire thee to send me thy answer by way of Writing. Brixton, the
nineteenth of the third month, 58. I am thy friend so far as thou obeyest and
love the Truth, Daniel Baker.


My friend George Henderson (who was with me) carried this Writing to the
Priests house, who after some time spoke with him (to wit) Priest Dingly,
who in his envious rage and fury abused him, and our friends with reproachful,
lying, malicious speeches, and refused to write an Answer; only here is what
came from his own mouth, which spoke from the unclean spirit which is head in
him, as does appear, let the honest Reader judge with that of God in his
conscience.

Now before my friend gave this Priest the Letter, he asked his name, saying,
is thy name Robert Dingly? (in such plain true words according to Scripture) he
answered in scorn, saying, thy name? thy name? I thought it was such fools as
thee art, with sundry other vain filthy speeches; I shall take a course with
thee, said he, I shall send thee to prison (mark) G. H. answered, I matter not
thy imprisonment; so the Priest took the Letter, and began to read (mark) and
said, We fools desire thee to give us a meeting. Now these words was not
written in the Paper (as the Reader may see above) but came from the unclean
spirit (head in him) then my friend asked him why he did lie; the Priests
answer was, saying, I know the Devil is in you all. After which saying he fled
away, and would give no further answer, only bid his man put him out of doors,
and bolt the door after him.

I being in the fear of the Lord (in love to the seed of the God of Abraham)
with bowels of compassion was moved to appear at the Steeple house, G. H. went
with me, where I came in amongst the multitude peaceably, and in the dread of
the Lord, and so continued for the space of about half an hour, and then spoke
a few words with tears, the Lord (whom I serve with my spirit) knows my
innocence, that I was free from envy or malice to any one man's person upon the
face of the whole earth; but I was hindered in the work of the Lord, the Priest
immediately called out (being in his Pulpit in Cains nature) saying to the
mult^tude, take him away, take him away, who with violence abused us both,
beating with a great staff, kicking and throwing us down, and haled us forth
of their Synagogue, or Steeple house, and brought us before the Magistrate (so
called) who had so much regard with compulsion, to have his person respected,
and honored, by commanding our hats to be taken off our heads, which was laid
in the dust before us (mark) a true figure where his honor shall be laid (as I
then shevved him) so that even that which would make him truly honorable, was
and is lightly esteemed by him. I could wish that he and all the Magistrates in
England, would lay it to heart to know, that before honor is humility, and
that which is meek is low in the heart, and is the higher power every soul is
to be subject to.

The w^iting (above written) which was sent to Priest Dingly (before I appeared
in the Steeple-house) was read before Tho: ^owrman (called a Justice) his
Priest Tomkins being with him, and wrested the Scripture to prove that Christ
did swear, like a blind blasphemous sottish bruit; Many other persons were
there present at the same time when we were examined, and most unjustly
committed to Prison by the said Thomas Bowrman, who was so deaf and blind, he
could not hear his sottish Priest speak blasphemy, neither see the
transgressor, to lay the sword upon his head within and without; but being
under the power of darkness, the sword was laid upon the innocent both
within and without.

Also he caused three men to svvear against us, contrary to Christ's Doctrine
(who said, swear not at all) and of his Disciples which follovved him in the
life; which taught the same Doctrine, saying, Above all things my brethren
swear not, lest you fall into condemnation. And if Thomas Bowrman; and Priest
Thomkins had been come to Christ the light of the wo^d, [as I questioned which
them when I was falsely accused before him,] and so abide in his Doctrine,
then he nor any such dare not go out of his Doctrine, neither cause others to
transgress. I wish he may find a place of repentance with the rest of his
brethren in the time, before it be too late, left such be then cut down as
fruitless trees which cumbers the ground.

Now I appeal to that of God in all consciences to judge, if so that R. Dingly
had bin a Minister of Christ, and had preached, practiced, and lived in the
life, walking in the doctrine of the light of the Son of God, whether or no it
did not highly concern him, with the spirit of meekness and sound doctrine, in
the audience of all people (as it was desired) to convince the gainsayers [in
such perilous times as these] and whether a Minister of Christ the Light,
would not have greatly rejoiced to have done the will of the Lord in the work
of the Ministry for the truths sake, that the honest simple-hearted might be
edified, and so to know how to beware of woolvish hirelings, such as the holy
Prophets, Christ, his Apostles, Ministers, and Saints did, and do witness
against, as the Scripture of Truth bears testimony, even against them who
seeks their gain from their quarters, eating the fat, drinking the sweet,
clothing with the wool, and feeding themselves (without fear) and not the
flock who are kept ever learning, and not able to come to the knowledge of the
truth, and so destroyed for lack of knowledge, by such greedy dogs which can
never have enough, Isa. 56. The latter end, even such as Robert Dingly is, who
as it does appear manifestly to all that fear the Lord God of Abraham, how that
if he had not been in the same footsteps of the false Prophets and Pharisees in
Cains nature, and also ashamed of his Doctrine, practice, maintenance and
conversation. I know he durst not have been so envious, raging with fury and
madness, running to carnal weapons, to the Magistrate, before whom he, with
the rest of his uncircumcised generation work their lying wonders, to
captivate, prison, and persecute the just, guiltless, and innocent, even unto
death, as many of this ravenous, cursed, rebellious seed of evil doers have
done (and daily do) who rebel against the Light, and with greedinesle are
hastening to fill up their measures of Iniquity in their unclean Tabernacles in
these their days, woe be to them. A terrible and dreadful day of darkness is
hastening over them.

Also I say, let the sober minded consider and observe this with me, its
written, Revel. 2, saying, behold the Devil shall cast some of you (to wit the
Saints) into prison to try you, so that its manifest, the Devil spoke by the
mouth of his unclean Prophet R. D. who said to our friend, I shall take a
course with thee, I shall send thee to Prison; so that from the unclean false
Prophet, the voice went forth, the beast being ready also, to do or execute his
Masters will, (who is the Prince of darkness,) and by his power to uphold the
false Prophet, and said to us whose meat and drink it is to do the will of our
heavenly Father (in our several measures) bearing testimony against the beast
and false Prophet, and all deeds of darkness whatsoever.

I say Thomas Bowrman said to us by the same Spirit (which is head in the
Priest and himself, and threatened to cast into prison, which was also
performed,) you think you have done your duty, I shall do mine, said he, and so
the Devil by his Ministers, (to wit the false Prophet and the beast, who) cast
us into prison, where we found the same unclean spirit, but could not bow to
it, in submitting to extortion, oppression and cruelty, and therefore were cast
into a stinking dungeon among thieves fellons and transgressors, dung, piss,
fleas and lice in abundance, and without straw to lie upon; but the servant is
not greater then his Lord, who had not where on to lay his head, though the
foxes have holes.

And let such who fear the Lord consider, if it be not the unclean spirit of
the Devil which rules in these blind hired Priests, who take council together
in the darkness, with the beast reviling, threatening, preaching against, and
persecuting even unto bonds, and imprisonments, whipping, stocking and stoning,
thrusting into holes and dungeons, the innocent servants of the Lord, whose
pure consciences are exercised toward him, and in love to all people for the
seeds sake for which they suffer all things, and love not their lives unto the
death, who follow the Lamb, the Light of the World, in this mighty day of
battle between the two seeds, and let all such who love Truth, and honestly
desire to come to the knowledge thereof, in the inward parts, (for that which
may be known of God is manifest within, the people may feel alter him and find
him, who saves from sin, and reconciles to God in the Light;) Consider I say
wether ever any of the holy men of God, Christ his Apostles, or Ministers did
persecute, rule, threaten or murder the innocent in them, or cast any into
prison, (as Robert Dingley and Thomas Bowrman has done;) but on the contrary
suffered under such an evil adulterous gainsaying and persecuting generation
(the seed of the Serpent) even as the servants of the most high, his Children
of Light have, and does grievously suffer at this day, for bearing testimony
for the Lord, and against the beast and false Prophet, wicked Rulers, Priests
and People without respect of persons, who with their cruel tyranny and
oppression smite the guiltles with the fist of wickedness to uphold the Devils
dark Dominion, and Babylons Merchants, the unclean Hireling Priests, Sermons
and Prayer-sellers, who (raven like Wolves, and) have wearied the Lord of hosts
with their words, speaking peace to the wicked who put into their mouths, and
such who dare not for Conscience sake, they prepare war in their hearts, and
cast them into prisons where sundry have suffered until death, Read a Book
titled a Record of sufferings for tithes.
a testimony against them for ever, who have robbed, spoyld and made a Prey of
men's goods, so that the Scripture is fulfilled upon their heads which said
Hosea 6. 9. as troops of robbers wait for a man, so a Company of Priests
murder in the way by consent, see Micha 3. 11. Jerem. 23. Ezekiel. 34. Esa. 56.
Math. 23. So that the holy men of God, Christ and his Apostles and Ministers
did witness, and pronounced woes against such, who did profess and preach the
good words, who were strangers, and persecuted the life (from whence the good
word came forth freely) even as Robert Dingley, Thomas Bowrman and the rest of
their generation do, and have done, who walk in the very foot steps of the
Scribes and Pharisees, and of the false Prophets in Cain, Cores and Balaams
way, Cursed Children, that cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Let such who
desire to fear the Lord our God, be faithful to the eternal witness the Light
of Christ in their Consciences, and with a single eye search the Scriptures,
and see if it be not even so. Thus far have I cleard my Conscience, for the
simples sake, as a testimony against the seed of evil doers, by whom I suffer,
with the rest of my Brethren, by them known in that which is hid from the eyes
which are full of Adultery, and cannot cease from sin, and to such my flesh is
known by the name of

Daniel Baker.
Winchester Bridewel this 2. of the 6. Month 58.
BY what was last written it may appear, who was in the Truth, he that was
willing to have all things proved and brought to the Light, in public before
the people, in soberness and plainess, or Priest Dingly, who unto a reasonable
offer, did not give a reasonable, but an unreasonable answer, saying, I shall
send thee to Prison, and then whether he was in the Truth that did cast into
Prison, without any offense, or he that was imprisoned, And moreover the fruits
of their fasts does appear, who live in pride, envy, and coveteousness) in
haling two of the Servants of Christ the same day out of their Synagague and
before a Magistrate, and cast them into prison, and so fulfill the Scripture,
not knowing the Father nor the Son, John 16. 2. 3. and so it is plain, their
days of fasting is for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness, and such God hears not, for they are according to their fathers
of old, Esa. 58.

Again those Priests in the days of the King, did keep days of fasting and
praying for their King, but was not their murder in their hearts, and their
sacrifice like Cains, for did not they stir up the people to rise, and if
possible cut off all them that then sought for Truth and liberty, and do not
the same Priests now, even upon their days of humiliation, stir up the people
against us they then called Round heads, and now called Quakers? if possible to
have us all cut off, from being a people among them, to bear witness against
their tyranny and coveteousness, and John Hodder Priest of Haychurch in
Dorsetshire, (whose most bloody persecution against me and others have exceeded
many;) he said if his Lord Protector would raise an Army to cut off all the
Quakers, he would be the first man that would draw the sword; Oh! when did ever
any man thirst more for blood? and are not the Priests always stiring up
strife, and did not they still pray for the upholding of that which they saw
was going down, and that which indeed the Lord was overturning, look back and
see what an outcry there was amongst them, for their Fathers the Bishops, and
for their King; and see if God did not overturn those that they prayed for, and
set up those that they prayed against as Heretics, and Rebels to their King,
and breakers of their Laws, and see whether they that prayed for the King, and
for the King of Scots, do not now pray for their Protector, [who with others
was instrumental for the overturning of their Bishops, and their King, the hand
of God being then with him;] who now has turned his hand for the Priests, whom
God is against, and has made a Law for them, far exeeding any that was made
for them, by any King or Queen; and therefore now, they boast much of their
Protector, and pray for him, as they did for their King, and he orders them
days to fast and pray with and for him, as their King did, and this is their
Protector, who protecteth them, by whom hundreds of us do suffer, who fought
with him against them, their Bishops and their Kings; but certainly the Lord
God will turn both them and their prayers backward, therefore let the Protector
take heed, how he set these treacherous, changeable, cursed Children, 2 Pet. 2.
14. To pray for him, or with him, in his fasting days, or otherwise, for the
same spirit in them which did pray for their Kings, does now pray for their
Protector, and the Lord is as much and more against them now, then he was in
the days of their Kings, and all that join with them, or upholds them, for he
changes not, though they do; therefore I, who was always and am a friend to the
just liberty of the Nation, do desire all Magistrates to take heed of these
Priests, least they by their fallasies and flatteries, exalt them in that which
God is against, until his wrath break forth against them all together: for
reasonable men may almost see, that they are not like to stand long, there is
such a stir and a cry among them, and so much praying and crying daily for the
upholding of their trade, for such a noise there was, with long and loud
Hypocritical Prayers, a little before, and at the very time that their Bishops
and Kings were overturned for ever, and the Priests or Prophets of Baal, and
the Prophets of the groves, they were many of them, and they also had days set
apart to offer sacrifice, and they prayed long, and cried aloud, but none heard
nor answered, and this was a little before they also were destroyed forever.

But to return to this Priest Dingly in particular, after the Servants of God a
fore named bad been kicked, beaten with a staff, and fists of wickedness, upon
his fasting day, and had caused them to be imprisoned (by the help of Thomas
Bowrman) then from the prison did they write unto him, who was so brutish, like
the Pastors before, Jer. 10. 21. That he would not read the Letter, nor open
it, but in a filthy fottish manner took a payer of tongs, and held it to a
Candle, and burnt it, saying, he would try whether it were bewitched, or the
Devil in it; but he himself is in the witchcraft, not obeying the Truth, as
may easily be proved, Gal 3. And envy which is of the Devil is found in
himself, the which Spirit of the Devil that guided him therein, would also
burn their bodies that sent it, if he had but a Law, and such a power as his
fathers the Bishops had, who burnt the Martyrs; and he also then said, the
Devil is in you; but people may see, there is something of God in us, guiding
us in patience to undergo much sufferings, and all manner of evil, that is
done, or spoken against us, for his names sake who is in us which to us turns
for a testimony, against the world that we are of God, Luke 21. 12. 13. And it
is because of the Spirit of Christ in us, (which testifies against the world,
that we are hated, and that Spirit of Christ in us is, that which Priest Dingly
call eth a Devil, saying, the Devil is in you, but it being Christ in us the
hope of glory, he is an open Blaspemer, and a denyer of Christ, that is come in
the flesh, and so he is an Antichrist; Therefore all are to beware of harkening
to his Doctrine, being found a Blaspemer, though he may speak never so smooth
words, for he is not only full of envy, but also of conveteousness, for he
claimed 3 l. (or less) for tithes of John Days, who desired not his Ministry,
and then instead of less then 3 l. he caused four cows to be taken from him
worth above 12 l. and so he is not only in filthy Lucre (contrary to the
Scripture) whose mouth should be stopped, but also unreasonable therein, to
demand 3 l. of a man that owed him nothing, and then to have above four times
so much as he ask't for, taken from him, Hosea might well number such as he
amongst Robbers and Murtheres, Hosea 6. 9. and this is not all neither, for
after he had caused these 4 cowes to be taken from him, he also caused the man
himself to be cast into prison, because he came into his own Parish
Steeple-house, and spoke some words there, and as for coming into the
Steeple-house, he had as much right as another man of their Parish; and
sometimes the Priests and Rulers would force friends to pay 2s 6d. because they
do not come to their parish steeple-house, and when they do come, they send
them to prison for coming, was ever the like wickedness practiced by any
Priests and Rulers before? And in all these things, Thomas Bowrman was a
Servant to the corrupt coveteous will of this persecuting Priest, for by his
order also or warrant, was John Days cowes taken away, and he himself sent to
prison, where he is now committed to the house of correction.

And moreover R. D. did cause Winifred Newman to be imprisoned for speaking a
few words in his Steeple-house, after he had done, and she was a servant to a
Widow, and the fatherless, and from them the Priest caused her to be taken to
prison, and such as he Isaiah cried against, Isa. 56. 10, 11. for in his days
also widows became their prey, and they robbed the fatherless, Isa. 10. 2.
And what an unreasonable thing was this, to rob the Fatherless and Widow of a
servant, who was daily serviceable unto them; but now they commit iniquity by
their Law, but the Law of God is made for men-stealers, 1 Timothy 1. 10. And T. B.
sent her to Prison also, and so consented with the Thief, Psalm. 50. 18. and was
in all these things a ready servant to this ungodly Priest, whom at present I
leave until the hand of God overturn him, and all the rest, that they may
leave their names for a hissing and a curse, like the Bishops before them, who
were as loath to come down, as the Priests are to follow after.

Here follows something in short of the long unjust imprisonment of James
Pottar, being also a husbandman, taken out of his hohonest employment by the
means of the Priest of the Parish of Baghust, whose name is Edward Bental.

I Who am clear in the fight of God of the breach of any law either of God, or
of the Nation, by which I may justly suffer, or of any evil intent or purpose
against the person of any man or woman whatsoever, but have and do desire to
keep a conscience void of offense toward God and man; as the Lord of life,
whom I serve in my spirit knows; yet was I by order from Richard Kingsmill,
and William Withar, who are set to do justice in the County of Southampton,
taken out of my honest lawful employments, without any examination, not having
that liberty as to appear before them to answer for my self against those
false accusations (which through envy, and from the wickedness of the hearts
of Edward Bentall Priest, and others) was laid to my charge, but was had away
to the common Gaol at Winchester, where I was kept a close Prisoner until the
Affizes following, at which time I was had up to the Bar amongst Thieves and
Murderers: And although nothing of what I was accused, nor any evil was there
proved against me, yet was I by the Order of Judge Nicholas returned back again
to the Gaol, there to be kept a Prisoner, unless I would pay a fine of five
pounds, because I did not put off my hat, according to their Heathenish
custom, which there is no law in the Nation for: And as for the Law of God, he
that respects persons, or prefers him that wears the gay clothing and
gold Ring, before him that is in vile raiment, makes himself a transgressor.

Now thus I declare, that I owe no man any thing but love, yet am I ordered to
continue in Prison (until I pay the said fine of 5 l.) where I have been
already kept before, and since the aforesaid Assize, about 63 weeks amongst
Thieves and Murderers, Drunkards, Swearers, Blasphemers, and almost all manner
of wicked persons; by whose wickedness and ungodly practices my soul has
been daily grieved, and my life often burdened, and pressed down, yea what I
have in this place suffered is not herein to be named; but woe unto them by
whom the occasion comes, by which the just does suffer.

Thus I who am freeborn of the Nation, am not only deprived of my right and
liberty in the Nation (which has been so much contended about, and so much
blood shed for) but also kept in long and cruel bondage (contrary to any Law
either of God or man) by most unjust and unreasonable men, and that not for any
evil, or withholding from any man his right, or the honor that is due to any,
who do honor all men in the Lord, though the worlds honor, with all their
customs, fashions and traditions I deny for ever; but if humility be before
honor, as the Scripture does witness, Prove. 15. 13 and 18, 12. then a proud
man is not to be honored, and he that honoreth the proud (whom the Lord
resists) he honoreth the Devil, who is king over all the children of pride, Job
41. 34. who is their head and rules in them, and so the honor which proud
flesh does love, and lust after, who are angry and seek revenge by casting into
prison, or otherwise persecuting where its not given them, is to be denied by
all them that fear the Lord, and this I know that those that witness the flesh
crucified, with the affections and lusts, they cannot feed nor satisfy the
lusts in others where it rules, by giving them honor according to their
corrupt wills, though they suffer by them, as I do (at this day) under their
merciless cruelty and tyranny.

Oh! how has the Devil blinded the minds of people, who are so foolish, vain,
and corrupt in their carriages one toward another, with bowing, bending,
cringing, putting off hats, with foolish gestures and deceitful words, as Your
humble servant, and such like, being proud, haughty, and high-minded, and will
scoff, and mock, despise one another when they are apart, and seek one
another hurt, when anger arises in them one against another. And at the
Assizes will not Thieves and Murderers put off their hats to the Judge, and
give him the titile of your Honor? and call him their Lord, and down upon
their knees to him, as at the aforesaid Affizes? And wherefore is it? to honor
him, when as perhaps, if so be they had him in another place with opportunity,
they would make him bow to them, and take away his money, if not his life.

What cursed flattery and deceit is used among people who know not God, nor
fear before him? and how is proud flesh bewitched with it? How common is it
for the poor man to stand uncovered to the rich? giving deceitful Titles, as
Your Worship, your Honor, and such like, whereby God is robbed, to whom all
honor, glory, and worship is to be given: and he that is rich and great in the
earth, giving the plain language of Thee and Thou, (and is not here respect of
persons, by which the law of God is transgressed?) And when the poor man is
gone from the rich, he will speak plainly of him, and say he is proud,
covetous, and the like, and this I have often seen and heard, and ask them
wherefore they use such deceit in their carriage toward them? they will many
of them acknowledge and say, they must do it, the great men look for it, and
their causes else they will not hear, nor do any thing for them; and this
deceit and flattery is of the Devil, and so the Devil in them is pleased with
it; but such who cannot bow to his pride, but stand witnesses against it (who
can bow to none but the Lord alone) such he persecutes and casts into prison.

He that boweth to the will of man, to please or have the favor of proud
flesh, he is an idolater, and a transgressor of the Law, which says, Thou
shall not bow down nor worship any, and such bow not to the Son of God, to whom
every knee shall bow; and such who call themselves Christians, and are seeking
their own honor, are hypocrites, mockers, and diffemblers with God, the Son of
God, who came to do the will of his Father, and did the works that none could
do besides, said, I receive not honor from man, John 5. 41. And said to such
who were seeking their own honor, how can ye believe which receive honor one
of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only, John 5. 44. And
so such who are seeking and receiving honor one of another, are not believers,
nor come to the faith, which respects no man's person, and so are Infidels, and
without God in the world. And these are they that would have the servants of
God how down, and become servants to their corrupt wills, who know not God,
neither are of him, but are enemies to him in all their ways, and are of the
generation fo proud Haman, who Mordecai refused to bow unto, although it was
the command of the King; and therefore did Haman build a Gallows fifty cubits
high to hang him thereon, Esther 7. 9. And also did seek to destroy all the
Jews that were in the Kings Provinces; and the same spirit is it that now
rules in all such who persecute the servants of God, by casting them into
prison, where their wills is not obeyed, nor bowed unto, by giving the honor
of the world unto them.

Wherefore all people mind the light of Christ in your consciences, that
reproves for sin and evil, and of all your pride, deceit, hypocrisy, and
respecting of persons, and of all unrighteousness, that by it you may be lead
out of the world, and out of all its ways, fashions, customs, and traditions,
which are evil, up unto God, to serve and worship him alone, who is a jealous
God, and will not give his glory unto another, who will bring down the mighty
from their ungodly seats, and will exalt the meek and the lowly, and all that
are proud and do wickedly and all that persecute and make a prey upon the
innocent, shall be as the chafe before an unquencheable fire; And the
loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and his haughtiness laid low, in this
the day of his mighty power, in which he is arising to shake terribly the
earth, and to give unto mystery Babylon and all her Merchants that are trading
with her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath, and all who
worship the Beast or his Image, and are joined together with him (making war
against the Lamb and his followers) shall have their portion together in the
Lake that burns for ever.

James Pottar.

Having thus let the cause appear of the committing of other friends under
their own hands, and having not been wanting before in sending and writing unto
the Rulers, to lay their unjust retaining of us in bo nds before them thereby
to attain our just liberty; but being most like at present to be deprived
thereof, and seeing that they commit more also unto Prison, we willingly
together gave up our bodies to suffer, if it were until death, and only
sought to have the liberty to work as before was mentioned; therefore we writ
as follows, and sent it to them called Justice Cobb, and Justice Betsworth.

WE whose consciences are clear in the sight of the living God, that we have
not injured nor wronged any person, neither broke the Law of God, whose witness
will abide in us for ever, that we are this day in bonds for the testimony of a
a good conscience, under the cruel oppression of men of sin, who have taken
several of us out of our honest lawful employments, and in prison kept us from
our labors, which we should labor in, for the maintenance of our selves and
families, whose souls do abhor idleness, neither dare we eat any man's bread for
naught; and by this unjust imprisonment have many of us suffered much, because
we could not proceed in our present occasions, some of our families also
wanting us much, whose wives are left as Widows, and children as the
fatherless: And seeing men's hearts continue so hard, as to keep us so long in
bonds from our business, therefore we have endeavored to have liberty to work
with our hands in the Prison, something whereof having been granted by order in
writing from John Bulkley.

We being in all 7 persons kept always close prisoners, and what abuses and
hard-ships we have suffered, we mention little herein, who are not only
deprived of our way of livelihood and liberty in the Nation, but also
restrained from having that liberty which the rest of the servants of God have
in most, or in all Prisons in England, which is, of having liberty for one or
more of us to go forth into the Town to buy food, and to provide other
necessaries for the rest; and for want of this liberty we have often wanted
water to drink, and sometimes bread to eat, and other things when some of us
have been sick, yet have we not troubled you with many complaints herein, but
in secret have we powered forth our souls with prayers and tears unto the Lord
God of life, who sees all our wants, and knows our innocence, and in his due
time can us deliver; but if not, to the Devil we cannot bow, for our souls
are subject to the higher power, which preserved them that broke the decrees
and commands of men, which is more then is justly charged upon us, Esther. 3.
2. Dan. 3. Dan. 6. Act. 4. 17, 18.

Now the thing which we write for, is that which is just in the sight of God,
and but reasonable in the sight of any reasonable Minister of the Law (which
law they themselves say should be grounded upon reason) which thing is, we
being six men, and one woman, that she the aforesaid woman, whose name is
Winifred Newman, or any other of us, may have liberty to go forth and buy, and
bring in other needful things for the rest of us, that so we may no more be put
to the extremity of want, nor to the charge of hiring another to do that for
us, which we might well do our selves, who have been at great charge already,
besides other loss, and that she or another of us may also bring work in and
out for us, and such things as may be needful for us to work with and upon;
And that she, or either of us, having this liberty granted, shall be as a
prisoner, without the least intent of running away, we shall all engage and
promise, so far as men fearing God can promise herein, that which we chiefly
intend is combing of Wool.

A speedy answer or order in writing herein is expected, and according to
justice desired by the members of Christ in Prison (and house of Correction) at
Winchester, whose names are Anthony Melledg, William Baily, Humphrey Smith,
James Pottar, Daniel Baker, George Henderson, and Winifred Newman.

THis Paper was directed and sent to Justice Cobb, and Justice Betsworth (as
they were called) but was chiefly intended for Justice Cobb, who was as Judge
at the Sessions before, who being without natural affection, denied the
members of Christ in prison this so reasonable a thing, the which then I laid
before the under-Sheriffe, and read a Copy of the Paper to him, he being then
in the Prison, who granted the thing to be but reasonable, whereby it does
appear, that he and them that should do Justice were unreasonable, in denying
that which was reasonable, and he said as the Justices did, that it was not in
his power, then I asked him, in whose power it was, to grant this reasonable
thing, seeing both Justices Sherif and Jailer had denied it, then he referred
me to one Browning, but suddenly I was informed that he was a Papist, and so I
laid the unreasonableness of it upon him, that we (of whom some had been
Captains, and others long serviceable for liberty from under Popish Tyranny,
should be now deprived of all Justice and Equity and referred only to the the
mercy of a Popish man.

Oh the cruelty and hard heartedness of the Sons of men, who can read it
without mourning, no Transgressor in the prison but might be heard, nor the
cause of any thief so turned aside, but the Lord of mercy was our refuge, who
is a present help in time of need, and can never forget his Covenant, nor for
sake his afflicted, who abide faithful, who in his mercy preserves his
Servants, but overturneth his enemies, for ever, and be did visit for these
things, and began to avenge himself on his adversaries, though his Lambs
rejoices not when the enemies falls, nor in that the Devils are made
subject, but in that there names are written among the living, but in our
affliction I writ the a foregoing paper, and sent it to Justice Cob and
Betsworth, upon the 11. day of the 4. month the 6. day of the week, and upon
the 16. day of the same month the 4. day of the week at night the a foresaid
Justice Cob was suddenly cut off, though no outward eye saw how, which was to the
astonishment of his family and many more And the man which the Justice and
Priest Bental caused to swear falsely against James Pottar, the same man was
since that time bruised, torn, and spoiled with a horse and harrows, so that he
died very shortly after being before troubled in conscience for what he had
sworn; yet notwithstanding Scripture is fulfilled, when the Lords hand is
lifted up, they will not see but they shall see and be ashamed.

And it may be observed that we had sent several other papers to the Justice
Cob (some whereof are herein written) all which he little regarded, he being a
great enemy to Truth, and a Persecutor of friends, he being as a judge at
another sessions was not satisfied, with the committing of Stephen Bevis to the
house of correction, (who was before committed by Col. Norton, to the common
Goal for hearing testimony against Priest Simons false Doctrine) but also gave
order that he should not be suffered to work at his trade, but be put to
pounding of hemp or some harder work though he declared his willingness in open
court to work at his trade.

A Copy of a paper to the sessions.
You at whose hands the dreadful God of life, and his Servants does require
right and sound judgment, to be by you performed at this present sessions at
Winchester.
LEt our several causes be heard and read in open court, and let our innocent
sufferings appear in the Light, before the eyes of the people, and let them by
whom we suffer be made manifest, and do not shut up things in darkness, as at
the last sessions, not suffering the cause of them who are oppressed to be read
in the open Court, wherein, and in many other things we have been deprived of
that which is just and right, the which i^ proceeded in, will even be a shame
unto you, for justice, Equity and true Judgment is that we do both expect, and
would gladly see brought forth in you; therefore do not wait to lay farther
snares, to betray the simple, whereby to cover that oppression some of you have
acted in against the Servants of the living God, but let the fear of God guide
you, that sound Judgment you may come unto, whereby rightly to understand,
what or what manner of evil, we have done, or what Law of God we have broken,
and what accusations are against us, with the ground and cause of those
accusations, and take heed of entertaining false witness, or joining with it,
or forcing men to swear against the members of Christ, contrary to Gods witness
in them, (as Thomas Bowrman has done) and if any thing be, or has been
proved, or any one falsely accused, either of the Servants of God, or any
other, you are to see that you do not punish such accused above or beyond the
fact, or crime charged against them, and herein all that rule for God, are and
should be guided with an understanding heart, in the spirit of wisdom, and
knowledge, as Moses, Joshua, Solomon and others were, that none may be
oppressed by wrong Judgment, nor ensnared because of envy, and prejudice which
lodges in the deceitful hearts of men, who are out of Gods fear.

For we who are in scorn called Quakers, do wait to have true Judgment set up
in the earth, in righteousness, established in and among the Sons of men, and
are friends unto and Lovers of all them who judge for God, without respect of
persons, and a praise to them that do well; And he that reproves a Hireling
that stands praying in the Synagogue, does well, for Esaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Micah, Malachiah, Hosea, and Christ, and Paul and Peter did reprove, and bear
testimony against such, and for the same things are the members of Christ, in
your days haled out of the Synagogues, brought before Rulers, and cast into
Prison, whom you should be a praise unto, for therein they do well, being moved
of the Lord thereunto, whose mouths, by men of sin, are not to be stopped,
though they would have us, or command us to speak no more in his name who
makes an end of sin, and said I am the Light of the world, whose Light has
led us out of evil, and so are become a prey unto an adulterous generation,
that know not God, whose love in our hearts, has constrained us to obey him
rather then man, in that wherein man would hinder us in our obedience unto God,
whose power works in ^s mightily, which keeps us from under the bondage of
man's corrupt will, yet to the higher power our souls are subject, even to that
power which preserved them who broke the Commands and Decrees of men, Hest. 3.
2. Dan. 3. Dan. 6 Acts 4. 17. 18.

Several papers have we sent to you (who should do Justice) of our unjust and
unreasonable sufferings in prison, and little has it been by you regarded, one
of which papers we sent by a friend to John Hook (called a Justice) of
Bramshot, which friend, since gave us an account in writing, that when he came
to deliver the paper, John Hooks Clerk beat him in the house, and others also
abused him and, after he was gone out of the house, another who belonged to the
house followed him, and in a Lane did beat him, and kick him very much, and
this was very evil, which you are to punish.

Here follows a short Relation of something of the cause of the committing
and retaining of the members of Christ in prison.
Anthony Melledg William Baily Humphrey Smith
IMprisoned two weeks without the breach of any Law, and since kept in the
House of Correction about 17 weeks from their business, and from their home,
because they cannot promise to go home, who know no law requiring them to make
any such promise, and where there is no law, there is no transgression.

Winif. Newman Imprisoned for speaking a few sober words to the hireling Priest
(who cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2 14.) after he had ended, she being before
a servant to a Widow and fatherless, and so the hireling Priest by causing her
to be imprisoned, has caused both she, the widow and the fatherless to suffer.

Daniel Baker Geo: Henderson
Imprisoned for speaking words of truth to the same Priest and people, which
Priest said, that God was author of evil. And another Priest before the
Magistrate wrested the Scripture, to affirm, that Christ did swear, when he
said, Verily, verily.

John Day Imprisoned for reproving the same hireling Priest (Robert Dingly) who
confessed he and his flock were full of sin and evil, which also does appear by
their envy and persecution, which is of the Devil.

James Pottar Imprisoned without the breach of any law, and fined at the
following Assizes 5 l. because he could not transgress the Law of God, by
respecting of persons, to satisfy the lusts and corrupt wills of men, in not
putting off his hat when he was brought to the said Assizes, of whom also is
demanded 3 l. for fees, who have been kept a close prisoner under these cruel
oppressions 59 weeks and some days.


From them who are not only ready to suffer bonds, and long unjust
imprisonments, but also death it self, if the Lord require it of us, in
testimony against all Deceivers, and all manner of unrighteousness and
oppressions; and we are friends to the Commonwealth, and to equity and true
judgment, having true love to the souls of all mankind, who for the testimony
of a pure conscience are Prisoners by the corrupt wills of men, in the Common
Gaol and house of Correction at Winton.

At this last Sessions D. B. G. H. I. D. were committed to the House of
Correction (being prisoners before) the which them set to do justice would not
have done, if they had not looked out more at the unrighteous hireling Priests
vain customs, and the glory of the world, which shall all perish, then to the
light of Christ (which endures for ever) in their consciences which did then
much judge them for what they did against the servants of God, and let them see
their evil therein, the which Light they are to love, obey, and follow.

From the servant of God in Prison to the Judge of the Assize at Winchester. A
Copy of a Paper to the Assizes.
THe righteous Judge of heaven and earth, who respects not the persons of the
mighty, who tries the hearts of Kings, who is the mighty God of Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, and their seed (who wandered up and down) some having no certain
dwelling place, even he who sees the secret intents of the hearts of the sons
of men, whose judgments are just and true, who rewards the proud in his
judgments, and hears the cry of the oppressed; who will reprove Kings for
the sake of the simple, and forsakes not his faithful afflicted ones, who by
the man Christ Jesus will judge the secrets of all men's hearts, according to
his light in them, whereby every man shall receive a just recompense of reward,
according to all their words and actions, whether for, or against him and his
people.

Wherefore this O man! thou art to know, that true ^ight and sound judgment is
to be by thee performed, according to the righteous Law of God, which is
written in the heart, that corrupt judgment, cruelty, persecution, nor
receiving of gifts, nor entertaining false witness, may not be found in thee,
nor in any of them that Join with thee, whether they are called Sheriffs,
Justices, Jury men, Clarks, or any other; but that according to the Law of God,
in his fear thou may perform that which the Lord God of hosts certainly will
require of thee, in the day when all the arm of flesh, and honor of the world
will not prevent the true and everlasting judgments of the most high, with
fierce wrath and indignation upon all them who pervert true judgment, and
transgress the righteous Law of God written in the heart.

The which that thou may not do, nor see done before thine eyes, when thou may
prevent it, and that thou may escape the wrath of the Almighty, which will
certainly come upon all who pervert judgment, and that in the council of God
thou may come to stand in meekness and godly fear, to judge for God, and not
for man, that his will by thee may be performed; that when thou come to stand
before the Throne of his eternal judgments, thou may not be turned to the left
hand, with them that forget God, and turn his Law behind their backs, and
oppress his servants, and neither visit, relieve, nor set at liberty the
members of Christ in Prison, who in these your days are in most Prisons where
thou come, and in Prison have been sick, and deprived of that liberty which
Thieves and Murderers have; and that thou may come to be joined to Gods
witness with it in thee, to see and rightly to understand the ground and cause
of things of which thou art to judge. Therefore art thou to be guided by the
light in thee, which comes from Christ, who is the sure foundation, and was
before-transgression, by which the transgression is seen, and with it is to be
judged, which light in thee will let thee see the ground of all transgression,
and by the same out of transgression thou art to be led, and then to judge over
that which is in the transgression, that so those who dare not transgress the
righteous law of God, thou may be a praise unto, and all such who reprove sin
in the gate, market places, public assemblies, or els-where; and that all who
transgress the law of God, with that of God in thy conscience, thou may be a
terror unto, executing true judgment upon that head which goes forth from the
light, into the transgression, for that is it for which the Law is added, which
by the Law which is perfect is to be judged, that out of the transgression man
may be kept.

Therefore hear with meekness and in patience, understand and consider my
words; for all the holy men of God, who ruled for God, and not for men, were
therein guided by that which is holy, pure, just and right, whereby they were
guided in his fear, to execute his judgments only upon the transgressor,
according to the will of him, by whom otherwise they themselves were to be
judged, and they were guided by that spirit in them which gave forth the Law,
and with that joined to execute the Law upon them that did transgress the law
of God, with whom in so doing they were said to be a help-government, and such
were called Gods, who bore not the sword in vain, standing in the higher power,
to which their souls were subject, to bring the transgressor in obedience
thereunto; but such who did not transgress the righteous law of God, their
souls were already subject to that higher power; but when man who should rule
for God, stood not in his council, but went themselves into the transgression
(out of the power) and judged for reward, such the light in them was darkened,
that they could not see the transgressor, but let him go free, and punish the
just, as Pilate and many others did, even in the days of the Prophets, who
then cried out against them, because they were become as ravening wolves, and
then of such it is written, I said ye were gods, but ye shall dye like men, and
fall as one of the Princes; and because of wrong judgment, and the want of true
exercise in the perfect law of God, have many fallen, and been overturned, even
Kings, Princes, Parliaments, Bishops, Judges and Rulers, as also in these your
days, even whole Nations turned up side down.

Therefore O man, let thy heart be opened to receive instruction from the Lord,
and let thy mind be enlightened with the light of his Son, which light is it
that gives the knowledge of God, and the right understanding of the perfect law
of life, that in the light which comes from Christ, thy mind may be exercised
toward God, that his enemies in his fear and dread thou may rule over, and
unto the friends of Christ who do well, to be a praise, and a Minister of the
law for good, that in thy place thou may be just, fearing God, and hating
covetousness, doing that which is good, that in the end of thy days thou may
have the praise of the same, and receive that honor which man cannot keep from
thee, that thy soul may rest in peace, which is the desire of the members of
Christ in bonds at Winchester.

H. S.

A Copy of a warning to the Rulers.
HEarken and hear ye men that shall dye, is it not for you O ye Judges, and
Rulers of the earth, to know, believe in, and be subject to the higher power,
even the eternal light of the Son of God in your consciences, wherein true and
sound judgment is placed? thereby should you be guided in the fear and council
of God to minister true and sound justice and judgment to all what soever
Causes comes before you, with patience and meekness to hear the poor, as well
as the rich, for you are not to have respect of persons in judgment, neither
to take bribes, receive gifts or rewards, or receive, or give honor one to
another, or compel any to give it to you, who seek and live not in the honor
of God only, your Judgment being corrupted, the eye being blinded by the God
of the world, who with his subjects or servaats would be honored, above all
that is called God, and so the just suffers, the sword is laid upon the
innocent (the guiltless smitten with the fist of wickedness) which sword
should slay the transgressor. Take heed you be not suddenly destroyed by the
hand of the great and mighty God, and so you bring eternal Judgment and
condemnation upon your heads; which most assuredly will be executed upon all
that forget God, who shall be cursed from his presence, and turned into hell.

Wherefore know that there is no iniquity, neither repect of persons with the
Lord God of hosts, who has shaken his hand at dishonest gain, and despises
the gain of oppression, even he then will be with you in the Judgment, when as
you to his power become subject, and so you will be a good savor to the
upright in heart, and answer that of God in all consciences, and become a terror
to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well, when you with a single eye
see, know, and lay the Sword in its due place, as men of truth, fearing God,
hating covetousness, meek and merciful.

The mighty day of Gods wonderful power (is come) and of your visitation and
time of trial, (O ye rebellious Children of Darkness) who know not at what you
stumble; yea, this day of the Lord is, and will be the life of all the meek of
the earth, though it is and will be a day of howling, trembling, and
astonishment, of fury, blackness, and darkness, and of eternal condemnation,
to all the proud and lofty workers of iniquity, yea the day of breaking down,
laying low the pride and loftiness of men that shall dye is come, and the
mighty God the Lord of hosts alone is, and shall be exalted.

Wherefore woe from his dreadful presence to all the proud and lofty, and all
that do wickedly, who are as stubble for the unquenchable fire, which is the
portion of all that forget God, who put the day of the Lord afar off, which is
darkness and not light unto such who are strong and mighty to do evil, calling
light darkness, and darkness light, turning judgment backward, laying the sword
(which should be upon the head of the transgressor) upon the innocent, whose
pure consciences are exercised toward God; so that truth cannot enter, equity
is fallen in the streets, justice stands afar off, and as it was in the days
of old, so it is now, He that departs from iniquity, makes himself a prey,
becomes a sign and a wonder to this evil, rebellious, and adulterous
generation: And thus the guiltless is smitten with the fist of wickedness, and
the transgressor goes free, but he in whose sight all the Nations are but as
the drop of a bucket, whose name is dreadful among the heathen, even he is
risen to plead the cause of the innocent, confound, overturn, and break in
pieces (as a potters vessel) his enemies, with an utter overthrow, to set his
poor prisoners and captivated suffering seed at liberty from such who oppress
persecute, scorn, and make a prey, and puff at them. Woe be to you by whom we
suffer.

Wherefore this is a warning from a true Lover of your souls to every one of
you, (O ye Judges and Rulers, for this County of Hampshire) to repent and let
this day of Gods love, and of your visitation, be precious' in your sight, who
sit in darkness under the shadow of death, and let this my Council (in the fear
of the Lord) be acceptable, and break off your mighty sins by righteousness, do
justly, love mercy, relieve the oppressed, and let fruits meet for repentance
be brought forth, therefore I say repent, and turn to the Lord God who is
Light, a measure of which is in every of your Consciences, a free gift the
grace of God which is to (and will) lead to the God of the Spiris of all flesh,
as to it you become obedient, I say again let fruits meet for repentance be
brought forth, least you be cut down as fruitles trees, and dye in your sins.

Woe be to you who are found among the unprofitable Servants persecuting and
making a prey upon the innocent, who are faithful witnesses for the Lord God of
life (which made the world) against all cursed practices and deeds of darkness
whether in Priests, Rulers or People without respect of Persons.

Remember you are warned in your life time, and so far he has cleared his
Conscience in the fight of God (whether you hear or forbear) who am a Friend to
that which exalts a Nation, a Lover of Souls, a Sufferer for the Testimony of
a pure Conscience, known to the World by the name of his flesh,

Daniel Baker.
Winchester Prison this 13. of the 5. month 58.
Now this may be observed, that no Wanderer, nor Transgressor was kept in this
prison, nor house of correction because they would not promise to go home, but
only we who do not transgress, and many persons has been committed to the
house of correction since we, and soon released again, as them Irish wandering
men, who had not any habitation in England as we hear of, were soon released,
but not us, and again any of their complaints would be heard by the Rulers, and
their papers received and read (which was but just) but why then should we be
deprived, of that right (every way) which they have, let the Rulers of
Hampshire return me any good reason according to Law, for their partiallity
herein, for we sent a copy of one of the papers before written, for some just
right and liberty to John Bulkley (and a book which I freely gave him in which
was some of his own actions which his Clerk said his Master desired it might be
printed, and if so, he might as well desire to have it) and he sent his Clark
after the messengers, who laid his hands on their goods, and broke up and read
Letters which were of concernment, and he also took away from them, 7. or 8
books or there abouts, which books were as properly the Goods of us called
Quakers, as the clothes on our backs, the which to be violently taken from us,
is by us esteemed no less then robbery, being not restored, and so to be
punished, and not practiced by a Magistrate, especially by such a zealous out
side professor as John Bulkley.

And so though any vile person might be heard, yet I have made it appear (but
it is to the shame of the Rulers) that we sent a messenger to John Hook of
Bramshot, and his Clark beat the Messenger, and we sent another paper by other
friends to John Bulkley, and did not he send his Clark and rob them? and then
we sent another paper, to that preverse rash tyrannical man, who is an evil
example to all Rulers and People, called Judge Nicholas, at the Assizes, and he
bid the Jailer take that Messenger; Therefore now let Gods witness in every
Conscience answer, whether that which Rules in these (and the like) men be to
be honored, and they flattered or owned, to be men ruling for God, or to be
herein denied and declared against by all such whose Souls are subject to the
higher power, which is Gods Ordinance, which whosoever resists, to please such
men's wills, shall receive to themselves damnation.

Pharaoh King of Egypt (of darkness) kept the Servants of God in bondadge, and
would not let them go, for which the plagues and Judgments of God came upon
him, and at last thick darkness which might be felt, and when the Judgments of
God were upon him, he would promise to let them go, but it was upon condition,
that they might leave some thing behind them, that he might make a prey upon,
therefore he bid them go, but leave their flocks and herds behind them, but
Moses was faithful, and said not a hoof should be left behind.

And so John Bulkley and the rest who sit in darkness and rule with the powers
thereof, has imbondaged the Servants of God, for which his Judgments has
often come near the heart of him, and others, even thick darkness which they
might feel overpowering their hearts, even bringing them down to the Chambers
of death, and then in their minds, and also in words would promise to let us
go, but it was upon condition, that we should leave something behind us, for he
or they to make a prey upon; therefore it was offered we might go if we would
leave an engagement behind us, by giving security to go home, and when they
could not have that then they would have us leave a promise behind us, by
promising to go home, and when they could not have that, then they would have
some words to that purpose, or some desires from us, for John Bulkley asked Ann
Read, what was desired, and if any thing was desired it should be done, but we
did not desire any thing as to beg it of them, but vvait for true justice and
judgment, and when John Bulkley with the rest saw that not a hoof nor the
least thing should be left behind of ours for him and them to boast of
afterward, then he, and more of them were tormented, and refused to let us go
out of their bondage from under their Oppressors, and out of their Workhouse,
like Pharaoh, who also kept the Servants of God in his bondage, under his work,
therefore was he destroyed for ever, as these are in danger to be.

Thus much at present of the unreasonableness of the Rulers and the
bruitishness of the Priests, Jer. 10. 21. next may be expected to come forth
our cruel sufferings in the prison, under Em. Hobs, whom it is more fit that
she her self were kept in a house of correction or in chains, then to be
suffered to be a Jailer, who has also suffered other Friends to be much abused
that came to visit us, who were at first like to suffer to death in this
prison, and house of correction, where the Servant (who is not greater then his
Lord) does suffer by them of whom I am called,

Humphry Smith.
Finished in Winchester common Goal, and house of correction, the 6. day of the
week, the 6. day of the 6, month, 58.
The sounding voice of the dread of Gods mighty power, to all the Judges and
Rulers of the earth, who rise up against the Lamb, And to Gog, Magog, and all
their Armies, And to the whole host of the powers of darkness, and to all men,
who fight against God, who, or whatsoever they be (or whatsoever they are
called.)
BEhold ye Rulers of the earth, listen and hear, all ye earthly minded men,
let the blindness of you minds be opened, that your dark hearts may be
enlightened, hear I say and stop not your cares, you whose minds are in the
earth, whose eyes are closed, whose hearts are covered, with a thick vail, by
your own iniquity, who see not the wonders of the Lord, wrought among the
living, neither perceive the mighty power of the God of the whole earth; who
are besotted through the sinfulness of your continual transgressions, and are
grovelling as moles in the earth, and laden with thick clay, and covered with
the vail that is spread over all flesh, that you see not the glory of the God
of life, neither perceive ye the comeliness, of the holy one of Jacob, to whom
the bright morningstar, is as a cloud of darkness, and the way of the living
God, as a fierce whirlwind of fire, who see not him that dwelt in the Bush,
neither hear his voice, who has made darkness his habitation, and his pavilion
round about him, thick clouds of the sky.

Hear I say, and let my words, have entrance in you, and let the sound of my
voice, take place in your hearts, let the opening of my lips give astonishment
to the wicked, and the enlargement of my heart the confounding of the Heathen,
let the dread of the Lord take hold upon the Hypocrites, and astonishment seize
upon the double minded, let the prudent keep silence and hear, and let the
honorable be quiet and consider, let the understanding give audience to my
words, and let the mouth of the fool be stopped, let the sinner stand still and
be quiet, and let the ungodly consider the words of truth, rebel not against
the word of the Lord, neither harden your hearts against the dread of his
power, let the tall ceders bow and bend, and that which is lifted up be brought
down, and stand ye all in meekness.

For behold the omnipotent power is come, the rock of ages is revealed, the
everlasting strength is made manifest, the God of Abraham has reached forth his
hand, and the Redeemer of Israel is come to dwell in the midst the great
Jehovah has uttered his voice, and he whose Name is I Am, is at hand, he that
moves upon the waters may be felt, and he that forms the seed in the womb
may be known, he that inhabiteth eternity, is come to dwell in his people, and
walk in the midst of the poor despised of his flock, having cleansed them by
the washing of water, and renewed them by the Spirit of burning, and refined
them, with his righteous Judgments, and cleansed them with the blood of his
Son, that in his Sion (redeemed with judgment) he may dwell for ever more, and
take up his rest in the midst of his people, having made the place of his
feet glorious, and his residence as a seat in the midst of a fire, which fire
burns against all them that are in the night, and given light to them that
are in the covenant, whose glory is hid from the dark mind, and his council
withholden from the unbeleeving in heart, he stands near unto the wicked, who
perceives him not, and takes notice of his secret intents, he observes the
footsteps of the Kings of the earth, and marketh the decrees of the
unrighteous, and when they have filled up their measure, he puts forth his
finger to their life, and takes away their breath, he suddenly cuts off the
wicked, and regards not the mightiness of Princes, he searches the hearts of
the Kings, and rules over the powers of men, his infiniteness, can never be
declared, in his hand is the breath of the life of the souls of all mankind.

Hear I say and consider my words, and ponder the meditations of my mind, for
behold the Lord God of life is come, Immanuel is revealed, the Root and
offspring of David is grown up as a plant of renown, the Seed of the shepherd
fits upon the throne, and before him shall all the Kings of the earth lay down
their Crowns; every Emperor shall bow and bend; and the Potentates of the earth
(before him) shall wither as a green herb, their glory shall perish as the
untimely birth of the womb, their honor shall vainish as the smoke before the
wind; their wisdom shall fade away, as a blossom cut off, and their
understandings shall come to nothing; the wisdom of the most high shall be
exalted over them all, and with his foolishness, will he them all confound, yea
with a foolish Nation will he anger the Judges of the earth, and with a
despised people will he provoke the Rulers of the world to jealousy, by the
foolishness of his flock, will he confound his enemies, and by his weakness in
them, will he subdue the strength of the mighty, and though all his enemies
(strive) in the arrogance of their Spirits, and in the fierceness of their
strength, yet shall he be exalted, who is lead as a Lamb dumb, and he shall
reign whose right it is, in whose mouth there is found no guile, who makes an
end of sin, and brings in everlasting righteousness, and sets up judgment
in the heart, and comes to rule in the Kingdoms of men, and overturneth the
host of his enemies, by whom Judges are lead away fools, deviners turned made,
before whose presence the mightiness of the mightiest Rulers of the earth is as
wax before the fire, and their strength meltteth away as the fat of Lambs.

Wherefore hear and see, O ye kindreds and Rulers of the earth, the Lord our
God is come, the might of his strength is revealed, and the power of his
presence made known; he has chosen his Army to himself, and their names are
written in his life; he has numbered up his hosts together, and armed his
chosen with his everlasting strength; the Captain of his host goes before
them, and the camp of the Lord is very great, they are numberless as the sand
of the Sea, and infinite as the stars of heaven: Even so is the seed of
Abraham, the remnant of the flock of Jacob, whom the Lord has redeemed, who
are chosen, and faithful, and true; yea, behold it is even so, and that all the
Nations of the earth shall know, for the Lord of hosts rides on in meekness,
in the midst of his host, and makes War in righteousness, with the enemies of
the Lamb, who would not that he should reign, who makes an end of sin, and he
is clothing his Army with ^eal as with a garment, and covering them with the
armor of light, and preserves their head in the day of battle, and girds them
up with strength, and guides their feet upon the rock, and preserves their
life under the shadow of his hand. When he speaks the word, his Army goes
forth, and at his command they march on their way^ He lists up a Standard
before them, and proclaims open War against the Inhabitants of the Earth, who
now hear that the Lamb is come to reign in Righteousness, and to stain the
pride of their glory, and confound the height of their wisdom, and lay their
honor in the dust for ever.

Therefore all Kindreds of the earth, even Gog, Magog, and all the hosts of the
heathen, are rising up in the bitterness of their spirits, in the height of the
power of the man of sin, joining all their forces together, as in one band of
darkness, taking counsel from Egypt, making a covenant with death, and an
agreement with hell, and gathering up the utmost powers of darkness to be as a
refuge unto them: And thus in the strength of the King of the childdren of
pride, they are rising up against the Lord, even the God of life, and against
his anointed ones, who have indeed and in truth received the anointings, and
need not man to teach them, but are all taught of the Lord God Almighty, who
also teaches their hands to war, and their fingers to fight: And he utters his
voice as the sound of many waters, before his Army, who follows him in the
might of his power, whose presence is dreadful in the midst of his host, and
there is none that is able to stand before him, for he is a consuming fire in
the midst of his Camp, and burns up his enemies round about; and before him
and his Army shall all faces gather paleness, everlasting shame shall cover the
glory of all flesh, before him all people shall be much pained, his dread and
vengeance shall take hold on all his adversaries; His redeemed shall march with
him in the travail of their souls, from strength to strength shall they
continue on, and none shall be feeble among them; their arrows shall reach into
the bowels of the scornful, and their words of life pierce the hearts of the
hypocrites. They shall tread upon Kings, as upon mortar, and trample upon the
wicked as upon ashes; they fear not the greatest Goliah's, neither yet the
wickedness of the pride of Haman, unrighteous Decrees cannot stop their mouths,
nor the fear of a Furnace, or a Dungeon withold them from their way, all
flesh is as graffe before them, and at their rebuke shall the potsheards of the
earth be broken for ever; before them there is no Nation shall stand, for one
of them shall chase a hundred, and before five shall the strength and wisdom
of a thousand be confounded.

And this the Lords Army shall never be confounded, and his glory in them shall
never be defaced, nor his power with them shall never be overcome, nor his
strength in them shall never be vanquished; therefore in vain do all the
potsherds of the earth strive; For they that rise up against them shall be as
flax before the fire, and the mightiest among the sons of men shall be as the
grass that is cut down; for the Lords host is very terrible, and in meekness
is the Lamb riding on to judgment, his followers are enrobed with the light of
the morning, and adorned with the beauty of the Sun. Their eyes are enlightened
with the light of the most high, and they see through the dark parts of all
their enemies, and discern the secret plottings of all their adversaries. Their
wisdom comes in like a river, and their understanding shall never be darkened.
Their strength is renewed as the morning, and they are valiant to do exploits.
The wisdom of the wise before them shall be confounded for ever, and the
understanding of the prudent be esteemed as a thing of naught. They spy out the
lurkings of their enemies, and see through the coverings of the deceitful. Of
their strength they shall never be deprived, neither shall their weapons be
taken from them. Their refuge shall never be shaken, nor the place of their
rest removed. The wicked shall never enter upon their dwellings, nor all their
enemies invade the land of their rest; for the desire of all Nations to them is
come and him that they long waited for have they now received. And they tread
upon the Cocka-trice den, and meet the devouring Lions; in the power of the
Fathers love there is no deadly thing that does them hurt, nor any weapon
formed against them that ever shall prosper.

And this is Sion, the redeemed of the Lord, the glory of the God of Israel,
the seed of Jacob whom the Lord has chosen, and set up on high over all the
kindreds of the earth, which stands against all the enemies of the Lord, and is
his new threshing instrument, with which he will thresh the Heathen in his
anger, and bath, his sword in the blood of the slain, for behold his sword
shall devour much flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many; with Sion the
perfection of beauty will the Lord break in pieces, wound, confound and
overturn for ever, the horse and his Rider; the Captain and his Troop; the
Ancient and honorable; the Prophet that tells lies, yea all the host of the
unrighteous, and the strength of the Army of the man of sin, and the beauty of
the whore that rides upon the beast, and all them who set themselves in battle
against the Lord, and all them who lead into captivity and would captivate the
Servants of the Lamb, shall go into captivity for ever.

For behold the Lord is with us, the Shout of a King is among us, the Lord
whose name is holy is come, he has uttered his voice from Heaven, and now the
Nations of the earth are angry, but the Lord will reign in righteousness, and
all his enemies shall be astonished at his presence, and his adversaries shall
be amazed for ever, their hearts shall be turned as a stone within them, and
men shall be at their wits end, for fear and for looking after those things
which shall come upon the earth, and all them whose names are written in it,
their wisdom shall not preserve them, their understandings shall not defend
them, neither shall all their subtilty cover them from the Light, their
nakedness shall appear to their everlasting shame, and the prisoners of hope
shall rejoice over them for ever more.

For behold I say your day is come, wherein you shall bow down under the
prisoners, and fall under the slain, according to the words of the spirit of
prophecy, Esaias. 10. 4. and the slain over you shall rejoice for ever more,
having the high praises of God in their mouths, and the sword of the spirit in
their hearts, with which they shall cut in pieces and pierce in sunder, the
bowels of all flesh, and it shall be as chaff before them, and the strength
thereof as the passing away of the morning cloud, and in the strength of the
most high, shall the Army of the Lion of the tribe of Judah, go on and prosper,
even as Kings, whose Armies are swift to the battle, their faces are as an
Adamant, and their countenances fierce, and terrible, the sound of their voice
is dreadful, and the noise of their appearance astonisheth the Heathen, the
earth before them is full of its fruit, behind them its a desolate wilderness,
they spare not the ancient, nor the honorable, neither have they respect to
the persons of men; they even smile at destruction when it is coming, and they
are prepared for all your oppressions.

Wherefore now gather your selves together, O ye potsheards of the earth, and
stand up all you that thirst for blood, assemble your selves together all ye
persecutors, let your counsels come up from hell, and let the depth of the
powers of darkness show forth it self in the utmost of its strength, and with
it combine ye all together, and stand up in the power of your King, which is
the Angel of the bottomless pit, who is head among (in) and over all you who
thirsts for the blood of the innocent. Now come and draw near in the very
height of your Fathers wrath, and behold we meet you in the infiniteness of our
Fathers love, and stand you together in the depth of your secret subtilty, and
behold we abide in the pure wisdom of the most High. Stand ye up for the glory
and honor of the world, and we abide faithful for the glory of the Lord our
maker.

And this I say plainly unto you, that your long tyranny will never weary but
the patience we have received, neither can you inflict more punishment then the
Lord has enabled us to bear; and as your wrath is increased, our humility is
increased much more; and as you are filled, and moved with envy, we are much
more filled and overcome with the power of the Fathers life; and though you
contrive ways to ensnare the innocent, we take no thought aforehand to deliver
our selves, for self we have denied, and we have given up our bodies and souls
a living sacrifice unto God, to do or suffer his will. And him that kills the
body we fear not, much less those that can but whip or imprison but for a few
months; for our life you cannot reach, neither can you disturb their rest whom
the Lord has crowned with honor, who out of the world are redeemed and bought
with the price of blood most precious, but are become his, to follow him
whither ever he lead them, though it be through trials, great tribulations,
bonds and long imprisonments, these things cannot move them who are brought to
rest in the deserts, and sleep in the woods; Yea, and there is none can make
them afraid with all their threats, unrighteous Laws, bonds, Bridewels, long
unjust imprisonments, or death it self.

And this honor has the Saints, and herein do they rejoice for evermore, in
that they are counted worthy to suffer for his Names sake, who was made perfect
through sufferings, and thereby overcame all the powers of Darkness, whereby
Principalities and powers are spoiled for ever, and through sufferings are we
made more then conquerours over all our enemies, whose day will have an end,
whose cruelty will cease, whose tyranny will be rewarded upon their own heads,
and their memorial will rot for ever; but the faithfulness of the faithful
shall never be taken from him, nor the innocence of the harmless shall never
be forgotten, neither shall they ever want strength to stand in the day of
battle, nor courage and boldness to endure, when the enemies of the Lord
arises up in opposition against the brightness of the rising of the power of
the Lamb of God, who is come to take away the sin of the world, even him who is
the Light, and the Heir, against whom with one consent, the Rulers of the
earth, the Hireling Priests, with all the profane, and unclean, and all them
of all opinions in the world, are joining together in one combination, as with
oneminde conspiring in their enmity, to slay, and murder the Heir that is now
come to make an end of sin, who says, I am the Light.

H. S.

THE END.

