A Paper showing who are the true Spouse of Christ, and who are not.
THe true Sponse of Christ, is his true Church which is in God our Father, 1
These. 1, 1. which hears his voice, feels his power, and is made one with him,
that is the light and have him near unto her, even in her bosom, and brings
forth increase by virtue of his power or life that is in her, who is not of the
world as he is not of the world but is bated by the world, as now under the
reproachful name of Quakers, and the like.

The Whore is not truly espoused to Christ, nor one with him, but is the false
Church which is not in God who is a spirit, but is in and of the world which
iso posite to the spirit, and spiritual worship, which hears not the voice of
Christ (but only the letter or men reading in a book which such as are not
Christ's sheep may hear read and know) neither does she feel his power, but
denies them that do, or that any do, neither is she made one with him that is
the light, nor have him so near unto her as within the hope of Glory, Col. 1.
27. but only as far as above the skies, or as Ierusaleni, and so far from
increasing in the increases of God, Col. 2. 19. or in the fruit of the spirit,
or to increase her number by virtue thereof; but only by an outward power,
law, learning, or letter that kills 2 Cor. 3. 6. which harlot or false Church
is of the world, and not of Christ, and has the worlds love, being truly
named Mystery Babylon, the Mother of harlots, Out of which God has redeemed
us, Rev, 18. 4.

Now this false Church and painted harlot, having not Gods power in her to
uphold her, is upheld by man's power, and is always subject to the
changeableness thereof, which Church or harlot is to fall with great violence,
Rev. 18. 21.

Then now will I leave it to understanding men to judge, whether ever there
were greater violence in this confused mother of harlots then now is; with what
violence are some of her late chiefest pillars now going down, that upheld her
a long time? and with what violence are others setting up, which violence
causes the people to mistak^ them, and so to cry them down, and what violence
is used in her between her Priests and teachers themselves one against another,
and all compassing the holy City about in which God dwells, (who promised and
does dwell in his people) as though they would devour (us) all at once, but
whether our help be of ourselves or from heaven, rea(...) Rev. 20. 9. and so
let all judge whether violence be not begun.

And again at Babylons fall the Saints rejoice, according as it is said rejoice
over (not bowing under) her my people, Rev. 18. 20.

And seeing Gods servants do begin to rejoice and shout for joy (though few can
he(...) it) and make melody in their hearts to the Lord, notwithstanding they
are with muc(...) violence persecuted, slandered, all manner of evil spoken
against them, and cast out o(...) the Sinagogues, threatened to be cursed out of
their Church (because they cannot ge(...) (...) in) and brought before Rulers
for his names sake, who said I am the light, John (...) Re^. 10. 8. which turns
to us for a testimony, Luke 21. 13.

Now men may mind the words of Christ, when the signs begin to come to (...)
then thereby to know what is near, Luke 21. 30. 31.

And now being it is so that Babel is to fall with great violence, and that the
servants and Prophets of God are then to rejoice.

And seeing also that they who are come out of her do begin to rejoice over her.

Let it now be considered what is to follow, or what God will bring to pass,
or what is near at hand, and whether the destruction be not near when they cry
peace, all the are safe, or whether the dreadful coming of Christ be not at the
midst of the dark night, like a theif, upon all the ungodly werkers of
darkness, over whom the Saints rejoice

My heart is filled with the power of God.

144 Lines of secret inward melody, not written to lift up any from that which
gives it.
MY heart shall sing of thee
who do my soul defend,
Whose life has saved me,
Who did my ways amend.
Whose strength has me upheld
Whose love is in me still;
Whose grace does virtue yield,
Who have taught me thy will.
Oh blessed be thy name,
Who have my life redeemd
That I may sound the same
With them that once were grievd.
Oh let me now rejoice
And praise the Lord my strength
Who long has been my choice,
And drawn my days in length.
Oh that I could declare,
Unto the sons of men,
His gifts and riches rare
Which he has yet for them.
Oh that my heart could dite
The goodness of his love,
Or that my pen could write
His mercies yet above.
Oh that I might express
With heart, with tongue or pen
His sweet delight somnesse
(...) men
Oh that I could unfold
Or in meekness declare
His strength which makes bold.
And keeps from the snart.
Behold his Throne is love
His seat is mercy pure
Descending from above
Is he both day and hour.
Behold his glory shines
Unto his jewels rare
He visits them betimes
When they in darkness are.
Behold his heart is bent
Toward his little ones
His love their hearts does rent
And in his virtue comes.
Behold he draws near
To all the poor and weak,
And he to them is dear
Who will them not for sake.
Behold he does arise
In might virtue and power,
To bring in his lost prise
Into his refuge Tower.
The weak he does defend
The poor he still uphold,
For needy he contend
And (...) them more then Gold.
His Lambs he still does lead
His little ones he teach
The hungry have his bread
The thirsty he refresh.
He makes the feeble strong
He makes the barren bear
He leads the blind along,
(...) the light most clear.
He comes as a dew,
In heat of Summer time
(...) his plants below
That forth their fruit may shine.
He feeds every babe
He seeks every lost,
His love does never fade
For his he spares no cost.
His life virtue and strength
His wisdom and his power,
He gives to his at length
And they of him are suer.
He never does for sake
His dear and little flock,
Who of that bread partake
That's hidden in the rock.
The heavens and the earth
He with himself does fill
He dwells in our hearts
And does reveal his will.
He makes known his way
That all his flock shall go,
And them in light array
(...) to withstand the foe.
He helps in time of need
(...) leaves not in distress,
He does effect the deed
Of man's deliverance.
He casts down to hell
^is power is so great
(...) does the living kill
And none can him defeat.
He raises from the grave
And makes the dead alive
From him there is none can save
Nor from his presence hide.
He Is always near at hand
From trouble to deliver,
He Is joynd with his in band
To live with them for ever.
No God is like to him
No honor like to his,
No man is said to win
Whose soul is lost from bliss.
O praise him all ye Saints
Who feels his virtue near,
Unto him still give thanks
Who is our Father deer.
Let wicked men lament
Let all ungodly howl,
Too late shall some repent
When down his judgments roll.
When Babels turned in lake
When beast is thither thrown,
When drunkards reele and shake
When wrath is powered down.
When vengeance much with might
Is poured on the Whore
And all secret deceit
Destroyed for evermore.
Then Sion shall be glad
Then God shall honored be,
Then praises shall be had
Then worship shall be free
Then comfort shall abound
In all true mourning lambs,
And Gospel free shall sound
Throughout all nation Lands.
The times hereof's at hand
The Captives shall be free
Gods seed in every land
By him shall g(...)thered be.
Let friends rejoice in fear
Let fear in love abound,
Let Thousands more draw near
For we the pearl have found,
Let all in patience dwell
And in the Lord still trust,
That we in love excel
In which with you I rest.
As I was walking alone in my close Prison at Winchester, upon the 24th day of
the 5th. month 62. in much quietness and inward refreshings by the rising
virtue of Gods refreshing love; these lines began to run gently through me,
with melody in my heart to the Lord and when I was free in my self to begin to
write, it departed not from me but came so easy and so fast as I could well
right, whereby in a very little part of the foresaid day this was begun and
finished with ney own hand; yet would not I have looked upon to be a great
thing, nor a pattern nor example for others to run into the like for since I
came into the life and obedience of truth, I durst not write any thing in verse
until this time.

Humphery Smith.

The 30th. of the 4th. month, 62.
AS in a vision the Sheep that I saw, they lodged on the side of a Mountain as
high as Heaven, and they lay one by another, and one upon another, yet not in
the least offensive one to another, but lay as quiet and as loveing as if they
had been asleep, or sleeping one by and upon another, yet were perfectly awake:
And though the whole world roaled from under them, whereby they were like to
fall, and no visible ground or thing was seen to receive them or to fall upon
(which was in such a manner that (...) cannot well express it) yet were they
not afraid thereat but lay as quiet in themselves as before, being upheld by an
invisible power; and they that were tumbling down, (...) were falling, had not
the least harm; but their removeal was to them as it is to a^ child to be
removed in the Nurses Arms, out of one place to another, (more then it
express) or though some of them seemed to be a little removed, or to fall,
when the whole world roaled from under them (which was but to try them) yet
they that (...) so were not in the least harmed thereby but were very well
supported, and in a (...) were recovered, and climbed up the most steepest
mount of the whole world that was ^fore them; and as for themselves they were
more large, fair, and comely than ever (...) natural eyes beheld, and their
wool was all over them as perfect shining gold.

After I had written this little thing and had also found that it was showed
(...) the very time that the Rulers of the Earth in London began to deprive
friends of (...) worldly helps and things which seemed thereby to be wholly
rolling from them (...) did I send one copy of it to a friend in that City to
see, who informing me that (...) friends desired to see it: wherefore I thus
open it more plainly.

The world was the outward visible world, with all things that are upon it, or
per^ning to it; the rolling away of it was so that nothing thereof was left
them at that (...) to lay hold on, or to stay themselves upon. As for the sheep
Christ termed his (...) ^thren and members so, and as for their wool they had
abundance thereof upon the yet no more then comely or rather glorious, and it
was as Armor to them not to be ^ced through, nor to be taken from them, neither
was it in the least defiled, which (...)

Printed for M. W.

The End

