Two Funeral SERMONS PREACHED IN St. SAVIOR'S CHURCH IN DARTMOUTH.

Together With a PREFACE, giving some account of the reasons, why they are now
made public.

By HUMFRY SMITH, M. A. and VICAR there.

LICENSED, Feb. 23. 1689/90. Z. ISHAM.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Yeo, Bookseller in Exon. 1690.

THE PREFACE, TO THE Inhabitants of Dartmouth in Devon, Grace, Truth, and Peace
be multiplied.
My Friends and Brethren,
YOU, that know me, and the occasions of the two following Sermons, will, I
doubt not, easily believe: that I was far, at first, from designing, they
should ever become more public, than the Preaching of them made them. As the
space, allow^d for either can hardly be called Days; so I am very sensible,
that performances of this kind, on which I have bestowed more time and labor,
have little in them to recommend them in an Age, which (God be praised) abounds
with Practical Discourses of the greatest Excellency. They do not therefore
come abroad, on a conceit of any thing extraordinary in the Contrivance; but
only to stand the Charges, which have been drawn up against them: That some,
who could not, and others, who would not, hear them; may perceive at length, as
I hope they will, that amongst the real imperfections to be found in them,
there is, however, nothing at all of a spiteful humor.

I am sure, I can truly say, that in those few Years I have lived amongst you,
I have labored, as to give no just offense to the Church established (of the
Lawfulness of whose Constitutions I am heartily persuaded.) so neither to any
of those who have been drawn to dislike her Communion, and separate from her. I
do not remember, that the Regard I have, and the particular Obligations I am
under to the former, have made me forgetful of a befitting Candor toward the
latter: especially in the public discharge of that Holy Off^ce, I am regularly
called to. But, alas, you very well know, the cry has been frequently
otherwise: such representations having been made of me, as if I were guilty of
malicious Reflections; and did not only, with those the Apostle speaks of,
preach Christ Phil. 1. 15.
of envy and strife, but preach even Strife and Envy themselves.

The discourses, which have been singled out as the chief Foundation of such
Reports, are these two now printed: which I put into your Hands, without any
material alteration from what they were in the Pulpit. Indeed some things,
which were then omitted, I have here added; but whatever was spoken, you have,
as near as may be, as it was spoken: and in those passages, which, I am told,
have given occasion of offense, I am secure, I think, of exactness, even to the
least word.

And now let me beseech those, who have been pleased to censure me, to
consider: whether the things are so faulty, as they have represented them? Or
rather, whether they did not seek for cause of displeasure, where none was
given? whether some have not thought fit to make reports, not so much of what
they heard, as of what they expected; and others supplied the defect of
Intelligence by a fruitful imagination?

The first of these Sermons was preached October. 24. 1687. at the Funeral of an
aged Gentleman, to whom I was obliged for much civility: and whom, by reason of
his coming sometimes to the Public Worship (his absence at other times being
easily accounted for, from much sickness and infirmity) I thought no
^onconformist to the Orders of the Church of England. Indeed a little after his
Death, I was informed that the Preacher in a separate Congregation had put in a
claim to him, and withal, that at the same time he was pleased, at least
plainly to insi^^^te, that this discourse of mine (preached but two or three
days before) was envious and reflecting.

The Crimes which soon after I was commonly ^ensur'd for, not only in this, but
several other places, you may remember, were principally these two: Reflection
on the Person interred, in what I said about Riches, in the middle of my
Sermon: and a spi^eful Character of him, at the latter end of it.

From both these faults, I hope, the discourse it self will now sufficiently
purge me: For as to the first, can it be with the least show of reason
concluded, that what was said of the Worldling (in compliance with a subject
which the Church her self has recommended on such occasions) should be mean
by me as a description of the deceased? I sp^ke likewise of the Voluptuous, the
Ambitious, the Learned, etc. And why should it be thought I aimed at him in
one, more than in any of the other? Yea, is it possible for any reasonable
Person to think, that when I considered the va^ity of Riches, and an immoderate
love of them; I designed to brand him for a M^s^r, whom, in the very same
Discourse, I expressly commended, for a Just, an Upright, and a very Charitable
Conversation?

This account of him was a part, you will find, of that other thing I am
censured for, The Character at the latter end, which (being too sensible of the
inconvenience, and sometimes mischief of Rhetorical Harangues in such cases)
according to my custom, I did not intend should be long; or contain any thing
in it, which had not the support of manifest truth. But as it is, I dare de^ie
my veriest Enemies to show any thing in it, in the least measure reflecting:
For my part I think it might have been applied, without offense, to any Man
that ever was, at least, beneath the Eminence of a Martyr, or an Apostle.

I declared that on his death bed he was frequent in the acts of a Duty, which
as it is extremely unsafe to begin on it, it is neither safe to give over on
it, Repentance: at which passage some, I know, have been displeased. As if a
penitent frame were not proper, at such a time as that is: or it were a
reproach to the memory of a Christian, to say, he waited for the coming of his
Lord, with an humble sense of his own unworthiness. I know not what Rules may
be given by some, for conducting the Devotions of a deathbed; but sure I am,
that very excellent directors, advise Repentance at that season, even to
Persons of the highest seize, as a Duty still agreeable: Repentance for
sins which have been committed through error and inadvertency; for sins which
are the constant attendants of Mortality; as also for those which were long
before considered and lamented. St. Augustine was a Person, (who, for above
Twenty years before his death, shone as one of the brightest Stars in the
Christian Church; and his Scholar and dear Friend that wrote his Life, did not
surely design to lessen his Praise, in the place where he tell us; That
Possidius de vita August. c. 31.
the Good man more than a week before his departure, would not have his Eyes or
Thoughts diverted from David's Penitential Psalms, but only now and then, when
his Physicians came to visit him, or his Friends to bring him Refreshment: That
^e read them as they were placed by his order on the Wall near his Bed; that he
meditated continually upon them, prayed, and often wept, and so dyed.

But I advised my hearers at last to avoid the failings and defects of him I
interr^d, as well as to imit^^e those things in him that were virtuous and
holy; and this was another ground of Offense. Such advice, it is true, I then
gave, as I have on such occasions several times before and since. For is not
what, you will find, I added, a very great truth, viz. That the best of us are
infirm and fallible? And does not St. John tell us plainly, if we make any
different Pretenses, we deceive our selves, and the truth is 1 John. 1. 8.
not in us? It is the peculiar Glory of the Holy Jesus, to have given a Pattern
to the World free from all blemish and imperfection: wherefore when one of the
greatest of his Servants recommended the following 1 Cor. 11. 1.
of himself, he limited the Counsel to those Instances only, wherein he
followed Christ.

Having met with such usage on the score of this harmless Discourse: The regard
that I had for my own injured Reputation drew from me three Letters to him,
who, as I had reason to believe, gave some occasion to these Reports. But
though I could get only some doubtful Answers to the two first, and none at all
to the last; I should not have attempted this public Justification of my own
Innocence, had I not found it called in question again, because of the Second
Sermon here printed.

This was preached on Nov. 21, 1689. at the Funeral of a Person, whom I look^
upon as honest and peaceable; one who several times expressed much Friendship
toward me, and to whom, as I am not consetous to my self, that I ever offered
any injury whilst alive; so I am sure I intended none being dead.

But it was not long after his burial, that I was surprised with the news of no
small clamor about this Sermon also, being told, that several had declared
themselves offended at it, that at least some Passages of it had been put in
writing, sent away as far as London, and there spoken against with much wrath
and violence.

You, that will be pleased calmly to read it over, will, I believe, find it
some difficulty to discover, where the Grievance lies. And indeed the charge
against it, though very heavy, has been so sparing of Particulars: that I
hardly know which are the Places I am to vindicate.

Besides the Text (which has been disliked, but for which, I hope, you do not
expect, I should go about to make an Apology) the only thing insisted on, that
I can hear of, has been a few words in the Conclusion: Words, which are
thought to bear hard, if not on the Person gone down into the Grave; yet on
some he has left behind him. To clear my self fully from this Accusation,
would be to mention some late Transactions, which have already made a noise not
only in this Place, but in some sort through the Nation. I shall therefore
attempt it no further than by this Appeal, which I make to every reasonable and
intelligent Person, acquainted with our Circumstances, of what Persuasion
soever, viz. Whether the things I spoke were not plain and notorious Truth? and
whether they were not such Truth, as was fit to be spoken by me on the occasion
I then had for it?

These things, Brethren, are what I thought proper to say to you by way of
Introduction to the ensuing Discourses: which, being thus drawn into the World,
may they be in some degree or other useful to all that read them: May they
contribute something toward an Holy neglect of the present things, and a due
provision and regard for those that are to come; The great ends, for which both
of them were sincerely designed, and to which it is now heartily prayed, they
may be successful, by

Yours in all the Offices of Christian Love and Duty, H. S.

The First SERMON.
PSALM 39. 6. Surely every man walks in a vain show. --


ADversity is one of the best Instructers, Wisdom being not so easily learnt in
any other School, as in that of Affliction.

Prosperity, like some over-strong Light, dazles the Eyes, that they can take
in but imperfect and confusd notices of things: but Calamity sets all right
again, as it prepares the Mind for a due Estimate or Judgment; so it removes
all the false Colors which are apt to cozen us.

David, according to the Opinion of several Vide Theodoret. Oper. tom. 1. p. 544
Commentators, labored under some extraordinary pressure; as when the
foregoing, so when this Psalm was penned. And hereupon we have him mounted up a
degree higher than ordinary above Earthly things, freed from the false Notions
and Opinions of the World, stripped of all the prejudices of sensuality, and
passing a right judgment on this mortal life. Verily, says he, in the foregoing
Verse, every man at his best state is altogether vanity: and his words in my
Text seem to be yet more comprehensive. Surely every man walks in a vain show.

Not to say any thing of a different reading In imagine Dei -- Ita legerunt S.
Ambrosius, S. Hieronymus, and ^lii non pauci.
made use of by some of the Ancients, the words, as here rendered agreeably to
the manifest design of the Psalmist in this place, give us an account of humane
life, the condition of Mankind in this present World. Short indeed the Sentence
is, but very expressive, as you will soon perceive by viewing a little the
several particulars we find in it: Namely these four,

1. The Persons concerned. 2. Their Business, or constant Employment. 3. The
Scene of their Travel. 4. The Assurance with which the Psalmist thus represents
them.
First, We find in the Words, the Persons concerned in this Sentence of David:
Every man: (...). Sept. v. 5.
every one that lives and breathes. All the whole Race of whatsoever Sex, or
Age, or Condition. There is not the least exception, either of the highest, or
else the lowest. All are concluded, from him that is clothed in Purple, to him
that is covered with Rags: from the Prince on the Throne, to the Slave that
grindeth at the Mill.

Secondly, Their Business, or Employment: They walk. They are constantly going
onward; they are in perpetual motion, always Travelers whilst on Earth. The
journying they are engaged in, toward their long home, is not to be
interrupted by an hours stay, or so much as one minutes rest.

Thirdly, We have the Scene of this travel or motion, a Scene proportioned to
the thing that moves in it: A vain show. About the meaning of which word there
is some difference amongst Expositors.

Some there are, who take it for a Shadow; and with these agrees that
Translation our Church makes use of in the office of Burial. For man walks in
a vain shadow. A Shadow which is a thing gloomy, but yet empty, having nothing
more in it, but only to cover us with darkness. Man, whilst here below, is in a
Region of obscurity, ^ona, R. (...) and Da^ per (...) exp. ^enebris ^ulat.
(...) Cl. Ca^i Lexic. ^taglot. in (...) (...).
wanders in a dark uncertainty, a place infected with the mists of Ignorance
and Error. He cannot look into the nature and events of things: he stumbles up
and down without any knowledge of his way, unless guided and directed by an
extraordinary Light sent down from above.

By others the word is thought to signify an (...). (...).
Image, accordingly that rendering is added in the Margins of some Bibles:
Verily every man walks in an image. He goes on in a life which seems (...).
^doret. ^cum.
indeed to be something to him; but he is cheated all the while: such degrees
of death are blended with it, that it may justly be called only a Picture or
faint resemblance of Life. And then he converses with things that seem to be
very shining, but yet they are a kind of Phantomes, like the Colors of the
Rainbow, which are only the Image of the Sun broken, and returned back by the
drops of a Cloud; or like that representation of our selves appearing in the
Glass; which, however delighted in, is nothing else but emptiness.

Another variety is to be found amongst In^erpreters (occasioned by a different
reading) (...)
^ot unfit perhaps to be mentioned. For as some ^ead, Man walks in a vain
show, so others have it, (...)
^s a vain show: according to the usage of Scri^ture in some places, applying
this Shadow not ^o the Scene of his motion, but to the Man himself. Man passes
on as a Shadow, as a sha^ow Psalm 102. 11. Job. 14. 2.
that declineth or flees away. Or, understand^ng the word to signify an
Image, it agrees to ^im also, to wit, a thing that (according to that seems the
meaning of an Ancient Writer (...). Apollinar. Metaphras.
^n this place) is acted, for the most part, like ^e Figures in a Pageant,
which look as though ^ey moved and spoke: whereas the whole is ^ue to the Skill
and Management of an invisible ^rtist. But,

Fourthly, and lastly, We have in the words the ^onfirmation of this Sentence
of David, Surely. ^e declares it with great assurance, having doubt^ss
considered the reasons which support it, and ^en it ratified by much
experience. It Is the ^sult of a very diligent Enquiry, and exact ^bservation.

The things we find in the Text being thus ^articularly noted, the sum of what
it aims at ^ppears to be this, That this mortal life is a very empty thing:
That our condition here in this present World is great vanity. This Truth, with
the Divine assistance, I shall briefly illustrate, and so go on to the uses of
it.

Whatever Opinions, my Brethren, we are ap^ to take up about our present abode,
it will certainly be found, upon a due examination, a^ Condition very
unsatisfactory, void of every thing, that is a solid Foundation of Happines^ or
Contentment. The greatest Pleasures of i^ are but Delusion: the greatest
Advantages bu^ Show and Appearance.

You are to observe however, that this is a^serted concerning humane life as
humane, ab^stracted from those Spiritual things, which giv^ it something of
Being; without the Improvements of Grace, which add some solidity eve^ to the
most fleeting things, and bring in some imperfect Felicity, where was nothing
else bu^ Misery.

Origin, it is true, in one of his Homilies o^ Orig. Hom. 1. in Ps. 38.
this Psalm, makes no doubt of applying the Sentence of the Royal Prophet, even
in some sort, to things Spiritual. That is, as com^paring their present
imperfection with what promised, and shall be revealed. If Moses hi^ self, says
he, were alive again, he would kno^ in part, and prophecy in part; he would
see but darkly through a Glass, and teach us Figures: so that though he must be
said to live, it would be only a life of vanity. And would you know the reason,
continues he, why we ought to call it Vanity? It is, because such things are to
have an end: For when that which is Perfect is come, then that which is in 1
Cor. 13. 10.
part shall be done away.

Indeed it must be granted, that this present ^ife, though it may yield some real
Happiness to them, that seek it in the ways of God, cannot yet afford a perfect
Happiness. Something of substantial good such Persons will be able to find,
very low however in the degree, and having in its composition a large portion
of different things to lessen or allay it. But then as this mortal life is
divided from the considerations of Religion, as it commonly pretends highest,
and is so apt to draw the Eyes and the Hearts of Mankind, it is nothing at all,
but an empty and deluding appearance. To it in this sense (the sense I shall
only consider it in) the Verdict of David is universally applicable: it is vain
without reserve or exception. Declarations of this kind are frequently to be
met with in Holy Writ. As St. Paul endeavored to take off the Corinthians from
too great a concern for worldly things, he added this reason of his advice: for
the fashion of this world passes away. 1 Cor. 7. 31.
The Fashion of this World, says the Apostle, making use of an expression
borrowed (as some learned Men have observed) from the Theater; to the Scenes of
which he compares the several states or changes of our life. Things that may
please, surprise or amaze, according to the different Designs of the Contriver:
but in the mean time are only show or representation.

The things which are seen, says the same Apostle to the same People, are
temporal. They are measured by Time, and partake of the Affections or
Properties of it: and (...). Haec S Basil and plura ejusmodi homi^. 1. in
Hexaemeron. vol 1. Oper. Bas p. 7. Edit. Paris. 1618.
that is such a thing as you cannot grasp or discern the least substance in.
That part of it which is gone is already become nothing, that part which is to
come is as yet nothing; and the present Minute, ere you perceive it to be,
vanishes away. Of this nature is Time and of the same are all Temporary
things: They are either growing or else perishing, having nothing at all in
them which may be depended upon as stable and certain.

We need instance in no other places of Scripture, but that which purposely
treats of this argument, the Book of Ecclesiastes. Solomon, the Author of it,
was the Person who made the most diligent search into the things of this life;
he proved them by very curious, too curious, experiment: He saw all the works
that are done under Eccl. 1. 13, 14.
the Sun, he gave his heart to know wisdom; yea, to know madness and folly.
Solomon also was the Person Eccl. 2. 3.
in the World; who could best judge of the things of this life, being endued
with Wisdom beyond all that came before him, or that should 2 Chronicles. 1. 12.
come after him. And now what says he? having made a large induction of the
severals that may pretend to worth, he declares the Sentence: Vanity of
vanities, says the Preacher, all is Eccl. 12. 8.
vanity.

And as such Notions of humane life have been entertained by wife Men within
the Church: so they have been likewise by some without it. Thou have tried,
says the Emperor Marcus Antoni^us to himself, (...) have tried to ^^^d
Felicity in the things of this World, having wandered through so (...). M.
An^^p. de seipso, and ad seipsum,
great a part of them: but what ^hou ^^s^ sought for, thou have not found: not
in the arts of Reasoning or Discourse, not in Riches, not in Glory, not in
Pleasure, not any where. This was the judgment of a Prince inferior to Solomon
indeed in Wisdom; but, as a learned Man has noted, exceeding him M. Casaubon
in his Preface to his English Version of that Empero^^'s Meditations.
much in Wealth and Greatness. He, who was Lord of more Kingdoms, than that
King of Israel was of great Towns, declares, That he could not discover in them
all (...), the means or ingredients of living Happily.

Many of the wiser Heathens had such low Sentiments of these transitory things,
that they would not so much as allow them to be called Beings, ascribing that
name to the Divine Essence alone. Hence the distinction of Plato, of (...).
Plat. Tim. p. 526. Edit. Lugdun. 1590.
That which is, but is not generated: and that which is generated, but is not.
The God infinitely existing of and from himself deserves the name of Being; but
the corruptible things, we convers^ with, are too empty and vain to claim tha^
Title.

This it is probable enough he took from tha^ Inscription in an Egyptian
Temple, giving some account of the nature of the Divinity suppose^ (...) --
Plutarch. de Iside and Osi^ide Oper. Tom. 2. p. 394. (...). 16^^.
to dwell in it: I am all that was, is, or shall be; which is so like that in
Exodus 3. 14. that we can hardly doubt of its Original. (...), say the
Septuagint, I am that I am.

For a more distinct view of the vanity of this present Life, it will be
convenient a little to consider these three things:

The Enjoyments of it. The Designs of it. The Continuance of it.
1. The Enjoyments of it: The things in the World, as the Apostle calls them,
that is, such as 1 John 2. 15.
are held to be valuable in it, and are commonly the Objects of Desire. And
now, certainly, a little Enquiry into the Nature of them, a few serious
Reflections on the Experience we have already had of them, will abundantly
discover their Emptiness.

A Christian Writer long since compared them all to a Dream, wherein the Mind
is sometimes employed indeed about things, which are very taking; but then the
Morning Aurum, voluptas, gaudium, Opes, honores, prospera, Quaecunque
nosinstant mala, Fi^ ma^e, Nil sunt omnia, Pruden^. Cathem. Hymn. 1.
comes on, the delightful slumber passes away, and presently we perceive all
the Being they had was only in the imagination.

St. John gives us a short Catalogue of the most considerable Enjoyments, which
this World can boast of: namely: The lust of the flesh, the 1 John 2. 16.
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life; that is, Pleasure, and Profit, and
Honor. These are all, says he, which are in the world: And can these, any, or
all of these contrive an Happiness, or purchase for us any real Contentment?
Should you make a trial of all the Pleasures that are under the Sun (those
Pleasures which chain the Senses, and bring a kind of Enchantment upon the
Mind) and then review them a little after cooly and deliberately: you would
certainly find, they were not at all answerable to the expectation was raised
of them. Yea the show, they make at a distance, begins to vanish common^y as
soon as you come near them: and when you think to take hold of them, like some
fantastical appearances, they pass away between your Fingers.

I said in my heart, Go to now, I will prove thee Eccl. 2. 1, 2.
with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure; says Solomon. Thus he sets out with a
strong resolution to be Happy; but see, alas! the wretched disappointment in
the very next words: Behold this also is vanity. I said of laughte^, it is mad;
and of m^rth, what does it?

If there (...) any relish in the Delights of sensuality, it is by a kind of
violence to our selves, that we are capable of it. How many degrees down must a
Reasonable and Immortal Spirit be sunk, before it can begin to perceive any
taste in them? Its nobler Faculties must be all bound (...), and laid asleep:
it must become an unthinking inconsiderate thing, like the Soul of a Beast. And
whenever it recovers its own Liberty, and the use of its proper Powers: How
does the joy^ turn presently into bitterness? It ^orments i^ self with Anguish,
Indignation, and Re^orse: The pleasure ends in loathing and detestation.

These a^e the Enjoyments of the voluptuous; and no greater sure are those of
the worldling. Follow him to his Treasure, and there see him with a mighty
diligence endeavoring to secure a sort of things so transitory, that they even
make to themselves wings, and fly away: a sort of things, Prove. 23. 5.
which moth and rust corrupt, and thieves break through Mat 6. 19.
and steal. See him there, laying up his heaps of Cares, making to himself a
Thorny Pillow, which will disturb his rest, and interrupt his sleep. Yea behold
him there, admiring and even adoring what will not afford him in a day of
distress a minute of Ease, or a drop of Refreshment. That darling of his Soul
his Gold, notwithstanding the value he puts on it, is only a little shining
Earth; and notwithstanding it pretends to a kind of Eternity, is yet a thing
that perishes. The Gold that perishes, says the Apostle, (...) Pet. 1. 7.

As for greatness and honor, they who have had the largest share of them, have
sufficiently shown that they were far from being contented. Some further thing
has been still in their Thoughts and their Wishes to render them unquiet. He,
that, from being the King of a little Country, carried his Dominion over the
greatest part of the then known World, could not yet find enough to satisfy
his thirst of Glory. And now the Reason of this is evident: for the things,
which Ambition pursues, being indeed without substance; the mind, that is
infected with it, meeting with disappointment in every purchase, is forced to
seek relief from some new hope or imagination.

What is there in Grandeur or Eminence, to repay the labor and difficulties
with which it was obtained? What is there to sweeten the hurry, and noise, and
slavery, it unavoidably engages in? What is there to balance all the danger
and fatal issues of it? What is there, I say, to do all these things; but only
a little popular Air, an insignificant Title, the wonder of the Crowd, things
light and empty as the breath of Fools?

Having food and raiment, says St. Paul, let us be 1 Timothy 6. 8.
therewith content: And the advice has this strong Reason to back it, viz.
That in having these two things, we have all that is really useful. A little
Food you may have, a corruptible thing: So our Savior calls it in that Command
of his, Labor Joh. 6. 27.
not for the meat that perishes. A little Raiment you may have too; but such,
as when Art has done all it can do for it, is outdone by the Lillies of the
Field: So our Savior tells us in that Declaration of his, I say unto you, that
Solomon Mat. 6. 29.
in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. The greatest industry in
the World will afford you no other advantages, but such mean things: Things
which serve indeed, at present, the Necessities of a mortal Condition; but
which you are not to carry hence, as being utterly useless in that state
hereafter, wherein Shame, and Hunger, and Thirst shall have no Place, and Men
shall be as Angels.

2. The Vanity of this Life will also appear from the Consideration of the
designs of it; the nature of (...) Purposes, which are ordinar^ly taken up, and
followed by the greatest part of Mankind.

Supposing something of real good in these Temporal things; yet the pursuit of
that good is so difficult in it self, and often meets with so many cross
Accidents, that to be busy in it, is altogether vain and foolish: Because to
every Eccl. 8. 6, 7.
purpose, says Solomon, there is time and judgment; therefore the misery of
Man is great upon him: For he knows not that which shall be; for who can test
him when it shall be? Much skill, and observation, and weighing of things are
necessary to a regular Conduct; the right Season, and proper Circumstances of
Actions being hard to be found out. And after these matters are fitly dispos^d;
the Event is still covered with a Veil of darkness, which time alone is capable
of removing.

He that contrives to gratify a Carnal Appetite, that is, to be as happy as a
Swine, frequently misseth his end by ill management. Some unexpected Accident
interrupts the design, o^ some Disease falls upon him, which quite overthrows
it. He that is resolved to be Rich, and therefore rises early, and sits up
late, and eats the Bread of Carefulness; finds often to his Grief, that the
Purpose will not prosper in his Hands: The toil and diligence will not succeed,
nor yet the injustice and rapine; having with Pharaoh's lean Kine devoured the
fat ones, he is still lean as before. The Man who plods and flatters,
undertakes the vilest Employments, and sets himself out to the basest drudgery,
complys with every Interest, is made a Property at pleasure, and becomes the
Tool of every Party, to arrive at length at the height he proposes to himself;
finds at last his labor in vain, after so much endeavor, the fine Projection
miscarries, the thing aimed at proves to him inaccessible, or else only a
Precipice whence he tumbles down. But these, you will say, are the Counsels of
wicked Men; and no wonder therefore that they are so frequently blasted; there
may be yet other designs, which as they are more just, so likewise more
successful; as, the Designs of a Family, of knowledge and wisdom. True it is
indeed that these designs appear somewhat more considerable, being suited to
the innocent Inclinations of Mankind; and therefore such as we may more justly
expect should prosper; but yet we cannot put them out of the number of Vanities.

He, whose desire and labor is for his Posterity, those Children which he
hopes to leave behind him, is often disappointed; disappointed even when he
thought he was entered on the Possession of his Wishes. His Sons and his
Daughters, o^ whom his Love was placed, either dye to his sorrow, or live to
his greater sorrow; are either s^atcht away and thrown into the Grave, o^ else
are left to consume his Eyes, and to grieve hi^ Heart.

He that is eager too in the pursuit of knowledge, pursues a thing, which,
without a divine Stamp upon it to set it above the World, is nothing else but
vanity. Solomon reckons it last indeed; but yet he re^kons it amongst
Impertine^cies, amongst Vexations. Of making many Boo^ Eccl. 12. 12.
there is no end, and much study is a weariness to the flesh. Justin Martyr,
being a Heathen, was ca^ried Haec de se fusius narrat B. Justinus Mar. in
dialogo suo cum Tryphone Judaeo paulo post principium.
with a great deal of earnestness to the stud^ of the Grecian Learning, passed
through the sev^ral Schools of Aristotle, Pythagoras, and Pla^ sought very
curiously for something satisfacto^ amongst all their Precepts and Discoveries;
bu^ nothing of that kind was it possible for him (...) meet with, till he
en^ountered a plain aged Chr^stian, who talked of Revelation and a Messiah^ who
reasoned of Bliss and Immortality, Redemption and eternal Glory.

3. Our Life is vain in respect of the continua^ of it. Did this World afford
such things, as ca^ make us happy, and were the method of co^ passing them
described unto us in plain and une^ring Rules; yet after all, the frailty of
the Creature, to whom the fruition belongs, is so very great, as to give the
whole the name of Vanity.

The man, our Savior speaks of, thought, no doubt, he had made an ample
Provision for felicity. The materials, he chose for it, were already at his
command; and he caressed himself with the sure expectation of the happy issue.
This Luke 12. 19.
will I do, says he, and then say unto my soul, take thine ease. But, alas!
all the while he forgets the very thing, which will destroy the Project, and
Heaven puts him in mind of it. God said unto him, thou fool, this night thy
Soul shall be required of thee.

^alia agentem, atque medi^antem mors praev^nit, Sueton. vit. Jul. Caes. c. 44.
says the Historian, concerning one of the greatest of Men; as he was now
designing the greatest things. He that by an uninterrupted course of study, and
diligence, and valor, and success, had raised himself to a height, that no man
ever arrived at before. And he that was now forming the designs of being yet
higher and more glorious, tumbles in his Blood, and is forsaken by all, till at
length three of his Servants have so much regard for the Emperor of the World,
as to take him up, and carry him home.

The Meditations are very good, though found in a Book which is very bad, that
were occasioned by the view of a Mariner Shipwrackt, and cast dead upon the
Shore Go now, ye Mortals, says Petron. Arb. Satyric. cap. ^5.
one who escaped the danger, go, and fill your Minds with vast Purposes: Go now
ye Provident, that are settling the Succession of your Wealth for a thousand
years. See here the Person, who but yesterday took an account of his Riches,
and appointed the day in his thoughts when he should be at home. Alas, how far
short is he fallen of the designs he had imagined! B^t this is not the Lot,
continues he, of those alone who commit themselves to the Faith of the Seas.
One Man miscarries through the defects of his Armor, another by the fall of
his Chariot, and a third is buried in the Ruins of the Place he came to
worship in. Sometimes Meat destroys him that eats it, and sometimes the want of
it him that eats it not. If therefore we reckon aright, Shipwreck is every
where.

Indeed the continuance of Man is so short, so transitory, that the Sacred
Writers themselves seem, as it were, at a loss for words sufficiently to
express the Vanity of it. Sometimes this mighty thing Life (which we have so
high an esteem for, for the sake of which we plow the Seas, and rip up the
Earth, yea, are ready to turn the World upside down) sometimes it is called!
What I pray? Not a Julian Period, or a Platonic Year, not a Sum to be
reckoned by Centuries or Ages; but a Duration to be measured by the Continuance
of a Flower, or a Leaf of Grass: All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of
man as the 1 P^t. 1. 24.
flower of grass: the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away. And
at other times an Emblem is made use of, that may express a greater
uncertainty: a Vapor is chosen, something exhaled out of the Earth on a
sudden, and tossed away with the Wind. What is your life? it is Jam. 4. 14.
even a vapor, that appears for a little time, and ^hen vanishes away.

And not to search into the Ages past, and so ^ick out here and there some
extraordinary in^tances of humane Frailty: consider but what you have seen with
your own Eyes, think upon the speed of some, and the infancy of others, which
have gone before you; yea lay the three^core years and ten (which a few,
amongst many Thousands, come up to) into the Balance against Eternity: And then
all these expressions will appear proper and natural, being but suited to that
haste and uncertainty they would describe.

Indeed, Brethren, let us but look into our own frame: let us examine the
Materials out of which we are formed, the sineness of those Threads with which
we are woven; let us consider a little how many Thousand very tende^ Parts are
necessary to keep on the work of Life and withal what variety of disorders all
these parts are constantly liable to: And then it wi^ appear unto us one of the
greatest wonders the whole Creation presents us with, that such things as we
are, should be able to continue, not for twenty, or thirty, or forty years; but
only f^^ two or three days, or two or three hours together.

Having thus shown you a little the vanity (...) humane Life: I now come to
make use of t^ Consideration of it: and the things I would (...) commend, as
plainly following from it, are the three:

Not to be in love with it. To endeavor for a better. To account the
possession of that better, (...) evil.
1. Our condition in this present World, being so vain a thing, let us manifest
our belief of this by not being in love with it. Will thou (says Prove. 23. 5.
Solomon, speaking of some Temporary Enjoyments) set thine eyes upon that which
is not? Will thou be fond of what has no real Being, dote upon Show, and court
a Shadow? I Let not reasonable Creatures, I beseech you my Brethren, be guilty
of any such extravagance. Let us not please our selves with Emptiness, and be
zealous ^n the pursuit of Trifles. Let us not place our Desires and our Hopes
upon what will miserably deceive us. In short, let us not seek for satisfaction
there, where nothing is to be found but only Vanity.

The truth is, we have been so accustomed to mistakes, that such Doctrine, as
this, is for the most part somewhat ^a^d of digestion. We ^ave many of us been
so long used to a good ^pinion of the World, that we know not how ^o begin to
think meanly of it: Yea if we open ^ur Eyes a little at any time, and see
somewhat unto the fallacy; some shining Appearance da^es our sight: If we awake
a little, some soft ^ir fans us again into our former slumber, where^n we are
pleased with fantastic Ideas, with a ^ream of Felicity. The Gentleman in
Arrianius returning from Banishment, seemed to himself abundantly satisfied of
the Follies of Ambition, and the Vanity of the World; declaimed earnestly
against his former course of Life, and resolved now for a Philosophical
Retirement, to spend all the little time should be further allowed him, in a
happy Ease and Tranquillity. With these (...). Arrian. Epictet. l. 1. cap. 10.
Thoughts and Designs he addresseth himself to his Journey; but he meets as he
goes on with Letters from Caesar: and the force, alas! of such a Charm is not
to be resisted, his Stoicism melts presently away, and all the late Purposes
are now quite forgotten.

Be sure therefore to use your utmost Industry not to be imposed on: cast off
the prejudice of unreasonable Lusts, all that Favor and Affection which blind
the Eyes, and warp the Judgment, that so at length you may be able to make a
due estimate in this matter. For ou^ Thoughts about these things are not mere
speculation, where though Truth be desirable, we ru^ no hazard in erring: But
they are the very bottom on which we build our Happiness, according to the
firmness of which it will either stan^ or fall.

Indeed there is a certain Light, through which if ye look on this mortal Life,
you cannot b^ mistaken in it. There is a certain temper of the Mind, wherewith
if you consider the World, you will see through the f^cus or disguise, which
usually covers it, and perceive truly what it is, and what regard it deserves.
I shall give you a little direction in this matter.

(1.) Consider this Life, as it appears in the day of Affliction: Consider it
as the Warmth and Sunshine cease, as the Clouds gather over your Heads, and a
Storm approaches. Consider it as the Body is set upon the rack of a Disease,
or the Mind afflicted. What taste have ye, O all ye Earthly things, what
Relish, what Sweetness is there in you at such a time as this is? What
Refreshment has the Man, who lies scorching upon his Bed, who is tortured with
Pain, or whose Soul is pierced by the Arrows of the Almighty? What comfort has
he then in thinking he is the Master of so many Acres, or so many Bags; that
his Table is laden with Delicacies, and his House bedeck't with no common Art;
that he is a Person of Name, and has been the talk of the World?

(2.) Consider this Life as it appears on the Day of Death. Imagine that, a
Summons being sent you for a speedy Removal, an Hour or two were all the time
you could further expect in this World: and then consider what thoughts you
must needs have of this present Life, as you thus looked back upon it from the
brink of Eternity.

Certainly, Brethren, though we are now apt to put so great a value upon it, it
will then appear a wretched impertinence, when all the Treasures of the East
and West will not bribe us to a Smile; When Ceremony and Attendance become
nauseous: When there shall be no Taste in Meat o^ Drink, neither will the Ear
hear the Voice of Singing Men or Singing Women: When the Soul is preparing for
its everlasting Flight, and the Body to go down to that Earth out of which it
was taken.

But, that you may know, how the World looks to a Person on the Day of his
Death: I will give you the Thoughts of two dying Men, D^ing and Dead Men's
Words, by Dr. Lloyd. ^ond. 1673.
both of our own Nation, as we have them amongst other very good things in a
late Collection. One as great a States Man almost as ever was, Sir John Mason.
Privy Councellor to four Princes: whose Declaration on his Death bed was this:
I have seen the most Remarkable things in Foreign Parts, been present for
thirty Years together at most Transactions of State, and have learnt this after
so many Years Experience, That Seriousness is the greatest Wisdom, Temperance
the best Physic, and a good Conscience the best Estate: And were I to live
again, I would change the Court for a Cloister; the bustles of State for an
obscure Retirement; and the whole Life I lived in the Palace, for one Hours
enjoyment of God in the Chapel: All things else forsake me besides my God, my
Duty, and my Prayer.

The other, a Man of as much Reading, as Mr. Seldom.
any our latter Ages have afforded, who, when he came to die, amongst all the
Learning of the Sons of Men, which he had surveyed, amongst all the numerous
Books and Manuscripts he had perused and was Master of, could not meet with any
thing that gave the satisfaction to his Soul, which he found in these words of
St. Paul: The Tit. 2. 11, 12.
grace of God, which brings salvation, has appeared ^o all men; teaching us,
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and ^odly in this present world.

(3.) Consider too what this Life will appear ^t the Day of Judgment. That is
the time, when ^ll Disguises shall utterly vanish, and every thing ^e seen in
its proper Colors. Think therefore that you now stood before the Tribunal of
the lord Christ, and there it were required of you to judge of that, for your
esteem, and use, and abuse of which, you your selves shall then be judged. In
such Circumstances as these, doubtless your Opinions of things would be very
different from what they too commonly have been.

What will Greatness, and Honor, and Fame signify, when there shall be no
respect of Persons; when the obscure Slave will be upon the same Level with the
Crowned Head; when there shall be no distinction known, but that of the sheep
on the right hand, and the goats on the left? Mat. 25. 33.


What will the having been the Possessor of a great deal of Gold and Silver,
many Houses and much Land be then accounted of, when the whole Frame of the
World is cracking and dissolving; the earth burning up, and the elements
melting 2 Pet. 3. 10.
with fervent heat?

Finally, What will the Memory of past Pleasures amount to, the Deliciousness
of this Fare, o^ the Sumptuousness of that Clothing, or the Sweetness of the
other Enjoyment? Yea, how glad would many be, if no such things had eve^ been,
then, when a strict account is to be given of every thing that has been done
in the flesh? But, 2 Cor. 5. 10.


2. If our Condition is so vain a thing, then hence also let us be stirred up to
vigorous and hearty endeavors after a better. Though our present Habitation, or
rather Place of our Pilgrimage be nothing else but Vanity; yet there is a
Country, which we have heard of, abounding with substantial things.

Those that have seen it, and known it, and came from it, have made relations
of what it is: They have spoken much of the Joys and the Glories of it, have
told us, that nothing there is Dark, or Frail, or Transitory; but all things
Pure, Clear, and Admirable, of a Goodness more extensive than our very Desires,
Brighter than ten thousand Suns, and as Lasting as Eternity: yea, they have
assured us that the things of it are unspeakable, beyond the power of Words or
Description.

We have too sufficient ground to believe, that this blessed Condition is not
such as cannot belong to us; but that we are capable of it, and were even
Originally designed for it, that, as the Author of the Book of Wisdom speaks,
God created man to be immortal, Wisd. 2. 23.
and made him to be an Image of his own eternity.

Yea more than all this, Solemn Overtures have been made, Messages have been
sent to us: We have been directed, enabled, invited, persuaded with the
greatest earnestness to come, and to secure to our selves this blessed
Habitation.

And Oh, my Brethren, shall we not now think it worthy of our thoughts and our
care? Shall we any of us neglect any longer to comply with those methods, which
Heaven has found out for transplanting of us from Vanity and Trouble into
Bliss and Immortality?

It is not indeed any light performance, which will fit us for that better
state; not a little Outside Service, or a little Lip-devotion; no, nor now and
then a pious Warmth, or a melting Temper; not a listing our selves in this or
that Party, or being reckoned under such a Denomination. The passage through
the strait Gate is not so easy as these things. But it is a faith that works
by love, a due conformity to all the Evangelical Proposals, a working
continually with fear and trembling, a having our Minds above the World, using
it so as if we used it not. In short, a being Religious, Sober, Just and
Charitable in our Conversation.

These are the Terms which the Angel of the Covenant requires; and shall we
stand at the difficulty of them, since they lead to real and lasting Good?
Shall we be discouraged in an undertaking, that will advance us above the
Vanity of this present Life, add some solidity even to these fleeting things,
converting our perishing Riches into an Heavenly Treasure, and at length bring
us to a glorious Eternity?

Thirdly and Lastly, our Estate at present being vain, let us account the
possession of that better one, we have been speaking of no evil. Let us not be
unwilling to enter, when God's time shall come, upon these never fading
Enjoyments our selves; or seem to envy the fruition of them to our departed
Friends.

Indeed for those, who are without the Pale of the Church, or for the negligent
within it, to be amazed at the Apprehensions of death, is but what is natural,
is but what is too reasonable. But for Christians to be so affected, shows that
something is yet amiss with them; that though they are Israelites traveling
for Ca^^aan, they have not quite forgot the things of Egypt; that some remains
are still in them of the Love of this present World, or else some Tincture of
Infidelity.

Certainly, Brethren, if we are as we ought to be; if the Sacred Truths of the
Gospel are thoroughly assented to in our Minds; and the Power of Religion has
new formed o^^ Hearts, we shall be ready to say under the expectation of our
own deaths, with an humble Confidence in the Merits of our Redeemer, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly; and at the departure of our Christian Friends, The Lord
has taken away, blessed be the ^ame of the Lord.

As for our Neighbor and Friend whom we have now committed to the Grave, as I
am not fond of such a Task in this Place, so I am not sufficiently qualified to
give you the perfect Character of him. Our Christian hope is, that he has
exchanged a Scene of Vanity for eternal Glory. He has long been exercised with
a troublesome, a painful Disease, a Sacred Discipline sufficient to instruct
him in the Vanity of the World, and, we hope, he was not unfruitful under it:
Yea, he manifested that he was not, by an upright, and just, and, as I am
informed, a very charitable Conversation. His Deathbed showed him Devout and
Pious; and he was frequent in the Acts of a Duty, which as it is extremely
unsafe to begin on it, it is neither safe to give over on it, Repentance.

But I shall conclude all with that advice, which I have often given on such
occasions; because it is some of the best I can give on such occasions. The
Failings, the Defects, that you observed in him (for the best of us are infirm
and fallible) learn to avoid. The things that were Virtuous, and Holy, Comely,
and of good Report, resolve to transcribe and imitate.

The Second SERMON.
ECCL. 4. 2. I praised the dead which are already dead, more than the living
which are yet alive.


PLato, in his Apology for Socrates, tells us, Plat. Oper. p. 360.
that That excellent Person made it his business for some time to find out a
prudent Man: He diligently searched amongst the several Ranks of People to
discover, if it were possible, one truly Wise.

A Task somewhat like it is that, which a more excellent Person, by a much more
excellent Spirit, is engaged in here in this Book of Ecclesiastes. He gave his
heart to seek and to search out by Eccl. 1. 13.
wisdom, concerning all things that are done under heaven; he made a very
strict enquiry, and the thing he looked for was Felicity: what sort of People
are in the Condition most desirable and blessed.

He seeks for these amongst the Gay and the Pleasant, those who give themselves
up to the gratification of all their irregular Appetites; but here he cannot
find them. He continues his enquiry amongst the Industrious and the Careful,
and with the same error and disappointment. He searches amongst the Knowing
and the Great, the Plodding and the Active, the Men of Design and Business: yea
he runs through the several Orders of the World; but his labor is still
fruitless, all the discovery he is able to make being only this, VANITY AND
VEXATION OF SPIRIT.

His search being unsuccessful above Ground, he tries withal a little what can
be met with under it, views the hollow Eye-pits, the shattered Bones, and
mouldring Ashes in the Grave. And of this enquiry, behold the result, I praised
the dead, says he, which are already dead, more than the living which are yet
alive.

The general Design of the Preacher in these words seems plain enough, they
being a declaration, that in the accounts of Happiness, the Condition of the
dead is to be preferred to that of the living.

The former of these two states is what he lately examined; and though (as he
thought fit to govern himself) he met with nothing in it but corruption and
uncertainty; yet returning and considering the Calamities of Life, Death
appeared desirable, and he began to praise it. Like one amazed with many
grievances before his Eyes, he cries out, and seems to say such words as these:
Death is the tying indeed, which humbles the Pride of the highest Mortal, down
to the level of the meanest Slave: yea some curious researches have afforded us
but imperfect relations of the difference, it leaves, between the Man and the
Beast; however we cannot easily imagine it to be more ^ntolerable than the
present Bondage. Though the House we must all go to at last be so dreadful to us,
that we are apt to recoil, and shrink, and not ^ield, at any rate, to be
willing to enter it; yet is ^t possible to conceive more unsufferable things ^n
it, than the Labors and Sorrows, which now ^lmost perpetually oppress the Sons
of Men?

A very ancient Commentator dis^overs a mystical Sense in this place, Si
renunciasti seculo, si abjecisti vitia, si jam non moveris ad peccatum, sed
mortuus es ad peccatum, melior es illo qui vivit peccato, and ^rit in te mors
ista laudabilis. O^igen. in Number. 12. Homil. 7.
and would understand by the dead, ^uch as are dead to sin; and by the ^ving,
those that still go on in it. An ^nterpretation, which contains a Truth, a very
great Truth; but not, I think, what is agreeable here. I shall consider the
words according to their literal meaning, which I take to be this, That the
miseries mankind is exposed to in this present Life, are sufficient to make
them consider Death as a thing of advantage.

Man, says Job, lies down, and rises not, till the heavens be no more: He
goes into the Region of Death; but he does not return and make discoveries of
the place. The evils of Life are things of Sense, we see them, we very often
feel them; but of what shall be hereafter the only information we can receive
is by Reason and Revelation. In the following discourse I shall therefore
endeavor to show the advantages of the dead above the living both these ways:
as they are to be discerned,

1. By mere Natural Eyes. 2. By the Eye of Faith.
1. The benefits of Death, as considered by natural Men, are but mean and low;
yet something, we know, they have been able to perceiv^^ in it preferable to
the Evils of this miserabl^ Life: and that with relation both to the Bod^ and
the Soul.

(1.) As for the Body, they could see nothing in the dissolution of it, but
what is common to Brutes: That which befalls the Sons of Men, befalls
Beasts: -- All go unto one place, all are of the Dust, and all turn to Dust
again: so the Preacher seems to speak their Sentiments, Chap. 3. verse Vid.
Notat. in vitam Dionysii per Petr. Halloix Dionys. Oper. Tom. 2. p. 269. and
Grot. de verit. Relig. l. 2. c. 7.
19, 20. Some of the Greek Philosophers fell indeed upon the Opinion of a
Resurrection; but the Tenet, we find, had but slender entertainment: for when
St. Paul Preached at Athens, it was treated as an impossibility.

But, though the wiser Heathen for the most part could not hope for a return of
the Body from the Grave, they could however consider it there as silent and at
rest, they could perceive an end of all the Labors, Pains, and Grievances of
it.

How often does a Man throughout the course of no long Life complain of Hunger,
and Thirst, and Weariness? How often is he scorched with burning Heats? How
often are his Sinews, his Bowels pierced through with unsufferable Pains, so
that he roars like a distracted Person because of the violence of the torment?
Now Death puts an end to all these disorders; Sighs, and Complaints, and Cries
are not heard in the Pit: The fatal thing comes as an Universal Remedy for all
kinds of Diseases and Miseries, and therefore the approach of it has been
sometimes desired with much impatience. Wherefore, says Job, is light given to
him that is in misery, and life unto Job. 3. 20. --
the bitter in soul? Which long for death, and it comes not, and dig for it
more than for hid treasures: which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they
can find the grave.

(2.) Concerning the condition of the Soul after Death, there has been much
uncertainty in the Opinions of natural Men. Who knows, says the Preacher,
Chap. 3. verse 21. the spirit of a man that goes upward, and the spirit of the
beast that goes downward? Who by the Light of Reason can be certain (for so
some understand the place) of any such difference? Or, according to others, who
is able to state the difference right, declaring the things of each? Some of
the learned Heathen fancied that the Soul, immediately as Vid. Ciceron. Tuscul.
Quaest. lib. 1. and Plutarch. de placitis Philos. lib. 4. cap. 7.
the Body becomes unfit for it, vanishes into the soft Air: and the greater
number, who were convinced of its Immortality, were yet full of doubt about its
future Condition and Employment. However, amidst all this darkness, they were
able to discern somewhat more valuable than the present Slavery. To be even
nothing at all, they thought, was not to be miserable: and whatsoever abode the
Soul, in case it survives, is to have after Death, it could not easily be
believed more inconvenient than the Prison it now dwells in.

It was observed by Eliphaz, that trouble is the Job 5. 7.
Birthright of Man: that it is as natural for him to undergo it, as for the
Sparks to fly upward. The sense is somewhat different in the Septuagint; Haud
absimile est istud Comici apud Athenaeum (...). Deipnosoph. l. 6. p. 223. Haec
S. Chrysostomus, and similia fere Olympiodorus in Catena in Job.
but it occasions the following Paraphrase of an excellent Father: Humane
Nature, says he, is inferior to the Productions of the Earth, and the
Mountains, which know no sorrow either in their beginnings or increase. Yea,
the Birds are allowed to make their Motions without pain, and to gather their
Meat without trouble, but Man in all these things is very miserable.

And declarations of the same kind are often ^et with in the Books of the
Gentiles. Seneca considering the wretched Circumstances of humane Life,
wondered at Non videmus quam multa nos incommoda exagitant, quam male nobis
conveniat hoc corpus? -- Hoc evenire solet in alieno habitantibus. Seneca
Epist. 120.
^he disproportion between the Inn and ^he Guest, thence concluding, that so
Noble a Being could not be designed ^or so vile an Habitation.

And Pliny writing the History of living Crea^ures, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7.
begins it with a complaint, That Nature ^ath been more unkind to Man than to
any ^ther Beings. He is, says he, at first the ^eakest, and always after the
most sickly thing. Other Animals are acquainted with necessary Arts without the
trouble of Instruction; but Man knows not any thing till he is taught, unless
it be how to cry. To him alone, among all living things, belong Mourning, and
Luxury, and Ambition, and Covetousness, and Superstition. As the Life of
nothing else is more frail, so no other Appetites are more insatiable than his.
None are so apt to be terrified and confounded. None more disposed to Rage and
Fury. Other living Creatures of the same kind live Peaceably together, we see
them join and oppose those that oppose them: The fierceness of Lions is not
engaged against Lions, neither do Serpents bite one another; but Men, alas! are
the greatest Enemies to Men, the Kind is perpetually at Wa^ with it self, and
one seeks the Mischief and Ruin of the other.

Indeed, he that duly considers the Thraldom of an Intellectual Being, as it is
now fettered i^ this Prison of Earth, made liable to so many Impressions,
discomposed and agitated by so many Passions, and enslaved to Corruption, mus^
needs conclude that Man is the only thing, which something extraordinary has
befallen: that e^ther God, who made him, designed him at first for greater
Misery than the rest of the Creature^ or else (which is indeed the truth) that
he is tumbled down from his Original Perfection, and become only the Ruins of
what he was.

And now it was the view of such disorders and perplexities of Life which gave
the chief occasion to those Heathens themselves, to bestow so frequently their
Commendations on Death. O how ignorant, says one of them, are those People of
what they suffer, who do not magnify Death as the best of things! Some called
it the O ignaros malorum suorum quibus non mors ut optimum naturae inventum
laudatur! Senec. de Consolat. ad Marc. c. 20. (...). Aeschylus apud Plutarch.
Tom. 2. (...). 106. Multi extitere, qui non nasci optimum censerent, aut quam
ocyssime aboleri. ^li^. Secundus Not. Histor. in Praefat. ad lib. 7. ad ea, ut
videtur, respiciens quae dicta sunt de Sileno, Alcidamo and pluribus aliis a
Cicerone Tuscul. quaest. lib. 1. Haec ubi res fortuna male divisit -- exaequat
omnia -- Haec est, inquam, quae effecit ut nasci non sit supplici^m; quae
efficit ut non concidam adversus minas casuum -- Seneca ubi supra. (...). Haec
de ^rausis populo Thraciae Herodotus lib. 5.. 4.
Remedy of evils, the Desire of the afflicted; others considered it as a thing
which rights all Wrongs, levels all Inequality, and inspires with generous
Resolutions. And by the custom of a whole Nation the Funerals of the Dead were
performed with Songs and other expressions of ^oy; whereas the newborn Infant
was received by them into the World, with Sorrow and Lamentation.

We have thus sufficiently seen how Solomon's declaration in the Text holds
true, as the things it concerns are viewed by natural Men. And I have been the
longer in showing it, because (as it is the Opinion of several Expositors, and
as methinks is manifest from the foregoing and following words) by such
Measures as those the wise Man was now conducting his Enquiries. To prove that
the great pretenders of the World are mistaken in their thoughts of Felicity,
h^ walks along with them a little in their own Path, to search it out. He that
spoke of trees, from the 1 Kings 4. 33.
cedar that is in Lebanon, even unto the byssop the springs out of the wall;
that spoke also of beast^ and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes
seems here to take Man for the subject of hi^ Philosophy, considering him and
his Happiness as to be known by the help alone of m^er unenlightened Reason.

2. The first thing proposed being finished, (...) now come to the second, to
show the advantage^ of the Dead above the Living, as they are to be discerned
by the Eye of Faith. A cloudy and corrupted Reason can afford but very doubtful
a^counts of what shall be hereafter; but the d^fects of that are abundantly
supplied to the Church by Revelation from above. The Great God, who is the Lord
of Death, and whose Commands it always obeys, has been pleased to acquaint us
with the things which he himself has appointed to succeed it.

All the sorts of mankind come, you know, under one or other of these two
denominations, Righteous and Wicked. Now the words of Solomon, in the Text,
being indefinite, and the Seventy (...) -- Sept.
Interpreters having rendered them by such as are expressly Universal: Some of
the Fathers have applied them as to the former, so to the ^atter also;
asserting that even to Re^robates themselves a speedy Death is Gravius est enim
ad peccatum vivere quam in peccato mori; quia impius quam diu vivit peccatum
auget: Si moriatur peccare desinit. S. Ambr. de bono Mortis, c. 7. (...). S
Chrysostom. Tom. 1. p. 734. Edit. Savil. Simile quiddam habet divinus ille
Philosophus Boethius lib 4. Pros. 4. Si nequitia miseros facit, miserior sit
necesse est diuturnior nequam.
^etter than a prolonged Life: For so their Iniquity (which is the only cause
of Infelicity) is cut off, and consequently the degree of their future
^ufferings somewhat lessened: He that ^inks under the transgressions of a ^ew
Weeks or Months, being likely to ^nherit more easy torments, than they ^at
have gone on in a course of Impenitency ^or many Years. And this Opinion is not
without ground from other places of Scripture: The ^postle tells us, that they
who despise the riches of Romans 2. 4, 5.
^od's goodness, forbearance, and long suffering; that ^e hard and untractable
a great while under the continued calls of unwearied Mercy, do treasure up
wrath against the day of wrath, do increase the Measures of Vengeance according
to the proportions of their Crimes. And says our Savior to Capernaum, It
shall be more tolerable for the Matthew. 11. 23.
land of Sodom in the day of judgment than for thee: that is the obstinacy of
those, who contemned the preaching of Lot was not to such a height as theirs
who rejected the many Overtures and Miracles of the Messiah himself, and as
there was such a difference in the guilt, so there shall be hereafter in the
punishment.

In such a sense as this, Death to the impenitent is to be preferred before
Life; but it is all the while a sad preference. A Sinner hastily snatch^ away,
it is true, inherits the lesser evil; yet that lesser evil is greater than can
be conceived; it is still dreadful as the Flames, which the Breath of the
Almighty has kindled, and which are to burn for ever. Concerning such a Person
as this the words following my Text may be fitly said, Better yet is he that
has not been; better is the condition of him that died from the Womb, and gave
up the Ghost when he came out of Mortuus praefertur viventi quia peccare
desivit. Mortuo praefertur qui natus non est; quia peccare nescivit. S. Ambros.
Exposit. in Psalm. 118. Sermon. 18. vid S. Hieronym. in Ec cl. 4.
the Belly: or as our Savior said of Judas, I^ had been good for that man, if
he had not been born.

Without a miserable limitation or abatement, we see, these words of the
Preacher are not to be applied to Sinners; but then to those that have been
sincerely conformable to the Precepts of the Holy Jesus, and have secured an
Interest in his Mediation, they fully agree. Happy, infinitely happy is the
condition of such Persons being dead, beyond what they themselves, or any other
were or are being alive. Death which is the product of Sin, by a Divine and
Wonderful Skill, is changed to them into the greatest of Benefits. Blessed are
the dead, that die in the Lord: Rev. 14. 13.
for they rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.

To declare the Advantages of such as these, being dead above those of the
living, is the great business of most of the Evangelical Promises. I shall put
you in mind of some of them, these two ways, viz. by showing you a little,

1. What Death delivers the righteous from. 2. What it gives possession of.
1. The Death of the Righteous is to be preferred to Life, because of the things
it delivers from, namely much trouble and affliction. God has not designed for
his Servants while on Earth serene and Halcyon days; but leaves them even to
more than the ordinary inconveniences of a mortal condition. When that strange
Plague in the time of Gallus and Volusianus passing through Arabia and Egypt,
and destroying mightily as it past, came at length into Africa, some of the
Christians there wondered, that it made no distinction between the Professors
and the Enemies of the True Religion. At enim quosdam movet quod aequaliter cum
gentilibus nostros morbi istius valetudo corripiat; quasi ad hoc crediderit
Christianus, etc. Cyprian. de Mortalitate, p. 158. Edit. Oxon.
But their excellent Bishop in that admirable discourse he wrote on that
occasion, earnestly reproved in them so gross an ignorance of the Nature and
Designs of the Gospel they pretended to: as if, says he, a Christian did
believe for no other purpose but a present security; and it were not appointed
for such to enter through the greatest Adversity here into future Joy. Our
Savior seems indeed once to have given his Disciples Mark 10. 30.
a Promise of Temporal Felicity, that those Houses and Lands which were lost
for the sake of him, and the Gospel, should be made up again by an
extraordinary Providence. But if the things mentioned have not (as it is
thought by some) a Spiritual meaning, the Promise however was attended with a
bitter exception: it should be fulfilled (...) with a reserve of Trouble, with
a certain mixture or alloy of Persecutions.

As for this present Life, if Happiness is to be measured by the outward
appearance, the followers of Jesus are ordinarily the greatest Wretches in the
World: for so the Apostle in effect tells us. If, says he, in this life only we
have hope in 1 Cor. 15. 19.
Christ; we are of all men most miserable. Besides those troubles which (as we
have seen) are natural to Mankind, there are other labors and sorrows
belonging to them that follow a Leader who conquered through Sufferings. Even
the gracious expressions of his peculiar Love to them do as it were mark them
out for a large portion of trouble: and he so engages his Servants to
difficulties, as if he this way designed to approve Invenitur, cui corona
debetur: non invenitur, qui idoneus certamini non probatur. S. Ambros. Expos.
in Ps. 118 Sermon. 18.
their fitness for the Crown he promises. This will sufficiently appear from
the view of some few of those particular evils, which are the Portion of
Christians, and from the Bondage of which, Death is the only rescue.

(1.) Death is the thing which delivers the Christian from the burden of his
natural Corruption: utterly puts an end to that, which keeps him now almost
perpetually restless and uneasy. The sense of much pollution, of a constant
deficiency, which has frequently too betrayed him into grosser sins,
perplexeth the penitent and humble Soul, and fills him often with terrors and
remorse: till at length Death brings him an happy quiet, dissolves his
substance, and thoroughly purges out the inherent dross, gives his Soul the
purity of an Angelical Nature, and prepares a corruptible Body to be raised
hereafter in incorruption.

Indeed pollution belongs to wicked Men in a degree vastly higher: However they
have commonly little sense of this misery. A kind of Lethargy renders them
stupid under a weight which is sinking them down into destruction: whilst the
Servant of God perceives the pressure of much less guilt, and bitterly
complains of it.

His impurity and transgressions are the things which cost him so many Sighs
and Tears; these employ him in much Grief and Lamentation. There is no rest in
my bones, because of my sin. Mine Psalm. 38. 3, 4.
iniquities are gone over my head: as a heavy burden, they are too heavy for
me, says the Psalmist in his Repentance. And as the Prophet represents the
condition of an humbled People, he cries out saying: Wo^ unto us that we have
sinned: for Lam. 5. 16, 17.
this our heart is faint, for these things our eyes are dim.

(2.) Death is that which rescues the Christian from the constant importunity
of temptations: It Is, as St. Cyprian calls it, his Peace, his only De Mortalit.
p. 157.
Peace and Tranquillity; his sure, and firm, and perpetual Security.

Here we are as a City continually besieged, exposed every Minute to the
Battery and Assaults of Enemies: yea, there is treachery also within the Walls,
we are liable still to the sudden Violences of untractable Passions and Lusts,
and the wickedness of a deceitful Heart. No wonder therefore that so many of
the Gospel-Precepts are delivered to us as to Soldiers and Combatants: by which
we are commanded to all the difficulties of a Militant state, to stand fast, to
watch, to strive, to fight, to put on the whole Armor of God, and use it with
all the Skill and Courage we are able.

O the sweetness of Peace after the hurry, and uncertainties, and fatigue of
War; after the hunger, and thirst, and cold, the hazards, and sometimes wounds
of such a state for many Years! O wretched man that I am, Who shall deliver me?
said St. Paul under the sense, as some think, of such difficulties as these.
The question implied the greatness of the Bondage, and the proper answer to it
seems to be this one word, Death.

(3.) Death is what delivers from the spitefulness of this present World: from
the opposition it maintains to Innocence and Holiness. The Apostle recommending
to the converted Jews the Example of our Lord, presents him under the following
Character, A sufferer of the contradiction Heb. 12. 3.
of sinners, a Person set out as the common mark of Contempt and Obloquy. And
the Lot of the master belongs to the Disciples: for so h^ himself expressly told
them: If ye were of the world, the world would love his own; but because John
15. 19.
ye are not of the world, therefore the world hates you.

Most of the ancient Apologists for Christianity observe, that though the
Religion they defended, was of the meekest, most friendly, and obedient Temper,
fitted, beyond all things that ever were, for the Peace and Advantage of
Mankind: ye^ it was the thing which the World was most enraged against, and
pursued with the greatest Cruelty: All other People, said one of them to the
Athenagor. Legate. pro Christianis. p. 2.
Emperors, Antoninus, and Commodus, enjoy and admire your Clemency and Lenity;
but we Christians are those alone, whom you are pleased to cast out of
Protection, and expose to Sufferings.

And though a miraculous Providence over the Church put an end at length to the
Heathen Persecutions of it; yet all its sufferings of this kind will not be
concluded, whilst any of the Members of it are on this side the Grave: the
World still declares its malice against the followers of the Lamb, true
Religion being often treated with scorn and gainsaying, and sometimes worse
usage by the Heretical and Hypocritical, by the Atheists and Profane. And then,

(4.) Death is that which delivers from the malice of the Devil, secures for
ever from that envious Spirit, which if he despairs of the final overthrow of
the Righteous: yet will not fail at least to be active in contriving their
present misery. Nothing is so grievous to him, as the Ease and Tranquillity of
Mankind: and therefore when he is held from making a prey, he will yet run to
the very end of the Chain to Plague and Torment.

If thou come to serve the Lord, said the Son of Sirach, prepare thy soul for
temptation: temptation Eccl. 2. 1.
seems to signify there (as it does sometimes in Scripture) a trial by
Afflictions: and such a one as this, he that comes unto God, must expect from
the Enemy of Mankind, so far forth as the execution of his Malice is not
restrained by the Hand of Omnipotence.

The most High, for reasons of Wisdom and Mercy, gave the Enjoyments of his
Servant Job into the power of Satan: and so the next news we hear of that good
Man is, that he is strip^ of all things, and become as a Leper on (...)
Dunghill. The Dragon being cast into the Earth, persecuted the Woman, and made
her fly into the Wilderness; and since he might not follow her, he sent a Flood
after out of his Mouth to drown her.

The Almighty indeed has promised to defend his Chosen, to set an Hedge about
them, and even a Guard of Angels to secure them from the power of the Devil.
However the Protection we are thus assured of relates principally to Spiritual
things: as for Temporal, we find Satan put in a Claim to them in his attempts
against the Lord of Life, by whom too he was not directly contradicted; al^
these things, said he, are delivered unto me. Luke 4. 6.


Having thus particularly mentioned some of the evils which, being the Portion
of the Christian whilst alive, he is only freed from in Death: I doubt not but
you will easily grant this last state to be for his Interest above the former.
Happier, certainly happier, is his condition then, when all these Labors are
at an end, all these Cares, and Fears, and Sorrows are done away; and, as one
of the Fathers speaks, no Tear at all darkens the Eyes of him, who now beholds
the Beauty of the Glory of God. And yet these Negative Benefits are not all, or
the chief part of what we are enabled to speak of. For, (...). S. Basil. Homil.
in Ps. 114.


2. I am also to put you in mind of the Advantages of Death, with respect to
the things it gives possession of. But on this head, being not so suitable to
what was the Preacher's design in the Text, I shall say but very little, and so
pass to the Application. Precious in the sight of the Lord: says the Psalmist,
is the death of his Saints; upon which place St. Basil (some of whose words I
but now mentioned) has this following Comment. Those Stones amongst the Homil.
in Psalm. 115.
lovers of Riches are called Precious, which shin^ with fresh and delightful
Colors: How much more precious then is that thing, which adorns the Soul,
being now purged from all its stains and spots, with a Luster beyond that of
all the Jewels or Precious Stones in the World Indeed, Death is the thing which
turns a poor imprisoned Spirit, wearied with the confinement, and sullied with
the filthiness of an Earthly Tabernacle, into a thing Bright as the Firmament
and the Stars, yea glorious as the Sun it self for ever and ever.

Imagine a little what the Happiness must b^ of a Soul received into Heaven,
with the Applauses of ten thousand times ten thousand Angels and Saints; with
the Embraces of an Allglorious Redeemer; and the Euge of the Great God. Think
what the Joy must be of Seeing, and Praising, and Adoring, and Enjoying him
that died for us; of sounding out perpetual Anthems and Hallelujahs; of
dwelling in Eternal Light, and beholding the Face of that God, in whose
Presence is fullness of Joy, and at whose right Hand there are Pleasures for
evermore. Think upon these, and such things as these, which Death gives the
Christian possession of, and then certainly in respect of such Persons, you
will be ^eady to join with the Preacher, and praise the ^ead, which are already
dead, more than the living, which are yet alive.

And yet after we have thus filled our Minds with the most Glorious Idea's, and
formed a No^ion of the highest Happiness which can be imagined, we still know
but in part, and see through (...) Glass darkly. We cannot possibly reach the
things we aim at, or have any just conception of those ineffable Pleasures. As
it does not yet ^ppear what we shall be; so Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard,
neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive the things which God
has prepared ^or them that love him.

The preference which Solomon gives the dead before the living, being to be
allowed; that which (...) have farther to do, Brethren, is, to persuade ^ou to
a Practical as well as a Speculative belief of this, so to behave your selves,
and to act upon all occasions, as if you were in good earnest ^onvinc'd of it.
Particularly to manifest the Faith of those Advantages the true Christian ^inds
in Death beyond those of Life (for that is ^he sense I shall chiefly have
regard to now ^n the Application) in the three following In^tances.

1. A contempt of this present Condition. 2. A comfortable expectation of a
Discharge from it. 3. Contentment, on the Departure of our Christian Friends.
1. A contempt of this present Life. We have great reason you see to think very
meanly of it, since its Excellencies, which tempt and allure us, and that we
are apt so passionately to court, cannot vie with the Grave. We have had a
description of some of the troubles this state brings upon us, both as Men and
as Christians. And consider I pray you now a little, whether any thing mixed
with Ingredients of so much bitterness, can indeed please our Taste, or draw
our Affection?

Was ever the Prisoner in love with his Dungeon, or the Gally-slave with his
Chain? Can Men long for Affliction, or desire to make Tears their Meat? No
sure, one would think such things should not raise our Appetites, or become
very Inviting. And can we then, Christians, dote upon our present Condition, be
so hugely solicitous, so full of Endeavor to prolong our Torment, and continue
yet a little while more in that Life which is our Misery? Take the Wings of
Meditation, and with the Dove, sent out of the Ark, fly through this
Tempestuous World: See whether there be any Hillock to rest upon, any Spot
which the Deluge has not covered. Observe how all things are overflown with
Cares, what a strange maze of Uncertainties and Disappointments we always walk
in: how deceitful all Earthly Pleasures are, like the Apples growing on the
Banks of the Lake of Sodom, only well-colored Ashes. Think thus on the
condition of things here below, and then tell me whether this be a state to be
desired? Whether here it is that we should be willing to set up our rest?

Cicero brings in the wise Cato, being now near his end, looking back on the
Years he had lived, and thus declaring his Opinion of them. If Cato Major, sive
de Senectute, sub finem.
the God above should make an offer to me to grow young again, and to be once
more an Infant, I would with all earnestness refuse it. I would by no means be
set back to the beginning of the Race I have run, and live the Years that are
past over again. For what has this Life of Benefit? What has it not of Labor,
etc. Could a Heathen be thus sensible of the troubles of living, how much more
must the true Christian? He whose Life has not only been exposed to the common
Lot of Humanity; but to the Labors, the Difficulties, the Watchings, the
Fastings, the Strivings, the Conflicts, the Groans, the Tears of a Condition of
Temptations, of a Self-denying Religion.

If, according to the saying of an ancient Father, it be allowable for that
Person to be desirous of Life, whom the World fawns Ejus est in mundo diu velle
remanere, quem mundus oblectat, quem seculum blandiens atque decipiens
illecebris terrenae voluptatis invitat. S. Cypri^^, de Mortalit. p. 165.
upon, whom a flattering and deceitful Age allures with the Baits of Earthly
Pleasures, yet certainly the laboring, the panting Christian is under no such
Temptation. A Person in his Circumstances, one would think, should be so far
from being in love with this mortal Condition, that did he not know it to be
his Duty not to deliver up this Fort of his Body, which the Great King has
entrusted him with, till a Summons comes from him, he would earnestly desire to
be rid of it as soon as may be. Had he not learnt with S. Paul in every state
to be content, he would be even impatient in that request of his, to depart
hence, and to be with Christ, which is far better.

2. The next thing I am to persuade you to, from the Consideration of the
Advantages of Death above Life, is, a comfortable expectation of a Discharge
from it. To put off those Fears of an approaching Dissolution, which are apt to
disquiet us, and to meet it with evenness of Temper, and a holy Cheerfulness.

The Preacher's declaration being indeed not to be applied to some, but only
with the sad Exceptions and Limitations already noted; I cannot direct what I
now say to every one: Yea, I do advise you, my Brethren, not to be overhasty in
arrogating to your selves Comforts of such a nature as this is. Strong
assurances of Infinite Happiness in another World are the rewards of strong
Christians, and to obtain them, meddle not with the unsearchable Decrees of God
Almighty; but enquire into your Lives past, and try whether you can find there
that you are the Persons to whom the Promises are made. He alone has ground
for such a Comfortable dependence, whose Conscience witnesses to the Truth of
this, that his Faith has been active, that he has endeavored, and does
still, with all his power, to be void of offense toward God, and toward Man.

And now to you, all you that are thus Christians not in name or profession
alone, but in deed and in truth: To you I say, be not discouraged when Death
shall begin to look you in the Face; to use our Savior's words which he spoke
on a different occasion, look up, and lift up your heads, Luke 22. 28.
for your redemption draws nigh.

Socrates, who though a Heathen, suffered for a great Article of our Faith; and
whom therefore Justin Martyr doubts not to call in part a Christian, Just.
Mart. Apol. 1. page 48. it. Apol. 2. p. 83. Edit. nuperae Colon.
is said to have refreshed himself with such Meditations as these which follow,
between his Condemnation and Execution. I would have you believe, said he to
his Friends, that I hope to go to those good Men already departed. However,
though this be not positively asserted by In Phaedone, p. 377.
me, yet that I am hastening to that Divine Being, who is the best Master in the
World, is what I most steadfastly affirm. And hereupon it is that I am not
afraid of Death, as otherwise I should be; but am prepared to meet it with a
cheerful mind. And Cato, beforementioned, cried out, saying, O the happy day
when I shall be admitted to the Assembly of departed Souls, being freed from
the present hurry and corruption.

To such a greatness of Mind have some few been rais^d by the dark and
uncertain speculations of natural Reason; but the Triumphs of Christianity have
been much beyond it, in answer to its greater Light, and Encouragements. S.
Ignatius, as he was carried in Fetters to be Meat (...). Epist. ad Ephesios.
for wild Beasts at Rome, called the Bonds they put on him Chains of Pearl. And
S. Cyprian, exhorting those under his Episcopal Care (in that Tract I have so
often made use of) to a resolution De Mortalit. p. 161.
becoming them, whilst the Pestilence raged amongst them; reckons up the fatal
Symptoms of that strange Disease, and tells them they were designed to manifest
the Excellency of their Faith, to discover to the World a Constancy unshaken
amidst those Ruins of Mankind. Indeed this was almost the ordinary Spirit or
Temper of the Primitive and persecuted Church, though. Time, and Ease, and a
prevailing Impiety have rendered it now in too great a measure degenerate and
fearful. Christians then were not discomposed on the apprehensions of Death,
when in despite of the greatest opposition, they made it their only business to
fit and prepare for it. But,

3. The last thing I am to recommend to you from what has been now considered,
is, contentment on the departure of our Christian Friends. If they better their
Condition, let us not be impatient at it: let us not mourn and lament because
of their happy Change from Misery and Trouble to Freedom and Glory.

Something indeed is to be allowed to the sense of our own loss, and the
tendency of our imperfect desires; but to be immoderate on such occasions is
our grief, is to contradict our own Faith, and to make our selves like those
unaccountable Worshippers, whom Plutarch mentions, (...). Quaest. Roman. Tom.
2. p. 277.
who, as they prayed to their Deity, bestowed a good name upon the Dead, but
withal, desired that they might have none of them in their Houses. I would not
have you ignorant, says the Apostle, concerning them that are asleep; that you
1. These. 4. 13.
sorrow not as others who have no hope. An extravagant sorrow might be
reconcilable to the Opinions of some ignorant Heathen; but are a perfect
contradiction to the knowledge and hope of a Christian.

Accordingly the Office of Burial in our Church (in conformity to the Customs
of the Primitive) contains not Lamentations; but is a kind of holy Triumph, a
public declaration of Joy and Thankfulness for the Blessedness of the Dead.

When we joined in it but now at the Interment of our departed Brother, we did
in effect say such words as these: Now the time, the happy time of Release is
come, when a Christian exposed to Griefs and Sorrows, Weariness and
Temptations, enjoys his everlasting Freedom. At length he is delivered from all
the hurry and noise of a troublesome World, from all the strivings, and bustle,
and contentions of it: particularly in the present case, from that part which
it was the good Pleasure of Providence he should act, from that Office of
Magistracy, which, I doubt not, he very unwillingly engaged in, and which he
considered as his burden and unhappiness. He is taken away from all the evil
to come, from all uncertainties of event, from all fears and fatal issues of
things. To conclude, his Prayers are heard, his cry is come up into the Ears of
the Lord of Hosts; all his Cares and Pains are at an end, and he has found, as
our hope is, Peace, Quiet, and Eternal Rest.

THE END.

