OF THE DISTINCTION OF FVNDAMENTAL AND NOT FVNDAMENTAL POINTS OF FAITH. DIVIDED
INTO TWO BOOKS. In the first is showed the Protestants opinion touching that
distinction, and their uncertainty therein. In the second is showed and proved
the Catholic doctrine touching the same. By C. R. Doctor of Divinity.

Ephesians. 4. One God, one Faith, one Baptism. AN. M. DC. XLV.

IN this Treatise is refuted the general doctrine of Protestants, concerning the
distinction of Fundamental and Not fundamental points of faith in their sense:
but particularly, the doctrine of the Late English Protestant Writers touching
the same, namely. W. Laud, Lord of Canterbury, in his Relation of Conference,
etc. D. Potter, in his Answer to charity mistaken, whereof I cite the first
edition, for want of the second: and of Mr Chillingworth, in his Answer to
Mercy and Truth. whereby is refuted the most material part of their said Books.

This Treatise was made some years ago, but not printed, in hope that these
tumults in England would have been ended before this time: but seeing no end of
them, is now published.

THE PREFACE to the Reader. VVHERIN ARE SET down the contents of this
Treatise. 1.
1. PRotestants do teach, See infra c. 2. n. 3 c. 12 n. 2.
that only the principal or capital points of Christian faith, are of the
substance of saving faith, true Church, and way of salvation, and alone, truly
and indeed, Protestants make only fundame^tal points necessary.
necessary to them: and that al other points of faith are, at most, of the
perfection of saving faith, true Church, and way of salvation, and may be not
believed, though they be sufficiently proposed, without los of the substance of
saving faith, true Church, or salvation. And in this sense they call the
principal points, Fundamental, that is, alone substantial and truly necessary
to saving faith, to true Church, and to salvation: and call al other points,
Not Fundamental, that is, nether substantial, nor truly necessary to saving
faith, true Church, or salvation, howsoever they be proposed. And hereupon they
teach, that al, who believe the principal points of faith, howsoever they
sinfully believe not other points, though they be sufficienty proposed to them,
have saving faith, are in the true Church, and in way of salvation: and that
who be divided in secondarie points though sufficiently proposed, are not
divided in the substance of saving faith, of the true Church, or of the way of
salvation.

2. And the chief ground (though they pretend Scripture) of this doctrine, Their
ground thereof.
that alone the principal points of faith are of the substance, and truly
necessary to saving faith, true Church, and salvation, is, that the principal
points are termed Fundamental, or the foundation, by Fathers and Catholics: as
if the walls and roof were not of the substance or necessary to a house, because
they are not fundamental, Their end.
or the foundation of it. But the end, for which they teach this doctrine, is,
to maintain by it, that such persons or Churches, as they cannot deny, but
sinfully err in some points of faith, either sufficiently proposed to them, or
which would be so proposed, if it were not their avoidable fault, have
nevertheless a saving faith, are true Churches, and in way of salvation, nor
divided from them in the substance of faith, of true Church, or way of
salvation. So that mere necessity of mainteining Churches sinfully erring in
some points of faith, drew them to this sinful and pernicious doctrine, that the
principal points of faith are wholly sufficient, and al other points, howsoever
proposed, wholly unnecessary to the substance of saving faith, true Church, and
salvation. And this is in truth their doctrine concerning fundamental and not
fundamental points of faith, and their ground, and end of it. whereof the ground
is silly, the end sinful, and the doctrine pernicious and Antichristian, as
quite overthrowing al Christian faith, as hereafter shall clearly appear, and
so abominable, as the very authors of it, are ashamed to expres it in plain
terms, yea sometimes forced to deny it inwords.

3. For albeit they teach expressly and absolutely, and without al exception or
limitation of sufficient or not sufficient Proposal of not fundamentals, that
fundamentals, are sufficient, and abundantly sufficient, and Not fundamentals,
are unnecessary to saving faith, true Church, and salvation: They are ashamed
expressly to avouch their doctrine.
yet they are ashamed to say so expressly with this addition, even then when
not fundamentals are sufficiently proposed, or, when it is the Unbelievers
faults, that they are not so proposed, or, when one sinfully erreth, in not
fundamentals. Yea sometimes they deny, they teach so, and affirm the
contrary. Yet that in effect and in deed they teach so, and mean so, we will
Yet are forced to it.
prove out of their common Tenets and Principles, and their plain words and
deeds. Nether in truth would 1.
this distinction of fundamental and not fundamental points afford them any
color of mainteining such erring Churches, as they endeavor to maintain by
it, unless they meant, that fundamentals, are sufficient, and not fundamentals,
unnecessary, to saving faith, true Church, and salvation, even when not
fundamentals are sufficiently proposed; or, it is the Unbelievers fault, that
they are not so proposed, because it is evident, that such Churches err in some
points of faith, which, either are sufficiently proposed to them, or would be,
if it were not their fault, and so do sinfully err in such points. Nether also
2.
would there otherwise be any controversy about the sufficiency of
fundamentals, and vnnecessarines of Not fundamentals, to saving faith, true
Church, and salvation, betwixt Catholics and Protestants: because Catholics
grant, that fundamental points are sufficient, and not fundamentals,
unnecessary (to be actually believed) to saving faith, to a true Church, and to
salvation, when not fundamentals nether are sufficiently proposed, nor it is
the Unbelievers fault, that they are not so proposed. Nether finally, 3.
would such Churches, as they seek to maintain by this distinction, give them
any thanks, if they would afford saving faith, true Church, and salvation,
only to such of them, as inuincibly err in some not fundamental points not
sufficiently proposed to them, or which not for their fault are not so
proposed, and would deny saving faith, true Church, and salvation, to al, that
err sinfully in any point of faith: Wherefore as long, as by this distinction,
they seek to maintain erring Churches, or communicate with such Churches,
without excepting those, who sinfully err in not fundamental points, and also
hold such common Tenets and Principles as they hold, in vain they deny, that
they teach that fundamental points are sufficient, and not fundamentals not
necessary, to saving faith, true Church, and salvation, even when not
fundamentals are sufficiently proposed, or would be, if it were not the
unbelievers fault.

4. And this their doctrine, that Protestants call their doctrine of defending
sinfully errants in faith charity.
such, as believe the fundame^tal points, but sinfully err in not fundamental
points, or (which is al one) who err in not fundamental points sufficiently
proposed to them, or which for their fault, are not so proposed to them, have
saving faith, are in the true Church, and way of salvation, they call Charity:
and because we afford nether saving faith, true Church, nor salvation to any
such, say, they have more charity then we have. But this their charity
toward sinful errants in some points of says, is not solid and But it is false
charity, and ungrounded
grounded in any word of God, which avouches such sinful errants to have
saving faith, to be in the true Church, and in way of salvation, as so main a
point ought to be: but is only apparent charity, grounded in humane pity or
compassion, if not in flattery of such errants, and is directly opposite to the
word of God (as shall hereafter appear) and to true charity, as damnably
deceauing them, by telling them that they have saving faith, who The manifold
impieties of this doctrine.
destroy al saving faith; that they are in the true Church, who destroy the
form and unity of the true Church; and that they are in state of salvation,
who damnably sin against faith; who excuse al heresies in not fundamental
points, from damnable sin; who bring in libertinisme to believe or not believe
not fundamental points; who allow communion in Sacraments with all heretics in
not fundame^tal points; who deny Gods veracitie, and (as Protestants
themselves sometimes See c. 10, n. 5. 6.
confess) commit Infidelity, and give God the Lie. Such charity it is (as God
willing I shall clearly show) to afford saving faith, true Church, and
sauation, to those, who sinfully err in not fundamental points: or (which is al
one) who err in not fundamental points of faith sufficiently proposed, or when
it is their fault, that they are not so proposed. Wherefore this false charitable
doctrine, is to be detested and impugned, not as a simple heresy or error in
faith, but as a ground And a ground of Heresy, Infidelity, and Atheism.
of heresies, scisme, infidelity, and atheism. And it is in itself so
horrible to Christian ears, as the very defenders of it (though in very deed
and effect they do defend and must defend it, as long as they will defend such
erring Churches, as they do, and communicate with them, and hold other their
common Tenets and principles) yet are ashamed to avouch it in expres words, yea
in words sometimes disclaim from it.

5. wherefore in this Treatise, first What is handled in this Treatise.
of al, I set down plainly the true difference betwixt Catholics and
Protestants, toutching this distinction of Fundamental and not fundamental
points of faith, in what sense it is good, and admitted by Catholics: in what,
it is naught, and meant by Protestants. Next, I prove by Protesstants clear
words and deeds, and by diverse their common Tenets and Principles, that they
hold, that vincible and sinful error in not fundamental points, or error in
them sufficiently proposed, may stand with saving faith, true Church, and
salvation. After I show, why Protestants make distinction of points of faith
rather by these Metaphorical and obscure terms, Fundamental, not fundamental,
then by proper and clear terms, Necessary, not necessary. Then, that
Protestants are not certain, what a not Fundamental point is, nor vhich be
fundamental points, which not: nor whether a true Church can err in fundamental
points, or no, but now say one thing, now the contrary, as it makes to their
present purpos. Which evidently shows, that this their doctrine of the
sufficiency of Fundamentals, and vnnecessarienes of not fundamentals, is but a
shift for the present, and not firmly beleved even of them who teach it: and
nevertheless do build upon it, their defense of persons and Churches, sinfully
erring in some points of faith, and of their own communion with such, in
Sacraments and publik worship of God. Which is to build their own and other
men's salvation upon a ground, not only most falls, and which they are ashamed to
avoutch in plain terms, but also which themselves dot not firmly believe.

6. And having showed in the first book this uncertainty of Protestants,
touching their Fundamental and not fundamental points, in the second, I proceed
to certaineties. And first of al, because Protestants sometimes say, that not
Fundamental points are not points of faith, I prove, that there are many points
of faith, beside the Principal or Capital points, which are those that are
called Fundamental. Next I prove, that sinfully to deny any point of faith,
or part of Gods word what sover, sufficiently proposed, is formal heresy;
then, that every heresy, is damnable, and destroieth salvation: also, that al
such sinful denial, destroieth true saving faith, true Church, and their unity
and also Gods veracitie and consequently his Deity. Moreover, that Communion
in Sacraments or publik service, with any Church, that sinfully denies any
point of faith, is damnable. And al these points I prove, by evident Testimonies
of holy Scripture, and Fathers, and confirm them by reason, and confession of
Protestants. Which is the sufficientest kind of proof, that Protestants can
desire. After this, I show that this distinction of Fundamental and
Not-fundamental points in the Protestants sense, has no grownd in Scripture,
Fathers, reason, or doctrine of Catholics, as some Protestants pretend: but that
the whole grownd thereof, is mere necessity to have some colorable shift to
defend by it, Churches vincibly and sinfully erring in some points of faith.
And also, that though this distinction were admitted in their sense, yet it
would not suffice to defend such Churches, as Protestants endeavor to defend
by it: because they are divided not only in not fundamental, but also in
fundamental points: and most manifestly and undeniably, in Communion of
Sacraments and publik worship of God. Which Communion, I prove by Scripture,
Fathers, reason, and confession of Protestants to be essential to a true
Church, and what Churches are divided in this Communion, to be essentially
divided. And hence infer, that it is When error in faith is sinful.
not enough to a true Church, or member thereof, or to the way of salvation,
that one believe all the fundamental points: But that it is also absolutely
necessary, that he do not sinfully err in any point of faith or in
communion: and he erreh sinfully, who erreth, when the point of faith or
communion is sufficiently proposed to him, or for his fault is not so proposed
to him. And that Luther and his followers, who divided themselves Chilling. c.
5. p. 273.
(as is evident also confess by Protestants) from the whole visible Church, in
communion of Sacraments and publik worship of God, divided themselves
essentially, and from the essence of the whole visible Luther in leaving the
communion of the whole Church, leaft her substance.
Church. And so were in no visible Church. at al (because the whole, includes
al) or were in an essentially new made Church, as their communion in Sacraments
and in their publik service amoung themselves, was substantially new, and not
before, either among themselves, or among any other Christians. For a new
essential part of a Church, which was not before, must needs make a new
essential Church, which was not before.

7. And because Protestants hold Protestants hold some part of the Churches
faith, but no part of her communion.
many of the points of faith, which they held before their separation: but
hold no part of the Communion in Sacraments and publik worship of God, which
they held before with the visible Church, but have made a quite new Communion
among themselves, in Sacraments and publik service, which Communion, nether
they, nor any Christians before them, had: therefore they cannot distinguish
Communion into fundamental and not fundamental (as they do points of faith) nor
can say, they hold the fundame^tal part of their former Communion, and thereby
pretend, that they hold the substance of the same visible Church, as they say)
they hold the fundamental part of the faith they had before, and by holding the
fundamental part of the faith of the visible Church, pretend, they hold still
the same substance of the visible Church. Whereupon our argument taken from
their whole leaving the Communion of the whole visible Church, in Sacraments
and publik worship of God, (which is essential to the Church) is far more
forcible to prove that they have left the very substance of the whole Church,
and so are in no substantial Church, or in an other substantially new made,
then that, which is taken from their leaving in part, the faith of the whole
visible Church: though in truth both arguments be forcible enough, as we shall
see P. 2. c. 6. 7. And Protestants knowing well, that they have no pretense to
any part of the external Communion of the whole visible Church, from which
they departed, never prove themselves to be of the true Church, because they
retain al, or the fundame^tal part of the Communion of the visible Church:
but Protestants speak not of communion but against their will.
only, because they retain the fundamental points of faith: And speak as seldom
of Communion, as they may, or if they say, they have Communion with the whole
Church, they equivocate, and by Communion understand charity. Which nether is
that See c. 11.
Communion, which is essential to the visible Church, nor is any other, then
they are bound to have to infidels, and all that are out of the Church, to wit,
to pray for them, Protestants have no other communion with other Christians,
then with infidels.
wish, and do them good. And (I think) they will be ashamed to say, they have
no other kind of Communion with the members of the Church, then they have with
infidels: See l. 2. c. 11. 12.

8. Lastly; I propose to the Reader, a sum of the Protestants uncertainties or
contradictions, touched in this Treatise, that thereby he may visibly see, that
they are not certain, what to say, but merely make use of what serves them
for the time: and so, that al they say, is but shifts for a time. For whiles
they are racked by the Protestants confess truth whiles they are upon the rack.
evidence of truth, they confess, that al points of faith sufficiently proposed,
are necessary to a saving faith, to true Church, and to salvation: that sinful
denial of any point of faith, is true heresy, destroieth salvation, faith,
Church, and unity thereof: That Communion in Sacraments and publik worship of
God, is essential to the Church, and that for want thereof, Scismatiks are out
of the Church, and in state of damnation. But when they look back upon the
Churches which they manteine, and see how they sinfully deny some points of
faith sufficiently proposed to them, or for their fault, have them not
sufficiently proposed to them, and are divided, partly in matters of faith, and
wholly in Communion of Sacraments, and publik worship of God, they are forced to
deny all that before they confessed, of saving faith, true Church, and true
Communion. And the reason of this their inconstancy, is, because they would
join saving faith, with their faith, true Church, with their Church, true
Communion, with their Communion. Which is as impossible, as to join truth with
lies, life with death, heaven with hell. And whosoever seeks to join such
together, must needs, be, as the Scripture spreaketh, vir duplex animo,
inconstans Jacob. 1.
est in omnibus viis suis. Whereas Catholics (their faith, Church, and
Communion, being true faith, true Church, true Communion) easily and without
any contradiction at al, join them together, and show by the very
definitions of true faith, true Church, true communion, given by Scripture, and
Fathers, confirmed by reason, and approved by Protestants themselves, that
their faith, their, Church, their communion, is true. And if Protestants would
with indifferency consider this quite contrary proceeding of Catholic and
Protestant Writers, they would easily see, that they constantly defend truth,
these inconstantly make shifts for to to uphold untruths for a time. But at
length (as the Apostle says) their 2. Tim. 3.
folly will be made manifest to al. And as Saint Cyprian affirms: This is
true Epist. 55.
madness, not to think or know, that lies do not long deceive. At length shifts
will appear to be but shifts, and that which needs them, to be untruth.

9. And finally, out of al which, I have said, I conclude, that it is no way
against charity, but rather according to true Christian faith and Charity, to
warn sinful errants of their danger.
charity, to tell al Churches and persons, which err in any point of Christian
faith, or in communion in Sacraments, sufficiently proposed, or who sinfully
err against any point of faith, or communion in Sacraments, that whiles they
do so, they are in state of damnation, that being so warned of their error,
they may correct it, and avoid damnation: And at last is briefly showed, that
Protestant Churches sinfully err, both in points of faith, and in communion of
Sacraments.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Chapters of the first Book.
I. WHAT Protestants teach of fundamental and not fundamental points, and in
what they differ therein from Catholics. II. That Protestants teach, that some
points of faith are so vnfundamental, as they are not necessary to saving
faith, true Church, or salvation, though they be sufficiently proposed. III.
Why Protestants distingush articles by these metaphorical terms Fundamental,
Not fundamental, rather then by these proper terms, Necessary, Not necessary.
IV. That Protestants make great account, and great use of their distinctoin of
Fundamental and Not fundamental points. V. That Protestants are uncertain,
what a Not fundamental point, is. VI. That Protestants are uncertain, which
are fundamental points, which are Not fundamental. VII. That Protestants are
uncertain, whether a true Church can err in fundamental points, or no.
OF THE SECOND BOOK.
I. THat there are points of faith, beside these principal articles, which are
to be preached to al, and believed of al. II. That sinful denial of any point
of faith, is true heresy. III. That sinful denial of any point of faith
destroieth salvation. IV. That sinful denial of any point of faith destroieth
true saving faith. V. Diverse errors of Protestants about the substance, and
unity of saving faith, refuted. VI. That sinful denial of any point of faith,
destroieth the substance of the Church. VII. That sinful denial of any point
of faith, destroieth the unity of the Church. VIII. That to deny any point
of Christ's doctrine suffieiently proposed, is to deny his veracitie and Deity.
IX. That Communion with heretical Churches, or which sinfully deny any point
of faith, is damnable. X. That their distinction of Fundamental, and Not
fundamental points, has no ground in Scripture, Fathers, Reason, or doctrine of
Catholics. XI. Though the Protestants distinction of Fundamental and Not
fundamental articles were true, yet it would not suffice for their purpos, for
want of union in fundamental points. XII. That their distinction would not
suffice, for their want of communion in Sacraments and publik worship of God.
XIII. Protestants errors about communion, refuted. XIV. The Protestant and
Cath. doctrine, about matters here handled, and their Defenders compared, and
brefly showed, that it is true Charity, to tell sinful errants in any point of
faith, or in communion, that they are in a damnable state.
A RAISONABLE REQVEST to him, that will seriously answer this Treatise, to say
directly, and plainly, yea, or no, to these questions following, and constantly
to stand to his ansuwer, in his whole Reply.
Whether Protestants, in their distinction 1.
into fundamental, and not fundamental points, do intend to distinguish true
points of faith: and mean, that not fundamental points, are true points of
faith, or no?

Whether sinful error in any true 2.
point of faith, or of Gods revealed word, can stand with saving faith, a true
member of the Church, and salvation, or no?

Whether there be not sinful error, 3.
when any point of faith is sufficiently proposed to a man, or, for his fault,
not so proposed, and yet not believed of him, or no?

Whether fundamental points be sufficient 4.
to saving faith, true Church, and salvation even when not fundamental points
or not principal points are sufficiently proposed, and not beleved, or sinfully
not beleved or no?

Whether not fundamental or not 5.
principal points be not necessary to a saving faith, true Church, and
salvation, when they are as sufficiently proposed, as points of faith ought to
be, or would be so proposed, if it were not our fault, or no?

Whether it be sufficient to prove, 6.
some to have saving faith, to be true members of the Church, and in the way
of salvation, that they beleve all the fundamental points: and it be not also
necessary to prove, that they do not sinfully err in any point of faith
sufficiently proposed to them, or, which would be so proposed, if it were not
their avoidable fault, or no?

Whether, if it be necessary to saving 7.
faith, true members of the Church, and to salvation, not to err sinfully in
any point of faith sufficiently proposed, or which should be so proposed, if
it Were not the vnbelevers fault, it be not damnably to deceive souls, to
teach, that al who beleve the fundamental points, have saving faith, are in the
Church, and in way of salvation, or no?

Whether sinful error against any 8.
point of faith sufficiently proposed, or which would be so proposed, if it
were not the Errants avoidable fault, be formal heresy, and al such Errants,
formal heretics, or no? or if it be not heresy, what sin it is?

Whether al formal heresy, be not 9.
damnable sin, and al formal heretics, in state of damnation, or no?

Whether the Grecian, Lutheran, and 10.
such other Churches, as Calvinists grant to err in some points of faith, have
not had those points sufficiently proposed to them, or might have, if it were
not their auoidable fault, or no?

Whether, when Calvinists say, that Grecians, Lutherans, or such erring 11.
Churches, have a saving faith, are in the true Church, and in way of
salvation, they mean even such of them, as err vincibly, and sinfully, or only
such as err invincibly?

Whether if they allow saving faith, 12
true Church, and salvation to such only, as err inuincibly in not fundamental
points, they can pretend to have more charity to erring Christians, then
Catholics have, nor no?

Whether Communion in Sacraments, 13.
and in publik worship of God, be not essential to a true visible Church, and
for want thereof pure Scismatiks, be out of the substance of the visible Church,
or no?

Whether they, who forsake the 14.
Communion of the whole visible Church in Sacraments and in publik worship of
God, do not substantially forsake the whole visible Church, or no?

Whether there can be just cause to 15.
forsake the Communion of the whole Church, in her Sacraments, and publiks
worship of God, and to institute a new Communion, which none before had, or no?

Whether, when Luther, and his 16.
Fellows, forsook the Communion of the Roman Church in Sacraments, and in her
publik worship of God, they did not forsake the Communion of the whole visible
Church in Sacraments, and publik worship of God, and instituted a new Communion
in Sacraments, and publik worship of God, which nether themselves had before,
nor any other Christian Church or no?

Whether if Communion in Sacraments, 27,
and in publik worship of God, be essential to the visible Church, Luther and
his fellows, when they instituted a new Communion in such things which was not
before, did not institute a new Church, which was not before? 18.


Whether Churches, which differ both in Communion, and in all the formal
essential parts of the visible Church, as in profession of faith, in
Sacraments, and Ministers of the word, and of Sacraments (as the Roman, and
Protestants Churches differt) can be one, and the same substantial Church, or
no?

If the Roman, and Protestant Churches, be substantially different 19.
Churches, how can both be true Churches, Protestants receive the keys of
heaven, and Lawful Mission from a falls Church, or show the continuance of their
Church, by the continuance of the Roman?

Whether al Protestant Churches, 20.
erring in some points of faith (as Protestants confess they do) do not err
sinfully in such points, as having them sufficiently proposed to them, or might
have, if it were not their avoidable fault?

Whether it be not charity, to tell 21.
al, that sinfully err in some points of faith sufficiently proposed to them,
or which would be so proposed to them, if it were not their avoidable fault and
thereby are formal heretics: or which sinfully err in Communion of Sacraments,
and publik worship of God, and thereby are formal Scismaticks, that they are in
state of damnation?

Whether, who deny some points of 22.
Gods word, proposed as sufficiently, as Gods word needs to be, or which
would be proposed, if it were not their avoidable fault, do not implicitly
deny God to be true in all his words, or no?

Whether who implicitly deny God 23.
to be true in all his words, be not implicitly, Atheists, or no?

Who will go close to the matter, and bewraye no distrust, either of the truth
of his cause, or of his own certainty thereof, will make no difficulty to
answer to al these questions directly and clearly yea or no, without making any
distinction, where there is no equiuocal term; nor make any shift to delude
the plain sense of the words.

OF THE DISTINCTION OF FVNDAMENTAL AND NOT FVNDAMENTAL POINTS OF FAITH.
THE STATE OF THE question, and difference betvveen Catholics and Protestants,
about Fundamental, and Not Fundamental points of faith, truly and clearly set
down. FIRST CHAPTER.
THE true stating of the question Prima causa victoriae, diligenter causam pro
qua dicturus es, dicere Cicero.
betwixt Catholics and Protestants, is half the ending of it, and if it bewel
observed, the question will be soon ended: and if it be not observed, the
dispute will be both fruitles and endless. For otherwise, the Disputants will talk
of different matters, and the one not deny, what the other affirms, but some
different thing. Wherefore, that the Reader may plainly perceive, wherein
stands the point of controversy between Catholics and Protestants concerning
Fundamental and not fundamental points, he must well note: that Catholics do not
simply Glossa d 19. c. ita Dominus. Super illo articulo fidei (Tu es Christus
etc.) fundata est Ecclesia.
deny the distinction of Fundamental and not Fundamental points of faith, but
only deny it in the Protestants sense. For that they grant some points of
faith to be Fundamental, others not fundamental, is evident, both by their own
sayings, and Protestants confession. For the Council of Trent sess. 3. and the
Catechism of the same Council c. 1. and Catholic Divines commonly, call some
points, the Peron Epistle to K. James obser. 3. Bellarm. l 4. de verbo Dei c.
11.
foundation, or fundamental points, and consequently must needs grant, that
other points are not the foundation, or not fundamental. And this D. Potter
sec. 7. p. 79. proves at large out of Catholic writers: and the like has L.
Canterbury sec. 38. and Chillingworth p. 159. And D. White None deny the
distinction of fundamental and not fundamental.
in Defense of his way c. 17. says: I know none of our adversaries, that
denies this distinction, of Fundamental and not fundamental points. And
Chillingworth in answer to the Preface, L. Cant. p. 213. In your sense
fundamental.
p. 16. In our sense of the word, Fundamental, I hope she (Roman Church) erred
not fundamentally, but in your sense of the word, I fear she did. Which is
plainly to confess, that Catholics grant, that there are fundamental points, and
that the difference betwixt them and Protestants, is about the sense. So that
the difference is not, whether there be fundamental and not fundamental points
of faith, (for this both Catholics and Protestants grant) but whether
fundamental and not fundamental points of faith be such, as Protestants would
have them to be, or no. And if any Catholics in words deny, that there are
any not fundamental points of faith, in deed they deny no more, then that
there any such not fundamental points, as Protestants teach.

2. For all Catholics grant, that there is great difference among points of D.
Potter sec 2. p. 47. sec. 5 p. 5. sec. 7. p. 74. L. Cant. p. 73. Chillingw. p.
263. 283.
faith. For some points are simply and absolutely necessary to be actually
believed, in all ordinary courses, of al men that can believe, actually, for to
have saving faith, to be members of the Church, and to be in way of salvation:
and therefore are to be preached to al kinds of men. And these are also
sufficient to be believed actually, to have a saving faith, to be a member of
the Church, and in way of salvation, in some case, to wit, when the ignorance
of other points is invincible, or not faulty, because they are not sufficiently
proposed, nor the Notbeleuers of them, are in any fault, that they are not so
proposed. Such are the principal points of faith, as the Passion of Christ, and
the like. There are other points of faith, which nether are sufficient in any
case, to a saving faith, member of the Church, or way Bellarm. l 3. de Eccles
c. 14.
of salvation: nor simply and absolutely necessary to be actually believed, but
only conditionally, in case they be sufficiently proposed, or should be so
proposed, if it were not the not beleuers auoidable fault. For otherwise, a
virtual or intentional belief of them, will suffice to a saving faith, member of
the Church, and way of salvation. Such is, that Abraham had twoe sonns, and
the like. And the points of the first sort, may well be Why some points may be
called fundamenlal.
called Fundamental, not only because they be absolutely necessary to saving
faith, Church, and salvation, as the foundation is absolutely necessary to a
house: but also, because other points of faith relievpon them, as other parts of
a house rely upon the foundation. And points of the second sort, may why
others, not fundamental.
be termed Not fundamental, because they are not simply and absolutely necessary
to be actually believed, for to have saving faith, to be a member of the Church,
and in way of salvation, as fundamental parts of a temporal building are
simply and absolutely necessary to it: nor other points rely on them, as other
parts of a building rely on the foundation. But whether some points of faith,
may be called Fundamental, which is a verbal question.
and others, not fundamental, is no great matter. For it is but a question of
words. The real question, and that of great weight, is, whether the which a
real.
the principal points of faith (whether they alone may be called Fundamental,
or no) be so sufficient to saving faith, to a member the Church, and way of
salvation, as the actual belief of them will suffice to the said ends, though
other points of faith be sinfully vnbeleued, or (which comes al to one) though
other points be sufficiently proposed and not believed, or would be sufficiently
proposed, if it were not the unbelievers auoidable fault. And whether les
principal points of faith (whether they may be termed Not fundamental points,
or no) be so unnecessary to saving faith, member of the Churc and way of
salvation, as they may be sinfully vnbeleued, and yet there may be saving
faith, member of the Church, or state of salvation: or (which comes al to one)
may be not believed, nether virtually nor actually, though they be sufficiently
proposed, or would be, if it were not the unbelievers fault, without los of
saving faith, member of the Church or state of salvation. For such fundamental
and not fundame^tal points, Protestants affirm to be, and Catholics utterly
deny there are any such; but say that no points of faith are so fundamental,
as they are sufficient to saving faith, to a member of the Church, and state of
salvation, when any other points of faith are sinfully vnbeleued, or not
believed when they are sufficiently proposed, or would be, if it were not the
unbelievers auoidable fault: Nor any points of faith so not fundamental, as
they are not really necessary to saving faith, member of the Church, and state
of salvation, when they are as sufficiently proposed, as points of faith need
to be, or would be so proposed, if it were not the unbelievers auoidable fault.
Protestants end in this their distinction.


3. And the end, why Protestants devised this distinction of fundamental and
not fundamental points in their forsaid sense or rather, wrested this
distinction unto their foresaid sense, is, for to defend some Churches or
persons to have saving faith, to be true Churches, and in way of salvation,
who sinfully err in some points of faith, either because they will not believe them
though they be sufficiently proposed, or are in fault, that they are not so
proposed: For (as is said) Not Fundamentals, in case of sufficient proposal,
are necessary to saving faith, Church, and salvation. Therefore Protestants
take this distinction In what sense Protestants understand fundamental, and not
fu^damental.
in a quite different sense from Catholics, and by fundamental points, mean
such, as (say they) are not only absolutely necessary, but also absolutely
sufficient (to saving faith, Church, and salvation) to be believed, even when
other points are sufficiently proposed, and not believed. And by Not fundamental
points, mean such, as are absolutely Not necessary to saving faith, Church, or
salvation, to be actually believed, even when they are sufficiently proposed, or
the Notbeleuers are in fault, that they are not so proposed. And that
Protestants made or understand this distinction of fundamental and not
fundamental in this sense, for to defend thereby such as sinfully err in some
points of faith, is evident by itself, and by these words of Rouse in his
Treatise of Cath. Charity c. 9. This distinction was first framed, to give
leave for difference in measure of faith. For this measure of The points in
question, for fundamentals.
faith, he admits concerning points sufficiently proposed. Wherefore all the
question betwixt Catholics and Protestants, about Fundamental and not
fundamental points, is, Whether there be any such fundamental points, as the
belief of them, is sufficient to saving faith, Church, and salvation, even when
ignorance or error in other points, is vincible and sinful: or (which is al
one) when other points are so sufficiently proposed, as points of faith need to
be, or should be, if it were not the Not-beleuers fault, and yet are not
believed. And whether, there be any such Not fundamental And for not
fundamentals.
points of faith, as the actual belief of them is not necessary to saving
faith, Church, or salvation, when they are sufficiently proposed, and virtual
or intentional belief of them be necessary, whether they be proposed, or no:
or (which comes al to one) whether, not fundamental points be such, as
vincible and sinful ignorance or error in them, may stand with saing saving
faith, true Church, and salvation. For such sufficiency of fundamental points,
and such vnnecessarines of not fundame^tal points, to saving faith, true
Church, and salvation Protestants affirm, and Catholics utterly condemn.

4. Protestants call this distinction Protestants charity.
in their sense, Charity, or (as Rouse terms it) Catholic Charity, because
it affords saving faith, true Church, and salvation, universally to all that
believe the Capital or principal points of faith, howsoever sinfully they believe
not other points. But first, this But both ungrounded and falls.
Charity is not grounded in any Word of God, (but rather is quite contrary
to it, as shall hereafter appear) but only in some humane pity, or rather
fond flattery of themselves, and of others, who sinfully err in some points of
says: and therefore is but seeming, and in truth, falls and deceiptful charity.
Secondly, it is quite opposite to true charity, because it damnably deceaueth
those, who sinfully err in not fundamental or secondarie points of faith,
telling them, that though they believe them not, when they are sufficiently
proposed, or when it is their fault, that they are not so proposed, yet they
have saving faith, are in the true Church, and in way of salvation: Which is in
truth to destroy the substance and unity of saving faith, of true Church, and
of salvation; to excuse al heresies in secondarie points of faith from mortal
or damnable sin: to bring an indifference or libertinisme in belief or not
belief of Secondarie points of faith: to give leave to Scisme, and to communion
with heretics; to reject Gods veracitie in secondarie points of faith, and See
c. 8. n. 5. c. 10. n. 5. 6. L. Epist. to the King.
so to lay a ground of atheifme, and finally (as Protestants sometimes,
convinced by euidencie of truth, contes) is infidelity, and the giving of the
Lie to God. Wherefore in vain do some, who teach this doctrine, complain, that
Atheism and irreligion gets strength, seeing that to teach that some points
of faith are sufficient to saving faith, true Church, or salvation, and others,
not necessary, though these be sufficiently proposed, or it be the not beleuers
fault, that they are not so proposed, is plain Atheism and Irreligion. And
therefore (as I said in the Preface) this doctrine is not to be detested and
impugned as a single, or simple error in faith, but as a ground of al heresies
in secondarie points of faith, of Scisme, of Infidelity, and Atheism. For as
long as they maintain such to be true Churches, to have saving faith, and to
be in the way of salvation, which sinfully err in some points of faith, or
(which comes al to one) which believe not some points of faith sufficiently
proposed to them, or for their fault not so proposed to the^, or communicate in
Sacraments and publik Liturgy with such Churches, in vain they deny, that
they hold this doctrine. For their said maintenance, or communion with such
Churches, is a real profession of this doctrine, and will force them to confess,
that they hold it. But now let us prove that Protestants both by words and
deeds teach this doctrine, because they sometimes (considering the horror of it)
do deny, that they teach it. But this their Denial will prove no more, then
that they contradict themselves, as is usual for heretics to do, and that the
doctrine is so horrible, as themselves sometimes are ashamed of it.

I enquire not here, who is a sufficient what is not here enquired.
Proposer of points of faith, to wit whether Sripture or Church, or both: nor,
which is a sufficient proposal of points of faith: nor, what points of faith
are sufficiently proposed. Neverthles many and weighty what is here proved.
points are here handled: For first is confuted that most falls and Atheistical
1.
doctrine, that the principal or fundamental points of faith are absolutely
sufficient to saving faith, to a member of the true Church, and to salvation:
So as if one beleve that, he need not care (for so much as is to have saving
faith, to be a member of the true Church, and in way of salvation) whether he
beleve any other points or no. Because (as is here proved) nether are they
sufficient to saving faith, in case that the les principal, or not fundamental
points be sufficiently proposed, or would be so proposed if it were not the
Vnbelevers fault, and are not beleved: Nether though they were sufficient even
in that case to saving faith, were they sufficient to a member of the true
Church or to salvation, Because Communion in Sacraments and publik worship of
God, is as necessary to a member of the true Church, and to salvation, as
faith 2.
is. Secondly, is here confuted the like falls and Atheistical doctrine: That the
les principal or not Fundamental points of faith are absolutely unnecessary to
saving faith, to a member of the true Church, and to salvation, even in case
they be sufficiently proposed, or would be so proposed, if it were not the
Unbelievers auoidable fault: For it is here showed, that the belief of any
point of faith whatsoever, sufficiently proposed, is necessary to saving
faith, to a member of the true Church, and to salvation. Thirdly 3.
here is confuted that like falls and Atheistical doctrine: That al who believe
the principal fundamental points of faith, are of the true Church: and that a
true Church, and a Church believing all the fundamental points, is al one. For
who believe not a les principal, or not fundamental point of faith sufficiently
proposed to them, or which would be so proposed to them, if it were not their
auoidable fault, are true heretics, and such Churches, true heretical Churches,
and give God the lie in those points, though they believe the principal, or
fundamental points. Fourthly it is showed to be a vain proof: That one is of
the same Church 4.
with the Roman, because he believes all the Fundamental points of faith which
the Roman Church believes. Because virtual belief of al points of faith
whatsoever, and actual belief of al points sufficiently proposed, and also
Communion in Sacraments and publik worship of God, is necessary to be of the
same Church with the Roman. Fifthly is showed, that saving faith cannot 5.
stand with sin in matter of faith. Sixthly is showed, that it is not only 6.
the greatness of the matters in points of faith, which binds us to beleve it,
but especially the authority of the Reuealer: which being equal in greather
and lesser points, equally binds us to beleve them al when they are proposed.
Seventhly is showed (though briefly and by the way) that 7.
Protestants generally speaking, err sinfully in not believing some points of
faith: Because, besides al other proofs, their own Ministers confess that al their
Churches err in some points of faith, and that they sinfully err, appears,
because either they have had them sufficiently proposed to them, or might have,
if it were not their auoidable fault.

That Protestants teach, that Fundamental points are sufficient, and Not
Fundamental points unnecessary to saving faith, to a true Church, and to
salvation, even when Not fundamentals are sufficiently proposed. SECOND
CHAPTER.
1 CHillingworth in his answer to Chillingw. confesses, al points sufficiently
propofed, to be necessary.
Mercy and truth c. 4. p. 196. says: The main question in this business, is
not, what divine Revelations are necessary to be believed, or not rejected,
when they are sufficiently proposed. For all without question, al without
exception, are so. And in his answer to the Preface p. 11. affirms, that D.
Potter avouches the same. True it is, that some times they say, al divine
Revelations sufficiently proposed are necessary, being forced thereto by the
euidencie of truth, and their confessions we shall c. 3. n. 5. 67.
produce hereafter for confirmation of this truth: but true also it is, that
often times they deny, that al such truths are necessary to saving faith,
true Church, and salvation, and they are forced to deny it, for to defend such
to be true Churches, to have saving faith, and to be in the way of salvation,
which they cannot with any probability deny, but that they believe not, and
reject some divine reuelatio^s sufficiently proposed to them, or which, (if it
were not their fault) would be so proposed. And their confession of this truth
sometimes, does not prove that other times they deny it not, but only, that
they contradict themselves herin; which is usual for heretics to do. Besides,
Chillingworth does not Chillingw. speaks reserved by not setting down the
whole question.
here expres, to what end, al divine Revelations sufficiently proposed, be
necessary, to wit, to saving faith, to a true Church, and to salvation: which
is that, which he knew Catholics affirm, and charge Protestants with the
denial thereof: but reseruedly says, that al divine Revelations sufficiently
proposed, are necessary to be believed (not telling to what they are
necessary:) which he may mean, that they are necessary to some other end,
as to avoid such a fault, as (c. 1. p. 38. he says) is incident to good and
honest men. Which kinds of fault may stand with saving faith true Church, and
salvation. And if he had meant, that al divine Revelations sufficiently
proposed, are necessary to saving faith, true Church, and salvation, why did
he not expres it, even then, when he endeavored to clear himself of the
contraric imputation?

2. But whatsoever he meant, I will prove clearly, by Protestants words and
deeds, by their direct and indirect sayings, by their common Tenets or
Principles, that indeed they mean, that al divine Revelations, though
sufficiently proposed, are not necessary 1.
to saving faith, to a true Church, and to salvation. For first they say
absolutely, and without any exception of sufficient or not sufficient Proposal
of not Fundamentals, that Fundamentals are sufficient, nay abundantly
sufficient to saving faith, to a true Church, and to salvation: And also
absolutely, that not fundamentals, are unnecessary, and not necessary. What
is faith enough for Protestants.
D. Andrews Respon, ad Apologiam Bellarmini c. 1. what is in the Creeds, and
in the fowr Councels, is faith enough for us. D. Whitaker controu. Sufficient.
2. q. 5. c. 18. we say it is sufficient (to the Church) if truth be kept in
the Sea Calvin 4. c. 2. 1. and c. 1.. 12.
chief and principal articles of faith. The Confession of Swissers in the
Preface. Mutual consent in the principal points of faith, and in the right
sense, and brotherly charity, was to pious antiquity abundantly sufficient.
D. Potter sec. 3. p. 69. Abundantly sufficient to salvation.
The main positive truths, wherein al (Protestants and Catholics) agree, are
abundantly sufficient to salvation. Chillingw. c. 7. p. 408. They that believe
Sufficient to unity.
al things plainly delivered in Scripture, believe al things fundamental, and
are at sufficient unity in matters of faith. Lord Canterbury in his Relation
sec. 38. p. 372. The Church can teach the Sea Vsherin sermon. before K. James p.
16. 28.
foundation, and men were happy, if they would learn it, and the Church more
happy, would she teach nothing but that, as Only fundamentals necessary to
salvation.
necessary to salvation. For certainly, nothing but that is necessary. And
for not fundamentals the same D. Potter sec. Frith in Fox page 944. There are
many things in Scriptures, which we are not bound to believe as an article of
faith.
4. p. 96. says: Al necessary or fundamental truth, is contained in
Scripture: making Necessary, and Fundamental, al one. And sec. 3. p 71.
speaking of not fundamentals, says: By their own Confession, the doctrins
debated, are unnecessarie. Chillingworth in Answer to the Preface n. 32. Those
are not fundamental points, which are not necessary. c. 4. p 219. By
fundamental articles, we mean al those, that are necessary. Ibid. p. 220. By
fundamental, we mean al, and only that, which is necessary. L. Canterb. sec.
21. p. 141. speaking of not fundamentals, says: The Church may err in
Superstructures, and deductions and othey By, and unnecessary truths, Behold,
how absolutely, and with out al exception, of sufficient or insufficient
proposal of not fundamental points, they teach that Fundamental points are
sufficient, and abundantly sufficient to saving faith, to a true Church, and to
salvation: that nothing but the Foundation is necessary: that by Fundamental,
they mean al, and only that, which is necessary: and that not fundamental
points, are not necessary, are By, and unnecessary truths. And why should
they say thus absolutely, and without any exception that fundamentals are
sufficient and not fundamentals, not necessary to faith, Church, and
salvation, and not be absolutely understood so, unless they would not be
understood, as they speak, but use mental reservation even in matters of faith?
which al men condemn, and justly, for it gives occasion of error in faith.

3. But that they mean, that Fundamental points are sufficient to saving faith,
true Church and salvation absolutely, and in all cases: and Not fundamentals,
unnecessary to those ends, even in case of sufficient Proposal, is evident by
diverse other doctrins of theirs. For (as we shall see her after) they teach,
that some obstinat heretics, obstinat Papists, and obstinat Lutherans, have
saving faith, are in the true Church, and in way of salvation: and obstinacy
is not, but where there is sufficient Proposal of truth, or it is the fault of
the obstinat, that there is not such Proposal. Besides, they teach, that
fundamental points make up the Catholic faith, integrate and make up the Body
of Christian religion; that in them consists the unity of saving faith; that
they properly constitute a Church, essentially constitute a true Church, that a
true Church, is al one, with a Church not erring in fundamentals: Breach in not
fundamentals, is no breach in necessary faith. D. Potter sec. 7. p. 76. The
Dogmatical foundation of the Church, Fund. make up our faith.
are those grand and Capital Doctrins, which make up our faith in Christ. P. 78.
By Fundamental points of faith, we mean those prime and capital doctrins of our
religion, which make up the Holy Make up the Cath, faith.
Catholic and Apostolik faith, that faith, which essentially constitutes a true
Church, and a true Christian Ib. p. 102. In those Essentially constitute a true
Church
fundamental truths, consists the unity offaith, and of the Catholic Church.
Item p. 73. 74. By fundamental dostrins, we mean such Catholic verities, as
principally and essentially perteine to the faith, such as properly constitute
a Church. And sec. 3. p. 60. In which Protestants In them co^sists the life and
substance of Religion.
judge the life, and substance of religion to be comprised. And finally sec. 5.
p 18. A true Church, is alone, with a Church not erring in the fundation.
Chillingworth c. 3. p. 159. calls fundamentals: The Doctrins which integrate
and Integrate the body of Religion.
make up the Body of Christian Religion. And ib. p 140. says. Not fundamental
(id est) no essential parts of Christianity. Lord Canter bury in his Relat.
sec. 38. p. 355. Errors in things not absolutely necessary, (those are his not
fundamentals) So also Usher in his Sermon. before k. James.
is no breach upon the one saving faith, which is necessary. And p. 360. In
things not necessary, though they be divine Truths also, Christian men may
differ, and yet preserve the one necessary faith. But surely, if fundamental
points make up our faith in Christ, comprehend the life and substance of
Religion, make up the Catholic faith, integrate and make up the body of
Christian Religion: if in them consists the unity of saving faith, if they
properly and essentially constitute a true Church, and a true Christian: if a
true Church be al one, with one not erring in the foundation: and if not
fundamental points, be no essential parts of Christianity, nor breach in them,
be any breach in necessary saving faith: our faith in Christ, the Catholic
faith, the entire body of Christian Religion, unity of saving faith, and the
essence of a true Church, and of a true Christian, shall As long as the
essential parts are, the thing is.
remain as long as fundamentals are believed, though Not fundamentals even
sufficiently proposed, be not believed, nor breach in these, can make any
breach in the essence or unity of a true Church, or of saving faith. The same
also follows out of 3.
their doctrine: That we may not forsake the communion in Sacraments, of a
Church, that erreth in not fundamentals, unless she impose the profession of
them. Chillingworth c. 5, p. 307. That it is not lawful to separate See him p.
281.
from any Churches communion, for errors not apperteining to the substance of
No separation for not fundamentals.
faith, is not universally true, but with this exception, unless that Church
requires the belief and profession of them. So that if she sinfully err in not
fundamentals sufficiently proposed, but require not the belief of them, we may
not separate from her Communion. Lord Canterbury sec. 26. p. 196. speaking of
not fundamentals, says absolutely: In necessariis, in, or about things
necessary, there ought not to be contention to a separation. And sec. 28. p.
139. The whole Church cannot universally err in absolute fundamental doctrins,
and therefore there can be no just cause to make a scisme from the whole Church.
So that if she sinfully erred in not fundamentals sufficiently proposed, there
were no just cause of separation. D. Potter sec. 2. p. 39. Amongst wise men,
each discord in Religion, dissolues not the vuitie of faith or charity. Ib.
unity in these matters, is very contingent in the Church, now greater, now
lesser, never absolute in all particles of faith. what more clear, then that
(according to these men) we must not separate from any Church for error in not
fundametal points, though these be sufficiently proposed: but only for errors in
fundamental points, or for imposing not fundamental errors? and consequently, a
Church sinfully erring in not fundamental points sufficiently proposed, but not
imposing them upon others, is a true Church and we may not separate from her,
but must communicate with such an erring Church, which we may not do, if she
be not a true Church.

4. This same follows evidently 4.
out of diverse common tenets or principles of Protestants, as first: That al
are of the Church, who hold the fundamental points, as is to be seen l. 1. of
the Author of Protestancie c. 3. and 7. secondly, that purity in fundamental
points, is a certain note of a true Church ib. c. 7. Thirdly that to prove one
to hold all the fundamental points (without proving, that he erreth not sinfully
in other points) is a sufficient proof, that he is of the true Church.
Fourthly, that we may lawfully communicate with all, that hold not al things,
but al things necessary, as speaks Chillingworth c. 5. Morton Appeal l. 4.
c. 2. Protestants communicate with all, who fundamentally profes the faith of
Christ.
p. 283. who p. 220. professes, that by Necessary, he understands
fundamental. Fifthly, that only fundamental points are of the substance of
saving faith, Church, and salvation. Sixthly, that they have more charity to
erring Christians, then Catholics have. For if al be of the Church, who hold
the Foundation: If purity in fundamentals, be a sure Note of a true Church: If
Holding the foundation, be a sure proof, that one is of the true Church: If
only fundamental points, be of the substance of saving faith, Church, and
salvation: and that we may lawfully communicate with all, that hold the
foundation, evidently it follows, that such as hold the foundation, but
sinfully err in not fundamental points sufficiently proposed, are of the true
Church. Besides, if Protestants allow not saving faith, Church, and salvation,
to such, as sinfully err in not fundamentals sufficiently proposed, they show
no more charity to erring Christians, then Catholics do. For we allow al to
Protestants have no more charity then Catholics.
have saving faith, to be in the Church, in way of salvation (for so much as
belongs to faith) who hold the fundamental points, and inuincibly err in not
fundamentals; because nether are these sufficiently proposed to them, nor they
in fault, that they are not so proposed, as is evident, and Cath. allow
salvation to inuincibly errants in not fundamentals.
confessed by Chillingworth c. 7. p. 139. and 400. If therefore they will seem
more charitable, then we are, they must allow salvation to such, as sinfully
err in not fundamentals, either sufficiently proposed to them, or for their
fault, not so proposed. For to such, we nether allow saving faith But not to
vincibly errants in them.
true Church, nor salvation. And as long as Protestants hold their common
doctrins hitherto related, in vain they deny, that they afford saving faith,
true Church, and salvation, to such, as sinfully err in not fundamental points
sufficiently proposed. But now let us see, both their doctrine, and deeds,
toward heretics; Papists, and Lutherans, and other erring Churches, which will
evidently convince, that they afford saving faith, true Church, and salvation,
to such, as they account to err sinfully in not fundamental points of faith.

5. And to omit, that sometimes 5.
they teach, that not fundamental points are no points of faith, as we shall see
c. 5. Whence it will evidently follow, that belief of them, is not necessary to
saving faith, or true Church, though they be sufficiently proposed, they teach,
partly, that obstinat error in not fundamental points is no true heresy; nor
such obstinat errants, true heretics: partly, that al heresy is not damnable.
For thus Perkins in Galat. 5. v. 20. Heresy is an error in the Heresy only
in fund, points.
foundation of Religion, which (says he) I add, to distinguish it from errors
about lesser parts of Religion. Spalatensis l. 7. c. 5. n. 40. True and
properly called heresy, is in defect, where a true and fundamental article is
denied, or not believed. See Field l. 3. c. 3. Eliensis Tortura Torti p. 80. and
wittenbergenses praefat. ad Acta cum Patriar. Constant.
Moulins contra Peron l. 1. c. 7. I would not have an error called heresy, if
it be in some small matter, and not in the foundation of faith. The Casimirian
Caluinists in their Admonition c. 4. p. 131. An heretik is he, who dissenteth
from the Creed, and foundation of holy Scripture. c. 7. p. 244. Not all that
err in the doctrine of Christ, but such as are in Beza ad defens Castal. p. 495.
Haereticos esse definio, non omnes qui sunt Apostatae and a veritate aberrantes.
error, which openly repugneth to the foundation of Religion, or from which
follows the euersion of some parts of the foundation be heretics. Doctor
Potter sec. 7. p. 82. The Creed is a distinctiue Note or character, seuering
orthodox beleuers from Infidels, and heretics. So that, who believe the Creed,
are orthodox beleuers, and no heretics, what other points soever they deny.
And sec. 4. p. 127. These errors of the Donatists (about Rebaptization) were
not in them selves heretical. Yet were they in a point of faith sufficiently
proposed to them. L. Canterb. sec. 21. p. 141. If the Church err in the
foundation she Becomes Heretical. Chillingworth c. 4. p. 209. There are no
damnable heresies, but such as are plainly repugnant to these prime verities.
And p. 215. There can be no damnable heresy, unless it contradict some
necessary truth. And c. 5. p. 271. Heresy we conceive an obstinat defense of
any error against any necessary article of the Christian faith. And by
necessary truth, or necessary article, he professes to understand
fundamental, Here n. 2.
as is before showed. So that, no error against any point of faith, is
heresy, or at least, not damnable heresy, except it be against some
fundamental point. And if it be not damnable, it may stand with saving faith,
and salvation. Naie they expressly teach, that heretics against not fundamental
points may be saved, and that heretical Churches, are true Churches: and yet
heretics cannot be without obstinacy, nor obstinacy without sufficient
Proposal of the contrary truth. D. Andrews Respon. ad Apol. Bellarm. c. 5.
Catholic and Heretik are not contrary. Hookerl. 3. p. 128. Heretics are not
utterly cut of from the visible Church of Christ. Whitaker controuer. 2. q. 5.
c. 18. If an Heretik must be excluded from salvation, that is, because he
overthrows some foundation. For unless he shake or overthrow some Heretics in
not fundame^tals may be saved.
foundation, he may be saved. And controuer. 4. q. 5. c. 3. Al Heretics are
within the Church. Alsted de natura Eccles. c. 9. I say absolutely, heretics
are of the Church, except those, who overthrow the foundamental articles.
Morton in his Imposture c. 15. p. 413. Nether do Protestants yield more saftie
to any of the Members of the Church of Rome in such a case, then they do to
whatsoever heretics, whose belief does not undermine the fundamental doctrine of
faith. Doct. Pottersec. 4. p. 111. Even in an heretical Church, salvation may
be had. Lord Canterbury sec. 21. p. 141. says. An heretical Church, may be a
Church of Christ still. And surely one may be saved in a Church of Christ. More
Assertions of Protestants, that heretics are in the Church, and may be saved,
are to be seen l. 1. of the Author of Protestant Religion c. 3. And generally
Protestants compare heresy to a sickness, which destroieth not a man, as may
be seen in Plessie de Eccles. c. 1. Moulins in his Buckler sec. 92. Lord
Canterbury epist. to the King. Chilling worth c. 5. p. 265. 269. c. 6. p. 335.
and others. And seeing the sin of heresy, cannot be without obstinacy, as L.
Canterb. p. 315. D. Potter sec 4. p. 120. Chillingw. p. 271.
is evident, and Protestants confess: nor obstinacy, but where there is
sufficient proposal of the truth, or sinful want of such proposal, manifest it
is, that Protestants do think, that sinful and obstinat error in some points of
faith, can stand with saving faith, Church, and salvation.

6. The same is also clear by what Protestants say the To. Church is a true
Church
they profes of Papists, or of the Roman Church. For Protestants commonly
profes, that the Roman Church is a true Church, has saving faith, and is in
state of salvation, as may be seen l. 1. of the Author of Protestant Religion
c. 2. Here I will add the like profession of some later English Protestants.
Lord Canterb. sec. 20. p. 128. 129. The Roman Church, is a true Church in
substance and essence. Sec. 26. p. 192. Protestants have not leaft the Church
of Rome in her essence, nor in things which constitute a Church. Sec. 35. p.
311. She is a Member of the Catholic Church. Ib. p. 285. Many Protestants
indeed confess, there is salvation possible to be attained in the Roman Church.
p. 282. The possibility of salvation (in the Roman Church) I think cannot be
denied. Sec. 38. p. 338. Salvation in Romans faith.
That the Lady might be saved in the Roman faith or Church, I confess. Doctor
Potter sec. 1. p. 11. we yield her (Roman Church) a member of the Catholic
(Church) sec. 3. p. 74 75. we acknowledge her a member of the body of Christ.
Ib. p. 78. we believe their (Roman) religion Romans Religion safe.
safe, that is, by Gods great mercy not damnable to some, such as believe what
they profes. And p. 62. Protestants yield them the substance of a Christian
Church. The like he has p. 66. 81. Chillingworth in answer to the preface p.
15. and 16. says of the Roman Church: She was (before Luther) a part of the
whole Catholic Church. c. 1. p. 42. Though D. Potter does not take it il, that
you believe yourselues may be saved in your Religion yet, etc. c. 2. p. 85. The
Roman Church is a part of the Catholic Church. c. 3. p. 163. Our hope is, that
the truths she retains, and the practice of them, may prove an antidote to
her, against the errors she mainteines, in such persons as in simplicity of
heart follow this Absolon. These points of Christianity, Antidote against al
errors.
which have in them the nature of an antidote against the poison of al sins and
errors, the Church of Rome, though otherwise much corrupted, still retains:
therefore we hope she errs not fundamentally, but still remains a part of the
Church. And these errors, though to them that believe them, we hope will not be
pernicious, yet etc. c. 5. p. 282. we hope your errors are not absolutely
unpardonable. p. 285. our and your salvation not desperately inconsistent. c. 7.
p. 401. D. Potter says indeed, that our not cutting of your Church from the
body of Christ, and the hope of salvation, frrees us from the imputation of
Scisme. Behold the Roman Church, is a true Church in substance and essence,
has the things which constitute a Church, is a member of the Catholic Church,
a member of the body of Christ, is not cut from the body of Christ, nor hope
of salvation, retains those points of Christianity, which have in them the
nature of an antidote against al sins and errors: possibility of salvation in
her, cannot be denied, men may be saved in the Roman faith and Church, her
Religion is safe to such, as believe what they profes, her errors will not be
pernicious to them, that believe them.

7. And nevertheless these same men And yet say she erreth sinfully and
obstinatly.
say, that the same Roman Church is obstinat, and convicted of her errors, and
obstinacy cannot be, but where the truth is sufficiently proposed, or would
be, if it were not the unbelievers See Calvin 4. Instit. c. 2.. 6.
fault. Doctor Potter sec 5. p. 26. The Protestants expressly accuse this
(Roman) Church, and have convicted her to, as To. Church convicted.
they think, of many gros and dangerous errors. p. 14. She is senseles of her
errors, Senseles of her errors.
and careless to seek any remedy. And sec. 3. p. 65. The first Reformers saw
Rome in love with her errors, so as she would not be cured. Chillingworth c. 6.
p. 373. says. The Roman Church is accused and convicted of many damnable
errors. Incorrigibla
And c. 3. p. 163. is most incorrigible. c. 5. p. 280. Mainteines errors with
obstinacy. Obstinat.
And ib. p. 295. would not be reformed, is obstinat in her corruptions. And p.
303. Papists are obstinat in their common superstition. Lord Canterbury sec.
20. p. 133. You thrust us from you, because we called for truth. sec. 21. p.
144. They are resolved to alter nothing. King VVil alter nothing.
James in answer to C. Peron. Their purpose is, constantly to maintain al they
hold. Morton in his imposture p. 404. To heresy and Idolatry, your Church
ioineth obstinacy. So that a Church convicted of errors in faith, which is
obstinat and senseles of them, which is incorrigible, resolved to alter
nothing, but to hold constantly al she holds, is, notwithstanding all this, a
true Church in substance, a member of the Catholic Church and body of Christ,
reteines al things that constitute a Church, has possibility of salvation,
her religion is safe to such as believe, as they profes, her errors not
pernicious to them who believe them And is not this plainly to teach, that a
Church sinfully erring in some points of faith, has saving faith, is a true
Church, and in way of salvation?

8. Nether will it help them to say (as sometimes they do) that when L.
Canterb. p. 35. 285. D. Potter sec. 3. p. 46. Chillingw. p. 282. 398. 400. 32.
they confess the Roman Church to be a true Church, to have saving faith, and to
be in the way of salvation, by Roman Church, they mean only those, who upon
invincible ignorance follow her Religion. First, because this is said
voluntarily, without any ground given in the places, where they confess this of
the Roman Church. By Roman Church can not be mea^t only inuincibly ignorants.
Where, if they meant only of the ignorants in the Roman Church, why did they
not name them, rather then the Roman Church?

9. Secondly, because they say thus, 2.
only, when we, out of their grant, that the Roman Church is a true Church,
has saving faith, and true way of salvation, do clearly infer, that the
Protestants Church, is no true Church, has no saving faith, nor way of
salvation. And have no other cause to expound themselves thus, but Because
otherwise they should condemn their Church, and religion. Thirdly, 3.
because this is to profes, that they equivocate in a matter of religion, because
nether we, nor themselves commonly, do by Roman Church, understand only those,
who in her, are invincibly ignorant. And if Chillingworth say c. 7. p. 399. By
Roman Church, to understand the ignorant members of it, is a very unusual
Senecdoche: much more unusual is it, by Roman Church, to understand them alone.
And yet (as the same man says c. 2. p. 57.) Men should speak properly, when
they write of Controversies in Religion. And, (as Calvin adds) Plain dealing
is to be used in all things, but chiefly in matters of faith. And if
Protestants, when they say, The Roman Church is a true Church, had only meant
the inuincibly ignorants in her, it had been easy for them, to have said so,
and thereby given no occasion to mistake their meaning. Fourthly, it is against
4.
their own descriptions of the Roman What Protestants mean by Roman Church.
Church. Morton in his imposture c. 14. sec. 12. The Church of Rome consists
of a Pope, and his subordinats, as of a head, and a body. And c. 4. No people,
can be called the Church of Rome, except they be Professors of the faith of
Rome. The like he has c. 2. p. 13. Field in Apendice part 3. The Roman
Church, that now is, is the multitude of such only, as magnify, admire, and
adore the plenitude of Papal power, or, at least, are content to be under the
yoke of it still. White in defense of his Way c. 33. The Church of Rome is the
Papacy. Sutclif l. 1. de Ecclesia c. 6. We must first tell, what we, and our
Adversaries mean, by the Church of Rome. I say, that the Church of Rome, is a
multitude under one Head, the Bishop of Rome, and agreeing in the publik
doctrine of the Bishop of Rome, and the external worship, and Rites of that
Church. Rainolds l. 2. de Idolalatria, c. 1. By the name of the Roman Church, I
mean al those, who defile themselves with the superstition of Rome, and
communion of the Pope. Whitaker controu. 2 q. 5. c. 5. p. 506. I esteem the
Papistical Church, not by number of men, but of Professors: And they cannot be
truly, called Professors, but who understand, and believe, what they profes: Al
which definitions, or descriptions of the Roman Church, or Church of Rome,
either only, or chiefly agree to them, who wittingly embrace her doctrine and
communion.

10. Fifthly this exposition of the 5.
Roman Church, is against the profession of the English Protestant Church. For
(as Rouse writes in his Catholic charity c. 2.) The Roman Church (according
to the Church of England) is to be understood of the Pope, and his adherents.
And in the margin cites the Homely on Whitsontide. And c. 3. The Church of
Rome being understood, (as before) according to the words of the Church of
England, to be the Pope, and his adherents, etc. And doubtless, the adherents to
the Pope, are not only invincible ignorants, but either only, 6.
or chiefly, the intelligents. Sixthly, because themselves sometimes declare,
that when they say the Roman Church, is a true Church, they mean even those,
who wittingly follow her doctrine. For Doctor Potter sec. 1. p. The cursed Dame
of Rome is a member of the Cath. Church.
10. having called her, the cursed Dame of Rome, who takes upon her to revel in
the house of God, who has many ways played the Harlot, and in that regard,
deserved See Usher Sermon. before x James p. 26.
a bil of divorce from Christ, and detestation from Christians: says in the
next page. Yet for those Catholic verities which she retains, we yield her a
member of the Catholic. Is not this plainly to confess, that the most obstinat
part of the Roman Church, is not yet divorced from Christ, and is still a
member of the Catholic Church? Moreover sec. 3. p. 74. 75. we acknowledge (says
he) the Church of Rome a member of the body of Christ, and this cleares us
from imputation of Scisme, whose property it is, to cut of from the body of
Christ, and hope of salvation, the Church, from which it separates. And the
same defends Chillingworth c. 5. p. 266. But they separated themselves from
the Pope and his adherents; Therefore those, they must account members of the
body of Christ, and in hope of salvation, or they clear not themselves from
scisme. Montague also l. orig. Eccles. part poster. p. 408. says: The Bishop
of Rome is a part, and a Chief, of the universal representative Church. And if
the Pope be a part, surely al Papists are. 7.
Seventhly, if they did allow no Papists to be of the Church, or in way of
salvation, but only the inuincibly ignorants, they could pretend no more
charity to Papists, then we have to Protestants. For (as Chillingworth Ib. p.
400. Material heretics, you do not exclude from possibility of salvation.
writes c. 7. p. 398. Ignorant Protestants may be saved by the confession of
Papists. The same he has c. 5. p. 308. And c. 1. p. 34. According to the
grownds of your own Religion, Protestants may die in their supposed error,
either with excusable ignorance, or with contrition, and if they do so, may be
saved. which is true, if he mean of invincible ignorance: but such are no true
or formal Protestants, such are rather Protestantibus credentes, then
Protestants, because wittingly they hold no point of true Protestancie, but the
Capital points of Christianity, which are the Capital points of Papacy. But
howsoever they can equivocate in the name of Roman Church, because they can take
that for different kinds of men, ignorants and intelligents, and say, that
when they affirm the Roman Church to be a true Church, and a member of the
Catholic Church and body of Christ, they mean only the inuincibly ignorants,
and not those who wittingly follow her doctrine: how can they equivocate in the
name of Roman faith, or Roman Religion, which is not of two kinds, as its
Professors are, but one only, and includes the pretended errors of Rome, as is
evident by that Epitheton Roman, when they say, men may be saved in the Roman
faith, or Roman Religion is safe to such, as believe what they profes, that her
religion has antidotes against al errors, or sins, that her errors will not be
pernicious to them, that believe Perkins initio problematis.
them, and withal profes, (as Chillingworth does c. 6. p. 375. By your Religion
I understand that, wherein you al what is the Romans Religion.
agree, or profes to agree, the doctrine of the Council of Trent. Is not this to
confess, that even those, who wittingly follow the Roman faith, or Religion,
(which is the doctrine of the Council of Trent) may be saved, if they believe as
they profes?

9. An other thing, which conuinceth 8.
the Caluinists, that they hold, that a true Church, saving faith, and state of
salvation, may stand with sinful errors in some points of faith sufficiently
proposed, or with faulty want of such proposal, is their mainteining, that the
Lutherans are a true Church, have saving faith, and may be saved: who yet
sinfully err in some points of faith sufficiently proposed to them, or at the
least, which would be so proposed to them, if it were not their fault, which is
al one, touching sin. For (as Doctor Potter says sec. 7. p. 109.) In this
case, the difference is not great, between him, that is wilfully blind, and
him, that knowingly gainsaith the truth. See also Chillingworth c. 7. p. 404.
That Caluinists grant the Lutherans to be their Brothers in Christ, is evident
by the Apology of the Church of England, and generally by their deeds and
writings. Here I will only set down the Profession of Chillingworth in his
Preface, n. 39. See D Potter sec. 3. p. 89.
I hold the doctrine of al Protestants free from al impiety, and from al error
destructive of salvation, or in itself damnable: and the Decree of the French
Protestants in their Synod at Charenton, an. 1631. in these words. The Synod
declares, that seeing the Churches of the Confession of Ausbourg (Lutherans) do
Caluinists communicate in Sacraments with erring Lutherans.
agree vith the other Reformed Churches, in the Principles, and fundamental
points of their Religion, the faithful of that Confession, who with the spirit
of charity and truly peaceable, do come to the publik Assemblies of the
Churches of this Kingdom, and desire their Communication, may without making
abiuration, be received to the supper of the Lord. Behold Lutherans admitted of
Caluinists to their Communion, without making abiuration; which is to confess,
that they hold errors worthy to be abiured. And the reason, why they are
admitted with their errors, is not because they sin not in them, or they are not
sufficiently proposed to them, but because they are not fundamental errors.
Nether is it likely, that Lutherans that live in France among Caluinists,
should not have their errors sufficiently proposed unto them. (For this were to
condemn the Caluinists of want, both of zele to their Religion, and also of
charity to their erring Brethren) or at the least, they might have their
errors sufficiently proposed to them, if it were not their fault. Besides,
Calvin contra Hessusium p. 843. Withaker controu. 2. q. 5. c. 8. and other
Caluinists generally affirm, that Lutherans are obstinat in their errors. But
that, which conuinceth, that Caluinists account as Brothers, even such
Lutherans, as are obstinat in their errors sufficiently showed to them, is,
that Note this.
Zuinglius, and his fellows in their Conference at Marpurg with Luther and his
Mates, desired to be held for Brethren of the same Church, by Luther and his.
And the same requested Beza and his companions, of Smidelin and his fellows,
in their Conference at Montbelgard, though to their faces they maintained their
errors. See Hospinian part 2. historiae Sacrament. An 1529. 1386. Had not
Luther his errors sufficiently showed to him by Zuinglius, and Smidelin, by
Beza, or at the least might they not have had, if it had not been their fault?
And yet Zuinglius and Beza accounted them for Brethren of the same Church, and
desired to be accounted such of them: but could not obtain it.

10. Moreover Protestants generally Al Protestants err in some points of faith.
confess, that every one of their Churches erreth in some points of faith. And
that they err sinfully, is evident. For either they have those points, in which
they err, sufficiently proposed to them by their Ministers, or might have; if
it be not either their fault, or their Ministers fault. Calvin. 4, Instit. c.
1.. 12. Either we must leave no Church at al, or we must pardon errors in those
things, which may be unknown without breach of the sum of religion. Whitaker
controu. 2. q. 5. c. 8. It is not needful, that al should think the same: if
such unity be required, there would be no Church at al. Bucer in his dispute
at Cambridg p. 481. There is no Church on earth, which erreth not in faith, as
well as in manners. Morton Apology l. 1. c. 68. Only Papists chaleng priuiledg
of not erring. Doctor Potter sec. 2. p. 38. It is a great vanity to hope or
expect, that al learned men in this life should absolutely consent in all pieces
and particles of divine truth. p. 39. unity (in points not fundamental) is
very contingent in the Church, never absolute in all particles of truth. Item:
Among wise men, each discord in Religion dissolues not the unity of faith or
charity. Sec. 5. p. 22. The Church may not hope to triumph over al error, til
it be in heaven. Lord Canterbury sec. 33. p. 360. This (that al agree in all
points of faith) cannot be hoped for, til the Church be Triumphant. Chilling
worth c. 5. p. 279. The visible Church is free indeed from al error abso-Lutly
destructive and unpardonable, but See whites way p. 110. Montacute part.
poster. orig. p. 408.
not free from al error, which in itself is damnable. Thus plainly they
confess, that al Protestants Churches err in some points of faith, that they
must pardon errors which are not against fundame^tal points, or have no Church
at al: that each discord in Religion dissolues not unity in faith. And if
Ministers have sufficiently proposed these errors to their Churches, or would so
do, if it were not their Churches fault, either they have no true Church, or it
may be a true Church, which sinfully erreth in some points of faith, and
communion with such an erring Church, is lawful.

11. Finally, sometime Protestants 8.
seem plainly to confess, that saving faith, true Church, and salvation, can
stand with sinful error in some points of faith, For thus write the Divines of
Casimire in their admonit. c. 7. p. 246. we offer ourselves to maintain
Brotherhood with Lutherans, from which these divines exclude us, even this
dissension in doctrine remaining. Chillingworth c. 1. p. 38. To oppose that,
which he might know to be the word of God, were he void Sinfully to oppose Gods
word, no mortal sin.
ofpreiudice, is a fault I confess, but a fault, which is incident to good and
honest men very often. Lo, to oppose that, which one may know to be Gods
word, were it not his fault, is no damnable sin, but such, as is incident to
good, and honest men. Is not this to excuse sinful opposition of Gods word from
damnable sin, and to say, that salvation may stand with sinful opposition of
Gods word? And c. 3. p. 139. He only in fact affirms, that God does deceive or
is deceived, who denies something, which himself knows or beleues to be Gods
revealed word. And upon this doctrine, be excuses p. 39. and 40. al Protestants
from damnably erring, because they do not oppose, what they know God has
testified: and says p. No dishonor to Gods veracitie.
40. They only err damnably, who oppose, what they know God has testified. And
c. 3. p. 135. Without any, the lest dishonor to Gods veracitie, I may doubt
or deny some truth revealed by him, if I nether know nor believe it to be
revealed by him. Is not this plainly to say, that they only err damnably, who
oppose what they know or believe to be revealed? and so they err not damnably,
who oppose that, which is sufficiently proposed to them, but nether believe, nor
know it to be Gods word? Is not this to excuse al opposers of Gods word, upon
sinful or affected ignorance, from damnable sin, or any dishonor to Gods
veracitie? For these nether know nor believe it to be Gods word: And to say,
that error in faith upon sinful or affected ignorance, may stand with saving
faith, true Church, and salvation? Lord Canterbury sec. 35. p. 285.
Protestants say, that the errors of the Roman Church, are so many, and some
so great, as weaken the foundation, that it is very Salvation may stand with
unbelief of truth manifested.
hard to go that way to heaven, especially to the^, that have had the truth
manifested. Lo, even those Papists, who have had the truth manifested, may go
to heaven, though very hardly. Is not this to say, that saving faith and
salvation may stand with unbelief of truth manifested? Ib. p. 282. The
possibility of Papists salvation, I think cannot be denied, with holding known
corruptions.
to the ignorants especially, because they hold the foundation: but a secure
way they cannot go, who hold with such corruptions, when they know them;
Behold again, a possible way, though not secure, even for those Papists, who
hold corruptions, when they know them. Is not this to grant saving faith, and
possibility of salvation, where not only truth is sufficiently proposed, but
also known corruptions are followed? And p. 299. I do for my part acknowledge
a possibility of salvation Salvation may stand with witting association to
gros superstitions
in the Roman Church, but so, as that which I grant to Romanists, is not as
they are Romanists, but as they are Christians, that is, as they believe the
Creed, and hold the foundation, Christ himself: not as they associate
themselves wittingly and knowingly to the gros superstitions of the Roman
Church. Behold again, possibility of salvation granted even to those
Romanists, who wittingly and knowingly associate themselves to the gros
superstitions of the Roman Church; And have not they truth sufficiently
proposed to them, who wittingly and knowingly associate themselves to gros
superstitions? Nether hinders it, that he grants not possibility of
salvation to Romanists, as they associate themselves wittingly to gros
superstitions. For it suffices us, that he grants possibility of salvation
to those same Romanists, who so associate themselves to superstitions, for to
prove, that they grant, that possibility of salvation may be in the same men,
with witting and known association to gros superstitions: which is more then I
needed to prove. For it sufficed me to prove, that Protestants teach, that
saving faith, and salvation may stand with sinful denial of some revealed
truths sufficiently proposed: And here salvation is granted even to those, who
associate themselves to known gros superstitions: which is far more, and far
worse. For he that does associate himself to gros superstitions only
sufficiently proved, does not associate himself to known superstitions, but
only which might be known of him. But who does wittingly and knowingly
associate himself to gros superstitions, does associate himself to known gros
superstitions. Finally sec. 32. p. 226. when they know it, if the error be not
manifestly against fundamental External obedience to known error.
verity, I would have al wise men consider, whether external obedience be not
even then to be yielded. Lo external obedience to be yielded to known error in
not fundamentals. Be it therefore certain, that howsoever Chillingworth or
Doctor Potter say, that al divine revelations without question or exception,
are necessary to be believed or not rejected, when they are sufficiently
proposed; or that other Protestants deny they teach, that Fundamental points
are sufficient, and not fundamental, not necessary to saving faith, true
Church, and salvation, even when not fundamentals are sufficiently proposed,
and deny, that saving faith, true Church, and salvation can stand with sinful
error in some points of faith, Protestants do plainly teach so, and must teach
so, as long as they defend such Churches as they do, and communicate with
such, and hold their foresaid common Tenets and Principles: and some say more,
to wit, that saving faith, true Church, and salvation, may stand not only with
sinful error of some points of faith sufficiently proposed, but also with
profession or association to known gros superstitions. And I have been the
longer in proving, that Protestants hold the foresaid doctrine, that saving
faith, true Church, and salvation, may stand with sinful ertor in some points
of faith, partly, because sometimes they deny, that they hold it, partly,
because to have discovered it, is half to have refuted it, it being so
detestable, as indeed it is. Now let us see, why Protestants make, or use the
distinction of points of faith, rather by these Metaphorical and ambiguous
terms, Fundamental, Not fundamental, then by these proper and clear terms,
Necessary, Not necessary. For it is not without cause, that they chose
improper and obscure terms, rather then proper and clear.

Why Protestants distinguish points of faith by the Metaphorical terms
Fundamental, Not Fundamental, rather then by proper terms, Necessary,
Not-Necessarie. THIRD CHAPTER.
PRotestants confess (and it cannot Chillingw. c. 4. p. 225.
be denied) that the word Fundamental is Metaphorical and ambiguous, and profes
sometimes by Fundamental Chillingw. p. 219. 220.
to understand Necessary: and nevertheless they rather make distinction of
points of faith into Fundamental, and not Fundamental, then into necessary,
and not necessary. And the reason hereof, is, partly because under these
ambiguous terms, Fundamental, not Fundamental, they can better cover the
fowlnes of their doctrine, whereof we speak in the former Chapter, That sinful
error in some points of faith, may stand with saving faith, true Church, and
salvation, The fowlnes whereof does not so evidently appear, if it be only
said, that some points of faith, are not fundamental to saving faith, to
Church, or to salvation, though they be sufficiently proposed. For in rigor of
speech, not Not al things Necessary are Fundamental.
every necessary part, is fundamental: as a roof is necessary to a house,
yet not fundamental. Besides by Not fundamental, they may seem to mean, Not
principal, or Not Capital. In which sense, it is no foul doctrine, to say,
Some points are Not Fundamental, Some points proposed, not principal, and yet
necessary.
though they be sufficiently proposed: as it is to say, some are Not
necessary though they be sufficiently proposed: Because not every thing
necessary, is principal. Partly also, that under these ambiguous terms,
Fundamental, Not Fundamental, See c. 16. n. 6.
they may fly from one sense of them, to an other, better then they could
under the proper terms Necessary, Not Necessary, and so delude their
adversary, and avoid conviction. For sometimes by Fundamental articles, they
only mean principal or capital articles of faith: And by Not fundamental, Not
principal, or Not capital articles. And thus they must mean, when they prove
out of Catholics, that they admit Fundamental and Not fundamental articles. At
other times by Fundamental, they mean articles sufficient to a Church, and to
salvation: And by Not fundamental articles, Not at al necessary to a Church or
to salvation, as we clearly showed in the second Chapter. And this craft they
could not so well use, under the words Necessary, Not necessary, Because nether
are they so ambiguous, as Fundamental, Not fundamental: nether do Catholics
deui'de articles into Necessary, Not necessary, (because they account al
necessary; either to be believed actually, if they be Al points of faith, twoe
ways necessary.
sufficiently proposed, or virtually, though they be not so proposed) as some
do into Fundamental, Not fundamental. And that Protestants use Fundamental in
an other sense, then we do, is evident, by these words of Chillingworth in his
answer to the Preface p. 16. In our sense of the word Fundamental, I hope she
(To. Church) erred not fundamentally: but in your sense of the word, I fear
she did.

2. Whereof to avoid al ambiguitie, In what sense Fundamental and Not
fundamental may be used.
equivocation, or dispute of words, if by Fundamental points, Protestants would
only mean, principal or capital points of faith; and by not fundamental, See
Bellarm. l. 4. de verbo Dei c. 11. Peron Epist, ad Reg. Iac. obseruat. 3.
not principal or not Capital points of faith: or if by fundamental points,
they would only mean such, as are the fundations of other articles: or lastly,
by Fundamental Articles, such as (in ordinary course) their D. Potter sec 7.
p. 74. Chillingw. p. 263. 283. 227.
actual belief is necessary to every particular person, and to salvation, And
by Not fundamental points, such as their actual belief is not absolutely
necessary to every particular person, or to salvation, but only
co^ditionally, if they be sufficiently proposed, there would be no difference
between us about this distinction of Fundamental, and Not fundamental articles.
But (as I said) their defending such Churches, as sinfully err in some points
of faith sufficiently proposed, or for their fault, Bellar l. 3. de Eccles. c.
14. multa sunt de fide, quae no^ sunt absolute necessaria ad salutem.
have them not sufficiently proposed, forces them to understand by fundamental
points, such points, as absolutely or in all cases suffice to saving faith, to a
Church, and to salvation: And by Not fundamentals, such as are absolutely or in all cases unnecessary to saving faith to a Church, or to salvation. In In what
sense it is ground of atheisine.
which sense we condemn this their distinction, as a ground of atheism and
damnable deceit of such, as sinfully err in some points of faith: But now let
us see, what account, and what use they make of this their distinction.

That Protestants make great account, and great use, of their distinction of
Fundamental, and Not Fundamental points. FOVRTH CHAPTER.
1. THat Protestants make great account, and great use, of their distinction of
Fundamental and Not fundamental points, is evident, both by their words and
deeds. For Doctor Potter sec. 7. p. 70. says This distinction is most
necessary, and has a ground in reason and scripture. And p. 73. he calls
it, a most necessary and A most necessary, most useful, and main distinction.
most useful distinction. And p. 75. a main distinction. K. James Epist. and
Card. Peron. This distinction, the King accounts of such importance, to
diminish the controversies in the Church, as he thinks it the duty of every
peacable man, most diligently to explicate, teach, and urge it. Chillingworth
makes the whole third Chapter of his Book to prove, that this distinction is
good and pertinent, and says: This distinction is employed by Protestants to
many purposes. In answer to the Preface p. 7. as it is applied by Protestants
is very good. Lord Canterbury in his Relation p. 21. and 24. grants, that
the Greek Church has a dangerous and greuious error, and yet affimeth her to
be a true Church, because her error is not Fundamental. The like judgment he
gives of the Roman Church p 296. 325. and p. 129. 311. So by this Saves
Churches greuiously erring.
distinction they save Churches, that have dangerous and greuious errors.

2. Secondly Protestants have made use of this distinction ever since they
began to be divided in points of faith, as a sovereign remedy to cover their
rent. For Zuinglius, when he had forsaken Luther in the point of real presence,
for excuse thereof, in his Used by Protestants since their dissension.
Apolog. tom. 2. fol. 374. said. That this matter pertined not to any
foundation of faith: The same said Bucer in Hospinian part secunda hist. fol.
127. and Martyr ib. fol. 244. Calvin Defens. 2. contra Wesphal. p 766 Beza
contra Wesphal. p. 258. Whitak controu. 2. q. 5. c. 8. Iuel in his Apology and
generally al Sacramentaries, when either they currie favor with Lutherans, and
would be held for brethren of them, or excuse to Catholics; their dissentions
in points of faith. See Doctor Potter sec. 3. p. 89. and sec. 5. p. 18. Lord
Canterbury sec. 38. p. 325.

3. Thirdly, this their distinction is the ground of their defense in
controversies The ground of Protestants defense in main points.
of greatest moment, to wit; which are true Churches, and in which salvation
may be had: and with which, men may communicate lawfully. For, if we prove,
that the Protestant Church in general (as it comprehends both Lutherans and
Caluinists) is no true Church, nor can afford salvation: nor is such, as men
may lawfully communicate withal, because her members are sinfully divided in
points of faith and Religion, one from the other, they answer not, that they
are not sinfully divided, but that their division is not in points fundamental,
but only in not fundamental points: which division does not hinder that unity
of faith, or of Church, D. Potter sec. 2. p. 38.
which is necessary. Likewise, if we prove, that the Lutherans are no true L.
Canterb sec. 38. p. 325.
Church, because they are divided in points of faith from the Caluinists, their
answer is, this division is not in fundamental points, but only in points not
fundamental, which division (whether it be sinful, or no) does not destroy the
substance of a true Church. The like answer for the Roman Church, Protestants
do give, when it pleases them to grant, that she is a true Church, and that
salvation may be had in her. Finally, if we prove, that no particular
Protestant Church can be a true Church, or have hope of salvation, because (as
Protestants confess) every one of their Churches erreth in some point of faith,
nay that there is no hope, that any Church shall be free from al error in
points of faith, they answer: This error is only in not fundamental points,
which error destroieth not saving faith, Church, or means of salvation,
whether it be vincible and sinful, or no.

4. Thus we see, that by means of this distinction, of fundamental, and not
fundamental points, Protestants do make Churches to be true, or false, as they
please, accordingly, as they make points of faith to be fundamental, or not
fundamental, as they please: nether telling us constantly, which are
fundamental, which not fundamental; nor giving us any certain rule to know
which are such, but reserving the determination hereof to their ends, as they
need: Secondly by means of this distinction, they endeavor what kind of
erring Churches may be true Churches.
to maintain three main points, to wit: That such Churches, as they confess to
err in some points of faith, are notwithstanding true Churches: That salvation
may be had in such erring Churches: And that men may lawfully communicate with
erring Churches. Which doctrine of theirs, if it were meant only of such
Churches, as inuincibly, unwittingly or innocently err, or which err in not
fundamental points, not sufficiently proposed, were not to be condemned: but
being meant (as it is, and must be what kind of erring Churches Protestants
mean.
by them, for many such Churches as they do maintain) of obstinat or sinful
error, or of error about Notfundamental points sufficiently proposed, is
abominable, and indeed the very ground of atheism. Nether, though it were
true, would itsuffice them for to mainteiue some Churches, which they
maintain, and salvation in the^: both because they sometimes confess, that those
Churches do err even in fundamental points: and also, because those Churches
want Communion in Sacraments, which is as essential, to a true Church, as faith
is, as we shall show hereafter. C. 19.
So that this their ground of mainteining such erring Churches as they do
maintain, is not only falls and atheistical, but also though it were true, were
insufficient to uphold such Churches, as they endeavor to uphold Protestants
ground, nether true, nor sufficient for their purpose.
by it, as (God willing) I shall show evidently in this Treatise. But first we
will show their uncertainty, both what, and which are Not-fundamental points,
and whether a true Church can err even in fundamental points, that thereby the
Reader may see, that this their ground, is not only falls, and also insufficient
for their purpose; but also that they themselves are not certain, or assured
of it; and yet do upon this ground, venture their salvation in living in
confessed erring Churches: and other men's also, in teaching them, that it is
not necessary to saving faith, to a member of the Church, or to salvation, to
believe every point of faith though sufficiently proposed, or which would be so
proposed, if it were not also the fault of the not beleuer, which is damnably
to deceive poor souls.

That Protestants are uncertain, what a Not-fundamental point is. FIFTH
CHAPTER.
1. THe questions: what is such a thing? and, which is such a thing? Difference
between what, and which is.
are different. For the former, enquireth the nature of the thing, and the
latter, which has that nature: as, what is a Lion, enquireth, what is his
nature? which is a Lion, enquireth, which is the beast, that has that nature?
In this Chapter, we will show the Protestants uncertainty, what is the nature
of Not fundamental points, and in the next chapter, their uncertainty, which
are they, that have the nature of Not fundamental points. For, either because
indeed, they know not, what is the nature, or condition of their Not --
fundamental points; or because, being between twoe streights, to wit, of
defending Churches, which sinfully err in points not fundamental, and of
defending their separation from the Roman Church, for pretended errors in
points not fundamental: Or lastly, because they would not have Catholics to be
able to convince, what they teach in this matter, they doeso perplexedly
deliver their doctrine about not fundamental points, as there is greater
difficulty to convince, what indeed is their doctrine herein, then that it is false doctrine.

2. First therefore, they teach (as Not fundamentals are not necessary for
salvation, or separation.
we showed before in the 2. chapter) that Not fundamental points, are By
truths, unnecessary, not necessary, for which no separation ought to be made:
and (as Chillingworth says c. 4. p. 220.) By, Fundamental, we mean al, and
only that, which is necessary. So, no point not fundamental, can be necessary.

3. Secondly, they say, that Notfundamental But opinions, doubtful, obscure,
not evidently deduced out of scripture.
points are opinions, doubtful matters, obscure points, disputable in
themselves, and happily, by plain Scripture, indeterminable, disputable
opinions, not clearly defined in Scripture, not evidently deducible out of
Scripture, of which nether Church nor Council has any infallible assurance,
and in which, modest opposition is tolerable. D. Potter sec. 2. p. 38. speaking
of Notfundamental Not fundamentals are opinions.
points says. The unity of the Church is nothing hindered by dinersitie of
opinions in doubtful matters. See also p. 40. 43. And p, 39. calls, Not
fundamental points, Probable, Opposition in not fundamentals, is tolerable.
Accidental, and Obscure points, wherein the oppositions of learned men,
proceeding modestly, are tolerable. Sec. 4. p. 94. If we did not dissent in
some opinions, from the present Roman Church, we could not agree with the
Church truly Catholic. Sec. 7. p. 74. says of Not fundamental points: They
are disputable in themselves, and happily, by plain Scripture, indeterminable.
And sec. 6. p. 54. affirms, that controversies among Whitaker. cont. 2. q. 5.
c. 8. our contentions are for faith, for Religion.
Protestants, are only in disputable opinions, not clearly defined in
Scripture. And yet their Controversies, arc (at least) in not fundamental
points: Chillingworth in his preface number. 30. The disputes of Protestants
(about not fundamentals) are touching such things, Not fundamentals, are
obscure matters.
as may with probability be disputed on both sides: and calls Protestants
men of different opinions, touching obscure controuersed questions of Religion.
Nu. 32. Those truths, will be fundamental, which are evidently delivered in
Scripture, and commanded to be preached to al men: Those, not fundamental,
which are obscure-Nothing that is obscure, can be necessary to be understood,
or not mistaken. c. 1. p. 41. Those are not fundamental, Not evidently
deducibleout of Scripture.
which are therehence (out of Scripture) deducible but probably, not evidently.
And c. 3. p. 129. calls the points, in which Protestants dissent, matters not
plainly and undoubtedly delivered in Scripture. c. 5. p. 306. As for our
continuing in their (Churches erring not fundamentaly) Communion, the
justification hereof, is not so much, that their errors are not damnable, as
that they require not the belief, and profession of these errors, among the
conditions of their communion. And 307. It is not No separation for not
fundamental errors.
lawful to separate from any Churches Communion, for errors not perteining to
the substance of faith, unless that Church require the belief and profession of
them. Lord Canterbury sec. 21. p. 147. terms not fundamental points,
Disputable doctrine, and points of curious speculation: and errors in the same,
light. Sec. 25. p. 165. Curious truths. Sec. 38. p. 361. opinions which flutter
about faith. Curious truths.
And sec. 38. p. 357. he affirms, that in not fundamentals, Nether general
Councels, nor the whole Church has infallible certainty. And ibid. p. 358. No
infallibility in not fundame^tal points.
That in them, it is no matter, if Councels err. And ibid. It it not requisite,
that for them, we should have an infallible assurance. And sec. 32. p. 226.
when they know it (the error) if the error (of a general Council) be not
manifestly against fundamental verity, I would have al wise men consider,
whither external obedience be not, even then, to be yielded. So that obedience
may be External obedience, to known error in not fu^dame^tals.
yielded against not fundamental verity. And sec. 26. p. 205. Bihops subject
to Kings in spiritual causes too, so the foundations of faith, and manners be
not shaken.

4. Thirdly, they teach, that not fundamentals points. are no points of faith.
This follows evidently out of what we even now related: For if they be but
opinions, obscure, and doubtful matters, whereof we can have no infallible
certainty, or assurance, not clearly defined in scripture, nor evidently
deducible out of Scripture, they cannot say, they are points of faith, unless
they will turn faith into opinion, and make that a point of faith, which nether
is clearly defined in Scripture, nor evidently deducible out of Scripture: But
besides this, some times they expressly teach, that not fundamentals are no
points of faith, Not fundamentals no points of faith.
or of Religion. Doctor Potter sec. 2. p. 40. calls not fundamental points,
Things beside, or without the faith. Sec. 5. p. 89. How Christ is in the
Symbols, and how in heaven and earth, is no part of faith. Sec. 6. p. 54. Our
(Protestant) Controversies are none of them in the substance of faith, but only
in disputable opinions. Lord Canterbury sec. 39. p. 387. Superstructures are
doctrins about the faith, not the faith itself, unless they be immediate
consequences. And p. 388. Suppose uncertainty in some of these superstructures,
it can never be thence concluded, that there is no infallible certainty of the
faith itself. p. 341. This Athanasius Creed, and the Apostles, and no more, is
the Catholic faith. Sec. 38. p. 361. he calls Not fundamentals, opinions,
which flutter about faith. And p. 376. says: Nor do the Church of Rome, and
the Protestants, set up a different Religion. For the Christian Religion, is
the same to both. And yet these Churches Not fundame^tals make not difference
in Religion.
differ, at least, in not fundamental points, and so Not-fundamental points,
are no points of Religion. Chillingworth c. 3. p. 129. But you (Papists) are al
agreed, that only those things, wherein you do agree, are matters Not matters
of faith, in which Protestants differ.
of faith: And Protestants, if they were wise, would do so too. Sure I am,
they have reason enough to do so, seeing al of them agree with explicit faith
in all those things, which are plainly and undoubtedly delivered in Scripture.
Thus Consubstantiation, vbiquitie, and such, are not matters of faith. And in
answer to the preface, when his adversary had said, That men of different
Religions (as Papists and Protestants) may be saved, is a ground of atheism,
he will not admit Papists and Protestants to be men of different Religions, but
says p. 14. By men of different Religions, he must mean Christians of diverse
opinions and communions, or else he Difference in not fundamentals should not
hinder communion.
speaks not to the point. And c. 4. p. 209. The diversity of opinions, which
is among the several sects of Christians, ought to be no hinderance to their
unity in communion. So that the several sects of Christians differ but in
opinions, and yet doubtless they differ in not Optatus l. 2. vbi vultis, ibi est
Ecclesia, and non est vbi non vultis.
fundamentals. Lord Canterbury also sec. 39. p. 376. Potter sec. 3. p. 58.
White in Defens. of his way c. 38. and others say, that the Protestant and the
Roman Religion are the same: and yet grant, that they differ in not fundamental
points. Whence it must needs follow, that not fundamental points are no points
of Religion. For if they be points of Religion, who differ in them, differ in
Religion.

5. Fourthly they teach, that no opposition to not fundame^tal points, Error in
not Fundamentals is not heresy.
is true heresy, as we showed before c. 2. and it follows out of what even
now we rehearsed. For if not fundamental points be no points of faith,
opposition to them, cannot be heresy. For heresy, is an error against faith.
And as Lord Canterbury says sec. 26. p. 198. Heresy, properly cannot be,
but in doctrine of faith.

6. Lastly, Protestants not content to teach, that not fundamental points Not
fundamentals, are matters of nothing.
are but opinions, no points of faith, doubtful matters, and such like,
sometimes speak contemptuously of them, as if they were not to be regarded at
al: as when we object to Caluinists, their difference from Lutherans, in such
points, as they account not fundamentals: Whitaker controu. 1. q. 4. c. 3.
calls them, small matters. K. James in his Monitorie Epistle: Things
indifferent, and tittles. D. Andrews Resp. ad Apol Bellarm. c. 14. Matters of
no great moment. The Apology of the Church of England, No great matters.
Calvin Admonit. vltima, p. 832. Matters of nothing. Martyr in Locis, Class 4.
c. 10. paragr. 65. Matters not to be much respected. Doctor Potter sec. 3. p.
89. No part of faith, but curious Nicities. Thus meanly, nay contemptously,
they speak of Not-fundame^tal points, when they will maintain any Church,
which they confess to err in Not-fundamental points, or salvation to be had in
such a Church, or their own Communion with her. And surely, If Not-fundamental
points, were such, as hitherto they have described, evident it were, that even
obstinat error in them could not destroy saving faith, true Church, or hope of
salvation, nor hinder Communion with any Church obstinatly erring in such
points.

7. But at other times, Not-fundamental At other times not fundamentals are
points of faith.
points, are points of faith with them, are weighty matters, as on which
depends men's salvation: and errors against them, damnable, as we L. 2. c. 1.
shall see at large hereafter. And thus highly they esteem of Not-fundamental
points, especialy, when they would justify their separation from the Roman
Church, which they confess to be a true Church, and to hold the fundamental
points, and yet say, her errors are horrible and damnable, and just cause of
separation from her. But let us hear them first freeing the Roman Church from
fundamental errors, and after, condemning her for damnable errors, and such as
are just cause of separation. Doctor Potter sec. 3. p. 62. The most necessary
and Rome holds that which constitutes a Church.
fundamental truths, which constitute a Church, are on both sides (Catholic
and Protestants) unquestioned. p. 60. The things, wherein the Protestants do
judge the life and substance of Religion to be The life and substance of
Religion.
comprised, their adversaries (Papists) themselves do auow and receive them, as
well as they. And p. 58. In the prime The fundamental truths.
grounds or principles of Religion, we have not forsaken the Church of Rome.
Chillingworth in Answer to the Preface, p. 16. In our sense of the word,
fundamental, I hope she (Roman Church) erred not fundamentally. c. 3. p. 164.
The Erreth not in fundamentals.
only and main reason, why we believe you not to err in fundamentals, is your
holding the doctrins of faith in Christ, and repentance. c. 7. p. 401. we
approve those See also c. 3. p. 163.
fundamental and simply necessary truths, which you retain, by which some
good souls among you may be saved. p. 404. We hope she reteines those truths,
which are simply, absolutely, and indispensably Holds what is necessary to
salvation.
necessary to salvation, which may suffice to bring those good souls to
heaven. Lord Canterbury sec. 35. p. 299. Romanists, as they are Christians
that is, as they believe the Creed, and hold the foundation, Christ himself, I
dare not proceed so roughly, Holds the foundation.
as the deny, or weaken the foundation, which is Christ, even among them, and
which is and remains holy, even in the midst of their superstitions. And
sec. 39. p. 376. The Protestant, and the Roman Religion, is the same. And the
same it could not be, if the Roman differed in fundamental points. And sec. 35.
p. 285. and sec. 36. p. 314. 315. affirms, that ignorant souls in the Roman
Church, are safe, and that Ignorants in the Roman Church, are safe.
their simplicity of believing, makes them safe, yea safest. And sec. 26. p.
192. Protestants have not leaft the Church of Rome in her essence, not in the
things which constitute a Church. Thus these men plainly confess, that the
errors of the Roman Church, are not fundamental, but only not fundamental. More
confessions of Protestants, that the Roman Church holds all the fundamental
points, may be seen lib. 1. of the Author of Protestancie c. 2. paragr. 3.

8. And nevertheless, these same men say, her errors are horrible and Yet
holds Rome horrible errors.
damnable, and just cause of separation. Doctor Potter sec. 3. p. 62. The Roman
Church is extremely defiled with horrible errors and corruptions. Chillingworth
in Answer to the Preface p. 16. Errors of the Roman Church, of Errors of
themselves damnable.
themselves, damnable. c. 1. p. 34. Popery in itself destroies salvation. Lord
Canterbury sec. 35. p. 296. He that beleues, as that (Roman) Church beleues,
Guilty of schism.
is guilty of the Scisme, which that Church first caused by her corruptions,
and of al her damnable opinions too. And p. Damnable opinions.
298. And therefore in this present case, there is peril, great peril, of
damnable, both Schism, and Heresy, and other Peril of Schism.
sin, by living and dying in the Roman faith, tainted with so many
superstitions, as this day it is. Chillingworth c. 5. p. 276. Your corruptions
in them selves may induce on obligation to forsake your communion. And they al
three though they confessed, that the errors of the Roman Church are not
fundamental, yet afford salvation to these only of the Roman Church, who either
are inuincibly ignorant of her errors, or repent themselves of them, as is to
be seen in Doctor Potter sec. 3. p. 76. Chillingworth c. 5. p. 267. 285. 283.
c. 7. p. 398. Lord Canterbury sec. 34. and 35. So not fundamental errors,
which before they so much slighted, sometimes are horrible errors, damnable
opinions, of themselves damnable, and destructive of salvation, and just cause
of separation.

9. Finally their ignorance, and uncertainty, what Fundamental, or Not
Fundamental points are, appears by their manifold, and ambiguous distinctions
of them: Their first distinction is, of Fundamental properly and improperly.
Doctor Potter Properly
sect. 7. p. 75. Fundamental properly is that, which Christians are oblidged to
believe by an expres and actual faith. Lord Canterb. sec. 10. p. 38. Catholic
Maxims are properly Fundamental. An other distinction is, Formally not
Formally.
Formally. L. Canterb. sect, 38. p. 334. Deductions are not formally
fundamental for all men. An other is, In some sense. In some sense.
Potter sect. 7. p. 74. whatsoever is revealed in Scripture, is in some sense
Fundamental. An other, Absolutely, not Absolutely.
Absolutely. L. Cannterb. sect. 18. p. 139. The Church cannot err in absolute
Fundamentals. p. 140. The Church cannot err in doctrins absolutely Fundame^tal.
sect. 25. p. 162. The Church cannot err in absolute Fundamentals. P. 165. In
absolute foundations. Chillingworth c. 5. p. 282. We hope your errors, are not
absolutely unpardonable. An other distinction is, Simply Fundamental, not Simply.
Simply. L. Canterb. sect. 9. p. 24. It was a question, not simply Fundamental.
sect. 10. p. 31. Nothing is simply Fundamental, because the Church declares it.
sect. 25. p. 162. Provided, it be not in any point simply Fundamental. Potter
in Chillingworth p. 7. Simply and indispensably necessary, Precisely
necessary. An other is, Prime foundations, and Prime.
not Prime. L. Canterb sect. 33 p. 256. 258. The Church is infallible in the
Prime foundations of faith. An other is: To some, and not to al. L. Canterb.
sec. 10. p. 37. What perteines to Christian faith, is not by and by fundamental
in the faith to al men. Chillingworth c. 3. p. 184. That may be fundamental to
one, which to an other is not so. Potter sec. 7 p. 103. Some truth is
fundamental in some persons in certain respects, which is Not to some others.
An other distinction, is That some are fundamental Remedielesly, Remedielesly
others not Chillingworth c. 5. p. 290. Fundamental errors, may signify,
either such, as are repugnant to Gods command, but pardonable by ignorance, or
which are Remedielesly pernicious, and destructive of salvation. An other. Some
are either in themselves, or by accident fundamental. Chillingworth c. 1. p. 41.
An other is, some are Reductiue Fundamental, others not, so Reductiuely
White in L. Canterb. sect 37. p. 317. Popish errors, are Fundamental
Reductiue. p. 321. Some errors of that Church, were fundamental Reductiue. But
what signifies this multiplicitie of ambiguous distinctions, but, their
ignorance or uncertainty, what is truly Fundamental, and their mind to
delude their Adversary, and to confound their Reader. Whereas one distinction,
Truly, Not truly, would have sufficed. For Fundamental is of one only Nature,
and what has that nature, is truly Fundame^tal, what has it not, is not truly
Fundamental, and this multiplicitie of Fundamentals, discovers clearly
ignorance, and uncertainty, what is the true Nature or Essence of
Fundamental. And thus we have seen, how uncertain Protestants are, What
Not-fundamentals points be, to wit, Whether points of faith, or but opinions.
Whether errors in them be damnable or no: Whether separation ought to be made
for them, or no: Whether they make difference in Religion, or no: And whether
the Nature of fundamental, be one or manifold. Now let us see, how uncertain
also they be, which are Fundamental points, Which, Not-fundamental.

THAT PROTESTANTS are uncertain, which are Fundamental, and which
Notfundamental. SIXTH CHAPTER.
1. IN the former Chapter I showed, how uncertain Protestants are, what a
Not-fundamental point is, but now say one thing, now the contrary, as it
serves for their present purpose, either to justify a Church that sinfully
erreth in Not fundamentals, For then they are no points of faith, but
disputable opinions, light matters, for which no separation ought to be made,
or to justify their separation from a Church, which they confess erreth but in
Not-fundamentals. For then they are matters of faith, and errors in them,
horrible, and of themselves damnable, and just cause of separation, or schism.
Now I will show their like uncertainty, which are the points, that are
Fundamental, and which, Not-fundamental: and that as it serves to their
present purpose, either to justify a Church, or to condem a Church, they make
the self same points to be Fundamental, or Not fundamental.

2. And as for their uncertainty, Impossible for Protestants to give an exact
catalogue of Fundamentals.
or ignorance, which are all the Fundamental points, themselves profes it. For
thus Chillingworth c. 3. p. 166. we know not precisely, just how much is
fundamental. p. 134. It is impossible to set down an exact Catalogue of
Fundamentals. Which he repeateth p. 135. and c. 4. p. 201. c. 6. p 367. and in
Answer to the Preface p. 26. And c. 7. p. 408. Protestants do not agree
touching what points are fundamental. Lord Canterb. sec. 38. p. 325. To set
bounds to this, and strictly to define it for particular men, Just thus far you
must believe in every particular, or incurdamnation, is no work for my pen. And
ibid. 372. The Church cannot teach, just how far every man must believe, as it
relates to the possibility, or impossibility of his salvation in every
particular. And if it be impossible for them to set down an exact Catalogue of
fundamentals, it is impossible for them to tell exactly, which are Fundamentals,
and which Not-fundamentals.

3. But at other times, they undertake to give us an exact Catalogue of
fundame^tals. For thus Chillingworth c. 4. p. 193. Concerning the Creeds
containing the Fundame^tals of Christianity, The Creed as it is explained, is
a sufficient Catalogue of Fundamentals.
This is Doctor Potters assertion. The Creed of Apostles, as it is explained in
latter Creeds of the Catholic Church, is esteemed a sufficient Summarie, or
Catalogue of Fundamentals, by the best learned Romanists, and by Antiquity.
The like he has p. 413 Behold, a sufficient Catalogue of Fundamentals. And
ibid p. 206. The Apostles Creed, is a perfect The Creed is a sufficient
Summarie of Fundamentals.
Summarie of the Fundamentals of the Christian faith. c. 1. p. 41. The Creed,
is a sufficient, or more then a sufficient, Summarie of those points of faith,
which were of necessity to be believed actually and explicitly. And these are
his Fundamentals. And c. 3. p. 133. This is the, minimum quod sic. wherein, in
men capable of faith, God will be pleased: and he that knows minimum quod sic,
and the lowest degree of faith, does he not know Maximum quod sic, and the
highest degree? And ibid. p. 150. They Out of Scripture we may learn which
are Fundamentals, which not.
may learn from the Scripture, that such points are fundamental, others are
not so. And if they can learn from the Scripture, that such points are
fundamental, others are not, why can they not gather out of Scripture a
Catalogue of Fundamentals? C. 7. p. 408. You ouerreach in saying, Protestants
cannot agree touching what points are fundamental. Doctor Potter sect. 7 p. 78.
Those prime and Capital doctrines of our Religion, which make up the Catholic
and Apostolik faith, that faith, which essentialy constitutes a true Church,
and a true Christian. These fundamentals are al contained in the rule of faith,
which The Apostles creed is a catalogue of Fundamentals.
rule has been summed up and contracted into the Apostles Creed, and has been
received by Orthodox Christians of al Ages and places, as an absolute Summarie
of the Christian faith. And after he had proved this, says p. 94. Now our
Mistaker Field l. 3. c. 4. names which they account fundamentals.
has his Catalogue of fundamentals. Behold again a Catalogue of fundamentals.
Sect. 3. p. 60. The things, wherein Protestants do judge the life and substance
of Religion to be comprised, are summarily delivered in the Symbols, or Creeds.
And what are those, in which the life and substance of Religion is comprised,
but Fundamentals? And ibid. p. 61. To those twelve (Articles) which the
Apostles in their Creed esteemed The Creed is a sufficient Summarie of
fundamentals.
a sufficient Summarie of wholesome doctrine, they (Papists) have added many
more. And what difference is there betwixt a Summarie, and a Catalogue?

4. Lord Canterbury sec. 38. p. 371. The foundation, is sufficiently known by
Scripture, and the Creeds. And if it be sufficiently known, why cannot
Protestants give us an exact Catalogue of Fundamentals? Sect. 37. p. 319. If he
mean, different in the foundation itself, the Creed, then, etc. Lo here the
Creed is the foundation. Sec. 38. cit. p. 334. The Protestants have as
infallible assurance, as you can have, of al points, which they account
fundamental, yea and of al, which were so accounted by the Primitive Church:
and these are but the The Creed, and some deductions from it.
Creed, and some few and those immediate deductions from it. Lo Potestants know
al points, which they account fundamental, and why then can they not give an
exact Catalogue of them? Sec. 10. p. 28. The Creed is a common, is a Deductions
cannot be fundamentals.
constant foundation: Deductions from it, cannot be fundamental. The English
Deputies in the Synod of Dort, sess. 15. The fundamental heads of Religion, are
contained in the Creed, the Lords prayer, Decalogue, and the Sacraments. Behold
(Christian Reader) how these men, sometimes cannot give an exact Catalogue of
fundamentals, sometime they can. Sometimes all the fundamentals, are contained
in the Apostles Creed, sometimes in the Apostles Creed, and in some few and
immediate deductions from it: At other times, deductions from the Creed cannot
be fundamental. Sometimes al fundamentals are comprised in the Symbols and
Creeds; and at other times, all the fundamentals are contained in the Creed, the
Lords prayer, Decalogue, and Sacraments. Who will see more of the Protestants
uncertainty, which articles are to be accounted fundamental, may read lib. 1.
of the Author of Protestancie c. 3. number. 1. and 2.

5. In like manner, they are uncertain, whether the pretended truths, against
which they say the Roman Church erreth, be fundamental, or no. For (as we saw
in the former Chapter, nu. 7.) sometimes they say, she holds the foundation,
the fundamental The errors which Rome holds are not fundamental.
truths, erreth not in fundamentals, and holds all that is absolutely
necessary to salvation: And the same follows evidently out of that, they
grant the Roman Church to be a true Church in essence, and say, that she and
the Protestant Church, and their Religions, be al one in substance For nether
could she be a true See their words infra c. 7. n 3. 4. and c. 2. n. 3.
Church in essence, if she erred in any fundamental point; nether can these
Churches, or Religions, be alone in substance, which differ in fundamental
points But at other times, they auow, that the errors of the Roman Church, are
fundamental, and in themselves damnable, and consequently opposite to some
fundamental points of faith. For thus Whitaker controu. 2. q. 6. c. 3. The
Roman Church Errors of Rome fundamental and damnable.
has taken away many fundamental Articles of faith, and corrupted faith in
the principal points. Chillingworth c. 5. p. 263. where does he (D. Potter)
say, that you had for the substance, the true preaching of the word, or due
administration of the Sacraments, or where does he say, you wanted nothing
fundamental, or necessary to salvation? Ibid p. 280. As for your pretense,
that yours (errors) are confessed not to be fundamental, it is an affected
mistake, as I have often told you. p. 289. Your Church did fall into substantial
corruptions. And p. 305. A falls hood it is, that the. Doctor judges the Roman
Romans errors in themselves fundamental.
errors, not to be in themselves fundamental or damnable. p. 308. As for your
obtruding upon us, that we believe the points of difference, not fundamental, or
necessary, you have been often told, that it is a calumny. And c. 7. p. 387.
False pretense, that we confess, the Roman Are damnable heresies.
Church free from damnable heresy, and yielding you salvation, no Protestant
is guilty of it. And p. 34. 282. 278. 293. Popery in it self destroies
salvation.
and 400. says. The errors of the Romans Church are in themselves damnable. And
c. 5. p. 256. 283. She is guilty of impiety and idolatry, which (he says)
is without question, to err in necessary matters. In like sort Lord
Canterbury sec. 33. p. 275. al. 257. Transubstantiation, taken properly,
cannot stand with the grounds of Christian Religion. Sec. 37. p. 320. The
Church of Rome, has in the expositions, both of Creeds and Councels, quite
changed and lost the sense and meaning of some of them. And yet ibid. p. 319.
says: The Creed is the foundation. Item p. 321. It is almost apparent by D.
Whites answer set down before at large; That he never said, that the Church of
Rome erred only in points Not-fundamental. Sec. 38. p. 325. You have many
dangerous errors about the very foundation, in that which you call the Roman
faith. And p. 327. The Roman Church at this day, does not believe the Scripture,
and Creeds, in the sense, in which the ancient Primitive Church received them.
And adds (as before) the Creed is the foundation. Thus uncertain these men
be, whether the pretended errors of the Roman Church, be fundamental, or no.
But sometimes they are, sometimes they are not, as it serves for their present
purpose.

9. Perhaps some, to save these contradictions See Chillingw. c. 5. p. 209. 291.
336. Potter sec. 7. p. 71
of Protestants, that the Roman Church holds all the fundamentals, and holds
them not al, has fundamental errors, and has not: will say, that fundamental
points are of two kinds. Some are fundamental not only by reason of their
revelation from God, and their sufficient proposal to us, but also of their
own nature, fundamental or necessary to saving faith, Church, and salvation,
as the passion of Christ, and such like capital articles: others, not of their
own nature, but merely because they are revealed from God, and sufficiently
proposed to us, are fundamental to faith, Church, and salvation, as that Saint
Paul had a cloack etc. And that when Protestants confess, that the Roman Church
holds all the fundamentals, or erreth not in fundamentals, they mean of
fundamentals of the first kind; when they say she erreth in fundamentals,
they mean of the latter kind, and so do not contradict themselves, because
they do not affirm and deny the same kind of fundamentals. True it is, that
there is this difference between points of faith, that some are fundamental to
saving faith, to a true Church, and to salvation, both of their nature, and by
revelation sufficiently proposed to us, as the mysteries of the Trinity, the
passion of Christ, and such like: others are fundamental or necessary to
saving faith, Church, and salvation, only by reason of Gods revelation
sufficiently proposed, as that Abraham had two Sonns, and such like. But this
will not suffice, to save the aforesaied Protestants from plain co^tradiction:
because, (if not in wonds) in effect and sense, they both affirm and deny that
the Roman Church holds, and holds not, al points of faith that are
fundamental of their nature. For whiles they say, that she is a true Church in
essence, a member of the Catholic Church and of Christ, that she holds the
fundamental points which constitute a Church, which are the life and substance
of Religion, the simply necessary truths, by which some are saved, and that
her substance and Religion is the same with the Protestants, they must needs
mean, that she holds all the points, which of their nature are fundamental to
saving faith, Church, and salvation: and contrariwise, whiles they say, that
the Roman Church holds errors of themselves fundamental, has corrupted faith
in the principal points, has not the substance of preaching the word, is
fallen into substantial corruptions, holds that, which cannot stand with the
grounds of Christianity, has quite lost the sense and meaning of some
articles of the Creed, is guilty of impiety, and idolatry, and scisme, they
must needs mean, that she holds not al points, which of their nature are
fundamental to saving faith, Christian Church, and salvation. Nether finally,
does this difference between points of faith, justify these Churches, which
they cannot deny, but sinfully err in such points, as they term
Not-fundamental points, For whencesoeuer a point be fundamental to faith,
Church, and salvation, whether of its nature, and revelation too, or of
revelation only, they cannot stand without that, which is fundamental to them,
as is evident by itselef, and Protestants confess it, as we shall see beneath c.
7. n. 5. Besides, themselves profes c. 7. n. 6. that by Fundamental they mean
Essential, and undoubted it is, that nothing can be without that, which is
essential to it.

7. And as uncertain Sacramentaries are, whether the errors of Lutherans, be
fundamental, or no. For sometimes they are not fundamental, nay light matters,
and not to be regarded, as we showed before c. 5. n. 5. And Chillingworth in
his Preface nu. 39. says: I hold the doctrine of al Protestants free from al
impiety, and from al error destructive of salvation, or in it self No error of
Protestants, is itself damnable.
damnable. c. 5. p. 306. we judge, they (Protestants) have no errors damnable.

8. But at other times, the Luherans Lutherans errors are fundamental.
error of Consubstantiation, or real presence of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist, is fundamental. For Calvin Admonit. vltima ad Wesphal. p. 831.
says: It necessarily draws with it impious Idololatrie. In consensu etc. p.
754. It is no les absurd, then Transubstantion. And Epistle 292. with
pernicious iuglings, it overthrows the foundations of faith. And Epistle 81.
It recalleth the dotages of Martion and Eutiches: Sadeel de coniunctone, etc.
It destroieth the nature of Christ. Pareus in Galat. 3. sec. 37. Nothing can be
more opposite to the articles of Christian faith. And the like say commonly al
Sacramentaires or Caluinists of the Lutherans vbiquitie, as is to be seen l.
1. of the Author of Protestancie, c. 3. nu. 5.

9. Thus we see, how uncertain Protestans are, which are their fundamental D.
Potter sec. 3. p 60. sec. 7. p. 74. 78. Chilling. c. 3 p 159. L. Cant. sec. 26.
p. 192.
points of faith, which (as they speak) comprehend the substance of Religion,
integrate and make up the body of Christian Religion, essentially constitute a
true Church, and in ordinary course are necessary to be distinctly and
expressly believed of every one that will be in the Church and be saved. And
which are their Not fundamentals, which are not of the substance of Christian
Religion, Church, or salvation. And which are fundamental errors, which
destroy the substance of saving faith, of a true Church, and of the way of
salvation: and which are not fundamental errors, which only destroy some
perfection of saving faith, of a Church, or of the way of salvation. And
consequently, they must be uncertain, which is substantially a saving faith,
or a true Church, which is not, which is a substantial way of salvation, which
is not; and whether they have a substantial saving faith, be in a substantial
true Church, and substantial way of salvation, or no: And also uncertain,
with what Church, they may lawfully communicate; Then the which, nothing can
be more miserable. For as Doctor Potter says sec. 5. p. 18. A true Church, is
alone, with a Church not erring in the foundation. And sec. 7. p. 74. By
fundamental doctrins, we mean such Catholic verities, as essentially perteine
to the faith, such as properly constitute a Church. And as Whitaker controuer
2. q. 5. c. 17. Morton A pologiae, l. 2. c. 41. and Protestants commonly teach:
Purity in fundamental points, is the only certain Note of a true Church. And
how can they be certain, which is a true Church, which is not, if they be not
certain, which is fundamental, which is not, etc. how can they be certain,
which is purity in fundame^tals, which is not, if they be not certain, which
are fundamentals, which not? Besides, al fundamental points, as Doctor Potter
affirms sec. 7. p. 74. 75. are necessary in ordinary course to be
distinctly Al fundame^tal points must be distinctly and expressly beloved.
believed by every Christian, that will be saved. And Fundamental properly, is
that, which Christians are obliged to believe by an expres, and actualfaict. And
the same has Chillingworth p. See Field l. 4. c. 22.
41. 193. 227. 209. and Lord Canterb. p. 28. And how then can they be certain,
that they are in the way of salvation, and expressly believe al they are abliged
to believe, if they do not distinctly and expressly believe al fundamentals, or
how can they be sure they do this, if they do not distinctly and expressly
know al fundamentals?

10. If any Protestant answer, that though they be not certain precisely,
which be fundamental articles, which not, yet they are certain, that the Creed
contains al fundamental articles, which constitute a Church, and which in
ordinary course are necessary to be actually believed: and this is sufficient
to be certain of: I reply, First, that at least they cannot be infallibly
certain, that the Creed contains al such fundamentals, because the Scripture
(which they will have to teach al things, whereof we can be infallibly certain)
speaks not at al of the Creed, and consequently they cannot be infallibly
certain, what Church, or persons, believe al, that is fundamental and
necessary to be actualy believed of every one, or who is in the way of
salvation, or with whom they may lawfully communicate. I ad also, that
themselves profes, So Chilling. c. 4. p. 194.
that it is, but only probable, that the Creed contains al fundamental
Probable only that the Creed contains al fundamentals.
articles. For thus Doctor Potter sec. 7. p. 102. It remains very probable,
that the Creed is the perfect Summarie of those fundamental truths, which al
Christians ordinarily are bound expressly to believe. Chillingworth p. 200. That
the Creed does not contain al main and principal points of faith of al sorts,
whither they be speculatiue, or practical, Doctor Potter grants, So that in
believing the Creed, we believe not al fundamental points. Lord Canterbury sec.
33. p. 334. says. The fundamental points, are the Creed, and some deductions
from it. Others ad other things, as is to be seen l. 1. de Authore Protestant
c. 3. Secondly, they cannot say, that the Creed contains all that is
fundamental and necessary to be believed of every one. For justification by
only special faith, which is the most fundamental point of Protestancie, and
the life, and soul thereof, (as Protestants call See li. 11 de authore c. 6
throughout.
it) is nether actualy in the Creed, nor can be clearly deduced out of it. For
to say, that justification by only special faith, is contained in that article
of the Creed; ( Remission of sins) is One thing is the end, an other the mean
ther-to.
absurd. Because that article speaks only of the end, which is remission of
sins, not of the means to atteine unto it, which Protestants will have to be
only special faith, of which the Creed speaks not. And in the same manner, is
Chillingworth refuted, when he says c. 3. p. 135. and 166. we are sure, that
all that is necessary any way, is in Scripture, and therefore believing all that
is there, we are sure to believe all that is necessary. And c. 6. p. 367.
believing all the Bible, we believe all that is fundamental. For, besides that their
foresaied most fundamental point of justification by only special faith, is not
in Scripture, but the quite contrary, fundamental points, (as D. To believe the
Bible is not to believe distinctly al fundamentals.
Potter says sec. 7. p. 74. are necessary in ordinary course to be
distinctly believed by every Christian, that will be saved. And p. 75.
Fundamenial properly, is that, which Christians are obliged to believe by an
expres and actual faith, And the L. Cant. p. 28.
same does Chillingworth say p. 41. 193. 227. 209. and other, also who make
the belief of Fundamentals necessary, Chillingw c. 6. p. 336. Usher Sermon.
before K. James.
Necessitate Medij. But who do only in general believe all the Bible, do not
distinctly and expressly believe all the fundamentals. And thus we have showed,
how uncertain Protestants are, both, what Not fundamental points be, to wit,
whether they be points of faith, or but opinions: and whether errors in them
sufficiently proposed, be damnable, or no: and whether they be a just cause of
separation The manifold uncertainties of Protestants about not fundamentals.
from a Church, or no: and also, how uncertain they are, whether they know
which points be Fundamental, which not fundamental: and whether the truths,
against which the Roman Church is pretended to err, be fundamental truths, or
no, and her errors, fundamental, or no: And likewise whether the errors of the
Lutherans be fundamental, or not fundamental: Now let us see, how uncertain
also they are, whether a true Church, remaining a true Church, may err in
fundamental points, or no.

That Protestants are uncertain, whether a true Church can err in fundamental
points, or no. SEVENTH CHAPTER.
1. THAT Protestants are uncertain, whether a true Church of Christ, can err
in fundamental points, and yet remain a true Church, or no, is evident. For
sometimes they plainly affirm it, other times, as plainly deny it.

4. They affirm it: For thus Whitaker The Church may err in some foundations.
cuntrouer. 2. qu. 5. c. 17. Out of which we gather, that the Church may for a
time err even, in some foundations, and yet be safe. qu. 4. c. 3. It is
evident, that the true Church may err for a time, even in things necessary.
Beza l. de Notis Ecclesiae p. 45. Some errors, even In fundamental heads.
in some fundamental heads of faith, may crecp into the Catholic Church.
Perkins in Explicat. Symboli colum. 790. whiles, either directly or diametrally,
May diametrally oppose the foundation
or by necessity of consequence, an error opposes the foundation, if the
error be of infirmity, the Errant is to be reputed a Couel art. 11.
member of the universal Church. And in Galat. c. 1. v. 2. If any err of
frailty, though the error be about the foundation, nevertheless the Church
remains: as is evident by the example of the Galathians. In Epist. Iudae v.
19. The Church of Galatia, by infirmity was turned to an other Ghospel, and
erred fundamentally, yet May be turned to an other Ghospel.
Paul wrote to her, as to a Church of God. And Tractat de Baptis. colum. 819.
The Apostle called the Galathians, the children of God, even when they erred in
the foundation, and had turned to an other Ghospel, saying; All ye are the
sonns of God. Hence it is, that not every enormious sin, or every error
against the foundation, does obscure, and much les extinguish, grace, and
regeneration, which makes sonns of God. Sadeel Respons. ad Theses Posnan. c.
12. The Galathians, and Corinthians (who May deny the Resurrection.
denied the Resurrection) though depraved with error, and dissenting about a
principal foundation of faith, nor about the manner, but about the thing
itself: nevertheless retained the name of a true Church. And the same of the
Galathians and Corinthians, commonly teach Protestants, as confessio Heluet. c.
17. Luther in 1. Gal. fol. 215. Calvin 4. Instit. c. 1. paragr. 14. and 27.
Beza 2. part Respons. ad acta Colloq. Montis: p. 253. pareus in Gal. 1. lect.
7. Riuet. tractatu 1. sec. 39. Field of the Church l. 1. c. 8.

3. Lord Canterbury sec. 21. p. 141. The whole Church may err in the
foundation.
If she (the whole militant Church of Christ) err in the foundation, that is,
in some one or more fundamental points of faith, then she may be a Church of
Christ still. Sec. 33. p. 233. A Church may err, and dangerously too. Sec. 37.
p. 320. A Church may hold the fundamental point literaly, and yet err grossly,
dangerously, nay damnably in the exposition of it. And sec. 9. p. 24. The Greek
error of denying the procession of the holy Ghost, is a greuious error in
divinity. And sec. 24. p. 154. what article of faith, does more concern
Christians in general, then that of [Filioque.] And nevertheless he says p.
22. 24. The Greeks, are a true Church: Likewise he affirms, that the Roman
Church has fundamental errors, as we showed in the former chapter n. 5. and
notwithstanding writes. Sec. 20. p. 128. 129. The Roman Church is a true
Church, and truth cannot deny it: A true Church in essence. Sec. 35. p. 311.
She is a member of the Catholic Church. And p. 282. 285. Salvation may be had
in her. P. 285. 314. 316. Ignora^ts in the Roman Church, are safe.
Ignorant souls in her, are safe, yea safest.

4. D. Potter sec. 5. p. 21. The faith of the Church cannot be totally
corrupted Faith of the Churc. may be partly corrupted in the essentials.
in the essentials of it, or abolished, yet may it be fowly infected. Which
insinuates, that it can be partly corrupted in the essentials, and fowly
infected in some of them. And p. 20. The Church may err, and dangerously too.
And (as we showed in former Chapter n. 5.) he affirms, that the Roman Church
erreth in the foundation; and nevertheless says sec. 1. p. 11. we yield her a
member of the Catholic Church. Sec. 3. p. 74. 75. we acknowledge her a member of
the body of Christ, and Property of Schismatiks
this cleares us from the imputation of schism, whose property it is, to cut
of from the body of Christ and hope of salvation, the Church from which it
separates. p. 58. Protestants reformation did not change the substance of
Religion. Ibid. The vital parts kept out the poison. p. 62. Protestants yield
them the name and substance of a Christian Church. And p. 78. we believe their
Religion a safe way to some, such as believe as they profes. And p 81. we were
never disioined from her in those main essential truths, which give the name
and essence of a Church. Chillingworth also (as is before showed c. 6. n. 5.)
avouches, that the Roman A true Chu. may fall into substantial corruptions.
Church wants something fundamental to salvation, is fallen into substantial
corruptions: and c. 5. p. 256. 283. Is guitie of Idolatry, and impiety: And
nevertheless c. 2. p. 85. She is a part of the Catholic Church. p. 88. Is a
part of the present Church. c 7. p. 401. Not cut from the body of Christ. c.
5. p. 284. A member of the body of Christ. Thus plainly do they sometimes
teach, that a true Church in substance and essence, a part of the Catholic
Church, a member of Christ, can err in fundamental points, namely in impiety,
idolatry, turning to an other Ghospel, and denial of the Resurrection of the
Dead. And the same must al other Sic Morton Appeal l 4. c. 1. sect. 5.
Protestants say, who teach, that the doctrine and worship commonly professed
and practiced in the Roman Church, is idolatrous and antichristian, and yet
say that ignorant Papists are in the Church and may be saved. And thus they
teach, when they will maintain some Church, which they confess to err in some
fundamental points, as the Caluinists affirm that the Lutherans do. For as
Luther lib. de Captiu. fol. 64. Zuinglius lib. de Relig. c. de Euchar.
Melancthon in Protestants acco^modate their doctrine to times.
Hospin. part 2. fol. 90. and others confess, they accommodate their doctrins
to times, and occasions.

5. But at other times, they teach, The Church cannot err in any fundamental
point.
that a true Church, remaining a true Church, can not err in any fundamental
point. Whitaker controu. 2. q. 5. c. 17. If any fundamental point be taken
away, the Church presently falls. And c. 18. If any fundamental principle
of faith be ouerthrown or shaken, it can be no more truly called a Church.
Ibid. Articles are called fundamental, because our faith relieth upon them, as a
house does upon the foundation. The same say many other Protestants, as is to
be seen l. 1. of the Author of Protest. c. 1. nu. 5. to whom I will ad some
later writers. Lord Canterbury sec. 37. p. 319. If it deny this foundation,
it cannot remain a differing Church, sed transit in non Ecclesiam, but passes
away into no Church: The like he says sec. 2. p. 162. and sec. 33. p. 240.
of the whole Church.

6. Doctor Potter sec. 5. p. 17. The whole militant Church can not possibly err
in any necessary point of faith. p. 18. A true Church is al one, with a
Church not erring in the foundation. Sec. 7. p. 74. By fundamental doctrins, we
mean such Catholic doctrins, as principally and essentially Fundame^tal is
Essential
perteine to the faith, such as properly co^stitute a Church. And no Church can
be without that, which essentially pertains to faith, and does constitute a
Church. And sec. 5. p. 16. and 21 and sec. 6 p. 66. makes fundamental and
essential, al one.

7 Likewise Chillingworth c. 3. p. Not fundamental, not essential.
140. says: Not fundamental, id est, No essential parts of Christianity. c.
2. p. 105. To say, that the Church, whiles it is Co^tradictio^ to say, the
true Church can err in fundamentals.
the true Church, may err in fundamentals, implies contradiction, and is alone
to say; The Church, whiles it is the Church, may not be the Church. c. 3. p.
131. If they (Protestants) differ in points fundamental, they are not members
of the same Church, one with an other. Ibid. p. 177. That the true Church
always shall be the mainteiner and teacher of al necessary truth, ye know we
grant, and must grant. For it is of the essence of the Essence of the Church
to maintain fundamentals.
Church to be so. And any company of men were no more a Church without it,
then any thing can be a man, and not be reasonable. Item p. 162. To the very
being of a Church, it is repugnant, that it should err in fundamentals. For if
it should do so, it would want the very essence of a Church. And c. 5. p. 291.
A Church remaining a Church, cannot fall into fundamental error, because when it
does so, it is no longer a Church. And thus have we seen the miserable
uncertainty of Protestants, what a fundamental point is, and also what a
not-fundamental point is: Which are fundamental points, which are
not-fundamental points: And whether a true Church, remaining a true Church, can
err in fundemental points, or no. And yet upon this uncertainty do they build
their maintening of Churches that err in points of faith, their hope of
salvation in them, and their Communion with them, and their separation from the
Roman Church. But now leaving their uncertainties, let us set down some
certainty; and first, that there are true points of faith, besides the
principal, or capital articles, which are those, which Protestants call
fundamental.

End of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK.
THAT THERE BE TRVE points of faith, besides the principal, or capital Articles.
FIRST CHAPTER.
1. IN the fifth Chapter of the former book we showed, how Protestants,
sometimes, (to wit, when they will maintain Churches erring sinfully in
Not-fundamental points, or salvation in them, their communion with them)
affirm, that Not-fundamental points, are no points of faith: that opposition
against them, is no heresy: and for which, there should be no separation in
communion: that denial of them, destroieth nether saving faith, Church, nor
salvation; Al which (God willing) we shall refute hereafter. But first we will
show, that there are true points of faith besides those, which are principal or
capital; For this is the ground of al our discourse following.

2. First, whatsoever is clearly delivered in Scripture, and sufficiently
proposed to us, is a matter of faith, Many matters of faith in Scripture,
besid fundamentals.
and ought to be believed: But there be many things besides the principal and
capital articles, that are clearly delivered in Scripture, and sufficiently
proposed to us, as that Saint Paul had a cloak, Saint Timothe was sickly, and
the like. Therefore they also are matters of faith, and ought to be believed.

3. Secondly, matters of faith are not Matters of faith are to be measured by
the formal object of faith.
to be measured only by the greatness of the material object, which is believed,
but especially by the formal object of faith, for which it beleues, which is
divine revelation sufficiently proposed to us. For every habit reaches to
whatsoever has is formal object. But many small matters have the like divine
revelation sufficiently proposed, as that of S. Paul's clooke, and Timothes
sickness; Therefore they are alike matters of faith.

3. Thirdly, the holy Scripture In faith are both great and lesser matters.
Mat. 5. and 22. says plainly, that there are greatest and least
commandments, and that there are Iots or Tittles of the Law. And why not
likewise, great and les matters of belief? If any object, that though there be
great and little things commanded to be done, yet little matters are not
commanded to be done under pain of loss of Gods favor, or of salvation: so
though little matters of says be revealed, and ought to be believed when they
are sufficiently proposed, as testified by God; yet are we not bound to believe
them under pain Difference between matters to be done and to be believed.
of damnation. I answer, that little matters are not commanded to be done under
pain of los of Gods freindship, or of salvation, because small matters of their
nature do not break freindship. For he were an unreasonable friend, who for
trifles would break freindship, and the end of the law is charity: but al
little matters testified by God, and sufficiently proposed to us, oblidge us to
believe them, because in not believing them, difference betwixt Faith and charity
touching small matters.
we account God not worthy to be believed in such matters, which is to deny
his veracitie, and consequently his deity: For who in things equally testified
by God, and equally proposed See Chillin. infra c. 4. n. 3. Potter sec. 5. p.
3. The principal ground on which faith relies, is divine revelation. So also p.
10.
to us as from God, believes somethings, and not others, believes nothing for
Gods authority, but because himself judges somethings more liklie to be true,
then others. For if he believed any for Gods authority, he would believe al,
which Gods authority equally proposed, does equally testify. Wherefore we may
keep charity with God, though we observe not little matters, commanded by him,
because breach of little matters, is not opposite to charity, but only to
perfection of charity. But we cannot keep faith with God, if we believe not
small matters, testified by him, and sufficiently proposed to us, because not
belief of the^, is opposite to Gods veracitie, which is the formal object of
divine faith, and implicitly says: God is not worthy of belief in such
matters. For where is the lest untruth, there is not divine or prime veracitie:
so his veracitie is denied by the lest untruth, but not his charity by the
lest sin. Hereupon God in the last of the Apocalips, threatened to put him out
of the book of life, who puts out one word of that prophecy: but no where
threatens the like, to whosoever shall not keep the lest thing he commands.

5. Holy Fathers also testify, that al things revealed by God, and
sufficiently proposed to us, are matters of faith, in that (as we shall see
hereafter c. 2.) they account obstinat error in all such matters, to be formal
heresy, and al such obstinat errants, formal heretics: And as Saint Basil
said: we should rather loose our lives, Theodoret l. 4. c. 17.
then fuffer one syllable of Gods Word to perish.

6. Protestants likewise sometimes confess, and must needs confess, that al, that
is clearly testified by God, and sufficiently proposed; or that those points,
which they call vnfundamental, if they be sufficiently proposed, are matters of
faith, and of Religion. Whitaker controuer. 2. q. 5. c. 17. Shall it not be a
true Church, if it think not sincerely of al heads of Religion, if it corrupt
any point of Religion. God forbid, Not fundamentals, are heads, parts, and
points of faith, and Religion.
yea it may be a Church, though it think not sincerely of some parts of faith
and Religion, so they be not fundamental. Lo, not fundamentals, are heads,
points, and parts of faith and Religion; And controu. 4. q. 1. c. 2. p. 527. It
is not necessary, that faithful men agree in all things, which are of faith, so
they agree in the highest, the chiefest, and the necessary. Behold again,
vnfundamental points, matters of faith. Matters of faith.
Doctor Potter sec. 2. p. 38. calls them divine truths, and p. 39. intending
to declare his distinction of fundamental, and not fundamental points, says:
Points of Religion are well distinguished Points of Religion.
by Thomas, and Stapleton. Some (say they) are primitive articles, others are
Secundarie. So that Secondarie, or Not fundamentals, are points of Religion, as
well as primitive or fundamentals. And sec. 7. p. 71. Being to prove his
distinction into fundamental and not fundamental, says: There be diverse
degrees of truths, and errors in Religion: and commends Aquinas for Of the
object of faith. So also Chilling. c. 4. p. 193.
dividing the object of faith, into that, which is so by itself, and that,
which is by accident and secondarily: The first, be to that, whereby a man is
made blessed: the latter, that, which is revealed, whatsoever it be: as that
Abraham had two sonns. Lo, whatsoever is revealed, is a truth of Religion, and
of the object of faith. P. 73. There is a certain measure Are revealed and to
be believed. The like he has sec. 6. p. 58. See white in his Def. c. 17.
and quantity of faith, without which none can be saved (and these are his
fundamentals) but every thing revealed, belongs not to this measure. It is
enough to believe some things by a virtual faith. Behold, vnfundamental points
belong to faith, though not to the highest measure thereof, and are to be
believed with a virtual faith. And p. 73. 74. By fundamental doctrins, we mean
such Catholic verities, as principally and essentially perteine to faith, such
as properly constitute a Church, and are necessary, in ordinary course, to be
distinctly believed by every Christian, that will be saved. Other points of
truth, are Belong to the unity of faith, though not primarily.
called Not fundamental, because they are not of such absolute necessity, and
do not primarily belong to the unity of faith, or to the essence of a Church
or to salvation of a Christian. Behold, not fundamental points, belong to the
unity of faith, though not primarily. And ibid. It is Are so fundamental to
faith, as it is infidelity to deny them.
true, whatsoever is revealed in Scripture, or propounded by the Church out of
Scripture, is in some sense fundamental, in regard of the divine authority of
God, and his word, by which it is recommended, that is, such, as may not be
denied or contradicted, without infidelity. Mark; whatsoever is revealed in
Scripture, or propounded out of Scripture, is not only a matter of faith, but
also is so How al revealed truths are fu^damentals.
fundamental to faith, as it cannot be denied without infidelity. And in the
like sort p. 105. It seems fundamental to the faith, and for the salvation of
every member of the Church, that he believe al such points of faith, as whereof
he may be sufficiently convinced, that they belong to the doctrine of Jesus
Christ. And p. 111. It is fundamental to a Christians faith, and necessary for
his salvation, that he believe al revealed truths of God, whereof he may be
convinced, that they are from God. So that al revealed truths, are not only
points of faith, but also fundamental points of faith, when they may be
convinced that they come from God: And surely they may then be so convinced,
when they are so sufficiently proposed, as points of faith require.

7. Chilling worth in answer to the Preface p. 10. repeateth and defends the
aforesaied words of Doctor Potter p. 105. So that by his confession, al
revealed truths, are not only points of faith, but also fundamental points of
faith, when they can be convinced to come from God, as al revealed truths
sufficiently proposed, can. And Maniepoints of faith besides fundamentals.
ibid. p. 11. diverse times admits, not fundame^tal points to be called
points of faith. And says c. 4. p. 209. There be many more points of faith,
then there be articles of simple belief, necessary to be explicitly believed.
Where, by articles necessary to be explicitly believed, he means
fundamentals. For thus he expresses himself ibib. p. 220. By fundamental, we
mean al, and only that which is necessary. And c. 5. p. 285. By all points of
faith, you mean (says he) al fundamental points only, or al simply and
absolutely. So that fundamental points, Fundame^tal points are not simply al
points of faith.
are not simply al points of faith. Ibid. p. 294. I would feign understand, why
one error in faith, (especially if Not fundamental) should not consist with
holiness of this Spouse, this Church, as well as many and great Sins. So there
be errors Not fundamentals delivered by the same authority, that fundamentals.
in faith, and yet not fundamental. And c. 4. p. 193. says, that, Not
fundamental points are to be believed, because they are joined with others, that
are necessary to be believed, and delivered by the same authority, which
delivered these. And if they be to be believed, and delivered by the same
authority, which See him ib. p. 218.
delivered fundamentals, surely they are matters of faith. And (we shall show
hereafter c. 3.) he oftentimes says, that it is damnable to deny any
revealed truth sufficiently proposed. c. 5. p. 290. Fundamental errors may
signify, either such, as are repugnant to Gods command, and so in their nature
damnable (and these are errors against his not fundamentals) or such, as are not
only meritoriously, but remidilesly pernicious, and destructive of salvation.
And these are errors against his fundamentals. And so errors against not
fundamentals, are of their nature damnable.

8. Lord Canterburiesec. 38. p. 325. Many things (besides fundamentals) which
are defide.
Bellarmin is forced to grant this: There are many things defide, which are
not absolutely necessary to salvation. Therefore there is a latitude in the
faith. Where, by points absolutely necessary, he means fundame^tals. So there
be many things defide, besides fundamentals. And sec. 10. p. 37. Al which
perteines to supernatural, Perteine to divine faith
divine, and infallible Christian faith, is not by and by fundamental in the
faith, to al men. Sec. 25. p. 161. he grants, that apoint of divine truth,
though by sundry consequences deduced from the principles, is yet a point of
faith. P. 163. The promises reach not to this, that the Church shall neuererr,
no not in the lightest matters of faith. So that al matters of faith, are not
the weightiest. Sec. 10. p. 29. Deductions can not be fundamental, and yet to
some men's salvation they are necessary.

9. Thus plainly do these men sometimes confess, that such, as they term Not
fundamental points, are matters of faith: and when they are sufficiently
proposed, are fundamental to faith, and to salvation, and that it is
infidelity to deny them, and errors in them, of their nature, damnable. How
contrary is this to that, which before they said, that not fundamentals L. 1.
e. 5. n. 4. c. 2. n. 1.
were no points of faith, matters of opinion, in which modest opposition is
tolerable, and for which no separation of communion ought to be made. And thus
having showed, that al revealed truths whatsoever, sufficiently proposed for
such, are matters of faith: now let us show, that al obstinat or sinful error
against such truths, is formal heresy, and al such opposers, formal heretics.

THAT SINFVL DENIAL of any point of faith sufficiently proposed, is true
heresy. SECOND CHAPTER.
1. IT seems so evident, that al sinful opposition or denial of any point of
faith sufficiently proposed, or which, for the opposers fault, is not
sufficiently proposed, is true heresy, L. Canterb. p. 198. heresies properly
cannot be, but in doctrine of faith.
as it ca^scarce be proved by any thing more evident. For what do Christians
conceive by the name of heresy, but sinful opposition to some point of
Christian faith: or what by an heretik, See S. Thomas 2. 2. q. 11. a. 2.
but such an opposer? Yet will I endeavor to make it more manifest.

2. And first, out of the definitions or descriptions of heresy or heretics,
given in holy Scripture. Romans vltima v. 28. I desire ye Brethren, mark them,
that make dissentions and scandales, contrary to the doctrine which ye have
learned, and avoid them. 2. Thessal. 3. we Heresy contrary to doctrine learned.
denounce unto ye Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw yourselues from every Brother walking inordinatly, and not according
to Contrarieto Tradition.
the tradition, which they have received from us: And Gal. 1. Albeit we, or an
Contrary to Saint Paul's preaching
Angel from heaven, euangelize to ye, besides that which we have euangelized to
ye, be he anathema. In all which places, an heretik, or heresy, is described,
not by opposition to fundamental points only, but by opposition to the doctrine
which we have learned, against the Tradition which we have received, or against
which Saint Paul had preached. C. 8. l. 1.
But Not fundamental points, are part of that which we have learned, part of
that tradition which we have received, and part of that, which S. Paul
preached. Therefore sinful opposition to them, is true heresy according to
Scripture,

3. Secondly, I prove it out of the descriptions of heresy, and heretics, An
heresy described by the Fathers.
given by the holy Fathers, of whom, no one describes heresy or heretitks,
by opposition to only principal or capital points of faith, but by only
opposition to Scripture, or doctrine of the Catholic Church. Saint Hierom. in in
Galat. 5. He is an heretik, who understands Contrary to sense of Scripture.
the Scripture otherwise, then the Holy Ghost would. Saint Augustine lib. 18.
de Ciuitate c. 51. The devil raised up heretics, who under the name of
Christians, should resist Christian doctrine. To Christian doctrine.
And adds, who in the Church do hold any unsound and naughty thing
pertinaciously, are heretics. Lib. 7. de Genesi ad literam c. 9. They are not
heretics, but because they understand the Scripture wrongly. And lib. de
haeresibus in fine. After he had reckoned diverse heresies, whereof many are not
against any principal point of faith, he thus pronounces: whosoever holds
any one of the^, is no Catholic Christian: which is as much, as to say, he is
an heretik. And both he, and al antiquity accounted And so does Chilling. c.
7. p. 398.
Donatists, heretics, for their error about rebaptization. who yet, (says
Lord Canterb. sec. 35. p. 300.) for ought I know, did hold the foundation.
Donatists heretics, yet hold the foundation.
And Morton in his Grand Imposture c. 15. p. 418. The question of
Rebaptization, was no fundamental error. And Chillingworth c. 1. p. 41. Saint
Cyprian and Stephen might both be saved, because their contrary belief (about
Rebaptization) was not touching any point contained in Scripture. Nether can
they say, that the Donatists error about Rebaptization, was fundamental, unless
they will damn S. Cyprian, who confessedly held that error, but L. Canterb. p.
315. Potter p. 103.
without obstinacy, as the Donatists did. Saint Epiphan. in Saint Hierom. l.
3. contra Ruffinum Many heresies have been cast out of the Church for one word
or twoe contrary to faith. He says not, contrary to the foundation of
faith, but absolutely, to faith, Saint Gregory Nazianzene Orat. 49. There
Contrary to Christ's doctrine.
can be nothing more dangerous, then those heretics, who with one word, as with
a drop of poison, infect our Lords true and simple doctrine, and Apostolical
tradition. But who err in Not fundamental points of faith, do so: For they are
part of Christ's doctrine, and Apostolical Tradition. Herupon Calvin 4.
Institut. c. 2. paragr. 5. says: Augustine puts this difference between
Heretics, and Schismatiks, that they, by false doctrins, corrupt the sincerity
of faith, but these, etc. And in 1. Corinthians. c. 11. v. 13. The Fathers put
heresy, in Fathers put heresy in corruption of faith.
dissension of doctrine. So clearly he confesses, that the Fathers account
any corruption of Christ's faith or doctrine, In disse^tion of doctrine.
to be heresy. And Perkins Galat. 5. v. 11. The Fathers condemned as Heretics,
who erred in small matters, holding the foundation, as Vigilantius Nouatus, etc.

4. Protestants also define heresy, to be an obstinat error in any point of
faith. Wittenbergenses in Refutatione orthodoxi consensus p. 73. Not Obstinat
error in one point is hresie.
enerie heretik impugned al and every article of faith: but for the most
part, each heretik impugned one only purposely; whom nevertheless, being
obstinat in their error, the Church rightly condemned as Heretics. Schusselburg
1. 2. Theol. In any falls doctrine.
Calvin art. 1. we are certain out of the word of God, that obstinat error in
any false doctrine, does make heretics. Thus the Lutherans: Beza li. de
puniendis See VVitak. cont. 2. q. 5. c. 17.
hereticis p. 150. we eal them properly heretics, who pretending great piety,
yet do not yield to the admonition of the In not yielding to the Church.
Church: and by false doctrine, do break the peace and confession of the
Church. And ibid. The Apostle in his epistle to the Definition of an heretik by
Scripture.
Romans does not name heretics, but plainly defines the^: For when he had
admonished the brethren, that they should note those who make dissentions and
scandales, he adds, against that doctrine which you have learnt: wherefore
where these two meet, there is heresy according to the Apostles definition,
then the which we ought not to seek any better. Fulk in his Reionder to
Bristow p. 82. The Parliament determines Heresy by contrariety By the
Parliament.
to the Canonical Scripture: And p. 71. I say, an Heretik is he, which in the
Church obstinatly mainteineth an opinion contrary to the Scripture. Plessie de
Ecclesia c. 2. we call them heretical Churches, who err in faith. Moulins lib.
1. contra Peron c. 7. They are called Heretics, who are separated from the
orthodox Church, for some error in faith. Bucanus in locis q. 33. heresy, is
properly dissension in doctrine. Morton lib. 1. Apol. c. 3. whosoever any way
departs from the Catholic faith, is an heretik, says Thomas, to whom
subscribeth Occam, and that rightly. Tom. 2. l. 5. c. 13. To be an hcretik, is
to dissent from Scripture. And in his Grand Imposture c. 5. p. 325. To be
unwilling, either to learn, or to yield to manifest truth, is proper to In not
yielding to manifest truth.
a Satanical Synagog. Iuel in Defense of the Apologiae p. 44. For just proof of
Heresy three things necessarily are required 1. that it be an error. 2. that
it be an error against the truth of Gods word 3. that it be stoutly and
wilfully mainteind. Sharp de Notis Eccles. col. 333. That is an heretical
Church, which obstinatly holds errors in doctrine. Chilling worth c. 2. p.
101. heresy is nothing, In oppositio^ to faith.
but a manifest deuiation from, and an opposition to the faith. The like he
has c. 4. p. 199. Doctor Potter sec. 2. p. 55. Whosoever, either wilfully
opposes any Catholic In oppositio^ to the Catholic visible Church.
verity maintained by this Church, (of Saints) or the Catholic visible Church,
as do heretics etc. sec. 4. p. 95. He is justly esteemed an heretik, because he
In not yielding to Scripture.
yields not to Scripture sufficiently propounded to him. Ibid. p. 124. An
obstinate standing out against evident Scripture sufficiently cleared unto him,
makes an heretik. Sec. 7. p. 110. where the revealed will or word of God is
sufficiently propounded, there he, that opposes, is convinced of error, and he
who is thus convinced, is an heretik. And ibid. p. 105. 106. It seems
fundamental to the faith, and for In oppositio^ to any point of faith
sufficiently convinced.
the salvation of every member of the Church, that he acknowledge and believe al
such points of faith, as whereof he may be sufficiently convinced, that they
belong to the doctrine of Jesus Christ. For he, that being sufficiently
convinced, does oppose, is ostbinate an heretik, and finally such a one as
excluds himself out of beauen. Field l. 2. de Eccles. c. 3. Freedom from
fundamental error, may be found among Heretics. And l. 1. c. 13. Heretics are
they that obstinatly persist in error contrary to the Churches faith. Behold,
how obstinat opposition to the doctrine of the Scripture, of the word of God, of
the Catholic visible Church, or of any point of which may be convinced to
belong to the doctrine of Christ, is true, proper, and damnable heresy. The
English Protestant Church also excommunicateth al, whosoever shall affirm that
the (39.) articles are in any part superstitious or erroneous. And yet I hope
they will not say, that every part of their 39. articles is fundamental in
their sense. Wherefore they may be justly excommunicated out of the Church, who
affirm some not fundamental point, to be erroneous. And art. 33. who are
excommunicated, are cut from the unity of the Church. Wherefore, when
Protestants will have Sup. c. 2. n. 2. l. 1.
only obstinat opposition to some principal or capital point of faith, to be
true and proper heresy, they speak nether with Scripture, Fathers, nor with
themselves. Nether have they any authority of Scripture, Father, Al sin
against faith is either heresy, or infidelity.
or other reason to limit heresy to obstinat opposition of fundamental points,
but only, least they should condemn some of their Brethren for heretics, whom
they cannot deny, but err in some points of faith sufficiently proposed, or
which, (if it were not their fault) would be so proposed to them, and
consequently, err obstinatly and sinfully. And if we ask them, what sin they
call, sinful error in any point of faith, if not Heresy, they can not tell.
But now having seen, that every sinful error against any point of faith
sufficiently proposed, or which would be so proposed, if it were not the
errants fault, is true heresy: Let us see, that eueric such error is damnable,
because sometimes Protestants will confess that al such error is heresy, but
deny, that al heresy is damnable: as is evident by what we have rehearsed of
their doctrine in the second Chapter l. 1. n. 2. And Chillingworth c. 5. p. 278.
puts fundamental heresles, and others, Some herasies though not fundamental.
which (says he) do not plainly destroy salvation, nor of themselves damn
no man.

That sinful denial of any point of faith sufficiently proposed, is damnable.
THIRD CHAPTER.
1. THat al sinful opposition or denial Whitaker. cont. 2. q 4. c 2. non omnes
errores, circa fidem sunt lathales, sicut noc omnes morbi.
of any point of faith sufficiently proposed, or which would be so proposed,
if it were not the opposers fault, is damnable, follows out of that we have
proved, that al such opposition, is true heresy. For that al true heresy, is
damnable, is evident out of holy Scripture, Fathers, Reason, and Confession of
Protestants. For the Apostle Galat. 5. v. 20. and 21. reckons sects or
heresies, Heresy numbered by the Apostle Among dam nable sins.
among those sins, of which he says: who do such things, shall not obtain
the Kingdom of God. And makes no more distinction of heresy, then he does of
the other sins. And Galat. 1. V. 8. says generally: If any Euangelize,
beside that, which ye have received, be he accursed. And Tit. 3. v. 10. Avoid a
man, that is an heretik, after the first and second admonition, knowing that
he, who is such a one, is subverted, and sins, being condemned by his
Heretics condemned by their own judgment.
own judgment. But what hinders to obtain the Kingdom of God, what
deserves a Curese, and condemns a man in his own judgment, is doubtless
damnable. Our Savior also Joan. 10. calls heretics Thieves and Robbers. And
Apocal. vltim. v. 19. it is said. Ifanie shall diminish of the words of this
Book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the Book of life.
And if it be damnable to diminish a word of Gods Book, much more damnable is
it, to diminish some point of his faith or doctrine. The same also follows out
of those places of Scripture, which we shall cite hereafter, C. 9. n. 2.
which command us to fly the company of heretics.

2. Holy Fathers also teach the same. Tertullian de praescript. c. 2. Heresies
are to destroy faith: and do Heresy brings damnation.
bring everlasting death. And c. 37. If they be heretics, they can be no
Christians. And surely it is damnable, to be no Heretics no Christians.
Christian. Saint Cyprian Epist. 73. Nether faith, nor Church, are common to us
with heretics. And he adds, that both by the testimony of the Ghospel and
Apostle, heretics are called Antichrists. Are Antichrists.
The like hesaieth Epist. 40. 55. 74. 75. and lib. de vnitate and Firmilian
Epist. 75. Saint Augnstin l. 2. contra Crescon. c. 10. says to the Donatists.
Ye have no Christian Church. l. 3. de Baptis. c. 19. Al heretics and False
Christians.
Schismatiks, are false Christians. L. 21. de Ciuitate c. 25. An heretik, is
worse then an Infidel. And in Enchiridioc. Worse then infidels.
5. Christ, in name only, is found with any heretics. Saint Gregory Nazian.
Orat. 21. Drive away heretics, as the stain and destruction of the Church,
and the poison of truth. And Saint Athanase in his Creed, whosoever will be
saved, before al things, he must hold the Catholic faith: which unless he keep
whole and inuiolate, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly. But heretics
hold not the Catholic faith whole and inuiolate. Therefore etc. S. Fulgentius de
fide c. 38. and 39. Hold most firmly, and doubt not at al, that not only
Pagans, but also al Jews, Heretics, and Schismatiks, who All that die heretics,
are damned.
end this life out of the Catholic Church, shall go into everlasting fire
provided for the Devil and his Angels. Finally Saint Chrysostom in Galat. 1.
expressly says that the lesterror in matter or faith destroieth faith. That he
(S. Paul) might show that any little thing wrongly mingled The lest mixture
corrupts faith.
does corrupt the whole, he said the Ghospel was ouerthrown. For as he who in
the Kings coin does clip but a little of the stamp, makes the whole of no
value: so who destroieth the lest particle of sound faith, is wholly corrupted.
Where then are they who condemn us, because we contend with Heretics, and say:
there is no difference betwixt us and them, but that al our discord is for
ambition to dominere. Let them hear what Paul says, that they had ouerthrown
the Ghospel who had brought in never so little novelty. Which words are more
clear then to be eluded by Chillingworths Answer c. 6. p. 381. that Saint
Chrysostom by Faith means only Fundamental points of faith. For Saint
Chrysostom. expressly speaks of little things, and lest particles of faith, and
never so little novelties. Besides his exposition is voluntary, not proved out
of one word of Saint Chrysostom. And his reason, because by Faith is oftentimes
meant only Fundamental points, is Sophistical. For it is a particularibus and
dissimilibus. For Faith is never taken for any part of it, but when that is
some way declared by the speaker or writer. Because al words are to be meant
according to their propriety and latitude, unless the contrary be declared,
else we could not be certain how words were to be taken. Which were to destroy
the end of speech and writing. Far more testimonies of Fathers might be brought
to this purpos, but whom these suffice not, none will suffice.

3. Reason also conuinceth, that al herefie is damnable. For it is a sin in a
weighty matter, to wit, against faith. Moreover heresy, is a sinful Not
belief, or Disbeleif of some divine truth sufficiently proposed to come from
God which is in effect not to believe God in that truth: or to deny Gods
veracitie, and to give God See here n. 5. 6.
the Lie; as Chillingworth speaks, or as Doctor Potter says: An act of
Infidelity. And an act of infidelity, or to give God the Lie, and to deny
Gods veracitie, is doubtless most damnable. And, as the same Potter says sec.
7. p. 109. In this case, the difference is not great, between him that is
wilfully Note this. Sinful ignorance excuses not from heresy or sin. See also
Chilling. c. 7. p. 404.
blind, and him, that knowingly gainesaieth the truth: but knowingly to gain
say divine truth, is most damnable, and a sin against the Holy Ghost. Nether
is there any ground in holy Scripture, Fathers, or Reason, to deny al
heresy to be damnable: But some Protestants deny it, merely, because they
cannot deny, but that some of their Churches and Brethren culpably hold some
heresies, whom they are ashamed to confess, to be in state of damnation.

4. Protestants likewise sometimes confess that al heresy is damnable. Luther
in Explicat. Symboli Tom. 7. fol. 124. No heretik is saved, unless No heretik
saved.
he return to the Church, and in all things think, do, and teach the same. And
l. de Calvin Act. 24. Detestabiles iubet haberi haereticos, Spiritus Dei.
Bezadepun. haer. p. 21. non potest non esse grauissimu^ haereseos crime^. see
p. 119. See Iuel. p. 43. 314.
votis Tom. 2. fol. 272. If any deny Marie to be a Virgin, or do not believe
any other singular article of faith, he is damned. King James Resp. and Peron
p. 384. Damneth al, who (says he) have departed from the faith of the
Catholic Church, and are become heretics. Apology of the Church of England.
Heresy is a forsaking of salvation and departure from the body and Spirit of
Christ. Idem: we pronounce al them damned, who have a wiked opinion of any
point of Christian Religion. French Protestants in their cene. I excommunicate
al Heretics. Field Append. p. 23. we do not admit any sectaries into the
communion of the true Catholic Church. White in Preface to his way: In
questions of faith whosoever erreth, loses no les then his soul thereby.
Hooker of iustific.. 11. Heresy is heretically maintained by such, as
obstinatly hold it, after wholesome admonition. Of these I make no doubt, but
their condemnation, without an actual repentance, is inevitable. Whitaker
Praefat in controu. One heresy, is One heresy damneth.
sufficient to damnation. And controu. 2. q. 4. c. 2. No heretics can be saved.
And ibid. q. 5. c. 2. we confess that heretics are to be fled. Hooker l. 3. p.
129. Heresies which are not actually repented of, exclude quite and clean from
salvation. More of the like Confessions of Protestants, may be seen lib. 1.
of the Author of Protestancie c. 1. to which I will ad the Confessions of late
English Writers.

5. Doctor Potter sect. 2. p. 55. Whosoever, either wilfully opposes any
Catholic verity maintained by this Church (of Saints) or the Catholic visible
Church, as do heretics, their condition Condition of heretics, damnable.
is damnable. Sec. 7. p. 74. It is true, that whatsoever is revealed in
Scripture, or propounded by the Church out of whatsoever is revealed, is
fundamental.
Scripture, is in some sort fundamental, in regard of the divine authority of
God, and his word, by which it is reco^mended, that is, such, as may not be
denied, or contradicted Infidelity, to deny any point sufficiently proposed.
without infidelity. And p. 110. Where there is no such impediment (of
incapacitie) and the revealed will or word of God is sufficiently propounded,
there he that opposes, is convinced of error, and he who is thus convinced, is
an heretik, and See Andrews cont. Apol. Bellar. c. 6. p. 132.
heresy is a work of the flesh, which excludes from heaven. Galat. 5. v. 20.
p. 105. It seems fundamental to the faith, Fundamental to faith and salvation.
and to salvation of every Christian member, that he acknowledge, and believe al
such points of faith, whereof he may be sufficiently convinced, that they
belong to the doctrine of Jesus Christ. For he that being sufficiently
convinced, does oppose, is obstinat, an heretik, and finally such a Fundame^tal
to salvation to believe al sufficiently proposed.
one, as excludes himself out of heaven. And p. III. It is fundamental to a
Christians faith, and necessary for his salvation, that he believe al revealed
truths of God, whereof he may be convinced that they are from God. Sec. 4. p.
99. Heresy is a greiuous crime, where it is true. And as Chillingworth says
in Answer to the Preface p. 8. He gives them only, hope of pardon of errors,
who are desirous, and according to the proportion of their opportunities and
abilities, industrious to find the truth: or at least truly repentant, that
they have not been so.

6. Chillingworth in Answer to To disbeleue what is sufficiently proposed, is
to give God, the Lie.
the Preface p. 10. and 11. To deny, or disbeleue any point of faith
sufficiently proposed to his understanding, as a truth revealed by God, is to
give God the Lie. P. 18. If this proposal be so sufficient, as the party, to
whom it is made, should, and (but for his own fault) would have been A damnable
fault.
convinced of the divine verity of the doctrine proposed, a fault I confess, it
is, and without repentance, damnable, if, al circumstances considered, the
proposal be sufficient. To may, and will not see truth, is damnable. See Morton
Impo. p. 372.
P. 19. When God has interposed his testimony on one side, or other, so that
either they do see it, and will not, or were it not for their own voluntary and
auoidable fault, might and should see it, and do not, let al such errors be as
damnable as you please to make them. P. 21. If any Papist or Protestant be
betrayed into, or kept in any error, by any sin of his will, such error is, as
the cause of it, damnable. P. 23. There is, (as matters now stand) Alike
necessity to believe not fu^damentals, as fundamentals.
as great necessity of believing those truths of Scripture, which are Not
fundamental, as those, that are. And p. 24. he cites Doctor Potter saying. If
any be negligent in seeking truth, unwilling to find it, either does see it,
and will not: or Negligence in seeking truth, is damnable.
might see it, and will not, his case is dangerous, and without repentance,
desperate. And Chillingworth adds: He secureth none, that in matter of
Religion, are None sinfully erroneous, is secure.
sinfully, that is, willingly erroneous. And c. 3. p. 138. You infer out of
Doctor Potters words, that al errors are alike damnable, Al error alike
damnable, if the preposal be alike.
if the manner of propounding the contrary truths, be not different: which
(for ought I know) al Protestants, and al, that have sense, must grant. And
ibid. p. 161. we are obliged under pain of damnation, to believe al, whereof we
may be fufficiently assured, that Christ taught it his Apostles, his Apostles,
the Church. And p. 137. namely he says of a Not fundamental See also p. 41.
point: It may, by accident, become fundamental, because it may be so
proposed, that the denial of it, will draw after it, the denial of this
fundamental truth: That al, which God says, is true. And all that is so
sufficiently proposed, as matters of faith ought to be, are proposed in such
sort. Ibid page 134. Among the conditions of salvation, which Christ requires,
one is, that we believe what he has revealed, when it is sufficiently declared
to have been revealed by him. And 158. If the cause of the error be some
voluntary, and auoidable fault the error is in itself finful, and consequently
in its own nature dawnable. And c. 5. p. 280. Capital danger may arise from
errors, though not fundamental. Seep. 278.

7. Lord Canterbury sec. 37. p. 320. It is true, that error in points not
fundamental may be damnable to some men, though they hold it not against their
conscience. As namely, when they hold an error in some dangerous points, which
grate upon the foundation, and yet will nether seek the means to know the
truth, nor accept and believe truth, when it is known especially being men able
to judge. And p. 342. I agree, that he which hopes for salvation, must believe
the Catholic faith whole and entire in every point. And sec. 35. p. 289.
says. A matter of faith, and so A matter of faith, is a matter of salvation.
of salvation too. As if every matter of faith, were also matter of salvation.
And both he p. 24. 31. 139. 140. 162. 165. Chillingworth p. 14. 277. 279. 281.
285. And Potter sec. 5. p. 19. sec. 7. p. 58. 78. speak of absolutely or simply
fundamental, or necessary points, which insinuates, that there are others
truly fundame^tal, or truly necessary, besides those which are absolutely such.
The Author of the Preface to K. James before Iuels works. In things necessary
only, necessitate Precepti, not only witting and willing disobedience, but
also wilful and affected ignorance does condemn.

8. In which Confessions of the Points to be noted.
Protestants, I would have the Reader to mark well these points. First, that al 1.
errors, fundamental or Not fundamental, are alike damnable, if the contrary
truth be alike proposed. Secondly, that a Not fundamental 2.
point sufficiently proposed, is so fundamental to faith and salvation, as to
contradict it, is infidelity, and to give 3.
God the Lie. Thirdly, that who believes not any one divine truth sufficiently
proposed, is an heretik, and excludes himself out of heaven. Fourthly, that who
is negligent to 4.
seek truth, or unwilling to find it, is, without repentance, desperate.
Fifthly, 5.
that who, were it not for their auoidable faults, might, and should see truth,
and do not, their error is damnable, and that they secure none, who is sinfully
erroneous. And if they would constantly stand to these points, there would be
little controversy about fundamental, and not fundamental Protestants some
times grant all the question. Magna est veritas and praeualet.
points. For this is to grant plainly, that no points of faith are so
fundamental, as they are sufficient to saving faith, Church, and salvation, if
other points be sufficiently proposed and not believed, or for the not beleuers
fault, not so proposed: nor any so not fundamental, as they are not necessary
to saving faith, Church, and salvation to be believed actually, if they be
sufficiently proposed, and necessary to be virtually believed, whether they be
so proposed, or no. And all the question betwixt Catholics and Protestants is,
whether any points of faith be thus fundamental, and any thus
Not-fundamental, or no. But because Protestants can not deny, but that some
Churches, which they maintain, have had the truth, against which they err,
sufficiently proposed to them, or if it were not their auoidable fault, might
and should see the truth, therefore when they are to defend such Churches, they
forget this doctrine. But now having proved, that to err sinfully, in any
matter of faith, is both heresy, and destroieth salvation, let us also prove,
that it destroieth true saving faith.

That vincible and sinful error against any point of Christian faith
sufficiently proposed, destroieth true saving faith. FOVRTH CHAPTER:
1. THat vincible and sinful error against any point of faith sufficiently
proposed, destroieth true saving faith, is evident out of this, that al such
error is true heresy, as is before C. 2.
proved, and heresy is opposite to saving faith, as is evident out of the
definitions of heresy, related before c. 2. out of Scripture, Fathers, and
Protestants: and also out of the testimonies of holy Fathers c. 3. n. 2. that
heresy is the destruction of faith, the poison of faith, that heretics have
nether faith, nor Church, common with Catholics, have Christ only in name: that
heretics are no true Christians, are false Christians, are Christians only in
name, are worse then Infidels, are Anti Christ's. Which evidently show, that
heresy is opposite to saving faith, and heretics, to Catholics. For if they be
no Christians, much les are they Catholics. And Protestants sometimes give the
same judgment of them. For thus Luther in caput 7. Math. tom 7. Heretics, are
not Christians: Protestants say that heretics are no Christians.
Magdeburgians in Praefat. Centur. 6. They are Antichrists, and devils. Beza
de puniendis haereticis. They are infidels, and Apostataes. Whitaker Controu.
2. q. 5. c. 2. the name of Catholic, is opposite to Heretics. Morton l. 1.
Apolog. c. 7. Either we must give the name of Catholics to Protestants, or we
must deny the^ the name of Christians. And surely, who are no Christians, but
Antichrists, devils, infidels, and Apostataes, and opposite to Catholics, have
not saving faith. And though Estius in prima^ Joan. 4. and 3. distinst. 23.
paragr. 13. think, that, what truth heretics believe, they believe it with The
question is of saving faith.
divine faith, yet he denies, that their faith is Catholic, or simply faith,
because it is not entire faith: nor ever said, that it is a saving faith, as
Protestants say, and is the main question between us and them.

2. Secondly, I prove it out of Heretics make shipwreck of faith.
Scripture. 1. Timoth. 1. v. 20. where certain heretics are said, to have
made Shipwreck of faith. And c. 4. v. 1. In the latter days, some shall depart
from faith harkning to spirits of error, and doctrins of Devils. And Epist. 2.
c. 2. v. 18. he says of other heretics: They have fallen from truth, and
ouerturned the faith of some. But who have made Shipwreck of faith, have
departed from faith, have fallen from truth, and whose faith is ouerturned, have
not saving faith.

3. Thirdly, I prove that sinful error against any point of faith sufficiently
Formal object of faith, is divine revelation sufficiently proposed.
proposed, destroieth true saving faith, because it destroieth the true formal
object of divine faith. For the formal object of divine faith, is whole divine
truth revealed by God, and sufficiently proposed to us, See S. Thomas 2. 2. q.
1.
that it is from God. But voluntary error against divine truth revealed, and
sufficiently proposed, takes away this formal object. Therefore it takes
away divine faith. For what takes away the formal object of any habit or
power, takes away the habit itself. The Minor is evident. The Mayor also is
clear. For what other can be said to be the formal object of faith? And it is
confessed by Protestants. For thus Lord Canterbury sec. See Usher Sermon. before
K. James p. 39 Morton Appeal. l. 1. c. 1. see 1.
38. p. 344. we believe them for the same formal reason in all, namely, because
they are revealed, from, and by God, and sufficiently applied in his word, and
by the Churches ministration. And Doctor Potter sec. 5. p. 3. The formal object
of faith, is divine revelation. The same he has p. 8. and 10. And
Chillingworth c. 1. p. 35. Faith is an assent to divine revelation, upon the
authority of the reuealer. And hereupon the same Chillingworth p. 23. says:
He that does not believe all the undoubted parts of the undoubted He that
believes not al Scripture, truly believes none.
books of Scripture, can hardly believe any, nether have we reason to believe,
he does so. And the same I say of undoubted points of Christ's doctrine.

4. Fourthly I prove, that sinful error against any point of faith
sufficiently proposed, destroieth true-sauing faith, because it destroieth the
true unity thereof. For true divine faith, is wholly one, and the same in all
true Beleuers. But who sinfully believe not some points of faith sufficiently
proposed, which others believe, have not wholly one and the same faith Therefore
etc. The Minor is evident. The Mayor I prove out of Scripture, Fathers, Reason,
and Confession of Scripture says that faith is wholly one.
Protestants. The Scripture Ephesians. 4. says: One God, one Faith, one Baptism.
Where, not only faith is said to be one, but also it is said to be one, as
God, and baptism are, which are wholly one. And this same, prove al L. Ca^t. p.
36. whatsoever is fundame^tal in the faith, is fu^damental to the Church, which
is one by the unity of faith.
those places of Scripture, which teach, that the Church is one, which hereafter
we shall cite. For seeing the profession of faith is part of the form of the
Church, she could not be wholly one, if her form were not altogether one.

5. The Fathers also teach the same Likewise Fathers.
For thus-Saint Ireneus l. 1. c. 4. She, who is the universal Church, has one
and the same faith in all the world. Saint Cyprian l. de vnitate: God is one,
and Christ is one, and his Church is one, and faith is one, unity cannot be
divided, nor one See s. Chrystom in Gal. 1. to. 4. col. 812.
Body separated by disunion of the ioints. Saint Hilarie l. 11. de Trinitate:
Who doubts, but it is beside faith, which is beside one faith? And lib.
contra Constantium. What is beside one faith, is not faith, but persidiousnes.
Saint Optatus Vna sides ab haereticoru^ erroribus separatur.
l. 5. If you give an other faith, give also an other God. Saint Leo sermon 4 de
Natiuitate: If it be not one, it is not faith. And these Fathers say simply ad
absolutely, that faith is one, without any restriction to fundame^tal points.
And it is both voluntary, and Sophistical, to limit that to a part, which is
spoken absolutely, when the speaker gives no occasion of such limitation: Reason
also co^uinceth, that faith is wholly one in every true beleuer. For (as we
said before) the formal object of true N. 3.
faith, is divine revelation sufficiently proposed: but this is wholly one and
the same in all beleuers, and consequently also faith, which (as al other
habits) takes its unity and distinction from its formal object.

6. Protestants also sometimes confess, And Protestants also.
that faith is wholly and entirely one, and undivided. Luther in caput 7. Math.
Tom. 5. fol. 74. Faith must be round, that is, in all articles, believing Faith
beleues little matters.
howsoever little matters. For who does not rightly believe one article, does not
rightly believe in all: as Saint I ames says, who offends in one, is made
guilty of al. And in tria Symbola Tom. 7. fol. 141. Christian faith must be
entire and perfect Entire every way.
every way. For albeit it may be weak and faint, yet must it needs be entire
and true. In caput 7. Deutron. tom. 3. fol. 56. Faith suffers nothing, and
the word bears with nothing: but the word must be perfectly pure, and the
doctrine always wholly Wholesome. And tom. 1. German. Epist. ad Albertum: He does
not satiffie, if in other things he confess Christ and his word. For who denies
Christ in one article or word, denies him in all, seeing there is one only
Christ, the same in all his words. Wittenbergenses in Refutat. Orthodoxi
Consensus p. 73. As he, who keeps all the Law, but offends in one, is
(witness Saint I ames) guilty of al: So who believes not one word of Christ,
though he seem to believe the other articles of the Creed, yet believes
nothing, and is damned, as incredulous. Scusselburg l. 1. Theolog. Calvin. art.
1. Most truly wrote Saint Chrysostom in 1. Galat. He corrupts the whole
doctrine, who subuerteth it in the lest article. Most truly said Ambrose Epist.
ad Demetriadem: He is out of the number of the faithful, Who dissenteth in
any point.
and lot of Saints, who dissenteth in any point from the Catholic truth. Field
l. 3. c. 3. There are some things explicit credenda, some things implicit:
which, whosoever will be saved, must believe them, atleast implicit and in
general.

7. Martyr Epist. ad peregrinos in Anglia, tomo 2. loc. colum. 136. we answer,
that al Gods words, as they proceed Al Gods words of equal authority.
from him, are of equal weight and authorities and therefore none may of his
judgment receive this, and reject an other, as falls. James says boldly, who
effendeth in one, is made guilty of al. If that have place in obedience to the
commandments, it will be true also for points of belief. Calvin in Ephesians. 4. v.
5. upon that: One God, one Faith, writes thus. As often as thou read the
word, one, understand it put emphatically, as if he said: Christ cannot be
divided, faith cannot be parted. Perkin in Explicat Symbolicolum, 512. Thus
indeed fares the matter, that a man failing in one article, fails and erreth
in all. Whereupon faith is termed in entire copulative. Spalatensis co^tra
Suarem, Faith is an entire copulative.
c. 1. nu. 7. Divine faith perishes wholly by the lest detraction, and
consequenity, it is no true Church, no not visible, No Church, without entire
faith.
in which entire faith is not kept in publik profession. L. Canterb. p. 325.
There is but one saving faith. Item 338. And 342. who hopes for salvation must
believe the Catholic says whole and entire in every point. P. 105. Faith
believes not only the articles, but all the things rightly deduced from them.
Doctor Potter sec. 2. p. 41. commends Saint Basil for saying; Not asyllable
of divine doctrine must be betrayed: And S. Gegorie Nazian. for saying: One
word, like a drop of poison, may taint and corrupt faith. And sec. 7. p. 74.
insinuates clearly, that not fundamental points perteine to the unity of
faith, though not primarily: and page 73. that they are to be believed by a
virtual, or general faith, and as it were a negative faith, whereby they are not
to be denied or contradicted. Whosoever therefore deny the^, being sufficiently
proposed, have no true saving faith. The like he has also p. 75. Al points
sufficiently proposed are fundame^tal to faith.
and (as I cited in the 3. Chapter n. 5.) does oftentimes say, that it is
fundamental to faith to believe all that is sufficiently proposed, and that it is
infidelity to deny any such point: whose words allows Chillingworth and Sup
c 3. n. 6.
adds that not to believe such points, is to give God the Lie And, that not
fundamental points may be so proposed, as the denial of them, will draw after
it, the denial of this fundamental truth. That al which God says, is true. And
if Not-fundamental points be fundamental to faith, when they are sufficiently
proposed, how can saving faith be, and not believe them? Seeing nothing can be
without all that is fundamental to it, as is evident by itself, and confessed
by Protestants before Sup. l. 1. c. 7. n. 6. 7.
l. 1. c. 7. number. 5. Besides they profes by Fundamental, to understand
essential: and nothing can be without that, which is essential to it. And if it
be infidelity, and to give God the Lie, to deny such points, how can there be
true saving faith, where such points are denied? seeing saving faith cannot
stand, where infidelity is, or the Lie given to God. And out of all that has
been said of faith it is evident, that there can be no saving faith, but that
which actually believes not only al fundamental points, but even al points
whatsoever of Gods revealed word sufficiently proposed: and virtually also, al
points or parts of his word whatsoever: and that al other kinds of belief, is
true heresy, and a spice of infidelity.

The errors of Protestants, touching the essence and unity of true faith, and
true Church, confuted out of that which has been said. FIFTH CHAPTER.
1. OVt of that which has been said of the essence and the unity of true
divine faith, together with that, which shall be said hereafter of the essence,
and unity of the true Church of God, the errors of Protestants touching the
essence and unity of true faith and Church, may be easily, and clearly
confuted.

2. Their first, and principal error, (out of which proceed the others) is,
Protestants put the essence, and unity, of faith and Church, in some points
only.
that there be certain principal articles, which alone, belong (as D. Potter
speaks, sec. 5. p. 16.) to the substance of faith. Sec. 3. p. 60. Comprehend
the life and substance of Religion. Sec. 7. p. 74. which essentially perteine
to the faith, and properly constitute a Church. P. 78. which make up the
Catholic faith. And p. 102, wherein consists the unity of faith, and of the
Catholic Church. Whereupon he says, sec. 2. p. 39. Among wise men, each
discord in Religion dissolues not the unity of faith. And Lord Conterburie
sec. 38. p. 355. says: That to err in Not fundamentals, is no breach upon the
one saving says. And p. 360. In things not necessary, though they be divine
truths also, Christian men may differ, and yet preserve the one necessary
faith. And Chilling worth c. 3. page 159. says there be certain propositions
or doctrins, which integrate and make up the body of Christian Religion.

3. But this error, that the essence of saving faith; and of the true Church of
God, consists only in-certaine principal points, and the substantial The
total object of faith is al Gods revealed word.
unity of them, is clearly confuted out of what has been said. For the
total object of true saving faith, is no part only of Gods revealed word, or
any part only of Christ's doctrine, but Gods whole revealed word, Christ's whole
doctrine, as is evident by itself, and is proved before, and also confessed C.
4. n. 9.
by Doctor Potter sect. 7. p. 71. and sec. 2. p. 39. where he allows the
diuisio of the object of faith made by Saint Thomas; into primarie, and into
Secundarie, as that Abraham had 2. Sonns. And both he, and Chillingworth cited
in the third chaptern. 5. 6. confess, that it is fundamental to faith, to believe
Not fundamental points sufficiently proposed, and so far fundamental, that to
deny them, is infidelity, and to give God the Lie. But what is fundamental to
faith, is essential to faith, as is evident by itself, and Protestants
confessed above l. 1. c. 7. number. 5. And besides they confessed Protestants by
fundamental mean essentials.
l. 1. c. 7. number. 6. and 7. That by fundamental, they mean Essential. And if
Not fundamental sufficiently proposed, be essential to faith, falls it is, that
the essence of saving faith consists only in certain principal articles. And
if the essence of faith consist not in them only, nether does the unity of it
consist in them only; but whosoever are divided in any points of faith
sufficiently proposed, are divided in the very substance, and substantial
unity of faith. And since the substance of faith, is but one, the one of the
parties divided, has no true saving faith.

4. Their second error, is: That (as Lord Canterbury says sec. 39. p. 376.
The Protestant and the Roman Religion are the same. Potter sec. 3. p. 58.
Reformation did not change the substance of Religion. So also white Defens. c.
38. The substance of Romans Religion different, from the substance of Protestants.
For the substance of the Roman Religion (as of al true Christian Religion) is
profession of al Christ's doctrine sufficiently proposed to us, and essentially
includes Romish doctrine, as is evident by that Epitheton Roman. See sup. n. 2.
Perkins Gal s. v. 9. Politicus, qui nullius est Religionis, dicit nos and
Pontificias non differ in substa^tia.
And the substance of the Protestant Religion, are only certain principal
articles of his doctrine. Therefore the substance of both of them is not the
same. Besides, who differ in not fundamentals sufficiently proposed, differ in
some essential point of faith, because (as is now rehearsed out of Protestants)
such points are fundamental to faith, and have the formal object of faith which
is divine revelation. But the Roman and Protestant Religion differ at least in
Not fundamental points sufficiently proposed; Therefore they differ in some
essential points, and in some formal object of faith, and consequently are not
the same. And this Lord Canterbury seems to confess when p. 125. he says.
The time was, that you and we were al of one belief. As if now we were not. And
p. 285. There are no mean differences that are beetweene us.

5. The third error is, that they have not left the Church of Rome in her
essence, as speaks. Lord Canterbury The essence of the Rom, and Protest.
Church is different.
sec. 25. p. 192. Doctor Potter sec. 3. p. 62. 66. and others commonly. For
since they have left the Church of Rome in profession of some not fundamentals
sufficiently proposed, they have left her in her essence: because her essence
includes al points of faith sufficiently proposed. And therefore who leaves
the Church of Rome in profession of some points of faith sufficiently proposed,
leaves her in her essence. Besides, Protestants say (as is related l. 1. c. 6.
number. 5.) That the Church of Rome erreth in fundamental points, holds errors
of themselves damnable, has corrupted faith in the principal points, is fallen
into substantial corruptions: How then can they say, They have not left her in
her essence? Since they say, That she herself has not the essence of the
Church. Moreover, seeing the Protestant Church differs Protest. and To.
Church differ in all the formal parts of a Church.
from the Roman in all the formal essential parts of a Church, to wit, in
profession of faith, (and that in great matters, as in sacrifice, Sacraments,
part of Gods written word, and such like;) and in communion of Sacraments, and
finally in officers of the Church, or ministers of the word and Sacraments, how
can they think, that their Church differs not in essence from ours, or that
they have not left our Church in her essence, having left her in all her formal
parts? Finally they have left her in her communion of Sacraments, which is an
essential part of her.

6. Their fourth error is, that Chillingw. p. 273. 132. L. Cant. p. 192.
they have not left the Church of Rome, but only her corruptions. For those
points, are essential points of the Church of Rome, and held of her as such,
because they are part of Gods revealed word sufficiently proposed to her.

7. Their fifth error is, that they have Potter sec. 1. p. 7.
not left the Church of Rome any farther, then she has left herself, to wit,
in some Change in faith is not reformation but a new formation of the Church.
points of faith. For if she had sinfully left herself in any point of faith
sufficiently proposed, she had left her own essence, and so had destroyed
herself. And so Protestants must have left her altogether, as she had left
herself altogether, in destroing herself by going from some points of faith
sufficiently proposed to her.

8. Their sixth error is, that there are some things, which separate from the
Church in part only, and not simply, as says Lord Canterbury sec. 10. p.
What separates from the Church in part, separates simply.
26. For if he mean (as he does) of points of faith sufficiently proposed,
nothing can separate from the Church in part, but it separateth simply. Because
(as is often said) every such point, is of the essence of the Church,
separates simply from her. For (as Aristotle well says) the essences of things
consist in indiuisibili, and are like numbers, which are changed by any
addition or substraction, whatsoever. And it is the whole word of God, whose
profession is of the essence of the true Church, and therefore who separates
from a true Church in profession of any part of Gods word, separates from her
simply. Who separates from a part of gods word, separates wholly from his
Church.
And one thing it is, to separate simply, or in part, from the word of God: an
other: to separate simply or in part, from the true Church of God. Heretics
separate not simply from the word of God, because they believe some part of it.
But they separate themselves simply from the true Church of God, of whose
essence it is, to profes the whole revealed word of God. And Heretics
separating from profession of the whole word of God, separate from this essence
of the Church of God, and consequently separate simply from her. For to
separate from her essence, is to separate from her, simply.

9. But al these points will be yet more clear, by what we shall say of the
essence, and unity of the true Church of God. And both by what we have said
of the essence and unity of true saving faith, and shall say of the essence
and unity of the true Church of God, it will easily appear to be true, what
Aristotle says, that A true definition solues al difficulties.
out of a true definition, al difficulties may be solued, which arise about
the thing defined. For if Protestants would constantly agree with us (as
sometimes, See sup. c. 3. n. 5. 6.
being convicted by euidencie of truth, they do) that true saving faith, is
essentially belief of al Gods what is true divine faith
revealed word, sufficiently proposed, they would never deny, but al and
every part of Gods revealed word sufficiently proposed, is essential to saving
faith, and denial of any part of such word of God, is denial of saving faith;
and that division in profession of such word of God, is a substantial division
in faith. It will also appear, that all the errors of Protestants about Errors
of Protestants about faith and Church, arise of not observing their true
definitions.
the essence or unity of saving faith, or of the true Church of God, rise of
their Not knowing, or rather of their not constant observing, the true
definitions of saving says, and of the true Church of God, which themselves
sometimes give. But being set between two opposites, to wit, true faith, and
the Protestant faith; the true Church, and the Protestant What Protestants can
not be constant in doctrine.
Church, when they consider the nature of true saving faith, and true Church,
they agree with us in defining or describing them: But when they consider the
nature of the Protestant faith, and Church, they are feign to say that, which
is clearly refuted out of their own definitio^s of true saving faith, and
true Church. And so in effect recall their own definitions of a true Church, or
of saving faith, and thereby quite alter the question, and make the dispute of
quite different things. For whiles they defend the Protestant faith or Church,
Protestants in defeding their faith and Church, mean quite other things by
Faith and Church.
by the names of faith or Church, they mean quite other things, then
Scripture, Fathers, we, or themselves other whiles, do. But it may suffice to
reasonable men, lovers of trut, hand not wranglers about words, that if by
faith, Protestants will mean, as Scripture, Fathers, we, and themselves
sometimes, do, they cannot say, that the essence of it consists only in
some principal points, but in all Gods revealed word sufficiently proposed: nor
the unity of saving faith, in unity of only some principal points, but in
unity of believing al Gods words sufficiently proposed, and that who differ in
belief of any point of Gods word sufficiently proposed, differ substa^tially
Protestants equivocate in the names of Faith and Church.
in faith. And if by Faith, they will mean some other thing, then Scripture,
Fathers, we, and themselves also sometimes, do, they may if they will; for
words are ad placitum; But it shall not be true saving faith, (For that is that,
whereof the Scripture, and Fathers mean) but a faith of their own invention,
whose essence and unity they may put in what points they please. And thus
having proved, that voluntary or sinful denial of any point of faith, or of
Gods word revealed, and sufficiently proposed to us, destroieth both the
substance, and unity of true saving faith: Now let us show, that it also
destroieth the substance, and unity of Gods true Church.

That sinful error, or error in any point of faith sufficiently proposed,
destroieth the substance of a true Church. SIXTH CHAPTER,
1. ALbeit it be evident, by what we have proved before, that sinful error
against any point of faith sufficiently proposed, destroieth the substance of
a true Church, because al such error is formal heresy, and destroieth Catholic
faith: And a true Church cannot be with heresy, or L. Canterb. sec. 10. p. 36.
what is substantial in faith, is substantial to the Church.
without Catholic faith: Yet will we prove it more particularly, out of the
definitions or descriptions of a true Church, given by Scripture, Fathers, and
Protestants themselves, and lastly by reason.

2. The Scripture Acts 2. v. 42. describing Description of the Church by
Scripture.
the true Church of Christ, says: They were perseuering in the doctrine of the
Apostles, and communication of breaking bread, and prayers, In which words is
contained a description of the true Church, even by confession of Protestants.
For thus Whitaker Controu. 2. q. 5. c. 19. This place is surely notable, and
these words do show, by what Notes the Apostolik Church was known and showed.
The first note, was the doctrine of the Apostles. For the Apostles delivered
that doctrine, which they received from Christ, the Christians of those times
embraced and perseuered in it, and it distinguished that company of men from
other companies and societies. For they alone then were the true Church, who
perseuered in doctrine. And Plessie l. de Eccles. c. 2. These words of Scripture,
are nothing but a description of the true Church of Christ, instructed in the
true faith of Christ by his word, and knit together in true love by the
Communion which is in him. But they who believe only fundamental points, and
sinfully deny Not fundamental The doctrine of the Apostles, includes al their
doctrine.
points of faith, de not absolutely persevere in the doctrine of the Apostles. For
the doctrine of the Apostles, is their whole doctrine, and includes as well Not
fundamental, as fundamental points of faith. Who therefore persevere only in the
fundamental points, and not in the vnfundamental, persevere only in a part of
the Apostles doctrine, and in part leave it, and consequently are not the true
Church. Besides, our Savior Joan. 10. says: My sheep, hear my voice. But who
hear his voice only in fundamental points, do not absolutely hear his voice,
but in part only, and in part hear it not. For Christ's voice, is as well in
Not fundame^tal points of his doctrine, as in fu^damental. Therefore such are not
Christ's. And Joan. 8. If ye abide in my word, ye shall be my disciples indeed.
But they abide not in his word, who forsake it in all points not fundamental.
Moreover, sinful errors in faith, are gates of hell. But gats of hell prevail
not against Christ's true Church. Therefore not sinful errors in faith. Besides if
the the Catholic Church, should sinfully err in any point of faith, she should
not be holy men, nor a holy society. For she should be a society in
heresy: and so that article of our Creed: I believe the holic Catholic Church,
should be false.

3. And in like manner, the holy Fathers define the true Church, as is evident
by their exclusion of al heretics, and by this confession of Moulins lib. 1.
contra Peron cap. 2. The ancient Doctors are wont to understand Description of
the Church by Fathers.
by the Church (which oftentimes they call Catholic) the whole society of
Christian Churches, Orthodox, and sound in faith, united together in Communion:
and they oppose this Church to the societies of Schismatiks, and heretics,
which sense (says he) we will not reject. But who sinfully err in some points
of faith sufficiently proposed, or for their fault not so proposed, are not
Orthodox nor sound in faith. Therefore if we will understand by the Church, what
the Fathers did, we cannot say, that such are of the Church. And this is
confirmed, because the true Church, which we believe, is Catholic, as is
professed in the Apostles Creed: And Catholic, by the Fathers judgment, erreth
not in any point of faith. For thus Saint August in l. imperfec. in Genesin c.
1. Catholic holds al.
The Church is called Catholic, because she is universally perfect, and halteth
in nothing. And Epistle 48. Perhaps she is called Catholic, because she truly
holds the whole, of which truth, some pieces are found in diverse heresies.
The like has Saint Cyril. Catechesi 18. S. Optatus l. 1. Patianus Epist. 1.
Vincet. c. 3. But who deny any point of faith sufficiently proposed, are not
universally perfect, nor truly hold the whole, but halt in something. Therefore
they are not Catholics, and consequently not of the true Church. Hooker l. 5.
p. 324. Cyprian with the greatest part of African Bishops were of nothing more
certainly persuaded, then that heretics are, as rotten branches, cut of from
the life and body of the true Church.

4. And in the same manner do Description of the Church, by Protestants.
Protestants sometimes define the true Church. For thus Moulins l. 1. contra
Peron c. 26. That is the true Church, which is united together in profession of
true faith, and communion of Sacraments. This definition (says he) is
received by Hiremias P. C. Resp. 1 ad VVirtenb. Qui se non totos veritati
dediderunt, ne in Christi quidem Ecclesia sunt.
our Adversaries. Whence it follows, that the true Church is discerned by
profession of true faith. And that he means by true faith, entire true faith.
I prove: First, because part of true faith, is not absolutely true faith: but a
part there of. Secondly, because he says, Catholics admit this definition,
which they never admit, unless by true faith, be meant entire true faith.
Thirdly, Entire true doctrine is the Note of the Church.
because c. 28. he says. The whole entire doctrine of salvation, is the Note of
the Church. Therefore when he defined the Church, by profession of true faith,
he meant entire true faith. And in the said c. 26. he says. The true Church
Field l. 2. c. 2. Entire profession of the truth revealed by Christ
distinguishes right beleuers from heretics.
is opposed to heretics and Schismatiks. And c. 25. The question (which is the
true Church) is of the Orthodox Church, joined in Communion, by what Notes she
may be discerned from heretics, schismatiks, and idolaters. Whatsoever Church
therefore is heretical, or not orthodox, is no true Church.

5. And generally al Protestants, put in their definitions of the true The
Church professes the pure, entire, an vncorrupt word of God.
Church, Pure, sincere, entire, and incorrupt word of God. The confession of
England ar. 19. The visible Church of Christ, is a Congregation, in which the
pure word of God is preached. The Swisers Confession c. 17. In which is sincere
preaching of Gods word. The French Confession Calvin 4. instit. c. 2. 3. vbi ad
definitionem Ecclesiae ve^tum est, haerent in suo luto.
art 27. In which is consent in embracing pure Religion. Beza Epist. 24. and
Sadeel contra Turian. loco 1. In which the doctrine of the Ghospel is purely
delivered. And loco 30. When I defined the visible Church, consisting of al her
parts, I said, that purity of doctrine, and true use of Purity of doctrine
esse^tial to the Church.
Sacraments, was essential to the Church. Vrsinus in Catechis. q. 2. In which
the entire and vncorrupt doctrine of the Law Entire.
and Gospel is embraced. Field l. 2. of the Church c. 2. Entire profession of
those supernatural verities which God has revealed in Christ, is essential and
gives being to the Church. Fulk. Joan. 14. not. 5. The true Church of Christ
can never fall unto heresy. It is an impudent slander to affirm, that we say,
so. The Magdeburgians Centur. 1. cap. 4. In which, the sincere doctrine of the
Ghospel, is embraced. James Andrews li. contra Hosium p. 210. In which the
incorrupt word of God vncorrupt.
sounds. Whitaker contro. 2. q. 5. c. 17. Sincere preaching of the word, and
lawful use of the Sacraments, make the Church: so as where they are not, the
Church is not. And c. 18. The Church is no other multitude, then which holds
the pure preaching of the word. Ibid. It can not hold any heretical doctrine,
and yet be a Church. Spalatensis l 7. de Repub. c. 10. nu. 26. The form of the
Catholic Church, is the Form of the Church, is entire profession of Christ's
faith.
entire profession of Christ's faith. And c. 12. number. 132. To the true Church,
two things only are required, to wit, entire faith in Christ, and peace and
communion with all that profes this faith. Calvin in Joan. 10. v. 1. We must not
communicate with any other Society, then that, which conspires in the pure
faiih of the Ghospel. Besides, Protestants profes, purity in doctrine, to be the
essential Note of the Church, as Beza lib. de Notis Eccles. Whitaker controu.
2. q. 5. c. 17. Morton l. 2. Apolog. c. 41. Danaeus contr. 4. p. 741. Riuet
tract. 1. sec. 45. Luther in caput 2. Isaiae: In which confessions of
Protestants we are to Note, how, when they intend to define the true Church,
they put, pure, sincere, entire, and vncorrupt doctrine in its definition, and
say, that such doctrine is the essential Note of a true Church, and the form
thereof. Also, how they deny any company to be a true Church, which has not
the pure word. But such as sinfully deny the not fundamental points of Gods
word sufficiently proposed, profes not his pure, sincere, entire, and vncorrupt
word. Therefore they are not of the true Church.

6. To this, no other answer can be Protest. can not answer without confession
that they equiuacate.
given, but that, when Protestants define the true Church, by the pure, sincere
entire word of God, or say that such is the essential Note, or form of the
Church, they mean only, pure, sincere, entire, or vncorrupt, in fundamental
points of Gods word, not in all Gods word sufficiently proposed. But this
evasion in clearly refuted. First because this condemns their definition of
obscurity or defect. Next because if they had only defined the Church to be a
company, in which the word of God, or the faith of Christ, is professed, they
could not have expounded it, of any part of Gods word, or of Christ's faith:
because the word of God, The faith of Christ, signify his whole word, his whole
faith, as the Church signifies the whole See c. 2. nu. 5. l. 1.
Church: And much les can they expound this definition, of profession Protest.
expound pure by impure Entire by a part.
of any part of Gods word, or of Christ's faith, seeing they have added to the
word of God, or to the faith of Christ those most significant adjectives, pure,
sincere, entire, vncorrupt. For What is pure, has no mixture, and what
entire, is no part.
what is the pure, sincere, vncorrupt, word of God, cannot be mixed with any
falsitie, or word of man. And what is the entire word of God, cannot be a part
only, but must needs be his whole word. Whosoever therefore sinfully, profes
any falsitie, or word of man, or not the whole revealed word of God, are not
the true Church. Secondly, because (as we proved before) C. 2. 4.
there are no fundamental points in Field l. 2. de Ecclesia c. 3. freedom from
pertinatious error, is ever found in the true Church. Fulks overthrow of the
answer to Char Preface p. 114.
the Protestants sense, that is, such as are sufficient to be believed, though
other points of faith be sufficiently proposed: nor any Not fundamental in
their sense, that is, such as are not necessary to be actually believed, when
they are sufficiently proposed, and virtually, though they be not proposed. But
al points of faith whatsoever, are fundamental or essential Al points of faith
essential to a true Church.
to a true Church, and are to be believed, either actually and explicitly, if
they be sufficiently proposed, or (at the least) virtually and implicitly, if
they be not sufficiently proposed. For (as is said before) the whole revealed
word (which contains as well Notfundamentals, as fundamentals) is the true
object of faith. And no company, but such as professes al Christ's doctrine,
can be a true Church of Christ. And therefore none, who deny any points of his
doctrine sufficiently proposed, can be his true Church absolutely, but only his
Church in part, as in part only they profes his doctrine. And this D. Potter
insinuates, when sec. 7. p. 74. he says; That Not fundamentals do Not
fundamentals belong to the essence of a Church.
not primarily belong to the unity of faith, or to the essence of a Church, or
to the salvation of a Christian. For if they do any way truly belong
(whether See Chilling. p. 209. 291.
primarily, or secondarily) to the essence of a Church, a Church cannot be
without them altogether, because nothing can be without that which any way
belongs to its essence. And they may be faied to belong secundarily, to the
essence of a Church, because How Not-fundamentals may belong secundarily
a Church may be without actual belief of them, to wir, if they be not
sufficiently proposed.

7. Reason also conuinceth, that what is simply and absolutely a true Al points
Christ's doctrine howsoever must be professed at least virtually or implicitly.
Church of Christ, must, (at least virtually and implicitly) profes al his
doctrine. Because if it do no way profes his whole doctrine, but only some part
of his doctrine, it is not simply and absolutely his Church, but in part only
his Church, and in parto not his Church; as in part it professes his doctrine,
and in part rejects it. And they, nether virtually not implicitly profes his
whole doctrine, who sinfully reject any part of it, when it is sufficiently
proposed to be his. Secondly, because to reject any part of Christ's doctrine
sufficiently proposed to be his doctrine, is to reject Christ's veracitie: for it
is as much as to say, he is not to be believed in that, and is an act of
infidelity, as Protestants before C. 3.. 5. 6. l. 2.
confessed. And how can they be a true Church of Christ, who in any point
reject Christ, veracitie, and commit an act of infidelity. Besides, as Lord
Canterbury says, sec. 10. p. 36. whatsoever is fundamental in the faith, is
fundamental to the Church, which is one by the unity of faith. But Not
fundamental points sufficiently proposed, are fundamental to faith, as before
D. C. 3. 5. 6. l 2.
Potter and Chilling worth confessed. Therefore etc.

8. And out of these definitions of a true Church, which we have brought out of
holy Scripture, Fathers, Protestants, and reason, it appears: First, how
untrue it is, which Canterbury, says sec. 16. p. 62. The Catholic Church,
which we believe in our Creed, is Catholic Church includes not al Christians.
the society of al Christians: or which Moulins says l. 1. co^tra Peron c.
2. The Scripture takes the name of the Church sometimes, for the universal
company of al those, who profes themselves Christians, and to believe in Jesus
Christ. Secondly, how, untrue it is, which the same Lord Canterbury has sec.
36. p. 314. No man can be said simply to be out of the visible Chureh, that is
baptized, and holds the foundation. Or sec. 20. p. 129. That Church, which
receaues the Scripture as a rule of faith, and both the Sacraments, as seals
of grace, can not but be a true Church in essence. Or which D. Potter says
sec. 5. p. 18. A true Church, is alone with a Church not erring in the
foundation. Or as Chilling worth says Tertul. praescrip. c. 41. haeretici
pace^ passim cum omnibus miscent.
c. 5. p. 283. Protestants grant their communion to al, who hold with them, not
al things, but things necessary. Or, (which generally al Protestants say:)
That the Catholic Church, is the multitude of al Christians through the whole
world, who agree in profession of the principal articles of Christian faith,
howsoever they deny other points of faith sufficiently proposed to them, nor
communicate together at al in Sacraments or publik worship of God. For, beside
that these things are said without al apparent proof, either of Scripture,
Fathers, or reason, but merely to include themselves and such others as they
please, within the bounds of the true Catholic Church, they are clearly
convinced out of the aforesaid definitions of the Church, taken out of
Scripture, Fathers, Protestants, and reason. For nether do al Christians, or all that profes themselves Christians, persevere in the doctrine of the Apostles, but
only in a part of it: nor are they al Orthodox or sound in faith, or united in
communion: nor do they al profes the pure, sincere, vncorrupt, and entire word
of God: and therefore, according to the definitions of the true Church given by
Scripture, Fathers, Protestants, and reason, they are not al members of the
true Church.

9. And with les appearance, can they be said to be the Catholic C. 6. n. 3. l.
2.
Church. For Catholic (as before I said out of Saint Augustine and other
Fathers) halteth in nothing, and many of those Christians, who hold the
principal articles, halt in many other points of faith. And besides, al such
Christians communicate not together, and co^demn one an other, as is evident in
the Roman the Grecian, the Lutheran the Caluinist, and such other Churches: And
communion, is as well essential to the true Catholic Church, C. 13. S. Austin
Epist 48. l. de unit. c. 6 Collat. 3. diei c. 3. de Pastoribus c. 13. Field l.
3. de Eccles c. 43.
as purity in faith, as hereafter shall be proved. Nay Catholic rather
signifies communion, then purity in faith. What monstrous Catholic Church
then must that be, which consists of al those Christians, who agree only in
the principal points of Christian faith, A monstrous Church of Protestants.
but in all other points, how sufficiently soever proposed to them, disagree,
and condemn one an others belief, and communion? Is such a Chaos, or hydra, the
Church instituted by Christ, the holy Church professed in our Creed, the
Spouse of Christ, the house and Kingdom of God? Certainly a Church consisting
of al Christians, or of all that profes themselves Christians, or of all that
hold the principal points of Christian doctrine, but deny other points of his
doctrine sufficiently proposed to be his, and communicate not together in
Sacraments, but condemn one an other, was never gathered or instituted by
Christ, never mentioned by the Fathers, Protestants equivocate in the name of
the Church.
but is a mere Monster of a Church, merely feigned by some Protestants, for to
include themselves, and sinfully erring Christians, within the pale of the
Church. But we care not, whom they include in a Church of their own invention
or making. It suffices us, that no such, can be in the true Church of Christ's
making and which the Scripture, Fathers, reason, and Protestants also (when
they only consider the nature of the true Church) describe and propose unto us.
And that sinfully to err in any point of Christ's doctrine sufficiently
proposed, destroieth the nature and substance of such a Church; which
Protestants would never deny, if necessity of defending sinfully erring
Churches, did not force them to it. Property of the universal Church, not to
err at al.
It is the property of the universal Church only, promised to her by Christ,
not to err at al, either voluntarily or involuntarily, either vincibly or
inuincibly, in any thing which she Essential, not to err vincibly, or sinfully.
professes as matter of faith: but it is essential, both to the universal, and
to every particular true Church, not to err sinfully, voluntarily, or
vincibly, in any matter of faith whatsoever. So that, it implies
contradiction, to err in that manner, and yet to be a true Church
substantially; And having thus proved that sinful error in any point of faith,
or of Christ's doctrine sufficiently proposed, destroieth the nature or substance
of a true Church of Christ: Let us also prove, that such error destroieth the
true unity of a true Church.

That sinful error in any point of faith sufficiently proposed, destroieth the
true unity of the Church of Christ. SEVENTH CHAPTER.
1. THat sinful error in any point of faith sufficiently proposed, destroieth
the true unity of Christ's Church, follows evidently out of what I have
before proved, that such error destroieth the substance of his true Church. For
if it destroy the substance of the true Church, it must needs destroy her
unity, which flows from her substance, and depends of it. But we will prove
it also in particular, out of Scripture, Fathers, reason, and confession also
of Protestants.

2. Ar for holy Scripture, it not only absolutely says, that the Church is
one, but also, that it is so one, as those are, which are wholly one, and
altogether Cyprian. de unit. Aug. tract. 6. in Joan. Optatus l 1. and 2.
undivided. Cantic. 6. v. 8. Christ says: My dove, is one. Which place both
Fathers teach; and Protestants confess, to be meant of the The true Church is
absolutely one.
true Church. Joan. 10. v. 16. Christ says of his Church: There shall be made
one flock, and one shepherd. Romans Perkins in symbal VVitak. Cont. 2. q. 1. c.
9.
12. v. 5. we many, are one body in Christ. But a dove, a flock, a body, are
wholly one undivided at al. Therefore such is the true Church of Christ. Besides,
the Scripture calls the Church, the Galat. 3. v. 28. omnes vos vnum estis in
Christo.
Kingdom of God, and adds Mat. 12. that every Kingdom divided it self, shall
perish. Wherefore seeing the true Church cannot perish, it is not divided in
itself. But who are sinfully divided in points of faith, are not wholly Not
divided.
one, but truly many, and divided in themselves. And Joan. 11. Jesus should
die, to gather into one the children of God that were dispersed. The like is
Joan. 17. and Actor 2.

3. The holy Fathers also teach, that the true Church is wholly one and
undivided in points of faith. Saint Cyprian lib. de vnitate says: The Church,
is people joined together in solid One in solid unity.
unity of a body, by the glue of concord, and adds, unity cannot be cut,
nor any body separated by division of ioints. But solid unity of a body,
and such, as cannot be cut or divided, is perfect and entire unity.

4. Saint Augustine in Psalm. 54. after he had recounted many things, in which
the Donatists were one with the Catholic Church, adds: They The Church is
wholly one.
were there with me, but not wholly with me, in many things with me, in few,
not with me. But by these few, in which they are not with me, the many, in
which they Not in part only.
are with me, profit them not. Lo how he exacteth, that men must be wholly one
with the Catholic Church, and professes, that it profits them nothing, to be
with her in many matters, if they be not in all. And yet the Donatists (whereof
he speaks) were Donatists were one in the creed and Sacraments. Sic etia^
Optatus l. 3. and 5.
with Catholics in fundame^tal points, as appears by these his words Epist.
48. Ye are with us in baptism, in the Creed, in the rest of Gods Sacraments:
in Spirit of unity, in bond of peace, finaly in the very Catholic Church, ye
are not with us. And lib. 1. de Baptismo c. 8. and 13. says. That an heretik,
is in part joined to the Church. And yet no L. 1. Ca^tholicus non es foris
estis In Catholica non estis l. 3. pars vestra, Catholica non est.
heretik is truly in the Church. Saint Optatus also lib. 4. says of the same
Donatists: Ye see, that we are not wholly separated one from the other. So that
by the judgment of the Fathers, it is not enough, to be in part joined to her.
See S. Leo epist. 4. c. 2.

5. Hereupon the Fathers say, The The Church is one.
Church is one. So the Nicen Creed, Saint Cyprian Epist. 46. and 64. S. Praeter
vna^ altera non est.
Optatus lib. 1. and 2. Saint Augustine de vnitate c. 2. lib. 1. contra Crescon
c. 29. and others commonly. Sometimes One only.
they say: She is one only. So Saint Augustine lib. 3. contra Petilian. c. 5.
and epistle 120. Saint Hilarie l. 7. de Trinitate. Not many.
Sometimes, she is not many: So Optatus lib. 1. S. Augustine lib. de vnitate c.
16. and in collat. 3. diei c. 10. Sometimes, that she cannot be divided. Cannot
be divided.
So Saint Cyprian epist. 47. and Saint Hierom in Psalm. 51. And out of this
whole and entire unity of the Church, Saint Cyprian epist. 76. infers: If
the Church be with Nouatian it was not with Cornelius. And yet Nouatian was not
divided from Cornelius in fundame^tal or principal points. For thus Doctor
Potter sec. 4. p. 127. The error of Nouatian was not it itself heretical,
especially in the proper and most heavy sense of that word. Saint Augustine
also lib. 18. de ciuit Dei c. 51. The Devil raised heretics, who under
Christian name, should resist Christian doctrine, as if they might be permitted
in the The Church can not have men of contrary beleifs.
city of God without correption, as the city of confusion had indifferently
philosophers, thinking both different and contrary things: who therefore in
Christ's Church have any unsound and naughty opinion, if being corrected for
to believe Note.
aright do obstinatly resist, and will not amend their pestiferous opinions, but
persist, to defend them, become heretics, and going out, are held for
exercising enemies. Lib. de haeres. after he had reckoned many heresies,
says: whosoever shall hold any one of them, shall be no Catholic Christian.
And yet diverse of them are not against any fundamental or principal point of
faith: And l. 2. ad Gaudent. c. II. If ours be Religion, yours is superstition.
And epistle ad Donatistas post Collat. and epistle 152. If our Church be true,
yours is false. Al which sayings, and inferences of the Fathers, were false, if
the Church could be sinfully divided in points of faith. For being so divided,
she were not absolutely one, nor one only, nor Not many: but truly not one, and
truly many: nether would it follow, that if the Church were with those who
deny the Not fundamentals, that it were not with them, who believe them: nor
that, whosoever hold any of the heresies related by S. Augustine, were no Cath.
Christians, as is evident.

6. Reason also conuinceth the same: For the true Church of Christ is a
society in profession of the faith or doctrine of Christ. But the faith or
doctrine of Christ, signifies his whole faith and doctrine. Therefore the Church
is a Society in profession of Christ's whole doctrine. But None dare define the
Church, by profession of part of Christ's doctrine.
where there is profession of Christ's whole doctrine, there can be no division
in his doctrine. Nether durst ever any Protestant yet, define the Church to be
a society in profession of any part of his doctrine. For the name of a part
of Christ's doctrine, shows, that it is not absolutely Christ's Church, but in
part only. Besides, the Church C. 6. n. 5. l 2.
(before defined of Protestants) is a Society in profession of Christ's pure,
sincere, vncorrupt, and entire doctrine. But where there is union in profession
of Christ's pure, and entire doctrine, there can be no division at al in doctrine.
For his pure doctrine, excludes al mixture of doctrine: and his entire doctrine,
includes al his whole doctrine. And if Protestants will constantly stand to
their foresaied definitions, it is impossible for them to imagine, any sinful
division in the true Church, in points of Christ's doctrine.

7, If any object, that hence it would follow, that a particular Church or
person, erring inuincibly in some point of faith, is no true Church, or true
member of the Church, because they agree not with the Church in profession of
the whole doctrine of Christ: I answer, what Church or person inuincibly erreth
in some secundarie point of faith, does virtually or implicitly believe that
very who inuincibly err in not fundame^tals virtually and implicitly believe
them.
truth, against which he erreth: because he explicitly believes the Catholic
Church, which teaches that truth. And implicit belief of secundarie points not
sufficiently proposed, suffices to a true particular Church, and to a true
member of the Church. Hervpon Doctor Potter sec. 7. p. 75. says: By virtual
faith, an erring person may believe the truth contrary to his own error, in
as much as he yields his assent implicitly to that Scriptare, which conteines
the truth, and overthrows his error, though yet he understand it not, And
Chillingworth in Answer to the Preface p. 18. They believe implicitly those But
who vincibly err, do not virtually believe.
very truths, against which they err. But this is not true of such Churohes or
persons, who sinfully err against any points sufficiently proposed: and
therefore they are not at al either explicitly, or implicitly united or sociated
in the profession of Christ's entire doctrine. And consequently are not of his
true Church, which is a society in profession (either explicitly, or
implicitly) of his whole doctrine. C. 5. n. 7. l. 2.


8. And this argument is confirmed, by what before we showed, that the faith or
doctrine of Christ, is an indivisible Copulative: And therefore all the points of
it must be professed, or it is not professed. For an indivisible, must be al
had, or none. And who professes only some part of Christ's doctrine, does not
profes the doctrine of Christ, but some part, and no part is the whole. And as
they profes but some part of his doctrine, and not the whole, so they are but
in part Christians, and indeed not Christians. For a whole or entire Christian
professes Christ's doctrine wholly and entirely: and who professes it but in
part, and in part rejects it, (as do they, who reject any point of his
Heretics but in part, Christians.
doctrine fufficiently proposed) is but in part a Christian, and indeed no
Christian. And hence it is, that holy Fathers say that heretics are no
Christians, as indeed they are not, if by Christians, we mean, not men
Christened, but followers of Christ's doctrine. For they follow not Christ's
doctrine, what Churches differ in profession of faith, differ essentially.
but only some part of it, and reject the rest. Moreover, Churches voluntarily
differing in profession of Christ's faith or doctrine, differ in the essence of
the Church, and consequently essentially. For profession of Christ's faith or
doctrine, is of the essence of his Church, and as such, is put of al men in the
definition thereof. But Churches, whereof one professes al points of Christ's
doctrine, fundamental and Not fundamental, and the other, professes only
fundamentals, and sinfully rejects Not fundamentals (though they be
sufficiently proposed) differ in profession of Christ's doctrine. For his doctrine
includes as well Not fundamentals, as fundamentals: they being equally revealed
by him, and equally proposed to us, as I suppose. Therefore the one of these, is
no true Church. For Christ has not two Churches essentially differing.

9. Lastly I prove, that unity in only fundamental points of faith, is not
sufficient to the unity of the Church. For then the certain unity of the
Church could not be known, as Protestants profes they know not the certain
number of fundamental points: nor give any certain mark, to know which are
they. And so we could not be certain, who were of the Church, who not, with
whom we may communicate, with whom not: as we cannot know certainly, which
are the fundamental points, which are not: Seeing we can nether have a Catalogue
of them, nor any certain mark to know them. But Catholics, who Catholics know
who are of their Church: and Protestants, not.
measure not the unity of the Church, by fundamental points only, but by
belief of al points of faith sufficiently proposed to them, clearly see, who
are of the true Church who are not, and with whom they may communicate, with
whom not.

10. Protestants also sometimes Protestants sometimes confess the unity of the
Church in matters of faith, to be entire. The Church is one.
confess, that the true Church is wholly one, and undivided in profession of
faith. For first they say simply and absolutely, that the Church is one: So the
confession of Auspurg art. 7. The Apology of the Church of England, and
Protestants generally. Also, that it is one only: So confessio Heluetica One
only.
c. 17. Belgica art. 27. Perkins upon the Creed art. de Eccles. James Respons.
ad Peron p. 384. Beza de pun. haeret. p. 25. Sadeel praefat. ad artic. Abiurat.
likewise, that the Church is not many: Luther l. contra Papatum Not many.
tom. 7. p. 461. Christ knows not two kinds of unlike Churches, but one only
Church. Melancton in Hospin part 2. hist. fol. 81. we spoke sharply to them in
this point, that we maruailed, with what conscience, they (Sacramentaries)
could hold us for Brethren, whom they thought to err in doctrine. And fol. 82.
Luther spoke gravely to them, saying: he much maruailed, how they could have
him for a brother, if they thought their doctrine true. Calvin 4. instit. c. 1.
paragr. 4. we cannot have two or three Churches, but Christ must be divided.
See him Joan. 10. v. 17. Musculus loco de Eccles. sec. 2. The true Church of
Christ, is not manifold, but one only. And Whitaker controuer. 2. q. 1. c. 10.
takes it so il, that we should say, They put two Churches, as he says; It
is a mere slander. And ibid. q. 3. c. 3. avouches: That it is impossible, the
Church should consist of them, who profes contrary faiths. Serauia de gradibus
Ministrorum c. 2. The Church is one, which cannot be cut The Church can not be
divided.
or divided. Lord Canterbury sec. 35. p. 284. It Is true, There is but one true
faith, and but one true Church. Ib p. 310. It is as necessary to believe one
God our father, as one Church our Mother, P. 366. There is but one Baptism, as
welas but one Church. Sec. 23. p. 147. Christgaue his natural body to be rent
and torn Elien. in Tortura p. 398. Ecclesia vnum corpus.
upon the Cross, that his mystical body might be one. Chillingworth in Answer
to the preface p. 7. D. Potter tells him: His labor is lost, in proving the
unity of the Catholic Church, whereof there is no doubt or controversy. D.
Potter sec. 2. p. 22. No Protestant denies the Catholic Church to be one.
Confessio Heluet. c. 17. The Church is not divided or severed in itself. But
how can those Churches be simply and absolutely said to be one, only one, not
many, not two or three, not divided, which are not one, Unity in some points,
is but unity, secundu^ quid, and is true multiplicitie.
are many, are divided in profession of points of faith sufficiently proposed?
Does not want of unity, or division in profession of such points, make want of
unity, or substantial division in Churches? Why should Luther or Melancthon
marvel, that Sacramentaries would account them brethren, and yet condemn
their doctrine, if men holding obstinatly false doctrine, may be brethren of the
same Church?

11. Moreover, sometimes they Division in Religion, is a Note of a false Church
confess, that division in faith or Religion, is a certain note of a false
Church. Spalatensis lib. 7. de Repub. c. 10. nu. 63. Negatiuely, this Note (of
unity) has full force. For if this unity (in faith) be any way wanting, the
true form of a true Church will be wanting. Alsted l. de Notis Eccles. c. 10.
Dissension in Religion, is a certain Note of a false and Antichristian
Church. Wesphalus in Calvin in consens. de re Sacramentaria p. 756. It is
proper to heretics, to disagree: to which Calvin: Be it so; what is that to us?
But where is want of unity in not fundamental points of faith, there is want
of unity in faith, and where there is dissension in Not fundamental points,
there is dissension in Religion. For Not fundamental points, are points of
faith and Religion, as is before proved. Therefore L. 2. c. 1.
want of unity, or dissension in them, is a certain sign of a false Church.

12. Furthermore, sometimes they teach absolutely (without making distinction of
heresy in fundamental or Not fundamental points) that heresy is a departure
from the Church, and Al heretics are out of the Church.
that heretics are out of the Church. Apology of the Church of England part
1. Heresy is a departure from the Body and Spirit of Christ. Whitaker
controu. 2. qu. 1. cap. 12. No heretics, though secret, belong to the Church of
God. Item. An heretik cannot be a member of the Church. Ibid. c. 4. That
(Bellarmin) proves, heretics Apostataes, and Schismatiks, not to be members of
the true Church, makes not against us. For none of us ever said so. And q. 5.
c. 18. It cannot hold an heretical opinion, and yet be a Church. And c. 6. It
is false, that heretical and schismatical Churches, are true Churches. Morton
lib. 1. Apolog. c. 3. Heretics are not truly, but in name only, of the Church:
not indeed, but equiuocally. Moulins lib. 1. contra Peron c. 26. The true
Church is opposite to heretics and Schismatiks. Sutcliff l. 1. de Eccles. c. 16.
No society of heretics does deserve the name of a Church. And yet (as we
proved before) al are heretics, who obstinatly C. 2. l. 2.
deny any point of Christ's faith sufficiently proposed. Therefore voluntary
breach, in any point of faith sufficiently proposed, destroieth the unity of
the true Church.

13. King James also Respons. ad The Church will suffer no light corruption in
faith.
Peron p. 388. Durstone, but lightly corrupt the faith approved through the
world? It was easy for a Child to discover the new Master by his Novelty. And
the Thief of truth being found, all the pastors of the whole world, if need
were, were moved, and being moved, did not rest, til they had removed the il,
and provided for the security of the sheep of Christ. Lo, how the Church would
not suffer Purity of doctrine, supreme law in the Church.
any, who, even but lightly, corrupted Christ's faith. And ibid. p. 385. He
knows, that the supreme law in the house of God, is purity of heavenly
doctrine. And if this be the supreme law in Gods house, none that teaches
impure doctrine, is to be suffered in Gods house.

14. And out of that which we have proved here, and before, appears See c. 2.
l. 1.
how falls the comparison is, which Protestants commonly make between
Integrity of faith is like life, and heresy, like death.
heresy and sickness; and between ingritie of faith, and health in men. For
health and sickness are accidents to men, and those also separable from them:
whereas integrity in faith is essential to the Church, and heresy, destructive
of its essence, as is evident out of their own definitions of the Church
before related. And therefore C. 6. n 5.
they thould rather compare integrity in faith to life, and heresy, to man's
death. Secondly, how untruly they teach, that division in points
Not-fundamental (if they be sufficiently proposed) destroieth not the unity of
the Church. For such division is quite opposite to the unity of the true
Church, which (as has been clearly proved) C. 7.
consists in actual, and explicit unity of professing al points of faith
sufficie^ntly proposed, and in virtual, or implicit unity of professing al
whatsoever Christ taught. Thus have we proved, that sinful denial of any point
of Christ's faith, destroieth saving faith, Church, and salvation. Now let us
prove, that it destroieth also Christ's veracitie.

That not to believe, or disbeleue any point of Christ's doctrine, sufficiently
proposed, is to deny his veracitie, and consequently his deity. EIGHT CHAPTER.
1. THat to deny Christ's veracitie in any point, is to deny his Deity, is
evident, For he cannot be God, or Prima Veritas, The first verity, who in any
point can deceive, or be deceived. And that to deny any point of his doctrine
sufficiently proposed, is to deny his veracitie in that point, is also evident
out of that which before we said of faith. For, as to believe or profes any
point of his doctrine for his authority sufficiently proposed, is implicitly to
believe or profes his veracitie therein: so not believe any point of his doctrine
for his authority sufficiently proposed, is implicitly to deny his veracitie
therein. For as belief and disbeleif are opposite acts, the one affirming, the
other denying: so what, belief implicitly affirms, disbeleif, implicitly
denies. If therefore belief of a thing for Christ's authority sufficiently
proposed, implicitly professes his veracitie therein: Not belief of the same
for his authority sufficiently proposed, implicitly denies his veracitie in
that point. Besides, divine veracitie being the formal object of divine faith,
as Sup. c. 4. n. 3.
long as that remains, and is no way removed, divine faith remains.
Therefore what takes away divine faith in one point, must needs take away
divine veracitie in that point. So S. Tho. 22. q. 11. art. 1.
But Christ's veracitie may be denied in two manners. First, explicitly and
directly, and so it is denied by Jews, Beza de puniend. haeret. p. 99. Christi
doctrina^ reijcie^do Christum ipsum repudiant. p. 105. haeretici Christi nomen
no^ profitentur.
Turks, and Infidels, who profes not to believe in Christ. Secondly, implicitly
and indirectly, and so it is denied by all heretics, who though they explicitly
and directly profes Christ's veracitie, yet in not believing al which he taught,
though it be sufficiently proposed to them as taught by him, implicitly and
indirectly deny his divine veracitie. For who denies that to be true, which
one has reported, and is sufficiently proposed as from him, implicitly and
indirectly denies that man's veracitie. For directly to deny the veracitie of
the report, though it be sufficiently proposed as from the reporter, is
indirectly to deny the veracitie of the reporter: Nether can any Iuditious
man conceive the contrary. Who therefore sinfully deny the truth of any point
of Christ's doctrine, sufficiently proposed for his, indirectly deny Christ's
veracitie.

2. Moreover of two points Chillingw. c. 3. p. 138. Gods revelation is an equal
motive to induce us to believe al objects revealed by him.
equally taught by Christ, and equally proposed to us, as from him, it is
impossible to believe for Christ's authority, the one, and not both: because
Christ's authority is equally in both, and where is equally the same motive of
belief, there must needs equally be the same belief, wherefore if we believe not
them both, we believe nether for Christ's authority, but for some other motive
humane. Again, not to believe Christ's authority sufficiently proposed, to be a
sufficient and just Motive to believe every thing taught by him, is to deny
his veracitie: But they who believe not every thing taught by him, and
sufficiently proposed to them as from him, do so. Tertul. l. de carne Christi,
vt quid dimidiatis mendatio Christum, totus veritas est.
Therefore they deny his veracitie. The Mayor is evident: the Minor I prove:
For not to believe every thing that Christ taught, and is sufficiently proved
to have been taught by Christ, is implicitly to deny his authority
sufficiently proposed, to be a sufficient and just motive to believe whatsoever
he taught. And surely to deny Christ's authority sufficiently proposed, to be
a just and sufficient motive to believe, is to deny his veracitie to be
sufficient for belief.

3. Hereupon rightly said S. Augustine to the Manichees: You who in Z. 17. cont.
Faust. c. 3.
Scriptures believe what you list, and what you list not, believe not Scriptures,
but yourselues. And so I say, who in points of Christ's doctrine, equally taught
by him; and equally proposed to them, believe what seems true to them, and what
seems not true to them, believe not, believe not Christ, but themselves. For if
they believed either for Christ's authority, they would equally believe both,
because his authority is equal to both. But because the motive of their belief,
is seeming truth, and seeming truth is to them more in one, then in the other,
they believe the one, and not the other. And to this purpos Chillingworth in
Answer to the Preface p. 23. said. He that does not believe all the undoubted
parts of the undoubted books of Scripture, can hardly believe any: nether have
we reason to believe he does. And he might have said so of al points of Christ's
doctrine sufficiently proposed, that who believes not them al, believes none, to
wit, with divine faith and for Christ's authority: because this is equal in all
such points, and therefore if it effectually work divine faith for one point, it
will work the same for all. Wherefore thus I argue. Where is equally the total
cause of divine belief, there is equally divine belief. In all points of Christ's
doctrine equally taught of him, and equally proposed to us, equally is the total
cause of divine belief. Therefore in them al is equally divine belief, The Mayor
is evident. The Minor is clear. For the total motive cause of divine belief,
is Christ's authority, and that is equally in all points of his doctrine, which
have been equally taught by him, and are equally proposed to us, whether they
be principal points, or secondarie.

4. Finally, what it opposite to faith, is Infidelity. Denial of any point of
faith sufficiently proposed is opposite to faith. Therefore it is infidelity The
Mayor is evident, and the Minor proved l. 2. c. 4. But infidelity denies
Christ's veracitie, either directly, as in those, who profes not to believe in
Christ: or indirectly, as in those, who believe not what he clearly taught, and
is sufficiently proposed to them for his doctrine. Besides, he that denies some
or all the fundamental points of Christ's doctrine sufficiently proposed to him,
denies Christ's veracitie, and has not saving faith. And why not he also, who
denies some or al Not fundamental points of his doctrine sufficiently proposed?
seeing Christ's authority as equally testifies these, as those. Why is not his
authority equally denied in all points, which he equally testifies? What does
the greatness of the matter, ad to the greatness of Christ's authority? or what
does the smallnes of the matter, diminish of his authority? seeing it is not
the greatness of the matter, for which we ought to believe it, but merely Christ's
authority.

5. This also is confirmed out of what we related, out of the holy Fathers,
that al, who deny any point of Christ's faith sufficiently proposed, are
heretics: and that al heretics, are no Christians, have no faith, but are
infidels. For surely, whosoever are no Christians, have no faith, and are
infidels, do in effect and (at the least) implicitly and indirectly deny
Christ's veracitie. And Protestants add here to (as we showed before c. 4.) that
Heretics are Apostates, AntiChrists, and Devils: and surely such) at least in
effect and indirectly) deny Christ's veracitie. Moreover S. Augustine (as we
rehearsed before) affirms, that Christ is in name only with any heretics.
And so heretics profes Christ in name only, and in effect deny his veracitie.

6. And this truth is so manifest, as Protestants sometimes confess it. For thus
Doctor Potter sec. 7. p. 74. It is true, whatsoever is revealed in Scripture,
What is sufficiently proposed is fundame^tal to faith.
or propounded by the Church out of Scripture, is in some sense fundamental, in
regard of the divine authority of God and his word, by which it is
recommended; And it is infidelity to deny it.
that is, such, as may not be denied or contradicted without infidelity. Lo,
that to deny whatsoever is revealed in Scripture, or propounded by the Church
out of Scripture, is fundamental to faith: so that faith cannot be without
belief of every such thing, because faith cannot be without all that, which is
fundamental to it: And also, that it is infidelity to deny any such thing,
and infidelity denies divine veracitie. Chillingworth also in Answer to the
Preface p. 11. For a man to deny or disbeleue any point of faith sufficiently
presented to his understanding, as a truth revealed by God, is to give God And
to give God the lie.
the lie. And to give God the lie, surely is to deny his veracitie. By which
is refuted what he says c. 3. p. 135 without any the lest dishonor to Gods
veracitie, I may doubt of, or deny some truth revealed by him, If I nether
know, nor believe it to be revealed by him. And p. 136. He only, in fact
affirms, that God does deceive or is deceived, who denies some things, which
himself knows or beleues to be revealed by God. which he oftentimes repeateth.
For if to deny or disbeleue any point of faith sufficiently presented to his
understanding as a truth revealed by God, be to give God the lie, he
dishonoreth Gods veracitie, and in effect affirms that he does deceive, or is
deceived, who denies or disbeleueth a point of faith sufficiently presented in
his understanding, as a truth revealed by God, though he nether know, nor
believe it to be revealed by God. For merely to deny or disbeleue a point of
faith sufficiently presented to his understanding, is (as he said truly) to
give God the lie, whether he know or believe it to be revealed by God, or no.
And otherwise affected ignorance, that God has revealed a point, which is
sufficiently presented or proposed to our understanding as revealed by God,
should be no dishonor to Gods veracitie, nor a giving the lie in effect to
him. And hence it is evident, that albeit only the principal points of Gods
revealed word be so in the covenant between him and men, as it is necessary
in all ordinary course to be actually believed of al, that can so believe: yet
Gods whole revealed word is so included in the same covenant, as it is also
necessary to be believed at least virtually, because who does nether actually
nor virtually believe his whole revealed word, does not believe him to be the
prime verity, or true in all his words: And surely they do nether actually nor
virtually believe al Gods revealed word, who will not believe some part of it,
when it is sufficiently proposed to them for Gods word.

7. And out of all that hitherto I have said, it appears (I hope)
sufficiently, that to teach, that some points of Christian says are not
necessary to saving faith, to a member of Christ's Church, and to salvation; to
be actually believed, when they are sufficiently proposed, and virtually and in
purpose of mind, whether they be proposed or no, is damnably to deceive
souls, is to excuse many damnable heresies from damnable sin, is to introduce
an indifference or libertinisme in Christian Religion, for believing or not
believing the most points of Christian faith, is to destroy the very substance
and unity of Christian faith, is to destroy the substance and unity of
Christ's Church, and to destroy Gods veracitie, to introduce infidelity, the
giving of the lie to God, and atheism. Now will I also show, that to
communicate in Sacraments and publik Liturgy, with any such as sinfully err
in any point of Christian faith, is damnable, and that to defend such
communion to, be lawful, is damnably to deceive souls.

THAT COMMUNION in Sacraments with any heretical Church, or Church erring
sinfully in any point of faith sufficiently proposed, is damnable. NINTH
CHAPTER.
1. ONE great motive for Protestants to teach, that there are some Not
fundamental points of faith in their sense, that is, not at al necessary to a
true Church, is to maintain their communion in Sacraments and Liturgy with
Churches and sinfully erring in some points of faith sufficiently proposed, or
for their fault, not so proposed to them. For though perhaps every Protestant
will not confess himself to err in any point of faith, yet they confess (as we
have seen before lib. 1. c. 2. nu. 10.) that every one of their Churches,
erreth in some points of faith. And if they say, those errors have not been
sufficiently showed to their Churches, they condemn themselves of great
negligence of their duty, of want of sufficient zeal of Gods honor, and of
his truth, and of want of charity to their Churches. At least their Churches
might be rightly informed, if they would, and therefore do err sinfully and
vincibly. To these therefore I will prove, that their communion with a Church
sinfully erring in points of faith, is damnable.

2. And first, I prove it out of Scripture. S. Paul Tit. 3. v. 10. An heretik,
after the first and second admonition, Heretics to be avoided.
avoid. 2. Thessal 3. v. 6. we denounce unto ye, brethren, in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw Who walk not according to tradition.
yourselues from every brother walking inordinatly, and not according to the
tradition which they have received from us. Romans 16. v. 17. I desire ye
brethren, to Who make dissentio^s in doctrine.
mark them, that make dissentions and scandals contrary to the doctrine, which
ye have learned, and avoid them. Saint John Epist. 2. v. 10. If any man come
to ye, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into the house, nor say,
God save you, unto him. For he that says, God save you, communicateh with his
wicked works. And Christ himself Joan. 10. v. 5. says, That his sheep follow
not a Stranger, but fly from him: And v. 8. Christ's sheep fly from strangers.
that the sheep hear not thieves and robbers. And Math. 7. v. 15. Take great
heed of falls Prophets. And whom we are to fly, to avoid, and not to salute, we
are not to communicate withal. And Numbers 16. v. 24. God said to Moises.
Command all the people to depart from the Tabernacles of Core, Dathan, and
Schismatiks to be forsaken.
Abiron. v. 26. And Moises said to the people, depart from the Tabernacles of
wicked men, and touch not the things which belong to them, least ye be iuuolued
in their sins, Thus God forbad communion with Schismatiks, and the same reason
is of heretics. For these divide the profession of the Church of God, as those
divide her communion.

3. The Fathers also teach the same. For thus Saint Ireneus lib. 3. c. 4. All the rest (besides the Church) are thieves and robbers, for which we ought to
avoid them. And c. 3. after he had told how Saint John ran out of the room,
where an heretik was, and Saint Policarp would not salute an heretik, he
adds. So great fear had S. John and his disciples, would not speak with
heretics.
the Apostles and their disciples, not to communicate, so much as in word, with
any of them, who had corrupted the truth. Tertull. l. praescrip. c. 12. we are
forbiden to go to heretics. And c. 7. what have heretics and Christians to do
together? And c. 41. Noted it as a property of heretics, that they
communicate with all. S. Cyprian Epist. 40. Go far from the contagion of these
kind of men, and by flying, avoid their speeches, as a canker and plague. And
epist. 55. Let there be no commerce with such, and let us be as much separated
from them, as they are from the Church. S. Hilarie l. de Synodis. Ye illoue
walls, ye il reverence the Church in howses and buildings, ye il inculcate the
name of peace under these. Mountains, and forests, and lakes, and prisons, and
gulfes, are safer for me. And lib. contra Auxentium. The name of peace is
specious, and the opinion of unity is fair, but who doubts, but the Unity
in Church and Gospel only, is unity in Christ.
only unity of the Church and Gospel, is that peace, which is Christ's. Saint
Augustine lib. 7. de Baptismo c. 45. John said, that to men of strange doctrine,
we L de unit. c. 4. Quicunque de ipso capite scripturis consentiuns and vnitati
Ecclesiae non co^municant non sunt in Ecclesiae.
should not say: God save ye. And lib. 2. contra Crescon c. 2. Ye are
heretics, and therefore most warily to be avoided. And lib. de vera Religione c.
5. condemns Philosophers, because teaching different things of God, yet they
frequented the same Sacrifices: and adds. So it is believed and taught, that
it is the Principal point of salvation, not to communicate with heretics.
principal point of man's salvation, that there is no other Philosophy, that
is, study of wisdom, when they, whose doctrine we approve not, communicate not
in Sacraments with us. S. Hierom. in 2. Thessal. 3. plainly by the authority
of this place, we must withdraw ourselves from every Christian, who walks
not according to the precepts of the Apostle, S. Cyrillus Catech. 18. And in
one Catholic Church: that thou may fly the filthy Conuenticles of them
(heretics) and persevere in the Church. And the Catholics being beaten of
Arians, cried (as Catholics communicate not with heretics.
reports saint Athanase Epist. ad Solitarios) Beat, as ye please, we
communicate not with heretics.

4. Reason also shows, that we may not communicate with heretics or any
false Church. Because communion in Sacraments and Liturgy with Comunion with a
Church, is real approbation of her.
a Church, is a real profession, that she is true: And to profes, that a false
Church is a true Church of God, is damnable. For it is to profes, that a false
Church is a Spouse, and Mistical Body of Christ, has the keys of heaven, and
that in a false Church, there may be salvation. Nay, it is by consequence, a
denial of the true Church. For there being but one true Church, if the false
Church be true, the true Church is false. Besides it is a real forsaking of the
true Church, who ever thrust them out of her communion, who communicated with
heretics. And as one cannot serve two opposite masters, be of two opposite common
wealths, so can he not be of tow opposite Churches. Moreover communion in
Sacraments is an essential part of the Church, as profession of faith, is, Who
therefore join with heretics in communion of Sacraments, join with them in an
essential part of their Church. Charity we must have with all, but communion,
with Catholics only.

5. Protestants also confess the Protestants command separation from falls
Churches.
same. For thus the French Confession art, 18. we think, all that communicate
with Papists, to separate themselves from the body of Christ. The Scotts
Confession art. 16. It is necessary, that the true Church be discerned from
filthy Synagogs, by clear and perfect Notes, least being deceived to our
damnation, we take the false for the true. The Holanders Confession art. 28. It
is the duty of al faithful, according to the word of God, to separate
themselves from al them, that are out of the Church. Whitaker in Praefat.
controu. If we be heretics, it is reason, that they warn al theirs, to fly
us. And controu. 2. q. 5. c. 1. we must fly and forsake the Churches of
Antichrist, and of heretics. Spalatensis l. 7. de Repub. c. 10. n. 82, There
is no doubt but that heretics are to be avoided and separated. Luther also and
Melancthon (as before we related) wondered, why the Sacramentaries would
account them brethren, and yet deny their doctrine. Chillingworth c. 5. p. 276.
Your corruptions in doctrine in themselves may induce an obligation to forsake
your communion. Morton in his imposture p. 372. obstinacy of error in
teachers, affected ignorance and obduration of people, etc. may be judged
necessary causes of separation from any particular Churches. And Lord
Canterbury sec. 35. p. 296. He that beleues, as that (Rom.) Church beleues, is
guilty of the Schism, which that Church has caused by her corruptions, and
of al her damnable opinions to. And yet often times he says, that the Romans
Church has not erred fundamentally, is a true Church in essence, and her
Religion the same with that of Protestants. And Calvin has diverse treatises in
his Opuscules See him also in Joan. 10. v. 1.
for to prove, that it is not lawful to communicate with a false Church. And al
are false Churches, which voluntarily err against any point of Christian faith
sufficiently proposed, C. 6.
as before is proved.

6. Hence appears, that untruly said Chillingworth c. 5. p. 281. Nether Any
church voluntarily erring is to be forsaken.
for sin, nor for errors, ought a Church to be forsaken, if she do not impose
and inioine them. Which he has also p. 209. 307. and Lord Canterbury sec. 26.
p. 196. and Potter sec. 2. p. 39 if See c. 2. n. 1. l. 1 and Calvin
contversipel. p. 357.
they mean (as doubtless they do) of sinful errors, or of errors in matters of
faith sufficiently proposed. For every such Church, is a false Church, and
beside the authorities of Scripture, Fathers, and confessions of Protestants
before rehearsed, the very remaining in her, is a real profession, that she
is a true Church, and that salvation may be had in her. Which to profes of a
false Church, is damnable. And hence also appears, that it is C. 2. nu. 10.
l. 1.
damnable for any Protestant, to communicate with any Protestant Church,
because they confess, that al their Churches err in some points of faith: And
they must also confess, that they sinfully err in points sufficiently proposed
to them, or else condemn themselves, (especially if they be Ministers of the
word) of damnable negligence of their duty, toward God, and their Churches,
in not showing sufficiently to their Churches their errors. At least their
Churches might be sufficiently informed of their errors, if they would: which
is al one, as if they were sufficiently informed. None can to live in a Church,
and not communicate with her.
As themselves confessed c. 3. n. 6.

7. Hence also is refuted, what Lord Canterbury says sec. 35. p. 296. It is
one thing to live in a Schismatical Church, and not communicate with it in the
Schism, or in any false worship, that attends it. For so Elias lived among
the ten Tribes, and was not Schismatical. For to live in a Schismatical Church,
To live among Schismatical people, is not live in a Schismatical Church.
is to live in a Schismatical communion. And Elias lived not in a Schismatical
communion, but only lived among men, that were Schismatical. And this error
proceeds of not distinguishing, between men, and a Church. One may live in
company of men, who are Schismatiks: but not in a Schismatical Church: for
that is to live in a Schismatical society, or communion.

8. And thus have we sufficiently proved, that there be no fundamental, or not
fundamental points of faith in the Protestants sense, that is, none sufficient
alone to saving faith, to constitute a Church, or to salvation, nor none not
necessary, either actually, or virtually to the constitution of a Church, to
saving faith and salvation. But that this distinction in this sense brings in
formal heresy, destroieth true faith, true Church and salvation, and is the
very ground of Atheism, denying Gods veracitie, and giving C. 3. n. 5. 6.
him the lie, even according to the confession of some Protestants. Now we will
show, that this their distinction in their sense, has no ground in Scripture,
Fathers, Reason, or doctrine of Catholics, as they pretend it has.

That the distinction of fundamental and not fundamental points in the
Protestants sense, has no ground in Scripture, Fathers, reason, or doctrine of
Catholics. TENTH CHAPTER.
1. DOctor Potter sec. 7. p. 70. says: The distinction between doctrins
fundamental and not fundamental, has ground in reason, and Scripture. True:
but not in his sense: His reason is, because as in humane sciences, there be
principles, and conclusions drawn out of them: So in Religion, there be
degrees of truth. For some, of it self, is the object of faith, some, but by
accident or secundarily. And it is the common doctrine of Schoolmen and
Casuists, that there is a certain measure and quantity of faith, without
which none can be saved: but every thing revealed, belongs not to this
measure. It is enough to believe, some things by a virtual faith, or by a
general and as it were, a negative faith, whereby they are not denied or
contradicted. This reason indeed proves that this distinction in some sense is
good, that some points of faith are more principal, then others: some more
necessary to be proposed to al, then others, and simply more necessary to be
actually believed of al, then others: about al which there is no controversy.
But it does not prove, that there are any points of faith sufficient to saving
faith, Church, and salvation, though others be proposed and not believed: or
any Not necessary to be actually believed of al, if they be sufficiently
proposed to al: or not virtually to be believed of al, whether they be
sufficiently proposed or no: which is all the question: Nay it insinuates
clearly, that al points of faith are to be Who hau no virtua or general faith.
believed virtually, and not to be denied or contradicted, and surely they do
not believe them virtually who deny them, when they are sufficiently proposed,
or are in fault, that they are not sufficiently proposed to them, Let him show
therefore, how Papists or Lutherans, (whom he accounts Note this.
true Churches) have a virtual, general, or negative faith of the
Sacramentaries truths, and do not deny or contradict them; or else this his
distinction of fundamental and not fundamental points, will so little help him
to defend the said Churches to be true Churches, as it will rather condemn
them, and him also, for defending them: or let him show, how any, who deny or
contradict some points of faith sufficiently proposed to them, (as Papists and
Lutherans deny and contradict the points of Caluinists faith, so sufficiently
proposed to them, as Caluinists can propose them) have such a virtual, general,
or negative faith, whereby they do not deny, or contradict those points: or let
him confess, that whosouer deny or contradict any point of faith sufficiently
proposed, have not so much faith, as is sufficient to salvation.

His ground out of Scripture, is because, says he, sec. 7. p. 76. The
dogmatical ground of the Church, are those grand and capital doctrines, which
make up our faith in Christ, that is, that common faith Tit. 1. 4. which is
alike precious in all 2. Petri 1. which the Apostlc. Hebr. 5. 12. calls the first
principles of the Oracle of God: And 2. Tim. 1. 13. form of sound words (These
are his fundamentals) the materials, laid upon this foundation, whether they
be sound or unsound, are named by Saint Paul 1. Cor. 3. 12. superstructions,
which are conclusions, either in truth, or appearance. And these, (if they be
sound) are his not fundamental points. I answer. First, that the grand and
capital doctrins may well be the ground of the Church, and yet The foundation
makes not up the building.
not make up the common faith of Christians. For more is required to a
building, then the ground or foundation. Secondly, they may make up all the
common faith of Christians, which is absolutely necessary to be believed
actually of al, and yet not make up all the faith, which absolutely is necessary
so be believed virtually and implicitly of al, and co^ditionally also actually
of al, if it be sufficiently proposed unto them. So that these places prove not
his fundamentals, which are so sufficient to saving faith, Church and
salvation, as others need not so much as to be virtually or implicitly believed,
for to have saving faith, Church and salvation. And for his Not fundamentals, I
say, that the place 1. Cor. 3. affords no solid ground to prove them. First,
because the place is very obscure and hard to be understood, Superstructions,
are not Protestants not fundamentals. S. Aug. epist. 48. Quis no^
impude^tissime nititur aliquid in allegoria positum pro se interpretari, nisi
habeat manifesta testimonia quorum lumine illustrentur obscura.
as Saint Augustine witnesses l. de fide and operibus c. 15. and 16. quest. 1.
ad Dulcitium, and Enarrat. in Psalm. 80. And Morton tom. 2. Apolog. l. 5. cap.
44. says: It is metaphorical, and entangled with many difficulties. And the
place itself does evidently shewit. And an obscure and difficult place can give
no sufficient ground of so maine a point, as this is: That there be some points
of faith, which are not necessary to salvation to be believed virtually or
implicitly, or also actually, if they be sufficienily proposed. Will D. Potter
venture his own, or other men's salvation, in so great a matter, upon an
obscure or difficult text? We with Saint Augustine lib. de vnitate demand,
aliquid No expres text, nor necessary consequence for Protestants not
fundamentals.
manifestum, quod interpret non eget. And you give us a place for Not
fundamentals in your sense, which no interpretation can make clear.

3. Moreover, how can you think it certain, that Saint Paul here by
superstructions, means any doctrine at al, seeing Saint Augustine de fide c.
16. Enchir. c. 68. and Enarrat. in Psalm. 38. 80. and S. Gregory l. 4. Dialog.
c. 39. expound it only of works, nor you convince the contrary? Finally,
admit, that by superstructions S. Paul means doctrins, how is it certain,
that he means doctrins of faith? and not rather humane doctrins invented by
men? because he calls them our work, and points of faith are not our work.
Admit also, that by superstructures, he means some points of faith, how
proves D. P. that S. Paul means, they are not necessary to saving faith,
Church, or salvation, when they are sufficiently proposed, seeing he nether
speaks of sufficient proposal, nor says, that such superstructures are not
necessary, not yet calls them superstructures in respect of faith, or
Church, but in respect of the foundation, as walls and roof may be called
superstructures in respect of the foundation, and yet are necessary parts of
the house. And so secondarie points of faith may be called superstructures in
respect of the principal points, on which they rely as upon their foundation,
and yet be necessary parts of the spiritual building of faith and Church.

4. So that this superstruction of Protestants not fundamentals want foundation.
D. Potter wants sufficient foundation for his not foundamentals in his
sense, and is a not fundamental foundation for diverse causes. First, because the
place is obscure, and so unfit to found any infallible certainty, especially
of this so weighty a point. Secondly, because it is not certain, that the
Apostle by superstructions, means doctrines, and not only works. Thirdly,
because though he called some doctrins, superstructions, it is not certain,
that he meant doctrins of faith; or if he meant doctrins of faith, that he
called them superstructions in respect of saving faith, Church or salvation,
and not in respect only of other points of faith, on which they are built. And
we deny not, but in respect of themselves, some points of faith may be termed
fundamental, other not fundamental. Fourthly, because though we grant, that
Saint Paul called some points of faith, superstructions in respect of the
Church, or of salvation, how proves D. Potter, that he meant so, even when
they are sufficiently proposed? we deny not, but some points may be termed
superstructio^s in respect of saving faith, Church or salvation, because they
are not so absolutely necessary to saving faith, Church, or salvation, to be
actually believed, as some other points are. But this will not prove, that they
are not necessary to saving faith Church, and salvation, to be actually
believed, if they be sufficiently proposed, and necessary virtually to be
believed, howfoeuer. 5. Admit, that he called them superstructions, even when
Superstructions may be essential.
they are sufficiently proposed, how proves Do. Porter, that he meant, they
were not then essential to saving faith, Church, or salvation? Is nothing, that
is laid upon the foundation, essential or necessary to the building? And in
this is the controversy, whether, any articles, which may be termed
superstructions, be essential to saving faith, Church, or salvation, or no? we
see the walls and roof are superstructions to the foundation, and yet essential
to the house. So on every hand falls down Doctor Potters ground out of
Scripture, for not fundamental points in the Protestants sense; which is, that
to have saving faith, Church, and salvation, See 6. 2.
they need not be believed actually, though they be proposed sufficiently, not
at al, virtually. For if he only would, that some points of faith How some
points of faith may be called not fundamental.
are so not fundame^tal to saving faith, Church, or salvation, as they need not
be actually believed, unless they be sufficiently proposed, and are not absolutely
necessary, as some others are, there would be no question. But this kind of
not fundamentals, will not help him, to justify his Churches, erring sinfully
in some points of faith sufficiently proposed, or his communion with such
Churches.

5. Other Protestants would prove, that Perkins and others cited c. 7. n. 1.
true Churches may err insome points of faith sufficiently proposed, because
the Galathia^s were turned to an other Ghospel, and the Corinthians denied the
Resurrection: and nevertheless Saint Paul calls them Churches of God. But this
argument, if it were good, would prove more then Protestants commonly do teach.
For it would prove that true Churches may err even in fundamental points,
which Protestants commonly deny. For doubtless, such were the aforesaied
errors. Secondly, it is evident out of Saint Paul himself. 1. Cor. 15. verse.
12. That only some of the Corinthia^s denied the Resurrection. For his words
are. Some among ye say, there is no Resurrection of the dead. And the same,
Protestants confess of the Galathians. For thus Sadeel Resp. ad Arthurum c. 5,
There was a Church among the Galathians, which is denominated of the better
part Whitaker controuer. 2. q. 5. c. 18. Some of the Galathians fell from pure
faith, not al. And. c. 19. The Galathians, that failed, were no Church. Morton
l. 2. Apologi c. 39. Not all the Corinthians or Galathians, but very few were
drowned in those errors. And as Saint Augustine says l. de Anima c. 17. and else
where often: The holy Scripture uses signify by a part, the whole, and by
the whole, a part.

6. Doctor Potter sec. 7. cit. p. 79. Catholics calling the Creed the
foundation, is not for D. Potters purpos.
89. and seqq. cites diverse Fathers and Catholics calling the Creed the
foundation. But this makes not to his purpose, which is, that the Creed alone
is essential to a true Church, and so sufficient to salvation, as nothing See
c. 5. n. 2. l. 2.
else need be virtually or implicitly believed, or also actually and explicitly,
if it be sufficiently proposed: and in this sense, no Catholic calls How the
Creed may be called the foundation.
the Creed the foundation. In other senses, the Creed may well be called the
foundation, either because it contains all the most principal and most capital
articles: or because al other points of faith depend on it: or because it must be
actually believed of al, nether suffices it that it be only virtually believed:
Nether will it follow, that the Creed alone is essential or sufficient to a
Church, because it alone is the foundation thereof, better then it will follow,
that the foundation alone is essential or sufficient to a house, because What
is alone the foundation, is not alone essential or necessary.
it alone is the foundation. At most will follow, that it is the chief essential
part of the Church, on which the rest essential parts depend, because it alone
is the foundation: which we willingly grant. And upon such weak foundations as
these: depend D. Potters proofs, that the Creed alone is essential to the
Church. And that who beleveth the Creed, has saving faith, is in the true
Church, and in true way of salvation, though he believe not, or disbeleue other
points of faith sufficiently proposed. Hence it L. Cant. p. 29. Deductions are
necessary to some, but not fundamental.
appears also, why (as I said before) they rather say some articles alone,
are fundamental or the foundation, then that some alone, are necessary; because
some articles are in some sense the only foundation of the Church and of
salvation, but in no Some articles be the foundation, but not alone necessary.
sense are only necessary. For all poins of faith are two ways necessary.
First, absolutely necessary, to be virtually and implicitly believed. Secondly,
conditionally, to be believed also actually, if they be sufficiently proposed.
Thus we have seen, that Doctor Potter has not so much as any probable
ground, much les certain and infallible (as he ought to have for so weighty a
matter) for the distinction of fundamental and not fundamental points in his
sense, either in Scripture, Fathers, reason, or Catholics doctrine. Now let us
show that though we granted him his distinction in his sense, yet it would not,
suffice to maintain the Protestants Churches, for mainteining whereof, it was
devised, as Rouse confessed, sup. c. 1. and is most certain.

THAT THOUGH THE Protestants distinction of fundamental and not fundamental
articles were admitted in their sense, it would not suffice to their purpose.
ELEVENTH CHAPTER.
1. THat though the Protestants distinction of fundamental and not fundamental
articles were admitted even in their own sense, yet it would not suffice to
their purpose, is evident. For the chief end, for which they devised this
distinction is their sense, was thereby to defend, that Protestant Churches,
though they be sinfully divided in matters of faith, yet be true Churches, and
have saving faith, and means of salvation, because (forsooth) they differ but
in not fundamental points, and such points are no way essential, nor
necessary to a true Church, nor to saving faith, or salvation. For Lutheran
Protestants are divided from Caluinists, not only in not fundamental, or not
principal points of faith, but also in fundamental and principal points: nor
only in points of faith, but also in communion of Liturgy and publik service:
both which divisions destroy a true Church.

2. That division in fundamental points destroieth a Church, is the common
doctrine of Protestants, as is before showed lib. 1. c. 7. nu. 5. 6. 7. Nether
can they deny it, because by fundamental, they profes to understand essential:
And evident it is, that division in essential parts destroieth the whole,
because the whole is nothing but al its essential parts joined together. And
that Lutherans are divided from Caluinists in fundamental points, both
Lutherans and Caluinists profes.

3. For thus Luther disput. contra Louanienses Tom. 2. fol. 203. In earnest, we
judge to be heretics, and out of the Church of God, Zuinglians, and al
Sacramentaries, who deny the body Luther condemns the Sacramentaries.
and Blood of Christ to be received with carnal mouth in the venerable
Eucharist. And this sentence he pronounced against the Sacramentaries anno
1545. as Hospinian 2. part histor. writes in that year; and died the next
year, 18. Feb. as he testifies anno 1546. And in anno 1544. he relates these
words of Luther. I, who am now near Luthers glory before God, to condemn
Sacramentaries.
my deatb, will carry with me this testimony and this glory to the Tribunal
of Jesus Christ, that with all my heart I have damned and avoided the Swarmers,
enemies of the Sacraments, Carolstadius, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and their
disciples, and we still damn them in Sermons. And their lying and blasphemous
heresy. And tom. 7. in defen. verb. Cenae fol. 381. he thus speaks: I will
call God and the whole world to witness, that I do not think with Sacramentaries,
nor ever did think, nor for ever, (God willing) will think. And fol. 382. Cursed
for ever be that charity and concord (with He curses agreement with them.
Sacramentaries.) The one party must needs be set on by the devil, we will
avoid them to the last breath, we will reprove and damn them, for Idolaters,
corrupters of Gods word, blasphemers, and deceauors. And there calls them
masked Devils, who bring in the devil in steed of God. And that, he should
recall this judgment of the Sacramentaries before his death, is feigned by some
without al sufficient proof.

3. And this his sentence, our English Protestants should fear, because in the
Apology of their Church, they profes to hold him for a most excellent man, and
sent from God to lighten the world. And Calvin l. 1. de libero arbit. calls
him, a Notable Apostle of Christ: and says, that God thundered by his mouth.
D. Potter sec. 3. p. 83. we esteem of Luther as a worthy man. So Field l. 2.
de Eccles. c. vlt. l. 3. c. 42. And did this worthy man, who thus severely
condemned the Sacramentaries doctrine, differ rather in forms or phrases of
speech, then in substance of doctrine, as D. Potter affirms sec. 3. p. 89. or
only in disputable opinions, as he says sec. 6. p. 54.

4. Nether did Luther only, but even the publik confessions of Lutherans
condemn the Sacramentaries doctrine. For thus the Confession of Auspurg in
Hospin l. cit. anno 1530, Of the Lords Supper, thus we teach: That Confession
of Auspurg damneth Sacramentaries.
the true Body and Blood of Christ, is truly under the form of bread and wine
present in the Supper, and there distributed and received. wherefore the
contrary doctrine, is rejected. Confession of Bohemia art. 11. Certain
phanatical Spirits, not abiding in the words of Christ, deny the bread and
chalice of the Supper, to be the Body and Blood of Christ. And in like manner
do the Lutherans in their Confession of Swed, (which was put forth 1563.) of
Mansfeld, and of Antwerp, condemn the Sacramentaries.

5. And the Sacramentaries do the same to Lutherans. For thus the
Sacramentaries condemn Lutherans.
Czengerin Confession, placed in the Syntagme of Protestant Confessions p. 194.
As we damn the Papistical dotage of Transubstantiation: so we also damn their
madness, who maintain fleasheating, that is, that Christ's natural and bloody
body is received with carnal mouth, without any mutation or
transubstantiation. And they add: This is contrary to the rule of faith, and
nature. The Confession of Swisers art. 21. The flesh of Christ cannot be
corporally eaten, Of wickedness.
without wickedness and cruelty. The Palatines Confession: Christ cannot now,
without manifest and horrible Idolatry, be saught in the bread of the Supper.
Of horrible idolatry.
Item, we see a horrible distraction raised in the Church, because some will eat
and drink the body and Blood of Christ, naturally, essentially, with their
corporal mouths, and who refuse to believe and profes this, are proclaimed
sacrilegious and blasphemous Sacramentaries.

6. Thus Protestants in their publik Confessions of faith, condemn one the
other. And that the chiefest See P. Martyr in epis. ad Eccles. Aug. Perkins in
Symb. col. 781, 793. Calvin 4. instit. c. 4.. 19.
Masters of the Caluinists condemn the Lutherans of error in fundamental
matters, I have showed l. 1. c. 6. nu. 8. and more may be seen l. 1. of the
Author of Protestancie c. 3. nu. 5. Here I will relate the Confession of the
Tigurins, in their preface to the Orthodox consent, set forth 1585. Of Tigurins
confess dissentions of Protestants.
the great and manifold contentions between Protestants. For thus they Nether
of the Lords Supper only, but also of Christ's person, of the union of the
divine and humane nature, of the vbiquitie of his body, of the corporal (and
which is made with mouth and teeth, and common to good and bad) eating of his
body, of his ascension into heaven, and sitting at the right hand of his
Father, is contended with such earnest dispute, that not few of the old
heresies, which were long since condemned and extinguished, begin again to
life up their heads, as recalled out of hell. And did not these men know, what
division there is among Lutherans and Caluinists, as well as D. Potter sect. 3.
page 89. Do These differ rather in forms or phrases Potter sec. 4. p. 119. The
errors of vbiquitie consubstantiation and the like, are gross and palpable.
of speech then in substance of doctrine? or as others say, they differ not in
fundamental points? Are not the person of Christ, his hypostatical union, his
ascension to heaven, and sitting at the right hand of his father, fundamental
points! Are they not in the Creed, which commonly is said to be the foundation
of Christianity? C 6. n. 2. l. 1.
or did not the Tigurins know, wherein Protestants dissent, as well as he? will
Protestants not only make fundamental or not fundamental what they Aug. de
vnico Baptis. c. 14.
please, as Donatists made crimes, but also when, or in whom they list? Thus we
see, that the distinction of fundamental and not fundamental points, will not
maintain the Protestants Churches. For they condemn one the other of
fundamental errors. Now let us see, that it will not serve them, for want of
Communion in Sacraments, and in publik service of God.

That the Protestants distinction of fundamental and not fundamental Articles,
vvil not suffice to maintain such Churches, as they would, for want of
communion. TWELFT CHAPTER.
1. ALbeit we should grant to Protestants, both, that some No certain articles
are sufficient without others.
articles are so sufficient to constitute a Church, as no other articles were
necessary thereunto, and also, that their Churches do hold al those articles,
which are so sufficient; (nether of which we shall ever grant) yet nevertheless,
would it not follow, that Nor none at al without communion.
their Churches are true Churches. For nether any certain articles, nor al
articles together, are sufficient to constitute a true Church of Christ,
without communion in Sacraments, Liturgy, and publik worship of God. Which
communion, because Protestants Churches want, both with themselves (as is
evident in Lutherans and Caluinists) and also with all other Roman, Grecian, etc.
such Churches, as they account true Churches: Therefore when they will prove,
either their own, or any other Church, to he a true Church, they make no
mention at al of communion, but only of fundamental articles: and infer, their
own, or other Churches, (whom they please) to be true Churches, only because
they hold the fundamental articles: wherein they commit a Triple fallacy. For
nether are Triple fallacy of Protestants.
any principal articles alone, sufficient to the constitution of a Church:
nether do Protestants hold al principal articles: nether though they held al
articles whatsoever, would that suffice to constitute a true Church, without
communion in Sacraments and publik worship of God. Which we prove to be
essential to a true Church, out of the definitions of a true Church, given by
Scripture, Fathers, and Protestants themselves, and confirm it by reason.

2. The Scripture Acts 2. verse. 42. describing the true Church, or true
Scripture puts co^m union in the definition of the Church.
disciples of Christ, says: They were perseuering in the doctrine of the
Apostles, and communication of breaking bread, and prayer. Where communication
in Sacraments and prayer, is put as essential a part of the true Church, as
perseverance in the doctrine of the Apostles is. And Calvin upon this place
expounds it of communication of the Supper, and publik prayers: And says:
we must be such, if we will be truly accounted the Church before God. And 1.
Cor. 1. when there was a Schism among the Corinthia^s, and one said he was of
Paul, an other of Apollo, an other of Cephas, The Apostle reproving them, faied
v. 13. Is Christ divided? As if it should follow, that Christ were divided, if
his mystical Body the Church, were divided. Besides, all the places of
Scripture, C. 7 nu. 2. l 2.
which before we brought to prove, that the Church of Christ is absolutely one,
prove, that she cannot be divided in communion of Sacraments. For such a
divided Church, is not absolutely one, but in part, or in some sort only. The
same also is evident out of our Creed: where we profes to believe the Catholic
Church, the communion of Saints. Where communion of Saints, is either an
explication of Cath. Church, as Calvin 4. c. 1. parag. 3. Confessio Scotica
art. 16. Catech. Gal. Domi. 15 Plessie de Eccles. c. 1. Kemnit. loc. de Eccles
c. 1. See Potter sec. 7. p. 88.
Protestants commonly teach, or a thing necessarily required to it. For it
makes no distinct article.

3. The Fathers also (as Moulins confessed c. 6. n. 3. l. 2
before) by the Church, understand the whole society of Christian Fathers put
such communion, as is opposite to Scismatiks.
Churches, orthodox and sound in faith, united together in communion, and
oppose it to heretics and Schismatiks. So that they make union in communion,
(which excludes Schismatiks, who are divided in communion) as essential a part
of the Church, of which they mean, as orthodoxie or soundnes in faith, which
excludes heretics. And S. Aug. Ep. 50 Donatistae de sola co^munione litigant.
See him 4. co^t. Crescon. c. 66.
it is manifest by all Fathers, that they exclude, as well Schismatiks, out of
the Church, who yet want nothing but communion in Sacraments: as heretics, who
want soundnes in faith. And their testimonies may be seen l. 2. of the Author
of Protestancie c. 15. And namely Saint Augustine l. 19. contra Faustum c. 11.
says: Men cannot s. August. puts communion in Sacraments, of the essence of
Religion.
be joined into any name of Religion, true or false, unless they be linked with
some sign or fellowship of visible Sacraments. So that there can be nether
true nor false Religion, without communion in Sacraments. And epist 118.
says. God has joined the society of his new people by Sacraments.

4. Reason also conuinceth, that Reason also.
communion in Sacraments and publik worship of God, is essential to the true
Church of Christ. For his Church, is Confessio Anglicaart. 19. Scotica c. 18.
Saxonica c. 12. VVittenbergica c. de Eccles.
a Society in profession of his faith and use of his Sacraments, as al men
conceive and define. And it implies contradiction, that there should be a
Society, without communion in matters essentially belonging to the society:
as Sacraments belong to Christ's Church. For if there be no communion in use of
Sacraments, there is no society in use of Sacraments: And if no Society in
use of Sacraments, no Church. For a Church is essentially a society in
profession of faith and use of Sacraments. And Protestants, who profes to give
none but essential Notes of the Church, give right use of See c. 6. n. 5. l. 2.
the Sacraments for a note of her. Wherefore what Churches are divided in use of
Sacraments, are divided in an essential part, and consequently essentially.
Moreover, without communion 2.
in Sacraments and publik Without communion the Church differs not from
schismatiks.
worship of God, the Church should not differ essentially from a Schismatical
Church. And it implies contradiction, that the true Church should not differ
essentially from a false Church. For else a false Church should substantially be
a true Church. Furthermore, 3.
use of Sacraments and publik worship of God, was the external end for which
the Church was instituted, and use of the Baptism and of the Eucharist are
commanded by Christ, Joan. 3. Luc 22. How then can the true Church be divided
in her principal external end? Besides, the 4.
true Church, is the mystical Body of Christ, and therefore, as all the members
of a natural body communicate one with an other, so must the members of the
true Church. Nether did 5.
Christ institute a Church divided in communion. Therefore a Church so divided,
is no Church of Christ's institution. Finally, all the arguments, 6.
wherewith before we proved, the true C. 7. l. 2.
Church to be simply and absolutely one, prove that she cannot be divided in
communion of Sacraments, and publik worship of God. For a Church so divided, in
not simply one.

5. The same also is manifest by Confessions of Protestants. For Confessio
Protestants confess that the Church is a society in Sacraments.
Argentinensis c. 12. says: God would have his to have external society
together, for which cause he gave them Sacraments. Confessio Heluetica c. 21.
we are admonished by the Celebration of the Lords Supper, that we remember of
what body we be members, and therefore agree with all brethren. Mulhusina art.
5. The Lords Supper is used in the Church, to testify faith and fraternal
charity. Consensus Poloniae: The Lord would have his Supper to be the Sinew of
publik Congregation. Saxonica c. 15. God would have this receiving of the
Eucharist, to be the band of publik congregation, and the band of mutual
charity among the members So Potter sec. 7. p. 98.
of the Church. Calvin 4. instit. c. 1. Calvin in Joan. 9. Pessimu^ in
Ecclesia, and maxim noxium malu^, est schisma.
. 7. The Church, by participation of the Supper, does testify unity in true
doctrine and charity. See him also ibid.. 8. Whitaker also controuer. 2. q. 5.
c. 20. Approves the definition of the Church, given by Bellarm. thus far.
Protestants put communion in Sacraments, in definition of the Church.
The Church is a company of men, joint together in profession of the same
faith, and communion of Sacraments, under lawful Pastors. Where conjunction in
Communion of Sacraments, is put, as an essential part of the Church. And
Where is not lawful use of Sacraments the Church is not.
ibid. c. 17. Sincere preaching of the word, and lawful use of the Sacraments,
make the Church. So as, where they are not, the Church is not. Moulins lib. 1.
contra Pero^ c. 26. That is the true Church, which is joined together by
profession of true faith, and communion of Sacraments. And cap. 25. The
question (which is the true Church) is, touching the entire body The question
about the Church, is about the entire body Orthodox, and joint in communion.
of the Orthodox Church, joint in Communion: we ask, by what external Notes, we
may discern this Church. Spalatensis lib. 7. de Repub. cap. 12. number. 132. To
the true Church, twoe things only are required, to wit, entire faith in Christ,
and communion with all faithful that profes this faith. Confession of Auspurg
art. 7. To the true unity of the Church, it is enough, to consent in the
doctrine of the Ghospel, and ministration of Sacraments. Sadeel cont. Tur. loc.
30. True use of Use of Sacraments is essential.
Sacraments, is essential to the Church. Calvin 4. iustit. c. 1.. 2. Unless
under Christ our Head, we be united to all the other members, we can have no
hope of heaven. There cannot be twoe or three Churches, but Christ must be
divided. And. 10. Ib. departure from the Church is denial of God and Christ.
God so much esteems the communion of his Church, as he accounts him a
Renegate and Forsaker of his Religion, who obstinatly separateth himself from
any Christian society, which has the true ministry of the word and
Sacraments. See him also in Ioa 9. Plessie de Eccl. c. 1. We co^fes in the
Creed, that the Church is the Communion The Church of the Creed is a communion.
of Saints. So also Confessio Heluetica c. 17. Mulhusina art. 5. Argetinensis
c. 15. How then, can the Church, which we profes in our Creed, be without
Communion? King James Resp. ad Peron p. 384. Damneth and detesteth those, who
have left the Communion of the Sea Iunius in sub Ecclesiastico c. 4.
Church, and become Schismatiks. Casaubon exercitat. 15. It is an undoubted
truth, that whiles pious people adhere to a lawful and true Bishop, that is a
true Church of God. So that if any separate himself from that company, it
cannot be doubted, but he is out of the Church. D. Potter sec. 3. p. 74.
Whosoever professes himself to forsake the communion of any one member of the
body of Christ, must confess himself consequently to forsake the whole.
Musculus loco de Eccles. sec. 3. The Church is a Communion of beleuers.
The true Church, is a Communion and society of true beleuers. Perkins in
explicat. Symboli col. 794. As long as any Church goes not from Christ, we
may not separate from it. The same he has in his Reformed Catholic tract. 21.
And Protestants commonly, who exclude Protestants exclude schismatiks who want
but communion.
Schismatiks out of the Church, as is to be seen l. 1. of the Author of
Protestancie c. 1. and yet confess, they want nothing but communion, as is to be
seen ibidem lib. 2. cap. 15. I will here ad the Confession of D. Potter sec. 2.
p. 42. Schism is no les damnable, Schism as damnable as heresy.
then heresy. P. 47. Voluntary and ungrounded separation from the Catholic
Communion, is without doubt a damnable schism. And p. 56. Whosoever peruersly
deuides himself from the Catholic Communion, as do Schismatiks, his condition
is damnable. Finally, Whitaker controuer. 2. qu. 5. c. 17. p 541. says:
Almost al our men put these twoe Notes of the Church, to wit, pure preaching of
the word, and lawful administration of Sacraments. And these twoe we affirm to
be true Lawful use of sacraments, is essential.
and certain Notes of the Church, and essential and perpetual Symboles of the
Church. And if lawful ministration of Sacraments, be a true and essential
Symbol of the Church, how can Churches be divided in ministration of
Sacraments, and not be divided in an essential part?

6. Hence it is evident, that the Protestant Church, which is divided in
communion of Sacraments, and publik worship of God, not only in itself, but
also from al other Churches, which they account true Churches, is no such
Church, as Scripture, Fathers, Reason, and themselves sometimes, propose unto
us. Nether will it help, which Doctor Potter says sec. 3. p. 67. and sec. 1.
p. 19. and Chillingworth c. 5. p. 274. That they are united to al members of
the universal Church, in faith and charity. For to omit, that Protestants
cannot pretend union in faith with all members of the universal Church, but only
union in part of faith; because they pretend union only in fundamental Union in
charity is not the essential union of the Church
points; which are but a part of faith; Union in charity cannot be that
union, which the Scripture, and Fathers, put in the descriptions of the Church
For the Communion, in Scripture, is in Sacraments, and prayer; also by Fathers.
Scripture speaks of union in Sacraments and prayer. The sup. n. 2. sup. n. 3.
Fathers speak of such a union, as is opposite to schism, which is breach in
communion of Sacraments and publik worship. And Saint Augustine expressly
speaks of union in Sacraments, which he says is necessary to any kind of
Religion, true or false: and also of union in prayer. For thus Co^cion. de
Gestis cum Emerito.
he speaks to a Schismatik: Do not say, I have charity: prove it, we have
one Father, let us pray together. Besides, Protestants themselves put the
communion of the Church in external And by Protestants
things. Confessio Heluetica cap. 17. The true concord of the Church consists
in doctrins, and rites expressly given by God. Whereby Rites they understand
Communion of the Church, is in sacraments, and Luturgie.
Sacraments. King James Respon. ad Peron page 403. Communion among the
faithful, chiefly consists in publik exercises of piety. And Chillingworth
c. 5. p. 265. To leave the external communion of a Church, is by refusing to
communicate with any Church, in her Liturgy, and publik worship of God. Field
lib. 1. c. 15. The communion of the Church consists in prayers and
dispensation of Sacraments. And l. 2. c. 2. says, communion in sacraments is
essential to the Church. So also ibid. c. 4. and Hooker lib. 3. p. 130. The
communion therefore, which is essential to the visible Church, is in rites or
Sacraments, publik exercises of piety, Liturgy, and publik worship of God.
Nether ever yet did any Protestant define the visible Church, to be a society
in profession of faith, and communion of charity: which they both would, and
must have done, if they had thought communion in charity, to be an essential
part of the visible Church. Communion in charity cannot be essential for a
Church.


7. But indeed it cannot be essential to a visible Church. First, because it is
no way proved, but merely affirmed, by reason that Protestants can pretend 1.
no other communion with the universal Church. For it is evident, See c. 13. n
5. l. 2.
they have no communion with her, in Sacraments, and publik worship of God.
Secondly, because the essential 2.
parts of the visible Church must be visible, as profession of faith, is:
otherwise, not the external Church itself, self, but only some part of it,
should be visible. And communion in charity is nether visible by itself, nor
by any undoubted acts thereof; as the soul of man is visible by her undoubted
vital acts. Thirdly, because if communion in charity were an essential 3.
part of the visible Church, none that want charity, should be true members
of the visible Church. And so wicked men should be nether of the invisible nor
visible Church. Which is contrary August art 7. 8. Saxon art. 12. Calvin 4. c.
1. parag. 13. whitak. co^t. 2. q. 5. c. 3.
to the Confessions of faith of Protestants. And Chillingworth cap. 5. p. 255.
When his Adversary had said: That all the members of the visible Church, are
by charity united into one mystical Body, replieth thus: which is manifestly
untrue, for many of them have no charity. How then can union in charity, be
that communion, which is essential to the visible Church; seeing they, that want
charity, may be true members of the visible Church, who cannot be united in
charity, which they have not? True it is, that who break the communion of the
Church, as Schismatiks do, have not charity, and charity hinders that
breach: But yet not al, that want charity, break communion. And one thing it
is, to want charity, an other to make Schism in the Church: And charity is
lost by Schism, but not only by Schism. Besides, what charity have 4.
Protestants to all the members of the universal Church, but such as they must
have to Jews, Turks, Infidels, and generally to all that are out of the Church,
that is, to pray for them, and wish and do them good? A singular communion
surely, with the members of the universal Church, which they have common to al
Infidels, and men whatsoever. Is there no communion peculiar to the members of
the universal Church, which they have among themselves, and one to an other,
more the^ they have to Infidels? If Protestants had indeed true charity either
toward God, or the universal Church, they would not separate themselves from
her communion in Sacraments, and publik worship of God. For as S. Aug. lib. 1.
de Sermon Domini c. 3. If they had charity, they would not tear in pieces
the Body of Christ, which is the Church. But they do external acts against
charity, and vainly pretend inward charity. And it is contrary to charity
both toward themselves and others, to forsake the communion in Sacraments, and
publik worship of God, of the universal Church. For so (as is before showed)
they put themselves Protestant inference absurd.
out of al Churches, and become in none. And out of all that has been said
hitherto of faith and Communion, appeareath evidently how fondly Protestants
infer themselves or other Churches or persons, whom they please, to be true
Churches, or true members of the Church, or in the way of salvation, only
because they believe all the fundamental points. For that is not enough to a true
Church, or to a true member thereof, or to the way of salvation. But they should
add also, that they do not sinfully err in anieother point of faith, or in
Communion. Because if they sinfully err in any point of faith, they are
Heretics: and if they sinfully err in Communion, they are Schismatiks: and so
no true Churches, nor true members of the Church, nor in the way of salvation.
But because Protestants despair to prove, that such Churches or persons, as
they maintain, do not err sinfully at al in faith or communion, they speak
not of this: and damnably deceive those that believe only fundame^tal points.
But now, out of that which we have said of the Communion of the Church, let us
refel the Protestants errors concerning it.

Protestants errors about communion, refuted outof what was said in the
former Chapter. THIRTEENTH CHAPTER.
1. OVt of that, which we have said of Communion, are clearly refuted the
errors of Protestants touching the same: their first, and radical error, and
the foundation of the rest, is, that King James resp. ad Peron p. 384
Communion is not essential to a true Church, or to a true member of the
Church. For Communion is put in the definitions of the Church taken out of
Scripture, and given by Fathers, and Protestants themselves: and therefore
essential to a true Church, and to every true member of it: If any ask, how
then can a true member of the Church, be without Communion, as if he be in a
Desert or be by force hindered from Communion? I answer, that natural or
material things cannot be without natural or material existence of every
essential part of them: But Moral things may have their parts but morally.
moral things (such as a member of the Church is, depending of man's will) may
be when some essential part is only morally, and by effectual will. And so
Communion of a man in a Desert, or held by force, morally may be. For it is in
his will to be done, when he can, and ought to communicate: and never leaves to
be, til he have a will the contrary, as Schismatiks have. And it is essential,
and sufficient to a true member of the Church, when he cannot actually
communicate with the Church, to profes to have this will to communicate
whenever he can, and ought.

2. An other error of Protestans is, that to leave the external communion of
the Church, is not to leave the Church: as one may leave the custom of the
College, yet not the College: so Chillingworth, c. 5. p. 265. 269. For
Communion To leave an essential part, is to leave the whole.
is essential to the Church, and to leave an essential part of a thing, is to
leave the thing itself: whereas the custom of a College is accidental to a
College, and to leave the accident of a thing, is not to leave the thing it
self.

3. An other error is, which D. Potter has sec. 3. p. 74. that they forsake
not the Communion of the Church of Rome, no more then the Body of Christ: For
to refuse to communicate with her in use of Sacraments, Liturgy, and publik
worship, is to forsake her communion. And he that means otherwise by
Communion, speaks a new language as indeed a new doctrine, needs a new language,
or equivocation to uphold it Wherefore Chillingworth c. 5. p. 261. says. It
needs no proof, that Luther and his followers forsook the external communion of
the Roman Church.

4. An other error, which Chillingworth has c. 5. p. 270. is, that the whole
Church being corrupted, some parts of it, might, and did reform themselves,
and yet might, and did continue parts of the Church, though separated from the
external communion of the other parts, which would not reform. As a man may
renounce a vice of a society, and yet be still of the Society. And p. 271. It
is certainly false, that no twoe men or Churches, divided in external
communion, can be both true parts of the Cath. Church. This I say is easily
refuted. For to omit, that blasphemy (that the whole Church can be corrupted)
whosoever volu^tarily separate themselves from the external communion of the
whole Church, separate themselves from an essential part of her. Root of the
Protestants errors.
For external communion is as essential to the visible Church, as is profession
of faith. And al these errors rise, of not considering or remembering well, the
former definitions of the true Church, given by Scripture, Fathers, and
themselves, and confirmed by reason. In all which, Communion, is put as an
esse^tial part of that true Church, which Scripture, Fathers, Reason, and
(sometimes) also Protestans, propose Protestants forsake the external communion
of the visible Church.
unto us.

5. And hereupon it is evident, that Chillingworth in confessing c. 5. cit. p.
273. That as for the external communion of the visible Church, we have without
scrupule formerly granted, that Protestants did forsake it. And p. 274. Though
Luther forsook the external communion of the Cath. Church, it will not follow,
he was a Scismatike: Plainly confesses, that Luther and Protestants are true
Scismatiks, and by forsaking the external communion of the Chilling. p 263. The
visible Chapter signifies the whole Church.
whole visible or Catholic Church, either made a new visible Church, or are in
no visible Church at al: For the external communion of the whole visible
Church, was an essential part of her, as well as profession of faith: And none
can leave an essential part of the whole visible Church, but he must leave the
Who is out of the whole visible Chapter is in none.
whole visible Church, which is to make a formal schism For he cannot leave
the whole visible Church, but he must be in no visible Church, seeing the whole
visible Church, includes al visible Churches; or he must be in a new
substantial visible Church, which must be, of his Why no just cause, to go
out of the whole visible Church.
own making. And hence it is evident, why there can be no just cause to leave
the communion of the whole visible Church, because there can be no just cause to
put onesself out of al visible Churches, and to be in no visible Church at al.
There may be just cause of separation from the communion of some particular
Church, because she may inuincibly err in some points of faith, and exact
profession of her Why may be just cause, to go out of a particular Church.
errors, for a condition of her communion. And nether is it necessary to
salvation, or to a member of the true Church, to be in communion of every
particular Church; nor the going out of any particular Church (if there be
just cause for it) is the going out of the whole true Church: But the whole
true Church, is not fallible, vincibly or inuincibly, in any point of faith,
by reason of Christ's promise, and the holy Ghostsassistance. So that, for
pretense of errors, there can be no just cause to go out of her communion. And
the going out of her, is the going out of al Churches whatsoever, because L.
Canterb. p. 311. out of the Cath. Church there is no salvation.
the whole Church includes al, and who is out of al, is in none. And there
cannot be imagined any just cause, to go out of al Churches, and to be in
none at al: And hereby we Infallibility, and necessity to be in the whole
Church, prove out the other.
see, how the infallibility of the whole Church, and necessity of being in
the whole Church, do mutually infer each the other. For if she were not
infallible in matters of faith, but sinfully Canterb. p. 240. All the members of
the militant Church can not err. So Morto^ Imp. c. 15. sec. 3. and 4.
taught errors, one might justly go out of her. And because there can be no
just cause to go out of the whole Church (for then we should be in none at al)
it must needs be, that she is infallible in matters of faith.

6. Wherefore, when Chillingworth Potter sec. 2. p. 47. Canterb. p. 143.
c. 5. p. 264. 271. 274. 284. and Protestants commonly define, Schism, to be a
Causeles separation from the communion of the Church, they voluntarily
Protestants false definition, of Schism.
ad that particle ( Causeles) nether do they find it in any definition of
Fathers, who never admit any just cause of separation from the whole Church:
but Protestants merely ad it, to excuse themselves from Schism, because they
have some pretense of cause for separation, See also supra n. 5.
but no color al at, to deny their separation from the whole Calvin Ep. 141.
discessione^ a toto mu^do facere concti sumus.
Church: yea they plainly confess it, as is to be seen l. 2. of the Author of
Protestancie c. 1. and 3. Out of which it is evident, that either they are in no
Church, because there is none besid the whole, or in a new made Church. Let them
show, that any Father ever put that particle ( Causeles) in the definition of
Schism, or said, that there can be just cause of separation from the
communion of the whole visible Church: or they must confess, that according as
the Protestants, Schismatiks as the Fathers use that word.
Fathers use the word, Scisme, they are guilty of Scisme, in separating
themselves from the external communion of the whole visible Church: and so in
judgment of the Fathers (as they use the word) are Scismatiks. And if they be
not Scismatiks, as themselves please to use the word, it little imports, let
them equivocate as they please, and use words without matter.

7. Let not therefore Chillingworth c. 5. cit. p. 272. advise men, to look that
their cause of separation from any Churches communion be just, because it is as
much as their soul is worth: but let him look, that he make no separation at
al from the communion of the whole Church, because hereof no cause can be just.
For (as I said) to go out of the whole Church, is S. Augustine, puts schism
merely in separation from the whole.
to be in no Church at al. Hereupon S. Augustine l. 2. contra Petil. c. 16.
said. I object to thee the sin of Scisme, which thou will deny, but I will
streigt prove. For thou do not comunicate with all nations: which proof were
none, if there could be just cause of not communicating with all Nations: but he
Schism simply, not to communicate with the whole Church.
should have added, that causelessly he he did not communicate. And lib. de
vnitate c. 4. whosoever believe that Jesus Christ came in flesh, in which he
suffered, was borne, etc. yet so dissent from bis Body, which is the Church,
as Schism, not to communicate with the whole.
their communion is not with the whole, whersoeuer it is spread, but is found
separate in some part, it is manifest, that they are not in the Catholic
Church. Which were not manfest, if there C. 3. n. 3. 6. l. ^.
could be just cause of not communicating with the whole. And evident it is,
out of what we related before out of Saint Augustine: that he means of
communion in Sactaments, and publik prayer. And therefore untruly said Doctor
Potter sec. 2. p. 33. That Protestants communicate (as Saint Augustine meant)
with the Catholic Church, in what part or place of the world soever. For they
communicate not at al with her in Sacraments and publik prayer. And so
according to Saint Augustins doctrine, manifestly are out of the Catholic
Church. Besides, Doctor Potter speaks not consequently, when sec. 2 p. 66. he
faieth: we do not communicate with Rome in her publik Liturgy: in that, our
communion is dissolved. And yet sec. 3. p. 74. Her communion we forsake not, no
more then the Body of Christ. For how does he not forsake the communion of
Rome, who does not communicate with her in Liturgy, and whose communion in
that, is dissolved: But to return to Saint Augustine: he epist. 48. affirms:
we are certain, that none can justly separate himself from the communion None
can justly separate.
of al Nations. Item: None can have just cause to separate their communion from
the communion of al Nations: lib. 2. contra Parmen. cap. 11. There is no just
necessity to break unity. And l. 3. c. 4. No just cause to forsake the Church.
The world does securely iugde, that they are not good, who separate themselves
from the world, in what part of land soever. And ib. c. 5. Let us hold it
firm and sure, that no good men can divide No good men can separate.
themselves from the Church: lib. 3. de Baptis. c. 16. It is charity, which
they have not, who are cut from the communion of the Catholic Church. And
epist. 152. whosoever is separated from this Catholic Church, albeit he think,
he lives lawdably, by this only wickdnes, that he is separated from the unity
of Christ, he has not life, but the wrath of God remains upon him. Lo, to be
separated from the Catholic Church, is to be sepated from the unity of Christ.
And what just cause can there be, to be separated from the unity of Christ?
And epist. 48. Relates, that certain Donatists thought faith, would suffice
without communion.
Donatists said: we thought it made no matter, where we held Christ's faith. So
that it is an error of Donatists, to think, that faith will suffice without
communion. Finally S. Cyprian l. de vnitate. Let none think, that good men can
leave the Church.

8. Protestants also sometimes confess, that there can be no just cause to leave
the communion of the whole Church. For Calvin 4. inst it. c. 1.. 10. says:
Departure from the Church of God, is denial of Christ, which were not true, if
there were just cause of departure. And lib. de Neces. Reform. Eccles. p. 68.
being urged, that there is no just cause, for which we may Usher sermon to House
of Com. No cause why We should make a rent in the Church of God.
break the unity of the Church; he does not answer, that there can be just
cause hereof: but (as supposing that) denies that they are out of the
communion of the Church. And again: But we are put back with this only engine.
That no cause excuses departure from the Church. But we deny, that we do so.
Surely, if he had thought, that there could be just cause to break the unity
of the whole Church, or to go out of her communion, he would here have said
it. But he did not then dream, that there could be a just or causeful
separation from the communion of the whole Church, which some Protestants since
have found out. Lord Canterbury p. 139. There can be no just cause, to make a
Schism from the whole Church. Item p. 192. D. Potter sec. 3. p. 74. There
nether was, nor can be, any just cause to depart from the Church of Christ, no
more then from no just cause to go from the whole Church.
Christ himself. Chillingworth sect. 5. p. 170. and 272. allows these words of
D. Potter, and adds p. 298. It is most true, that there can be no just cause
to depart from the Church: That is, to cease being a member of the Church, no
more then to depart from Christ himself. And surely, he cease being a member
of the Church, who separateth himself from the communion of the whole Who
leaves to be of the whole Church leaves to be of any Church
visible Church. Because communion (as I have proved) is an essential part of
the visible Church: And he can be no member of the visible Church, who wants
an essential part of it. And to depart from the communion of the visible
Church, is not (as Chillingworth speaks p. 269. 283. 298. 302.) te depart
from some opinions or practices of the Church. But it is to depart from some
point of faith, or from communicating with the Church, in use of Sacraments,
Liturgy, and public worship of God, as is evident, and himself confesses ib.
p. 265. and we related his words c. 13. nu. 4. In which to communicate, is most
substantial to the Church. For Sacraments, Liturgy, and publik worship of God,
are a principal external end of the Church. And namely Sacraments are put in
the definition of the Church by Protestants. Wherefore, to be associated C. 12.
nu. 5. l. 2.
and communicate in them, is most substantial to her, who is a Society in use
of them, and in profession of Christ's faith. And therefore to depart from her
communion in them, is clearly to depart from the society.

9. And here is to be Noted, that Protestants make not a distinction of
fundame^tal and not fundamental Communion.
Protestants cannot make distinction of fundamental and Not fundamental
communion, as they did of fundamental and Not fundame^tal articles. For
separating themselves from communion in Sacraments, Liturgy, and publik
worship of God, they separated themselves most fundamentally in communion, and
condemning the communion in these, of the Church, from which they separated,
they must condemn the fundamental communion, and so say, she is substantially
no Church. Whereupon it must needs follow, that either they must make a new
Church, substantially different from the whole visible Church, or else be in no
Church at al. For (as I have said) There can be no Church besides the whole
Church: Whereas, dividing articles into fundamental and Not fundamental, and
saying, that the Church, from which they separated themselves, retained the
fundamental articles, which co^stitute a Chureh, and that they feparated
themselves from her only in Not fundamental points, they had, some color to
say, that they still remained in the substance of the Church, from which they
made separation; And therefore an Argument, taken from Protestants separation in
communion from the whole Church, is more forcible against them, then taken from
their separation in faith from the whole visible Church. For her faith they
leaft but partly: but her Communion they leaft wholly.

10. Nether helps it which Chillingworth: says: c. 5. p. 274. and 295.
Though the whole Church were corrupted, yet Luther and his Followers forsook
not the whole corrupted Church, or the external Luther and his fellows forsook
their own communion, which they had with the whole Church.
communion of it, but only forsook that part which was corrupted, and still
would be so, but forsook not themselves, and their own communion. For though
Luther and his followers forsook not themselves, yet they forsook their
communion which they had with the whole Church in her Sacraments, Liturgy, and
publik service, and instead of that, began a new communion among themselves, in
an other Liturgy. For they joined not themselves in communion to any Church
preexistent, in her Liturgy and publik service: and so they forsook the
communion And began a new communton.
of the whole visible Church, even their own communion, which before they had
with her, and thereby ceased to be any formal part of the whole preexiste^t
Church, because they wholly leaft her communion in Sacraments and Liturgy, which
was essential to her: and began a new Church, as they began wholly a new
communion, in new use of Sacraments, in a new Liturgy, and new publik service.
Howsoever therefore, Chillingworth c. 6. p. 334. and D. Potter say sec. 3. p.
58. Protestants never intended to erect a Who inte^d new communion, intend a
new Church.
new Church, seeing they intended to erect a new communion in Sacraments, and
publik worship of God, they intended to erect a new Church. Nether is the
example of some leaving the disease of a Society, and yet not the Society
itself, to the purpose. For a disease is an accident to a Society, but
communion in Sacraments is essential to a Church, because she is a Society in
use of Sacraments, Liturgy, and publik service of Christ. And therefore this
communion being leaft, the Society itself is leaft.

11. Perhaps some may say, that To communicate in Sacraments, is more then to
use common Sacraments.
Luther and his Followers leaft not the communion of the whole Church in
Sacraments, because he retained the same Sacraments, which the whole Church had.
But besides, that Luther retained no Sacrament which the whole Church had,
beside baptism, and so had not Sacraments, but only one Sacrament common with
the whole Church: It is one thing, to have some Sacraments common with the
whole Church, which Schismatiks have, and an other, to have communion in
Sacraments, which Schismatiks have not, nor Luther had: For he did not
participate with the whole Church in Sacraments. As any may eat the same
meat which an other does, and yet not dine or sup with him: So Luther might
receive the same Sacraments, which the whole Church did, yet not communicate
with the whole Church in Sacraments.

12. By what has been said, we Protestants errors rise of ignorance of the
definitions.
may see, that these, and the like errors show well, that Protestants are of the
number of those, whom the Apostle says, know not what they speak of. For if
they knew, what true saving faith is, They would never say, The essence of it
consists only in belief of some principal points; or the unity of it, in
unity only of such points: or if they knew, what a true Church is, they would
never say, that some principal points only, constitute the essence of it, or
that the substantial unity of the Church, consists only in unity of such
points: nor would they compare integrity in faith or in communion, to health,
and defect in faith or in communion, to diseases or vice: nor say, that they
have communion with all Catholics in the world, because they have (as they say)
love or charity to them al: nor say, that those can be of the same Church, who
communicate not in use of Sacraments, Liturgy, and publik worship of God. For all these errors, and the like, rise of their not knowing or not marking, what is
true saving faith, what is a true Christian Church, what is true Christian
Communion, as is evident by what has been said and proved: If they would
constantly agree with us, in the definitions of saving faith, true Church, and
her communion, given by the Scripture, Fathers, and by themselves sometimes,
and confirmed by reason, these errors of theirs, about fundamental and Not
fundame^tal points, about the essence, and unity of true saving faith, and
about the true Christian Church, and her communion, would presently vanish. And
if they will maintain these errors, they must needs reject the definitions of
true saving faith, true Church, and her communion, given by Scripture, Fathers,
and Protestants must make new definitions and so change the question.
themselves sometimes, and give new definitions, and confess, that they dispute
not with us of such a faith, Church, or communion, as Scripture, Fathers, and
themselves sometimes, propose: but of an other faith, Church, and communion, of
which nether Scripture, nor Fathers ever dreamed, described, or proposed to us;
but is invented by themselves. And if they will confess this, I will not dispute
with them, whether there be any fundamental or Not fundamental articles to
such a faith, or Church, or whether in ward charity will suffice to such a
communion, as they have devised, different from the faith, Church, and
communion described by Scripture, and Fathers, and themselves sometimes. This I
am sure, That no other faith, Church, or communion, will help them to salvation,
but such a faith, Church, and communion, as Scripture, and Fathers propose. And
such faith, and Church, I have clearly showed, cannot admit any Not
fundamental points in the Protestants sense, nor any sinful division in points
of faith, or in communion of Sacraments, Liturgy, or publik worship of God.
But such faith, such Church, such communion, is perfectly and entirely one (at
least virtually and implicitly) in all points of faith, in all use of Sacraments,
and al publik worship of God: and can only differ in some rites or ceremonies;
which being accidental, and therefore by none put into the definition of the
Church, (as profession of faith and communion) cannot divide substance of the
Church. And such a Church, none is, but the Roman Catholic Church. And who
careful of his salvation, will not prefer a Church, which is entirely one in all
points of faith, and communion, before a Church, which confessedly is divided
both in some points of faith, and altogether in communion? If one ask, why can
not the Church admit division in faith or communion, as well as in other
matters: I answer, because Faith and Communion are essential parts of the
Church, and, as such, put in her definition: and nothing can admit division in
its essential parts. For division of a thing in essential parts, is
destruction of it. In other matters, which are not essential to her, she may be
divided, and not destroyed.

The aforesaied doctrine of Catholics and Protestants, and their Defenders,
compared together. FOVRTEENTH CHAPTER.
1. HItherto (Gentle Reader) have we refuted the distinction of fundamental and
Not fundamental How falls the Protestants distinction is.
points in the Protestants sense, and clearly showed, that in their sense, it
introduces formal heresy, destroieth true saving faith, Catholic Church, and
salvation, contains Infidelity, and denies Gods veracitie, and so is the
very ground of Atheism. We have also showed, that this distinction, How
insufficient for their purpose.
even in the Protestants sense, suffices them not, for that purpose for which
they devised it: which was, to maintain some such Churches, as are sinfully
Rouse of Cath. Charity c. 9.
divided in points of faith: because some of them are divided even in
fundamental points, and al are wholly divided in communion of Sacraments and
publik worship of God: which division, as well destroieth the Church, as
division in fundamental points, does.

2. Now it rests, out of that which has been said, to compare the faith and
Church of Catholics, and of Protestants together: and also the certainty, or
uncertainty of their defenders, that thou may the better judge, whether of
these several faithes, or Churches, is of God, and which of their Defenders
defend their doctrine for truth, or conscience sake, whether, to make a shift
for a Time.

3. The Catholics faith, essentially Difference between their faithes
embraces al Gods revealed word sufficiently proposed: The c. 5. n. 2.
Protestants faith, essentially embraces 1.
only the fundamental points. The 2.
Catholics faith, can stand with no heresy, or sinful denial of any point of
faith sufficiently proposed: Protestants faith, can stand with any heresy, or
sinful denial of any point C. 2. n 2. l. 1.
of faith, which is not fundamental, how sufficiently so ever it be proposed,
which is (as Protestants sometimes C. 3. n. 5. 6. l. 2.
confess) infidelity, and a giving the Lie to God. Catholics faith, is 3.
perfectly and entirely one, and the same in every one, believing actually
every part of Gods word sufficiently proposed, and virtually, every part
whatsoever: Protestants faith, is necessarily C. 5. n 2. l. 2.
one, only in fundamental points, and may be various or divided in all other
points, how sufficiently soever they be proposed, which unity, is merely in
part, and is true multiplicitie. Catholic faith, is approved 4.
of Protestants, to contain C. 5. n. 7. l. 1.
all that is essential to true faith: Protestants C. 5. n. 7.
faith, is proved of Catholics, to want many things essential to true faith.

4. Likewise the Catholic Church, Difference between their Churches.
embraces only those, who actually believe every point of faith sufficiently 1.
proposed to them, and virtually what other points of faith soever. Protestants
Church, embraces sometimes all that are Christians, C. 6. n. 8. l. 2.
or al, that profes Christ's name, what heretics so ever they be: Sometimes, all that believe the fundame^tal points, howsoever they sinfully deny other points
sufficiently proposed: which is to include Infidels, and Giuers of C. 3. n. 5.
6. l. 2.
the Lie to God. The Catholic Church, is perfectly and entirely one, both in 2.
profession of faith, and in communion of Sacraments, and publik worship of
God: Protestants Church is at most, one in profession of fundamental C. 5. n.
2. l. 2.
points, and various in all other points: And no way one (but wholly divided) in
communion of Sacraments, and publik worship of God. Which is to be one in a
small part, and to be simply and truly many. The 3.
Catholic Church, is approved of Protestants, to be a true C. 2. nu. 3. c. 7.
nu. 9.
Church, a member of the Catholic Church, A member of the Body of Christ. Her
Religion, a possible way of salvation, a 4.
safe c. 7. n. 3. 7. c. 2. n. 3.
way for them that believe as they profes, and safest for the ignorants: and
even those, who are most obstinat in her, members of the Catholic Church. The
Protestants Church is condemned of al Catholics, for a false Church, guilty
both of heresy, and schism, and to have no possible way of salvation, but
assured way of damnation to all that wittingly live and die in her.

5. Seeing therefore, by the testimony of holy Scripture, Fathers, and Reason,
and Confession of Protestants, the faith, and Church of God, is both one and
holy, judge, whether of these two faiths, or Churches, be more one, or more
holy; whether Cath faith more one, then Protestants.
that faith be not more one, which admits no voluntary division in any
point of faith whatsoever, then that, which admits voluntary division in all
points of faith; besides those, which are fundamental. And whether that faith be
not more holy, which admits And more holy.
no sinful denial of Gods word whatsoever, then that, which admits sinful
denial of al his word, besides that which is fundamental how sufficiently soever
it be proposed: which kind of denial, is C. 3. nu. 5. l. 2.
Infidelity, and a giving of the lie to God. And whether that faith, be not
more secure, And more secure.
which is approved of its Adversaries to contain all that is c. 5. n. 5. l 1.
essential to true faith, then that, which is proved of Catholics, to want
many things essential to true faith.

6. Likewise, whether that Church Catholic Church more one then Protestants.
be not more one, which is entirely one, both in profession of al points of
faith, and in communion of Sacraments: then that, which requires no more
unity, but in fundamental points which every one is actually to believe, and
admits sinful division in all other points, and whole division in communion
of Sacraments, and publik worship of God. And whether And more holy.
that be not more holy, which admits no heresy in points of faith, nor no
schism in division of communion, then that which admitts al heresies, except
in fundamental points, and al schime in division of communion. And whether that
Church be not the And more safe.
safer way to salvation, which is approved of its Adversaries for c. 7. n 3.
6. 2 n. 3. l. 1.
safe, then that which is approved only of its followers, and utterly condemned
by all adversaries.

7. And as for the Defenders Catholics constant in in their doctrine.
of these different faiths and Churches, it is evident, that Catholics
constantly and resolutly condemn the distinction of fundamental and Not
fundamental articles in the Protestants 1.
sense, and avouch, that there are no certain points so sufficient to saving
faith, to a Church, or to salvation, that others may be denied, or not
believed, though they be sufficiently proposed. None so Not fundamental, as they
must not necessarily be believed of a Church, and for salvation, if they be
sufficiently proposed: That there be more points of 2.
faith, then those, which must be actually believed of every one: That it is 3.
true heresy, to deny any point of faith sufficiently proposed: That sinful
4.
denial of any such point of faith, destroieth true saving faith, and
salvation, the substance, and unity of the true Church: That communion in 5.
Sacraments and publik worship of God, is essential to a true Church: That
though there were such distinction 6.
in points of faith, as Protestants make, yet that would not save some of their
Churches, which err even in fundamental articles, and want al communion in
Sacraments, and in publik worship of God; and that seeing 7.
the Protestants faith does not essentially embrace al Gods revealed word
sufficiently proposed, but only some part of it, nor is opposite to heresy in all points, nor is one in all Gods word, but only in some part, that it is not 8.
true saving faith. And seeing their Church does not profes Gods entire word,
nor is one at most, more then in fundamental points, nor is at al one in
communion of Sacraments and publik worship of God, it cannot be the true Church
of God: And seeing it did 9
leave the communion of the whole visible Church, and thereby leaft the whole
visible Church, and leaving the whole, leaft al visible Churches, and leaving
al, that it can be in no visible Church, unless at their separation there were
some new visible Church made. These points (I say) Catholics constantly teach.

8. Whereas Protestants, most inconstantly teach almost all that we have
rehearsed of their doctrine. For sometimes they teach, that their Not
fundamental points C. 1. n. 5. 6. 7.
are points of faith: Sometimes they C. 5. n. 8.
are not. Sometimes sinful denial of them is C. 2. n. 4. l. ^.
heresy: Sometimes it is C. 2. n 5.
not. Sometimes sinful denial of them, is a sufficient c. 6. n. 8.
cause of separation: Sometimes it is c. 2. n. 3. 6. 5. n 5.
not. Sometimes Protestants can give a Catalogue c. 6. n. 2.
of fundamentals: Sometime they cannot. c. 6 n. 3. 4.
Sometimes the Roman Church, is a c 2. n. 6 c. 7. n. 3. 4.
true Church in essence: Sometimes she is c 6 n. 5. c. 5. n. 7.
not. Sometimes her errors are c. 5 n. 7. c. 6. n 5.
fundamental: Sometimes they are c 5. n. 7.
not. Sometimes c. 2. n. 5.
heretics are in the Church. Sometimes they are c. 7. n. 12. 13. l. 2.
not. Sometimes heretics c 6. n. 4. 5.
may be saved: Sometimes they c 1. n. 12. c. 10. n. 4 5.
cannot. Sometimes a true Church c. 7. n. 2. 3. 4.
can err in fundamentals: Sometimes it c 7. nu, 5. 6. 7.
cannot. Sometimes al c 3 n. 5. 6. 7. l. 2.
points of faith are necessary to saving faith: Sometimes they are c. 2. n. 2
not. Sometimes denial of any point sufficiently proposed, c. 4. n. 6. 7. l. 2.
destroieth true faith: Sometimes it does c. 2. n. 3.
not. Sometimes sinful denial of any point of faith c. 6. n. 4. 5. l. 2.
destroieth the substance of the Church. Sometimes it does c. 3. nu. 2. l. 2.
not. Sometimes division in any point of faith c. 7. n. 10. l. 2.
destroieth the unity of the Church: Sometimes it does c. 5. nu. 2. l. 2.
not. Sometimes there is c. 13. n. 4. l. 2.
just cause of separation from the whole visible Church: Sometimes there is c.
12. nu. 8. l. 2.
not. Sometimes communion in Sacraments and publik worship of God is c. 12. n.
5. l. 2.
essential to the Church: Sometimes it is c. 11. n. 1. l. 2.
not. Sometimes to leave the communion of the Church, is to c 12. n. 5. l 2.
leave the Church: Sometimes it is c. 12 n. 4. 5. l 2.
not. Sometimes wilful error in faith c. 11. n. 5. l 2.
is just cause to forsake a Church: Sometimes it is c 9 nu. 6. c. 2. n. 3.
not.

9. Surely, it must be a very il cause, that drives such witty and Learned
men thus often, and thus plainly to contradict themselves, about one question
of their fundamental and Not fundamental points. For it is nether want of wit,
nor of learning, that makes them in this sort to contradict themselves: but
whiles they will join truth with falsehood, faith with heresy, Gods Church with
a false Church, they cannot do otherwise. For the evidence of truth, of faith,
and of Gods Church, forces them to say one thing, and falsehood, heresy, and
their false Church makes them to say the quite contrary. Wherefore we must no
more expect of heretics to speak agreably to themselves, then of Drunken men
to go straight. For heretics be (as the Prophet speaks) drunk, and not with
wine: heresy, is a spiritual drunkenes, Esaiae 51.
which makes men to reele between truth and falsehood, as drunkenes makes
Calvin. Co^futat. Hollandi. Spiritus vertiginis quo minatur Deus se verbi sui
co^temptores potaturum, brutam omnium ebriosoru^ amentiam superat.
men reele from one side to an other. It may be, that Catholic writers in some
great work, and writing upon different matters, may contradict themselves by
forgetfulness: but that witty and learned men, in so small works, and in one
kind of matter, should so often, and so plainly contradict themselves, cannot
proceed, but of the nature of the matter, which they would maintain, and of
Athal orat, 2. co^t. Arian Qui incidu^t in heresim mentis vertigine laborant.
C. 19.
their spiritual drunkenes, or that spirit of giddines, which (as the
aforesaied Prophet says) our Lord has mingled in the midst of Egypt, and
made Egypt to err in all her work, as a drunken and vomiting man erreth.

10. And finally, out of al hitherto said, I conclude, that it is not against
Charity, to tell Churches sinfully erring, of their damnable state.
charity, but rather most agreeable to Christian faith and true charity, to
admonish al Churches or persons, that they are in a damnable state, who err
sinfully either because they will not believe some point of Christian faith, or
part of Gods word, sufficiently proposed to them, or through their fault, have
it not sufficiently proposed: For (as Protestants confessed cap. 10.) The
difference is not great, between him, Sinfulmant of sufficient proposing,
excuses not.
that is wilfully blind, and him, that knowingly gainsaieth the truth: and
who, were it not for their own auoidable fault, might and should see truth,
and do not, their error is damnable: And if any be negligent in seeking truth,
unwilling to find it, or might see it, and will not, his case, without
repentance, is desperate; Wherefore thus I argue in form.

11. It is charity to admonish them, that they are in a damnable state, who
Because they err damnably. See Chilling. c. 6. p. 359.
err damnably, committ an act of Infidelity, and give God the Lie. But all that
err against points of faith sufficiently proposed to them, do so; and the like
case is of al, who for their fault have not such points sufficiently Al sinful
erra^ts in faith are damnable.
proposed to them. Therefore it is charity, to admonish al who err against
points of faith sufficiently proposed to them, or who (for their fault) have
them not sufficiently proposed to the^, that they are in damnable state. The
Mayor is evident, and the Minor proved, and confessed also by Protestants, c.
10.

12. Secondly, it is true charity, to admonish alformal heretics, that they
Because they are true heretics.
are in state of damnation: But all that believe not some points of faith
sufficiently proposed to them, or for their fault have them not sufficiently
proposed, are formal heretics. Therefore it is charity to tell al such, that
they are in state of damnation. The Mayor is proved c. 9. and the Minor c. 10.

13. Thirdly, it is true charity, to Because they destroy faith
tell al, that destroy true saving faith, and the unity thereof, that they are
in state of damnation: But all that believe not foam points of faith sufficiently
proposed to them, or, through their fault, have not them so proposed to them,
do so. Therefore it is true charity to tell them, that they are in state of
damnation. The Mayor is evident, for with out faith, it is impossible to please
God. And the Minor is proved cap. 11.

14. Fourthly, it is true charity to Because they destroy the Church.
tell al such, as destroy the nature or substance of Christ's true Church, that
they are in damnable state: but al such as believe not some points of faith
sufficiently proposed to them, or through their fault, have them not
sufficiently proposed, do so. Therefore, etc. The Mayor is evident; and the
Minor is proved c. 13.

15. Fifthly, it is true charity, to tell al Because they destroy the unity of
the Church. See L. Lauda sec. 35 p. 284
such as destroy the unity of Christ's Church, that they are in state of
damnation: But al such as believe not some points of faith sufficiently proposed
to them, or through their fault have them not sufficiently proposed, do so.
Therefore it is true charity to tell al such, that they are in state of
damnanation. The Mayor is evident: And the Minor is proved c. 14.

16. Sixthly, it is true charity to tell al Because they profes a false Church.
such, as by deeds profes a falls Church, to be a true Church, that they are in
damnable state: But all that communicate in Sacraments, or Liturgy, with a falls
Church, do so. Therefore it is true charity to tell them, that they are in a
damnable state. The Mayor, and Minor are proved c. 15.

17. Seauenthly, it is true charity, to Because they put themselves out of al
Churches.
tell such as put themselves out of every true Church, That they are in a
damnable state: But al such, as either put themselves out of the communion in
Sacraments, and Liturgy, of the whole Church, (as did Luther and his first
followers) or do themselves live out of that communion (as those do that yet
follow him) do so. Therefore it is charity, to tell al such, that they are in a
damnable state. The Mayor is evident: and the Minor proved c. 18. and 19.

18. Eighthly, because the contrary doctrine, to wit, that it is not charity,
Abominable that sinful error in faith is not damnable.
to warn a man, that is in stare of damnation (as al are, that sinfully
erragainst any point of faith or communion) is so abominable, as no Christian
(I think) will dare to avouch it in plain and expres terms.

19. And that Protestant Churches Protestants Churches sinfully err in points
of faith.
sinfully err against points of faith sufficiently proposed, or, through their
fault, have not them sufficiently proposed, is likewise manifest. For that al
Protestants Churches err in points of faith, is confessed by Protestants
themselves cap. 2. And that those points are sufficiently proposed to them, or
that it is their fault, that they are not so proposed, is likewise evident.
Besides the Protestants Church went out of the whole Churches Communion in
Sacraments and And in Communion.
Liturgy, and began a new Communion of their own. And so is in no Church, or
is a new Church c. 19.

20. Innumerable more, and most evident proofs, might be brought, that
Protestants Churches sinfully err against points of faith sufficiently proposed
to them, or which (if it were not their fault) would be so proposed to them:
But I will not go out of the compass of what has been said in this Treatise.
Who will see at large the errors of Protestants sufficiently disproued, even by
the expres word of God, may read the Collation of the Catholic and Protestant
doctrine, by the expres word of God. Which has been twenty years ago
published, and not yet answered by any Protestant. Which is an evident
argument that they can not answer it with any probability, seeing they have no
pretense but the word of God.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 43. lin. 10. with saving. dele saving. P. 95. lin. whereof. lege wherefore.
P. 115. lin. 20. the lege to. P. 138. lin. 8. faict. lege faith. P. 159. lin.
16. be to. lege to be. P. 210. marg. what lege why. P. 252. lin. 26. after not.
add. believe not. P. 261. lin. 14. dele and.


