AN ACCOUNT OF THE Greek Church, AS TO Its Doctrine and Rites of Worship: WITH
Several Historical Remarks interspersed, relating thereunto.

To which is added, An Account of the State of the Greek Church, under Cyrillus
Lucaris Patriarch of Constantinople, with a Relation of his Sufferings and
Death.

By THO. SMITH, B. D. and Fellow of S. Mary Magdalen College Oxon.

LONDON, Printed by Miles Flesher for Richard Davis in Oxford. MDCLXXX.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY Lord Bishop of London, Dean of His
Majesty's Chappel-Royall, AND One of the Lords of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
IF I had no particular obligation to your Lordship, the very Argument of the
following Observations, upon a Presumption at least, that they are faithfully
made and collected, would soon have determined my choice, and suggested to me
where I ought to address my self in a Dedication. How highly your Lordship has
merited of the Greek Church by taking it into your care, and by opening a
Sanctuary for the poor distressed Bishops and Priests of that Communion to fly
unto, is not unknown at Constantinople: and whatever the success of it may be,
They cannot be so unjust, as not to applaud your Lordships design, as worthy of
your great Charity and Piety, to relieve the necessities of those, whom either
curiosity and love of learning shall draw into these parts, or Turkish cruelty
and persecution shall drive and force out of their own Country; and at the same
time to reduce them from those errors and corruptions, which have of late
crept in among them, by bringing them into a nearer and more familiar
acquaintance with the Doctrine, and rites of Worship established in the Church of
England. It cannot be doubted in the least, that the most likely way to effect
this excellent design, was not only to permit but to encourage the building of
a Church in London for their Nation; where they might enjoy the free exercise
of their Worship in all things that are decent and inoffensive, and any way
essential to their Religion. That this has been done with such Christian
generosity and prudence, they owe, next to His Majesty unto your Lordship: whom
they must for ever look upon as their great Patron. And if the Governors of
their Church have not such a grateful resentment of the favor, as it highly
challenges and deserves, or if They, who enjoy the happiness and benefit,
should render themselves less worthy of it, yet your Lordship will not lose
your reward with God: and all good men consider it as the effect of that
public and generous mind, which has been so conspicuous in all parts of your
Lordships conduct. With what a steday courage your Lordship has defended the
Church of England, in this day of Trial, against the furious assaults of her
restless enemies, the Papists on the one hand, and the Giddy Sectaries on the
other, (who both agree in the same designs of pulling down the Hierarchy, and
overturning the Government, in order to her more effectual ruin,) all her true
and genuine Sons, who love and pray for her peace and prosperity, cannot but
most gratefully acknowledge. And though the spirit of fury rages still, and is
not to be charmed or allayed by that mildness and sweetness of temper, which is
so natural in your Lordship, yet they cannot but inwardly admire you, against
whom they have only this to object, that you are a Bishop. It is for the great
honor of our Church, that we can balance your Lordship against any of your
renowned Predecessors, and against the most celebrated Bishops of the Church
of Rome, as Antonine, Borromeo and Sales: and it is the great happiness of our
Church too, that a Person of such Illustrious Birth and Merit is advanced to so
high a Station and Dignity in it. It will be the proper work of those, who
shall write the History of our Times, to transmit a full character of your
Lordships worth to Posterity, which, when envy and malice are laid aside, and
an impartial judgment is made of Persons and Things, will always pay a great
respect and honor to your Name and Memory: and therefore it will better suit
with my Meanness, with my Function, and with my Obligations, to pray to
Almighty God to continue such a public Blessing to his Church, and to profess
my self in the highest degree of duty,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble and most Obedient Servant, Tho. Smith.

TO THE READER.
HAving obliged my self by Promise in a Letter, which I wrote from
Constantinople in the year 1669. to an Honorable Gentleman at Whitehall, upon
my return into England to present him with an account of the State and
Condition of the Greek Church, as to matter of Doctrine and Rites of Worship
and Discipline, (an inbred curiosity, which made me undertake that Voyage at
first, and afterward sufficiently exposed me to danger in that barbarous
Country, where they are so jealous of every inquisitive Frank, that appears in
any of their inland Towns out of a place of Trade, as if he were a Spy, and
come to view the several places, where they might be attaqued with the greatest
advantage, or rather the duty of my Function inciting me to make use of those
happy opportunities, which I there enjoyed, in order to a full and satisfactory
discovery:) to comply with this obligation, and to satisfy the importunity, as
it is very well known, of several excellent persons, who were pleased in
Discourse and by Letters, to mind me of a Promise also, which I had made in my
Latin Epistles, of publishing at some time or other an account of those
Observations, which I had collected upon this Argument, I drew up about five
years since a short Scheme of them in Latin, and not long after presented it
to the Right Reverend Father in God, the present Lord Bishop of Oxford, one of
the greatest examples of the Age for promoting and encouraging Learning, and
whose merits to the University will make up a great part of the future History
of it, who did me the honor to print it at the Theater, where so many
excellent Books have been by his Lordships direction and care published.

That I now publish the same in English, (though with large additions) it is
more to do right to the world, then to my self, who have no private passion to
gratify in it: my design in the one and the other being to contribute somewhat
to the public good.

It cannot be imputed to me as a piece of vanity and ostentation, that I say,
that I have taken all imaginable care to represent things truly as I found
them, and relate nothing but what is confirmed by the Offices used in the
Service of that Church, and other Ecclesiastical Writings, as Confessions, and
Catechisms, and the like; or by notoreity of practice and fact, there being a
necessity to premise so much to make the following Narrative credible. In the
contexture of which, I wholly aimed at truth without serving any Party or
Hypothesis, and have dealt impartially in the case without the least tincture
of Affection or Prejudice. To which purpose I have studiously endeavored to
couch things in a plain close style, without enlarging upon them unnecessarily,
being more ambitious in a subject of this nature, of the reputation of being
accounted an honest and careful, then spruce and elegant Writer. I have
sometimes indeed referred to the judgment of Antiquity, but it was wholly in
order to the better understanding the present practice of the Greeks: and I can
say most conscientiously, that those few reflections, which I have made, are
wholly owing to a just zeal and love for the honor of truth, and the
advancement of strict and discreet Piety, whereby my my Reader may not only be
bettered in his judgment but in his life too.

You will here clearly see, with what great difficulties the poor Eastern
Christians struggle, against what mighty opposition they still maintain the
profession of Christianity, and how the Cross of Christ triumphs,
notwithstanding the cruel mockings and insultings of the professed Enemies of it:
though it must be most sadly confessed, that several corruptions and errors in
point of Doctrine and Superstitious Rites and Practices in Worship have crept in
among them, to the great disadvantage, scandal, and dishonor of our Holy
Religion, which is hereby continually exposed to the censure and contempt of
the Mahometans, who, dull and stupid as they are, do not pretend to examine the
grounds and reasons of the Christian Belief, but judge of the whole by such odd
fantastic misrepresentations, and fortify their old prejudices every day more
and more with fresh matter of dislike.

The common people among the Greeks do as they are directed, without the least
examination or demurr, and depend altogether upon their Teachers and Spiritual
Guides in matters of Religion: being wholly ignorant of and unacquainted with
the Scriptures, few having the leisure and fewer ability to read them. It was
the pious design of that great man Cyrillus Lucaris, (of whom more at large
hereafter,) in causing the New Testament to be translated into vulgar Greek for
the use and benefit of the meaner sort, that they might be built up in the most
Holy Faith, and thence be fully instructed in the knowledge and Doctrine of God
our Savior. But though they had curiosity and learning enough to consult these
Sacred Writings, the Copies are very rare and scarce to be met with, and no
care is taken to furnish out a new Edition: and it is too too apparent, not
without design, to keep them more in subjection and awe, not to say, ignorance.
They are bred up in the same persuasion as formerly, and so zealously do they
retain the outward Services of Religion in all its punctilio's and
circumstances, that even the Bishops themselves, who would be content to relax
somewhat of the severities of their Fasts, dare not attempt to make any
alteration in the least, lest their people, obstinate to excess, should be
offended at it, and doubt of the truth of what they would have them still
profess and believe.

And indeed, considering the present state of things, there is little sign or
hope of a Reformation. For the misery of it is, that though it is manifest to
all, who understand Antiquity, how much the present Greeks have in several
points of Doctrine varied from the Belief of their Ancestors, and have
corrupted the simplicity and purity of Religion by a mixture of odd opinions
and fancies, they pretend notwithstanding; that their Tenants are agreeable to
the Fathers; and that they follow the Traditions of the ancient Church. But
without looking back much beyond this last Century, whoever will compare the
answers of the Patriarch Jeremias to the Letters of the Divines of Wittenberg
in the year 1576. with their Confession of Faith published in the year 1662.
and with the Bethleemitick Synod held in the year 1671. will find such a vast
difference between the modesty of that Patriarch, and their bold
determinations, as will incline any sober and considering man to believe, that
they have of late more then ever been wrought upon by the sly artifices and
insinuations and underhand dealing of the subtle Emissaries of Rome, who watch
continually over the poor Greeks, and take advantage of their poverty and
distress to bring them to a further compliance, and in time, to a downright
subjection. I do not doubt, but that time, which is the great revealer of
secrets, will discover the mystery of the last Synod held by the Patriarch of
Jerusalem: who, when I waited upon him at Constantinople not long before my
departure, knowing me to be a Priest of the Church of England, and Chaplain to
his Excellency, the English Ambassador then at the Port, entertained me very
respectfully, and acquainted me, that he had several Papers against the
Romanists, which he would take care to transcribe, and put into my hands to be
printed in England: but he did not, I confess, tell me the particular Subject
and Argument of them, nor thought fit afterward to send them, as he had at
first designed. Reflecting upon this discourse, I was the more amazed at the
determinations of this Synod held by his Authority: and perchance it would not
be want either of good manners or charity to guess by what arguments they were
prevailed upon, and how they were influenced.

This design of the Romanists, which has been carrying on for so many years,
was soon discovered by Cyrillus Lucaris Patriarch of Constantinople, a man of
great parts and of an extraordinary courage, who was resolved to give a check
and put a stop to it, as much as in him lay, and by degrees to reform those
abuses and errors, that had prevailed among the Greeks, and introduce a
stricter alliance and union of the Eastern Church with the reformed Churches of
Christendom. This drew upon him the indignation of Urban the Eighth, then
Pope, and the Congregation of Cardinals de propaganda fide, as they speak at
Rome, who knew no good could be done, while he sat upon the Patriarchall
Throne; and therefore finding after several attempts to bring him over by fair
means to relinquish his pretensions, that he was too stout and too honest to
submit to their overtures and proposals, they made use of several evil arts to
dethrone him; and in order thereunto blackened and defamed him with a thousand
calumnies, and pursued him with unwearied diligence and malice, and never
desisted till they had got him strangled. Out of respect to the memory of this
good man, who suffered so much in his lifetime by the Jesuits, the great
instruments made use of in his Persecution, and Tragical end, and is still
most unworthily treated by Monsieur Arnaud, (from a man of such excellent
Learning and Piety so much disingenuity could scarce be expected) in the height
of his zeal for the Roman Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and by the Latinizing
Greeks, who contrary to all laws of humanity, return him hatred for his good
will, and tear his reputation in pieces by most reproachful language and
slanderous imputations, to gratify, at this distance of time, not so much their
Passion, as a little base paltry worldly interest, as I have just reason to
suspect and believe, I have added a short account of the state of the Greek
Church under his Government: which I have drawn out of authentic Papers and
Memorials.

After all these triumphs gained over the poor Greeks, who now declare so
fiercely for a (...), let it be remembered however, that, (besides their
ignorance of the true state of the Controversy, the consequences of which they
never thoroughly studied nor yet understand, as appears by their silence and
stupid amazement, when they are urged with them) they do not expose it
publicly to be adored, that they have no fete di Dieu, or Corpus Christi
Festival, which to me was the most mortifying sight in the world, (for who
would not be confounded to see the most Holy Institution of our B. Savior
turned into a pompous piece of Pageantry?) and lastly, that they do not as yet
sing in their Churches any thing like that, which the Romanists teach their
people to sing in the solemn Procession of that day: Non est panis sed est Deus
homo, and salvator meus: not to mention the other differences at present in the
matter of the Sacrament between the Greek and Roman Church, as communion in
both kinds, communicating Infants, and the like; which I choose rather to leave
to the Readers judgment and observation upon his perusal of the following
Discourse.

Notwithstanding these errors and defects, we preserve a great charity for
this distressed part of the Catholic Church, and wish and pray heartily for
their deliverance from Turkish slavery; and that in the mean while they may see
from what purity of Doctrine and Worship they are fallen, and may be restored to
their ancient integrity and splendor. This Christian compassion obliges us to
do. We leave it to the Jesuits and to the other fierce Religionaries of the
Church of Rome to ascribe the ruin of the Empire to their Heresy, as they term
it, about the Procession, to their Schism and defection from S. Peter's See.
Next to the justice and all-wise Providence of God in the disposal of Empires,
and putting periods to Governments, we can assign other more probable causes of
their oppression, and among them chiefly, the want of timely assistence from
Italy, though two or three of the Emperors had been there in person to beg it.
But this is properly the work of a Civil Historian, and is besides the intent
of this Preface; which I shall soon put an end to after I have added this one
thing; That I cannot reflect without horror upon what I have read in Cardinal
Pole's third page 78. Fol. of the German Edition an. 1555. though no place be
mentioned in the title page. Si Caesarem audirem cum omni sua class in altum
jam provectum, cursum ad ipsam Turcarum Regiam Constantinopolim direxisse, etsi
omnia mihi pericula proponerentur, nunquam quiescerem, donec eum invenirem, ac
si jam Hellesponti fauces tenentem conspicerem, ut primum conveniendi facultas
daretur, in haec verba prorumperem: Caesar quid par^^, quid cogitas, etc.
Book pro defensione Ecclesiasticae Unionis, where he says, that if Charles the
Fifth had been at that time unde sail with his Fleet, and steering his course
toward Constantinople, he would never be at rest, how great soever the
difficulties of the Journey were, till he had found him out, and then being
brought into his presence he would importune him to leave off that design, and
employ his Armies against the Germans and against King Henry the Eighth (his
natural Liege Lord and Sovereign) as being a far more glorious work. And all
this out of a pretended love to his Country, and charity for the Church infused
into him, as he speaks, by the Son of God. And the more to encourage the
Emperor, in this eloquent harangue page 79.
he tells him, that several Legions lay hid in England, that had not bowed
their knees to Baal, that the English for lesser crimes then Heresy and
Injustice to Catholics had deposed their Kings, as for mispending the public
Treasure, that they still retained the same inclination, and that nothing was
wanting to execute their design, but his Imperial Presence. page 80.
Soon after he addresses to King Henry himself, and tells him in downright
terms, that if the King of France would suppress his designs against the Church
(that is, the Church of Rome) it would be no less glorious to him, then if
Caesar had recovered Constantinople out of the hands of the Turks. At what a
high pitch of indiscretion and fury do men arrive by their intemperate heat and
bigotry! They forget themselves not only to be Subjects but even Christians,
at the same time they would appear extraordinary zealous Catholics; and care
not how far the great Turk prevails, provided that a pretended Heresy, which
consisted only in a recovery of the essential Rights of the Crown from the
usurpations of the Papal See (which was the only case at that time here in
England) had been extirpated, and the Germans reduced to the same subjection to
Rome they were in before the appearing of Luther: which had been the readiest
amd most effectual way to have made Solomon Master of Vienna, which was one of
his earnest wishes, if the Emperor and his Council had not been persons of
greater Policy and more Moderation, and had not foreseen the fatal
consequences of such Catholic advice.

Certainly it is a more innocent and Christian wish, that there were a happy
end put to the differences now on foot, which disturb the quiet and peace of
Christendom, that so some of the powerful Princes of it may turn their Forces
Eastward upon the great enemy of their Faith and Savior, and restore the poor
oppressed Christians there to their ease and liberty. This indeed is too great
a good to be hoped for at present, and as things now stand, not to be effected
without a miracle. And may this miracle be wrought in our days. O Christ hear
us. Amen,

T. S.
Magdalen College Oxon. Febr. 23. 1679-80.
The Reader is desired to mend the following Errata, most of which have happened
by reason of the hasty transcribing the Author's Copy for the Press.
PAge 25. lin. 4. for call read style. p. 26. l. 5. Panteelemon. So p. 128. l.
10. p. 38. l. 3. and Patriarchs, add, in the matter of images. p. 41. l. 26.
blot our, being. p. 55. l. 21. Tophana. p. 82. l. 5. for recovers, read
renews. p. 83. l. 10. He will. l. 24. expose. p. 88. l. 8. Tzia. p. 97. l. 21.
Sheichler. p. 127. l. 2. read life and salvation. p. 136. l. 13. fanned them.
p. 150. l. 27. for page 145. read A. 1645. p. 179. l. 24. penance. p. 211. l.
17. little less. p. 241. l. 5. Pegas. p. 242. l. 8. Pope. p. 250. l. 4. for
being, read had been. p. 260. l. 26. the titular -- p. 279. l. 5. but I. p.
288. l. 17. for upon the Persians, read against -- p. 202. l. 2. for faith,
read religion. p. 294. l. 15. a Graeco.

Page 22. lin. 26. p. 26. l. 29. (...). p. 23. l. 27. (...). p. 27. l. 28.
(...) p. 28. (...). bis. p. 34. l. 27. (...). p. 129. l. 1. (...). p. 139. l.
25. (...). p. 146. l. 27. (...). p. 127. l. 26. lege (...). p. 184. l. 30.
dictus, (...). p. 280. l. 14. (...).

In Appendice occurrit plusquam semel Psalterium S. Notkeri pro Antiph^nario
seu libro Hymnorum.

An Account of the Greek Church, as to its Doctrine and Rites of Worship; with
several Historical Remarques interspersed relating thereunto.
THE Eastern Church anciently and strictly so called, The Eastern Church what,
and why so called.
was only that which, being in the most Easterly part of the Roman Empire, was
under the Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Antioch, and was usually styled the
Diocese of the East, containing Syria, Cilicia, Palestine, and part of
Mesopotamia and Arabia. But afterward, upon the Division of the Empire, and
the Removal of the Imperial Seat from Rome to Constantinople, the Churches
which held Communion with the Patriarch of Constantinople, and acknowledged
that the chief See, and looked upon him as their Head, and were subject to the
Greek Emperors, had all of them the Title of Eastern, by way of distinction
and opposition to those of the Latin or West. In which comprehensive sense I
use the word,

These Churches are governed by four Patriarchs; Governed by four Patriarchs.
each of which has full power in his Patriarchate of calling his Metropolitans
and Bishops together, of receiving Appeals, of conferring holy Orders, of
determining Controversies, and of Excommunicating grievous and notorious
Offenders: a Primacy of Order being only allowed to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, upon the account of his being 3. Canon Concilii
Constantinopolitani, and 28. canon Concilii Chalcedonensis.
Bishop of the Imperial City, and by Ecclesiastical right becoming and made
next in dignity to the Bishop of old Rome.

The four Patriarchs are of Constantinople, Their Jurisdictions, Limits, and
Titles.
Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem: who, according to Histor. Ecclesiastic.
lib. 5. cap. 8.
Socrates Scholasticus, had the Limits and Boundaries of their several
Districts and Jurisdictions set them by the Fathers of the first general
Council held at Constantinople. But it is certain, from other Authorities, that
they had not then the Power of the Patriarchs of the following Ages. Nor was
the word in common use (it being introduced to diminish and overtop the Title
of Exarchus) till the times of the Council of Chalcedon, which Vid. actionem
16. Council. Chalcedon. and 28. canon. cjusdem Council.
advanced Jerusalem to the supereminent dignity of a Patriarchal See, and
assigned the Asian, the Thracian and the Pontic Dioceses to the Patriarch of
Constantinople. It cannot be supposed otherwise but that these Boundaries and
Limits have in the several successions of Ages from that time to this been
subject to great alterations and changes.

The Patriarch of Constantinople, Patriarch of Constantinople.
as he is the chiefest in Dignity, so he has a larger Jurisdiction than any of
the other three. It takes in all the lesser Asia, except two of the most
Easterly Provinces, which border upon Syria, Thrace, Macedonia, and all the
other Provinces of Greece, and the Islands that are scattered up and down in
the Archipelago, Dalmatia, Albania, Walachia, and Moldavia. His usual Title,
when he subscribes any Letter or Missive, is, (...).
by the mercy of God Archbishop of new Rome, Constantinople, and Ecumenical
Patriarch. But of this I shall have occasion to speak more distinctly in
another place.

The Patriarch of Alexandria exercises his power over the Christians throughout
Egypt, Alexandria.
Libya, and part of Arabia. The Title which he still retains, is this, (...)
by the mercy of God Pope and Patriarch of the great City of Alexandria, and
This Title of Ecumenical Judge, Nicephorus Callistus Hist. Eccles. lib. 14. c.
34. says, has belonged to the Bishops of this See from the time of Cyrillus,
who presided in the Council of Ephesus, Pope Coelestine writing to him to
supply his place there. Which does not in the least suppose a Supremacy in the Sea of Rome, but only a Precedence or a Primacy of Order.
Ecumenical Judge. Sometimes he styles himself Ecumenical Patriarch; it
having been the V. Epist. Cyrilli Lucaris, tunc temporis Patriarchs
Alexandrini, ad Johannem Vytenbogaert. in Epistol. Ecclesiastic. page 407.
chief See before the times of Constantine, and founded by S. Mark. Hence
Alexandria is called frequently the Throne, the Seat, the Chair of that
Apostle. Sometimes the Title runs in larger terms, (...). Vide (...) ad finem
Codini de officiis and officialibus Curiae and Ecclesiae C. P. Parisi^s 16. 18.
page 411. and 419.
Patriarch of Alexandria and all Egypt, Pentapolis, Libya and Aethiopia: the
Abyssines using from the time of their first Conversion, till of late years, to
send their chief Bishop or Metropolitan to be Consecrated and Confirmed by him.
This Patriarch, for his own better ease and accommodation, and for the greater
benefit of the Christians of his Communion, makes his usual residence at Grand
Cairo, where they are very numerous, and where, in case of any grievous
oppression, they may have recourse to the Bassa, who keeps his Court in that
City.

The Patriarch of Antioch governs the Churches of Syria, Antioch.
Mesopotamia, and of the two Provinces of Isauria and Cilicia, which are in the
lesser Asia. He writes himself thus, (...).
by the mercy of God Patriarch of the great City of Antioch, called Theopolis,
and of all the East: alluding to the ancient and restrained sense of the
Eastern Diocese. His usual residence is at Damascus.

The Patriarch of Jerusalem has Palestine and part of Arabia within his
District. Jerusalem.
His Title is,.(...)
by the mercy of God Patriarch of the Holy City of Jerusalem, and of all
Palestine: and sometimes he is saluted by the name and V. (...) ad finem Codini
page 419.
Title of Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Holy Mount of Sion, Syria, Arabia, beyond
Jordan, Cana of Galilee, and of all Palestine.

For these Four Patriarchs they pray in their Public Liturgies, Prayers made
for them.
without any mention of the Bishop of Rome. Which omission being looked upon as
an argument of disrespect and ill will, among other heads and articles of
Agreement and Union between the Churches of old and new Rome, it was required
by Alexander the Fourth, the then Pope, of the Emperor Michael Palaeologus,
that in their Public Offices and Hymns the Pope should be named at the same
time with the Four Patriarchs, as (...). Histor. (...). lib. 5. cap. 1. page
89. Colon. Allobiogum 1615. V. Phransen. in histor. lib. 1. cap. 6. This is
called by Cardinal Bessarion (...), in the letter he wrote, to the Governor of
the Sons of Prince Thomas Palaeologus, in the vulgar Greek, published by
Meursius.
Nicephorus Gregoras relates. And since this, upon a disuse, the same was
agreed to at Florence; at least the Instrument of Union in the close, where the
Five Patriarchs are reckoned up in their Order, may seem to suppose it. But the
Proceedings of that Council, and the Union which followed, being generally
disliked upon the return of the Greeks to Constantinople, they have not since
prayed for him publicly by name, but adhere to the old number and form.

The other Sects of Religion have their distinct Patriarchs; Patriarchs of
other Sects.
as the Armenians, Maronites, Jacobites, etc. And there is usually a Titular
Patriarch of Constantinople, the Pope pretending a power of constituting such a
one, not only upon the account of his usurped Ecumenical Pastorship; but
because the Latins were once in possession of that City, which they held
between fifty and sixty years; that is, from the year 1203. to 1260, at which
time it was recovered out of their hands by Michael Palaeologus. And for the
most part there resides at Constantinople a Bishop sent from Rome, who has the
power of a Legate. In my time a Franciscan Friar resided there for this purpose
with the title of the Bishop of Calurmina, a City in India, upon the Coasts of
Coromandel, where S. Thomas was martyred.

The Greek Church, Extent of the Greek Church.
considered in it self and with reference to the vast extent of those
Countries, where the doctrine and rites of it are professed and maintained, is a
very considerable part of the Catholic Church. All the Christians of the vast
dominions of the Emperor of Moscovy, the Cossacks, the Inhabitants of Podolia,
and of the black Russia, who are Subjects of Poland, the people of Aethiopia in
the inner part of Africa, lying South of Egypt, of Circassia, of Georgia,
formerly Iberia, and of Mengrelia, the Colchis of the Ancients, and of the
Islands of the Mediterranean under the Venetians, being of its Communion. In
all which places it may be justly said to flourish, being the established
Religion, and where the Christians are either absolute Lords and Masters, or
else only make some acknowledgment to the Grand Signior or Sophy of Persia for
their peace and quiet, as do those Asiatick Princes, who live beyond the Euxine
Sea, and whose Country reaches toward Mount Caucasus, and so are as it were
miserably harassed and ground between the two mighty Empires of the East. But I
am to consider the Greek Church, chiefly as it is contained in the dominions of
the Turks, where it is most sadly afflicted. For though the Greeks have the
free use and exercise of the Christian Religion, and are allowed their Churches
for the public Worship of Christ, and in Moldavia and Walachia especially
which the Turks leave wholly to be inhabited by them under the Government of
the respective Princes, (who indeed are in effect but their Tax-gatherers, and
who swear Allegiance to the Port, and whom they prefer and degrade as their
interest or covetousness incline them,) yet in all other respects they are no
other than as Slaves.

It Is merely out of interest and a sense they have of the benefit of their
service, Oppression of the Greeks.
and not any regard to the last Testament of Mahomet, which commands all his
followers to show kindness to the Christians (for to That they are strangers,
it being most probably the invention of some good meaning persons of our
Religion, who hoped by this pious kind of fraud to take off the Conquerours
from that fury and barbarity wherewith their own ^ough temper and the Chapter
of the Sword in the Alcoran might inspire them) that they admit the Greeks to
the favor of enjoying their lives and their Religion together. Which they
dearly pay for, being subject to innumerable arbitrary taxes upon all
occasions, besides their head money, which is severely exacted every year, even
of boys, if above 14 years of age: (not to mention either the extortions of the
Cadies, who suck their very blood upon every slight miscarriage, when they fall
into their clutches, and oftentimes upon unjust and frivolous avanias or
pretensions, when they are wholly innocent, or the insolences of the
Soldiers, who enter their houses, in the Country especially, and rob and spoil
and tyrannize over the poor people, these injustices, though too much connived
at, being besides the intent of the Government.) They are forced sometimes into
the wars to do all the drudgery of the Camp, or to serve as Pioneers in
working their Mines, or to look to their Carriages, and the like: exposed daily
to horrid indignities and injuries, against which they have no remedy, every
rascally Turk making use of his Privilege to triumph over them, oftentimes out
of zeal to his false Religion, but oftener out of wantonness and a proud
insolent humor.

This wretched state and condition of life, How heightened and aggravated.
though it cannot but strike a horror into the minds of all, who enjoy the
happiness of freedom and a mild government, might be digested well enough and
born with some kind of patience, if they suffered only in their bodies or in
their purses; if they were not upbraided with their being Christians, if they
could be free from either their menaces or invitations of renouncing their
Faith and their Savior: if their Children were not ravaged and torn from their
arms, and bred up in the false and brutish Religion of Mahomet, to be
afterward their plagues and tormentors.

For to supply their Seminaries, Collection of Christian children.
formerly as often as the necessity of affairs required, though of late years
they have forborne to practice it, they send forth Officers into the several
Provinces of Europe (they yielding generally the most hardy and best Soldiers)
who coming to any Town command the poor Christians to bring their male-children
from seven or eight years old and upwards before them. If any should dare to
conceal them at home, or send them away into the woods or upon the mountains,
they are punished. But of these they choose the best complexion'd and strongest
and the most likely to answer the ends of their Collection. Some of their
Parents indeed out of natural pity and out of a true sense of Religion, that
they may not be thus robbed of their children, who hereby ly under a necessity
of renouncing their Christianity, compound for them at the rate of fifty or a
hundred Dollars, as they are able, or as they can work upon the covetousness of
the Turks more or less. Though others to the great shame and dishonor of their
Religion, Christians only in name, part with them freely and readily enough,
not only because they are rid of the trouble and charge of them, but in hopes
they may, when they are grown up, get some considerable command in the
government. After some trial some of the most hardy are taught the use of arms
in order to their being Janissaries; others, that are of a softer but more
docile temper are bred up in the studies of the Persian language and fitted for
civil affairs, and advanced to some place and office about the Emperor's
Person: the more stupid are sent into the Seraglio to be Cooks, Bakers,
Gardiners, Confectioners, and such like inferior servants; or else are cut,
that they may be the better qualified to attend at the women's apartments.

What a Glorious design would it be, A Union of Christian Princes desired in
order to the freeing the Greeks from the slavery of the Turks.
and how much for the honor of our Religion, if the Christian Princes would
unite and enter upon a Holy War, and redeem the Oriental Christians from the
burden of this intolerable tyranny and slavery! But alas! there is little hope
of such an Union in this great declension of Christianity, when the life and
spirit of it seem to be lost and swallowed up in those horrid feuds and
factions, that disturb the peace of Christendom, and expose it to the assaults
of the common enemy, whenever he shall be at leisure to attaque it, and when
interest seems wholly to govern and influence all Public Councils.

However the Bishops of Rome, A Holy War.
who then exercised an entire and absolute dominion over the consciences of all
of their Communion, might have private designs of their own in Publishing their
Crusades and putting the several Princes of the West upon the recovering the
Holy Sepulcher out of the hands of the Sarazens: yet this ought not to diminish
from the glory of their piety and generous Courage, who undertook those long,
painful, and hazardous Voyages. This we may miscall easiness of temper, and
misguided and ill-managed zeal: but in the meantime do not the Infidels enlarge
their conquests and gain ground continually, and advance their half Moons,
where the Cross before was placed? Where have we recovered for several scores
of years so much as a village or slight fortification from them, except
perchance one or two in Dalmatia?

The poor Christians in those parts of the World are in a desperate and
remediless condition, The Greeks quite dispirited, their temper low and mean.
as to any help and assistance they may receive from us, who have not that
compassion for them, which their condition deserves. And indeed all they have
to do to make their condition tolerable is to flatter their Imperious Patrons,
and scrape a little money together, to buy their favor and good will. For long
slavery, continued for several years, has broken their spirits, and quite
altered their tempers, and taken them off from the natural courage and vigor
and love of liberty, wherewith their Ancestors were inspired. They are content
(not to say well pleased) with their slavish condition of life, they dare not
entertain any generous thoughts of revenge, they are afraid to venture, though
there were probable hopes of gaining their liberty by it: They are so overaw'd
and stupefied and lost to all sense of honor, that they have abandoned all
thoughts and hope of a change, which uses to be the poor and miserable comfort
and support of the distressed.

It Is sad to consider the great number of wretched people, Renegados.
who turn Turks: some out of mere desperation: being not able to support the
burden of slavery, and to avoid the revilings and insultings of the Infidels:
some out of a wanton light humor, to put themselves into a condition of
domineering and insulting over others, or of wearing a pair of yellow shoes;
which is the peculiar finery and gallantry of the Musulmans; the Christians and
Jews wearing either red or black (though the Greeks, belonging to the Christian
Ambassadors, relying upon their protection, presume to do otherwise; a
miscarriage which has sometimes been complained of by the Turks and severely
punished with drubbing) some to avoid the penalties and inflictions due to
their heinous crimes, and to enjoy the brutish liberties, that Mahomet
consecrated by his own example, and recommended to his followers. These are the
great and tempting arguments and motives of their Apostasy, mere considerations
of ease, pleasure, and prosperity, or else of vanity and guilt: for it cannot
be presumed, that any through conviction of mind should be wrought upon to
embrace the dotages and impostures of Turcisme.

By these Accessions the Turkish Empire and Religion are chiefly supported, The
Turkish Empire how supplied by them.
the Renegado Christians being to be met with every where; the natural Turks,
not having such numerous issues, as in the Ages past (whether this happens by
their laying restraints upon themselves as to the number of women to avoid
expense and charge, or by some other natural or supernatural cause I know not)
would sensibly diminish, but for these supplies and that of Christian slaves;
most of which change their Religion, who are yearly brought into their Country
by the Tartars, or taken as prize by themselves in the time of War.

And indeed considering the great confusion in which the Lay-Christians are,
The causes of the decay of Christianity in the Levant.
especially the poorer sort, how destitute of all helps of Learning, there
being no public Schools among them, how ignorant of the grounds of Religion,
to what grievous temptations their Poverty and Persecution do continually
expose them, how unacquainted with the Holy Scripture, how little instructed in
the doctrine of Christianity, not one in twenty being able to read, and
Sermons being very rarely preached, and oftentimes in the learned Greek, and
those only in the Patriarchal Church at Constantinople, or where the
Metropolitans or Bishops make their residence, and at particular times, as at
Christmas or Lent, etc. the povidence of God is to be admired, that there is
yet any Christianity left in the East, and that the number of Apostates is not
greater, and that Mahometanism has not yet prevailed in these Countries as
absolutely as it has done all along the coasts of Africa, and up the Main land,
from the Syrtes beyond Tripoli Eastward, to the furthermost points of Barbary
West, where a Christian is not to be found, unless in the English or Spanish
Garrisons, or Slaves seized upon by the Pirates, the very refuse and dregs of
all mankind, and carried into their Ports to the great scandal and shame of
Christendom, which suffers those Canaglia not only to live, but to live in
triumph.

Next to the miraculous and gracious providence of God, The preservation of the
Christian Religion there owing to the strict and religious observation of the
Festivals and Fasts of the Church.
I ascribe the preservation of Christianity among them to the strict and
religious observation of the Festivals and Fasts of the Church; this being the
happy and blessed effects of those ancient and pious Institutions, the total
neglect of which would soon introduce ignorance and a sensible decay of Piety
and Religion in other Countries besides those of the Levant. This certainly is
the chiefest preservative of Religion in those Eastern Countries against the
poison of the Mohammedan superstition. For Children and those of the most
ordinary capacities know the meaning of these holy Solemnities, at which times
they flock to Church in great companies, and thereby retain the memory of our
Blessed Savior's Birth, dying upon the Cross, Resurrection, and Ascension, and
keep up the constant profession of their acknowledgment of the necessary and
fundamental points of Faith, as of the doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, and the
like. And while they celebrate the sufferings and martyrdoms of the Apostles of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and other great Saints, who laid down their
lives most joyfully for his name, and underwent with unwearied and invincible
patience all the Torments and Cruelties of their Heathen Persecutors, they take
courage from such glorious examples, and are the better enabled to endure with
less trouble and regret the miseries and hardships they daily struggle with.

The chief, sixth, Festivals.
and unmovable Festivals are placed in this order in their Menology or
Calendar.
SEPTEMBER.
They begin their year the first day of this month.

VIII. The Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God.

XIV. XIV. The Greeks date this Festival from the times of Constantine and
Helena, and so seem to confound it with the invention and first discovery of it
at Jerusalem by a miracle, and derive the reason of its name from the Patriarch
Macarius; in placing and setting it on high above the Ambo or Pulpit (...)
(...). page 13.
, (...), that it might the better be seen and adored by the people: But the
Latins celebrate the Festival in memory of the Holy Cross, brought back out of
Persia to Jerusalem by Heraclius, A. C. 628. after the victory he had gained
over Cosroes, which is the account given in the Roman Martyrology, but it is
certain it was in use long before, and might receive some additional honor
from the triumphs and successes of that Emperor.
The Exaltation of the Holy Cross.

XXVI. (...) Migratio. Ita enim planius reddenda erat ista vox, de Ecclesiae
Graecae hod. statu, p. 16. licet idem innuebam per translationem, nempe ex hac
vita in alteram. In the Latin Edition I rendered this word by two Latin words,
translatio seu obitus: alluding by the first to the opinion and fancy of
several of the Brethren in the Apostle's time, (who from a mis-apprehension of
our B. Savior's words, concerning this beloved Disciple, to S. Peter in the
20. Chap. of S. John v. 22. If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that
to thee? concluded, that he was not to die, (...). Graeca Venet. 1621. fl. 24.
b. (which mistake he corrects himself v. 23.) and in the Ages following, as we
learn from Tertullian in his book de Anima, and several others. Others fancied,
that when they opened his grave they found no body or relic of it, p. 24. a.
b. But that he died at Ephesus really and truly, and was buried there,
Polycrates Bishop of that City discourses in a Letter to Victor Bishop of Rome,
which is preserved by Eusebius in his Church History, lib. 3. c. 31. not to
mention other Authors, who have confuted this error about the translation of
S. John, who only of all the Apostles survived the last destruction of the
City and Temple of Jerusalem, when Christ came to take Vengeance upon his
Murderers, and lived to the times of Trajan, sixty eight years after the
Crucifixion of our Savior, according to S. Hierom de Scriptor. Eccles. in
Joanne.
The migration or death of S. John the Evangelist.

OCTOBER.
VI. S. Thomas Apostle.

IX. S. James, the Son of Alphaeus, Apostle.

XVIII. S. Luke Evangelist.

XXIII. S. James the Brother of our Lord and Bishop of Jerusalem.

XXVI. S. Demetrius, Proconsul and Martyr, (...), p. 71. b.
pierced through with lances at Thessalonica by the command of Maximian.

NOVEMBER.
VIII. Archangels, Michael and Gabriel, and all Angels.

XIII. S. John Chrysostom.

XIV. S. Philip, Apostle.

XVI. S. Matthew, Apostle.

XXI. The Entrance of the Blessed Virgin into the Temple at Jerusalem. S. Luke
Chap. 2.

XXX. S. Andrew, Apostle.

DECEMBER.
VI. S. Nicolas, Bishop of Myra in Lycia, and Confessor under Dioclesian and
Maximian.

XII. S. Spiridion, Bishop and Confessor under Maximian, having had his right
Eye struck out, and hamstring'd in his left Leg, and condemned to work in the
Mines; afterward present at the Council of Nice.

XX. S. Ignatius, to whom they give the Title of (...), the third Bishop of
Antioch from S. Peter, thrown to the wild Beasts in the Amphitheatre at Rome
under Trajan.

XXV. The Nativity of our most Blessed Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.

XXVII. S. Stephen, first Martyr.

JANVARY.
I. The Circumcision of Christ: as also the Festival of S. Basil.

VI. (...).
Epiphany, or Baptism of our Savior. Upon this day after they have celebrated
the Holy Sacrament, they consecrate and bless the Waters, and especially for
the uses of Holy Baptism.

XVII. S. Anthony, one of the first Founders of the Monastic Order in Egypt
under Decius.

XVIII. S. Athanasius and S. Cyril, Bishops of Alexandria.

XXV. S. Gregory Nazianzene, whom they style (...) or the Divine.

XXX. S. Basil, S. Gregory, and S. Chrysostom: the memory of which three great
and famous Bishops they celebrate together.

FEBRVARY.
II. The Presentation of Christ in the Temple by the Blessed Virgin, after the
forty days of her Purification, when Simeon met them there; therefore called
(...).

XI. S. Blasius, Bishop of Sebaste in Armenia, who having confessed Christ there,
obtained the glory of Martyrdom under Diocletian.

MARCH.
IX. The forty Soldiers, Martyrs, who being exposed naked in a Lake or Ditch
near Sebaste in the lesser Armenia, were frozen to death under Licinius.

XXV. The Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin, S. Mary.

APRIL.
XXIII. S. George of Cappadocia, crowned with Martyrdom under Diocletian,
styled peculiarly by the Greek (...).

XXV. S. Mark, the Evangelist.

MAY.
VIII. S. John, the Divine.

XXI. Constantine the Great, and his Mother Helena, whom they call (...), or
equal to the Apostles.

JUNE.
XI. S. Bartholomew and S. Barnabas, Apostles.

XIX. S. Jude, Apostle, and Brother of our Lord.

XXIV. The Nativity of S. John Baptist, the forerunner of Christ.

XXIX. S. Peter and S. Paul, Apostles.

JVLY.
XVII. S. Marina, Virgin and Martyr, of Antioch in Pisidia, the Daughter of
Aedesius, an Idol-Priest I suppose him, between whom and Julian the Apostate
Emperor, there was a great intimacy and familiarity. The Latins call this
martyred Saint, Margaret.

XV. Decimo tertio Kalendas Augusti, quo die leves Graeci raptionem Eliae ad
Coelos ludis scenicis celebrant. Luitprandus in legatione ad Nicephorum
Imperatorem, p. 146.
Elias the Prophet.

XXVI. S. Parasceve, Virgin and Martyr, had her Head struck off somewhat about
the times of page 317. (...).
Antoninus.

XXVII. S. Panteleemenon, Physician and Martyr, who suffered at Nicomedia in
Bithynia under Maximian. The Latins call him Pantaleon.

AUGUST.
VI. The Transfiguration of our Blessed Savior.

XV. The Death of the Blessed Virgin: (...), dormitio. This the Latins call
the Assumption: in the relation of whose triumphal carriage into Heaven by the
Angels, Page 330. a.
the Greeks are very idle and fancifull, even to a great height and degree of
credulity and folly. The institution of this solemnity Histor. Ecclesiast. l.
17. c. 28. vide etiam l. 15. c. 14.
Nicephorus attributes to the Emperor Mauritius, some little time before the
year 600.

XXIX. The beheading of S. John the Baptist.

Almost every day has a peculiar Saint and Martyr, Other Festivals observed in
Monasteries.
at whose commemoration the Religious in their Convents use a proper office, as
in the Roman Breviary, which makes their Church-books swell to a great bulk.
These are the entertainments of their devotion in their retirements from the
world, performed indeed without that great solemnity as the abovementioned
Festivals are, at which the people are usually present, and are obliged to keep
sacred by their (...) or abstaining from the servile works of their callings,
according to the practice and direction of their Church in the Rubric of their
See also the (...) printed at Venice 1626.
Menology.

Their offices are long and tedious. Their Offices used in time of the Divine
Service long.
The Priests and Deacons and other devout persons observe the Vigils preceding
the great Festivals, spending the whole night in prayer and reading the History
of the Gospels, or the proper Lessons for the Solemnity, without any
interruption, taking their turns, and relieving one another when tired, and so
keeping up the (...) or sacred ministration. I have been present for seven
hours together at their service upon a Festival day from between four and five
of the clock in the morning, till toward twelve. When there is a full
Congregation, the ordinary prayers appointed for the Solemnity begin, and the
life of the Saint is read to them in the vulgar Greek translated out of Simeon
Metaphrastes, or the Synaxaria, which are collections briefly containing the
most remarkable passages and accidents of the Saints lives, and the
particularities of their sufferings and martyrdom, to which the people are very
attentive. For this purpose among others they make use of the translation of
Maximus Bishop of Cerigo, Anciently Cythera, printed at Venice 1621. Quarto.
a Book called (...) or the Treasure composed by Damascen. of Thessalonica,
(Venice 1618. Quarto,) which contains Moral discour^es intermixed with the
Historical, and indeed are in the nature of Sermons; and a Venice 1621. Quarto.
third Book, which they call by the name of (...) or the new Treasure.

At such solemnities the holy and august Sacrament is always celebrated, and
that with great pomp and ceremony: The Holy Eucharist at such times always
administered.
and indeed is not only a necessary, but the principal part of the Festival.
Their Offerings and
Every one strives to bring his present or gift as he is able, according to the
Primitive custom, as Bread, Wine, Oil for the Lamps, Wax-candles, Frankincense,
and such like, to be mae use of in the following sacred rites, or any other way
as the service of the Church may require.

At such times also they are very charitable and liberal to the poor: Charity.
the meaner sort giving away what they can scarce spare from themselves; it
being usual for such as are fallen into any extraordinary distress to get Letters
from the Patriarch (I speak of the places in and about Constantinople
especially) to recommend their case, and to stir them up to compassion. And I
have observed several Turks to bring their Christian slaves with a bolt or
chain about their leg to the Church-doors of the Greeks, to beg their alms in
order to their relief and maintenance: but this being the usual artifice of
their covetous Patrons, there is little notice taken of them.

They go to Church always betimes in the morning, Their time of going to Church.
and in the Winter time an hour or two before day, (which was the practice of
the first Christians in the times of Trajan according to the 97. Epist*
relation which Pliny the younger, then Pro-Praetor in the lesser Asia made to
that Emperor) and this they do that the people may be present at the entire
service, and dismissed in good time to attend and look after their concerns: but
chiefly, that they may perform their devotions more securely and be less
disturbed and molested by the Turks. If I may judge of others by my self, I am
persuaded that no Christian of what Communion soever can be present at their
religious worship, but he will melt into tears and sighs, and find great
strugglings and yearnings in his bowels, and put up a hearty prayer to Christ
our common Savior, that he would be pleased to deliver his poor distressed
suppliants out of the hands of these proud and insulting Infidels, the enemies
of his Cross, and despisers of his Godhead.

The other Festivals are moveable, Moveable Festivals.
and depend upon the great Anniversary of our Blessed Savior's Resurrection.
In the assigning of this, they make use of the old Paschal Cycle, and limits of
it, as they were established by the Fathers of the first general Council at
Nice; who taking no notice of the inequality and difference of the true
Astronomical year from the Civil, then and still in use, which admits not of
the nice calculation of the supernumerary minutes, made no provision for the
praecession of the Aequinoxes, in the succession of after Ages: our account
being the same with theirs.

Easter day is called (...).
the holy and great Lord's day or Festival of the Passover, Easter.
or (...).
the Passover of the Resurrection: and sometimes (...).
the Resurrection day; hence the Lord's day or Sunday is called oftentimes by
the same name, as being the weekly repetition and celebration of the Easter
Festival. Upon this and the two following days at their first meeting, whether
in the Streets, if they can do it conveniently without any great observation of
the Turks, and hindrance; or in their Churches or Churchyards, to express their
mutual love and joy and belief of this great Article of our Faith, the men kiss
each other, using the old form of words taken out of the Gospel of Cap. 20. v.
34.
S. Luke, (...), Christ is risen; to which the answer is, (...), He is risen
indeed. Sometimes it is called (...) or the bright or white Sunday, alluding to
the custom and practice of the first Ages, the Catechumeni, upon their being
baptized at this solemn time, being clothed in white, the whole week being
thence called (...), which name is still retained in their public Offices, and
in other of their Ecclesiastical writings.

The Sunday after Easter (...) or (...), the same with Dominica in Albis, the
Albs being then left off, or (...),
the new Sunday, or (...).
the Sunday of S. Thomas, because of the Gospel of the day taken out of S.
John Chap. 20. relating to the history of his doubting, and of the confirmation
of his faith in the Resurrection, done, as upon this day, the eighth day from
our Savior's rising out of the grave, verse. 26.

The second Sunday after Easter, (...).
the Sunday of the Women who brought the Ointment, and of Joseph the Just, of
Arimathea.

The third Sunday, (...).
the Sunday of the man sick of the Palsy, cured by our B. Savior.

The fourth Sunday, (...).
the Sunday of the Samaritan woman.

The fifth Sunday, (...).
the Sunday of the Blind man restored to sight. These four also so called from
the several Gospels read upon them.

The Thursday following is the (...).
Festival of our Savior's Assumption or Ascension into the Heavens.

The sixth Sunday, the Sunday (...).
of the Three hundred eighteen divine Fathers, who were assembled at Nice. They
are particularly commemorated and extolled upon this day, for their Piety and
Zeal in the defense of the true Catholic Faith against the Impieties and
Blasphemies of Arius and his followers.

The Friday following, All Souls day.

The (...).
Sunday of the Holy Pentecost.

The day following, (...).
the Festival of the most Holy and undivided Trinity.

The Sunday after Whitsunday, (...).
All Saints day.

Another great instrument of preserving the remainders of Christianity among
them is, Fasts.
the strict observation both of the annual and weekly Fasts. They retain them
most religiously, and think it a grievous sin herein to transgress the laws of
the Church in the least; partly out of a principle of Conscience, and partly
through long custom and practice, which make the greatest hardships and
severities of life tolerable and easy. They have gained a perfect mastery as it
were over their appetite, and are so far from complaining of the tediousness
and rigor of these Fasts, that they will not hear of any abatement and
relaxation, but would be the rather apt to entertain strong jealousies and
misapprehensions, that their whole Religion would be in danger, if there were
the least indulgence permitted in so necessary a part of it.

Their solemn yearly Fasts are these four, Yearly Fasts four.
which we may call so many Lents.

The first (...).
great and holy Fast, Lent, or Fast before Easter.
as they speak, is that before Easter, according to the ancient practice and
example, and takes up full eight and forty days, besides the Sundays: all which
time (unless upon the Festival of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin, and
Sundays, when they are indulged to eat some sort of Fish which they may not
upon other days of Lent) they wholly abstain from all sorts of Flesh, and Fish
too, except Shellfish, as Cockles, Muscles, Oysters, Scallops, and such as
have no blood; (for of these they may lawfully eat;) as also from Eggs, Cheese,
and whatsoever is made of Milk; and use themselves for the most part (...).
to a dry kind of diet. On Sundays and Saturdays the use of Wine and Oil is
permitted: but the devouter sort of people, and especially the Priests and they
of the Monkish Order, refuse both. Some are so strangely devout, or rather
superstitious, that they will not touch any thing that is forbidden: so that if
by chance a drop of Wine or Oil should fall upon their Bread, or any of their
lawful food, they think them polluted and profaned, and accordingly throw them
away; and had rather (out of obstinacy and desperateness) perish, either
through hunger or by sickness, then be guilty of so grievous a sin, as they
esteem it.

The Sunday before Septuagesima is called (...).
the Sunday of the Publican and Pharisee, from the Gospel taken out of S. Luke
chap. 18.

Septuagesima, (...).
the Sunday of the Prodigal Son, S. Luke chap. 15. or (...) or (...), and the
whole week (...), because notice is usually given at this time of the nigh
approach of the Fast.

Sexagesima, (...), which we may render Dominica carnisprivii, or the Sunday in
which they bid farewell to Flesh, which no longer becomes lawful to be eaten;
White meats being still permitted.

On the Saturday (...).
they celebrate the memory of all who have been famous for their Retirement
from the tumults and business and vanity of the world, and for their severe and
Ascetick lives.

Quinquagesima, (...), so called, because to this day inclusively they are
indulged to eat Cheese, Eggs and White meats, and no longer. For on Monday
(...).
the rigid and solemn Fasts begin. On this day they read (...).
the History of the Expulsion of Adam out of Paradise, which they ascribe to
his Luxury and greedy wanton appetite.

Quadragesima, or (...).
the first Sunday day in Lent; they call it also the Sunday (...).
of Orthodoxy, celebrating upon it the memory of Orthodox Kings and Patriarchs.
Upon the same day also they excommunicate the (...), or such as deny the
worship of Images, in compliance with the second Nicene Council, wherein that
strange doctrine (which was afterward opposed and confounded by the Bishops
assembled at Francford by the command of the Emperor Charlemaine) was
established under the penalty of an Anathema.

The second Sunday in Lent.

The third Sunday in Lent is called (...)
the Sunday of the precious and life-producing Cross, as they speak; or (...),
according to de Officiis Aulae CP. cap. 9.
Codinus: because on this day and the week following they kiss the Cross more
frequently then at other times, and pay a respect to it which falls little or
nothing short of Adoration.

The fourth, (...).
Mid-lent Sunday.

The fifth Sunday in Lent.

The Saturday following, (...).
the Saturday of S. Lazarus raised from the dead.

The sixth, (...). V. Luitprand. in libro de Gestis Imperat. and Regum, lib. 6.
cap. 5. page 110.
Palm Sunday, so called from their carrying branches of Palms in their hands,
in imitation of what we read S. Mark 11. Chap.

The week following is called (...)
the Week of the holy and salutary Passion, The Holy week.
or the great and holy Week. Every day of which has the same title and
denomination given to it; as Monday is called the great and holy second day,
and so of the rest, in the order of their number: for the Greeks have no proper
and peculiar names for them derived from the Planets. How they call the days of
the Week.
Sunday they always call the Lord's day; the five next, the second, third,
fourth, fifth, sixth: though they call this latter commonly (...), or the
Preparation, as Thursday (...), the day before the Preparation, following the
Jewish custom, and in allusion to them, Saint John chap. 10. 31. and in stead
of the seventh, they generally say the Sabbath.

On Thursday in the evening, The ceremony of washing the feet of twelve persons.
in the Patriarchal Church at Constantinople, is the Ceremony of the (...), or
washing the feet of twelve Kaloirs, or other Officers belonging to that Church,
performed by the Patriarch; in imitation of that wonderful act of
condescension in our Blessed Savior, who in this demonstrative instance took
on him the form of a Servant, according to the Custom of those Eastern
Countries. Each of the twelve bears the name of the Apostle whom he represents.
And though, as they make it, it be but a mere mockshow, and soon over; to
prevail with one to stand for the Traitor Judas, is no small difficulty, this
reproachful and infamous name, for the most part, sticking by him as long as
he lives. But this being a necessary part, the Patriarch is forced to bribe
some one or other with the promise of preferment; or else to interpose his
Authority, that they decide it by lot. All things thus prepared, and the
Prayers and the Hymns sung, which are prescribed in the Office, the Patriarch,
having put off his Robe, girds himself about with a Towell, according to the
direction of the Gospel, which is then read by pauses, by him of the number
who represents Saint John, and pours warm water into the Laver: and as soon as
he hears those words read, S. John chap. 13. v. 5. Then he began to wash the
disciples feet, he falls to his work. Advancing toward Judas, who throws out
his Legs with some kind of have and disorder, in a very foolish and indiscreet
manner, the Patriarch, both by his look and behavior in the action, shows a
manifest dislike; which causes laughter and sport among the people present at
the solemnity, who hitherto are usually grave and serious. He who represents S.
Peter is usually the chief person in dignity among them, and is the last who
has his feet washed. He, upon seeing the Patriarch approach him, contests it for
a time, and deprecates it in the words of S. Peter, verse. 8. and so on they
discourse it in the words of the Gospel. The Ceremony being over, the other
persons being present dip their Handkerchiefs in the Wash-pot, believing that
there is a great deal of virtue in the Water which has been used in the
Solemnity. This Custom is not confined to Constantinople, but is performed
elsewhere in their Monasteries, and by Bishops and Priests in their respective
Churches, where there is a considerable number of Christians: such sights
signifying little, and losing much of their splendor, except there be crowds
of spectatours.

Good Friday, Good Friday.
(...).
the great and holy Preparation, the Passover of the Crucifixion; but most
commonly, the most holy Passion-day.

The (...)
Vigil of Good Friday is spent in fasting and mortification, and prayer, and
reading the history of, and meditating on our Lord's Passion, and the dolorous
and shameful circumstances of it. The Women submit very readily to these
rigours; and Boys of six or seven years of age endure as much as they are able,
and care not to be exempt from these bodily exercises, in which they place a
great part of their Religion: herein keeping up the practice of the Primitive
Christians, who were wont to afflict themselves at this solemn time, and show
an extraordinary Devotion; as Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 17.
Eusebius relates of the Therapeutae mentioned by Philo, whom he fancies to
have been Christians, and Disciples of S. Mark. But whether that be a truth or
a mistake, he says the same severities were used in his time. Great numbers
watch all night in the Church: the neighboring streets in the nightime are
full of such as pass to and again. Those who are weak and sickly are allowed a
little bread and water, to prevent swouning in the daytime: but generally,
except in such like cases, where an absolute necessity may justify the fact,
they abstain from all sort of food till after Sunset the next day. Others, of
a more vigorous and athletick temper and constitution, fast four and twenty
hours longer, and eat nothing till Easter-Eve, that is, at night.

Toward the evening of Good Friday, An Image of our Savior carried about in
their great Churches on Good Friday at night.
they carry an Image of our B. Savior about the Church in procession with
tapers and torches; and then they represent the (...), or the manner of taking
our Savior down from the Cross: in which they betray a great deal of
superstition and folly, this being only to gratify a childish and gross fancy.

On the Saturday they eat but once, Easter Eve.
which is purely to sustain nature. At three of the clock in the afternoon,
when their Vespers begin, the devout people flock to Church; some continue
there all night, and carry with them bread, dates and figs, and the like, to
make use of upon occasion of any fainting fit. Toward break of day they sing
the Hymn which begins, Glory in the highest. After which the Patriarch begins
that excellent Hymn, the Quire immediately following; (...).
Christ is risen from the dead, having by his death trampled upon death, and
given life to those who were in their graves. Which they repeat twelve times
together. This Hymn is sung every day from Easter Day to the Feast of the Holy
Ascension.

The (...).
second solemn Fast is of forty days, Fast before Christmas.
beginning on the fifteenth day of November, and serves to usher in the
Solemnity of Christmas. The reason that some give for the determinate number of
days appropriated to this Fast, is no better then this, That as Moses remained
forty days upon mount Sinai fasting, in the way of an holy initiation, before
he received the two Tables of the Law; so it becomes Christians, by the like
Abstinence, as much as humane infirmity will permit, to prepare themselves to
receive Christ, the true and great Lawgiver. This Fast is very mild and easy,
in comparison of the great Lenten Fast before Easter: for though they are
obliged to abstain from Flesh, Butter, Eggs, etc. yet there is a free use of
Oil, Wine, and all sorts of Fish, as at other times.

The third solemn Fast is (...)
in honor of the B. Virgin, The Fast of the B. Virgin.
and called by her name. It lasts fourteen days, that is, from the first of
August to the fifteenth day of that month, the Festival of her Obit or (...)
Dormition, or, as they sometimes explain it more largely, of her (...)
Translation from Earth to Heaven: which the Roman Church chooses rather to call
the Assumption of the Virgin. Only there is some little relaxation indulged
upon the Festival of our B. Savior's Transfiguration, that falls within this
time.

The fourth solemn Fast is (...)
the Fast of the holy Apostles, The Fast of the Apostles, S. Peter and S. Paul.
S. Peter and S. Paul. The duration of this Fast is not fixed and certain, as
the rest are; for it is longer or shorter, as Easter falls higher or lower in
the year. It begins on the Monday after All Saints day, which is with them the
Sunday after Whitsunday, and is continued to the Festival day of those two
great Saints, which is on the 29. day of June. They find out the length of this
Fast by this easy Method and Rule: Look how many days there are from Easter to
the second of May, so many make up the intervall or number of days allotted to
this Fast. As for instance, when this Canon or Rule was first told me at
Constantinople, in the year 1669, by a Greek Priest, Papas Jeremias Germanus,
(who had traveled into England, where he met with considerable relief, and
particularly here at Oxon, being a man of more refined parts and learning then
the Kaloirs usually are,) Easter happened to fall on the 11. of April; from
which day to the second of May inclusively are two and twenty days: which was
the number of the days they fasted that year, in memory and honor of the
Apostles. For All Saints day falling consequently on the sixth of June, if we
reckon from the day following to the Festival, in reference to which the Fast
is instituted, we shall find the same number. But whether this Rule (...).
holds in all other cases, and is infallible, as he pretended, I am not at
leisure to examine or enquire; nor is it worth my study or time, if I were.
Thus much for the Annual Fasts.

The Weekly Fasting-days are (...).
Wednesday and Friday; Weekly Fasts.
which are strictly still retained, in compliance with the ancient Custom and
Practice of the Catholic Churches in the first Ages of Christianity. The
reason and original of which may be ascribed to the Zeal and Piety of the
Christians of those times, either that they might not be behind-hand with the
more religious sort of Jews, who, according to the prescription and tradition
of their Elders, fasted twice a week, S. Luke chap. 18. verse. 12. or that they
might with a due and becoming sorrow reflect and meditate upon our Blessed
Savior's being betrayed and crucified, as upon these days, and afflict and
humble themselves under a sense of their guilt, the meritorious cause of his
Sufferings and Death.

Out of this number they exempt the Wednesdays and Fridays of the three great
and famous Festivals, Some days exempted out of the number.
that is, of Christmas, (...).
comprehending the whole twelve days, of Easter, and Pentecost, that there be
no interruption of that innocent and sober Joy, which deservedly attends these
Solemnities, by the interposition of Fasts usual at other times; as also of
Septuagesima and Sexagesima, that they may not seem to agree in the least with
the Armenian Christians, fasting most rigorously at these times, whom they look
upon as Heretics, and hate mortally. The reason of which possibly I may
account for hereafter at large.

They are obliged also to fast (...).
on the Vigils of some peculiar Festivals; Vigils.
such as are the Vigil

Of the Epiphany, that being purged and cleansed from sin by fasting, they may
drink with greater success and benefit of the Waters which upon the following
Festival are blessed and consecrated: and this they do very heartily,
attributing great virtue to them. The antiquity of this custom, of Blessing the
waters upon this day, may appear from the (...).
Homily of S. John Chrysostom, Patriarch of Constantinople, upon this very
argument.

Of Pentecost, and the Monday following, to prepare them the better to receive
the influences of the Holy Spirit.

Of the Transfiguration.

Of the Exaltation of the Cross, the figure of which they kiss fasting.

Of the Beheading of S. John the Baptist.

They hold it utterly unlawful to fast on any Saturday throughout the year,
Unlawful to fast on Saturdays, except that of the Holy week.
excepting that of the Holy week; following herein the ancient custom: it
being prohibited under the grievous penalty of Deposition to an Ecclesiastical
person, and of Excommunication to a Layman, by the (...).
66. Apostolical Canon, which was renewed and confirmed by the sixth general
Council, as they reckon, held in Trullo, Canon the 55. By which, says in
Scholiis: (...).
Zonaras, they endeavored to correct the Error of the Latins. The alteration
of one of the days of the weekly Fasts being, among others, a great occasion of
the breach and disunion of the Eastern from the Western Church.

But to put an end to this discourse about their Fasts, The end and design of
these Fasts.
reserving the consideration of the severities and restraints inflicted and
imposed by the Kaloirs upon themselves to a fitter place; I shall only add
thus much, that whatever the present opinion or abuse be about these Fasts, the
design of the Catholic Church in the institution of them, and especially of
the Lenten Fast before Easter, was truly pious and Christian, that a public
check being thus given to the corrupt inclinations of nature, and the Body kept
under by mortification and abstinence, the Mind might be more at liberty to
reflect upon it self, and be taken up with thoughts of God and Religion; and
that all, after such exercises of Penitence, may be the better prepared to
partake of the great Mysteries of the Body and Blood of our Lord, especially at
Easter.

In so great Confusion, Their Churches.
which has long since overwhelmed the outward glory and splendor of the Greek
Empire, it is not to be expected, that their Churches should be rich and
stately. The Churches which now belong to the Greeks are narrow and mean, and
without any rich furniture; whereby they become less liable to be made a prey
to the covetousness of the Infidels, who are wont to envy the Christians the
use of any thing that is rich and beautiful: Christianity here, as to the
exterior part of it, being reduced to the same state and condition, as it was
in before the times of Constantine the Great, when their (...), Hetarriae. Vid,
Plin. 10. lib. Ep. 97. (...). V. Origenem adv. Celsum lib. 1. non procul ab
initio.
Sacred Conventions, sometimes forbid by the cruel Edicts of the Heathenish
Proconsuls and other Magistrates, under most severe penalties, and made Treason
against the Government, were kept secret in Grotta's and Caves under ground;
and when tolerated and connived at, in obscure and unadorned Chapels, which
had nothing to attract either envy or emulation, or to please and gratify the
eye and fancy, but where God was worshipped in the Beauties of holiness. These
Churches they still enjoy, by virtue of the Grant made them by the Emperor
Mahomet, at his triumphal entrance into, and taking possession of this Imperial
City: (it being their interest not to depopulate it wholly of Greeks:) but in
case of any ruin or breach caused by Fire or Earthquake, or any other
unforeseen accident, they are utterly forbid to rebuild or repair them without
leave; which is not obtained without great difficulty, and vast sums of money
too: the Turks presuming, I suppose, that if their Churches were once
demolisht, their Religion would sensibly decay, and in process of time be
wholly extinguished. It concerns the Greeks therefore to be careful (as indeed
they are) of these Sacred Structures, upon the least defect in the walls or
roof, as soon as it is visible; lest it being neglected, they be necessitated to
purchase the good will of the Cadyes, with expencefull Bribes, to keep up and
maintain the Fabric.

There are about six and twenty Churches in Constantinople, Churches in
Constantinople, and
whose names here follow, as they were communicated to me by a Greek Priest,
when I was upon the place.

The (...).
Patriarchal Church, dedicated to the B. Virgin.

S. Nicolas, not far from Sancta Sophia, if I do not misremember.

S. George.

(...).
The Holy Virgin.

S. Nicolas.

S. Carpus.

These four are in the Streets toward the Propontis, not far from
Psamathia-Gate.

S. Constantine, in Caramania-Street, hard by the Seven Towers.

The Holy Virgin, in Belgrade-Street.

The Holy Virgin, in New-Street.

-- Another, near the Gun-Gate.

S. Demetrius, in the Street called (...).

S. George, near Adrianople-Gate.

(...)
The Holy Virgin, Queen or Lady of Heaven, in the same Street.

S. Demetrius, near the Wood-Gate.

The Holy Virgin, near the Crooked-Gate.

The Holy Virgin, in Arabage Meidan, or Arabian Marketplace.

The Holy Virgin, near Balini.

(...).
S. Nicolas of the Achridians.

(...).
The Chapel of the Holy Sepulcher.

(...).
The Holy Virgin --

(...).
S. George --

S. Nicetas, near the house of the Prince of Walachia.

The Holy Virgin, near the house of the Prince of Moldavia.

The Holy Virgin, near the Patriarchal Church, called, for distinction, (...),
or the little Church.

S. George, near the Lantern-Gate.

(...).
S. John, belonging to the Patriarch of Alexandria.

There were about seven Christian Churches burnt down in the dismal fire that
happened about fifteen or sixteen years ago, near Condoscali by the Sand-Gate;
some of which they thought to have rebuilt, having procured leave from the
Caimacam or Governor of Constantinople: but the Imams and other zealous Turks
remonstrating against it, they were commanded to desist.

They have likewise six Churches at Galata, Galata.
which are

(...).
The Holy Virgin --

(...).
Christ hanging upon the Cross.

S. Demetrius, near Sophana, the place where the Turks cast their Guns, and
where I have seen several Cannon and Fieldpieces taken from Christian Princes.

S. Nicolas.

(...).
Christ's --

S. John.

They have a small Church in the Bagno, where a Greek Priest is sometimes
permitted to come and officiate before the poor Slaves of their Communion, at
such time as the Armata of Galleys is returned from visiting the Isles in the
Arches, or any such like Summer-expedition. Not to mention the Churches
belonging to the Towns and Villages near Constantinople, on either side of the
Bosphorus.

Those glorious and magnificent Piles of building mentioned by Procopius, Most
of the ancient Churches destroyed, or turned into Moschs.
the Author of the Survey made in the times of Theodosius Junior, Cedrenus,
and Codinus, (which latter lived a little before Constantinople was taken,)
which the Piety of several Emperors had raised in honor of our Religion, at
so vast an expense, in Constantinople, (and the like is to be said of the other
great Cities under the dominion of the Grand Signor) are either levelled with
the ground, and new Foundations built upon them; or else seized upon by the
Turks, pleased with the curious Architecture, and turned into Moschs, upon the
taking of that City, with some little alteration, the better to accommodate
them to the Uses of their Religious Worship; the Chancells being laid open, and
the curious Images in Mosaic disfigured. We may guess at the richness and
beauty and glory of the rest, by those few which remain, of which I shall only
mention the Churches of Saint Sophia and of the Holy Apostles.

The former, which is now the chief seat of the Mohammedan Worship, The Church
of Sancta Sophia.
as it was before of the Christian, was called so (...), Niceph. Histor. Eccl.
l. 7. c. 20. (...), Chronic. Constantin. p. 4. (...), p. 12. (...), Procopius
de Aedificiis Justiniani l. 1. c. 1. See the Praises of this glorious Church in
the eloquent Letter of Manuel Chrysaloras to the Emperor Johannes Cantacuzenus.
in honor of our Blessed Savior, who is the Wisdom of the Father; built by
the Emperor Justinian according to the contrivance and model of the two
famous Architects of that Age, Anthemius of Tralles, and Isidorus of Miletum:
upon which he had set his heart so much, that he judged no cost great enough in
order to the accomplishment of his design, as if this had been the crown and
perfection of all those glorious actions, both in peace and war, for which his
Reign is so deservedly famous. At the Dedication whereof, (after he had given
solemn thanks to Almighty God, who had enabled him to finish it, and had
continued him alive to see the holy Triumphs of that day,) he could not contain
himself, but brake out into rapturous expressions of joy, saying, (...), Codin.
de Origin. Constant. p. 71. edit. Paris.
O Solomon, I have got the better of thee. And if we may give credit to Codin.
page 21. fine.
Codinus, he caused the Statue of that King to be placed near the Regia
Cisterna, sitting in a Chair, and, in a melancholic posture, leaning upon his
elbow, with his eyes turned toward Sancta Sophia. By which kind of Emblem he
designed to represent the great Grief that would seize upon him, if he were to
be restored to life for some time, to see this Church so much outshine the
Temple he had the honor to build at Jerusalem. The Turks call this Church,
with very little alteration from the Greek, Aia Sophia: the Greeks in their
ordinary discourse, as formerly in their writings, before it fell into the
hands of the barbarous Infidels, the great Church, or the great Holy Church.

The Church of the Holy Apostles, The Church of the Holy Apostles.
Vid. Cedrenum ad 23. annum Justiniani.
where the Relics of S. Andrew, S. Luke, and S. Timothy were anciently
deposited, being before of Wood, was pulled down, and rebuilt of Marble Vid.
Procop. de AEdif. Justiniani l. 1. c. 4. and Codinum de Origin. CP. p. 73.
by the Empress Theodora, the Wife of Justinian, incited by his example to do
something worthy of her, to make her name known to, and admired by posterity.
This Church, according to the tradition of the Greeks, was first granted by the
Emperor Mahomet, upon his taking the City, to the Patriarch Gennadius
Scholarius: but he soon revoked his Grant, and turned it into the Mosch which
now bears his name.

The Patriarchal Church formerly belonged to a Convent of Nuns, The Patriarchal
Church: where is
where the Patriarch has a convenient dwelling. part of the Pillar to which our
B. Savior was bound.
It is situated upon the rising of a hill, near the Lantern-Gate, toward the
Haven; of an ordinary bigness, and without any great Ornament, for the reason
above mentioned. The Emperor Alexius Comnenus here lies interred. They showed
me here also the Relics of S. Euphemia, and of some other Martyrs, locked up
in Chests, which they open with great solemnity, to gratify the curiosity of
Strangers, who reward the civility sufficiently. But that which they most
esteem is a piece of black Marble, as they pretend, part of that Pillar which
formerly stood in the Praetorium or Hall of Pontius Pilate, to which our
Blessed Savior was tied, when he was whipped; about two foot long, and three
or four inches over; (if my memory serves me right, for I did not think it
worth my pains, though never so small, to take the exact dimensions of it;)
enclosed in brass lattice Grates, that it may not receive prejudice either from
devout or sacrilegious persons. For they have a strong imagination, that the
dust rased from it, and put into wine, or any way conveyed into the stomach,
cures Agues and Fevers almost infallibly. In a brass Plate under it I found
these six Verses engraven, alluding to the tradition I just now mentioned,
which they believe as undoubtedly as if it were Gospel.

(...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
Near hereunto, the Emperor Selim, Artifice of the Greeks in diverting Selim
from building here.
emulous of the glory of his Ancestors, once intended to have built a Mosch,
for the advantage of the situation. The Greeks, fearing lest their Church
should be demolisht for the enlargement of the Area of it, played a master-game
of cunning, by bribing the Vizir and the other Bassa's, who had a mighty
Ascendent over him. They accordingly diverted him from his purpose, and
persuaded him to build it at Adrianople, to the great joy of the poor
Christians, who were thus happily delivered from their fears.

The Churches are of different figures; The form and figure of their Churches.
some (...).
rising up with Cuppola's in the midst, as Sancta Sophia: others are built
(...).
Cross-wise, like our Cathedralls; (...)
others square and oblong.

That the Rites and Ceremonies, A particular description of a Church.
which I shall have occasion to mention hereafter, may be the better
understood, I will briefly describe the make and fashion of one of their
Churches, with the several parts of it; (for where any of them is wanting, it
is wholly for want of room, or some other convenience;) referring the curious
Reader to the Latin Copy.

In the first fabric and constitution, they had regard to the Sea Symeon
Thessalonicensis, in his tract (...).
threefold condition and order of persons admitted within the Church-doors:
which are, (...).
Ecclesiastical persons, or Priests, and other inferior Ministers belonging to
them.

(...)
Lay-persons, which lie under no Church-censure, but enjoy the privileges of
their Baptism, and have the liberty of serving God in the public Congregation;
or the Faithful.

(...).
Penitents and Excommunicated persons, deprived of the use of the holy
Sacrament in the way of a spiritual Punishment: among whom, anciently, the
Catechumeni, and persons possessed with Evil Spirits, were placed. Accordingly
every complete Church consists (...).
of an Entrance, Nave, and Chancell, distinguished by the several uses to which
they peculiarly belong, and appropriated to particular persons.

Before you enter the Church, Porch.
is (...).
a covered Porch, usually arched, running out at each side the Portall with
Seats against the wall, upon which are painted several Images, as of our
Blessed Savior, the Virgin Mary, S. John, S. George, and the like, (these two
last being the great Saints of the East,) and of that Saint particularly, to
whose memory the Church is consecrated; but very wretchedly, and without beauty
or proportion: Painting, as well as the other ingenious and polite Arts, having
been long since banished Greece and the Lesser Asia.

The outward Gate, Outward Gate.
which they call (...).
the great or Silver Gate, opens into a long narrow space, Narthex.
which they call (...).
(...) distinct from the Body of the Church, and separated by a half partition.
In the innermost part stood the (...). See the Commentary of Zonaras on the 9.
Canon of the Council of Nice.
Penitents, to hear the holy Scriptures read; next to the Gate were the (...).
This place hence called (...) or (...).
Candidates of Baptism; and between both, those who were (...).
possessed: this being their proper place, beyond which it was not lawful to
advance one step forward. But these uses long since ceasing, the rooms are
taken up by the Women, who never sit promiscuously with Men, there being
Lattices at the farther end, through which they look into the Church, without
being seen themselves. Here they leave the Coffin of the person who is to be
interred, (unless he be a Churchman, and then they carry it in farther,) while
they perform some Funeral offices in the Church; which ended, they carry it
into the Churchyard. In this place the Font is placed, Font.
of which I shall speak more distinctly, when I come to show the Ceremonies
which they use in Baptism.

The middle Gate, Middle Gate, and Body of the Church.
which they call the (...).
Beautiful Gate, opens into the (...).
Nave or Body of the Church, which lies open, unless almost toward the upper
part, where there are some few (...)
Stalls, Stalls.
as in the Patriarchal Church, where is one higher then the rest for the
Patriarch, and others for the Princes of Walachia and Moldavia, or for the
Metropolitans and Bishops, when any happen to be present. Above which, but more
toward the Wall, in little oblong Squares, those who belong to the Quire have
their station; and a little higher in the middle is the Desk, Desk.
where they read the Holy Scripture to the People. In the great Churches a
(...).
Pulpit is usually placed in the middle, Pulpit.
but which they very seldom make use of. Partition between the Nave and
You advance only from a single step to the wooden Partition. Which intervall
I suppose to be the Soleas, about the meaning and right placing of which
several learned men have contested at large. This reaches almost from the roof
to the pavement, and takes up the breadth of the Church. It is full of Pictures
done at large, especially those lately mentioned; sometime daubed over with
Gilt, as I have observed in their Monasteries, which, being either in the
Islands, or in the Country in by-places, out of the sight of the Turks, are
better and more richly adorned. Three Doors open out of it; whereof the
middlemost, called the (...).
holy or royal Door, is not opened, or passed through, but upon special
occasion: See the Diataxis of Philotheus Patriarch of Constantinople.
as in the solemn introitus of the Vespers of the great Festivals; or at such
time as they celebrate the Communion, when the Deacon goes out thence to read
the Gospel to the Congregation: or when the Priest, after the Procession,
immediately enters in order to consecrate; or when such as communicate approach
thither to receive the sacred Symbols from the Priest or Deacon, who stands
just in the entrance of it. There are two lesser Doors at each extremity, the
one at the North, the other at the South side of the Church; by which at all
other times they pass into the Sacrarium or Chancell.

This enclosed space they most frequently call (...).
Bema: Chancell: within which
either because of the little rising and ascent to it; or rather because it is
looked upon as the Throne and Tribunal of Christ, which is the signification of
the word in the New Testament, (for See the above cited Symeon Thessalonicensis.
this and such like honorable appellations, as the Holy of Holies, the Seat
and Place of God, and his Rest, etc. they bestow upon it,) it being the holiest
and most venerable part of the Church, peculiar to the Priests and others who
serve at the Altar; it not being permitted the Laics to enter there during the
Communion-Service, according to an express Canon 19.
Canon of the Council of Laodicea. Out of respect to which, and the Custom of
those Times, founded upon it, Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 18. The curious
Reader may see this more at large in the Latin Copy, p. 59, 60, 61.
S. Ambrose thought fit to admonish the Emperor Theodosius, upon his stay
there in order to receive the Sacrament, after he had made his Offerings: which
the good Emperor took very patiently and quietly, and readily submitted to.
Hence it is called (...) sometimes (...) or the Propitiatory, because of the
Holy Eucharist, the representative Sacrifice of the Death of our Savior, who
once offered up himself upon the Cross, for the sins of the World; and
sometimes (...), for the same reason: de Graecae Eccles. hodierno statu, p. 61,
62.
as I have elsewhere proved at large.

Within this place, in the greater Churches, three Tables.
there are three Tables; which differ much in use and dignity: it being only
lawful to consecrate upon the middlemost, which is of Stone, fastened to the
Wall, which they call (...).
the holy, The holy or mystical Table.
Divine, and mystical Table; where, as in their proper place, the Gospels lie,
and over which there is a Cross, as a memorial of the Death of Christ.

On the left hand of it, Prothesis.
toward the North, is a little Table, called (...), where they deposit the holy
Gifts or Presents, (as under the Mosaic Law, the Shewbread, which the Greek
Interpreters of the Old Testament call (...),) and where several things are
done preparatory to the Holy Communion.

On the opposite side is the called also (...).
(...), Sacristy.
or (...), or Sacristy, that has a Table also. Here they put their Books and
holy Vessels and Vestments, which they use in the time of Divine Service. This
is properly the place of the Deacons and other inseriour Ministers (hence
called (...)) employed in lighting the Lamps and Tapers, and in heating water
to pour into the Chalice, and the like.

The Sacristy was not always anciently within the Church, The Sacristy not
always within the Church.
but sometimes without; hence called (...) as the round Stone-building within
the first Gate of the Seraglio is supposed to have been to Sancta Sophia; and
the like I observed still standing hard by the great Church at Pergamus. They
burn Lamps for the most part before the Altar, and sometimes in the Nave of the
Church.

In the Patriarchall, Seats within the Chancell.
Metropoliticall and Episcopal Churches, there are Seats in the Concha or space
about the Altar: the chief Seat higher then the rest, which they call by the
name of (...), or holy Throne, to distinguish it from the other Seat of the
Patriarch, Metropolitan, or Bishop, below in the Church: in both which (...).
V. Syropuli Historiam concilii Florentini page 3. Symeon Thessalonic. in
Euchologio, p. 223. (...), etc. and afterward, (...), etc. speaking of the
Bishop, (...), page 217. Hence the phrases (...) and (...), to be created
Patriarch; and (...), the same with (...) or to be deposed.
he is placed at his Inauguration; which is never omitted, as being a necessary
Ceremony, and gives them a full possession of their Dignity.

They are forbidden the use of Bells. A wooden B^rd or iron Plate in stead of a
Bell.
But to supply that defect, in the Villages which they enjoy to themselves, to
call the people together to Church, they make use of (...).
a wooden Board, or iron Plate full of holes, which they knock with a Hammer or
Mallet. As the sound is greater or less, or more or less repeated, those who
are disposed to go to Prayers, knowing the meaning and distinction of the
several blows, prepare themselves accordingly.

But of the figure of the Greek Churches hitherto.

The Greeks retain and keep up the same form of Ecclesiastical Government
under the Tyranny of the Turks, Their Ecclesiastical Government.
which they had formerly in the flourishing times of the Empire; there being
still the same Orders and Degrees of the Clergy, distinct in office and
dignity. So that there is a face of a Church, though sadly distressed and
harassed, everywhere visible, and a due Subordination observed among the
Ministers of holy things, and Discipline exercised: by which, the merciful
Providence of God so ordering it, they have prevented that Confusion which
otherwise had overwhelmed them, had they levelled all Titles, confounded
different Orders, introduced a Presbyterian Parity, and relinquished the Canons
of the ancient Church, by which their Ancestors were governed. I will give a
brief account of the state and condition of all sorts of Ecclesiastical
persons among them; and, for method sake, will begin with the supereminent
Dignity of the Patriarch.

All the Eastern Christians of the Greek Communion look upon the Patriarch of
Constantinople as their Chief and Head, Patriarch of Constantinople.
upon whose wise Conduct and Government the Happiness and Quiet of the Church
mostly depend. And though he does not constitute the other Patriarchs, yet they
pay him extraordinary Respect; and, carrying on the same common and joint
interests, often consult him in Person, and frequently by their Deputies, in
case of any difficulty that may happen; as being unwilling to determine any
thing of moment without his advice and approbation.

This Right he still claims by virtue of a Canon made in the Council held at
Chalcedon, His Primacy in the Eastern Church.
and retains, in the midst of his poverty and affliction, the pompous Title of
Ecumenical Patriarch, as if ready to dispute it with the Bishop of Rome, with
the same eagerness as Joannes and Cyriacus, and others of his Predecessors:
the same Ambition cleaving also to the several Metropolitans under him, who
value themselves as much upon the ancient dignity and preeminence of their
Sees, as if they enjoyed the same Revenue and state, and exercised an equal
Power, and had the same number of Suffragans still under their Jurisdiction.

The Patriarchate of Constantinople (as I mentioned in the beginning of this
Discourse) comprehends under it all the Lesser Asia, The extent of his
Jurisdiction.
except the Provinces of Isauria and Cilicia, as also Thrace, Macedonia, and
the other Countries of Greece, the Islands of the Aegaean and Ionian Seas,
Dalmatia, Albania, Walachia and Moldavia. What places exempt.
But as for those Countries that lie North of Thrace, toward Mount Haemus on
the one hand, and bounded by the Danube on the other, they remain exempt from
his Jurisdiction, and enjoy the privilege of being independent on any other
then their own Metropolitans, according to the Constitutions of the Emperors,
who raised them to that dignity. Such are the Archbishop of Justiniana Prima or
Achridae, (who claims this privilege from the times of the Emperor Justinian,
See Authent. Collat. 2. tit. 6. novel. 11.
who, to do honor to the Country where he was born, equalled it in dignity to
an Apostolical See, and made it altogether absolute and free.) He is Primate of
all Bulgaria, and has under him about eighteen Bishops: though it must be
acknowledged, that some, who have enjoyed this Title, have come to the
Patriarch of Constantinople to be consecrated. But this can no more be alleged
as a prejudice and bar to their just liberty and power, then it might be to the
Patriarchs of Alexandria, who have sometimes received their Consecration in the
same place. Next, the Archbishop of (...). Ita scribitur (...) ad fi^em Codini,
page 419.
Pecium, a City of Servia, who governs that whole Country with the assistence
of sixteen Bishops. These two Countries make up the higher and lower Moesia of
the Ancients. Then the Archbishops of Georgia and Mingrelia. And lastly the
Archbishop of the Island of Cyprus, who has three or four Suffragans, being
free from the pretensions of the Patriarch of Constantinople, as well as of
Antioch. But notwithstanding these immunities, all of them yield a mighty
deference to the chief See, and upon occasion, according as they are able,
contribute to support the necessities of it.

For besides the Present they are obliged to make upon the Presentation of a
new Patriarch, The expense of the Patriarch for the maintenance of the Christi
an Religion.
who is always to be confirmed by the Grand Signor or Vizir, (who indeed do
oftentimes impose such as they think fit;) a yearly sum is now exacted in the
way of Tribute. Emanuel Malaxus, in his History of the Patriarchs of
Constantinople from the taking of the City to his own time, that is, to the
year 1577, tells us, that the Elections of the four first Patriarchs were free;
and how that afterward, upon a Present of a thousand Ducats of Gold made in
favor of a certain Kaloir of V. Historiam Politicam Constantinopoleos in
Turco-Graecia, page 22. 24. 39.
Trapezond, named Symeon, whom his Countrymen especially desired to make
Patriarch, the Turks took advantage of their forwardness, and made it a
standing rule and precedent for the future: and the sum was soon doubled and
trebled, and not long after turned into a yearly Tribute. And this has been
increasing ever since, by the covetousness and rapaciousness of the Turks, to
which the horrid Differences and Dissentions among the Greeks have given too
great an occasion, as I shall have occasion to show immediately by late
examples. The Sultana, and the Favorites and great Officers of the Port,
besides the yearly Presents made to them also, are to be bribed lustily upon
all occasions: so that the standing and accidental Charge of the Patriarch, put
both together, make a great sum, for which he is responsible.

For the raising of this money, The Revenue of the Patriarch.
with which they buy the liberty of their Religion, there is a certain Tax or
portion of money payable by every Metropolitan and Bishop, besides what is given
at their Consecration, (for he usually makes them,) every year, which they
receive from the several Priests under their Jurisdiction, according to the
value of their Incomes. To collect these sums, or (...).
honorable Presents, he deputes one of his Dependents every year, as his
Legate, whom they call (...) and sometime upon occasion he goes himself in
person to visit for the same purpose. Money comes in also from the Ordination of
Priests, that are within his particular Diocese, who pay him so many Dollers a
year as their Livings are worth; from granting Licenses of Marriage, and
Dispensations; and from Lawsuits judicially heard before him. For, to prevent
the ill consequences of running to the Turks for Justice, they usually appeal
to him as to their Judge in Civil causes, The Patriarch Judge in civil affairs.
and are concluded by his sentence and determination, under the grievous
penalty of being excommunicated; which they dread more then death it self. For
if they refuse to stand to his arbitrament and decision, they are ipso facto
deprived of the benefit of the Sacraments: and in case any should be so hardy
and obstinate, as not to endeavor quickly to be reconciled to the Church,
(unless he has a mind to turn Turk to gain his pretended right, by suing his
Adversary before a Cady or in the Divan,) the Patriarch and those about him
will spare for no charge to get such a one condemned to the Galleys for a
certain time, till they have conquered his refractoriness of humor, and
brought him to terms of submission; this being the main pillar and support of
their Government. But they seldom make use of this rigorous and expencefull
course, a Principle of conscience in the persons concerned hindering the
prosecution of it, and making them afraid to transgress therein; while they
remember that chiding expostulation of S. Paul, in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, 1 Epist. 6. 1. as if it had been particularly directed unto them,
1 Cor. 6. 1.
Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to law before the unjust,
and not before the Saints?

The Patriarch, His Assistents.
in the determination of causes brought before him, has the assistence of
twelve of the chief Officers belonging to the Patriarchal Church and dignity.
These also assist the Archbishop of Heraclea, in vesting and crowning him at
his Inauguration, and still retain the same high titles as they did before the
Turks came among them. These are as it were his standing Council, to whom he
refers the great affairs and concerns of Religion. Lastly, several devout
persons, that by their handlabour and frugal way of living, or otherwise, have
advanced their fortunes, and have scraped some money together, leave it
oftentimes in the way of Legacy to the Church, to serve the needs of it. By all
which ways and means the Patriarch, as I was made to believe, may receive
between thirty and forty thousand Dollers a year. But this being matter of
conjecture, and wholly uncertain, I lay not any great stress upon it, and
determine nothing in the case.

The Patriarch most commonly is chosen out of the number of the Bishops, The
Patriarch usually chosen out of the number of Bishops, and a Kaloir.
who, according to the present constitution and practice of that Church, are
Kaloirs of the Order of S. Basil, and bred up for the most part at mount Athos,
and consequently under a vow of Celibacy.

To derive a greater luster upon the Episcopal Dignity and Function, His
retinue and title, when they address to him.
their menial servants and such as attend them are usually in Deacons Orders.
When they address to him, the usual style is, (...), most Holy Father; or
(...), or (...), your Holiness; and (...), or (...), most Blessed Father, or
your Blessedness: that they may not be behind-hand with the Romanists in
expressing the great esteem and veneration they have of the Patriarch, whom
they make equal in all respects with the Pope.

As formerly ambition and greedy thirst after the highest Dignities and
preferments in the Church occasioned great disorders and distractions amongst
the People, Dissentions in the choice of a Patriarch.
according as they took part, and sometime introduced a Schism, whereby Altar
was set up against Altar, to the great scandal of Religion and breach of
Christian Communion, the Heathen making sport at these Divisions, and taking
advantage hereby to oppress and ruin both parties: So it is still; the Peace
and Quiet and the great and real Interest of Christianity being oftentimes
sacrificed to this restless Passion. The oppression which the Greeks lie under
from the Turks, though very sad and dismal in it self, becomes more uneasy and
troublesome by their own horrid Quarrels and Differences about the choice of a
Patriarch: there being oftentimes several Pretenders among the Metropolitans
and Bishops, and they too making an interest, by large sums of money, in the
Vizir, or the other Bassa's, to attain their ends. He who by his money and his
friends has prevailed, and has defeated his Competitors, will endeavor to
reimburse himself, and lay the burden and debt, which he has contracted, upon
the Church, which must pay for all: while the rest, who envy his preferment,
and are vexed at their disappointment, unite their interest and strength to get
him displaced, by remonstrating against his injustice and ill management of
affairs, and put up fresh Petitions to the Turks, and bribe lustily to be
heard. The Turks, glad of such an opportunity of gain, readily enough admit
their Complaint, and put out and put in, as they see occasion. In the mean
while, large sums of money are usually taken up at a great interest by the
contending Parties, to carry on these foolish and un-christian Quarrels.
Sometime, beside the reigning Patriarch, there have been three others alive at
the same time, who have enjoyed the Title. Such were in the years 1669, 1670.
Paisius, Dionysius, and Parthenius: the Patriarch then being the most Reverend
Father Methodius, before Archbishop of Heraclea. But I concluded from the
murmurings and dissatisfactions I observed among the Greeks, that he would not
continue long in that dignity; and the event soon justified my fears. For
Parthenius, being a man of an unquiet temper, and not able to brook his former
disgrace, makes in with the Vizir, and recovers his former pretensions, and by
the usual arts prevails, and was restored to the Patriarchal throne: Methodius
being thrown into prison by the Caimacam or Governor of Constantinople. But he
being after some time restored to his liberty by the new Governor, and
thinking himself not safe from the malice and revenge of Parthenius, who had
got him displaced, takes sanctuary in my Lord Embassadour's Palace at Pera,
where he had all manner of good accommodation. Parthenius by his imperious
carriage and cruel exactions grew hateful to the Bishops of his See, and to
the generality of the Greeks; whereupon they accuse him of fraud and injustice,
and that he had detained for his private use the yearly tribute due to the
Emperor, which had been collected: whereupon the Turks were content to
displace him, provided that they made good the same sum. Thus after eight
months sitting he was banished to the Island of Cyprus, and Dionysius
Archbishop of Larissa made Patriarch. In this state of affairs I left Turkey:
what has happened since, I leave to the relation of others. While I reflect
upon these Revolutions and Changes, I am filled at the same time with amazement
and pity, and cannot but put up this hearty prayer to Almighty God, (and I
doubt not, but that whosoever shall cast his eyes upon these Papers, will join
with me as heartily in it,) that He would be pleased to inspire the Grecian
Bishops with sober and peaceable counsels, that, laying aside all partiality,
and the consideration of base worldly interest, they may study the good and
quiet of their Church, and see at last in this day of their most severe
Visitation the things which belong to their peace, before they be hid from
their eyes, and before their name and Religion be quite lost and extinguished.
To which sad doom these horrid Differences seem fatally to enclose them.

The State of the Greek Church, The several Metropolitanships and Bishoprics
under the Patriarch of Constantinople.
as to the number and order of the several Metropoliticall and Episcopal Sees
now subject to the Patriarchate of Constantinople, is vastly different from See
the Notitia of the Emperor Leo, who lived about eight hundred years since, in
the Jus Graeco-Romanum, published by Leunclavius: (where also is a Constitution
about the Preeminence of the several Sees, as to their Session in Councils:)
the (...) of the Emperor Andronicus Junior at the end of Codinus; as also that
published by Carolus a Sancto Paulo in his Geographia Sacra, and more fully by
Mr. Beverege in his Notes upon the 36. Canon of the Council held in Truth.
what it was in ancient times; as may easily appear by comparing the following
List, which I received from a very able and learned hand, whilst I lived in
Constantinople, with any of the ancient Notitia's or Surveys. For, alas!
besides the Alterations and Changes, which happen in the succession of several
Ages, since the ruin of their Empire, such great Confusions have followed,
that there seems to be a new face of things. Some Ecclesiastical Dignities
being lost in the ruin of those Cities from whence they were denominated;
others retaining only the Title; several Metropolitans being without
Suffragans, as the Archbishop of Caesarea, to whose Jurisdiction formerly eight
Bishops were subject; others having only two or three; some few retaining a
greater number, according as the Christians are more or less in the several
Districts.

A Catalogue of the Metropolitanships and Bishoprics at this day subject to
the Throne of Constantinople; which consisting only of bare Names, when I
received it, I have inserted a few explications, to make it the better
understood.

Caesarea.

Ephesus.

Heraclea. The Archbishop of this Vid. Nicephor. Gregoram lib. 6. Historiae p.
117. This honor being done to his See, as having been the Metropolis of the
Thracian Diocese, before Constantinople was made the chief Seat of the Empire.
See challenges a right of consecrating the Patriarch: which custom is still
continued. He writes himself Exarchus of all Thrace and Macedonia, and has five
Bishoprics under him; which are, Callipolis, a maritim City on the Propontis,
Rodesto, situated upon the same Sea, Tyriloe, Metra, and Myriophyton up in the
Continent of Thrace.

Ancyra.

Cyzicus.

Philadelphia.

Nicomedia, (before which formerly was Sardes, now utterly extinguished.

Chalcedon, now a poor Village, only with one Church in it, dedicated to S.
Euphemia. In the whole Province there may be about sixty Churches, and no more.

Thessalonica. This Archbishop has Jurisdiction over all Thessaly, and has for
Suffragans the Bishops of Citros, anciently called Pydna, (...).
Servia, Campania, Petra, Ardamerion, Hierissus, and Mount Athos, Plantamon,
and Poleanina.

Athens. Under this Metropolis are the Bishoprics of Talantium, S^yrros,
Solon, and Mendinitza.

Prusia.

Trapezond.

Philippolis.

Philippi and Drama.

Thebes.

Methymna.

Lacedaemon; under which are the Bishoprics of Cariopolis, Amiclae, and
Brestena.

Larissa; under which are the Bishoprics of Demetrias, Zetonion, Stagon,
Thaumacus, Gardicion, Radobisdion, Sciathus, Loidoricion, Letza, and Agrapha.

Adrianople; to which only belongs the Bishopric of Agathopolis.

Smyrna.

Mitylene.

Serrae.

Christianopolis; the same with Arcadia.

Amasia, in Cappadocia.

Neo-Caesarea.

Iconium.

Corinth; under which the Bishopric of Damalon.

Rhodus.

New Patras, in Thessaly.

Aenus,

Drystra.

Tornobus; under which are the Bishoprics of Lophitzus, Tzernobus, and
Presilabe.

Joannina, a City of Aetolia, formerly called Cassiope; under which the
Bishoprics of Bothrontus, Bella, Chimarra, and Drynopolis.

Euripus.

Arta, the same with Ambracia, a City of Epirus.

Monembasia, the same with Epidaurus, a City in Peloponnesus: under it the
Bishoprics of Elos and Marina, Rheon and Andrusa.

Nauplium.

Phanarion and Neochorion.

Sophia.

Chios, now called Scio.

Paronaxia.

Tria.

Siphnus.

Samos.

Carpathus, now Scarpanto.

Andros.

Leucas. These eight are Islands in the Archipelago.

Varna, near the Danube.

Old Patras; under which the Bishoprics of Olene, Methona and Corona.

Proconnesus.

Ganus and Chora.

In the same Paper, that was put into my hands, these Bishoprics were added.

Media, toward the Euxine.

Sozopolis, not far from Adrianople.

Praelabus, somewhere toward the Danube.

Capha, in the Cimmerian Bosphorus, a City of Tartaria Praecopiensis.

Gotthia, in the same Country.

Bindana, near Sophia.

Didymotichum.

Litiza.

Bysia.

Selybria.

Zychnae, in Macedonia.

Neurocopus.

Melenicus.

Beroea.

Pogogiana, in Illyricum.

Chaldaea.

Pisidia.

Imbrus.

Myra.

Santorina, an Island near Melos.

Aegina.

Walachia: for this I suppose is meant by (...).

In Moldavia are four Bishoprics; as in Candia there were lately three under
the Metropolitan of that Island.

Several of the Bishops mentioned in the Catalogue being freed from the
Jurisdiction of the Metropolitans to which they formerly belonged, How some
Bishops have the title of Archbishops.
and so become in respect of them (...), free and independent, and only
subject to the Patriarch, are called, by way of distinction, Archbishops; as he
of Samos, for instance, who before was under Rhodes, and so of the rest. The
Archbishops which have Suffragans under them still, or had formerly at least,
being generally called Metropolites. But of the Metropoliticall and Episcopal
Sees thus much.

Considering the Poverty of the Greek Church, Priests.
and the scanty provisions made for such as enter into holy Orders, there being
no rich Livings to invite them to do so, it must only be a principle of
Conscience at first, that makes them willing to take up that holy Calling,
which deprives them of all other ways and means of getting a subsistence. For
the Clergy must be content with their allowance, Their poor Allowance and
Maintenance.
and not think to better their condition by busying themselves in any Secular
employment, as being altogether inconsistent with their holy Profession. But
custom and long use make things most troublesome, and difficult to be born,
easy at last. It is accounted a good Preferment, if in a Country-village the
poor Priest can make in the whole year forty Crowns, out of which he pays a
proportion to his Bishop. For there being no Lands belonging to the Church,
besides the small allowance agreed upon at first by him and the people, they
pay him so many Aspers for Christening their Children, giving them the
Sacrament upon extraordinary occasions, Burying their dead, and performing
other Funeral rites, and the like. And on the great Festivals they present him
with money, or what is monyworth, that he may expressly mention their names, or
their relations, whether alive or dead, when he comes to that part of the
Liturgick-service in the celebration of the Sacrament, where such
Commemorations are used; as believing such a Recommendation, made by the Priest
at that solemn time, to be of great force and efficacy. Marriage no impediment
to holy Orders.
Marriage does not hinder any person, if he be not otherwise unqualified, from
being put into holy Orders: not in such a one obliged to live from his Wife.
But the general practice of the Church is against Marriage after Orders. So
that if any Priest, once married, should marry a second time, much more, if a
Priest not before married should enter into this state, they are liable to
censures, and, as if the character imprinted upon them, when they were made
Priests, were by this act rased out, they are esteemed as mere Laics, and
accounted (...) or flagitious persons, and transgressors of the Laws and
Canons of the Church. They have a distinct Habit from the people, Their Habit.
which is black; wearing a Cassock, and having a Felt-cap upon their heads of
the same color, over which they throw a kind of Veil, which hangs down behind
their back, if they be Kaloirs; and are permitted by the Turks to wear their
Hair long, and over their Shoulders. Which the other Greeks of late years
presuming to imitate, the chief Vizir Achmet, upon his return from Candia,
fearing that it might be of ill effect and consequence, if this Innovation were
any longer indulged, commanded them under a grievous penalty to shave their
heads as formerly: which they with haste and trembling submitted to, well
knowing, that such orders were not to be dallied with. The Respect shown to
them.
They are in great veneration among the people everywhere, who have a just
opinion of the necessity of their Order, and of the dignity of their Function,
that they are set apart by God for his more immediate Worship and Service, and
that without their Ministry the Christian Religion would soon be at an end in
Turkey; and salute them always by the name of (...) or Father, giving them
Respect wherever they meet them, and oftentimes kissing their hands, and then
putting them to their foreheads: which is one of the greatest signs of
Reverence in that part of the world.

Next to the Priests are the Deacons, Deacons, Subdeacons, and Readers.
of which there are great numbers belonging to the Bishops, who are never
advanced to the Priesthood; and Subdeacons, which assist in the service of the
Church; and Readers, whose office is in the great Church to read the Scripture
to the people. But of these inferior Orders I shall have occasion to say
somewhat hereafter. Superior Orders how conferred.
I shall only add thus much of the superior, that they are never conferred
together and at the same time; but there is to be necessarily the interposition
of a day at least. And therefore if, upon a Capriccio of the Grand Signor, any
simple Kaloir should be designed to be Patriarch, he is to be advanced by
degrees, and not immediately placed in the Patriarchal Chair, till after some
little time.

The strict and severe course of life which the Religious lead is greatly
admired by the Greeks, Kaloirs or Monks of S. Basil and S. Antony.
as the height of perfection in this world, and what equals them to Angels. Of
which sort are great numbers in Greece and the Lesser Asia, which follow the
Rules and Constitutions of S. Basil the Great; as those do of S. Antony, who
live upon Mount Sinai and Libanus, and are dispersed up and down Egypt from
the Desert to the Red Sea. The name (...), or Kaloir, (the Greeks in their
ordinary discourse mightily humouring this pronunciation) was at first, I
suppose, appropriated to the old men of the Order; but now it lies in common
among all, and is the general name by which they are called. They have their
Convents in several By-places out of the public roads, or in the Islands of
the Arches, that they may the better enjoy their solitude and devotion; and are
indeed not only in their Retirements, but manner of life, divided and
separated from the rest of the world. And indeed their innocence and strictness
of life have procured them such an esteem among the Turks, otherwise barbarous
and insolent, as that they seldom give these poor men any trouble, who,
abandoning all secular business, give up themselves wholly to the severe
exercises of Religion, and having neither will nor power to do the least
injury to others, deserve well of all by their incessant prayers for the peace
and prosperity of mankind.

There are three degrees of them, Three degrees of them.
according to their age and standing, and the progress they have made in the
Ascetick discipline, to the highest of which they advance and proceed in due
order. (...).
The Novices, upon their first admission into the Monastery, are immediately
shaven, and oblige themselves by vow to continue in this state of Religion all
their lives long, to lead a chaste life, and to be obedient to their Superiors,
and to all the rest of their Brethren in Christ, and willingly and cheerfully
to undergo all the mortifications and severities of a Monastic life for the
Kingdom of Heaven. After they have completed their Novitiate, in stead of the
course Hair-cloath they have worn hitherto, they put on the (...) or Coat,
which they call (...).
the lesser Habit, and hereby become complete Monks. But the holy and
Angelical or Divine habit, (...).
as they variously word it, is reserved for such as are more eminent in piety
and austerity of life. Hence they are called (...), such as are admitted to put
on the great Habit, which is only a Hood thrown over their heads and
shoulders. Some of these I have observed to have a little square piece of
cloth sewed in the inward side of their Caps, or else worn next to their
hearts under their woollen Shirts, upon which is the figure of a Cross, with
these letters at each side, IC. XC. N. K. that is, (...), Jesus Christ
overcomes; which they look upon as an holy Amulet to preserve them from evil
and mischief.

At the time of their being Professed, New names given them, when Professed.
new names are usually given them: examples of which we have frequently in the
Writers of the Byzantine History. Thus Codin. de Origin. Constantinop. p. 80.
the Emperor Manuel Comnenus, upon his receiving the Habit, was called
Matthew; and so his Wife, the Emperess, Mary, when she became a Nun, was called
Xene: and so Page 82.
Joannes Paleologus was called afterward Joasaph.

The chief Seat of these Religious is upon Mount Athos, Mount Athos, the chief
seat of their Residence,
which is indeed the principal Seminary of the Greek Church, which is hence
usually supplied with fit persons to succeed in the vacant places and
Dignities; to the acceptance of which some have been forced out of their Cells.
I am most assured, that Kaloirs bred up here have a greater fame and reputation
for piety and learning, then any others throughout the Empire. Upon which
account it is known by no other name among the Greeks, called the Holy Mountain.
then that of (...), or the Holy Hence (...) for a Monk, who is professed and
lives there.
Mountain: and the Turks, in way of compliance with the fame that passes
generally of that place, call it Sheicher dag, or the Mountain of Priests or
Religious.

Here are about one and twenty or two and twenty Monasteries, whereof several
belong to the Bulgarians, and one peculiarly to the Russians. They who speak
most moderately say, there may be in the whole about four thousand constantly
resident; no Woman of what quality soever being permitted to come among them,
or indeed to set her foot within sight of any of these Religious houses:
whereof such as are near the Seashore are fortified, to prevent the Robberies
of the Pirates, who sometime land, and do mischief. But not having been my
self upon Mount Athos, for reasons mentioned in other Papers, I forbear writing
any thing upon hearsay, but refer the Reader to the description of it written
by the Archbishop of Samos, who lived several years there, in the vulgar
Greek, and translated into French at Paris, and published in English almost two
years since at London.

The behavior and employment of the Kaloirs is generally the same in all
Monasteries. The behavior and employment of the Kaloirs.
They are exceeding industrious, painful, and severe in their lives, and seem
to keep up the credit of the first Institution, and fall not short of the great
examples of some of their Predecessors, so much admired in the Ages past. They
are strict and diligent in their public Devotions, at the appointed hours both
of day and night. The spare time from their Devotion they employ in the
necessary business of the Convent, each according to his quality: for every one
has his employment. The Monks who are not in holy Orders, are some of them
Mechanics, and understand Iron-work or Building; others look to the Fields and
Vineyards that are about their houses; others make their Clothes, and the like.
Such Convents which lie toward either of the Bays at the end of the Isthmus of
Mount Athos, or are upon the Bosphorus, or in any of the Islands, maintain
Boats, which they put to Sea in to take Fish. Though sometimes, for want of fit
persons, in the lesser Monasteries especially, they provide themselves with
such things as they want with their money; but with some kind of regret, scarce
caring to be at any expense for any thing that may be procured by labor and
industry. The Priests and Deacons among them are, by reason of their character
and function, exempt from all such servile employments, and, by way of
distinction from such Ecclesiastics as are not professed, and so not under the
obligation of any Rule or Vow, are called, the former, (...), or (...), the
latter, (...). The leisure-time they enjoy after they have performed their
Offices is spent in reading, or collating or transcribing old Greek books, or
else in visits, according as their Superior shall direct, and as civility or
business shall require. Notwithstanding this good husbandry and parsimonious
way of life, in an ill year, when their corn and vines are blited, they are not
able to subsist, and are forced to send out some of their number to beg the
charity of others in order to their relief. But this is done very seldom, and
only when a real necessity urges.

We may justly suppose those, Their severe way of living.
who have renounced the pleasures and delicacies and vanities of the world, not
to be overcurious and nice in their Diet. They never touch any kind of Flesh,
or Fish that has blood in it. Their chief food is Shellfish, Olives, Beans and
Pulse, Onions, Melons, Raisins, and what their Fields and Gardens afford. With
this dry diet they make hearty meals, and enjoy good health, and find the happy
effect of moderate and thin feeding in a lasting vigorous old age. Their Bread
is course and hard, being usually twice baked. Thrice a week, that is, on
Monday, Wednesday and Friday, they do not end their Fast till after three a
clock in the afternoon. After Evening-prayers they are content with a crust of
bread and a draught of water. On other days they eat the Fish that they account
lawful, and White-meats, and then allow themselves to drink Wine. In the great
Lenten Fast before Easter, some will eat but once in eight and forty hours;
others will forbear all kind of sustenance for two or three or four entire days.

There are several of these Monasteries in the Islands, Monasteries in the
Islands not far from Constantinople.
which in the Sea-charts are called l'Isole rosse, or the Red Islands, about
six or seven leagues from Constantinople, divided from each other by little
Streights: whereof the five which lie toward the Bay of Montagnia (which I take
to be the same with the Sinus Nicopolitanus) are uninhabited, being little, and
very rocky; their names not worth mentioning. Pyrgos lies directly over against
the Bay of Nicomedia. The Island which lies nighest to Constantinople is
called by the Greeks (...), by the Turks Kinali, where is a single Monastery.
The greatest Island, called Prencipe, (the Antigonia, if I mistake not, of the
Ancients,) may be about ten or twelve miles in compass, where are two Convents,
and but one Town at present; the other having been consumed by fire. Next to
this is Chalce, which the Turks call Heibili, about half as big as the former;
where I found three Convents. In the ground before the Monastery dedicated to
the Holy Virgin, (to the South-west of the Island) which maintains about thirty
Kaloirs, is the Sepulchrall Monument of Mr. Barton, sent Ambassador from Queen
Elizabeth to the Ottoman Port; by whose wise conduct the Trade of the
Levant-Company of Merchants was first established in those parts: For the good
success and prosperity of which I acknowledge my self very much obliged to
pray. To do right to the memory of this Honorable Gentleman, I presume the
Reader will pardon me, if I here put down the Inscription, as I found it
somewhat faultily engraven upon the upper Stone, which the worthy Factory take
great care to keep in good repair.

Edvardo Barton, Illustrissimo Anglorum Reginae Oratori, Viro Praestantissimo,
qui post reditum a bello Vngarico, quo cum invicto Turcarum Imperatore
profectus fuerat, diem obiit, Pietatis ergo.
Aetatis An. XXXV. Salutis vero anno 1597. XVIII. Call. Jan.
The Greeks, The Greeks living upon these Islands how maintained.
who live upon these Islands, get a good livelihood by Fishing, being free not
only from the cohabitation, but from the visits of Turks, who, very fearful
of storms and foul weather, hate the Sea, and seldom care to go thither for
pleasure or curiosity, but when they collect the Haratch or Head-mony of the
poor Christians.

The Monastery situated upon the Thracian side of the Bosphorus, Afamous
Monastery situated at Mabro Molo upon the Bosphorus.
at a place called Mabro Molo, or the black Rock, is of a mighty reputation
among the Greeks of Constantinople and the neighboring Villages, and
frequented by them in great companies on the Festival of the Assumption of the
H. Virgin, to whom it is dedicated. Between fifty and sixty years since, a
certain Kaloir belonging to Bujukdere, a neighboring Village upon the same
side of the water, either by chance or curiosity, walking up and down among the
overgrown bushes, at last lighted upon an (...) or holy Fountain, where was
engraven the figure of the B. Virgin; which as soon as he had discovered to
those of his own Nation and Religion, they grew satisfied of the truth of an
old Tradition which passed current among them, that formerly there stood in
that melancholic Recess a Church or Convent. Whereupon, with great expense and
difficulty, they obtained leave to raise the present Building. The ground on
which it stands belongs to the Mosch of the Emperor Bayazid in Constantinople,
for which they pay a yearly rent of thirty Dollers. And to procure the
protection and favor of the Bostange Bashi, or chief Gardener of the Grand
Signor, a great Officer in the Seraglio, whose jurisdiction reaches to the
mouth of the Black Sea, to whom they have recourse in case of any injury and
oppression, they present him every month with ten Oaks of wax, (each containing
between two and three pounds English,) with sheep and kids for the use of his
family. The Patriarch once a year makes a visit to this Convent, and celebrates
the Sacrament in their Chapel: for which honor they make him a Present of
five hundred Aspers. Here are maintained about five and thirty Kaloirs, whereof
only seven Priests, as the good man Macarius the (...) or Superior acquainted
me, when I was upon the place with him: from whom also, at the same time, I
received this following Narrative. That in the year 1661. or 1662. (for I have
forgot the exact year) the present Emperor Sultan Mahomet Chan, hunting not
far from the Euxine, (to which kind of exercise he is very much addicted,) in
the pursuit of his game, at last, wearied and tired, lighted to rest at a
Fountain at some little distance from their Convent. Upon the news of which,
they consulted, whether they should wait upon him with some poor Present or no:
at last one of the pert Monks undertook it. Advancing toward the Emperor,
having made his reverence after the custom of the Country, and making an excuse
for the presumption he was guilty of, he presented him with a little Cheese and
a basket of Cherries: then which latter nothing could have been more welcome to
him, being thirsty and overheated with excessive riding, and who yet in such
an extremity abhorred the least thought of Wine. After some little time he
calls the poor Kaloir, and very calmly asked him, whether he would become a
Musulman, out of design questionless to have preferred him. But he, no way
wrought upon by this powerful temptation, continued speechless in his humble
posture, with his eyes fixed upon the ground. The Emperor no way displeased
with his behavior, which he looked upon as a modest denial, Well, said he, I
perceive you have a mind to continue as you are; and then bidding him look up,
made a half circle with his hand, telling him, he gave the grounds lying about,
which he thus marked out, to the Convent; and then commanded one of his
favourite-Attendants to give the poor man thirty pieces of Gold.

There are several (...).
Women, Women Professed.
which wear a Veil, but most of them Widows and old, and forced by poverty to
take a Vow upon them; this way getting a tolerable subsistence from the Church,
which they attend upon the Festival-days: and they are oftentimes employed in
looking to the sick, and such like pious and charitable drudgeries. I was told
of some few Convents of Virgins professed, and particularly of one in Scio:
Anchorets.
as also of Anchorets, living in desolate Hermitages upon herbs and water, and
such like course fare; but out of the sight of the world, and far from any
company. But these matters not being within the compass of my own observation
and knowledge, I choose rather to be silent, then venture to relate uncertain
Stories and Hearsays.

The present Greeks reckon up Seven Mysteries, Seven Mysteries or Sacraments.
which with them is another name for Sacrament: but this limited and set
number, in the defense of which in the last Century they were very
pertinacious, as they are now in this, was unknown to the Greek Church for
above a thousand years after Christ, and was afterward in all probability
taken up in compliance with the Latins. Of these they admit only two, Baptism
and the Supper of the Lord, as Respons. 2. Patriarchae Jeremiae, page 240.
(...).
generally necessary to Salvation, and as instituted by our B. Savior: the
rest, as delivered by the Church, and as founded in Scripture, and in the
practice of the first Times. The word Mystery, formerly in a large sense
applied, in the Writings of the Ancients, to any sacred or religious Rite or
usage whatsoever, that, besides the bare outward act of Ceremony, may have some
farther hidden meaning, (in which sense S. Paul calls Marriage (and the
necessary adjuncts and consequences of it) a great Mystery, because it is a
type and representation of the near relation which is between Christ and the
Church, as he explains himself 5 Ephesians. 32.) in aftertimes became appropriated
to these Seven:

(...).
Baptism.

(...).
Unguent of Chrism.

(...).
Eucharist.

(...).
Penance.

(...).
Holy Orders.

(...).
Matrimony.

(...).
Oil with Prayer.

Of all which I will discourse particularly in the same order as they are here
mentioned.

Although there be no time prescribed for the Baptism of Infants, Baptism.
yet they seldom either defer it beyond the eighth or tenth day, or hasten it
before, unless in case of violent sickness, and for fear of sudden death. For
they believe such an absolute necessity of this Sacrament, which they ground on
those words of our Savior, S. John 3. 5. Except a man be born of water and of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, as that they entertain
hard and cruel thoughts of the state of Infants, which by some misfortune and
casualty are deprived of it. In case of necessity Lay-persons may baptize.
To prevent which mischief, and secure their fears, where there is a real and
certain danger of imminent death, in the absence of a Priest, who is at all
other times the only lawful Minister of this sacred Rite, it is allowed to
Lay-persons of either Sex, as it is expressly laid down in their public
Confession of Faith, written in the vulgar Greek, and printed in the year 1662.
(...), page 118.
It is not lawful and proper for any one to baptize, but a lawful Priest,
except in time of necessity: and then a Secular person, whether man or woman,
may do it.

At all other times the Infant, Baptism public and in the Church.
if well, is to be brought to Church: in the entrance of which toward the
Narthex is the Font, Font, its several names.
usually large, and about a foot and a half deep, which they call by several
names, as (...), or the Laver, (...), and (...) or Pool, (alluding to that in
Jerusalem mentioned in the 5. chap. of S. John, whose waters had a miraculous
virtue in them of healing diverse diseases; or to that other in Siloam, S. John
9. 7. where the blind man by the command of Christ washed, and received his
sight; the waters of Baptism having the same effect upon the mind by virtue of
our B. Savior's institution, as they had upon the body.)

The Water made use of is usually consecrated for this purpose on the Feast of
the Theophania, The Baptismal water when consecrated.
or Baptism of our Savior, and that with great solemnity, after the
celebration of the other blessed Sacrament: for which there is a peculiar
office. This they call (...), or the great Sanctification. But because a
sufficient quantity of water for the whole year may not be blessed at that
time, and (besides) what is reserved may be apt to putrefy, and so be unfit to
be used, every month, or sooner, in greater Cities, they furnish themselves
with more.

In the Winter, The manner of Baptism.
that the tender body of the Infant may not suffer by cold, they for the most
part warm the water, (perfumed with sweet herbs) upon which the Priest breaths,
and makes a Cross, and then pours Oil upon it in form of a Cross three times;
with which having anointed the Child, and holding him upright with both his
hands, and his face turned toward the East, he performs the mystical Rite with
this form of words, (...).
The Servant of God, such a one, is baptized in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and for ever. Threefold Immersion.
Amen. At the mention of each Person of the Trinity the Priest dips the Child
under water: at which time (...), Compater, seu Pater Spiritualis, qui infantem
e lavacro suscipit.
the Godfather, if it be a Male-child, who is here always single, answers,
Amen, in all thrice. The 50. Canon of the Apostles, as that Collection is
called, commands (...), that is, as it is there explained, (...).
Which threefold Immersion they for the most part rigidly retain, according to
the custom and practice of the first Ages; though they do not scruple to vary
from it upon occasion, being content sometimes to pour water upon the face of
the Infant three times, Though sometimes Pouring or Affusion.
in acknowledgment of the Mystery of the H. Trinity, in whose name the Infant
is Christened. But whether the Sacramental Rite be either by Immersion or by
Affusion, the effect of the Sacrament is the same, that is, Vid. (...) page 117.
the washing away of Original sin derived from the first Parent of mankind,
(which they call (...),) and an undoubted seal of eternal Life, the Baptized
persons being regenerated and made members of the Body of Christ.

The form of Baptism is always pronounced passively in the way of declaration,
The form of words passive.
The Servant of God, such a one, he or sibe, is baptized, etc. not actively, I
baptize thee. For which in opusculo (...). Veneties A. C. 1600. p. 24. a.
Gabriel Archbishop of Philadelphia assigns these two poor reasons, or shifts
rather: the one, that although our B. Savior, at the institution of this
Sacrament, used the active voice, when he said, Go teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name, etc. yet it is read passively in S. Mark, chap. 16. 16. He
that believes and is baptized shall be saved: the other, that this way of
expression savours more of modesty and humility; which he pretends to fetch
from S. Chrysostom. Whereas there is but little difference in the forms, and
none in the sense: Such a one is baptized, that is, as he adds by way of
explication, (...), by me, being indeed the very same with, I baptize such an
one. The zealous men of both Communions are certainly to blame, while they are
so eager and fierce in defense of their own form, and use bitter and severe
Invectives one against another for a matter of so small moment, as this variety
of expression seems to be. But as to the latter words, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, in which both agree, the Greeks
universally hold them so necessary and essential to the Sacrament, that unless
they are entirely and distinctly pronounced, they think that it is not so much
the Sacrament of Baptism which is celebrated, as a ludicrous imitation, or
heretical and profane abuse of it.

They never use the same water a second time: The same water not used twice.
but if two or three Infants are to be baptized at the same time, so often they
empty and fill the Laver. But the water which has been made use of for this or
the like sacred purpose, is not thrown away into the street, like other common
water, but poured into a hollow place, which they call (...), or (...), under
the Altar, where it is soaked into the earth, or finds a passage.

Soon after, Unguent of Chrism, or Chrismation.
a Prayer or two being interposed, the Priest proceeds to anoint the
newly-baptized Infant, lately covered with its Mantle and Swaddlingcloaths: for
in the Greek Church Chrismation is inseparable from Baptism, and though
reckoned as a distinct Mystery, as indeed it is, is in a manner a necessary
appendage and complement of it; according to the 48. Canon of the Council of
Laodicea, which orders (...), the baptized persons to be anointed with the
heavenly Chrism. (...).
Which Chrism, as Matthaeus Blastares explains it out of Zonaras and Balsamon,
whose words for the most part he retains, being sanctified by Prayer and the
invocation of the Holy Spirit, sanctifies the persons anointed with it, and
makes them partakers of the heavenly Kingdom of Christ; unless impenitence and
impiety of life afterward alienate and render them unworthy of it.

Confirmation among the Greeks consists Confirmation
of this one single Rite; and is therefore called by them (...), Unguent or
Chrism, or jointly, (...), or the unguent of Chrism, and peculiarly (...) or
(...), the Seal or Obsignation.

This being practiced only upon Infants newly baptized, In this no imposition
of hands used.
and that without Imposition of hands, (this material part of the Rite having
been for several Ages neglected by the Greeks,) and not reiterated and repeated
when they are adult and grown up, some Zelots of the Roman Communion, (making
no distinction between the mystical Rites of the Christian Religion, neither
making allowances for different customs and usages, which seldom keep at the
same stay, but alter and vary in the whole, or in part at least,) as if every
punctilio and circumstance in the Ceremonial part were essential, hereupon have
objected the want of it to the Greeks, and maintain with great zeal and fury,
that they have no such thing as Confirmation among them. These differences have
been carried on with great animosities on both sides, and have helped to make
the Schism irreconcilable; the Greeks, upon the reproaches made them by the
Latins, that the Chrismation used by their Priests is unlawful, and a mere
usurpation of Episcopal right and power, growing more and more obstinate: as
may be seen from the Encyclicall Epistle of the Patriarch Photius, who does as
sharply reflect upon the Roman practice, fomenting and keeping up the
controversy, which had been started long before with great heat. For that he
was not the first, who by his wit and power introduced the present custom among
his Greeks, as some have imagined, I could demonstrate by undeniable
testimonies, if it were agreeable and proper to mix controversies in this
present Compendium and Narrative.

This Anointing and Obsignation is made upon the forehead, Anointing how made.
eyes, nostrills, mouth, ears, breast, hands and feet, the Priest repeating
these words, (...). The Seal of the gift of the Holy Spirit. Amen. Which form
they derive from the Assessors of the Council of Constantinople held in Trullo,
and thus explain: (...).
as if the Priest had said at large, With the anointing of this holy Ointment
thou art sealed and confirmed in the graces of the Holy Spirit, which thou
receivest for confirmation of thee in the Christian Faith. The reason of which
form is assigned in their (...) or Confession. ibid. -- (...).
As the Holy Spirit formerly descended upon the Apostles in the shape of fire,
and poured upon them his Gifts: in like manner, when the Presbyter anoints the
baptized person with holy Oil, the Gifts of the Holy Spirit are poured out upon
him from above. And to this they apply the words of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22.
Now he which establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, in God,
who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. But
as for the anointing part, they quote no higher authority then the writings
which bear the name of Dionysius Areopagita.

Though this Oil be used by Presbyters in the performance of this Rite, This
Oil only sanctified by the Patriarchs and Bishops.
yet it is only blessed and sanctified and made fit for use by the Patriarch or
Bishops; as is expressly asserted by Gabriel Philadelphiensis, and in page 121.
the Catecheticall Confession, and (...). page 247.
in the Bethleemitick Synod. This is done on Thursday in the Holy week. The
composition of it.
They are wonderful curious in the composition of it, it being made up of
Storax, Balsam, Cassia, Myrrh, and the decoction of twenty several Drugs, Seeds
and Plants added to and mixed with Wine and Oil: a Catalogue of all which
Ingredients you may find in the Euchologion. This is afterward distributed and
put into round bottles or vialls, either glass or glazed over, called (...),
but often (...) or Alabasters, in allusion to the Alabaster box of ointment,
which S. Mary Magdalen brake and poured upon our Savior's head.

When they deny the reiteration of this Rite, This Rite not reiterated, except
in one particular case.
it is with an exception of one particular case: (...). page 122.
for when Heretics or Apostates, sensible of their errors and impieties, are
readmitted, after just proofs of a hearty and sincere repentance, into the
bosom of the Church, they are confirmed again, after the same manner as when
they were first Christened, by the grace of the Holy Spirit, in the holy Faith,
which they now profess. And herein they follow the 7. Canon of the Council
abovementioned. But this is scarce ever practiced of late, it being death for a
Renegado to renounce Turcism, and embrace Christianity.

Before I mention the Rites and Ceremonies used at the celebration of the holy
and august Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord, Eacharist most commonly
expressed by the word (...), and sometimes by (...), and (...).
it will be necessary to premise somewhat concerning their Liturgick Books. The
word (...), though in the general it is used of Prayer, or any part or office
of the sacred ministry of Religion, is restrained to this great and tremendous
Mystery, called sometime, for distinction-sake, (...), or the holy, sacred and
divine Liturgy or Ministration: and the Priest, from this principal and eminent
prerogative of his Function, being set apart to offer up this commemorative
Sacrifice, is peculiarly called (...) or Liturgist, as well as (...) (...) and
(...), the Minister of the (...), or the most solemn Rites of the Christian
Worship.

These Liturgick Books or Offices are only three: Their Liturgick Books.
for though there be Liturgies that go under the names of S. Peter, S. Mark, S.
Matthew. and S. James, etc. they, being confessedly spurious, are rejected by the
Greeks, as well as by some of the sober Romanists. The pretended one of S.
Peter was scarce heard of for fifteen hundred years and more: it is stuffed up
with Intercessions and Prayers to the Virgin Mary, who is there called (...),
and other Saints. Where is also the Ave Maria, the Gloria Patri, and other
notorious and manifest proofs of its late invention, the Forger having
contrived it to agree in many things with the Roman Canon of the Mass. S.
Mark's Liturgy is equally supposititious, there being mention in it of the
inferior Ecclesiastic Orders, of the Trisagion, of the Nicene Creed, of the
title and appellation of (...) deservedly given to the B. Virgin, of the
Diptychs, and of the Imperial City of Constantinople, (...), and the like signs
of its noveltie. If it be said, that these are only insertions and
interpolations, but the body and contexture of the Liturgies may be justly
referred to the Apostles as to their Authors; they cannot expect, either
wisely or civilly, that this should be yielded to them merely upon the strength
of their fancy, (for they have not the Authority of any ancient Writer to
countenance it,) that every Apostle made a distinct Liturgy: for this does not
suit with the simplicity of the celebration of it in the Apostles times, and in
the second and third Century, according to the account we find of V. Apolog. 2.
versus finem.
it in Justin Martyr. More indeed may be said for the pretended Liturgy of S.
James, as being mentioned in the 32. Canon of the Council in Trullo, and by de
Traditione Divinae Missae.
Proclus: but it was not received among them, as appears from Balsamon's first
answer to Marcus Patriarch of Alexandria, and from Jeremias Patriarch of
Constantinople, who lived in the last Century, in his answer V. Respons. 1.
page 98. 103.
to the Divines of Wittenberg. Nor could I ever learn, that it is at any time
used by any of the Christians of the East; though de Libris Ecclesiasticis
Graecorum, page 16.
Allatius tells us it is one day in the year recited at Jerusalem, out of
respect to the memory of S. James, the first Bishop of that City: that is, I
suppose, on the twenty third day of October, which is the day of his
Commemoration.

The three Liturgies I was mentioning are those of S. Basil, Only three.
S. Chrysostom, and S. Gregory Bishop of Rome, whom they distinguish from the
rest of that name by the additional title of (...), or the Dialogist, from the
Books he wrote in that form and style. For he is commonly supposed to be the
Author of the (...), or Liturgia Praesanctificatorum; though, I think, it ought
to be ascribed to Germanus Patriarch of Constantinople, as shall be proved
elsewhere, his Junior by some hundreds of years. All of which, but especially
the two first, (by the cunning contrivance of those who governed the Church, to
advance the superstitious fancies of their Times, under a pretense of ancient
Piety recommended by those holy men, whose names they have in great
veneration,) seem horribly altered and corrupted from what they were anciently;
as is demonstrable from those many and various interpolations, which plainly
savor of Novelty; and from that great variety of manuscript copies, two of
which scarce agree, unless in some of the most solemn Prayers.

For the better establishment of decency and order in the Worship and Service
of God, These Liturgies read at set times,
and for prevention of all confusion, there is a certain and fixed rule
appointed to be observed everywhere in the reading of these Liturgies at set
times, it not being left to the liberty and humor of any Priest to make use of
which he thinks fit.

The Liturgy of S. Basil is read only ten times in a year; and when.
that is, on the five Sundays of the great Lent, from Quadragesima to
Palm Sunday exclusively, on Thursday and Saturday in the Holy week, on the Eves
of Christmas and Epiphany, and on the first day of January, which day is
devoted to the memory of the great Saint.

The Liturgy of S. Chrysostom, which is more contracted then that of S. Basil,
is recited on all other Sundays and Festivals, and other days, when they
celebrate the Sacrament; V. 52. Can. Synodi Trullanae.
except in Lent, at which time, except Saturdays and Sundays and the feast of
the Annunciation, they use the Liturgy of the Praesanctificata. But of this I
shall speak more distinctly hereafter.

The Sacrament of the holy Eucharist is performed after this manner. The manner
of consecrating the holy Sacrament.
The Priests and Deacons, having washed their hands, (by which Ceremony they
design to show, with what Purity of Soul and Body they ought to approach these
holy Mysteries,) carry the gifts of Bread and Wine presented by the people to
the Altar of the Prothesis; by this oblation (which they call (...), or (...))
separating them from profane and common use.

The top of the Loaf is marked either with a Square in a Circle, or Square
only, The holy Bread marked at the top.
with two right lines crossing each other, with several letters in each
quarter, thus,

Which being pierced in several places, and cut into several parts.
is at last cut and divided from the rest into various Particles by a Knife,
set apart for this purpose, which they call (...) or the holy Lance, alluding
to the Lance which pierced our Savior's side. With this Lance he makes a
Cross upon the Seal, saying thrice, (...).
in memory of our Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ. Then he strikes his Lance
upon the right side of it, and cuts it, saying, (...).
He was led as a sheep to the slaughter: afterward upon the left, saying, (...).
and as an innocent sheep before the shearer is dumb, so He opened not his
mouth: then upon the upper part, saying, (...).
His judgment was taken away in his humiliation; and upon the lower, saying,
(...);
But who shall declare his generation? After this he lifts up the Bread, thus
cut off, saying, (...).
For his life is taken from the earth; and lays it in the Patin, saying, (...).
The Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world, is offered for the
life and sin of the world. Then thrusting his Lance into it, he says, And one
of the soldiers pierced his side with a lance, and straitway there issued
forth blood and water: upon which the Deacon pours wine and water into the
Chalice. This blessed Bread is only designed to be consecrated. Afterward the
Priest, out of the same or another Loaf, (for it is indifferent, several being
offered by the people for these purposes,) takes a small piece, saying, (...).
In honor and memory of our most Blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God,
the ever-Virgin Mary; by whose intercession receive, O Lord, this Sacrifice
upon thy supercelestial Altar. Then he elevates the Particle, and lays it on
the right side of the Holy Bread. Then he takes another piece, and so to the
ninth; which are placed on the left side* all which he offers up in honor of
S. John Baptist, the Apostles, S. Basil, Gregory the Divine, Chrysostom,
Athanastus, Cyrillus, Nicolas, and all holy Bishops; S. Stephen, George,
Demetrius, Theodorus, and all holy Martyrs; S. Antony, Euthymius, Saba,
Onuphrius, Athanasius of Mount Athos, and all holy Monks; holy Physicians, who
cured gratis, Cosmus and Damianus, Cyrus, John, Panteleemenon, Hermolaus,
Sampson, Diomedes, Thallaleus, Tryphon, and the rest; S. Joachim and Anna; and
of the Saint of the day, and all Saints; (...).
for the sake of whose prayers and supplications, O God, protect us: and in
behalf of the Bishop of the place, and of the whole Hierarchy, of Benefactors,
and Friends, and Relations, living and dead, (here he names the persons whom he
is desired particularly to commemorate) -- (...).
that the merciful God would indulge them pardon. Then he puts a little silver
instrument upon them, that the Coverings may not touch the Particles, (which
are put in three rows,) and so disorder them, it being made of two short arches
crossing each other in the figure of a star, hence called (...) repeating these
words, S. Matthew. 2.
And the star came and stood over where the young child was. And then they
cover the Patin and the Chalice distinctly with linen or silk, saying at the
first, The Lord is King, and has put on glorious apparel, etc. and at the
second, (...) --
Thy power, O Christ, has obscured the heavens, and the earth is full of thy
glory now and for ever: and afterward both together with a larger covering or
veil, which they call (...), saying, (...).
O our God, hide us under the shadow of thy wings now and for ever. Amen.

All which, that is, both Bread and Wine, The Oblation of Bread and Wine how
blessed.
making the Oblation, are blessed soon after (...), etc.
by this solemn Prayer, which they call (...). O God, our God, who have sent
our Lord and God, Jesus Christ, our Savior and Redeemer, (who does bless us
and sanctify us) to be the heavenly Bread and nourishment of all the world; do
thou bless this Oblation, and receive it upon thy supercelestial Altar.
Remember, O gracious and merciful God, those who offer it, and those for whom
it is offered, and preserve us blameless in the celebration of thy Divine
Mysteries: (this being said by the Priest in a soft and still voice, as it were
to himself, he afterward says aloud) For thy most venerable and glorious Name
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is sanctified and glorified now and for ever.
Amen.

This Prayer of Benediction being pronounced, The first or lesser Procession.
the Elements, though barely blessed and yet unconsecrated, become (...).
venerable and divine Gifts or Oblations, as they speak. The Deacon having
received the book of the Gospel from the hands of the Priest, holding it on
high, that the people may the better see it, goes out at the North-door of the
Chancell, the inferior Officers carrying Tapers before him, and is followed by
the Priest: and so having made a short Procession in the Body of the Church,
they enter into the Chancell at the middle door, and deposit the Gospel upon
the middle Altar, where the Consecration is always made. (This they call.(...)
the first and lesser Introitus or Entrance.) Then the Priest says this Prayer
secretly. O Omnipotent Lord God, who only art holy, who receivest the
sacrifice of praise from those who call upon thee with their whole heart,
receive our Prayer, who are Sinners, and bring us to thy holy Altar, and make
us fit to offer up to thee Gifts and spiritual Sacrifices for our Sins, and the
Trespasses of the people: and grant that we may find favor before thee, and
that our Sacrifice may be acceptable unto thee, and that the good Spirit of thy
grace may dwell in us, and in these Gifts thus offered, and in all thy People.
Next, the Quire sings the Hymn, which begins, (...), etc.
Come let us adore and fall down before Christ: save us, thou Son of God, etc.
and the other short Hymn, (which they call (...),) (...), etc. which may be
rendered declaratively, God is holy, he is holy and, etc.
Holy God, holy and powerful, holy and immortal, have mercy upon us. Glory be
to the Father, and to the Son, and, etc. Which being ended, the Deacons read
the (...).
Epistle and Gospel appointed for the day. So far, in ancient times, when the
Discipline of the Church flourished and was kept up in its perfection and
vigor, the Catechumeni were admitted to be present in their proper place,
(this being the Missa Catechumenorum,) and then were dismissed with a peculiar
Prayer, the Deacon crying aloud and making proclamation, (...).
Whosoever of you are Catechumeni, depart; (and this was repeated thrice) let
none of the Catechumeni stay: you who are of the number of the faithful or
complete Christians, stay. Let us more and more call upon God in peace.

Then the Priest says several private Prayers to himself: The second or great
Procession.
after which he, advancing toward the Altar of Prothesis, takes off the
Chalice, which he holds in his hand covered, and is attended by the Deacon
carrying the Patin, in which is the holy Bread, that is to be consecrated, upon
his head, and that covered too with a piece of silk, that it may not be seen;
and by the other inferior Ministers, going before in order with the Lance,
the Sponge wherewith they wipe the Dish and the Chalice, gilt Crosses, Incense,
Pots, Tapers, and little Bells, and the like. They all pass out at the little
North-door, and proceed slowly into the Nave or Area of the Church, about which
they take a compass: the Quire in the mean while singing the Hymn which they
call Cherubicus. The people during this Procession show all imaginable
reverence, bowing their heads, bending their knees, and sometimes prostrating
themselves upon the pavement, and kissing the hem of the Priest's Stole, as he
passes by, besides crossing themselves continually during this pomp, and
repeating these words, (...).
Remember me, O Lord, in thy Kingdom; the Priests and Deacons interceding for
themselves and the people in this form, (...).
The Lord God be mindful of us all in his Kingdom now and for ever. Then they
enter in at the (...), or middle Door, and place the Elements upon the Altar
directly opposite to it, in order to their consecration. This Procession they
call (...).
the second or great Introitus or Entrance or access to the Altar.

This seems to be, The undue veneration shown by the Greeks herein.
and really is, as they order the matter, the most solemn part of the Grecian
Worship, and at which they express the greatest devotion, if we may judge of it
by these outward and visible signs. A practice that really gives great offense,
and is wholly unjustifiable, notwithstanding all the little and trifling
excuses and pretensions made by (...).
Symeon Thessalonicensis and Gabriel Severus in favor of it: as, that (...)
signifies any Adoration and Respect in general; and that the Elements, by their
being blessed and separated from common use, are already sanctified and dedicated
to God, and so (...).
are in a readiness and disposition to be consecrated and made the Body and
Blood of Christ; and that they are fit matter prepared and determined to this
Sacramental end and purpose. Therefore, say they, this Adoration is justly due
to them. Whereas after the Consecration, when the Symbols are exposed and shown
to the people, the Reverence is not half so great; only a little bowing of the
body, which is soon over. But the miscarriage seemed to me, when I was present,
so gross and scandalous, as that it needs no other confutation then the bare
relating.

When the Priest consecrates, The Consecration.
the Door of the Bema or Chancell is shut up, or at least the (...), januae
adyti velum: quandoque scribitur (...), sed male; (...) enim in sequioribus
Graeciae seculis pro velo ponebatur: antiquitus (...). and (...) But this
latter also signifies the Altar-cloath, in whose four corners the names of the
four Evangelists are embroidered. Vid. Symeonem Thessal. (...), p. 215. in
Eucholog.
Veil or Curtain drawn before it; the people being wholly debarred from the
sight of the Priest's consecrating the holy Elements, and no person of what
quality soever suffered to be present, but such as belong to and attend upon
the holy service. After the recital of several Prayers and Antiphons, and the
Constantinopolitan Creed, (the same with that which is commonly, through a
mistake, called the Nicene Creed, unless in the Article of the procession of
the Holy Spirit from the Son, which is inserted by the Latin Church,) the
Priest proceeds to the consecration of the Elements, (the Deacon having fanned
with a little Fan, called (...),) saying softly to himself, (after the Quire
has sung the (...) or triumphant Song, Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath,
Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory: Hosanna in the highest; Blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest.) With these
blessed Powers, O merciful Lord, we cry aloud and say, Thou art holy,
altogether holy, and great is thy glory; so is thy onely-begotten Son, and thy
Spirit. Thou art holy, altogether holy, and great is thy glory; who so love
the world, that thou gave thy onely-begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life; who, when He had come and
fulfilled the Dispensation which He undertook for us, in the night in which He
was betrayed, or rather in which He delivered up himself for the life of the
World, took Bread into his holy, pure and spotless hands; and when He had given
thanks, and blessed it, and sanctified it, and brake it, He gave it to his holy
Disciples and Apostles, saying, (here he inclines his head, and, laying his
hand upon the Bread, says with a loud voice) Take, eat, this is my Body which
is broken for you for the remission of sins: likewise also after supper, He
took the Cup, (which taking up in his hand he says aloud) Drink you all of
this; this is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you and for many
for the remission of sins.

Afterward he says secretly, Mindful therefore of thy saving command, and of
all things done for us, of thy Cross, Resurrection the third day, Ascension
into Heaven, Session at the right hand of God, and of thy second and glorious
Coming again, (then with a loud voice) we offer to thee thine of thine own, in
all things and through all things -- the Quire singing, We praise thee, we
bless thee, we give thanks to thee, O Lord, and we make our supplications to
thee, O God. Then the Priest prays again, We also offer to thee this rational
and unbloudy worship and service; and we beseech thee, and pray thee, and make
our supplications to thee, send forth thy Holy Spirit upon us, and upon these
Gifts that lie before us. After some Adorations and short private Prayers, (as,
(...).
O Lord, who sentest thy most Holy Spirit upon the Apostles at the third hour,
do not, O merciful God, take this thy Spirit from us; and, Create in me a
clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me, which he repeats thrice
to himself,) the Priest, standing upright, signing the holy Elements with the
sign of the Cross three times, says privately, (...).
Make this Bread the precious Body of thy Christ; and then, (...).
Make that which is in this Cup the precious Blood of thy Christ; (laying both
his hands upon them;) (...).
changing them by thy Holy Spirit: and soon after, that this Sacrament (...)*
etc.
may be to those who partake of them for the health and sobriety of the Soul,
the remission of Sins, the fullness of the Kingdom of heaven, and assurance in
thee, and not for our sin and condemnation. Then it follows, The Commemoration
of living and dead.
We offer also this rational service for those who rest in Faith, for our
Ancestors, Forefathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Preachers,
Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and for every Soul made perfect by
Faith; and especially for the glorious and spotless ever-Virgin Mary, S. John
Baptist, all the holy Apostles, the Saint whose memory we now celebrate, and
all thy Saints, etc. Here he names several of the living and dead. For the dead
he says, for the rest and ease of the Soul of thy Servant in the bright place,
(...) So in the Liturgy of S. James. -- (...)* in Biblioth. Patr. edit. Paris.
page 9, 11, 17. of S. Mark, page 34, 35. and of Gregorius Dialogus, p. 129.
whence all grief and sighing are banished; and make it to rest where the light
of thy Countenance shines. Then he prays God to remember all the Orthodox
Clergy: and then, We offer also this rational service for the whole world, for
the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, for all Christian Princes, their
Courts and Armies, that God would grant them a peaceable reign, that we may
live a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty, etc. Several
other Prayers and Responses follow, together with the Lord's Prayer.

The Priest comes to the middle door of the Chancell, Elevation.
and elevates the Bread, which he afterward breaks and divides into four
parts, and lays them down in the figure of a Cross: one of which he puts into
the Chalice, They mix Water with the Wine before the Consecration at the
Prothesis, and then again after Consecration, as is plain from the Liturgy of
S. Chrysostom. See also the (...) in Euchol. page 190.
wherein is poured again some warm water; after which he himself communicates.
At the reception of the Cup, he drinks thrice, saying, at the first sip, In the
name of the Father, at the second, and of the Son, at the third, and of the
Holy Ghost.

The Priests and Deacons receive the Elements apart and distinctly in this
form. At the delivery of the Bread, (...).
The precious, holy, and undefiled Body of the Lord God, our Savior Jesus
Christ, is given to thee for the remission of sins and everlasting life: and at
the delivery of the Cup, (...).
The precious and holy Blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is given to
thee for the remission of sins and everlasting life. This tenor of words is
not always retained, but admits of a variation, the Priest saying sometimes, I
give unto thee the precious and holy Body of our Lord, etc. sometimes, Thou
receivest the precious and holy Body of our Lord, etc.

After they within the Sanctuary or Holy place have been partakers of the
Divine and tremendous Mysteries, the Deacon, standing at the middle door with
the Chalice lifted up in his hands, invites the Communicants to approach; (...).
Come hither, in the fear of God, with Faith and Charity. He then dips a spoon,
(...), into the Chalice, and taking out a bit or bits, which are usually very
small, of the consecrated Bread (called (...) or pearls) soaked in and floating
upon the Wine, he puts it to their mouths, saying to each, (...).
The precious and holy Body and Blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ are
given to thee for the remission of thy sins and eternal life; or, with a little
alteration, Thou receivest the precious and holy Body and Blood of, etc.

Thus the people communicate in both kinds; The Sacrament in both kinds.
which is the express doctrine and constant practice of the Greek Church: which
they ground on the words of our B. Savior, S. John chap. 6. v. 53. Verily,
verily I say unto you, Except you (that is, all of you, for no particular order
of men being mentioned, they understand this declaration universally) eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you; and on
the example of the Apostles; and on the history of the Institution, explained
by S. Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, 11. Chapter.

It is an usual custom with them, Of their mutual asking Forgiveness, before
they communicate.
and certainly in it self highly commendable, and which argues a great sense of
the dignity of these Holy Mysteries, that before they receive the Sacrament,
they ask Forgiveness one of another. The Deacon begs it of the consecrating
Priest, who always takes care to be reconciled to any one who has a matter
against him, before he approaches the Altar. The Priests, who assist, turn
their heads to the right hand and to the left, signifying by this gesture their
desire of Forgiveness, if they have offended any there present. And the people,
who communicate, every one for himself, says aloud, in the hearing of all,
before the act of receiving, (...), Forgive, O Christians: which the rest with
one voice answer, (...) (...), God forgive you.

When the Communion is over, The blessed Bread distributed afterward among the
people.
the Priest distributes promiscuously to such as are present the blessed Bread
unconsecrated. (For only the upper part of the Loaf, circumscribed within the
Seal, hence called (...), is used for the Sacrament.) This is called by several
names; as (...), or divine bread; (...) and (...), from its being sanctified
and blessed; and most commonly (...), being given in stead of the consecrated
holy Gifts or Elements to those who do not communicate: to which the people
ascribe great efficacy and virtue; and which they oftentimes carry home, and
bestow upon their sick Friends, thinking it as effectual, if not more effectual
then any Physic. The sacred Solemnity is soon after concluded, the Priest
dismissing the people with a Blessing.

Thus much in the general. I shall now proceed to mention several things
relating to this Argument, which if I had inserted in the precedent Paragraphs,
might have interrupted the series and order of this most solemn Administration,
which now lies close, as to all the material parts of it, and falls under one
easy view.

As to the moment of Consecration, In what moment of time the Consecration is
made.
in which the Symbols become and are made the Body and Blood of Christ, it is
certain that the Greeks, herein following the authority of several ancient
Writers of their Church, do not hold this Divine Mystery to be perfected and
consummated by or after the pronunciation of those words, Take, eat, this is my
Body; the Change, whatever it be, not being made, according to S. John
Damascen, but by the descent and illapse of the Holy Spirit upon the Gifts or
Elements placed upon the Altar. Therefore in order to the completion of this
Sacrament, they add Benediction and Prayers, in which they do explicitly
implore the Divine grace of the Holy Spirit of God: the Priest, after he has
recited the words of our B. Savior in the Institution, invoking God in these
words, Send thy Holy Spirit upon us, and upon these holy Gifts lying before us;
and after a little pause, having three times made the sign of the Cross,
adding, (which I purposely repeat) Make this Bread the precious Body of thy
Christ, and that which is in this Cup the precious Blood of thy Christ; then
with his hand lift up, and held over them, changing them by the Holy Spirit.
These are the formal words of the Liturgies of S. Chrysostom and S. Basil now
in use. It is of no great moment what some object, that the last words of all,
changing them by thy Holy Spirit, are omitted in several ancient Manuscript
Exemplars; for the same thing, that is, that the Elements become sacramental by
the intervention and descent of the Holy Spirit, is said expressly in the short
prayers which precede, which are confessedly ancient, and free from any
interpolation. Thus in their (...) etc. (...)
Confession of Faith, it is positively asserted, that the Change is made by the
operation of the Holy Spirit of God, whom the Priest invokes at that time,
consummating this Mystery, and praying, Send thy Holy Spirit upon us and, etc.
For after these words there presently follows a (...). Of this change I am next
to speak.

It Is most certain, Of the change made after Consecration, which they call
(...).
that the doctrine of Transubstantiation, by virtue of which, according to the
fancies of the Romanists, the natural substance of the Elements is supposed to
be annihilated and wholly destroyed, the Species or Accidents only remaining,
was not admitted in the Greek Church till of late years: But this doctrine
altogether new;
there being nothing in their Liturgies tending that way; only that a Change
is made, and that the Elements after consecration become the Body and Blood of
Christ: (which no Christian of what Communion soever does doubt of in the
least.) And this they thought fit to express by the names of (...), without
determining the manner of the Presence of Christ in the Sacrament. For that
these words do not infer such a substantial Change, that is, that the Elements
notwithstanding their Consecration retain their essence and nature, though they
are, as they are justly said to be, the Body and Blood of Christ, is clear, not
only because at the same time they are acknowledged, in the Liturgy of S.
Basil, to be (...), antitypes and representations of his holy Body and Blood;
but because the person baptized is said (...), or to be changed; and so of
(...), Eucholog. page 350. And so in the Office (...) they repeat the same
words, page 449. (...), -- page 353.
the Water: which cannot be understood of a natural change: and in the Office
of Baptism, they pray, that the water may be sanctified (...) by the power and
operation and access of the Holy Spirit. (And so the like they say of the Vid.
Euchol. p. 354.
Oil used at that time.) Which very manner and form of words being used of the
Elements of Bread and Wine, that they are sanctified and consecrated, and
become the Body and Blood of our Savior by the power and operation and descent
of the Holy Spirit upon them, can no more infer a substantial change in the one
then in the other.

There is no mention made of a (...) in any Liturgy, and the word wholly new
too.
Creed, or Prayer, the word being wholly new, and altogether unknown till the
latter end of the last Century, when it was first used (as I hope I may
pardonably conjecture) by Gabriel Archbishop of Philadelphia, in his Treatise
of the Seven mysteries; who, though otherwise a zealous defender of the Rites
of the Greek Church, yet living at Venice, and not unacquainted with the
niceties and subtilties of the Latin Schoolmen, might easily be wrought upon
to bring in this new word, in a way of compliance with the Doctrine of Rome; of
which Jeremias Patriarch of Constantinople, who made him Archbishop, seems to
be utterly ignorant. For he, far more agreeably to the rules of modesty and
truth, in his Declaration of the Faith of the Greek Church in the matter of the
Sacrament, in his Answer to the German Divines, says only thus much, that
(...), Respons. 1. ad Theologos Wittenberg. p. 86. (...), Respons. 2. page 240.
-- (...), ibid.
the Catholic Church believes, that after the Consecration the Bread is
changed into the very Body of Christ, and the Wine into his very Blood, by the
Holy Spirit, without defining more particularly the nature and manner of the
Change. Nor do I find that this word began to be of common use, at least in the
public and authentic Writings of the Church, for several years after. For the
two Synods that were held at Constantinople, on purpose to condemn and
anathematize the Confession of Faith published by that great man Cyrillus
Lucaris, Patriarch of that See, the one under his immediate Successor Cyrillus
of Berrhoea, in the year 1638. the other under Parthenius, in the year 1642.
seemed to abstain religiously from the use of it, each of them only declaring,
Vid. Synod. primam page 76. 80. and Synod. 2. page 129. edit. una cum
Confessione Cyrilli, page 145.
that the Elements by the blessing of the Priest, and the descent of the Holy
Spirit upon them, became the true Body and Blood of Christ. Afterward indeed,
in the year 1643. there was a Confession of Faith made in the name of the
Eastern Church, in the way of Question and Answer, in the lesser Russia,
approved of by Parthenius and the three other Patriarchs and several
Metropolitans, though not published till the year 1662. wherein, together with
this new word, they established the doctrine of Transubstantiation. (...), p.
124.
After these words, (the Prayers above mentioned,) there presently follows a
(...) or Transubstantiation, and the Bread is changed into the true Body of
Christ, and the Wine into his true Blood: the Species, which appear, only
remain, and this according to the Divine dispensation. But if we reflect upon
the state and condition of the Greek Church at that time, and consider by what
arts and by whose assistence Cyrillus Lucaris was first deposed by the Turks,
and afterward strangled, and his ungrateful Successor advanced into his
throne, it will cease to be a matter of wonder to us, that this man (who had
studied Philosophy in his younger days under the Jesuits at Galata, and was
wholly governed by them; whose end too was as dismal as his Predecessour's, he
being banished to Tunis, and there by order of the Port strangled) and the rest
of the (...) or Latinizing Bishops should renounce the Faith of their
Ancestors, and determine thus boldly. And how they have been wrought upon
since, in the Synodus Bethleemitica, to come up more fully to this and several
other Tenants of the Roman Church, shall appear hereafter. The Romanists are
now aware, that there is no hope and likelihood of reconciling Greece by
blustering and force; and therefore they betake themselves to closer arts and
methods of subtlety: the Greeks bred up in the College of that Nation at Rome,
especially after they have finished a course of study, being sent into Turkey,
upon a design of working an Union, and of reducing their Countrymen from the
scandal and guilt of Schism and Heresy; who are permitted to dissemble their
Communion, and oftentimes are advanced to great Dignities in the Church; to
whom, being men of great eloquence, and wit, and learning, and policy, I
believe these Alterations are chiefly to be ascribed. In the mean time, let the
Zelots of the Roman Church triumph, that the present Greeks declare absolutely
for them: we need not envy them a victory, which they have gained by such base
and treacherous Arts, not to say Bribery. But however, this is one great
argument, that the opinion of Transubstantiation is wholly new among them, that
they have not much studied the point, but heedlesly take it upon trust with an
implicit faith. For when their Bishops and Priests are urged with the horrid
and monstrous consequences of it, fully made out from Scripture and Philosophy,
they stand amazed, and return no other answer but this, that it is a great
Mystery, and not to be disputed. It Is certainly a great, an holy, a venerable
Mystery, this we most readily and heartily acknowledge; but how much better had
they consulted the honor of the Christian Religion, and the peace of the
Church, had they not proceeded so boldly and blindly to such a peremptory
definition?

The Greeks use Leavened bread in the Sacrament: They use Leavened bread in the
Sacrament.
which practice of their Church they defend with great fierceness, as if our B.
Savior had clearly and in express terms forbad the use of Azymes. For so they
interpret the words of the Institution, that Christ said of Bread, not of
Azyme, that it was his Body: as if there could be no Bread truly and properly
so called without a mixture of Leaven in it. But that which they most rely upon
is, an imagination, that our Savior, in the celebration of the Passover,
anticipated the usual time of the Festival, and kept it a day before, (which
they think may be proved from S. John 18. chap. v. 28. and chap. 19. 14.) that
is, Luna decima tertia, or the thirteenth day of Nisan at the evening, and
consequently, that he used leavened bread. And some of the Vid. Allat. de
Libris Ecclesiasticis Graecor. page ^20.
Greek Writers, who managed this controversy formerly, were so ridiculously
impudent, as to assert, that there was a piece of that very leavened bread,
which our Savior at his last Supper consecrated, reserved, among other
Relics, in the Chapel belonging to the Emperor's palace in Constantinople,
at what time that City was taken by the Latins.

While they urge the necessity of using Leavened bread in the Sacrament with an
intemperate (not to say, an unreasonable) zeal against the Latins, (whom they
therefore reproach with the name of (...), or Azymites, and aggravate, as a
horrid and grievous defect and fault, the quality of the Bread, whether
leavened or unleavened, being in it self a matter of small moment, and mere
indifference, and no way essential to the Sacrament,) the Schism, upon the heat
and contest arising hence several Centuries of years before the overthrow of
the Greek Empire, grew wider and wider, and at last became irreconcilable,
being fomented in the following Ages by the ambition of the great
Ecclesiastics of both parties, who upbraided each other with prevaricating,
and departing from the mind and will of Christ herein.

The Sacramental Bread is to be (...), clean or pure; The Sacramental bread
pure, and by whom made.
which purity does not so much refer to the fineness of the corn, as to the
manner of its being kneaded and baked, either by Men legally pure, or else by
the (...) or Old women professed, or the Wives of married Priests, not
otherwise unqualified: the former being supposed upon the account of their Vow,
the other of their relation, to be of more then ordinary Sanctity.

They celebrate the Holy Sacrament on the same day but once upon the same
Altar, The Sacrament celebrated but once the same day upon the same Altar: and
anciently but one Altar in a Church.
which is always the middlemost of the three; or where there are only two, on
that which is opposite to the middle Door; and never upon the Prothesis.
Anciently there was See S. Ignat. epist. ad Philadelph. page 40. edit. Voss.
(...), etc. Et in epist. ad Magnesianos, page 34. (...).
only a single Altar in each Church: (as one High Priest and Mediator, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who by his own blood entered in once into the Holy place:)
as appears, not only from the order and disposition of their Fabric;
Antiquity being wholly unacquainted with Side-Altars, (wherewith the Churches
under the Papacy are crowded, for the sake of that great number of Masses,
daily sung, as they pretend, for the relief of poor Souls in Purgatory;) but
from the sacred use to which it was appropriated, (for, for some hundreds of
years, the Sacrament was not celebrated twice the same day,) as is evident from
the eloquent Panegyric of Paulinus Bishop of Tire, concerning the structure of
Churches, preserved by Eusebius, in the tenth book and fourth chapter of his
Ecclesiastical History.

In the great Churches the Priest celebrates the Sacrament upon the solemn
Festivals and upon Sundays, The Sacrament celebrated often, and when; and
and at other times upon occasion, when he is hired either to pray for the Soul
of any dead person, or for success in a journey, or the like.

Sometimes they go to ruined places without their Towns or in the Fields, in
ruined places, where formerly Churches were seated.
where formerly were Churches, or near a holy Fountain. A Table there placed in
stead of an Altar is covered with sive (...). De horum consecratione vide (...)
in Euchologio.
(...) or consecrated clothes, without which they cannot consecrate in
unhallowed places. At these times I have observed persons troubled with Agues,
and other feverish distempers, laid at some distance from the Altar with their
faces toward it, hoping, by the merit of the Blessed Sacrament, and the prayers
of the Priest officiating, to be restored to their health.

The Laics are obliged to receive the Blessed Sacrament four times a year.
People obliged to receive the Sacrament four times a year.
With which law of their Church they most readily comply, none omitting it,
especially at Christmas or Easter, unless hindered by a real and urgent
necessity. In order to their better Preparation, the preceding Fasts are
appointed and observed.

It is not allowed, The Priest does not consecrate till after daylight.
that the Priest begin the service of Consecration till after morning: the
usual time being about the third hour of the day; which is not without a
design: the Priest using this short form of Prayer, O Lord, who sentest thy
most Holy Spirit upon the Apostles at the third hour, O merciful God, take not
thy Holy Spirit from us. But at the Festival of Easter their piety is early*
this Service being usually performed before the Sunrise, after the example of
S. Mary Magdalen and the other devout women, who came with their ointment to
the Sepulcher, where Christ had been entombed, (...).
as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week, S. Matthew. chap. 28. v.
1. or, as S. Luke expresses it, chap. 24. v. 1. (...)
on the first day of the week very early in the morning.

In the time of the Great Lent, In Lent the Sacrament is not celebrated till
the afternoon.
except on Saturdays, Sundays, and the Feast of the Annunciation, the Sacrament
is not celebrated till in the middle of the afternoon. But of this more at
large hereafter.

The Greeks communicate fasting, The Greeks communicate fasting.
looking upon it as a thing very unlawful and scandalous to taste a drop of
wine, or eat the least bit of bread, for several hours before they receive; so
that it is oftentimes to be admired, with what great courage and obstinacy they
do as it were violence to themselves, and get the mastery over their natural
passions and inclinations.

When they receive the Sacrament, Their Posture at receiving.
they do not kneel, but only incline their body; at which moment they are
taught to exercise an act of Faith after this manner: (...).
I confess and acknowledge, that thou art Jesus Christ, the Son of the living
God, who came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Which form,
were it as ancient as the times of S. Chrysostom, which will never be proved,
cannot justly be urged by the Patrons and Asserters of Transubstantiation, in
favor of their opinion; because the words are, most probably, referred, not to
the Elements, which they are just about to receive, but to our B. Savior, God
and Man, in Heaven, whom the sacred Elements not only truly and really
represent, but also exhibit.

The People are obliged by the law of the Church to confess to a Priest
rightfully and lawfully constituted, The People obliged to Confession, before
they communicate.
before they communicate: But the Confessors (whom they call (...) or
spiritual men) do not require and exact of their Penitents a rigid, anxious, or
particular confession of their Sins, but have regard to modesty, and an ill
memory, that may not retain every circumstance of fact; and are not
over-difficult in granting their Absolutions. What remains to be farther said
about Confession, may be seen in its proper place.

The Priest too is obliged, The Priest himself obliged also.
by the (...) or Order prefixed to the Liturgy which bears the name of S.
Chrysostom, to confess, before he goes to consecrate. But I am apt to fear,
that this piece of Church Discipline is not kept up among them, and that
Priests and people, notwithstanding the obligation, are not very strict and
zealous in the practice of it, unless in the case of heinous Crimes which wast
the Conscience, it being oftentimes intermitted. This is the fault of the
Persons: and as to the practice it self, the Church of England does no way
disallow it, but rather recommend it to those of her Communion, in the Office
of the Holy Sacrament; provided it be done after a due manner, and that the
Consciences of the people be not burdened with unjust scruples, as if the
whole benefit of the Sacrament would be lost, and the Confession it self
rendered ineffectual, except they disburthen and lay open the secretest thoughts
of their heart, and reveal the minutest punctilio and circumstance of their
guilt.

They give the Eucharist in both kinds to little Children of one or two years
of age, They communicate Children in both kinds.
sometimes to newborn Infants, that is, after they have been Christened, in
case of imminent danger of death; grounding their belief of an absolute
necessity of this Sacrament also upon the words of our B. Savior, S. John chapter
6. v. 53. Verily, verily I say unto you, Except you eat the flesh of the Son of
man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. If it be objected against
them, that these words are not to be understood of a Sacramental manducation,
and that the custom which they retain seems to be so far from being necessary,
that it is scarce proper and justifiable, Children not possibly having any
actual Faith or understanding of these Mysteries; they will appeal, for their
justification, to the universal practice of the Church in the Primitive times
for several Ages, wherein the communicating of Infants was looked upon as a
necessary and essential point of the Christian Religion.

That there may be a provision made at all times for the necessities of Sick
and Dying persons, They reserve the Sacrament for the use of sick persons.
that they may not depart out of this world without the comfort and support of
this heavenly Viaticum, they take care that a sufficient quantity of Bread be
consecrated for this purpose on the Thursday of the Holy week; which being
broken into little Particles, and sufficiently tinged and moistened in the
consecrated Wine, they take out of the Chalice, and dry them in a small dish,
put under a pan of coals, and then put them into a Pix or Box to be reserved.
This (...).
Box, whether of silver or wood, is put up into a silken case, the better to
defend what is enclosed from cobwebs or any thing that may defile it, and is
hung up usually behind the Altar against the wall, with a Lamp or two for the
most part burning before it. Upon occasion the Priest, taking out one or more
of the Margaritae, carries them to the houses of such as are sick, who desire
to communicate; but they are first dipped and moistened in common Wine: which is
done upon a double account; either, that by this vehicle the little Particles
may the better pass into the stomach; or else, that the Particles of the
consecrated Wine, which were dried up and condensed by the heat of the fire,
may this way be excited.

I hope it will not be unacceptable to the pious Reader, A digression about the
original of this custom.
if I make a little Digression, and show the antiquity and original of this
practice.

So great was the Faith and Zeal and Piety of the first Christians, that they,
in all probability, every day received the Blessed Sacrament, which evidently
set forth before their eyes Christ crucified in the chiefest and most
remarkable passages and circumstances of his Death. Acts 2. v. 42, 46. (...),
in the Apostles Creed, perchance ought thus to be understood, for the
participation of the Sacraments, and other holy things of God, as they lie in
common to all Saints, in the language of the New Testament, that is,
Christians; who have herein a Communion one with another.
They continued steadfastly, (...), (diligent and assiduous) in the Apostles
doctrine, and in communication, perchance of the several gifts of Bread and
Wine, among other things, especially for the uses of the Sacrament, and the
Agapae or Love Feasts, which followed, and in breaking of bread, and prayer,
that is, in receiving the Sacrament, and in joint and public devotion. This
was done partly out of the great love and affection which they bare to our B.
Lord and Savior, who shed his dearest Heart-bloud for us; and partly out of
obedience to his blessed will, who therefore was pleased to institute and
command it, that it might be a perpetual Memorial of his precious Death, until
his coming again; (for they did not think it a mere matter of indifferency,
whether they received the Sacrament or no, as many in this degenerous Age are
apt to deceive and flatter themselves;) and partly out of a deep sense they had
of the many Benefits flowing from a worthy Participation of it. For being
convinced by the most satisfactory way of proof, experience, that the Sacrament
was a most effectual instrument of conveying Grace into their Souls, that
hereby they were strengthened in Grace and Virtue, that hereby they held a
close Communion with Christ, and became one with him, and were fulfilled with
the Divine Grace and heavenly Benediction, and, lastly, were more and more
confirmed and encouraged to undergo all the troubles and torments either of
life or death for his Name; they were frequent and assiduous in their
approaches to the Altar. At that time it was made death by the law for the
Christians to have their Religious meetings; an horrible Persecution raged
everywhere throughout the Empire; they were dragged before Tribunals, and
sentenced to be burned, or crucified, or tormented worse. All this they beheld
with their eyes, without shedding a tear, without a sigh, without regret and
trouble of mind; rejoicing greatly, that they were counted worthy to suffer
reproach and death it self for the Name of Christ, and that they were thus made
conformable to the image of their Savior, and partakers of his Sufferings. It
was altogether uncertain whether their lives were not to end before the day:
they therefore daily contemplated Christ in the holy Elements: this inspired
them with new courage, and their zeal became more ardent and vigourous then the
flames that consumed them. They were indeed oftentimes prevented by the
malicious industry of their Idolatrous enemies, and pursued to the very
Grotta's and Caves, and continually hunted out by the Heathen Officers, from
whose violence nothing could be safe, and thus deprived of these happy
opportunities. In such perplexity of affairs what was to be done? They would
joyfully lay down their lives for Christ, so that they might but first receive
Christ in the Sacrament. Hereupon it was permitted them to carry away with them
some part of the consecrated Bread, and reserve it either about them or in
their houses, that if they were discovered, and seized upon, and hurried before
a Judge, and immediately sentenced, and dragged to execution, they might have
wherewithal to comfort and strengthen them in their last Agonies. This was
afterward indulged to Hermites, who had retired to the Woods or Mountains, and
other solitary places scarce accessible, to enjoy themselves and their Devotion
without the least molestation from company. With which kind of life frequent
journeyings to Cities and places of resort did no way suit and comport. Very
few of them being dignified with the Priesthood, it seemed very hard and
severe, that they should be deprived of so comfortable a repast as the Body of
Christ is, in their recesses and solitudes. A mass of consecrated Bread was
either sent to them accordingly; or else, when they thought fit to come and
converse with the World for a few hours, they carried it away with them upon
their quick and speedy return. When this custom of reserving the Sacramental
Bread in private hands began, it cannot, I suppose, be exactly stated: it is
most probable, that it might be about the beginning of the Third Century. But
however this is certain; that there being not only just suspicion, but just
and full proof, that the Holy Bread which was reserved was abused to very evil
purposes, it was forbid by the Council held at Saragosa, the chief City of the
Province of Tarragona in Spain, in the year of our Lord 381, Canon the third,
that any should presume to carry any of the Holy Bread away with him. Upon the
same reason, several pieces of the consecrated Bread were reserved and kept by
the Priests, to distribute among Sick people, and especially to Lapsed persons,
(who, through humane frailty, had been guilty of some sinful compliance in the
times of Persecution, and ipso facto were deprived, in the way of penance and
humiliation, of the Sacrament, till the hour of death,) who possibly otherwise
could not have gone out of the world with peace and comfort. A famous instance
of this we have in Vid. Eusebii Histor. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 44.
a Letter of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria to Fabius Bishop of Antioch
concerning Serapion, who had miscarried under Decius. He, being in these
circumstances, and at the point of death, in the nightime was in great
disorder and trouble of mind for want of a Priest to absolve him, and give him
the Communion: whereupon a Messenger was sent immediately to fetch the Priest
to administer comfort to the dying Penitent. But the Priest happened to be sick
himself. He, following the orders and direction of his Bishop, the Relater of
this story, in such like cases, (...).
that the dying persons might not despair, but depart with good hope of their
Salvation, gave S. Basil, in his Liturgy, calls the Sacramental bread
distributed to the Communicants, (...).
(...), or a little piece of the Sacramental bread, to the youth, commanding
him to dip it in water, and convey it into the mouth of the poor old man, who
was just upon the point of yielding up his Soul into the hands of God. This
shows us, that they had such an high esteem and reverence of the Sacrament in
ancient times, as to judge it almost absolutely necessary in articulo mortis:
which was the effect of their great Piety, which deserves the highest
commendation and encouragement.

I cannot here forbear my wonder at the odd fancies of a late learned Writer
concerning the Blessed Sacrament, A just Censure on a little posthumous Piece
of Mr. J. H.
in which, as in many other arguments of Religion, he chose to be singular,
presuming too much upon the strength and nimbleness of his wit, to make out
plausibly any Paradox, he, to run counter to the Times, unluckily pitched upon.
And I think the Publisher of these Posthumous Remains was not aware of the ill
effects that such Notions, whereby the Blessed Sacrament is so horribly
slighted, may produce, to the cooling those ardours of Devotion and zeal, which
all truly devout persons have to this Holy Institution of our Savior. No
person certainly whatever can receive the Symbols of our Blessed Savior's
Passion and Death too often, so he come with that due preparation of mind which
these pure and tremendous Mysteries require: and the time of one's last
Sickness especially is very proper. Our Church, indeed, has declared, that a
frequent and conscientious use of the Sacrament in the time of Health is
sufficient; and that such devout and religious persons, in case of sudden
Sickness, have less cause to be disquieted for the lack of the same. Our
Salvation does not necessarily depend upon, nor is restrained to an external
and oral Communion; whether there be or be not an opportunity, God accepts the
will and desire of a contrite and devout heart, in stead of this commemorative
Sacrifice. Nor do we attribute so much efficacy to the Sacramental Sign, as to
the internal Grace, for fear we should detract from the perfection of the
Sacrifice of the real and natural Body of our Savior, once offered upon the
Cross, of which this is a Type and a Representation, though not only so. I
urge it no farther, but that it is very convenient for sick persons, when they
foresee that their Sickness may prove mortal, to receive; and undoubtedly they
would find the great benefit of it. I put an end to this Digression, with
reference to the present practice of the Greek and Roman Churches, as to the
Reservation of the Blessed Sacrament; that the reason which held formerly, has
ceased long since. For there are Priests enough at hand, even in Greece it
self, to consecrate the Sacrament in the presence of the sick man, if he
desires to communicate; and this may be done (I mean, as to what is only
necessary and essential, the Ceremonies being omitted, which are used at the
public Communion in the Church, where a greater regard is had to splendor and
decorum) with less trouble, and sooner, then taking the Sacramental Bread out
of the Ciborium, and carrying it in Procession to the houses of dying persons.

The ten Particles, About the ten Particles.
which are placed in the Patin with the Holy Bread, become sanctified
relatively and in a way of participation, as in tractatulo (...).
Gabriel Philadelphiensis speaks, because they are blessed at the same time
with the Holy Bread that is to be consecrated just after the great Offertory.
The Priest is to take care, (...).
that he does not give one of these Particles, through a mistake, to any of the
Communicants in stead of a consecrated one; as the same Author does advise.
Whence it follows, Among these Arcudius lib. 3. cap. 10. etc. and C^^d. Bona de
rebus Liturg. l. 1. c. 1. p. 311.
that those who assert so many Hosts to be offered up as there are Particles,
are mistaken; for (...).
they are only close joined to the Body and Blood of our Lord, and are not
consecrated, but are reckoned to be of the same nature with the unconsecrated
blessed Bread.

After the celebration of the Sacrament, About the Colyba or boiled Wheat.
upon great Festivals, there is usually an entertainment for the people then
present in the Church, which is called by them (...), or the oblation of the
Colyba, that is, a heap of boiled Wheat and Pulse, Raisins, Nuts, Almonds, and
the like. For the Priest, having a Charger full of this confused mass, goes
about the Church, and distributes more or less of it to the men, women, and
children, that are in his way; which they receive very readily and gratefully,
kissing either his hand or vest. The original of boiled Wheat they derive from
the times of the Apostate Emperor Julian, who had caused the bread, flesh, and
fruit exposed to sale in the market, to be polluted with the blood and steams
of the Idoll-sacrifices. The Bishop being warned of this from God, by the
appearing of S. Theodore, who had been martyred under Maximine, commanded the
people, lest they should be polluted by this unlawful food, to satisfy their
hunger this way. Thus the story is related by Nicephorus Callistus in his
Church History, l. 10. c. 12. (...).


By this Ceremony they pretend to Vid. peculiare opusculum Gabrielis
Archiepiscopi Philadelphiensis (...).
make out their belief of the general Resurrection of the dead at the last day,
The pretended reason of it.
of which they suppose this to be a symbol; deriving the occasion of it from
the words of our B. Savior, S. John 12. 24. Verily, verily I say unto you,
Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground, and die, it abides alone; but if
it dies, it brings forth much fruit: and of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 36, 37, 38.
Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die: and that
which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body which shall be, but bare grain, it
may chance of wheat, or of some other grain. But God gives it a body, as it
has pleased him, and to every seed his own body. Nothing indeed does represent
more clearly to the eye, or render more probable to our belief, the great
mystery of the Resurrection of the body, then the stupendous raising and growth
of seeds of Corn, hid and buried in the furrows, into ^ull ears. Gabriel
Philadelphiensis finds a Mystery in the addition and mixture of the other
things, without any other ground then that of his own tri^ling fancy: for they
are only added as sauces, (...). to the Wheat, to make it more grateful to
the palate, and more easily digestible in the stomach. But it is certain that
these things are offered in honor of particular Saints upon their
Festival-days, and In the (...). in Euchol. p. 658.
in remembrance and behalf of the dead: and accordingly they carry them to the
graves of their deceased Friends.

During the solemn time of Lent, No consecration in Lent but on Saturdays,
Sundays, and the Feast of the Annunciation.
set apart for the severe exercises of Penance, there is no consecration of the
Sacrament, except on Saturdays, Sundays, and the Feast of the Annunciation. For
which cause the other days are called (...). But lest by this intermission
there should seem to be a neglect of our B. Savior's Institution, which it
concerns the Christian Church to observe every day, to implore God's mercy by
the oblation and merit of this unbloudy Sacrifice; there is this provision made
for it, yet so as that the severities of the Lenten Fast shall be preserved;
that there shall be only celebrated in the intermediate space (...), or Missa
Praesanctificatorum. Thus at this day, according to the ancient custom, about
three a clock in the afternoon, when the Fast is ended, about the time of
Vespers, (though sometime, the old severe discipline being somewhat relaxed as
to this circumstance, they do it sooner,) the Priest does receive and exhibit
the Elements, which were before consecrated: so that this Solemnity is nothing
but an image and repeated celebration of the former Consecration, except that
there are peculiar Prayers allotted for this service, which are to be found in
the Office. Of the Sacrament of the Eucharist hitherto.

Under the title of (...), or Ecclesiastic or sacred Order, Holy Order.
the Greeks comprehend the inferior as well as superior Ministers, which any
way soever may belong to the Church. In the whole they reckon up seven, which
are,

(...).
The Sexton, Sexton.
whose office is to light the Lamps, keep the Church clean, and do any such
like mean work.

(...). Vid. Balsamonem in quartum canonem Synodi Trullanae.
The Reader, Reader.
who reads the Lessons out of the Gospels or Epistles to the people; though
sometimes this is performed by a Deacon at the Desk.

(...).
The Quire-man, Quire-man.
whose office is to sing the Prayers and Hymns, (...), whence they are called
(...), and the Praecentor (...) or Canonarcha. I have observed a little Boy
sometimes passing from one side of the Quire to the other, and repeating
several versicles, which they chant after their poor way. For their vocal
Music is very rude and harsh, without any art or gracefulness.

(...).
The Subdeacon, who takes care of the Utensils of the Altar, Subdeacon.
and of the several Vestments used by the Priest and Deacon in the time of
their officiating. He remains in the Sacrarium during the Service, which is
cumbered and perplexed with so many Ceremonies, that his being there to assist
is almost necessary.

Of the three superior Orders, Deacon, Priest and Bishop.
Deacons, Priests, and Bishops, I have discoursed already. I will only
observe, Office of a Priest, in what it consists.
that the office of a Priest, according to the Sea the (...)* p. 129.
Greeks, consists of these three parts; that is, in the power of absolving or
remitting the sins of Penitents, of teaching and instructing the people, and of
consecrating the Blessed Sacrament.

In conferring any of these three Orders they take a strict care, Imposition of
hands always used in the conferring these three last Orders.
(...). page 130.
that the person ordained have no lameness or other defect in his body, whereby
he may be made less fit and capable to do the duty belonging to his Order and
Office. And this is always done by Imposition of the hand of the Bishop,
according to the Canonical practice, and as the particular condition and order
of the persons ordained shall require. This is so essential a part of the Rite,
that with them (...) and (...) are promiscuously used, and serve to express the
same thing.

The doctrine of Confession and Penance conduces very much to preserve the
esteem and dignity of the Priesthood, Penance.
notwithstanding the great want of secular advantages among the Greeks, who are
very sensible of the great quiet and satisfaction they find within them from
their Ghostly Fathers Counsels and Absolutions.

In order to which (...). page 132.
they make oral Confession necessary: Confession.
not a nice and scrupulous Confession of every sin, with every particularity
and circumstance of it; but a general and free disburthening of the Conscience,
as the Penitent, who knows his own case best, shall think fit in prudence to
make, in order to his recovery and confirmation. They Vid. (...). page 109.
oblige all in general to go to Confession four times a year: but they think
fit to dispense with the (...) or simpler sort of people, if they only confess
in Lent. But for such as have advanced in Piety, they expect from them a
monthly Confession. Every Priest is not a Confessor, nor indeed can be without
the license of the Bishop, who usually chooses out grave and elderly and prudent
persons, to exercise this solemn part of the Priestly Function. Men of this
faculty and of these qualifications being for the most part made
Parish Priests, for the greater ease and comfort of sick and dying persons, of
whose Souls they have the care. They are called (...), or Spiritual men or
Fathers, and are readily obeyed and complied with in the Penances, which they
inflict according to the practice and Canon of the Church; which is therefore
called in the vulgar Greek (...) as also (...), because it is exacted in the
way of punishment and satisfaction. But here I could wish I had not reason to
complain of the avarice and jugglings of the Priests, who commute these
Penances with Pecuniary mulcts; which yet perchance are as grievous to the poor
people, as the severest austerities of Fasting.

After the Penance inflicted is performed, Absolution.
or some way or other satisfied, the Priest absolves the Penitent after this
manner; (...).
The Grace of the All-holy Spirit by my Meanness, that is, by the mediation of
my Ministry, pardons and absolves you. This form of Absolution is not
constantly observed, but is varied oftentimes, it being left in a manner wholly
to the discretion of the Penitentiary. Christophorus Angelus, a Greek of the
Morea, in the account he published of the State of this Church in the year 16
-- mentions this form. Cap. 22. (...).
According to the power which Christ gave to his Apostles, saying, Whose sins
you loose upon earth, they shall be loosed in heaven, and according to the
power which the Apostles gave to the Bishops, and according to the power which
I have received from my Bishop, thou shall be pardoned by the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. Amen. and thy portion shall be with the just. But in the Prayers of
Pardon, which the Priest recites over Penitents, and such as have confessed, it
runs thus; (...).
Thou, O Lord, remit, pardon and forgive the Sins committed by thy Servants:
(...).
again; Be pleased to absolve thy Servants according to thy word: (...).
again; Do thou pardon, as being our good and gracious God: (...).
again; Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ pardon all these Sins which thou have
confessed before him to my Meanness, and those which thou have forgotten: (...).
again; Thou, O Lord, pardon this thy Servant all those Sins which he has
committed, by me thy poor unworthy Servant, and be reconciled to him, and unite
him to thy Holy Church: (...).
again; God pardon thee by me, who am a Sinner, that is, by my Ministry: and
sometimes very briefly in the vulgar language, (...), Be thou pardoned, or
absolved. Out of this great variety, it is most clear and evident, that the
sentence of Absolution is not pronounced by the Priest, who is the only
Minister of this sacred Rite, in his own proper person, much less judicially;
but only in the way of supplication or deprecation. So that we may here justly
conclude this form, (...).
My Meanness absolves thee, or the other, which is more plain and express,
(...).
I absolve thee from all the Sins which thou have confessed before God and before
my Unworthiness, or (...).
the third, I pardon all thy Sins, to be upstart and novell, and borrowed from
the Latins, whom they love to imitate in most things.

This authority of the Church in inflicting and relaxing Censures is generally
esteemed sacred, The good effect of Church Censures among them.
venerable and divine, and consequently of great efficacy, and does very much
conduce, as I have intimated before, to the preservation of the Christian
Religion among them. For fear of these Censures, they are not only affrighted
from the commission of those Sins which would bring a scandal upon their holy
Profession, (this argument prevailing more with slavish and degenerous minds,
then considerations of modesty, or the loveliness and agreeableness of Virtue
to humane nature,) but from running to the Turkish Judges for justice. For they
look upon the person to be in a most desperate condition, and as undone for
ever in the other world, who dies unabsolved from the sentence of
Excommunication, that was canonically past upon him. Such great power has the
dread and reverence of Ecclesiastical Authority over this querulous and
contentious people.

If any person happen to die before the Excommunication be taken off, the
general belief is, that his body feels the sad effects of it in the grave, and
quickly becomes black, the blood no way clotted or dried up notwithstanding its
stagnation, and all the parts remaining entire in their natural posture without
the least alteration; and this for ten or twelve months after, or longer;
except that the skin hardens, and swells like a drum; (whence the person is
called (...)) and that this is caused by the Devil's entering into it. Stories
pass current among them of the walking of their which they call (...), or
(...), a f^etore, qualis e limo putrescente in fossa oriri solet, sic dictas.
Ghosts, especially in the nightime, not only in the Churchyards, but in the
Streets, and knocking at the doors of the houses, and calling them by their
names. The Greeks are so timorous and superstitious herein, that they will not
answer any one in the dark at the first call, though they know his voice never
so well, for fear it should be this Spirit; for then they look upon themselves
as dead men, and fall into an irrecoverable melancholy. This opinion is so
rooted in their minds, that there is no persuading them to the contrary: They
will tell you of matter of fact, how several graves have been opened, and the
bodies found undissolved: though I could not hear of the success of the
experiment, notwithstanding my diligent enquiry. But I found the Priests
equally credulous, not so much out of design to keep the poor people in awe of
the Church Censures, as out of weakness, being led away with the same popular
error. The Bishops Thus Metrophanes, Patriarch of Constantinople, menaces the
Christians of Candia, unless they ceased from molesting the Jews of that
Island, that they should be (...). In Turco-Graecia page 281.
accordingly in their Briefs, when they forbid any thing to be done, threaten
the transgressors, that they shall be separated from God and cursed, and
deprived of the use and benefit of the Sacrament, and after death their bodies
shall swell and be undissolved. And this latter is inserted in the sentence of
Excommunication, to add to the horror and terror of it. At See an instance
of this at large in the History of the Patriarchs of Constantinople, since the
taking of that City by the Turks, written in vulgar Greek by Manuel Malaxus, in
the Life of Maximus, in Turco-Graec. p. 133, etc. also the Historia Politica of
Constantinople, in the same Volume, p. 27, 28. Vide etiam Christophor. Angelum
in Enchiridio.
the same time they will tell you, that as soon as the Dead person has been
absolved, at Constantinople by the Patriarch, or by the Bishop of the Province,
the body, though buried in some of the Islands in the Arches, or at what great
distance soever, immediately corrupts and dissolves, and crumbles into ashes.
Vid. (...), in Euchologio, page 684, etc.
This (...).
indulgence is procured and granted to the Dead, and read over his grave, with
several Prayers to the same purpose.

They have the same fearful apprehensions of an evil Spirit, called Our
Interpreters at Constantinople fansied this word to be corrupted from the
Turkish Kara Congia, which signify a black old man, in which shape they
pretend this Demon often to appear.
(...), which they pretend to be let loose the twelve days of the
Christmas-Solemnity, and possess Children born within that space: during which
time also the little Boys and Girls dare not go abroad in the nighttime, for
fear of meeting this Hobgoblin, but hasten home before Sunset. The Turks seem
to be infected with the like Superstition; for they will scar^e venture to Sea
till after the waters are blessed by the Christians, that is, till after the
Twelfth day, the Festival of the Baptism of our Savior, when that Ceremony is
performed; grossly imagining, that in their voyage they shall be met and sunk by
a brazen Ship. They usually also fright their Children with stories of
Apparitions and Specter, which they call (...), which word properly denotes
any thing dressed up in an odd ridiculous shape and habit.

All (...).
clandestine Espousals are severely forbidden, Espousals.
and therefore they are never lawfully done but before witnesses; and sometime,
to ratify and confirm them the more, before a Priest. At such time they go to
Church, and standing before the middle door of the Chancell, the Priest, having
made the sign of the Cross upon their heads, delivers lighted Tapers into their
hands, and descends with them into the body of the Church: where, after some
Collects, he produces two Rings, the one of gold, the other of silver, which
before had as it were been consecrated, by being put upon the Altar, and gives
the former to the Man, and the latter to the Woman, repeating these words
thrice, (...), etc.
The Servant of God, such a one, espouses the Servant of God, such a one, in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and for
ever. Amen. Which form, mutatis mutandis, he, turning toward the Woman, uses as
often. Immediately after the Paranymph or Bride-man takes the Rings from off
their fingers, and makes an exchange; the Priest then joining their hands. And
this is done, as well that the Woman might not too much resent the inferiority
of her condition, represented by the Ring of the less noble metal; as to
signify, that she is to be admitted into an equal right and share of her
Husband's goods and possessions, which, upon a consummation of this Matrimonial
contract, are to become common to both.

Their Marriages are always performed Marriage.
publicly; Vid. Harmenopulum, apud Gabrielem Philadelph. page 55. a. (...).
this being an express Law of their Church, Let none presume to marry but
before Witnesses. If the Priest should transgress herein, he is liable to
Ecclesiastical Censures provided in such like cases. Be the persons of what
quality or condition soever, Crowns or Garlands made for the most part of
Olive-branches, stitcht over with white silk, and interwoven with purple, are a
necessary and essential part of the Nuptial Solemnity, (hence (...) is
oftentimes used for Marriage, and (...) and (...) signify the same thing,) they
being the Symbols, not to say the complement, of this mystical Rite. The
Priest, covering the head of the Bridegroom with one of these Garlands, says,
(...).
The Servant of God, such a one, is crowned for, that is, marries, the Servant
of God, such a one, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Then he crowns the head of the Bride with the other Garland, repeating
the same words with their due alterations; and then putting their hands across,
he blesses them in this form thrice, (...)*
O Lord God, crown them with glory and honor. After the Epistle and Gospel
and several Prayers are read, the new-married couple drink out of the same Cup
which the Priest had blessed, in sign and token of Love, Agreement, and Joy, and
as a pledge of their mutual Conversation, and of their right to one another's
estates and fortunes. After two or three short Hymns, the Priest takes the
Garlands from off their heads, and they, saluting each other, are dismissed with
his Blessing.

They are not over-favourable to second Marriges, Second and third Marriages
how esteemed.
following the rigor of the ancient times. But as for (...), or third
Marriages, they look upon them as forbidden by the Canons of the Church, and
arraign such persons as guilty of Incontinence; and severely condemn the fourth
as altogether unlawful and sinful: making no allowances for temper, or
accidental deaths. This variety or change of Wives they most invidiously call
by the name of (...), or Polygamy, contrary to the primary signification of the
word: against which they so fiercely declaim, as a thing hateful to God, (to
whose providence in taking away their first or second Wife by death, they say,
every one should submit, and curb his natural desires and inclinations,) and as
unworthy of men governed by reason. In this sense I find the word used by
Photius, Epist. 1. ad Michaelem Principem Bulgar. p. 39. (...).
who opposes it to (...) as that to (...), and passes this severe Censure upon
the thing, that it is very base and detestable, and only proper to impure and
lustful irrational creatures.

To make the Marriage-vow the more binding and solemn, Consent of Parents and
Friends necessary.
the Bridegroom and Bride receive the Holy Sacrament. He must be always above
fourteen years of age, and she above thirteen: and the consent of their
Parents, Guardians or Tutors, is esteemed so necessary, that without it is
accounted unlawful, and no other then Fornication. Spiritual Affinity an
hindrance of Marriage.
Among other impediments of Marriage they reckon (...). Vid. (...) l. 28. tit.
5. cap. 17. and Determinationem Joasaphi Metropolitae Corinthii apud Crus. in
Turco-Graec. lib. 4. page 324. Vide etiam p. 330. and 339.
spiritual Affinity, that is, such as arises at the Font: as for instance, he
who is a Godfather to any one, and his Son, cannot lawfully marry either the
Mother or the Daughter. Such two as have had the same Godfather, are incapable
of marrying each the other; and if they do, they are accounted incestuous.

The practice of the Greeks does horribly contradict their established doctrine
of the Indissolubility of the bond of Matrimony; Divorces frequent among them.
for Divorces are easily and frequently obtained and granted upon several light
and frivolous accounts, besides that of Adultery; as if it were left wholly to
the idle and extravagant fancy of every lustful and discontented person, who
is weary of his Wife, to retain her, or divorce himself from her, as he
pleases. This evil seems past all remedy; there being no other way left at
present to satisfy a people, who are so prone to revenge where they have
conceived a grudge, or to make new love after a dislike of the former match,
then by this most unjust and horriblyabused indulgence.

It is the proper work of the Priest, Oil with Prayer.
who has a power to make and consecrate the Holy Oil, to anoint dying persons
with it; (...). p. 137.
all other persons whatsoever being excluded. Which practice they found upon
the example of the Apostles, who were sent out by Christ, and S. Mark 6. 13.
anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them; and upon the Advice or
Order of S. James, chap. 5. v. 14. Is any sick among you? let him call for the
Elders (or Presbyters) of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him
with oil in the name of the Lord. And from this Text they pretend to conclude
most strongly, that several are necessary in order to the right performing of
this last office. The Office requires, that they be no less then seven, and
assigns to every one of them their particular employment at that time. But this
number is not rigidly exacted, and three oftentimes serve. They only anoint
the forehead, ears, and hands of sick persons. Several Prayers are used at the
time of Unction, and this particularly among the rest. (...).
O Holy Father, Physician of Soul and body, who have sent thy onely-begotten
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, to cure all diseases, and to redeem from death,
heal thy Servant of his infirmity both of body and Soul, and quicken him by the
grace of thy Christ, for the intercession of our Lady the Mother of God, the
ever-Virgin Mary, etc. and here they recite the names of several Saints -- for
Thou, O Christ, our God, art the Fountain of all healing; and we give the glory
of it to Thee, and to the Father, and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever.
After Vid. (...). page 110.
this they give the sick person the Holy Sacrament, as the last Viaticum. The
Houses of the sick persons are also anointed with the same Oil, the figure of a
Cross being made with it upon the walls and posts: at which Ceremony the Priest
sings the 91. Psalm, He that dwells in the secret place of the Most high,
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty, etc.

This Oil is not only used upon persons lying in extremis: for the people,
This Oil sometimes used upon persons in perfect health, or but lightly
indisposed.
believing that there is great virtue in it to heal the Distempers of the Body,
in case of any Sickness or Indisposition, that does not bring in danger of
Death, use it almost in the nature of a remedy or medicine; and think
themselves also by it better enabled to resist the Assaults and Temptations of
the great Enemy of their Souls, the Devil. But of the Seven Mysteries of the
Greek Church hitherto.

In the midst of the sad Pressures which daily afflict the poor Greeks, The
Greeks orthodox in the great Articles of Faith.
and the continual Scoffs and Blasphemies of the Turks, (who, being stupid and
dull, are guided wholly in their judgments of things by a gross fancy, and
reject with a brutish kind of pride and scorn whatever is raised, though never
so little, above the reach of Sense,) it is no slight argument of the truth of
the great Articles of the Christian Religion, against the subtle contrivances
of a party of men in Christendom, (who, under a pretense of sober reason,
undermine the foundations of it,) that the Christians of the East do still
retain, with all imaginable constancy, and firmness of assent, the entire
profession of the Mysteries of Faith, as they were believed and acknowledged in
the first Ages.

They retain exactly the Catholic Doctrine concerning the most Holy and
undivided Trinity, Constantinopolitan Creed.
and the Incarnation of the eternal Son of God, according to the
Constantinopolitan Creed, which they only retain in their Liturgies and
Catechisms, this being but an Exposition of the Apostles Creed more at large;
which is the true reason, why the Apostolical form came anciently to be
omitted among them. As to that of S. Athanasius, they are wholly strangers to
it. They are content with the profession of Faith as it is laid down there,
without troubling themselves with curious and nice distinctions, which
oftentimes, in stead of explaining, confound and obscure the Mystery. Yet with
a becoming zeal they condemn the madness and impiety of Arius, Nestorius,
Paulus Samosatenus, and the other Haeresiarchs: whose Opinions if any one be
known to favor in the least, they presently excommunicate him; and do not
restore him to the Communion of the Church, till he has renounced his Heresy
with tears, and given other ample satisfaction.

Indeed, as to the manner of the subsistence of the Holy Spirit, They believe
the procession of the Holy Spirit to be only from the Father.
the Greeks vary from the Latins, and from the Churches of the Reformation;
and by what we may judge, from the reluctance and unwillingness of the Bishops,
after all attempts of Reconciliation, the difference herein is like to be
perpetual. They object, with a great deal of bitter passion, that the Bishops
of the Roman Church have not dealt honestly in this matter; for that, without
consulting them, and without regard to the Canon of the Council of Ephesus,
which forbad such Additions under the penalty of an Anathema, they have
inserted the words Filioque into the Constantinopolitan Creed. For the
justification and proof of this Charge, they appeal to the Writings of the
ancient Fathers, to Acts of Councils, to Ecclesiastical History, to the faith
of the best and most authentic Manuscript Copies, nay to Rome it self, Vide
Epistolam Photii ad Archiepiscopum Aquil^iae. Respons. 2. Patriarchae Jeremiae,
p. 222. Et (...).
where that Creed was engraven on two silver Tables hung up in S. Peter's
Church by the command of Pope Leo the Third, where this Addition is wanting.
This was hotly disputed by the Greeks in the Council held at Florence; and no
one argument or point of controversy have they maintained, or do still
maintain, with greater variety of learning or subtilty. At present I shall
content my self with one or two irrefragable testimonies. Cyrillus Lucaris, who
afterward fell a sacrifice to the malice and revenge of the Jesuits, in the
Epistle he wrote to Vytenbogaert, out of Walachia, when he was Patriarch of
Alexandria, says, Ipsa (i.e. Ecclesia Graeca) Spiritum Sanctum a Filio
essentialiter and interne and quoad esse procedere negat; The Greek Church
denies that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son essentially and internally
and as to his subsistence. And so afterward, when he was advanced to the
Patriarchall throne of Constantinople, in his Confession of Faith, which
brought upon him all that envy and mischief which afterward befell him, chap.
1. (...).
The Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father by the Son. Which form of words he
very wisely and warily thought fit to use, in compliance with the ancient
Writers of his Church; as it was proved in the Council of Florence by Isidorus
Bishop of Russia, and Bessarion of Nice, and Marcus Eugenicus of Ephesus, from
the authorities of S. Maximus, and S. John Damascen, and several others. This
being so expressly asserted by Cyrillus, I cannot sufficiently wonder at the
rashness and disingenuity of the Assessors of the second Synod held against
this good man at Constantinople under Parthenius, who most unjustly censure and
condemn him for maintaining, against the Sentiments of the Catholic Church,
the eternal and substantial procession of the Holy Spirit, as well from the Son
as the Father. Lastly, they declare in their Confession, (...), etc. page 90.
that the Holy Spirit proceeds eternally from the Father, as the fountain and
principle of the Deity; according to what our Savior teaches us, saying, When
the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the
Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, He shall testify of me, S.
John 15. 26.

The great argument made use of by Phatius and other Writers, The chief
Argument made use of by the Greeks.
both ancient and modern, is briefly summed up by Cyrillus; The Greek Church
does therefore deny the procession of the Spirit from the Son, quod veretur, ne
dicendo a Filio ut a Patre, duo asserat in Divinis principia existentiae
Spiritus Sancti, quod esset impiissimum, fearing lest they should assert and
introduce two distinct Principles of the existence of the Spirit of God in the
Deity, which they look upon as an horrid impiety.

But to prevent all unjust suspicions, They believe the Holy Spirit to be God,
and coessential (...) the Father and the Son;
as if they entertained any evil or heterodox Opinions about the Third Person
of the glorious Trinity, they declare fully against the Heresy of Macedonius
and the rest of the (...), and most readily acknowledge the Holy Spirit to be
of the same substance with the Father and the Son, to be God from eternity
proceeding from the essence and nature of the Father, without beginning, and to
be equally adored. Likewise they acknowledge, that He is the Spirit of the Son,
and to be the Spirit of the Son.
and (...).
that He is sent, poured out, and given by the Son. But this they refer to the
temporary mission of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles and upon all the
Faithful. So that they neither confound the Persons of the Holy Trinity, nor
take away the Personal Relations and Proprieties of the Son and Spirit;
forasmuch as the manner of Generation, whereby the Son subsists, is distinct
from the manner of the Procession of the Holy Spirit.

From these premises it will fully appear, Apology for the Greeks.
that the Greeks are most unjustly accused by some of the Roman Church in the
height of their intemperate zeal, as deserters of the Catholic Faith, and as
guilty of Heresy in a necessary Article of Faith; for that the difference
herein is rather verbal then real, and lies not so much in the substance of the
Article, as in the way and manner of expressing themselves. To justify this
their imputation, they with an equal rashness are not afraid to assert, and
that as boldly as if they had been admitted into the Secrets of God, that the
Holy Spirit has sufficiently showed his anger from Heaven against this supposed
grievous and fundamental Error, because Constantinople, the chief Seat of the
Grecian Empire and Religion, was taken by the Turks on a Whitsun-Tuesday, in
the year 1453. But it is ill arguing from such an accidental circumstance; and
they may as justly conclude, that the people of Rhodes, and particularly the
Knights of Jerusalem, were guilty of some grievous Error concerning our
Blessed Savior, because the chief City of that Island, which they had so
bravely defended, was at last lost upon a Christmas Day.

As to the state of the vita functi, Their opinion about the state of the Dead.
they know not well what to determine: for taking for granted, that the Souls
of the Righteous are not in Heaven, where they shall be after the Resurrection
of the body, they know not where to fix them. But wherever that place is,
which sometimes they call Paradise, from the words of our Savior to the Thief
upon the Cross, S. Luke 23. 43. sometimes Abraham's bosom, from S. Luke 16.
22. sometimes the hand of God, from that of Ecclesiasticus, The Souls of the
Just are in the hand of God; it is certainly distinct, according to them, from
the presence of God. For thus they pray in their Liturgy; (...).
Remember, O Lord, all that sleep in hope of the Resurrection and everlasting
Life, and grant that they may rest, where the light of thy Countenance shines
forth: and so (...), etc.
in the Office of Burial; O God of Spirits and of all flesh, who, having
trampled upon Death, and vanquished the Devil, have given life to the world;
Thou, O Lord, make the Soul of thy deceased Servant to rest in the glorious, in
the pleasant place, in the place of refreshment, whence grief, trouble and
sighing are banished. And yet at other times, as it were compelled by the force
and evidence of truth, they retract, at least color over, this Opinion with
this acknowledgment, (...). page 8.
in their late Confession: By which of these three names above mentioned any
shall call the Receptacle of righteous Souls, he will not err; provided that
he believes and understands thus much, that they enjoy the favor of God, and
are in his heavenly Kingdom, and, as the Church-Hymns mention, in Heaven. But
as for the Souls of the Wicked and Unrighteous, they hold, that they descend
immediately into Hades or Hell, the place of Condemnation, and of God's Wrath.

They reject, in words at least, They do not believe a Purgatory by fire, but
they are otherwise heterodox; as appears from their Prayers and Suffrages, and
from
the Romish Doctrine of Purgatory by fire, as having no foundation in
Scripture, and teach their people accordingly in their Catecheticall
Confession, and thus argue ab absurdo against it; (...). p. 86. -- (...) --
If the Soul satisfies for Sins committed in this life in such a place, then,
by parity of reason, part of the Mystery or Sacrament of Penance might be
performed there, which is, say they, (...), contrary to orthodox doctrine. But
notwithstanding this declaration, they fansy the Souls of the departed detained
and shut up in most secret and unknown recesses under ground, and there to be
perplexed and to suffer (...) or grievous things, and to find ease and
refreshment from the V. Gabrielem Philadelph. page 20, 21.
Prayers and Suffrages and Oblations and Sacrifices of the living. Upon this
account it is, the offering up of several Particles of Bread at the Prothesis.
that in the celebration of the Sacrament the Priest, standing at the
Prothesis, offers several Particles of Bread; page 19.
one in honor of the Virgin Mary, which they place on the right side of the
Bread that is to be consecrated; the rest in honor of S. John the Baptist, the
Holy and glorious Apostles, S. Basil, S. Gregory the Divine, S. John
Chrysostom, Athanasius, Cyrillus, Nicolas of Myra, and all holy Bishops, S.
Stephen the first Martyr, S. George, Demetrius, Theodorus, and all other holy
Martyrs, S. Antony, Euthymius, Saba, Onuphrius, Arsenius, Athanasius of Mount
Athos and all holy Monks, the holy Physicians Cosmus and Damianus, Cyrus and
John, Pantaleon and Hermolaus, Sampson and Diomedes, Thallaleus and Trypho, and
the rest, S. Joachim and Anna, the Saint of the day, and all Saints; and for
his particular Archbishop and all the Clergy, and for the Founders of the
Church or Monastery, for the living and dead, where he mentions their names,
and for all who sleep in hope of the Resurrection to everlasting life, to whom,
O merciful God, give pardon.

These are placed in the Patin, The custom of the Greeks a perverse imitation
of the Ancients.
and are carried to the Altar of Consecration, and by reason of their vicinity
to the Bread that is to be consecrated, and is afterward actually consecrated,
partake of that blessing and sanctification. It Is manifest that this practice
of the Greeks differs vastly from the ancient Rite of the Christians of the
Second and Third Centuries, which they would seem to imitate. For they
imagining that the Souls of deceased persons were not admitted into the Divine
Presence, but did exspectare in candida diem Judicii, as Tertullian speaks,
their surviving friends and relations, fearing lest their present condition
might require it, at least to show their love and care of them, brought their
Oblations: but this was done only once a year, laborantibus animabus
refrigerium quoddam adpostulantes; but they were not particular and distinct,
but for all together; nor were they esteemed by them in the nature of
satisfactory or expiatory Oblations, but only to show the honor they bare to
the memory of the holy Apostles and Martyrs in this solemn kind of pomp, and at
the celebration of the Holy Sacrament, at which time they only prayed to God,
that He would be pleased to remember them. And certainly no more can well be
understood by the Commemoration, which follows just after the Consecration of
the Elements in their present Liturgies.

The present Greeks too account it a great piece of Piety and Religion, They
visit the Graves of their deceased Friends.
to visit the Graves of their dead Friends upon a set day every year, and there
perform several Funeral rites, and pray for their Souls: and after that the
Priest has performed his Office, and the religious part of the Ceremony is
over, they cover the Grave with their Napkins and Handkerchiefs, and make a
festival entertainment, made up with part of the Colyba or boiled Wheat with
These Fruits were anciently called (...) as Balsamon explains the word, (...),
in 4. Canonem Apostolorum.
mixed Fruits before mentioned, with a great deal of mirth and jollity, very
unbecoming the Solemnity. But to return to the modern Greeks.

The reason of this their practice is thus assigned by in tractatulo (...).
Gabriel Philadelphiensis; The reason assigned by them for their offering up
Particles.
We offer these Particles for our Fathers, Brothers, Friends and Kinsfolks who
sleep in Christ. The end and design is, that God would place their Souls in a
bright and pleasant place, in a place of rest, whence grief and lamentation are
banished, and send them a relaxation and deliverance from those grievous things
that at present seize upon them, and give them freedom and redemption from the
lamentation of Hades and from tears. in Epist. ad Joannem Vytenbogaert.
Cyrillus Lucaris was ashamed of this superstitious practice, and the idle
pretension commonly used for the defense of it; and therefore adds another:
Esset hic referendum (...) quae (...) novem minimae particulae sunt panis, and
decima B. Mariae Matris Domini; quas, post aquae and vini in calice infusionem,
ab uno Pane oblato sumptas, penes Eucharistiae Panem ponimus, ad significandum
jam beatam esse sortem Sanctorum, qui, ut Membra Capiti Christo conjuncta, una
in coelesti gloria triumphant. By which he supposes only the Blessedness of
the Saints to be designed, that as the Particles are placed near the Bread that
is consecrated, so they, as the Members of the Body Mystical joined to Christ
as to the Head, triumph together with Him in the Heavenly glory.

But besides this, Offerings for the Dead.
they say a particular Mass for the Dead: which does not differ from the form
used at other times, but that there is a peculiar Epistle and Gospel, and the
dead persons, for whose benefit it is intended, are particularly mentioned,
each having a single Particle offered up in his behalf. But a general Mass for
the Dead is solemnized on the Saturday before Pentecost, which day is sacred to
the Memory of All Souls. While they seem to reject with so much caution a
Purgatory, they are fallen into the Error of Origin about the Redemption of the
Souls of the wicked from Hell. For they thus boldly determine: Certainly many
Sinners* are freed from the Chains of Hades, not upon the account of any
Repentance or Confession made in those infernal regions, but for the good Works
and Alms of the living, for the Prayers of the Church made in their behalf, and
chiefly for the sake of the unbloudy Sacrifice, which the Church daily offers
up for the living and the dead. Again, The Sacrifices, the Prayers and Alms
which are performed by the living, greatly comfort and benefit the Soul, and
free it at last from the bonds of Hades. Though to salve this, they say, such
persons as are freed went out of the world with good dispositions, and were
prevented by death from completing their Repentance, and procuring the Favor
of God. So page 247.
Patriarch Jeremias explains himself. Three times that year their Friends die
they celebrate their Exequies, the third, the ninth, and the fortieth day, and
repeat the same Prayers for the peace and quiet of their Souls. I omit the
Howlings of the Women really concerned at the Funerals of their Husbands, or of
their Slaves, and of persons hired to act their parts in this most extravagant
scene of Grief. This being a relic of an old Custom used in the days of their
Heathenish Ancestors, and not falling properly within the comprehension and
compass of my design.

The Greeks have so great prejudice to all engraven Images, They have no
engraven and embossed Images in their Churches* but
and especially if they are embossed and prominent, that they inveigh severely
and fiercely against the Latins, as little or less then Idolaters, and
symbolizing with the very Heathen; applying that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 135. v.
16, 17, 18. They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see
not, they (...) Pictur^^*
etc. But as for the Pictures, whether in colors or printed, of our Savior,
and of the Saints, they account them sacred and venerable. These they reverence
and honor by bowing and kissing them, and See the Rubric of the (...), in the
Horologi^n printed at Venice 1646. in 12^.
saying their prayers before them. With these the Partition that separates the
Bema or Chancell from the Body of the Church is adorned. At set times the
Priest, before he enters into it, makes three low Reverences ((...)) before the
Image of Christ, and as many before that of the Virgin Mary: and he does the
like in the time of Celebration, and oftentimes perfumes them with his
Incense-pot. Upon some of the great Festivals they expose to the view of the
people, upon a Desk in the middle of the Quire, a printed Picture of that day's
Saint done in Christendom, whither upon their approach they bow their body, and
kiss it with great devotion. (...). page 237, 238.
This practice they defend from the Authority of the Seventh general Synod,
which is the Second held at Nice: and from this vain and idle pretense, that
they worship the Saint in the Image which represents him, by the help of which
they presently have an Idea of him in their mind; and that they worship the
(...). So Photius in his Epistle to Michael Prince of Bulgaria, page 15.
figure and representation not with the worship of (...) but of (...), and that
only (...), relatively: which is all they have to say for their gross and
scandalous behavior herein; to the great prejudice of the Christian Religion
among the Turks, who are too gross and dull to understand these subtle and nice
distinctions, which they allege in defense of this Worship. But I intend only
a Narrative, and not a Confutation.

A great part of their Worship consists in external Adoration, Their Adorations.
which they call (...) of which they make two sorts: (...). Vid. (...), page 36.
the greater, which they call (...) or (...), bowing the body very low, almost
to the ground; and the less, with a little inclination of the head and knee.
This they do when they come into the Church, or when they are in sight of a
Church or Chapel, either upon land or sea, repeating these words, (...) or,
(...), Lord, or God, be merciful to me a Sinner; or else only these, (...),
sometimes V. (...) Philothei, and Officium dictum (...) ^ive Lucernarium, and
(...), p. 34.
forty times, sometimes a hundred times together, out of an excess of Devotion,
crossing themselves all the while.

The custom of praying toward the East is Thus in the above cited Diataxis of
Philotheus, the Deacon bows toward the East thrice, p. 2. 4. And ^o in S.
Chrysostom's Liturgy, at their first entrance into the Church, the Priest and
Deacon (...), and so often: the Priest also crosses and prays toward the East,
p. 67.
still practiced, Praying toward the East.
and held sacred and inviolable among them: and of the two, they had rather
turn their backs upon the Church, then upon that point of the Heavens when they
are at their Devotions: and because the Altar is in the Eastern-most part of
the Church, S. Basilii Liturg. p. 169. S. Chrysostomi Li^urg. p. 67. 68. 73. 77.
they worship toward that.

They seldom sit in the Church, They seldom sit or kneel in their Churches.
except when quite tired by their long standing: there being no accommodation
of Pews or Benches there, except a few Stalls in their greater Churches. And
they do as seldom kneel, except V. Gabr. Philadelph. p. 20.
perchance on the day of Pentecost, or some such solemn time; herein being
wholly swayed and governed by the custom and practice of the Country; the
frequent reverences and inclinations they make with their body serving in stead
of Genuflexion.

They have a peculiar manner of crossing themselves, Manner of crossing
themselves.
which is, with the two Fingers of their right hand and Thumb closed; to
denote, as they tell you, the mystery of the Three Persons in the Holy Trinity
in one Essence. They first sign their forehead, then the lower part of their
breast, then their right shoulder, and then their left, saying, (...), Holy
God, holy and powerful, holy and immortal, have mercy upon us; or some such
ejaculation, as, (...), O Lord Jesu Christ, thou Son and Word of God, have
mercy upon me: but more especially the short forms above mentioned.

They keep their Culpacs or Caps on their heads in the Church, Their behavior
and gesture in their Churches.
except at the Procession, and at the time when the Gospel is read, and at the
celebration of the Sacrament: then they all stand up uncovered, and show a
particular Reverence.

Their Singing, Singing m^an and inartificial; no musical Instruments.
as I said before, is very mean and pitiful, without figure and the relishes
of art, and is at best but a kind of harsh Plain-song. They have no Organ or
any kind of musical Instrument in their Churches, that they may not give any
offense to their cruel Masters, the Turks: which is the reason also why they
have no Bells.

They have no Holy water at their Church-doors, No Holy water at their
Church-doors.
nor do they use to sprinkle themselves; though oftentimes they drink very
greedily of it, after the ceremony of its benediction is over, and rub their
eyes with it.

Upon their recovery from any grievous distemper and sickness, Offerings upon
recovery from dangerous sickness.
they offer up thin broad Plates of silver, which are hung up in their
Churches. Oftentimes they represent the figure of the Part affected, in
imitation of the Romanists; from whom the modern Greeks have derived many of
their religious Customs and Ceremonies.

They number their years not only from the Birth of our B. Savior, Their
accounts of time.
but also from the Creation. They reckon from the Creation to our Savior's
Birth 5508 years, following the account of the Septuagint in their Chronology.
Thus they write, that Constantinople was taken in the year 6961, that is, of
our Lord 1453.

They acknowledge but V. Epistolam Photii ad Michaelem Principem Bulgariae,
page 3, etc. Epistolam Jeremiae Patriarchae Constantinopolitani ad Theologos
Wirtenbergenses, and Epistolam Meletii Patriarchae Alexandrini ad V. Cl. Janum
Douzam, quae exstat in Itinerario Georgii Douzae, M. D. IC.
seven General Councils, They acknowledge but seven general Councils.
which I shall here briefly reckon up.

The first held at Nice in Bithynia, under Constantine the Great, in the year
of our Lord 325. against Arius and his Followers, who denied the Divinity of
our B. Savior.

The second held at Constantinople, under the elder Theodosius, in the year
381. against Macedonius, who denied the Divinity of the Holy Ghost.

The third at Ephesus, under Theodosius Junior and Valentinian, in the year
431. against Nestorius, who asserted Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, to be
(...), or mere Man; and so made the Son of God distinct from the Son of the B.
Virgin, and refused to give her the title of (...), or the Mother of God.

The fourth at Chalcedon, (a City situate over against Constantinople, on the
other side of the Propontis,) under Marcianus, in the year 451. against
Eutyches and Dioscorus, who maintained only one Nature in Christ.

The fifth at Constantinople, under Justinian, in the year 553. against the
Disciples of Origin; whose corrupt and heretical Doctrine about the
Prae-existence and Transmigration of Souls, the Temporariness of Hell Torments,
and the Salvation of Devils, and the like, was here condemned and anathematized.

The sixth at Constantinople, under Constantine Pogonatus, in the year 680.
against Sergius, Pope Honorius, Macarius Bishop of Antioch, and their
Followers, who asserted but one Will in Christ, hence called Monothelites.

The seventh at Nice, under Constantine then a minor, and his Mother the
Empress Irene, in the year 787. against such as would not allow the Worship of
Images, whom they hence nicknamed (...) or (...). But the Decrees of this
Council, not founded upon Scripture, but upon weak and uncertain Tradition, and
without any ground of sound or judicious reasoning, were confuted soon after by
a Council of Bishops of the West, held by the Authority of Charlemaine at
Francford in Germany.

There was a Council held at Constantinople under Basilius in the year 869. A
Council at Constantinople, in which Photius was condemned; and another, in the
same place, in which he was restored. Each called the eighth general Council by
different Writers.
wherein Photius the Patriarch of Constantinople (who had appeared very active
against the Sea of Rome, and had provoked the Latins especially, among other
things, by imputing to them the guilt of Heresy, for adding Filioque to the
Constantinopolitan Creed) was dethroned and anathematized. This the Romanists
honor with the title of the Eighth Ecumenical Council. But that which the Sea
the Annals of Zonaras and Glycas.
Greeks call so was held ten years after, that is, in the year 879. in which
all the Acts against Photius, who was restored to the Patriarchal dignity not
long before, were rescinded and abrogated, and the Creed recited and fixed
without that addition. But because nothing relating to matter of Doctrine was
established anew in this Council, which was held chiefly in favor of Photius,
the Greeks content themselves with the acknowledgment of seven only.

Some of the Latinizing Greeks call the Council held at Florence in the year
1439. Council of Florence.
under Pope Eugenius the Fourth, in which were present the Emperor Joannes
Palaeologus, Joseph Patriarch of Constantinople, and several Metropolitans and
Bishops of the Greek Church, the Eighth general Council. Here the Greeks, out
of politic ends, that is, to please the Emperor, who urged them to a
Subscription, to gain the assistence of the Latins, which only was to be had
upon these hard conditions, against the Turks, then ready to take an entire
possession of the Empire, were forced to comply. But upon their return home,
there were great stirs and tumults in Constantinople, and all over the Empire,
about this Agreement, and the Subscribers were looked upon as Betrayers of the
established Doctrine of the Eastern Church. In a Letter published by Chytraeus,
sent from Constantinople to the Bohemians, about two years before the taking of
that City by the Emperor Mahomet, they very zealously renounce the Union of
Florence, calling it (...), or a Disunion from the Truth. This was subscribed,
among others, by Silvester Syropulus, who had been present at that Assembly,
and wrote the History of it, published in the year 1660.

In their Monasteries they keep up the piety and rigor of the ancient
Discipline, The manner of their reciting the Psalms and Scriptural Hymns in
their Religious houses.
being very punctual in the performance of their daily Offices. They are
frequent in the reciting of the Psalms, and Hymns of the Old and New Testament,
as consisting chiefly of Praises and Thanksgivings: which they divide into
twenty Sections or (...) each Section into three parts, which they call (...)
at the end of which they repeat the Gloria Patri, standing all the while. This
Psalmody is one of the principal parts of the Monastic life and institution,
and they are so continually used to it, that there is scarce a Kaloir but has
the whole Psalter exactly by heart. They observe this order: They read the
Psalter twice in each of the first six weeks in Lent, and but once in the Holy
week, ending it on Wednesday; from which time to the Saturday in Easter-week,
according to ancient custom, it is wholly intermitted. Afterward to the 20.
day of September, two Sections are read in the morning, and one in the evening:
but from the 20. of September they read three Sections in the morning, and in
the evening the Psalms called (...), and sometimes (...), (which are the Psalms
of Degrees, so called from That is, according to the Greek account; for
according to the Hebrew it is the 120. Which account is also to be understood
of the rest which follow.
the 119. the first of them, which begins, (...). This method they continue to
the Saturday before Sexagesima, in which week and the week following it is but
once repeated also; except that from Christmas to the 15. of January they
recite in the evening the 135. Psalm, which is called by them (...), from the
frequent repetition of the Hemistichium, (...).
for his mercy endures for ever. So that the whole is finished in the space of
seven days; except in strict and high Lent, when it is repeated every week
twice, as is above declared. The that is, according to the Hebrew, the 119.
118. Psalm, which makes up the seventeenth Section, is called (...), from the
first verse, (...). The 104.
103. Psalm is called (...), so called because with it they begin their evening
service, and their prayers at other solemn times. There are six Psalms (the
whole therefore called (...)) V. Philothei Diataxin, page 7.
which they usually recite betimes in the morning, and especially if it be
preceded by a Vigil: these are the that is, 3. 38. 63. 88. 103. 143. according
to the Hebrew. The reason of which difference is this: The 9. Psalm according
to the Greek contains the 9. and 10. according to the Hebrew: and the 146. and
147. Psalms according to the Greek make up but one Psalm, that is, 147. Psalm,
according to the Hebrew. Anciently the 62. Psalm according to the Greek was
called (...). S. Athanasius epistola ad Marcellinum -- (...). Et (...) -- Et
Constit. Apostol. l. 8. c. 37. (...), etc.
3. 37. 62. 87. 102. and 142. Otherwise, if there be no Vigil, and it happen to
be Sunday, they sing the (...), or Hymn in praise of the most B. Trinity.

That excellent Hymn, The great Doxology.
which our Church retains in her Communion-Service, which is said or sung after
we have been made partakers of the holy Mysteries of Christ's blessed Body and
Blood, Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, good will toward men; We
praise thee, we, etc. makes up a necessary part of their morning-devotion, upon
Sundays and the other more solemn Festivals: and indeed, as it appears by their
(...), or Office used every morning, on all other days, only with this
difference, that it is then barely read, and not sung; which is their present
practice, as I found particularly upon enquiry: as also (...), or in their
solemn Prayers after supper, before they go to their rest. This is called by
them (...), or the great Doxology, to distinguish it from the other, which they
call (...), or the lesser, that is, the Gloria Patri; which they repeat at the
end of every Station of the Psalms, and at other times prescribed in the
Liturgick and other Offices: this latter being a more contracted glorification
of the Holy Trinity, which they thus express, somewhat different from the
Latin form; (...). Ita quoque apud S. Athanas. (...), etc. nisi quod (...)
illic desit. Quandoque (...) ante (...) omittitur.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, both now and
always and for ever, or to eternal ages. Amen. This greater Doxology, (from the
constant usage of it called It has the title of (...) in the Apostolical
Constitutions, lib. 7. cap. 47.
(...) or And so particularly in the Alexandrine Manuscript of the Septuagint;
and in several other Greek Manuscripts.
(...), the morning Prayer or Hymn, (it being made up both of Supplications and
Lauds, though the latter be the more common appellation,) and by some, the
Angelical Hymn, from the Preface to it, sung by the Angels at the Birth of our
B. Savior, S. Luke chapter 2.) is of great antiquity, being mentioned de Virgin.
versus finem.
by S. Athanasius, as universally known and used by the generality of
Christians of both sexes, in those Eastern and Southern Countries of the world,
in their private Devotions; and is to be found after the Psalms and Hymns, in
the third Volume of that most venerable monument of Piety and Antiquity, the
Greek translation of the Bible in His Majesty's Library at Saint James's sent
to King Charles the First, Martyr, of blessed and glorious memory, by that
great man Cyrillus Lucaris, Patriarch of Constantinople, who was also
murdered, which he brought with him out of Egypt, upon his leaving the
Patriarchate of Alexandria, written in capital letters, and, as he guesses, in
a paper placed by him in the beginning of the first Volume, giving an account
of it, above thirteen hundred years since. This I conjecture to be the (...)
mentioned by Lucian in his Philopatris, in these words of Triephon to Critias,
(...) which I understand thus, that the Christians of that time, whom the
wicked Infidel sports with and abuses in that Dialogue, used to begin their
Devotion with the Lord's Prayer, (...) and conclude it with this divine Hymn,
or (...), or Ode full of the appellations of God the Father and Christ. This I
think to be no way unlikely, as judging the (...) and (...) to be distinct and
different forms. But because it is possible, that it might be but one
composition or Prayer, concluding with an Hymn, I am more inclined to believe,
notwithstanding, that it ought to be meant of this, rather then of the Lord's
Prayer; and however, that it more then seems (though the most learned
Archbishop V. Dissertationem ejusdem Reverendissimi Antistitis de Symbolis,
page 34.
Usher will have it only to seem so) to be one of those Psalms and Hymns
mentioned by an Apud Eusebium in Histor. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 28. (...).
ancient Author, who confuted the Heresy of Artemon, to have been composed and
sung by the (...) and (...), or Christians, in honor of our Blessed Savior's
Divinity; (...) (what Epist. 97. lib. 10. Affirmabant hanc fuisse summa^^ vel
culpae suae vel erroris, quod essen^ soliti stato die ante lucem convenire,
carm^nque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem --
Pliny testifies of them also in a Letter to Trajan;) to which that part of
this divine Hymn, (...) -- does very fitly and properly answer.

There immediately follows in the same Manuscript this Hymn, The Greek of this
and the preceding Hymn with the following, see in the Appendix.
collected for the most part out of the Psalms, which is still retained by the
Greeks in their Morning-service, and repeated after it, as a part of it.

Every day will I bless Thee, and praise thy Name for ever.

Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin.

Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our Fathers, and blessed and praised be thy
Name for ever. Amen.

The present Greeks here insert this Versicle, Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon
us, as our trust is in Thee.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, O teach me thy Statutes. This Versicle is repeated
thrice.

O Lord, Thou have been our refuge from one generation to another.

I said, O Lord, be merciful to me; heal my soul, for I have sinned against
Thee.

Lord, I fly unto Thee; teach me to do thy will: for Thou art my God.

For with Thee is the fountain of life, in thy light we shall see light.

Extend thy mercy to such as know Thee.

The following Hymn is always recited in that part of the Evening-service, The
Evening Hymn.
just upon Sunset, which they call (...), and the Latins Lucernarium; which I
only here put down for the antiquity of it: it not being my business to
transcribe their Offices, which the learned and pious Reader may consult at
large, to his great satisfaction and advantage.

Pleasant brightness of the holy glory of the immortal, heavenly, holy, blessed
Father, Jesu Christ, we having arrived to Sunset, and seeing the evening
light, praise the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit of God. Thou, O Son of God,
giver of life, art worthy to be praised always with holy voices. Wherefore the
world glorifies Thee.

This seems to be the very form of the (...), which S. Basil refers to in his
Book de Spiritu Sancto ad Amphilochium, cap. 29. as having been established by
the Fathers long before his time: (...) This form being accounted ancient by S.
Basil, who lived in the fourth Century, it may not unfitly be referred to the
first and early times of Christianity. In compliance with this supposition, the
Authors of the Constitutions commonly called Apostolical, lib. 2. cap. 59. and
lib. 8. cap. 35. order this to be done: where the (...); is not to be
understood of this Hymn, as Archbishop Usher is willing to grant; but of the
according to the Greek: the 141. according to the Hebrew.
140. Psalm, whereof the second verse runs thus, (...) Let my prayer be set
forth in thy sight as incense, and let the lifting up of my hands be an
evening-sacrifice: this being called (...) and is always repeated after the
(...), or 103. Psalm above mentioned. By this it appears that the Greeks do
ill, in their Horologion, printed at Venice 1646, to ascribe the composition of
this Hymn to Sophronius Patriarch of Jerusalem.

It must be sadly acknowledged, Superstition of the Greeks, and chiefly in
their prayers to Saints.
that there is a great deal of Superstition mixed in their public Service and
Offices: such is their perfuming the Church, the painted Figures, the holy
Table, the Deacons and others with their Incense-pots; their frequent Crossing
themselves; the extravagant respect they pay to the unconsecrated Elements in
the great Procession; their closing several of their Prayers with these words,
(...).
for the intercession of our Lady, the spotless Virgin Mother of God; and
sometimes they add, and of all Saints; the oblation of Particles, and their
Prayers to Saints, and especially to the B. Virgin, and the like. After the
offering up of the Particle, (...) Liturg. S. Chrysostom. Which Hymn is also
thrust into the Liturgy of S. James.
the Quire sings, It is meet indeed to praise Thee, the Mother of God, who art
always to be blessed, free from all blemish, the Mother of our God, more to be
honored then the Cherubims, and beyond all comparison more glorious then the
Seraphims, who broughtest forth God the Word, without any diminution of thy
Virginity: we magnify Thee, who art truly the Mother of God. They oftentimes
make direct Prayers to her; as, (...). This occurrs frequently in several of
their Offices.
O Mother of God, holy above all, save us. When they are rising out of their
beds in the morning, they are taught to say, (...). Vide Horologium page 3.
Occurr^t saepe in Tropariis.
Thou, O God, art holy, holy, holy: for the sake of the Mother of God have
mercy upon us. Besides, there are peculiar Prayers and Hymns directed to her in
their Offices, hence called (...), full of extravagant expressions, and which
argue a great declension from the purity and simplicity of the Christian
Worship, too fulsome to be here recited at large; only for a taste I shall add
one or two. (...). In officio aquae benedictae minoris, inter alia (...)
ejusdem (...), in Euchol. p. 442.
In Thee, O Mother of God, have I put all my trust; save me by thy
intercession, and grant me pardon of my sins. And, (...). V. varias lectiones
in S. Chrysostomi Liturg. page 87.
O blessed Mother of God, open to us the gate of thy mercy: let not us who hope
in Thee, err; but let us be delivered from dangers by Thee: for Thou art the
safety of all Christians. And the like horrible Superstition they are guilty of
in their Addresses to Angels and Saints.

This superstitious custom is oftentimes practiced among the Kaloirs: About the
triangular piece of bread called (...).
One of them after dinner takes a triangular piece of bread, which they call
(...) (for by this Ceremony they pretend to show their great devotion to the B.
Virgin, who is most commonly among the Greeks expressed by that name.) which
they had laid before her Picture during the whole time of dinner, in away of
oblation; and lifting it up between his fingers, says first, (...)*
Great is the name; they answering, of the Holy Trinity. Afterward he says,
(...).
O most holy Mother of God, help us; they answering, (...).
By her intercession, O God, have mercy upon us, and save us. Then they all,
having been censed by the keeper of the Refectory, and singing Hymns in her
praise, and particularly that above mentioned, It is meet, etc. break and eat
it, and soon after drink as it were a grace-cup, that has been blessed in her
name. This ceremony is also performed at the request and in the behalf of such
as are taking a journey, whether by land or sea, for their good success; who
are thus superstitiously careful to commend themselves to the protection of
the B. Virgin, who is addressed to under the title (...) hence bestowed upon
her.

They most rigourously abstain from Blood and things Strangled; Abstinence from
blood and things strangled.
and in their greatest hunger and extremity have an utter loathing and
abhorrence of all sort of Flesh, whose blood, when it was killed, was not
poured out upon the ground, after what manner soever dressed and prepared:
relying herein upon the Canon made by S. James and the other Apostles assembled
in the Council at Jerusalem, Acts 15. 20. 29. for the direction of the Gentile
Converts; (which they hold to be of perpetual use and obligation;) and upon the
practice and example of the Primitive Christians, who were wont to be tempted
and tried by this kind of diet, whether they were Christians or no, as Cap. 8.
Erubescat error vester, qui ne animalium quidem sanguinem in pabulis habemus,
qui propterea quoque suffocatis and sanguine abstinemus, ne quo sanguine
maculemur vel intra viscera sepulto. Denique, inter tentamenta quoque
Christianorum botulos etiam cruore distentos admovetis, certissimi scilicet
illicitum esse penes illos, per quod exorbitare eos vultis.
Tertullian tells the Heathen in his Apology; Inter tentamenta quoque
Christianorum botulos etiam cruore distentos admovetis. And Octavius, in
Minucius Faelix, in his answer to the Objections and Cavills of his Heathen
friend Caecilius, replied, Tantum ab humano sanguine cavemus, ut nec edulium
pecorum in cibis sanguinem noverimus. The Greeks, not content with this custom
still retained in the East, fiercely reproach the Western Church with the
violation of this Apostolical Constitution; this little controversy
contributing something to the heightning of the Schism: forgetting, that the
reason of the Decree ceasing, (which was the great tenderness and respect
showed to the Jewish Converts, that they might not be scandalized, if such a
liberty had been allowed,) the obligation ceases also; and that the matter of
it being altogether indifferent, and without the least moral evil in it, it
plainly appears to be only provisional and temporary. Collateral hereunto is
their abstinence from flesh of any creature that dies of it self, because,
though it be not properly strangled, the blood remains in it. These meats
they account (...) defiling; and if at any time through ignorance and
inadvertence they eat of them, or of things strangled, and such kind of
unlawful food, which they equally abominate, these (...)* think themselves
obliged to confess and do penance for the involuntary transgression.

When they swear, Their swearing upon a Cross.
they lay their hand upon the Cross, and kiss it afterward, and put it to their
forehead: hence the word (...) or (...), a term of horrible disgrace among
them, is used for a perjured person, who treads as it were upon the Cross, and
stamps it under his feet. Such an one the Italians call Sputa in croce, from
another usual sign of contempt and defiance.

No Service is perform either by Bishop, No Church Service performed without
peculiar Vestments.
Priest or Deacon, without their (...), or proper Vestments; in which they are
as fancifull as the Romanists: and particularly the Priest when he consecrates
always wears (...) or a Stole. To give a particular account of their Habits
when they officiate, would be too nice and perplexed, and of little use.

To advance the dignity of the Patriarchal Throne, Several Monasteries exempt
from the Jurisdiction of the Diocesan.
several both Churches and Monasteries were anciently exempt from the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of the Diocese, in the nature of Peculiars, and
immediately subjected to the Patriarch of Constantinople. This prerogative was
taken away from Joannes Veccus Patriarch for his siding too much with the
Bishop and Church of Rome, by a Decree of Michael Palaeologus, about the year
1279, recorded by Histor. lib. 6. cap. 11.
Pachymeres, who observes, that it did entrench upon the (...), or power
belonging to him as Oecumenicall Bishop. But this held only for a time, and
was made use of to serve a present turn, the Privilege being afterward
restored, and still remaining. The Monasteries which enjoy these Immunities are
called (...), from the fixing of a Cross behind the Altar there by the
Patriarch in person, or by his Deputy, at the request of the several Founders,
who by this Ceremony appropriated the whole power of it to himself.

An Account of the state of the Greek Church under the Government of Cyrillus
Lucaris, Patriarch of Constantinople, with a relation of his Sufferings and
Death.
CYrillus Lucaris was born in Candia, the chief City of the Island to which it
has given its name: which, when the neighboring places became a Prey to the
Ottoman arms, for several years before and since, kept up and maintained a
well-establisht peace and quiet under the mild Government of the Venetians. The
Greeks there sensible of the great blessing and benefit of Liberty, and of the
full exercise of their Religion, according to the Rites of their Church,
without the least disturbance or control, endeavored to render themselves
worthy of it. They were stout and courageous, and very faithful to the State
whose Subjects they were, which gave them protection. They cherished all
inclinations to ingenuity in their Youth, and sent them (as their Nation did
formerly to Athens) to Venice and Padua, to be educated and trained up in the
exercises of Wit and Philosophy, and in the Studies of all polite and solid
Learning. This happiness befell Cyrillus, who at Venice was committed to the
Care of Maximus Margunius, afterward Bishop of Cerigo, (an Island in the
entrance into the Archipelago, still in the possession of the Venetians,) who,
among other, wrote a learned Discourse about the Procession of the Holy Spirit,
in the old Greek. After he had finished his Studies here, and had acquired a
perfect knowledge of the Latin and Italian Tongues, he traveled out of Italy
into other parts of Christendom, the better to fit himself for the service of
his Country; where he learned enough, by discourse and conversation, added to
his own inquisitive genius and wise Observations of things, to make him more
and more disrelish the Tenants of the Roman Church, and the Fopperies and
Superstitions of their Worship, and to pity the defects and miscarriages which
his distressed Countrymen lay under by reason of their Ignorance and
Oppression, and to be more and more in love with the Reformation.

These Accomplishments and Qualifications gained him the favor of Meletius
Pegus, Patriarch of Alexandria, a Candiot too by birth, who had also studied in
Italy, whence he carried away with him a settled dislike of Rome, which he
afterward in the whole course of his life declared with great zeal and
fierceness. By him he was made a Priest, and afterward Archimandrite or Prior
of a Convent. That Of this Meletius see more at large in the Itinerary of
Georgius Douza page 42, etc. where is the Letter which this Patriarch wrote to
his Father. p. 112.
this Meletius was a man of excellent Learning and Judgment, those Books, which
he published, sufficiently show. Such as his Book against the Jews, written
both in Greek and Latin, and afterward published in the year 1593. at
Leopolis, in the Greek and Ruthenick or Slavonian languages: his Dialogue
called (...), or Orthodox Christian, printed at Vilna 1596: and several Letters
written in Greek, printed at London about the year 1624, and others in Latin;
as that, for instance, which he wrote from Constantinople to Janus Douza in the
year 1597; and that apud Regenvolscium in systemate Historico-Chronologico
Ecclesiarum Slavonicarum. Trajecti ad Rhenum 1652. 4o. page 467.
which he directed out of Egypt, in the year 1600, to Sigismund the third,
King of Poland and Sweden, wherein he disputes very solidly and judiciously
against the Supremacy and universal Headship of the Popes. The occasion of this
Letter, which our Cyril carried, and wherein he is so highly commended, was
this. page 463.
Several Bishops of Lithuania and Russia nigra, who had hitherto continued in
the Communion of the Greek Church, wrought upon by several temporal advantages
and honors, which they proposed to gain in the Diet and Government of Poland,
sent two of their number to Rome in the year 1595. in order to their being
reconciled to that Church, and to offer their Submission and Obedience to
Clement the eighth the Pope then reigning. But their going thither, and doing
this in the name of all the Ruthenick Churches, page 466.
was protested against, and a public Act made of it by Constantine Duke of
Ostorovia, and Palatine of Kiovia, (at whose expense the Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament were translated into the language of those Countries, and
published 1581.) and several others, who utterly disliked this intended Union.
Upon the return of the two Messengers from Rome, where they had been
entertained with all sorts of caresses, page 470.
a Synod of the Bishops was summoned to meet at Bresta, in October new style
1596. by the authority of King Sigismund; who constituted three persons of the
highest quality for title and office in Lithuania, as Duke Radzivil, the
Chancellor, and the Treasurer of that Duchy, his Ambassadors, to fix and
establish this affair, which he desired with great earnestness to effect.

At this Synod the Duke of Ostorovia with the rest of his Party, who were
resolved to continue in the same Obedience which their Ancestors had professed
and shown to the Patriarchal Throne of Constantinople, were commanded to
appear: which they did accordingly, but thought fit to hold their meeting
apart, and after several contests and strugglings refused to submit to the
Union proposed, which several, who had before retained the Rites and Doctrine of
the Greek Church, now so greedily embraced. Our Cyril was of the number of the
Non-uniti or Dissenters, being sent thither by Meletius (...) as (...), page
156. Of which Author and Book more below.
Caryophilus speaks, to break off and disturb the Union of the Russians with
the Church of Rome: whence V. Hottingeri Analecta in append. page 553. where
the number of the year is amiss: though Regenvolscius says, that at that time
he kept a School and taught Greek in that Country: which is not so likely.
he hardly escaped with his life; whereas Nicephorus, sent thither by the
Patriarch of Constantinople for the same purpose, was taken and strangled.

Afterward those of the Greek Communion, in order to their securing their
civil interests and privileges the better, against any attaque which might be
made upon them, had a meeting with several Protestant Nobles and Divines, who
had embraced the Augustan Confession, at Vilna, in the year 1599. Here several
Proposals were made about their uniting in Spirituals, which met at first with
opposition from the ignorance and obstinacy of the Lithuanian Bishops and
Priests, and became afterward, upon a sedate reflection on things, more
inclinable to terms of peace and reconciliation. But they being unwilling to
determine any thing of this nature without consulting the Patriarchs of
Constantinople and Alexandria, there was a stop put to the Debate for a time,
while Letters were dispatched away from the Evangelici about this excellent
design which afterward fell to the ground, and proved abortive.

It was much about this time, that Sigismund, out of his great zeal to the
Roman Church, had published an Edict for the preventing the farther spreading
of the Greek Religion in his Dominions, and forbidding Strangers to enter there
without leave; and soon after wrote a Letter to Patriarch Meletius, to persuade
and advise him to acknowledge and submit to the Pope of Rome. This Letter he
answered with all due and becoming respect, desiring the King to bestow his
Royal favor upon Cyril his Exarchus or Nuntio, a Person both for learning and
integrity very worthy of it. A tua vero clementia hoc quidem tempore petimus,
ut reverendum Patrem Cyrillum Lucari, Exarchum hujus Apostolicae sedis and
filium nostrum, favore Regio dignetur, hominem and Probitate and eruditione
Regio favore dignissimum. In this second journey from his Patriarch meeting
with great opposition from the other Party, who were favored by the
Government, and finding, that the answer of Meletius to the Protestant Divines
would disgust the King and all of the Roman Communion, he forbore either to
deliver or make it public. And here it was, in all probability, that,
reflecting upon the great hazards which he ran during his stay in those parts,
his heart failed him, if it be true what apud Regenvolse. page 471. 479.
Petrus Scarga a Jesuit, who had been Chaplain to the three Ambassadors at
Bresta, says, that in a Letter written at Leopolis in January 1601, and left
with the Archbishop of that City, he published a Confession of Faith agreeable
to the Roman. However if it were so, he redeemed this slip of humane infirmity
with undaunted resolution and courage in the future course of his life, which
he afterward sacrificed as it were in a way of expiation.

His active way of life, and knowledge of the world, gained by his travels and
employments in several matters of concern relating to Religion and the State of
the Greek Church, rendered him everywhere conspicuous, and worthy, in the
judgment of those who knew him, of the highest dignity of that Church; for
which he seemed every way fit and proper. The Patriarchal See of Alexandria
becoming vacant, he was chosen to succeed Meletius; as being a person of a
public spirit, and of equal zeal and learning and prudence. Here he continued
above nineteen years. The great deference which the other Oriental Patriarchs
of the Greek Communion pay to the chief See, that of Constantinople, puts them
upon frequent voiages thither, as the affairs of their respective Churches
require. Here he came about the beginning of the year 1612. This I find in a
Letter written by Sir Paul Pindar from Constantinople in April that year.
In the Lent following a certain Kaloir, a Neapolitan born, in a Lent-Sermon,
having received his instructions from the Jesuits, with whom he had daily
conversation, said many things in favor of the Romish Religion, to the great
distraction of the minds of the People. But he was opposed herein by Cyrillus,
who perceiving the designs of the Jesuits, who began to grow confident of
success, was resolved to set himself against them, and ever after detested them
vehemently.

It pleased God, that during his last being in that City Neophytus the
Patriarch died. At such a time horrid quarrels and dissensions usually happen
among the Metropolitans and Bishops about the choice of a new Patriarch: of
which the Turks, greedy of money, know how to make a mighty advantage. For the
chief Vizir and the Bassa's expect in such cases, that the several Pretenders
should make application to them. Without the Grand Signor's confirmation, no
one dares accept the title or exercise the power of a Patriarch: nor dare the
Greeks refuse whom they impose, be the person otherwise never so unfit, or the
Election of another never so Canonical. Cyril had a great party among the
Bishops, who wished that the Primary conduct and management of the affairs of
their Religion might be committed to him: and therefore were very zealous in
his promotion to the Patriarchate. To prevent which, the opposite Faction made
use of the accustomed evil arts of bribing the Turks, and proffered to advance
considerably the yearly Tribute, which they pay the Emperor for the Exercise
of their Religion, so Timotheus Bishop of Marmara might be the man. Money doing
all things in Turkey, they got him established Patriarch. The new Patriarch,
which is usual, makes use of the Interest, which he has lately gained, with his
masters the Turks, and prosecutes such as opposed him, and banishes and
displaces, as his passion suggests, and as he finds himself able. Among them
the Competitor especially could not hope to find any favor, and therefore
retires, or rather is driven away. Timotheus not long after dies: though
Allatius, (a most passionate and virulent Writer, who cares not what stories,
though never so false and scan^dalous, he picks up from any discontented Greek,
so they reflect upon the honor of Cyrillus, or such as favored him) will have
him poisoned at an Entertainment at the Dutch Ambassadour's; and further adds,
as if they being afraid that the poisonous wine, which he drank, should not
have the desired effect, that the Physician, who was sent for, was hired with a
thousand zechins to accelerate his death by stronger medicaments. Whereupon
Cyril was chosen, unanimously and without any opposition, to succeed him, the
26. day of October in the year 1621, doubtless to the great regret and trouble
of the Latinizing Greeks, and especially the Jesuits and Friars, who, by the
permission of the Grand Signor, under the protection of several Ambassadors of
the Roman Communion, kept up the Service of their Church in their respective
Convents. For they were very sensible what an active man Cyril was, and with
what zeal he had declared himself against their several Innovations and
Encroachments; and thence they could not but conclude, that, now having
attained to this supereminent Dignity in the Eastern Church, he would vindicate
the honor of his See, and by degrees work off the Greeks from those Errors
and Mispersuasions into which they had insensibly fallen, and introduce a
Reformation among them.

And now began with this new Honor the most laborious and troublesome part of
his whole life, from the bitterness and fierceness of the Roman Zealots, who
were so exasperated against him, that they were resolved by all imaginable
artifice and policy either to gain him, or ruin him: and to that purpose they
thought fit to infuse jealousy into the Turks of his conspiring against their
Government and Religion, thereby to render him and his followers obnoxious to
their implacable rage and cruelty: whereby the Christian name and Religion were
in great danger of being extinguished in the East. A brief account of these
Troubles, which befell the Greek Church in the beginning of his Patriarchate,
was written at Galata, in Latin, in the year 1628. by an eyewitness, and
printed in 1633. at the end of a little Book, entitled Mysteria Patrum
Societatis Jesu. This Book indeed, which, containing a declaration of matter of
fact, states the ca^e very much to the disadvantage of the Jesuits, is railed
at by Allatius, after his usual manner, which is an easy way of confutation:
but there is nothing in it, but what I can confirm by an uncontrollable
testimony, with the addition of several circumstances and particulars which
escaped that Author: and this out of a large Relation written by Sir Thomas
Row, in Constantinople, July 1627. at that time Ambassador at the Port, where
he arrived 22. December 1621. Of whom I cannot forbear to say this little, (for
I do not pretend to write a full Character,) out of gratitude to his memory
both as a Member of the famous University of Oxon, (to which, upon his return
into England, he made a noble Present of excellent Manuscripts both Greek and
Arabic;) and by whom Cyrillus presented to King Charles the First that
incomparable monument of Piety and Antiquity, the Bible in Greek, supposed to
be written by the hand of Thecla; and as having lived sometime in
Constantinople, where to this day our Nation enjoys the happy effect of his
Negotiation: that he was a Gentleman of excellent parts, and of great honor
and integrity, and one who served the interests of his Prince and Country in
Turkey with great courage and fidelity, and with an agreeable success; before
whose times the affairs of our Merchants were in great disorder, and little
regard had to the Capitulations and Privileges accorded by the Grand Signor,
either to our Nation or to any other; he having to his immortal reputation
recovered the Respect due to Ambassadors, which had been utterly lost for
several years before, by a succession of insolent Vizirs; and that he deserved
most highly, not only of the Greek Church, by his generous protection of it
against those who endeavored, as much as in them lay, to destroy its very
being; but of Christendom in general, and particularly of Poland, which King
Sigismund acknowledged with great respect and thanks in a Letter to his
Excellency, written from Warsaw Sept. 1622. which I have had the good fortune
to peruse. I shall here give an Extract of it out of Papers now in the
possession of the Right Honorable William Earl of Denbigh; whose Lordship's
generous favor showed to me herein, I do here, as it becomes me, most
thankfully acknowledge.

February 1622. The Jesuits, who bore Cyrillus a grudge for his former zealous
opposition of their Designs, as well as present, labored openly, by the help
and assistence of the French Ambassador, to have him deposed, in order to
their preferring Gregorius Bishop of Amasia, who had submitted already to the
Pope, and was very willing to truckle under them. Cyril's intimacy with the
English and Dutch Ambassadors and those under their protection, heightened
their malice; and indeed was the goodly pretense they made use of to justify
their proceedings against him, as one tainted with Heresy: which forced him in
his own defense, with the assistence of four Archbishops and the rest of the
Clergy assembled in the great Church, to excommunicate the ambitious Pretender.
This Ecclesiastical Censure made them the more outrageous; and to effect their
purpose better, they accuse Cyrillus to the Vizir, whom they had gained, of a
design of delivering up an Island in the Arches to the Duke of Florence, whose
Galleys used to rove in those Seas. Whereupon he was seized, deposed, and
banished to Rhodes; and the excommunicated Bishop was advanced to the
Patriarchall dignity, upon promise of paying twenty thousand dollers: a certain
sum, more or less, being usually paid to the Turks, from See page 75.
the time of Symeon of Trapezond, preferred by Bribery, in the nature of an
acknowledgment, upon every new advancement. The Greeks upon this grew
discontented, and refused to contribute toward the levying this sum; and no
supplies coming from Rome, as were expected, Gregorius, after ten weeks
sitting, was willing to give way to Anthimus Archbishop of Adrianople, whom
they knew to be rich, and had prevailed upon to accept of the Resignation. He
making his Covetousness veil to his Ambition, pays part of the promised sum
down in hand, and the rest, being armed with the authority of the Vizir, he
forces from the Christians in what proportion he pleases. * The news of this
victory, which they had gained so basely, quickly flew to Rome, and the service
done the Catholic Cause in the Levant by the French Ambassador, the Count de
Cesi, was highly magnified; and afterward taken notice of and acknowledged by
Urban the Eighth, in This Letter is printed at the end of Codinus de officiis
and officialibus Curiae and Ecclesiae Constantinopolitanae, Paris. 1648.
a Letter sent to him from Rome, dated July 1624. not long after his assumption
to the Pontificate: in which his Holiness breaks out into very opporbrious
languages against poor Cyrillus, whose name now grew more and more odious at
Rome, calling him Son of darkness and Champion of Hell. Quid autem
Constantinopoli egeris, as he complements the Ambassador, jampridem plaudens
laudibus pietatis tuae Romana Ecclesia audivit. Filium illum tenebrarum and
Inferni athletam, Pseudopatriarcham, scimus quae calamitates perculerint,
quantumque Haeresi vulnus inflictum sit, dum venerabilem Patrem Antimum isti
Ecclesiae praefici curasti.

This triumphing did not long last: for Sir Thomas Row, having received Orders
from King James in favor of the oppressed Greeks, to oppose these violent
courses of the French Ambassador and the Jesuits, happily stepped in and
countermined them; and by his assistence chiefly Cyril obtained his liberty,
and returned to Constantinople in September following. Whereupon Anthimus, now
grown conscious of his Simony, and of having invaded his See, waited upon him
privately, and submitted himself to him, acquainting him with his readiness to
resign to him, as being the rightful Patriarch. This so alarmed the French
Ambassador, now grown warm in the quarrel, as well out of a point of honor
as of bigotry, that he sends for Anthimus to his house over the water at Pera,
and what by promises of protection from the Pope and his Master the French
King, and to spend forty thousand dollers in his defense, and what by threats,
he prevailed upon the weak man to make good and retain his Title and Charge.
But notwithstanding this encouragement and assurance, Anthimus being afraid of
the evil consequences of his obstinacy in case Cyril should be restored by a
high hand, came in the night, and humbled himself, and begged his absolution
for the miscarriage he had been guilty of, and absolutely divested himself of
the Patriarchall Dignity. Cyrillus hereupon, though not without a great sum of
money paid to the Turks, this Restoration being looked upon as a new
Advancement, was re-established in his former Seat.

January 1623. A Kaloir, preferred to be an Archimandrite, arrived at
Constantinople from Rome, whence he brought the assurance of a considerable sum
of money, in case they could once more secure the displacing of Cyril: but the
design taking vent, it was happily prevented. However the cause was not given
over as desperate, but new designs were carried on at Rome with greater
subtilty, and endeavors were used to corrupt the Patriarch, and this way,
having blasted his reputation among his friends, (who had hitherto afforded him
their utmost assistence, and who had a great opinion of his honesty and
integrity,) the more effectually to ruin him. Accordingly three were sent from
Rome about Febr. 1624. Padre Berilli, a Jesuit, a man of great subtilty and
wit, who was to insinuate himself into the acquaintance of the Patriarch, and
to persuade him to stir up the Cossacks, over whom he had a mighty influence,
they being of the Greek Communion: which if it had been really practiced and
discovered, had been punished with a thousand deaths, if he had had so many
lives to lose. A second, who was a Lay-gentleman, to make some overtures about
a League and Peace with Spain. A third, a Greek of Nauplia, bred up in the
Greek College at Rome, founded by Pope Gregory the Thirteenth in the year 1581.
called Cannachio Rossi, who had instructions in Italian, under the hand and
seal of Cardinal Bandini, in order to adjust matters with Patriarch Cyril.
These may be seen at large in the Narrative abovementioned: the sum of them in
short is this, That the Pope was willing to expend considerable sums of money to
reunite the Greek Church to the Roman; that they saw not how this Union could
be made, if the reports which they had received of the present Patriarch were
true, as that he denied the Invocation of Saints, and the worship of Images,
Transubstantiation, (which they chose to express by the name of the Real
Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, for at that time the word (...) was scarce
known among the Greeks;) Liberty of will, Authority of the Councils and
Fathers, the necessity of auricular Confession: thus drawing up a confused
charge of Articles against him, whereof some were wholly untrue, (for no person
professed a greater respect to the ancient Councils and Fathers then he;) that
he sent several Young men to the Universities of England and Germany, in order
to his propagating the same Doctrine all the East over; and that he distributed
Catechisms amongst his Bishops full of the same Errors, in compliance with the
Hugonot Ambassadors. And if that he would gain their esteem and favor at
Rome, he should admit the Florentine Council, and condemn and anathematize the
Errors and Blasphemies of the Calvinists and Lutherans. Upon these proposals
of Rossi, the Patriarch consulted our Ambassador, and was over-perswaded by
him, contrary to his own temper, to make no reply at the present. But this
silence was taken for a contempt and a refusal, which they could not brook; and
therefore in the way of revenge, they stirred up some of the Bishops, whom they
had made of their party, to dethrone him, and offered twenty thousand Dollers
to fix one of them in his place. During this hurly-burly, he thought fit to
retire, till the Jesuiticall intrigue was made known to the Government; who yet
would understand nothing of it, till their eyes were opened with a Present of
ten thousand Dollers.

The Greeks now expected to enjoy the Peace which they had bought at so dear a
rate; but the event showed, that their expectations were vain and ill grounded:
for at Rome they were resolved not to give over a game as a lost, which they
had some kind of hope to retrieve by foul play. To effect this, they thought
fit to send an Anti-Patriarch, though only with the Title of Apostolical
Suffragan, and with him a Treasurer, with full and absolute Power and Authority
to do as they should think fit, and agreeable to the Interests of the Roman
Church. And to promote this design, new Titular. Bishops of Smyrna, Naxia, and
the other Islands, were created. Monsignor Suffraganeo arrives at Naxia,
December 1626. where he was complemented by the French Ambassador, who sent
thither his Chaplain, titular Bishop of that place, and two Jesuits, to receive
him. They brought him to Scio; where at first he met with the same respect as
the Townsmen of Lystra would have shown to S. Paul and Barnabas, as if the Pope
had come amongst them and appeared in his likeness. But the man swelling with
the thoughts of the extraordinary Power wherewith he was entrusted, and not
able to contain himself, begins to lay about him, to the great scandal of those
of his own Communion, as well Ecclesiastics as others. The Greeks especially
were alarmed at this unparalled boldness; and, seeing that the Liberty of
their Church was now struck at and invaded, made friends to the Vizir, and
represented their case so effectually, that the Suffragan was forced to fly,
and the titular Bishops, who had the ill luck to be apprehended, were committed
to Prison, notwithstanding the mediation of their great Patron.

The Affairs of the Greek Church were in a likely way of settlement, to the
great vexation of the Jesuits, who were horribly perplexed and confounded at
their late shameful baffle and overthrow. They seemed to acquiesce, but it was
only till a fair opportunity presented it self of renewing the onset with
greater fury and violence. This they wished for, and knew could not be long
wanting in Turkey, where there is such frequent alteration among the chief
Ministers, and such change of humor too, upon any fresh emergence: it being a
maxim of Turkish Politics, to suspect a Design in every little accident, and
take ombrage at it; and accordingly so it happened.

In June 1627. there arrived at Constantinople, upon a ship of London, a
certain Kaloir, called Nicodemo Mataxa, born in Cephalonia; who having learned
in England, where he had lived several years, the art of printing, had brought
with him a Press and Types in order to the publishing of Books for the use and
information of the poor ignorant Greeks. The design was excellent and most
Christian: but it being wholly new, the great difficulty was, how to get the
luggage ashore, without giving any jealousy to the Turks. The good man was
brought to our Ambassador by the Archbishop of Corinth from the Patriarch, to
beg of him to own the goods, otherwise in great danger to be seized. Which
accordingly he did, upon a farther application of the Patriarchs of
Constantinople and Alexandria, this latter, Gerasimus, happening then to be upon
the place, who with the Dutch Ambassador, the Sieur Van Haghe, came to his
Lordship's Palace to consult him. But to prevent all sinister interpretations
of the Turks, he thought fit to do it openly, having first given the Vizir
notice of it.

There was a longer demurr about working at the Press, it being very obvious to
foresee how liable they were to be accused by the jealous Turkish Cadyes and
Imams, that is, Justices and Priests, of printing Books against their Religion.
The Ambassador would by no means be persuaded by the Patriarch to permit this
to be done in his house, but advised them to take a house in the neighborhood,
promising them his assistence. It was impossible that this should escape the
knowledge of the French Ambassador and the Jesuits, who hearing that the Press
was set up, and all things ready for their work, grew strangely dissatisfied at
it, as if the design had been chiefly to print Books against the Church of
Rome, and by publishing Catechisms and Rudiments of Learning spoil the trade of
the Jesuits, who had set up a School in their Convent, and taught Greek
Children gratis, and by these means oftentimes made Proselytes of their
Parents. They first tried to win Mataxa by fair means; but this way not
succeeding, they called him Heretic and Lutheran; and soon after it was told
him, that they had designs upon his life: which put the poor man into such a
fright, that he made it his earnest request to the Ambassador, that he might
be permitted to lie in his house, not daring to adventure to stay in the night
in his own lodgings, where he worked in the daytime, for fear of having his
throat cut. The Patriarch, to vindicate himself from the aspersions cast upon
him by the Jesuits, as if he had introduced new and scandalous Doctrines in the
Greek Church, sent a little Book to the Press concerning the Faith and Doctrine
of that Church, which some years before Mataxa arrived he had composed, and
designed to have sent into England to be printed there, and to dedicate to King
James: but now he inscribed it to his Son and Successor, Charles the First, of
blessed and glorious memory. They looked upon this as such a bold Defiance of
Rome and France, that they were resolved not only to destroy the Press, but to
sacrisice the Author and Printer to their revenge. And having procured a copy
of a Book written by Cyril, and printed in England, in defense of our B.
Savior's Divinity, which he chiefly intended against the Jews, and finding
some few passages in it against the Opinions of the Mahometans, they gained a
Buffone, who was a cunning Rascal, and in esteem with the Vizir, by promising
him twenty yards of Satin, to acquaint him, that Mataxa was a Soldier, and
sent to stir up the Greeks to mutiny: that under a pretense of printing Books
for the use of Children, he had dispersed others of a quite different argument,
and such as opposed the Alcoran, (meaning this little Book of Cyril's, several
copies of which he had brought over with him:) that the English Ambassador
protected him, that the Patriarch was the Author: and that great numbers were
sent into Vkrain, to persuade the Cossacks to invade the Empire upon the
absence of the Grand Signor, who then designed an expedition into Asia.

The Vizir upon the first notice, without examining whether the accusation were
true of false, or so much as likely, (which I intimated before to be the rash
and heady practice of the Turks,) sends a Company of Janissaries, no less then
one hundred and fifty, commanded by a Captain, to seize upon Mataxa: and this
at the instigation of the French Ambassador, who contrived that the designed
assault should be deferred till Twelfth-day, having learned, that our
Ambassador had invited the Venetian Bailo, (a Roman Catholic, but a man of a
more mild and Christian temper then the French Count, and with whom he
maintained a friendly and intimate correspondence, notwithstanding their
different sentiments in some few poi^^ of Religion, no way essential to it,)
the Patriarch, and several other persons to an entertainment. But Mataxa, very
happily absent, at Galata, with the Embassadour's Secretary, in his return to
Pera, not knowing that his house was beset, passed unknown through the
Soldiers, being in a hat; and though pointed at by some as the man, yet others
saying, that he belonged to the English Ambassador, he escaped at last, and
got into the Palace, half dead with the fright he was put into. The Captain
missing his chief prey, binds his Servants, rifles his Chests, empties the
Room, and carries all away with him, as the goods of a Traitor, to the value
of seven thousand Dollers. The Patriarch lying under the accusation of a Crime
so capital, and fearing the sad effects of Turkish fury upon the first
impressions, before the fit is over, durst not go home to his own house that
night. The next day the Book was examined, and the particular place, in which
was the supposed Blasphemy against Mahomet, interpreted by two Greek
Renegado's, in the presence of the Vizir and several Churchmen: but no great
matter upon their examination could be made of it. Cyrillus himself, relying
upon his innocence, appearing the same day, against whom several crimes were
objected, but without the least proof. The day following, the Ambassador
thought fit to demand audience of the Vizir, to expostulate the case with him,
and to satisfy him in several particulars relating to Mataxa, which he did with
an admirable success; the Vizir confessing with shame, that he had been
over-credulous, wondering at the impudence of those, who had abused him by false
informations, and promising to see restored all the goods which had been taken
away three days before in that great hurry. And to wipe off the prejudice out
of the minds of the Turkish Priests, he thought ^it and condescended to go soon
after to the Mufti to satisfy him also.

Upon these heinous provocations, the Ambassador and the Patriarch were so
justly offended, (the Ambassador, for that they endeavored to ruin his
reputation in the Turkish Court, and had spoken not only reproachfully of him,
which he generously slighted, but of the King his Master, whom Rossi, in a
discourse with the Patriarch the day after the Turks had seized upon the Press,
had called the Head of the Heretics; the Patriarch, for that they conspired
against his life,) that they were resolved to show their resentments upon the
Authors and Contrivers of the Plot; and prevailed so far, notwithstanding the
reiterated instances of the French Ambassador, as to have Cannachio Rossi and
the Jesuits thrown into prison. The Turks designed to strangle them, as having
contravened the Laws of their Government; but at the intercession of the
English Ambassador chiefly, they forbore to execute this bloody sentence, and
banished them and the rest of their Order the dominions of the Grand Signor, as
disturbers of the public peace.

Soon after, Sir Thomas Row leaves Turkey, succeeded by Sir Peter Wych, a
Gentleman of great worth and rare accomplishments, and every way fit and
qualified for that weighty and difficult Employment: who, following the example
of his Predecessor, took the Greek Church into his Protection, and had a
particular value and esteem for Cyril: But not having had the happiness
hitherto to meet with any account of his Embassy under his own hand relating to
the Greeks, I shall out of others give a brief Relation of the Troubles which
befell the good Patriarch, and the manner of his death.

V. Hotting. page 558.
For some few years after this blow given his enemies, Cyril was at quiet, but
far from being secure. Designs were then carrying on in the dark, and the
discontented Greek Bishops were made use of in order to his Deprivation: and
particularly Joasaph Archbishop of Philippopoli, who struck at him, but missed
his blow, the other keeping his ground. They grow furious and clamorous
hereupon, and knowing what were the most effectual arguments with Turks, they
offer twenty thousand Dollers, in favor of Isaac Metropolite of Chalcedon, who
had espoused the Roman Interest, and was in great vogue and reputation among
them. But the Emperor having had one of his Pages killed in his presence in
his Seraglio at Beshiktash, (a place about four miles from Constantinople upon
the Bosphorus,) being much troubled at the sad accident, and looking upon it as
ominous, and the Greeks, who were friends of Cyrillus, lamenting the sad
misfortunes they were likely to fall under by the loss of him, refused at last
to give his consent for his Removal. In the mean while his Exchequer was not
to suffer, and if they would continue the old Patriarch, the same sum was to
be paid in, which was proffered to make a new one.

The Dutch Ambassador Cornelius Van Haghe, having obtained a copy of the
Confession of Faith in Latin, which he had begun to print in Greek at
Constantinople, at the time the Press was broke, sent it into Christendom; and
it was first printed at Geneva, about the end of the year 1630. This alarmed
them at Rome, as much as if an Army had been on their march toward that City.
At first it was looked upon as a thing feigned, because only writ in Latin;
and it was given out, that the Patriarch's name was only made use of for a
blind: but however an answer was published by one of his Countrymen, a Candiot,
Joannes Matthaeus Caryophilus, bred up in the Gregorian College at Rome, and
Titular Archbishop of Iconium; and printed at Rome 1631. under the Title of
Censura Confessionis Fidei, seu potius Perfidiae Calvinianae, quae nomine
Cyrilli Patriarchae Constantinopolitani circumferatur: which was also put into
Greek by the same hand, and dedicated to Urban the Eighth, and printed at Rome
1632. by the Printers of the Sacred Congregation, as they speak, de propaganda
fide.

Afterward Cyrillus thought fit to translate this Confession, which had made
so great a noise in Christendom, word for word into Greek, with a considerable
addition of four Questions and Answers: which was done in Jan. 1631. though not
printed till 1633. at Geneva.

It was now no longer a question or doubt, who was the Author. He himself
owned it in all companies, when he was consulted about it: and notwithstanding
all the artifices and violence used upon him, he would never be brought to deny
or dissemble the thing, or retract his judgment. Which will more fully appear
from the following Memoire, which I have copied out of a Letter written by the
Sieur Van Haghe, Ambassador of the States of the Netherlands, at
Constantinople, Jan. 17. 1632. wherein he says that Cyril visiting the new
French Ambassador, the Count de Marcheville, was received very respectfully,
the Ambassador giving him the Title, which was then newly appropriated to the
Cardinals, of Eminentissimo Signore. After dinner, the Ambassador showed him
his Confession, which the French Ambassador at Rome had sent him, by order of
the Pope, with express order to demand of him, if he had made it, and if he
would persist in it. The Patriarch, after he had taken up the Book in his hand,
and looked carefully upon it, replied, That truly it was his Confession: but
before they demanded, whether he would persist in it, they ought first to show
and convince him by the Scriptures, wherein he had erred: that it was more then
five hundred years, since the Greek Church had been entirely separated from the
Roman; and that he had nothing to do with the Pope, and was no way obliged to
render an account of his Faith to him, or to any who depend upon him: adding
further, that he had more then a hundred Metropolitans and Bishops, besides a
great number of other Ecclesiastical persons, under his Jurisdiction, to whom,
if it were requisite, he would be always ready to give satisfaction in a
general Synod of the Greek Church, referring all to the Word of God, and the
ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church. To this just discourse the Ambassador
made no other answer but this, That at Rome, and in France they held his
Eminence for a Calvinist; which Sect was much hated by the King his Master: and
I wish, said he, that your Eminence were a Roman Catholic, as the King is,
whose favor and liberality might be gained this way. The Patriarch replied in
these few words: In the affairs of my Belief, and eternal Salvation, I shall
neither follow the King of France, nor any person in the world whatsoever; and
I shall never do any thing otherwise then what my Conscience directs me. Here
the Conversation ended; the Patriarch immediately taking his leave of the
Ambassador, having given him thanks for his kind and noble entertainment: but
to prevent all misreports that might pass upon the account of this Visit, he
acquainted his friends with the particularities of it.

I do not doubt in the least, but that this stout and honest Profession, which
Cyrillus made before the French Ambassador, in which he continued to the last
minute of his life, will, in the esteem of all indifferent persons, whose
judgment is not perverted either by prejudice or passion, fully vindicate him
from all those unjust, and malicious Accusations, wherewith he is charged by
his enemies, whom his zeal and love for Truth had provoked beyond all degrees
of respect and Christian charity, to an irreconcilable hatred of his person.
What artifices were used by the Romanists to gain him, and make him theirs,
cannot be denied or contested, and it is as certain, that if he had studied any
base or secular interest, or had had any regard to ease, and quiet, and a
secure enjoying of his dignity, that if he had not been a man of great
integrity above the temptation of money, and of an invincible courage to sustain
all thofe frequent assaults, wherewith they thought to tire and weary out his
patience, and to expose himself without any concern of fear, to continual
dangers, even of death it self, wherewith he was threatened, only that he might
preserve the peace of his Conscience, he would have sunk under these powerful
Temptations, and might have made his peace upon very advantageous terms, and in
all probability have died in his bed for any crime the Turks had to lay to his
charge but through their false suggestions.

By this let the world judge, whether there be the least degree of probability
in the charge of Grotius, In discussione Apologetici Rivetiani. Sumenda est
Ecclesia Graeca, non qualem ex suo Capite Cyrillus nuper inductus pretio
confinxerat --
that he framed this model of his Faith, pretio inductus, merely out of
considerations of gain. For what Collections were ever made in England or
Holland for his support, or to induce him to defend the doctrine of the
Reformation? who were they that furnished him with money to bring him to this
compliance? The violent persecutions, under which he lay, forced him upon
making applications to the English and Dutch Ambassadors, for their
assistence; that he might not be run down by the power of his enemies: and
these public persons, though both justly zealous for the Religion and Doctrine
of Protestants, scorned to do any thing unworthy of Gentlemen, or inconsistent
with the strictest point of honor. His opposition of Rome bore a much
ancienter date then his acquaintance with them, and without doubt was founded
upon a just and clear conviction of his understanding. So that this Imputation
of his being bribed to do what he did, is wholly groundless and fictitious,
and proceeded from an excessive courtship and civility in that great and
incomparable Scholar to the Jesuits, of whose good opinion, and friendship he
seemed at that time very ambitious.

The Invectives of Monsieur Arnaud are equally unjust and groundless: who
fetches all his proofs from Allatius: but certainly the passion and partiality
of that Writer, which are both so notorious, ought to have rendered his
Testimony suspected, which is now invalidated and confounded by the attestation
of two public Ministers, then living upon the place, which I am confident no
Roman Catholic, if he be a person of quality or sense, will scruple to
prefer, notwithstanding their being Protestants, before that of a hungry
Greek, who lived at Rome, and wrote for bread. And whereas Monsieur La
perpetuite de la foy, livre 4. chapitre 11.
Arnaud makes Cyrillus an Hypocrite, in communicating with his Greeks still,
and using such Ceremonies as he esteemed superstitious, I shall only make this
Appeal to himself, whether there are not in the Church of Rome several rites of
Worship and other religious Ceremonies practiced by himself, and especially in
the service of the Mass, which he in his Conscience knows to be vain and idle,
and wishes were altered or abolished, and only thinks fit to practice in
compliance with the present custom and establishment: and yet I presume he
would take it in great scorn to be accused of Hypocrisy for so doing. But it is
not my business at this time to answer the objections of Monsieur Arnaud, but
shall refer the Reader to his learned and eloquent Antagonist, my very worthy
and honored Friend, Monsieur Claud.

What the Assessors of the Bethleemitick Synod or writer of the book in their
name prefixed to their determinations have said of Cyrillus, is so ridiculously
idle and scandalously false, that whosoever is but a little acquainted with the
history and transactions of those times, he must be amazed at the strange
confidence and boldness of these men, who dare thus contradict plain and
notorious matter of fact: as for instance, when they say, that Synodus
Bethleemitica. Parisiis, 8o. 1676. p. 33.
Cyrillus said nothing of what goes under his name either in public or
private; that none of his friends and acquaintance say any thing of him like
this; that page 34.
his Confession was not under his hand; that they have a thousand witnesses of
his (...), I suppose, they mean, of his being pious and orthodox in the
doctrine contrary to that in his Confession; and page 37.
that they have a great book of his (...), or Sermons preached on Sundays and
Holy Days in Constantinople, containing things repugnant to his Confession. But
with their good leave there is nothing in all those (...) or excerpta, which
they have printed, except perchance one citation, (if they have not injured him
in it, by inserting a word or two not extant in the Original,) which
contradicts in the least his Confession, or (...), those Articles or Chapters,
which, as they idly pretend; falsely go under his name. The bare recital of
these fooleries is a sufficient confutation. And whereas they object often,
that the Eastern Church never received or acknowledged this Confession of
Faith, and that it was his private fancy, and done by his own sole Authority,
which is also objected by Credenda definire Papae non solent, nisi in conciliis
universalibus, aut si ea haberi non possint, cum consensu tali, qui ad Concilii
Vniversalis auctoritatem proxime accedat: contra quam nuper fecit
Constantinopoli Cyrillus, qui sine Patriarchis, sine Metropolitis, sine
Episcopis novum nobis propinavit Symbolum. D. Grotius in append. ad Comment. de
Antichristo. Amstelod. 1641. 8o. p. 48, 49.
Grotius, I shall by way of answer communicate what I find in the close of the
Sieur Van Haghe's Letter, where he says, that there was scarce any one among
the Metropolitans, of which a great number were then present at Constantinople,
who would not adventure his estate, life and person in the defense of the said
Patriarch and his Confession. But of this more hereafter, if they who have a
power and right of command over me shall think fit and necessary.

Out of the Letter of the Sieur Van Haghe.
Not long after the arrival of the French Ambassador, there came from Rome to
Constantinople two fugitive Greek Bishops, the one having been Metropolite of
Sophia, the other of Acrida, sent thither by the Pope and the College of
Cardinals de propaganda fide, to give the Patriarch further disturbance, and to
get him displaced, in order to the advancing any one of their Caball, otherwise
never so unqualified either for life or learning. These two recommended to the
French Ambassador, had lodgings assigned them in his Palace, and were fully
assured of his protection. To show their zeal to the cause, which they came to
advance, they fell upon the Patriarch with most reviling language, calling him
Heretic, Lutheran and Infidel; and threatened the Metropolitans, that they
would give a great sum of money to the Grand Signor for the Patriarchship, and
take it to farm: and this they would do, as soon as they received new
instructions and orders from Rome. The French Ambassador appearing so much in
their behalf, the Patriarch, together with the Bishops and chief of the secular
Greeks, who readily and jealously joined with him, thought, that it highly
concerned them and the peace of their Church, to inform the Emperor, Vizir,
and the principal Ministers of the designs of the Pope and his adherents.

It was V. Hotting. Analecta in append. page 558. who was fully informed of
these particulars by Monsieur Ledger, a French Divine, who had lived for several
years in Constantinople, and was very intimately acquainted with Patriarch
Cyril.
not long after, that the Metropolites of Adrianople, Larissa, Chalcedon,
Cyzicum and Naupactus entered into a conspiracy against the Patriarch: but by
the help of friends and a Present of ten thousand Dollers the tempest was
allayed.

page 559.
October 1633. Cyrillus Contari Metropolite of Beroea, who had been formerly
See the Letter of Dionysius Guillius, a Jesuit, one of those, who had been
banished Constantinople, where he gives a large account of his studies and
behavior, and of the great deference, which he showed to those of his Order,
apud Leonem Allatium de Ecclesiae Occidentalis and Orientalis perpetua
consensio^e, lib. 3. ca. 11. sect. 5. page 1077.
a Scholar of the Jesuits, made use of the money, which, by virtue of Letters
commendatory from the Patriarch, he had collected in several Provinces for the
uses and necessities of the Church, to dethrone his Patron, who had employed
him. The occasion of his disgust and hatred of the Patriarch proceeded from his
not being preferred by him to the Archbishopric of Thessalonica, which he
earnestly desired, and now he was resolved in the way of revenge to step into
his Seat: for which advancement he was to pay no less then fifty thousand
Dollers. But not being able to make good his undertaking and satisfy for this
great sum, after seven days huffing and domineering, the Turks banished him
and the Bishop of Amasia his Confederate, who died there, to the Island of
Tenedos: whence writing penitential Letters to the Patriarch, in which he
acknowledged his guilt and the justice of his punishment, he was by his favor
restored to his former Diocese.

V. Hotting. Annal. page 559. where through a mistake he is called Athanasius.
March 1634. Six months after this, Anastasius Pattelari of Candia, Archbishop
of Thessalonica, bought the Patriarchship at the price of sixty thousand
Dollers: and this by the instigation and with the assistence of the Romanists,
as Cyril writes in a Letter from Tenedos, whither he was banished. But this
perfidious and ungrateful man, whom Cyril had preferred to be a Bishop, and
had otherways obliged, continued scarce a month in the dignity, which he had
gained by horrid Simony, Cyrillus being restored in June following upon the
hard condition of paying, besides the sum which the sacrilegious Usurper had
contracted for, an overplus of ten thousand Dollers, almost to the utter ruin
of the poor Greeks, of whom it was to be exacted and levied.

March 1635. page 561.
Cyrillus Contari begins again to raise new troubles in the Greek Church, to
gratify his own ambition and pride, and his Masters, the Jesuits, and bribing
the Turks with fifty thousand Dollers, invades once more the Patriarchall
Throne, which is now wholly influenced and governed by the Jesuits. In the
midst of his wine in April following, not able to keep the secret, he
confesses, that all was done by an agreement with the Pope, to whom Cyril was
to be sent, whom they had got banished to Rhodes. This man was every way fit
for their turns, being of a base mercenary temper, and wholly depending upon
Rome: making frequent profession, that if the Pope would but furnish him with
money enough, he would not only kiss his hands, but his feet too: and I suppose
he would have been content to have styled himself Patriarch, Imperatoris
Turcarum and Romani Pontificis gratia. Cyril now an Exile in Rhodes gives an
account, by Letters to the Dutch Ambassador, of his hard and cruel usage, and
of the designs of some of the Christian Corsayrs to have seized upon him in
order to his transportation into Italy: which being made known to the chief
Officer, who commanded the Soldiery in that Island, was happily prevented by
his removing him thence.

About eighteen months after, July 1636. he was restored, though not without
the powerful intercession of his friends, and great sums of money, without
which be the cause never so just and clear, nothing is done in Turkey.

Cyril, though restored, had the same difficulties to encounter with as before:
the same enemies still remained, who kept up their animosities and malice
toward him: those of Cyrillus of Beroea his party, advanced during his
usurpation to titles and dignities in the Church, who were now disgraced and
ran the same fortune with him, endeavoring by all means possible to promote
his interest: and we cannot easily imagine, that the Jesuits were now
reconciled and become his Friends. No, they saw to their hearts grief, how
Cyril had still prevailed, notwithstanding his frequent depositions and
banishment: and therefore they all were resolved to be rid of him one way or
other and get him dispatched. For now they were grown furious and desperately
mad against him: and nothing less then his blood would satisfy their revenge.
Which yet God would not suffer them to effect, till about two years after.

The Tragical time drew nigh, in which this excellent man was to be made a
Sacrifice. Of the manner of his Death I am able to give a particular relation,
as having received it from the mouth of the Reverend Doctor Pocock, Prebendary
of Christ Church Oxon, a person of excellent judgment and incomparable learning
in the Oriental Languages, as those many useful and curious Books, which he
has published, fully declare, who then lived at Constantinople, when the bloody
fact was committed, and of which he sent a large account to that excellent man,
Archbishop Laud, of famous memory, who was very inquisitive to know the minute
circumstances of the Patriarch's Death, little thinking at that time, that his
own sad fate was coming on so fast. The copy of this Letter was unhappily lost
in the time of the Civil Wars: but this reverend and excellent Person has been
pleased often in discourse to give me the sum of it. Which very much confirms
the relation of the same Murder, written by V. Epistolam Conopii ad Antonium
Legerum apud Hotting. in appendice Analectorum, page 564.
Nathanael Conopius, Protosyncellus of the Patriarchall Church under this
Patriarch, in Greek.

Cyril's Enemies not able to get any advantage over him, during the Emperor's
stay at Constantinople, the chief Vizir being his Friend, they foreseeing their
departure from that City, had with their money gained an interest in Bairam
Bassa, then in great favor, who undertook the business for them, which he thus
by a wile effected. For the Grand Signor, having resolved in the year 1638.
upon a War upon the Persians in order to the recovering of Bagdat out of their
hands, into which it had fallen not long before, sent this Bairam Bassa before
him to prepare the way, and to make all necessary provisions for the intended
Siege: while he and the Vizir advanced in slow and easy marches with the gross
of the Army, then gathering from the most distant parts of the Empire, though
in two distinct Bodies, and at some distance, for the convenience of forage
and quarter. The Emperor finding all things to his mind, and agreeable to his
expectation, was hugely pleased and satisfied with his conduct. He taking the
advantage, and being often admitted into the Emperor's presence, assisted
herein by Husain Bassa, represented to him, among other things relating to that
conjuncture, that Cyrillus had a great power over those of his Religion, that
by his instigation the Cossacks had but lately fallen upon In the ordinary Maps
it is called Azoph.
Azac, (a considerable Town upon the River Tanais, not far from the great lake
of Maeotis,) which they took and pillaged, that he was a dangerous man, and
might stir up the Greeks, which were so numerous in Constantinople, to mutiny,
at that time especially, when the Imperial City was left bare and defenseless,
most of the Janissaries being in the Camp, and therefore that it was fitting and
necessary to prevent such a mischief, as might easily happen, by putting him to
death. The jealous Emperor possessed with these plausible stories, immediately
in a rage signed an Hatte Sherif or Order for his being strangled: and a
Courier was dispatched away with it in great have to the Caimacam or Governor.
He, pursuant to his Order, forthwith sent his Officers to seize upon Cyrillus,
and sent him Prisoner to one of the Castles upon the Bosphorus. In the Evening
Anno Domini 1638. Januarii 27. Cyrillus Patriarcha Constantinopolitanus,
inimicorum calumniis oppressi^s, Imperatoris tum absentis mandato strangulatus
est. D. Pocockius in supplemento Historiae Dynastiarum ad finem Gregorii
Abulpharagii, page 53. Oxon. 1663. Vbi vir ille long praeclarissimus pro
Januario mense reponendum fuisse Junium me plusquam semel admonuit, uti in
charta recte seriptum erat quam male intellexit Typotheta, nec mendum inter
legendum sustulit Corrector.
June 27. they took him thence, and put him into a Boat, telling him, that they
were carrying him on board a Vessel lying at Santo Stephano, a small Port upon
the Propontis, a little below the Seven Towers, in order to his transportation.
But as soon as they had launched forth, he perceiving their design to murder
him, fell upon his knees and prayed with great fervency and earnestness,
preparing himself for death. After some revilings and buffettings, they did not
long delay to put the fatal string about his Neck, and soon dispatched him.
Having done the bloody work, they stripped him and threw his naked Body into the
Sea: which was afterward taken up by Fishermen, and by some of his Friends
buried upon the Shore, where it had lain exposed for some time. But it soon
appeared, that the malice of his enemies was not yet satisfied: for envying him
the honor of a Grave, they addressed to the Caimacam; and got an Order from him
to have his Body dug up, and thrown into the Sea again: and it was done
accordingly. But the Body was afterward recovered, and buried obscurely in one
of the Islands, that lie over against the Bay of Nicomedia. Thus fell this
great man Cyrillus Lucaris by the hands of violence, whom both for his Piety
and Sufferings, which were wholly upon the account of Religion, I shall not be
afraid, having just reason so to do, notwithstanding the passionate censure of
Monsieur Arnaud, to esteem a Saint and Martyr.

APPENDIX.
PRaeter ea, quae de hac vetustissima juxta ac piissima Doxologia page 223, etc.
superius annotavi, paucula haec subnectere visum est. Exstat Doxologia haec
Graece edita in fine Liturgiae S. Chrysostomi, ab Ambrosio Pelargo Niddano,
ordinis Praedicatorum, Wormatiae, 4o. an. 1541. quem Symeon Syracusanus (uti
ille loquitur) Popponem Trevirorum Archiepiscopum e Terra Sancta, quam
religionis forte causa inviserat, redeuntem comitatus, Treverim attulisse
fertur. Codicem autem hunc mirae vetustatis esse depraedicat, and ante mill
annos descriptum fuisse, and ante octingentos plus minus annos Treverim
allatum. Pauculas variationes in margin apposui sub nota Tr. Librum autem
istum, rarissimum quidem and vix alibi reperiendum, ex ipsius Bibliotheca
quantivis pretii ceimeliis refertissima, utendum dedit vir consummatissimae
eruditionis, and omni laud major, D. Thomas Marshallus S. Theologiae
Professor, and Collegii Lincolniensis Oxon. Rector perquam dignissimus. Facile
quoque videbis formam istam, quae in Libro Constitutionum Apostolicarum paulo
amplior occurrit, cum Codice Treverensi magis convenire, quam cum nostro
Alexandrino. Sed discrimen utriusque adeo leve and nullius momenti est, ut in
caeteris mirifica consensio perplaceat, and invictissimum Catholicae veritatis
argumentum contra nuperos Dogmatistas, qui sub purioris Theologiae titulo
antiquam and Apostolicam de Sanctissimae Trinitatis and divinitatis D. nostri
Jesu Christi mysterio fidem subdole and impie corruperunt, merito debeat
aestimari. Reperi quoque hunc divinissimum Hymnum ad finem duorum Psalteriorum
Graecorum MSS. in Bibliotheca Bodleiana, quorum alter number. 15. in 8o. inter
Codices Baroccianos, scriptus erat ante quingentos and septuaginta plus minus
annos, ut ex circulis Paschalibus post Praefationem S. Basilii, Theodoreti, and
Cosmae Indico-pleustae illic descriptis abunde liquet. Horum enim primus
incipit ab anno Creationis 6613. sive Christi 1105. ultimus vero desinit anno
ejusdem Epochae 6648. sive Christi 1140. Circa hujus intervalli initia codicem
descriptum fuisse hae tabulae ad computum Ecclesiasticum spectantes, quae
futuris annis, uti solent Ephemerides and Calendaria, prospicere merito
censendae sint, liquido testantur. Alter vero in 4o. manu quidem recentiori and
vix ante tria secula, uti ex characteribus conjectari fas est, exaratus.
Denique S. Notkeri Psalterium MS. in Archivis Seldenianis pulcherrime, additis
notulis musicis, descriptum, monitu eruditissimi mei Amici, D. Edvardi
Bernardi, S. T. B. and Saviliani Professoris Astronomiae, consului, quo praeter
versionem Latino Sermon expressam, quam Ecclesia Anglicana juxta rituale in
Ecclesiis Occidentalibus fere ubivis locorum usu receptum, ad amussim sequitur,
nisi quod e Graeco paulo variatum sit, Graece quoque, characteribus licet
Latinis exstat. Variantes Lectiones litera N. notatas habebis.

(...) juxta exemplar Alexandrinum, sive, uti illic inscribitur, (...).
(...)
(...),
(...) Ita pro more in isthoc codice vetustissimo scribitur pro (...), uti
quoque in Constitut. Apost. lib. 7. cap. 47. and apud S. Athanasium (...),
Psalter. Oxon. 8o. Treverensis Codex and S. Notkeri Psalterium and Psalterium
Oxon. 4o. habent (...).
(...)
Vice (...) substituitur apud S. Athanas. in Psalt. Oxon. 8o. and in Horologio
(...) In Cod. Tr. inter (...) interponitur (...), uti etiam in Constit. Apost.
and Psalter. Oxon. 4o.
(...),
(...),
Postponitur (...) in Constit. Apost. post, immediate verbis plane interpolatis
sequitur, (...) deinde (...) --
(...)
(...)
(...) Psalt. Oxon. 8o. male deest omnino in Tr. and Constable. Apost. at habet
vetus exemplar Wormatiense, uti annotavit Pelargus.
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...) (...), Tr. Constable. Apost. Psalter. Oxon. N. and Horolog. post (...) in
Constable. Apost. caetera, quae sequi debuerant, ita con^unduntur, (...).
(...),
(...) Ita quoque Psalter. Oxon. 4o. at Tr. Psalter. Oxon. 8o. una cum libris
impressis rectius (...). N. habet imperfecte (...).
(...),
(...),
Desunt haec verba de Spiritu S. in Psalt. N. utpote quae in fine reponuntur.
Caeteri codices hic habent uti in proprio and debito loco.
(...)
(...),
Deficit articulus ^, Tr.
(...),
(...),
(...) (...) Tr. mendose: and fortasse non Librarii sed Typothetae mendum.
(...) (...), numero singulari Constit. Apost. Psalteria Oxon. uti etiam N. and
quantum est codicum impressorum, juxta Evangel. S. Joannis cap. 1. v. 29.
concordant vero omnes in sequente versiculo, habentque Pluraliter -- (...) --
(...)
(...) (...). Tr. mal^.
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...) Psalter. Oxon. 8o. (...).
(...)
(...), Graeci in (...), and alibi, nescio qua authoritate freti, semper hic
praefigunt (...), quod plane redundare videtur.

deest (...) in Constable. Apost. uti supra videre est. Occurrit quippiam simile in
Constit. Apost. lib. 8. cap. 13. (...).
(...),
post (...) sequitur in N. (...) -- habet quoque Psalt. Oxon. 4o. (...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
Hymnus Matutinus, e Psalterio S. Notkeri.
Gloria in excelsis Deo,
Et in Terra Pax,
Hominibus bonae Voluntatis.
Laudamus Te,
Benedicimus Te,
Adoramus Te,
Glorificamus Te,
Gratias agimus Tibi,
Propter magnam gloriam Tuam,
Domine Deus, Rex Coelestis,
Deus Pater Omnipotens.
Domine fili Vnigenite
Jesu Christ,
Domine Deus,
Agnus Dei,
Filius Patris,
Qui tollis peccata mundi,
Miserere nobis,
Qui tollis peccata mundi,
Suscipe deprecationem nostram*
Qui seeds ad dextram Patris,
Miserere nobis,
Quoniam Tu solus Sanctus,
Tu solus Dominus,
Tu solus altissimus,
Jesu Christ,
Cum Sancto Spiritu,
In Gloria Dei Patris. Amen.
Sequuntur in eodem venerandae Antiquitatis Codice hi Versiculi, e Psalmis
maxima ex part collecti, tanquam Hymni pars, ^isdem uncialibus characteribus
and plane (...) descripti; neque dubitandum videtur, quin simul ac eodem
tempore olim recitarentur; quod hodie faciunt Graeci, uti ex Horologiis
manifestissimum est: male ergo Hymni Vespertini, a Viro eruditissimo, titulo
insignitus est. Variantes lectiones hic quoque annexas habes.
Quando recitatur (...), reponunt (...).
(...),
(...),
(...) post hunc Versiculum sequitur in Psalter. Oxon. 8o. (...) ad finem; inde
repetunt, (...) --
(...).
(...) (...), Psalt. Oxon. and Codices impressi.
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...). post in (...) and in (...) and (...) inseritur hic Versiculus, (...).
Ita etiam in Psalt. Oxon.

(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...) ita quoque Psalt. Oxon. 4o. at alterum habet (...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
Per singulos dies benedicam Te,
Et laudabo nomen tuum in seculum,
Et in seculum seculi.
Dignare Domine die isto
Sine peccato nos custodire.
Benedictus es Domine Deus Patrum nostrorum,
Et laudandum ac glorificandum est
Nomen tuum in secula. Amen.
Benedictus es, Domine,
Doce me justificationes tuas.
Benedictus es, Domine,
Doce me justificationes tuas.
Benedictus es, Domine,
Doce me justificationes tuas.
Domine, refugium Tufactus es nobis,
In generatione and generatione.
Ego dixi, Domine, miserere mei,
Sana animam meam, quia peccavi in Te.
Domine, ad Te confugi,
Doce me facere voluntatem tuam;
Quia Deus meus es Tu.
Quoniam apud Te est fons vitae;
In lumine tuo videbimus lumen.
Praetende misericordiam tuam
Scientibus Te.
(...).
(...), (...), ita apud S. Basilium de Spiritu S. ad Amphiloch. cap. 29.
(...), (...), apud S. Basil. uti etiam ad finem Psalterii in Bibliotheca
Bodleiana in 4o.
(...) (...) apud S. Basil. and in Psalt. Oxon.
(...) (...), Psalt. Oxon.
(...), (...). Psalt. Oxon.
(...)

Ita Hymnum hunc exhibent codices impressi.
Hymnus Vespertinus.
Lumen hilare Sanctae gloriae, immortalis Patris, Coelestis, Sancti, Beati,
Jesu Christ, quum ad solis occasum pervenerimus, lumen cernentes Vespertinum,
Laudamus Patrem and Filium and Spiritum Sanctum Dei. Dignus es tempore quovis
sanctis vocibus celebrari, Fili Dei, Vitae dator, quapropter Mundus Te
glorificat.

Viginti (...) sive Sectiones, Vide page 221.
integro Psalmo comprehensae, hoc modo disponuntur.
I. Continet Psalmos 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. II. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
III. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. IV. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. V. 32, 33,
34, 35, 36. VI. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45. VII. 46, 47, 48, 49, 50,
51, 52, 53, 54. VIII. 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63. IX. 64, 65, 66, 67,
68, 69. X. 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76. XI. 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84. XII.
85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90. XIII. 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100. XIV.
101, 102, 103, 104. XV. 105, 106, 107, 108. XVI. 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114,
115, 116, 117. XVII. 118. XVIII. 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127,
128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133. XIX. 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142.
XX. 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150.
AN INDEX OF THE Chiefest matters contained in this Book.
A.
ABsolution. page 180 Abstinence from blood and things strangled. 234 Accounts
of time. 216 Adorations used by the Greeks. 213 One Altar only in a Church
anciently. 155 Alexandria. The Patriarch of it. 4 Anachorites. 107 Anointing of
the sick. 193 Of others in health. 195 Anointing after Baptism. 117 Not
repeated except in one particular case. 119 Antioch, the Patriarch of it. 5
Archbishops, who so called. 89 Armenians hated by the Greeks mortally. 48
Assumption of the B. Virgin. 26, 46 (...) Athos. 97
B.
Baptism. 109 The Greeks believe an absolute necessity of it. ibid. The manner
of it. 111 Form of words. 112, 113 Effect of it. 112 S. Basil's Liturgy. 124
Bishops, always Kaloirs. 79 Bishoprics subject to the Patriarchate of
Constantinople. 85 No Bells, what used instead of them. 70 Bread blessed and
distributed. 143 Sacramental Bread pure. 155
C.
Catechumeni. 132 Church Censures, their good effect. 178, 183 Chancell. 67
Charity of the Greeks upon Festival-days. page 29 Chrismation inseparable from
Baptism. 115 Christianity the causes of its decay in the East. 17 Of its
preservation. 18 S. Chrysostom's Liturgy. 123 Church. Their time of going to
Church. 30 Churches mean. 51 Not to be repaired without leave. 52 The manner of
their Fabric. 62 In Constantinople. 53 And Galata. 55 Church of Santa Sophia.
57 Of the Holy Apostles. 59 Collection of Christian Children. 11 Colyba. 172
Commemorations of the Living and Dead. 91, 128, 139, 207 Communicating of
Children. 161 Communion in both kinds. 142 Confession to a Priest. 160, 178
Confirmation. 115 Consecration of the Elements. 135 When made. 144
Constantinople. The Patriarch. 3, 73 Expense. 75 Revenue. 76, 79 His
Assistents. 78 Retinue and Title, when they address to him. 79 Dissensions in
the choice. 80 What places exempt from his jurisdiction. 73 Atitular Patriarch.
7 Constantinopolitan Creed. 136, 196 Council of Florence. 7, 220 Seven general
Councils admitted by the Greeks. 217 The Eighth Council, which. 219 Crossing,
the manner of it. 215 Cyprus. Archbishop of it, his privilege and jurisdiction.
page 74
D.
Days of the week how called. 39 Deacons. 93 Dead. Their opinion about the
state of the Dead. 202 Divorces frequent. 192 Doxologie greater and lesser. 223
E.
Easter. 31 Eastern Church what, and why so called. 1 Elevation of the
Sacramental Bread. 140 Eucharist celebrated upon Festival-days. 29 The manner
of Consecration. 125 European Children prove the best Soldiers. 11 Exaltation
of the Holy Cross. The Festival of it. 20 Excommunication, and the supposed
effects of it. 184
F.
Fasts. 34 Festivals, the happy effect and consequence of them. 18, 19
Calendar. 20 Font. 65, 110 Forgiveness, they ask it one of another before they
communicate. 143 Good Friday, the severities used upon that day. 42 Gates of
their Churches how called. 64 Godfather but one. page 112 Government
Ecclesiastical. 71 Graves visited. 207 Greek Church, the extent of it. 8
Greeks, how sadly oppressed. 9 Their temper low and mean. 14 Orthodox in the
great articles of Faith. S. Gregorie' s Liturgy. 123
H.
Head-mony paid by the Greeks. 10 Heraclea. The Archbishop of it crowns the
Patriarch of Constantinople. 78, 85 Hymn morning. 44, 225 Evening. 228 Howlings
of women at Funerals. 211
I.
Jerusalem. The Patriarch of it. 5 Images, painted. 63, 66 No Images engraven
or embossed in the Churches. 211 Immersion threefold. 112 Imposition of hands.
177 S. John the Evangelist his death. 20 Islands not far from Constantinople.
101 Justiniana prima. The Archbishop of it, his privilege and jurisdiction. 73
K.
Kaloirs. 93
L.
Lenten-fast. 35 Lamps burning before the Altar. page 69 Lay-persons baptize in
case of necessity. 109 Leavened bread in the Sacrament. 153 Life of the Saint
read upon his Festival. 28 Liturgies several sorts. 121 Three only in use. 123
M.
Mahomet's Testament counterseit. 9 Marriages. 180 Metropolitans and Bishops
under the Patriarch of Constantinople. 83 Monasteries exempt. 237 Upon Mount
Athos. 97 Monks. 93 Mysteries or Sacraments seven. 107
N.
Nicene Fathers. 34
O.
Oblation of bread and wine how blessed. 129 Offerings of the Greeks. 29 Upon
recovery from sickness. 216 For the dead. 209 Offices long and tedious. 27 Holy
Orders. 93, 176 Oil only made and blessed by the Patriarch and Bishops. 118 The
Composition of it. 119
P.
Painting mean. 63 Palm Sunday. 39 Particles of bread. page 127, 171, 205, 208
Old Paschal Cycle still made use of. 31 Passion-week. 39 Day. 42 Patriarchs
four, their jurisdictions, limits and titles. 2 Particularly prayed for. 6
Inauguration. 70 Judges in Civil affairs. 77 Patriarchs of other Communions. 7
Patriarchal Church at Constantinople. 59 Penances. 178 Pictures admitted in
their Churches and reverenced. 211 Pillar, to which our B. Savior was tied,
part of it remaining. 60 Pope not mentioned in the public prayers of the
Greeks. 6 Prayer to Saints. 231 Posture and behavior in their Churches. 214
Priests. 90, 177 Praesanctificatorum Liturgia. 123, 125, 175 Procession of the
H. Spirit. 197 Processions used in their Churches. 130, 133 Purgatory. Whether
the Greeks believe Purgatory. 204
R.
Readers. 93, 176 Renegado's. 15
S.
Sacraments or Mysteries seven. 107 Sacrament but once celebrated the same day
on the same Altar. 155 Vp^^ Holy Days. 156 Received four times a year. 157 And
Fasting. 158 At what time of the day celebrat. 157 In Lent not till the
afternoon. 158 Their posture at receiving. 159 Reserved for the uses of sick
persons. 162 Sacristy. 69 Salutations at Easter. 32 Singing mean. 216 Slaves
Christian. 16 Subdeacons. 93, 177 Sunday how called. 31 Sundays after Easter.
32 Before Easter. 36 Superstition of the Greeks. 231 Swearing upon a Cross. 236
T.
Communion Table. 68 Table called Prothesis. 68 Transubstantiation, a novel
Doctrine. 146 Triangular piece of Bread in honor of the Virgin. 233 Turkish
Empire how supplied. 16
V.
Veneration of the unconsecrated Elements. 134 Vestments. 237 Vigils. 27 Of
Good Friday. 42 Of other Festivals. 49 Union of Christ. Princes desired. 13
W.
The ceremony of Washing the Feet of twelve persons. 40 War. The Holy War
defended. 13 Water poured into the Chalice. 127, 140 Waters when blessed. 23, 49,
111 The same Water not used a second time in Baptism. 114 No Holy Water at
their Churchdoors. 216 Women Professed. 106
FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and to be sold by Richard Davis in
Oxford.
IN FOLIO.
DR. Hammonds Works the 1. Vol. Containing a Collection of Discourses chiefly
Practical, with the Life of the author, 1674.

-- His Paraphrase and Annotations on the New Testament, the fourth Edition,
1675.

-- On the Psalms. -- His Sermons.

Lucian's Dialogues, made English from the Original, by Jasper Mayn, D. D.

Mereator's Atlas, Englished by W. Saltonstall.

A Poem to the Duke of York on our late Sea Fight with the Dutch, by J. M. C.
C. Oxon.

Five New Plays. The Siege of Urbine. Selindra. Love and Friendship. Pandora.
Imperiale a Tragedy. By Sir William Killigrew, Vice-Chamberlain to Her Majesty,
1666.

An Elegy on the Death of the Duke of Gloucester, by M. Lluellin Dr. in Physic.

The History of the Pretended Saints, by Hen. Foulis the second Edition. 1674.

The Works of Mr. William Pemble.

Songs for 1. 2. and 3. Voices to the Thorow-Bass with some short Symphonies.
Collected out of some of the select Poems of the Incomparable Mr. Cowley and
Others. And Camposed by H. Bowman Philo-Musicus. Engraved upon 85 Copper
Plates. The 2d. Edition corrected and amended by the Author. 1679.

A Letter of all the Lay. Nobility of England to the Pope, 1300. then denying
his Suppremacy in things Temporal in the Kings Dominions, in Latin, with the
same in English, and all the said Nobilities Names with their Coats of Arms
(being 104.) Engraved on a large Copper Plate: to which is adjoined a brief
account of the Pope's Pretenses to the Crown of England, and an Answer
thereunto. With a Dedication of All to the present Nobility. Printed on two
broad sheets of Royal Paper. 1679.

Annalium Mundi Universal. Origines Rerum (and progressus) sacras juxta ac
Seculares, ab Orb condito tradentium, Lib. XIV. Authore Hug. Robinsono, olim
Wintoniensi Archididascalo, postea Archidia^ ^o.

Jussu Regio Recognovit, emaculavit, lacunosum explevit, multaque nocte
adopertum in lucem edidit, THOMAS PIERCE, S. T. P. Decanus Sarisburiensis. 1677.

Jamblichi Chalcidensis de Mysteriis Aegyptor.

Tho. Gale Anglus Graece nunc primum eddit, Latin vertit, and notas adjecit.
(1678.) e Theatro.

Provinciale, (seu Constitutiones Angliae) etc. Auctore Guliel. Lyndwood, J. V.
D. Cui adjiciuntur Constitutiones D. Othonis, and D. Othoboni, Cardinalium,
Annotationibus Johannis de Athona. Huic editioni nunc primum accesserunt
Constitutiones Provinciales antedictorum Archiepiscoporum, and aliorum sine
Glossematis in ordinem digestae. Omnia ab innumeris, quibus undique scatebant,
erroribus atque mendis purgata ac restituta. 1679.

IN QUARTO.
A Collection of several Replies and Vindications of the Church of England, by
H. Hammond, D. D. in 4. Vol.

The hurt of Sedition, or the true Subject to the rebel, by Sir John Cheek,
with a Preface of D. Langbane's.

A Funeral Sermon on Phil. 1. 23. by John Millet.

The Vaulting Master, or the Art of Vaulting illustrated with sixteen brass
Figures, by W. Stoaks.

Christ and his Church, or Christianity explained in 7. Evangelical and
Ecclesiastical heads, by Edw. Hyde, D. D. sometime Fellow of Trinity College in
Cambridge, and late Rector of Brightwell in Berks.

Cheerful Airs or Ballads, for three Voices, by J. Wilson Dr. in Music, late
Professor of the same in the University of Oxford and one of the Gentlemen of
His Majesty's Chapel, in 3. Vol.

Hosanna, a Thanksgiving Sermon on the Kings Return on Psalm. 118. v. 22, 23,
24, 25. by Jo. Martin.

A Sheet of directions for Daily Examination of Sin, by Bishop Usher.

The Throne of David, or an Exposition on the second Book of Samuel by W. Guild.

Howel's Vocal Forest the First part.

Davenant, Morton, Drury, etc. Good Counsel for Peace.

Sicily and ^aples, or the Fatal Union. A Play.

Some Considerations touching the Usefulness of Experimental natural
Philosophy, proposed in Familiar Discourses to a Friend, by way of Invitation
to the study of it, by the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire, The 2d. Edition.

-- Considerations of the Usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, the 2d. Vol.
1671.

-- The 2d. Vol. of his Experiments of Air, with many Figures engraved on 8
Brass Plates. Also his Treatise of the Atmospheres of consistent Bodies. 1669.

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. Numb. 6, 7, 8. 1666.

Nehemiah, or the Excellent Governor: A Sermon Preached at Dublin, Aug. 69.
before the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Ossery then Lord Deputy of Ireland,
by Jo. Parry, D. D. and Dean of the holy Trinity in Dublin, 1670.

A Sermon Preached at a Visitation at Grantham in the Country and Diocese of
Lincoln, 8 October. 1641. on Mat. 15. 9. by the Right Reverend Father in God,
Robert Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of that Diocese, in Folio and Quarto. 1671.

Two Patterns of Goodness and Charity; one of Job in the midst of his Honor
and Wealth, the other of the Widow of Sarepta in the Extremity of her Poverty.
In two Sermons by David Stokes, D. D.

A censure upon certain passages contained in the History of the Royal Society,
as being destructive to the Established Religion and Church of England, by
Henry Stubbs, Physician in Warwick, the second Edition with additions, 1671.

-- His Replies to Glanvil, More, etc. 1671.

A Collection of Sermons upon several occasions by Tho. Pierce, D. D. Dean of
Sarum. 1671.

-- His Correct Copy of some Notes concerning Gods Decrees.

-- His Decad of Caveats to the People of England, being a 2d. Vol. of Sermons;
to which is added an Appendix for Conviction of the Atheist, the Infidel, and
the Setter up of Science to the prejudice of Religion. 1679.

A Sermon Preached in Lent Assizes at Alesbury, Mar. 8. 1671. being
Ash Wednesday, by A. Littleton, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Maj.

The Attique antiquities in seven Books, the three first by Fra. Rous, the four
last by Za. Bogan. The Eighth Edition. 1675.

A Sermon of the Credibility of the Mysteries of the Christian Religion. With
an Appendix to the same by Tho. Smith Fellow of St. Mary Magdalen College.

Propositions concerning Optic-Glasses, with their natural Reasons, drawn from
Experiments. At the Theater, 1679.

Of the Benefits of our Savior Jesus Christ to Mankind. At the Thea. 1680.

The Ends of Christian Religion justified in 10. Sermons, by R. Sharrock, L. L.
D. 1673.

Moxon of the Globes Celestial and Terrestrial, the 3d. Edition. 167^.

Joan. Buridani Quaestiones in octo Libros Politicorum Aristotelis.

Porta Mosis; sive Dissertationes aliquot R. Mosis Maimonidis, nunc primum
Arabice prout ab ipso Authore conscripta sunt, and Latin editae, una cum
Appendice Notarum Miscellan. Opera and studio E. Pocockii Ling. Hebr. and Arab.
in Acad. Oxon. Professoris.

Historia Dynastiarum Arabice. Auth. Gregorio Abul Pharagio. Edit. Int^rpret.
and continuat. per E. Pocock, L. Hebr. and Arab. Profess. in Acad. Oxon.

Idea Trigonometriae demonstratae. Item de Cometis, and inquisitio in Bulliadi
Astronomiae Philolaicae Fundamenta, Authore Setho Ward. nunc Ep. Salis.

Savili Oration coram Eliz. Regina.

Britannia Rediviva. Musarum Acad. Oxon.

Epicedia Acad. Oxon. in obitum Hen. Ducis Glocestriensis.

Epicedia Acad. Oxon. in obitum Mariae Principis Arausionensis.

Academiae Oxoniensis Notitia. Edit. 2 da. 1675.

Dissertationes quatuor, Quibus Episcopatus jura, etc. contra sententiam D.
Blondel and Aliorum, Auth. H. Hammond, S. Theolog. D.

Oxonium Poema per J. Vernon. ex Aede Christi.

De anima Brutorum quae Hominis vitalis est, exercitationes duae. Authore Tho.
Willis, M. D. and Professore Sedlaiano. 1673.

Pharmaceutice rationalis sive diatriba de Medicamentoram operationibus in
Corpore humano pars 1a. and 2a. vol. 2. Auth. T. Willis M. D. 1674. and 75.

De Causis Remediisque Dissidiorum, quaeorbem Christianum hodie affligunt,
exercitatio Theologica. Authore Tho. Smith S. T. B. and Col. B. Mar. Mag. Oxon.
Socio. 1675.

Examen Censurae: sive Responsio ad quasdam Animadversiones antehac ineditas,
in Librum cui titulus Harmonia apostolica etc. per Geor. Bullum Anglicanae
Eccl. Presbyterum. Accessit Apologia pro Harmonia ejusque Authore contra
Declamationem Thomae Tullii, S. T. P. in libro nuper Typis evulgato, quem
justificatio Paulina, etc. inscripsit, per eundem. 1676.

Catalogus plerorumque omnium authorum (tam antiquorum quam recentiorum) qui de
Re Heraldica Latin, Gallice, Italice, Hispanice, Germanice, Anglice
scripserunt. Interspersis hic illic, qui claruerunt in Re Antiquaria, and jure
civili, ea saltem part quae HERALDRIAE facem accendit, etc. A Tho. Gore,
Armig. 1680.

IN OCTAVO.
DR Hammond's Practical Catechism, with the reasonableness of Christian
Religion.

A View of the threats and punishments recorded in the Scriptures,
Alphabetically composed, with some Observations upon several Texts, by Zachary
Bogan of C. C. C. in Oxon.

-- The Mirth of a Christian Life, and the sorrows of a wicked Life, by the
same Author.

Fides Apostolica, or a Discourse asserting the received Authors and Authority
of the Apostles Creed: together with the grounds and ends of Composing thereof
by the Apostles, the sufficiency thereof for the Rule of Faith, etc. by George
Ashwell, B. D.

-- Gestus Eucharisticus, a Discourse concerning the Gesture at the receiving
of the Lords Supper.

A Treatise of the preservation of the Eyesight, by Dr. Baily.

The Circles of Proportion, and the Horizontal Instrument, etc. Both invented,
and their use written, by W. Oughtred Aetonensis.

The natural Man's blindness, in 3. Sermons on Romans 7. 7. by H. Hurst.

Essays and Observations on the Humors of the Age, Discovered and
Characterized, by W. Masters, A. M. late Fellow of Merton College.

Ovid's Invective against Ibis, translated into English Verse, by J. Jones
Schoolmaster in Hereford, 2 d. Edition.

A plain and profitable Catechism, with a Sermon on Ex. 23. 2. by Mr. James
Bacon, published by Dr. Henry Wilkinson.

A Divine Theater, or a Stage for Christians, a Sermon at C. C. in Oxford by
John Wall, D. D.

Shepherd of Sincerity and Hypocrisy, with a Tract annexed, to prove that
true Grace does not lie so much in the Degree, as in the Nature of it. By a
Reverend Divine.

Downham, of Christian Liberty.

Homer a la mode, a Mock Poem upon the first and second Books of Homer's
Iliads, 2 d. Edition.

Christian Liberty rightly stated and enlarged, in a brief Vindication of the
Lawfulness of Eating things strangled, or Mea^s confected with Blood, by W. Roe.

The Nullity of the Romish Faith, or a Blow at the Root of the Romish Church,
being an Examination of their Fundamental Doctrine concerning the Churches
Infallibility, by Matthew Pool, late Minister of the Gospel in London, 1671.
the 4 th Edition.

The Origin of Forms and Qualities (according to the Corpuscular Philosophy)
Illustrated by Considerations and Experiments, by the Hon. Robert Boil Esquire
Fellow of the Royal Society, 1671. the 2 d Ed.

-- Hydrostatical Paradoxes, made out by new Experiments (for the most part
Physical and easy*) 1666.

Tracts about
The Cosinical qualities of things. Cosmical Suspicions. The Temperature of the
Subterraneal Regions. The Temperature of the Submatine Regions. The Bottom of
the Sea. To which is Prefixed, an Introduction to the History of particular
Qualities. 8o 1. vol.
-- New Experiments of the Relation betwixt Flame and Air, and about
Explosions, with an Hydrostatical Discourse in Answer to Dr. More. Of weighing
water in Water, of the Levity of Bodies under Water. Of the Airs spring on
Bodies under Water. Of the Differing Pressure of Heavy Solids and Fluids
(1673.) in one vol.

-- Tracts of the saltness of the Sea, Of a staticall Hygroscope and its Uses.
Of the force of the Airs moisture. Of the Natural and Preter-natural state of
Bodies. Of the positive Nature of Cold, etc. 1674.

-- The Skeptical Chemist, or Chymico-Physical Doubts and Paradoxes, touching
the Experiments whereby Vulgar Spagirists endeavor to evince their Salt,
Sulphur, and Mecury, to be the true Principles of Things. To which in this
second Edition, are subjoined diverse Experiments and Notes about the
producibleness of Chymicall Principles. 1680.

Whitby's Answer to sure footing, and Fiat Lux.

A Funeral Sermon on 1 Cor. 7. v. 29, 30, 31. by Tho. Hawkins.

Holland of taking the height of a Comet.

-- His Globe Notes. 1678.

The City Match, and Amorous War, two Plays by Jas. Maine of C. C. Ox.

The Devil of Mascon, or a true Relation of the chief thing an unclean Spirit
did and said at Mascon in Burgundy, in the house of Mr. Fr. Precand, Minister
of the Reformed Church there, Published in French by the said Minister, and
made English by one that has a particular knowledge of the Truth of this
Story, the fifth Edition. 1679.

The History of the Propagation and Improvement of Vegetables by the
Concurrence of Art and Nature, etc. written according to Observations made from
Experience and Practice, the second Edit. much Enlarged by (...) late Fellow of
New Coll. 1672.

Characters of a (...) Heart and the Com^orts thereof, Collected out of the
Word of God by Hen, Wilkinson. D. D. late Principal of Magd. Hail. 1674.

An Explication of the Divine Goodness, in the Words of the most Renowned
BOETIVS. Translated by a Lover of Truth and Virtue. 1674.

Animadver^^ons upon Sir R. (...) Chroni^le, and his Continuation, wherein are
many Errors discovered and some Truths advanced by T. Blunt, Esquire 1^72.

A View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law: by Sir Tho. Ridley Knight, with
the Notes of J. Gregory late of Chr. Chapter O^on. the 4th Edition.

Experiments, Notes, etc. about the Origin of particular Qualities of Alkali
and Acidum, etc. by the Hon. (...) Esquire 1676.

Notitia H^^^^ricorum (...), or Animadversio^s on the Ancient and Famous Greek
and Latin Historians, Englished with some Additions, by W. Davenant, of (...)

Sermons Preached upon Several Occasions by (...) D. D. Prebend of Chr. Chapter
(...)

Decrees of Pope Inno^^nt the 11th. containing the suppression of an Office of
the (...) Conception of the most Holy Virgin; And of a Multitude of
Indulgences. According to the Copies at Rome: from the Printing-Pr^^s of the
most Reverend Apostolic Chamber. Translated (...) English out of the French
Copy; (to which the Latin was (...) as also here it is) by the direction of an
Eminent Person of Honor. 1^79.

A Guide to the Holy City, of Directions and (...) to an Holy Life, by J^
Reading B. D.

Scripture vindicated from the Misapplicat^^n^ of Mr. St. Marsha^l in his
Sermon (...).

The Christian (...) by (...) D. D.

A Sermon on the 2 (...) with the Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy, by W.
(...)

Certain Sermons and Letters of Defense and Resolution to some of the late
Controversies of our times, by Jas. Maine, D. D.

Col. Henry Martin's Letters to his Lady of Delight, with her kind Returns,
etc. published from the Original Papers, by Edm. Gayt^n.

A short Introduction of Grammar generally to be used, Compiled and se^ forth
for the bringing up of all those that intend to attain to the knowledge of the
Latin Tongue. To which are added useful Observations, by way of Comment, out
of Ancient and Learned Grammarians, the third Edition at the Theater, (...).
1679.

De Confirmatione, sive Benedictione post Baptismum solenni, etc. (...) H.
Hammond. S. T. D.

Ailmeri Musae Sacrae, seu Jonas, Jeremiae Threni and Da^i* Gr^^ reddit^
carmine.

Ad Grammaticem ordinariam supplementa (...) 3. mul^is ^^ctior, a Guil.
Phalerio.

Contemplationes Metap^^sice (...) Natura Rer^m and rects Rationis lumine
deductae, Auth. G. Rit^ch^, Bohemo.

Delphi Phoenicizantes per Edm. Dickinson, M. D. Coll. Mert. Socio.

Artis L^gic^^ Compend^^^ a Roberto Sanderson, (...) Epis. Lincoln. Edit. Nona.
1680.

-- Compendi^m (...)

Exercitath Epistolica in Tho. Hobbii Phil^s^ph; (...) Auth. Seth. Ward. S* T.
D.

-- Astronomia Geometrica. V^i Methodu^ proponitur qua primariorum Planetarum
Astronomia sive ^iliptica Circularis possit Geometrice absolivi.

Carmen Tograi Poetae Arabis (...), una cum (...) Latina and Notis Praxin
illius exhibentibus. Opera Ed. Po^okii L. Heb. and Arab. Profess^ris. Accessit
(...) de pros^dia Arabica, per Sam. Clericum. 1661.

Juelli Apologia Eccl^siae Angl. Graec. Let.

(...) Lat. ex Oti^ and Opera H. Edmunson. 166^.

A^^^tii Stratagem^^um Satanae.

^

A^a^i Phenomena (...) Scholiis Grae^.

(...) Scholiis Grae^. 1672.

(...) 1679.

Fa^stiri and Mar^^^^i Lib^ll Precum. -- de Trinitate contra Arian^. (...) 1678.

Zosimi Historiae (...) lib^isex. Gr. Lat. (...)

Richardson de (...) 1678.

Ashwell de (...)

Ethica, sive (...) S. T. D. (...) 1680.

Sharrock de Officiis (...) de Moribus.

-- De Incontinentia.

Anal^sis Libri Aristo^elis de S^phistic. Elenchis, Opera and (...) 1664.

HOMERUS EBPAIZO^N sive (...) Sacris quoad Normam Loquendi. Subnect. HESSIODUS
(...) A^th. Zach. Eogan, e C. C. C. Oxon.

Pu^riles Consabulatiunculae, Graeco-Latinae Ad calcem adjectius est I^d^^

Graecus and Latinus in quibus omnia fere Gr. and Lat. (...)

Occurrunt, compre^enduntur. Authore W. Jackson.

Diaconi Epitome (...). Gr. Lat.

Scheibleri Compend. (...) 167^.

Alcinous de Doctr. Platon. Gr. (...) 1667.

Nemesius de Natura Hominis Gr. Lat. 1671.

Antiquitates (...) e (...) BONO JUVENTUTIS. Opera and (...) correctior. 1674.

Epistolae Quatuor* quarumduae (...) T^rcarum agun^. Duae Septem Asiae (...)
continent. Auth. Tho. Smith, Coll. D. (...) 1674.

Bleau de Gl^^^s.

(...) Edit. (...) 1675.

C. (...) Opera Omnia. Notis (...) 1676.

De (...) J. Seobaldo (...) Com. Pal. 1676.

(...) D. Nortono Knatchbull, (...) and (...) 1677.

(...) and Notis Idustrati. e (...) 1678.

(...)

IN DUODECIMO.
A Christian (...) or p^^parations for, and Consolations against Death; with
the (...) Cordial, by Edw. Hide, D. D.

-- A Vind^c^^on of Truth against Erro^: in seven Controversies, 1. Of Sinners
Prayers. 2. Priests Marriage. 3. (...) 4. Images. 5 Praying to Saints and (...)
6. Justification by Faith. 7. Of Christ's New Testament or (...)

Directions to a Godly Life, Instructions for the worthy receiving of the Lords
Supper, by H. (...) The ninth Edition. 1680.

Two Assise Sermons Pr^ached at Reading and Abbingdon, on Cant. 7. 4. Ps. 82.
1. with two other Sermons Pr^ached at St. Mary's in Oxon. on 1 Cor. 15. 10. Ps.
58. 11. by (...)

A short review of some Directions for performance of Cathedral Service, by Ed
L^we. The 2 d Edition, with additions. 1664.

A complete Herbal, by Robert Lovel. The 2 d Edition.

Dr. Stoke's Directions for private Devotions and Retirements, to which are
adjoined some private Devotions of the late Learned Bp. Andrews; never before
extant. 1668.

D^exelius of Eternity, in Welsh.

The Trial of a Christians Sincere Love to Christ in four Sermons, by W. Pink.
The fifth Edition.

The Gentile Sinner, or Englands brave Gentleman Charactered in a Letter to a
Friend: both as he is, and as he should be, by Clem. Ellis, M. A. late Fellow
of Qu. Coll. Ox^n. The sixth Edition. 1679.

The Christian Sacrament and Sacrifice, by way of discourse, Meditation and
Prayer, upon the Nature* Parts and Blessings of the Holy Communion, by (...) D.
D. The 3 d Edition at the Thea. 1679.

A Nomenclator of such Tracts and Sermons as have been Printed or translated
into English upon any place or book of the Holy-Scripture now to be had in the
Public Library in O^on. by John Vernevill.

Cross, de Febre intermittente.

Pav^^il Disputat. Ethi^^.

Paradoxa Hydrostatica per Rob. Boil.

-- Origo formarum^^ Qualitation, etc.

-- Cogitationes de S. (...)

-- Tractatus Novem de Qualitat. (...) etc.

Clementis Epistolae G. L. 1669.

Theses (...) a Curolo Potter.

(...) Smith.

Element^ (...) Author^ Edvardo Brerewood.

Roberti Baroni^ (...) The^log. Ancillans.

-- De Peccato Mortali (...)

Prolusienes (...) in duas parts distrib^^^, 1. de Judiciis. 2. de Origi^e
Dominiiservititis, etc. Tho. Jon^^. L. I. D. (...)

(...)

-- Institut. Metaphyscae. 1675.

Bradshaw de Justificati^^e.

Issendoor^i Cursus Logicus.

Combachii Metaphysica

Minutius Foelix (...) etc. (...)

Galateus de Moribus and Bartholini Enchiri^ion (...).

Q. Curtius Notis (...) 1672.

Pembli Tractatus Tres de (...), etc. 1669.

Pharmaceutice Rationa^^^sive Diatriba de (...) in Human, etc. Corpore Authore
Tho. Willis M. D. duo Vol. 1674. and 1675.

Rev. Patris Lan^. Andrews, Epise. Winton. Preces Privatae Graece and Latin, e
Theatro.

Richardi Gardener Hereforden^^^, Aedis Christi Oxon. Canon. Specimen Oratorium
cum Supplemento (...) 1675.

M. Antonini Imperatoris, de scipso and ad seipsum, lib^i XII. Gr. Lat. (...)
and Notis illustrati, e Theatro. 1680.

In 24. LIps^^ de Constantica.

(...) de Consolatione Phil ^.

FINIS.

