THE QUAKER DISARMED, OR A TRUE RELATION Of a Late Public DISPUTE HELD AT
CAMBRIDGE

By Three Eminent QUAKERS, against One Scholar of Cambridge.

WITH A Letter in Defense of the MINISTRY, AND AGAINST LAY-PREACHERS.

ALSO Several Quaeries proposed to the Quakers to be answered if they can.

LONDON, Printed by I. C. and are sold near the Little North-Door of S. Paul's
Church. 1659.

THE PREFACE
BEfore I set down the particulars of this Dispute, it seems not amiss to
premise (as an introduction to it) what passed between this Scholar and the
forementioned George Whitehead before it.

In May last this Scholar walking over the Palace Yard about his necessary
occasions, chanced to see a great multitude of People over against Westminster
Hall compassed with Soldiers in red Coats. Drawing near, he heard Whitehead
preaching against Universities, Learning, and Tithes, and the Clergy; and asked
some of the red-coates whether he might speak a word? They answered they could
not tell. Whereupon he crowded up to Whitehead and asked him the same question,
who said No, no. Another Soldier that stood near him, said, hold thy tongue or
I Will stop thy mouth.

So the Scholar held his peace, till W. had done his railing, against the
Priests. Then the People cried out with one voice, Let the Gentleman speak, let
the Gentleman speak. Whereupon the Scholar stood up, and used such arguments in
few words against W. (in answer to which, W. said nothing; but another Q. stood
up and prayed) that all the People showted. Notwithstanding which the Q. going
on in his prayer, the people made an hideous shriek to disturb him. The
Quakers all desired the S. to quiet them telling him they were his followers
and Sons of Ishmael. At length the People (seeing that none of the Quakers
would attempt to answer the Scholars argument, desired him to come away; lest
the Q. should do him a mischief. So he left the Quakers, and with ^im came all
the People, leaving a few Soldiers and about a douzen Quakers at their
exercise. The Day following, and several days after the S. went to seek the
Quakers at the said house, but found none, and never yet heard that any of them
met there since.

But upon Aug. 25. 1659. the same S. having been all the Afternoon (from one a
clock till four or five) in St. John's Coll. Library turning over Arabic and
other MSS. returning home wearied his nearest way, unexpectedly saw the same
Whitehead preaching in the Quakers common meeting house. So he went in, desired
leave to speak: and (when Whitehead had done) confuted his Doctrine. Next day,
considering how apt silly Women were to be led away captive by such deceivers,
he sent this following Note to the Major of Cambridge, hoping in the conclusion
to reclaim his Wife, who is a Quaker.

Whereas George Whitehead preacher to the Quakers in Cambridge delivered in his
Sermon among them Yesterday, 1. That they are not Heretics, and 2. that they
teach no other Doctrine but what Abraham and Christ taught; and 3. afterward
said, that the Scriptures are not the word of God.

I am ready this Day (at any hour or place) to prove the forementioned
Doctrines very false, and 2ly. to defend those 3 arguments that I urged against
him yesterday, by showing that he neither did, nor can answer any thing to
them: and 3ly. to prove by diverse other arguments, that it is a damnable sin for
him (or any such man) to preach, and a damnable sin for any man or woman to
hear him.

T. S.
Chr. Coll. Aug. 25. 1659.

Hereupon the Major sent for Whitehead, who (before him) wrote down these
following positions; which he said he would defend against T. S. at what time,
and place, the Major should appoint.

1. That we called Quakers do not open a door to damnable Heresies. 2. That we
called Quakers are not Heretics: because 3. We do not teach any Heresy, and 4.
We walk not in the steps of Heretics. 5. That the Bible is not the Word. These
things I will defend against the contrary affirmations of T. S. George
Whitehead.

Then he caused these three positions to be writ saying, he would defend them
also.

6. The Scriptures does not say, If any man say he has no sin he deceives
himself. 7. I deny that this is truth [If any man say he has no sin he
deceives himself] as concerning the Saints. 8. It Is not a Damnable sin, for me
or any such man to preach, and for any man or woman to hear us.
On Saturday night Aug. 27. T. S. wondering that he heard nothing of the time
and place of meeting, went to the Major to ask what was resolved, who answered,
that the Aldermen were not willing it should be in the Town Hall; So that if
there were any Dispute at all, it must be in the Quakers common meeting house,
but that several Aldermen were not willing there should be any Dispute, and
that he himself would not advise T.S. to Dispute. Whereupon T. S. resolved not
to dispute against the mind of the Corporation. Next day Aug. 29. between 12,
and 1. a clock came this following Summons to T. S. from W.

Friend, T. S. This is to certify thee, that according to our agreement when I
was with thee, I am willing to give thee a meeting. And seeing that no other
place is appointed, I intend to be at our meeting place (over against Sidney
Colledge-gate this day about the 1. or 2d. hour in the afternoon. Where I may
expect thy appearance, according to thy promise to me, first to produce thy
arguments, etc.

Subscribed G. Whitehead.
Cambridge this 29th. of the 6th Month. 59. Superscribed for T. S. at that
place called, etc.

Immediately the same Person received another Summons from Mr. James Alders
beginning thus.

Sir, I was called this Morning to Mr. Major, and there I was told that it is
the desire of the Quakers to meet you, at their house of meeting; they begin to
think you are afraid to meet them, etc.

Notwithstanding these T. S. continued in his Chamber, till a Messenger came
from Mr. Alders to tell him, that the Quakers were met and reported that T. S.
did not dare to come. Thereupon he went and found G. Fox preaching. Esteeming
it not lawful to hear him, he left the room, but entered again, as soon as
sermon was done. Then there was some debate where T. S. should stand, and
because the Q. would suffer him to take no place but where he should be
compassed with Quakers (as G. Whitehead was also) he stood where they appointed
him.

The Dispute.
AS soon as T. S. had taken his place, G. W. made a long speech to tell the
people the occasion of that dispute: and that the questions to be discussed
were these.

1. Whether it were a Damnable sin for him to preach and 2. a Damnable sin for
any to hear him. And charging T. S. with folly for saying that Whitehead was an
heretic, and yet confessing that T. S. knew not all W's. Opinions. T. S.
interposed only this, Mark the word all. I may truly say you hold heresies, if
I know only some.

When he had done. T. S. said thus Good people; you come not hither to hear
sermons and speeches but a dispute. This man has troubled you with a long
discourse wherein he concludes that I must begin at the latter end; which of
what consequence it is, all you that have skill in any trade or science know as
well as I. I shall not trouble you with many words, but (in short) shall only
entreat you to hear him again, I Will read to you his own paper. George Whitehead
is this your hand or is it not.

W. I acknowledge it my writing.


S. I Will read his handwriting, So T. S. read it (as, it is set down before) and
then asked the people whether he should take the propositions in order as they
were placed in Whiteheads paper or not. Who answering Yea Yea. He began thus.
1. That we called Quakers do not open a door to damnable Heresies. 2. That we
called Quakers are not Heretics.


Against this your first position I dispute thus.

He that writ this Book opens a door to damnable Heresies (holding forth a
Printed Book in his hand, entitled Ishmael and his Mother cast out.)

You writ this Book, therefore you open a door to damnable Heresies. Whitehead
replied, I deny it.


S. What do you deny?


W. That you spoke last, I do not open a door to damnable Heresies.


S. That is my conclusion: you should deny one of the Premises.

Here S. gave him the Book to look on: and then asked him whether he were the
Author of that Book or not?


W. I did not write it all: for there is somewhat scribled in it.


S. True, here are some things writ on the backside: I Will charge You with
nothing but what is printed. Were you the Author of all that is printed in this
Book? Your Name is printed both in the beginning midst, and end of it.


W. About three years ago I and four more writ it between us.


S. I pray tell me plainly whether you will own it or not. If you will not own it all,
then tell me what you will own, what not. Otherwise when I have proved it a
most wicked book, you may disown it, and so all my discourse fall to the
Ground. It Is no pleasure to me to speak, or this people to hear vain words. If
you will not own it speak. But you may as well disown to morrow all that you
say to day (telling us that words are but wind) if you disown that which you
have printed and affixt your name so often unto.


W. Well. I will own it, prove what thou can.


S. All Papists open a door to damnable heresies.
You who writ this book are a Papist.
Therefore you who writ this book open a door to damnable heresies.

Fox, wisper'd (but loud enough) Mark the Major is Universal.

Whereupon some of the people cried, down with that black fellow that prompt's
behind, but S. said, no let them alone. What do you answer?


W. I deny. I deny.


S. What do you deny? Major or minor?


W. That you spoke last.


S. repeated the argument again and W. denied the conclusion.


S. If you go on to deny my conclusions I shall do nothing but repeat my
Syllogismes: for my Syllogism proves my conclusion.


W. Repeat it then. Here W. Allen a Quaker interposed and made a speech to tell
the people that he did not like this way of disputing and bid T.S. dispute
plainly without Logic and syllogismes, and vain terms.


S. Whitehead was the first that mentiond major and minor, and used a
Syllogism the other day to prove Scripture was not the word of God Fox said that
the Major was universal. It seems they both understand well enough what
belongs to a Syllogism. And I think I have not spoke a word which the meanest
here does not understand, and that this way of dispute is liked best by all: if
not let them speak.


People. It Is very well, very well. We like this way of dispute best of all.


S. My argument is this, All Papists open a door to damnable heresies, you who
writ this book are a Papist, Therefore you who writ this book open a door to
damnable heresies.


Alderman Blackly. This S. does nothing but say the same thing again and again.


W. I am no Papist.


S. You deny my minor: which I prove thus. He who refuses to take the oath of
abjuration is a Papist. He who writ this book refufuseth to take the oath of
abjuration. Therefore he who writ this book is a papist.


W. I deny all Popery.


S. A Papist will say so too. I might charge you with many Popish Doctrines;
but now I only ask whether you will take the oath of abjuration, or deny one of
my propositions?


F. Here Fox who had interposed several times before made a long discourse to
prove that 'twas unlawful for a Christian to swear. S. did let him run on to
the end, and let W. speak after him. Then asked whether any more of that party
had ought else to say? all being silent T. S. replied.


S. I came not hither to dispute with Fox or Allen; but since you are resolved
to dispute three of you against one, I shall reply to you all (yea if there
were three hundred, if you speak but one at once) Which of my propositions do
you deny major or minor? For you must deny one unless you will grant the
conclusion that he is a Papist.


F. Prove that it is lawful to swear.


S. That is another question: which I Will prove at any seasonable time when ever
you shall desire me: but this is no fit season; for we must now stick close to
the questions before us.


People. Yes do so. Do so.


Here the Majors wife entreated T. S. to lay aside Whiteheads book and dispute
from Scripture. Well quoth he I will for a while: so he gave the book to her,
and taking a Bible said. S. Turn to 2 Cor. 5.20. Where you have these words,
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ. From which words I prove that it is an
appropriate Ministry; proper to some only, not common to all: and therefore
that every Christian man and woman is not an Ambassador of Christ, as you G.
W. told the people the other day. I frame my argument thus.

He who pretends to be an Ambassador of Christ and has no commission to show,
but what all the damnable heretics in the world do or may show, that man opens
a door to damnable Heretics. But you pretend to be an Ambassador of Christ
and have no commission to show, but what all the damnable Heretics in the
world do or may show. Therefore you open a door to damnable Heretics.


W. I deny that, prove it.


S. What do you deny?


W. I deny that I open a door to damnable Heresy.


Here almost all the Company laughed, shouted, stamped and hissed. And the
Quakers asked T. S. if he was not ashamed of his followers. He answered, That
none of them were his followers; for he came alone, and brought not one with
him: That it was their Meeting House, and therefore more likely to be their
followers. So after S. (at the Quakers request) had entreated the people to be
quiet, he asked W. S. Do you profess your self to be an Ambassador of Christ,
or do you not?


W. Yea I do.


S. Then that you may understand my argument the better (for I perceive you do
not yet ken it) I Will illustrate it by a similitude. Suppose we being not at
peace with Spain, twelve men should go hence to the King of that Nation, and
tell him that they are all sent Ambassadors to him from the Parliament of
England. He asks them for their Commissions. One of them shows him his
Commission in Parchment: and the other 11 tell him they have a Commission, but
he must believe them on their words for they cannot show it. Every one of them
exclaiming against this man who shows his Commission, and against the other
for counterfeits: crying aloud, that he himself, and he alone is the true
Ambassador, though he have nothing to prove it by, more then the other ten
false. In such a case would you not say that these 11 are Knaves? Answer.


W. and F. and all the rest stood still and said not a word.
S. If it be an heinous sin for any man to pretend a Commission from an earthly
Prince or Parliament, when he has none indeed to show, shall not his crime be
incomparably more grievous, his condemnation unspeakably more dreadful, who
pretends one from the King of Heaven when he has none to show?


W. I have a commission.


S. Show it.


Here W. Stood mute: and the people said he was wont to call the Clergy Dumb
Dogs; but now he was Dumb himself. S. Let us hear or see what your commission
is. Distinguish that commission which you say you have from that which all the
Damnable Heretics in the World do or may produce for themselves.


Here W. made a long speech to the people. To which S. replied, S. You have
told us a long story, whereof I can make neither head nor foot. I am sure it
concerns my argument no more then if you should tell us, they are now selling
apples upon the Market-hill. Tell us, or show us what is your commission.


W. I have my commission from Christ.


S. I do not well hear what you say; but I think you told us of another
commission the other day from that which you speak of now.


W. I told you then, that I had it from the power of God, and now that I had it
from Christ.


S. They differ. For Moses had his commission from the power of God, yet had it
not from Christ: who gave no commission to any before the Twelve Apostles.


Fox. Christ and the Power of God are all one.


S. Well, we will not discuss any impertinent questions. Whether they be one or
not, you do not answer my argument. It Is this. He who pretends to be an
Ambassador of Christ, and has no commission to show, but only a talk that he
is sent from Christ; he has none to show but what damnable Heretics do or may
show. But you pretend to be an Ambassador of Christ, and have no, etc.


W. Did ever any Heretic pretend a commission from Christ?


S. Yes Dav. George, Socinus, Arius, and all the Heretics I ever read of.


W. They could not prove it by the effects as I can; that is, show the people
that were converted by them.


S. Yes they could. Arians converted a nation of Infidels to Christianity
(which is more then you pretend to) and his opinions spread so far among them
who before his time were Orthodox, that in short time 'twas said, All the world
seemed Arian.


W. But did the Heretics live good lives?


S. It Is confessed by all the Ancients that Arius and his Followers did, by St.
Austin that Pelagius did: and I remember no Sect-Master that did not. If you
have no commission to show but this, you see that all damnable Heretics do or
may show the same: and so my conclusion remains firm, That you open a door to
damnable Heresy.


W. No. I have proved my commission sufficiently, and you have brought nothing
against it.


S. Let the people judge of that. You and I come not hither to be judges in our
own cause.


W. You should prove me an Heretic: which you do not go about to do.


S. I shall do that when I come at it. It Is the second question. We are not yet
come so far; we are yet but at the door of your house. I am proving that you
open a door to let in Heretics. A man may, open the door of his house to let
them in, and be none himself.


W. I Will prove that I am none my self, and that from Scripture.


S. You come hither to answer, and not to oppose; but since (contrary to the
rules of dispute) you resolve to do both at once, I Will give you leave; come let
us hear your argument.


W. It Is taken out of 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. But there were false prophets also among
the people, even as there shall be false Teachers among you; who privily shall
bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring
upon themselves swift destruction.


S. (Mark destruction and damnable twice applied to Heresy in one Verse)


W. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of
Truth shall be evil spoken of. Hence I prove that I am no Heretic. Observe
here, Heretics are those who deny the Lord that bought them; I do not deny the
Lord that bought me; Therefore I am no Heretic.


S. I deny your major. All Heretics do not deny the Lord that bought them. The
Apostle there instances in one sort of false Teachers, the worst, who would
even deny the Lord. Observe the word even: here is a special brand put upon
them. It follows not hence that none are false prophets, none false teachers,
or (as you would have it) none Heretics, but those who do deny the Lord that
bought them. Prove that. Prove your Major.


W. I have Christ within me; and therefore I do not deny the Lord that bought
me.


S. You do not prove your major. I believe you do not understand my answer,
I Will explain it. Suppose a man lying here sick unto death, will you prove that
he is not sick at all, because he has no plague sore upon him, or has no
consumption: Because he has not this or that, or a third disease, therefore
has he none. There be many sorts of Heretics (the Apostle here mentions
damnable Heresies in the plural) as there be of diseased persons. Some deny the
Lord that bought them, others not. 'Till not follow, that because you are not
of one sort of these, therefore you be not of the other. Prove your major if
you can; if not, give me leave to argue against you from this very Text.


Whitehead, Fox, and all the rest here stood silent. S. Well, beloved, from
this very text that he has brought to prove he is no Heretic, I will
demonstrate (which I am sorry that I must do, but you see he thrusts me upon
it) that this man is the most damnable Heretic that ever was in the world; and
that since this Epistle was first writ 'twas never so literally and plainly
fulfilled in any person as in him this day. [ Here the people fecht a deep
sigh.] Hear the words again, the two first Verses. There were false prophets
also, etc. I begin my Argument from those very words you inlisted on, even
denying the Lord that bought them, the worst of Heretics. He that writ this
book [ Ishmael, etc.] even denies the Lord that bought him. You writ this book.
Therefore you even deny the Lord that bought you.


W. I deny the major.


S. I Will read a few lines of it, and then prove my major; you write this
against Mr. Townsend Minister of Norwich. In your second page are these words,
Christopher Atkinson, James Lancaster, George Whitehead, and Tho. Simonds now
in Norwich Goal for their errors and miscarriages -- Thee Priest Townsend --
thou Dreamer -- thou Deceiver -- Witch -- O thou blind Guide, thou enemy of
God -- without Christ and his knowledge, and in Antichrist.


W, Is the word Witch there?


S. Thou would bewitch the people with thy lies, p. 3. After these and many
more such good words, he comes p. 10. to speak against the B. Trinity, and has
this passage, p. 10. The Three Persons thou dreamest of (speaking to Mr. T.)
which thou would divide out of one, like a conjurer, are all denied, and
thou shut up with them in perpetual darkness for the lake and the pit.


Here the multitude held up their hands and cried God bless us! S. See here he
says that he who asserts the three Persons in the ever blessed Trinity is a
dreamer and a conjurer, and that that man shall be damned with that Trinity.


Fox. We do not deny God therefore we are no Heretics. Atheists deny God,
therefore they are Heretics.


S. This man will be opponent again. Atheists are no Heretics.


F. Are not Atheists Heretics.


S. No. Atheists are worse then Heretics; but they are not Heretics. From
these words in Whiteheads book now read, I argue thus, He who denies the three
persons in the B. Trinity, and calls him dreamer and conjurer who asserts them,
saying that a man who says there be three persons in the Trinity, shall be
shut up with them in perpetual darkness for the lake and the pit, that man is
an Heretic even denying the Lord that bought him. But you G. Whitehead deny
the three persons in the blessed Trinity, etc.


Fox Here made very long discourse against the Trinity. S. Beloved you see I
let him speak all he can say, I do not disturb them in their speaking as they
do me, I am willing to hear him or any of them, speak all they can for
themselves, but I confess it grieves me to hear them speak against the B.
Trinity, and I had far rather hear them talk of somewhat else then make
declamations against Almighty God. I answer, That nothing of this your speech
is to the purpose. What do you answer to the argument? I repeat it again. He
who denies, etc.


Fox run on in another discourse against the three persons. S. I came not
hither to hear you to repeat a deall of stuff out of Paul Beast [who writ
against the Trinity.] I came hither to dispute. If you will answer my argument, do.
If not, say you cannot.


F. Prove that there be three persons.


S. I will.


F. But prove it out of Scripture.


S. I will so (1 John 5.7.) There be three that bare record in Heaven; the
Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three are one.


F. Prove that there be three Persons.


S. I will.


Allen. Prove them to be three Persons plainly without Logical terms and vain
Philosophy, that we may all understand thee.


S. I will, if the Father, Son, and H. Ghost, be three he is, then they are
three Persons; but they are three he is.


F. What do you mean by three he is?


S. Three things that may be pointed at, he, and he, and he.


F. I do not like that argument.


S. I would fain give you an argument that you should like, are you three
Persons who dispute against me this day, or are you not?


F. Yea we are three Persons it is plain.


S. Give me now any argument that pleases you to prove it; and by the very
same argument I Will prove that there be three Persons in the B. Trinity.


F. We are in three places and therefore three Persons.


S. The Father, Son, and H. Ghost, have been in three places, and therefore are
three Persons. At the baptism of Christ while Jesus came up, the H. Ghost came
down; in the same moment, one ascended out of the water, the other descended to
the water, Matt. 3.16, 17. And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway
out of the water; and lo the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the H.
Spirit of God descending like a Dove and lighting upon him. And lo a voice
from heaven saying this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. In this
verse is mention of God the Father in heaven, God the Son coming out of the
water, and the H. Ghost descending on this side Heaven like a Dove.


F. Prove there were three persons.


S. I do it thus, If Christ was coming up out of the water while the H. Ghost
was coming down to the water, then they were in several places, but Christ was
coming up out of the waters, while the H. Ghost was coming down to the water.
Therefore they were in several places.


F. They have not flesh and bones as we have.


S. What then? I did not promise to prove them to be men, or you to be Angels
or Gods; but them to be Persons: like you only in personality.


F. Persons have flesh and blood as you see we have.


S. I prove that all Persons have not flesh and blood. If God should send this
day three Angels from Heaven to prove the truth of Christian Religion against
you, who deny it; and one of them should stand at one end of your meeting
house, another at the other end, and a third in the midst preaching. Would you
not say that these three Angels were three Persons? Yet they have not flesh and
blood. Speak, would you say they are three Persons, or would you not;


All stood mute, at length one of them said that Angels are not Persons. S.
Till me what you mean by a person and I Will prove that Angels are persons.


F. A person is a subsistence, We three are three different susistences.


S. So are the Father, Son, and H. Ghost, if they were in different places,
they must needs be different subsistences. You see my argument stands firm,
notwithstanding your objection I pass to another argument.

He who denies the Bible to be the word of God, saying that to assert Scripture
to be the word of God, is one of the deceitful imaginations which the Priests
of this generation have deceived the People with; that man is an Heretic; but
you deny the Bible to be the word, and tell Mr. Townsend that to assert it, is
one of the deceitful imaginations which the Priests of this generation have
deceived the People with; Therefore you are an Heretic, see here your own
book, p. 1. lin. 1.


In stead of answering this argument about the word of God, they started back
to the former about the Trinity: and Fox said F. They cannot be three Persons
because they were not visible in several places, I can see that man, and he
can see the other.


S. If Christ was man, and the H. Ghost was in the form of a Dove, then they
were both seen.


F. Prove that they were seen in several places.


S. Christ was seen when the H. Ghost was not seen: therefore they both were
seen in several places, one in the water, the other out of it.


F. Prove that they were seen.


S. If many beheld them both, and this their seeing was upon record (we saw,
and they who see it bare record, and we know that our record is true) then they
were seen. But many beheld them at once; and this their sight was upon record.


F. The H. Ghost could not be seen.


S. If he was in the form of a Dove, then he could be seen: but he was in the
form of a Dove.


F. Not in the form of a Dove, but he was in the likeness of a Dove.


Whereat some laughing, he answered again that he was seen, but not visible. S.
Then he was visible and invisible.


F. Yea.


S. Then contradictions may be true at once, then you may be a Quaker and no
Quaker, a Papist and no Papist, an Heretic and no Heretic. Hereupon Alderman
Blackly who is a Quaker said to T. S. I think it is time now to leave off.


S. I think so too: when he says contradictions may be true at once.


F. I pray take notice all of you that this Book [ Ishmael and his Mother cast
out] about which so much stir has been, was not writ by me but by this man,
pointing at G. Whitehead.


S. True, but you defended it, I came to dispute him, if I had known of your
disputing I would have brought one of Your Books.


THE END.
A Letter sent to Mr. E. of Taft four miles from Cambridge a Year since, to
which no answer has been returned.
Sir,
1. SInce you had not so much patience as to hear me the other day, nor would
suffer your daughters to tarry, I now make use of my first hour of leisure to
write to you part of that which you might have heard me speak then: Hoping that
you and they (whom I look on as having more breeding then any other his
Auditors that I saw) will not believe him, whom his friends generally call the
Tinker, upon his bare word; but like those noble Bereans, Acts 17.11. with
readiness of mind search the Scripture whether those things were so.

2. I guess at the breeding of most of his followers by this passage; One of
the chief of them, viz. Daniel Angier (who invites him to that Town, entertains
him in his house, lends him his Barn for a meeting place) when I charged him in
that place with maintaining that God was a body, ( viz. that he had hands,
feet, a face, etc. like one of us) saying that he contradicted me in my
Churchyard, after I had preached the contrary from John 4.24. he told me plainly
before all the people, when he saw his Ringleader T. would not defend it, that
I lied; whereas my whole Parish are ready to witness the truth of what I said.

3. But to the purpose, I shall in this paper follow that method which the T.
commanded me (though I desired the contrary) showing first his false doctrine,
and then prove it is a dangerous sin in him to preach (as he did publicly, and
in the people to hear him.

4. He said in his Sermon that God would lay before us at the day of Judgment 4
books, viz. the book of his remembrance, 2. the book of the creatures, 3. the
book of the Law of Moses, 4. the book of the Gospel. By the book of the
creatures, he said, he meant this or that cup of bear, or pot of wine whereby a
man is drunk, the timber in the wall, etc.

5. I answer, that it is impossible God should set these (this book) before us
at the day of Judgment, because the Scripture says, 2. Pet. 3.10. that the
earth, and the works therein shall be burnt up. If all these shall be burnt up,
how shall they be laid before us, pots and cups, etc. Had he said that the
Conscience should represent these things unto us, he had spoken sense, but he
made the conscience a witness at that bar, and not a book.

6. When I told him that Christians should not be judged at that day by the
book of the creatures, but the Gospel; he answered that he did not take his
Auditory to be Christians, but unbelievers, and in his Sermon I heard him utter
these words, I know that the most of you are unbeleevers.

7. Formerly I have wondered that most of his followers were sad melancholy
persons, not looking nor behaving themselves like other folk; hereafter I shall
never wonder, if I see or hear they are mad: for such speeches as these are
dreadful and very uncharitable; tending to no other end, but to make good
people run out of their wits, if they have not more then to believe him. For I
pray consider that an unbeleever is an Infidel, that is, either a Jew, or a
Turk, or a Pagan or an Atheist: persons who shall be damned as sure as that God
is true, Mar. 16.16. with whom it is unlawful for any Christian to marry, 2 Cor.
6.14. Now if this famous preacher should descend to particulars, come to you
and your three children, and say to each singly, Thou art a Jew, and thou a
Turk, thou an Atheist, and thou a Pagan, I am confident you would be ready not
only to say, but (if urged) to swear that he did you a world of wrong. And you
cannot but think the rest of the company in that Barn as ready to profess the
same as you.

8. But supose most of them had been unbelievers, yet it is impossible that he
being a stranger, and having never seen half those faces before could know it.
For nothing can be the object of any man's knowledge, but that which is as
certain as any thing can be.

9. S. Paul calls those Saints, and beloved of God, to whom he wrote, he never
called them unbelievers, though some of them were as bad as any of the people
in your barn. See Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Cor. 1.1. Ephesians. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. Col.
1.2.

10. And (as I told him) all the Protestants beyond the seas call their
Auditors in their Sermons, Fideles, that is beleivers: and he is the first man
that ever I read or heard of, who preached among a company of people who were
all baptized and professed Christianity, and yet called them unbelievers or
infidells. Entreat him from me to consider that of our Savior, Matt. 7.1. Judge
not, that ye be not judged; or that of St. Paul which was the first place I
urged against him, 1 Cor. 13.1. Though I speak, with the tongue of men, and of
Angels, and have not charity, I am as sounding brass, or a tinkling Cimball.

11. I asked him what Scripture or reason he had to prove that Christians are to
be judged at the great day, not only by the Gospel, but also the Law. He cited
Iam. 2.12. and said, that the law of Moses, was there called, the Law of
Liberty. I beseech you consult the place, and judge, you will find that not the
Law, but the Gospel is there meant, quite contrary to this man's purpose, which
I would prove by the context, if I thought it worth the while. This same Law is
called the perfect Law Iam. 1.25. Now the Law of Moses is never termed the
perfect Law in the New Testament, for it could not make the comers thereunto
perfect, Heb. 10.1. But the Gospel is termed Liberty, Gal. 5.1.13. Stand fast
in the Liberty, etc. You have been called unto liberty. By which name the Law
is no where called in all the holy Scripture. For the more ample confutation of
this his Doctrine and exposition I pray read Gall. 4. from the 19th. verse to
the end of that chapter.

12. These and several other strange passages in that little of his Sermon
that I heard (with confuting whereof I shall not trouble you now, because my
leisure is not much, and I intend this paper chiefly to a better purpose) made
me sadly think on that place of St. Peter (at the end of his 2d. Epistle) that
there be some things in St. Paul's Epistles hard to be understood, which they
that be unlearned, and unstable wrest, as they do other Scriptures to their own
destruction.

13. One of those hard places I take the Tinkers Text to be, 1 These. 4.16.
which I did not know to be his Text till next day: otherwise I should have told
him that his sermon (as far as I could hear my self, or gather by others) did
not come any nearer to that Text then to those words, Abraham begat Isaac.

14. Before I leave him let me mind you of two passages which he used to me
several times, and leave you to judge, whether he who spoke those words often
in that auditory can be a good Christian, or a man in his right wits. First, he
called me frequently fool, and giddy pated fellow, etc. Concerning which, see
Matt. 5.22. whosoever shall say to his Brother Racha (it is a Syriack word
signifying giddy-pate) shall be in danger of the Council and whosoever shall
say thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

15. Hear what St. James says, 1.26. If any man among you (though he be a
wandering preaching. Tinker, for you must give me leave to call him so, till I
know what other name he has) seem to be religious and bridle not his tongue,
that man's religion is vain. I shall not take upon me to censure him. I told him
that I had not called him any such name, nor did I think it fit, but I Will
entreat him to consider what St. Jude says 9.10. that when Michaell the
Archangell disputed with the Devil about the body of Moses he durst not bring
against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. So that if he
had been an Archangell, and I a Devil, he should not have used me (when he had
nothing to answer) as he did. Michaell durst not -- See what follows. These
speak ^vill of those things which they know not, but what they know naturally,
as br^^^ beasts in those things they corrupt themselves.

16. This minds me of his 2d. passage which I before hinted, viz. his sayin^
several times that Logic was hell bred and came from hell. A way (quoth he)
to Oxford with your hell bred Logic. Either this man knows what Logic is or
he knows not: if he knows not what it is, and railes against it, he incurre^
St. Iudes censure speaking evil of those things which he knows not, etc. And
I must, entreat him to remember the sad words of 2 Pet. 2.12. That those who as
natural bruit beasts made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of those
things which they understand not, shall utterly perish in their own corruption,
and shall receive the reward of unrighteousness. If he know what Logic is,
then he knows it is a Greek word which signifies rational, Romans 12, 1, or
rather the right way of arguing, which he reproved me for not knowing, in his
first words to me. Now to blame me for not knowing how to argue; and at the
same time (almost in the same breath) to blame me for discoursing Logically,
that is (if he understand himself) for knowing how to argue, is to speak
contradictions. And he that will do so and defend it, is no fit man to be a
Preacher, nor to talk with any rational man, much less to be followed by any
wise person.

17. And I pray ask any man in the world that knows what Logic is, whether it
does not put a difference between a man, and a beast: which proposition I
affirmed and he several times denied but would not let me prove it. He saying
'twas sin that put the difference, whereas nothing but sin can turn him, (who
in one of his books, says, if you would go to Christ, go as filthy as you can)
or any other man into a beast.

18. I shall leave his Logic, when I have told you, that I am ready to prove,
whenever you desire me, that Christ used Logic in every discourse in the
Gospel, and the Apostles in every Epistle; and that without Logic it is
impossible for any man to understand, much less to interpret, either the
Epistles, or Gospells.

19. Thus much briefly concerning the T's errors published in the barn the other
day, I could name more (for he delivered much falsity in those few words that I
heard) but I hope this will suffice to let you see clearly, he is not such a
true Preacher as you have lately took him to be. For sure if you had not took
him to be excellent, you would not have stood up in the barn several times to
defend him, and rebuke me, who offered not to speak a word till all where
coming out. And if you had not done so, but would have had half the patience to
have heard me as you had for the Tinker, I would not have troubled you with
this paper. Without which (as the case stands) I know not how to perform that
promise which you forced me to make before them all of satisfying you some
other time*

20. And now I proceed to the 2d. general head which I promised to prove viz.
That it is a dangerous sin in him to preach, as he did, and in the people, to
hear him. I argued to him thus; To do that which God strictly forbids all holy
men both under the Old and New Testament, is to commit a dangerous sins. But to
preach publicly as he did being not ordained, is to do that which God ^rictly
forbids all holy men both under the Old and New Testament, Therefore the doing
it is to commit a dangerous sin.

21. For the Old Testament, I proved that all Gods people who were not ordained
or consecrated to be Priests, were forbid to meddle with any Sacerdotall
Office, Number. 18.22, 23. Ex. 28.1. And as by these two places so by two examples
of Gods dreadful judgment upon Vzza and Vzzia, who offended against this Law.
Vzzia though he were a King (and so you will say might take more upon him then any
Subject) was withstood by the Priests, and forbid to burn incense before the
Lord. while the censure was in his hand, the Leprosy arose in his forehead, and
continued there, as a brand upon him, as long as he had a day to live, 2 Chronicles.
26.16. etc Vzza did but put forth his hand, to take hold of the Ark, to stay it
from falling, while the Oxen shook it, and presently the anger of the Lord was
kindled against him, and God smote him dead upon the place, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. To
which add the judgments that fell upon Cora and his company, who for offering
incense were swallowed up alive by the earth, Number. 16.3.39, 40 Upon Jeroboam
and his family, who for setting up Priests of the meanest of the* People, who
were not of the sons of Levi, 1 Kin. 12.13. Had those fearful curses denounced
against them, c. 14.10. I will take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam,
as a man takes away dung till it be all gone Him that dies of Jeroboam in the
City shall the Dogs eat, and him that dies in the Field shall the fouls of the
Air eat, for the Lord has spoken it*

22. For the new Testament I urged Heb. 5.4. No man takes this office to
himself, unless called of God as was Aaron. For there be Evangelical Priests
and Altars, as well Legal, which appears, Heb. 12.10. And in many other places
of that Epistle. Christ was faithful in all his house, as was Aaron, Heb. 3.2.
And if he was so faithful in his house, that is the Church, then he appointed
some to Minister, as well as Aaron did. As Aaron made Legal Priests, so Christ
Evangelical Ministers. As Aaron had an Altar, circumcision, and the passover,
so Christ, the Lords Table, Baptism, and the Eucharist.

23. When he ascended he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, etc. Till we all come in the unity of the faith; that is, till
the end of the World. He gave some Pastors, therefore not all. Every man may
not take upon him to be a Pastor, nor a Prophet, because Christ appointed only
some, Ephesians. 4.11.

24. Nor is there any thing more Evident in all the Book of God, than that
there ought to be a distinction of Sheepheards and flocks, Learners and
Teachers, some that are charged with the cure of Souls, others that are charged
to attend and obey, Heb. 13.17. Some that are separated from the affairs of
this life, that they may give themselves wholly to reading, 1 Timothy 4.5. to
exhortation to Doctrine, and therefore are to be partakers of other men's
temporals, that others may be partakers of their Spiritualls: Others to plow,
and sow, and harrow the ground, and use other lawful trades, working with,
their hands the thing that is good, that they may have to give to him that
needs.

25. I beseech you to lay aside passion, and consider some day when you retir^
from your worldly affairs, whether it be possible, that that power which at
fo^^ several times, upon four several occasions, our Blessed Savior did
mention and give to the Apostles, could expire with their persons. Some things
o^ great concernment he mentions but once in all the Scripture (as upon wha^
heads chiefly we shall be examined at the day of judgment and the speech tha^
he will then make Mat. 25.34.) And when he who was the Wisdom of the Father,
names a thing not only four times, but upon four notable occasions, can you
imagine that matter a trifle, and intended only for some very few years? The
thing which I mean, is the power not only of preaching the Gospel, and
administering the Sacraments, but also of remitting, and retaining sins, which
was mentioned by Christ. 1. Upon occasion of St. Peter's confessing him,
promising, and foretelling that he would enstate it upon the Apostles Matt.
16.19. 2ly. Upon occasion of exemplifying that necessary truth, that the chief
end of Christ's coming into the World was to save that which was lost, Matt.
18.11. He speaks of the institution of this power as evidently isntrumental to
that design, 3ly. Immediately before his final departure out of this World, he
enstated them initially in this ghostly power Ioh. 20.21.22. with significant
ceremonies and important circumstances, saying, As, my Father has sent me, so
send I you. He breathed on them and said, receive the H. Ghost. Lastly
immediately after his Ascension, sending the great promise of his Father, Luke
24.49. It Is absurd to think that this power thus insisted on by Christ, thus
given to the Apostles, was to expire with their persons; especially considering
that at his bestowing it on them, He promised to be with them, to the end of
the World, Matt. 28.20.

26. I hope you will not wonder I mention this power which our Savior gave his
Ministers of remitting and retaining sins; when I believe this very Tinker
arrogates it to himself, as well as the power to preach. For in the midst of
our forementioned dispute about his false doctrines, he breaking out into very
many impertinent di^erting questions (as asking me when I was converted? what
were the signs?) at length he demanded what were the particular sins which I
confessed to Almighty God when I last received the body and blood of Jesus
Christ? As if I were bound to confess my private sins, not only to him (when,
as I told him, God has not made you my Confessor) but also to the meanest of
all the vulgar in the Country.

27. But to proceed. The Apostle asks Romans 10.15. how shall they preach unles
they be sent? He puts the question, as if he should say, what man in his wits
can think it lawful? who that has read one leaf either of the law or Gospel?

28. Considering the examples not only of Vzza, and Vzzia, under the Old
Testament, but in the New of Matthias: who had been as well as any man else, a
witness of the Doctrine, and life, and miracles, of our B. Savior, yet was not
by any thought fit to be termed an Apostle till he had a special call to that
office Act, 1.23.

29. 2ly. Considering that Joseph surnamed Barsabas, was a witness to all this
as well as Matthias, yet never exercised the Apostleship (though it seems the
Church of Christ esteemed him fit for it) because he was not ordained thereto;
^nymore then many others who where educated in the schole of Christ as well ^s
the best.

30. 3ly. Considering that the most Blessed Jesus himself, the only begotten
son of God, often professed that he came not without being sent Io. 17.8.18. Nor
preached any thing, but what he heard, nor did any thing, but what he was
commanded: and this in a time when there was confessedly very great necessity
of Reformation. And then with what face (other then brazen) can any man now
justify the doing these things of himself, who neither pretends that he is the
Son of God, nor yet that he sees such a necessity of Reformation.

31. Lastly considering that not only those Christians who lived nearest the
times of our Savior (who probably might know more of his institution than it is
possible we at this distance should) but all succeeding ages for 1600. Years
have had a Clergy and a discipline; Certainly, Sir, we have sins as great as
any of them, the old sins to mortify (I heartily wish to God we had no new
ones too, then unheard of) and therefore certainly we stand in as much need of
Physicians as any of them did; of all the blessed remedies and wholesome
medicines against them, which our good God has appointed.

32. I might add many other places of Scripture, as 2. Cor. 5.19. God has
reconciled us to himself by Christ Jesus and given to us the Ministry of
reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ. Wherein I entreat you
to Observe that he says, committed to us the ministry of reconcilation, here
then is an appropriate Ministry not common to all the vulgar. We are
Ambassadors. It Is limited to some few by virtue of a commission. All cannot be
Ambassadors The Church is a body, and all cannot be ears, or eyes, 1. Cor.
12.14.15.16.

33. But I must not omit the answer which your friend made to, Romans 10.15. he
said he was sent by the Church of Christ at Bedford. To which I replied. 1.
That, that which he called the Church of Christ at Bedford, could not send him,
or give him power to preach, etc. Because nothing can give that which it self
has not. That Church consisting only of women and a few Laymen is not in
indeed a Church of Christ; none of them has power to preach or administer the
Sacraments, and therefore none of them can give the Tinker power to preach and
administer the Sacraments.

34. 2. The Church of Antioch was in all probability very numerous in those
days when miracles were ordinary, and three thousand were converted in one
place at one sermon: and yet in all the Scripture you shall not find by any
word, the least sign that those many people who were thus converted at Antioch
did join together in Church-duties and ordinances (as the Lords supper, which
the primitive and best Christians received every day Act. 2.42.46. and the
people of your Town have not desired, as I hear, these fourteen years) until
Barnabas and Paul had been with them. When these two who were ordained
Ministers of the word came unto them, then (and not till then) were the
Christians at Antioch termed a Church. Act. 11. from. the 20th. verse to the
27th.

35 I confess it is both lawful and laudable for private Christians to endeavor
the conversion of any that be indeed Infidels or Unbelievers to the truth of
the Gospel, or to teach children or servants the Catechism, etc. (and if this
Tink^^ had done no more, staid at Bedford, and taught his Family the Lords
Prayer, the Apostles Creed, the Ten Commandments, and the Doctrine of the
Sacraments, which things few of his followers in these parts can endure to hear
of: or if he had followed S. Paul's advice, 1 These. 4.11. studied to be quiet,
and done his own business, I should have nothing to have said against him) It Is
lawful for private Christians to do what they can to convert Jews, or Turks, or
Heathens, or Atheists, that is, to prepare stones for the building of the
Church (as the ancient Ecclesiastical stories tell us that Frumentius and
AEdesius did in India, and the captive maid in Iberia) but after they be
converted, after they are baptized, to unite these together and make up a
building, to assemble them in an Ecclesiastical body, to usurp the Pulpit and
that power which our Savior distributed, when he said All power is given to me
both in Heaven and Earth, go ye therefore and preach: This is such a piece of
presumption as we read not in the Acts of the Apostles (nor in any other
Ecclesiastical story that I have seen) that any of the primitive Christians
were ever guilty of. But all this your T. has been guilty of, and much more.
For he has not only intruded into the Pulpits in these parts, and caused the
people of your Town to hate their lawful Minister, [Mr. John Ellis sen.] but
(as he told me) encouraged them to proceed so far as to cudgel him, and break
open the Church doors by violence. I wonder what example or precept in the
Scripture he has for this. When he has read Tit. 3.2. I desire him to see his
doom, 1 Pet. 4.15. where (...), (that is one that thrusts himself in to preach
in another man's parish against his consent) is reckoned by the H. Ghost among
no honester men then a Thief and a Murderer. This will be a sad Text for him,
when the books shall be opened before him at the great Judgment day.

36. And here I give you under my hand what I professed to the T's face, that
if I could see any reason to draw me out of the true ancient Catholic and
Apostolic Church into which I was baptized (whereof the Church of England is
the soundest part, as I am ready to make appear against the Papists, and all
other new and old Schismatics and Heretics their Confederates) If I say, I
could see any reason to draw me out of that Church into your Schism, who
encourage the Tinker to preach, I see not what should stop me from running into
the worst Sect in the world; from being an Anabaptist, or Ranter, or Quaker, or
Antiscripturist, or what not.

37 Give me leave to tell you a story, (you gave the Tinker leave to tell you
several of things done at Bedford) It Is out of S. Augustines Notes on John 1.2,
3. All things were made by him. S. Austin says, that a Manichee and another
being troubled with Flies, and disputing, one of them said, he thought that our
good God could not be the Creator of such troublesome Insects. Why then replied
the other, who made the Be which is somewhat bigger, and has a sting? He
yielded that the Devil made it. From a Be they proceeded to a Locust, from a
Locust to a Lizard, so to a Bird, to a Sheep, to an Ox, to an Elephant, to a
Man. And thus was the silly man deluded into a persuasion that he himself was
not Gods Creature. Just such a dreadful Conclusion do most of these people
make, who think it lawful for a Tinker, (or a man not ordained) to preach, are
they not ready to pull down the Church walls to mend the High ways? (you know
who desired it.) To take the Bells out of the Steeple, and carry them in
Butter-panniers to London, and sell them, (you know who did it.) Do they not
cry that Sacraments are needless, mere empty Ceremonies? Preaching Foolishness?
Paul and Barnabas, the sons of the Prophets, Bablers? Are they not ready to cry
down Faith for a fancy? All Clergymen as Limbs of Antichrist? Devotion as an
emasculating trick of Machiavel. In a word if these men may prevail, down go
Presbyters as well as Bishops, Universities, Schools, Hospitals, All thoughts
of God, All Reverence to his Word, and all that is Holy. And instead of these,
in rusheth Carneades's Philosophy, that gain is Godliness: and then the poorest
hireling in the Town will soon have as much land as you, or your Heir. For men
will turn from being an orderly Commonwealth to be a Community of Bears
Tigers, to delight in tearing and devouring each other; from living in civil
conversation, they come to join hands in that grand piracy, wherein the
stronger swallow up the weaker, upon no other pretense of right or reason
imaginable, but because they are the stronger: saying with the Atheists, Wisd.
2.1^. Our strength is in the law of Justice, and that which is feeble is found
to be nothing worth.

41. But I see this paper swells above the ordinary extent of a letter and
therefore I shall draw to a conclusion, when I have spoke to one particular,
which is the common talk of this County, viz. That one of your daughters being
troubled in mind you sent for this Tinker to quiet her conscience.

42. Sr. I know you are a man of so much prudence, that if her or your
temporal life were shaken with a palsy, or the title to a parcel of your
visible estate questioned by some potent-man; you would not think it enough to
employ a cheap Attorney or an ordinary Agent, or send for some country dame to
administer her kitchen physic, but the ablest counselors and the skilfullest
Doctors should be posted to, and exceeding much wariness and diligent
attendances made use of: and all thought little enough. For truly a man's life
and health, and sometimes his estate is worth all this: and in some cases it
needs it all. But then, I beseech you, do you believe your immortal soul (for
which Jesus laid down his precious blood) the only triflle and toy about you?
Are there not a thousand dangers, and a million of difficulties and innumerable
possibilities of miscarriage? And how then comes it to pass that you think a
Tinker or mean ignorant person can serve here? If a man or woman, be sick says
St. James 5.14. let him send for the Presbyters of the Church and let them pray
over him. It Is needful certainly to have such guides (St. James knew which
were best) to steer the vessel when a stormy passion or a violent imagination
(despair or presumption) transport a man, to awaken his reason, and quicken his
devotion.

43. And truly considering how like beasts of the heard, men, both of high and
low degree do live in this age, it is but reason that there should be a deal of
retirement and initiation, industry and instruction to educate such a person,
to tame the beast within him, to subjucate his lower soul, to enlighten his
natural and ^ctuate his spiritual powers, to clear his eyesight that he may
have a plain prospect of those gaities which the worldling dotes on, and a true
sense of the realities above to instruct his understanding and judgment that he
may be able to resolve the many abstruce and intricate cases of conscience, to
confute the infinit^ company of impudent heretics and gainsayers (which St.
Paul notwithstandin^ your anger looks upon as the preachers duty Tit. 1.9.) to
prepare him for so high and difficult an employment.

44. I would now use some arguments drawn from reason and common sense to prove
it is unlawful for this Tinker to preach; but supposing that you believe
Scriptures to be the word of God, I think such arguments needless.

45. Remember that he who commits Ieroboams sin, does justly incur Ieroboams
punishment, and to hear such a person as Jeroboam set up, is to commit
Ieroboams sin: For if such men had no hearers, no applauders, they would soon
lay preaching aside; To hear him then is to partake of his sin, which the
Apostle bids us beware of Rev. 18.4. Ephesians. 5.7. Besides, he that hears such
throws his Soul unnecessarily upon temptations and out of the promise of Gods
blessings, for no blesing is promised to any, but while he is doing that which
God commands: now he commands us to hear our Sheepheards Io. 10.1. to hear
Moses and the Prophets, Matt. 16.31. and those that sit in Moses chair, Matt.
23.3. But never commanded us to hear the lowest of the people, or men not
ordained. To this I might add that the flock must be under an oversight. Act.
18.23.-20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. 1 These. 5.12. Heb. 13.17.24. A man's own pastor has a
more special dispensation of the grace of God, Ephesians. 3.2. and a pastors more
especial tie to his flock than another, argues that they are more especially
tied to him. He is appointed to feed them; they therefore to hear him.

46. I shall commend you to the work of Gods grace when I have entreated you to
consider the words of our Savior, John. 10.5. the sheep of Christ will not
hear the voice of a stranger, but will fly from him. The sheep here, are those
who shall stand at the right hand of Jesus in the day of judgment, Mat. 25.33.
(as the T. confessed when I urged this text against him) And that by a stranger
is meant an intruder into the sacerdotall office appears by comparing this
place with, Number. 16.40-1.51-3.10-18.7. And with other texts where this word is
interpreted to be one that is not a Levite one not ordein'd by imposition of
hands as the Preachers were, not only in the first and best times of
Christianity, 1. Tim. 4 15-5.22-2.22-3.10.6.13.14. 2. Tim. 1.6. Tit. 1.5. but
also ever since, in all places all ages till this.

47 And now, Sir let me beseech you for Gods sake, for Christ's sake, for his
Churches sake, for your reputation sake, for your childrens sake, for your
Countries sake, for your own immortal souls sake, to consider these things
sadly and seriously: not to think a Tinker more infallible then the pu^^ spouse
of Christ, the Church of all ages mentioned in your creed, but to search the
Scriptures (...) Canon whereof you receive merely upon the authority of that
Church and to foresee what will be (...) sad consequence both to the souls and
bodies and estates of you and your children in following (...) strangers,
Entreating you to peruse also this enclosed printed paper against
Lay-preachers, I bes^^^ the Lord to give you and yours understanding in all
things: remaining.

Your faithful Servan^ in Christ Jesus,
Caucat. May.

