Mr. SMITH'S SPEECH In Parliament, made in the House of Commons, On Wednesday
the 29. of DECEMBER, 1641.

Concerning the late tumultuous Assemblies about the Parliament Houses.

LONDON, Printed for A. R. 1641.

Master Smith his Speech the 29, of December, 1641.
Master Speaker,
THe business we have now in agitation concerning the Irish Affairs, and the
Treaty with the Scottish Commissioners for their timely assistance of Aid
(being to be determined this day) is of great consequence and weight, even of
such importance, that I have not read of greater, when the greatest troubles
were in that Kingdom in Queen Elizabeth her Reign of good Memory, these
troubles with them being comparatively similized are of far greater danger;
And I would to God we might so agree with the Lords, that a speedy concurrence
might be with the Scots, toward their relief in Ireland.

Yet notwithstanding (Master Speaker) the greatness of this Rebellion and most
outrageous Cruelties committed daily by the Rebels, hazarding nearly the loss
of that Kingdom (without speedy help, which takes up all our debates and
arguments) if we remove not therewithal such impediments here at home, as do
hinder our speedy proceeding not only in that business, but in the settling of
the peace and quiet of this Kingdom, all our endeavors in the suppressing the
Rebels in Ireland will little avail.

Master Speaker,
Under favor of this honorable Assembly I entend to give you a touch of such
Lets which do much hinder us, as I (conceive) in expediting the great Affairs
of Church and State, and our proceedings against such Incendiaries and
Delinquents in the same.

We have daily you know, Master Speaker, received Petitions from the Citizens
of London, some of them having been delivered by good hands, and men of good
worth and quality, which we have willingly taken, and I doubt not but we
shall in due time give them good satisfaction in answering of them.

Likewise we have received Petitions from abrupt and disordered persons
without any matter that may deserve our consideration, but are more fitter to
be rejected as I under favor conceive.

But Master Speaker, that which I intend to intimate to you, as the greatest
stop in our proceedings, is the riotous, and tumultuous Assembly of vain and
idle persons, who presume to begirt our House, not only in an irregular manner
to prefer their Petitions, but with open clamor would prescribe us what
laws to in act, and what not; and what persons to prosecute, and who not.

These tumultuous persons, Master Speaker, take up a great deal of our
precious time in Answering and appeasing of them, when as I conceive other
business more nearly concerning the welfare and security of his Sacred
Majesty, and his Kingdoms, lies even as it were gasping, and ready to perish
for want of our timely assistance.

Master Speaker, Our Patience I persuade my self is one of the greatest causes
that Animates, and encourages these illegal outrages, and if some rebukes were
ministered from the House to them, they would not surely be so Audacious.

It is true Master Speaker, I confess it, that their Trading is decayed, and
hard for them, (many of them) to subsist with their Families, by reason of the
slow proceedings against Delinquents, the reason whereof they are incapable of,
neither as I conceive should they be made acquainted therewith; otherwise then
to understand that their unseasonable, and unfitting repair to the House, is
one principal cause thereof.

Therefore Sir, I conceive if some speedy course were taken for the suppressing
these tumults, by a strict guard about the House, with a Command, not only by
persuasions to avert their resort hither, but to shoot at them if they
obstinately refuse to be persuaded, it will be the best and speediest means
to repel them.

Likewise that in the City of London and Suburbs (by some trusty Officers,
appointed by the House for that service) diligent search may be made for
Papists and Recusants to apprehend them, if they find them Armed with any
weapons, and bring them before a Committee for Examination appointed for that
purpose. Which is my humble motion,

For, Master Speaker, the Papists resort as well as others hither to several
places, as I am informed, which as these tumultuous persons pretend, is one
great cause of their meeting here, which if they perceive, that they be
prosecuted according to the Laws of this Kingdom in that case inacted, they
conceive they shall have less cause to trouble us.

And truly Sir, may I speak my mind really herein, I persuade my self, that
unless the Laws be put in execution with severity against some of the
greatest Recusants, to make them exemplary to the rest, and that with speed,
neither this City, nor other places of this Kingdom can be secure from their
devilish practices and plots, and that our too favorable proceeding against
them, if so continued, may cause our too late repentance, if any of their
perverse and wicked stratagems should take effect, which God forbid, and I
heartily wish that such course may be taken by the blessing of the Almighty on
our endeavors, that for ever all the Inhabitants of his Majesty's Kingdoms
that are true Christians, and Loyal Subjects, may lie down in peace, and rise
in safety, to which I shall always say, Amen.

FINIS.

