A TRUMPET Sounded in the Ears OF PERSECUTORS;

WITH Lowing of Oxen, and Cows; Bleating of Sheep; Neighing of Horses; Ratlings
of Pots, Kettles, Skillets, Dishes, and Pans.

Taken from an Innocent People, for Confessing Christ Jesus, Gods Everlasting
WAY out of Evil; and for their Meeting together in his Name, where Gods
Presence is felt, to Support, and carry above the fear of Man.

To Awaken them out of their Security, which whilst they have been a Sleep,
they have taken up in Malice and Envy.

Stephen Smith.

Isa. 51.22.23. Thus says the Lord God, even God that pleads the Cause of
his People, Behold I have taken out of thine hand the Cup of Trembling, even
the Dreggs of the Cup of my Wrath, thou shall drink it no more -- But I will
put it into their hand that spoil thee, etc.

Printed in the Year, 1670.

A TRUMPET Sounding in the Ears of all Persecutors, to awaken them out of their
dead Sleep, in which they have taken Prey from the Innocent; who have made
themselves Drunken with Malice and Envy, and so, Nabal like, are saying, What
are these, that we should regard them, etc.
Come Persecutors, Awake, Awake; hearken how the Cows and the Oxen Low in your
Ears; when you lie down to Sleep, does not their Lowing trouble you? And when
you rise, are not you tormented at the Noise of their Lowing? Sleep as secure
as you can, you will be awakened at last; and then the Noise of the Lowing of
Cows and Oxen will sound in your Ears: In your Lying down, in your Rising up;
in your Eating, and Drinking; in your going about your Business; it will be a
dreadful Noise, when the Cause of the Innocent, whom you have wronged, comes to
be laid before you.

Come Persecutors, Awake, Awake, hearken; Do you not hear the Bleating of
Sheep, which have been taken from an innocent People, for keeping the Commands
of Jesus? Stop your Ears as hard as you can, they will be opened at last; and
their Bleating will be so loud sounded in your Ears, that you cannot avoid the
terrible Noise thereof.

Come Persecutors, Awake, awake; hearken what a dreadful Noise is amongst the
Pots, Kettles, Skillets, Frying-pans, Dripping-pans, Pewter-dishes, Flagons,
Chamber-pots, etc. the which have been taken from an innocent People, for
keeping their Conscience void of Offense toward God and man; that men take
offense against the Innocent, when no Proof can be made thereof; that is the
steps of the Wicked in all Ages: But hearken Persecutors, sure you are not so
fast a sleep, but that you may hear the Rattling of these things in your Ears;
well, they will make a fearful Noise at last.

Come Persecutors, Awake, awake; open your Eyes, they will be opened at last,
and then the Beds, Cloths, Corn, Hoggs, Horses, Butter, Cheese, Bacon, and all
sorts of commodities taken from Tradsmen, out of their Shops, and working
Instruments from poor people, Shoe-Leather, and abundance of other things, too
long to name; all taken from an Innocent Harmless People, who seek the good and
well-being of all men: At last all these things shall be laid before your Eyes,
you shall not be able to shut them against them, nor to stop your Ears from the
several dreadful Noises; but they must sound in your Ears, and you must know,
that all these doings proceed from a corrupt rotten heart and mind, which is
abhorred by the living God.

And now after all the Spoil, that has been made on the Goods and persons of
an innocent People, many of whose Bloods have been shed in your Streets,
witness Horslydown Meeting: After all this, the matter of Fact which the
innocent People, called Quakers, have bin accused of, it has not at all bin
proved against them; neither has there been any cause of a ground given to
suspect their Meetings to be any ways tending to Sedition, etc. they having
been always peaceable on their parts; and therein the Peace and Well-being of
all has been sought? When you are awakened, and the Book opened wherein your
Wickedness is recorded; then will the Meetings of the People of God, called
Quakers, appear unto you to be as aforesaid. And so all you, who are wondering
at a Peoples standing still in silence to wait upon the Living God, to receive
Counsel from him, that by the same they may be guided in the Way and Path of
Life: Would it not be good if all would do the same? And not run forward in
Satan's Counsels, in Envy, Hatred, and Malice, till you come to be bitten and
devoured, one of, and by another: What is it the near to have the Names of
Christians, when there is none of Christ's Spirit or Nature in you. Be not
Deceived, the Living God will not be Mocked; though in his tender Mercy, he
has yet spared many Vials of Wrath, and has not poured them forth, but
instead thereof he has caused many to go out in his Dread, and Fear to
testify of his Good Will, upon repentance and amendment of life; but that Love
having been slighted, the contrary will come heavy at last; and then your
courage and valor which you have exercised against an innocent People, that
will fail you; and Fear, and Trembling, and Amazement, that will seize upon
you. Brambles and Thorns, whose nature is to Tear and Rend, cannot stand
against a consuming Fire.

Come, hearken all that have had a Finger in this Dish; Have you not betrayed
your Master? are you not called Christians? and should not Christians have all
one Master? Did not the name of Christian come by him who is Master of all, and
has all Power in Heaven and Earth? And was it not given to them who came out
of the Heathenish nature, who came under the Power, which was manifest to
destroy the works of the Devil, and the nature of the Devils power, which is to
Rend, Tear, and Devour; coming in Tr^op, as he did upon Jobs Goods, in Troops
of Caldeans, and Bands and Troops of Sabeans? So have not you, who are in the
same works now, as the Sabeans and Caldeans were then (in spoiling the Goods of
innocent men, who love that which is Good, and hate that which is Evil? Have
not you betrayed your Lord and Master, having given your selves up to serve a
wicked Ruler, he that is prince of the power of Darkness, who has his rule in
his Servants, who are departed from their obedience to him who is Lord and
Master of all, and ought to be served and feared by all; since there is no
blessing, nor any thing that is good, but what is of him, and from him, who
created all, and upholds all, who is Lord of all blessed for ever.

Come, be awakened, and hearken; Where do you find (by the Example or Doctrine
of Christ Jesus, who is Lord of all, and has all Power in Heaven and Earth) or
do you read of any such works aforementioned, done by him or his Followers? No,
no, you have betrayed him, who call him Lord, and yet live in such works of
malice and revenge; he taught, and teaches quit contrary, even to learn of him,
who is meek and lowly in heart, admonishing all to love one another, and to do
good for evil, and to love Enemies; who dwells with them that are of a contrite
and humble spirit, who teaches the humble and meek, and who washes and
cleanses his Followers from their filth, as in days past, so to day and for
ever. Oh you betrayers of him, who have rendered him a hard Master, in that you
deny him; for he is righteous just and true, and gives power to them that
receives him, and obeys him patiently, to bear the reproaches, of the wicked,
and to undergo their cruel mockings, scoffings and spoilings, till his pleasure
is to plead the cause of the Innocent, who have no arm of Flesh, nor carnal
Weapon; but their trust is in him who is Lord of all, unto whom all Tongues
must confess, and every Knee must bow; though for a while, the Wicked, with
their Ruler the Devil, may be loose, he must be chained at last, and cast into
the Lake of Fire, where their part and portion will be, who continues serving
him (a sad Bargain.) So all you Betrayers of the just holy Principle of Light
and Life in your own hearts, be awakened, come see what a Dream you have been
in, and what Dreamers you have followed, who are out of the Way of the Lord,
and yet for lucre sake, by art and policy, keeps people confessing they are out
of the Way of the Lord, persuading them its not to be found, or as if there
were no such thing.

Oh, be awakened, and see what a Dream you are in, and what filly Dreamers
these are, who have put from them Christ, the Way* the Truth and the Life, by
which all that ever comes to God, it must be by him, whom many have found, so
cannot but confess him before men, there being no other way out of Evil, and
which brings and leads to peace; this is a perfect Way, and tried Way, into
which no Unclean Person, nor Envious Person can come into; he must forsake his
Envy, and Uncleanness, and all the Devils works, if ever he comes there.

Come, don't stot your Ears, and shut your Eyes, it will all be in vain; for he
that is Lord, Master and Creator of all, sees and beholds all, you can hide
nothing from him, and he will call you to an Account; then, what can the
Betrayers say?

Oh, you whose days are not quite over, consider what you are a doing, and
what you are treasuring up; Malice, Envy and Hatred are from a corrupt root and
ground, which is for Cursing.

Come, be awakened, cease to do evil, then learn to do well, if happily you may
obtain Mercy; restore the Pledge and repent: Keep nothing back that has been
taken by violence.

Be awakened, and see how filthy your hands are, through Malice and Cruelty,
which has brought a filthy Smell and Curse upon your Estates; a sad Portion
for your Children, for their Fathers to die with their Estates entailed in the
Curse, the which can never be removed, from Father or Child, till the cause of
the Curse be repented of, and done away, and so the hands washed in innocence;
until which time every one shall bear his own Iniquity, because of the accursed
thing that is in their hands.

So out of love to Truth, and good will to all is this written, whatever
construction you may make thereof, into whose hands it may come; yet in his
sight who sees all things, I am cleared, that herein I wish the good of all.

The 10th of the 8th Month, 1670. Stephen Smith.

THE END.

