ANTICHRIST in Man: OR A discovery of the Great WHORE that sits upon many
Waters, Wherein is declared what that Whore or inward Mystery is; together with
the destruction thereof, by the powerful appearing of Christ in us.

By JOSEPH SALMON, a Member of the ARMY.

Rev. 18.2. And he cried mightily with a strong voice saying, Babylon is
fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and a cage of every
unclean and hateful bird.

Ver. 20. Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles, and Prophets,
for God has avenged you on her.

LONDON Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Black
spread Eagle at the west end of Paul's.

To all those who desire to be acquainted with the Mystery of Godliness, and
especially to those my beloved friends and Brethren in the Lord, with whom I
have formerly walked in outward formal Communion, both in City and Country.
MY dear friends, whose I am in the bowels of unfeigned love; considering with
my self, that there is nothing more requisite to be known, then these two
great mysteries, the mystery of godliness, and the mystery of iniquity; and
likewise pondering how much all flesh is opposite to the discovery of these two
mysteries; I have presumed to dictate my thoughts unto you in this small
Treatise, wherein I have briefly and infirmely discovered unto you, what the
Lord has manifested unto me of the spirit of Antichrist, that is in all of us:
It may be that I may be supposed, by many of you, in this little volume, to
endeavor the subvertion and overture of that form and discipline that you for
the present walk in; but I assure you from the truth of my heart, that I intend
no such thing; but shall rather encourage any of you to continue in that
dispensation, where the Tord does manifest himself to you in the same: only
this know dear friends, that the Lord has his movings toward his people, to
some he shows himself more clearly; to seem more obscurely; to some he makes
the flesh of Christ comfortable, and joyful; that is, the discovery of
himself in flleshly dispensations; to others he crucifies his own flesh (as I
may so say) that is, dies, departs, goes away in the flesh, or fleshly forms
and dispensations; and this is my condition for the present; I were a wretch if
I should deny the appearances of God to me in that way you now for the present
stand in; but now it has pleased God to move out of these things to me, I now
see, that all the knowledge of Christ that they could set out to me, was but o
knowledge of him after the flesh; in a word, I see that Christ has crucisied
himself to me, in all these things in which before I enjoyed his fleshly
presence; insomuch that I now wait with the Disciples, where Jesus has
appointed me, even at the gates of wisdoms house, and at the posts of wisdoms
doors, for the return of the Spirit; for I believe this departed Jesus will
come again, but it shall he in Spirit; not in flesh; and will make himself to
be that substance to me really, which I catched at in the shadow typecally; and
this, through mercy, I do in some measure enjoy, and though in much
imperfection, yet so sweetly, that henceforth I desire to know Christ after the
flesh no longer.

Now as concerning this Treatise it self, I desire you to look upon it as
coming from a Child in the understanding of the divine things of God, and if
you suppose your selves to have come to more maturity in divinity then my
self, and that you think that you can speak in more glory then I have done, I
hope you will be so muh the more engaged to pass a charitable censure upon the
stammerings of my Infancy: If any of you shall notwithstanding testify any
rigednesse of spirit against me in this particutar; herein I joy and rejoice,
that the Lord in his time will bring you to live so in the light of that Sun,
as that you shall see all your now present light, to be darkness, and your
form to be flesh, and then you will not be bitter against any poor Saint,
that desires to enjoy God in a more high dispensation then your selves; in the
mean time, I desire your prayers to the Lord for me, and I shall for ever
commit you into his hands, who I hope ere long will dye to you in all these
outward things, as he has to me, and by his rising and second coming in you,
will so manifest himself to you, that you shall see him to be the spiritual
water, bread and wine, without and beyond all these types, and shadows; which
is the daily prayer of him who still professes himself to be your brother, by
that one Baptism of that one spirit, into that one body; and for ever remain
yours til death.

Joseph Salmon.

ANTICHRIST in Man: OR The discovery of the great WHORE that sits upoh many
waters.
THere has been much controvercy about the finding out of this great Whore;
that spirit of Antichrist, which God shall judge, and whom Christ shall
destroy, by the breath of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming: and in
this eager persuit of her, to find her out in her scarlet colors, riding upon
the Beast; some men have atained to glimmerings, some to a more perfect
discovery of her; some there are that affirm this great Whore to be the Pope;
some the Presbyter, some the Episcopacy; now these men have seen the Whore but
in a fleshly discovery, they take the fruit for the tree, the stream for the
fountain; in a word, they have seen her outside, but not her inside; they know
her in the History, but not in the Mystery; for upon her Forehead is written,
MYSTERY, BABYLON, THE GREAT, etc. Rev. 17.5.

Know therefore O man, whomsoever thou art! that judge the whore by these
carnal conceptions of her, that thou art far deceived by her, in her fleshly
appearances to thee:

Thus while the sons of men seek to behold this Strumpet in her proper sphere
and center, they deceive themselves, by looking too fleshly and carnally upon
her: know first then O man! that this great whore is in thee, whilst thou
seek to behold her without thee, whilst thou beholdest her in other men,
she is in the mean time acting in a Mystery in thee: whilst thou despisest
the appearance of her in other men, she has by guile caught thee, and by her
Mysterious workings ensnared thee; and has stolen thy heart from God and good
ness, she imbraceth the in her arms; she kisseth thee with her mouth; she
deceives thee by her flatteries, whilst thou think thou have nothing to
do with her; she is in thy bosom, whilst thou think she is far distant
from thee; and this is done in a mystery and thou see it not.

Now then looking upon this Whore spiritually, not carnally; in us, and not out
of us; in the Mystery, and not in the histery: once more let us make
inquisition after her, and endeavor to find her out in all her subtle and
close corners. For thy better attaining to the discovery of her consider;

First, what this great Whore is.

Secondly, how she works, and what pretenses she deludes the soul by.

Thirdly, how a soul comes to attain a sight of her.

Fourthly, and lastly, how and when, she shall be destroyed: and thus we may
attain to a sight of Babylon, with her Rise, and her downfall.

First what is the Whore?

This Whore, this Babylon, this Antichrist, Is thy fleshly wisdom; that
spiritual Serpent thou art deceived by, and commitest fornication with all, is
the wisdom of the flesh, the carnal Policy of the creature.

This was that Antichrist that appeared in, and to our first Parents, and that
which they harlotryed with, from the Lord: God He created Adam blind and naked,
to this end, that Adam might not see, but God for him; nor Adam might not know,
but what God knew in him, and for him; and so this Adam, though blind and
naked, yet clothed with such divine Robes, as were altogether inconsistant to
fleshly Adam; so here was God All, the Creature Nothing.

But now comes the Serpent, which is, the subtilest beast in man's worldly
heart; namely, Self, and Flesh; and that dispences its wisdom into the heart
of the Creatures, and that bids them eat, for then their eyes should be opened,
and they should be as Gods, knowing good and evil. Now man desiring (by the
report of fleshly-wisdome) to have his eyes opened, and to be as God, and to
be no more a subject, but a King; no longer governed, but a governor; runs
away from God, departs from his first Lover, and commits adultery with his own
fleshly wisdom: And as Adam, in the History; so all in the Mystery, commit
daily fornication with the Whore our fleshly wisdime; by cating of the
forbidden Tree; for this forbidden Tree, is in us, and we taste of it
continually; and howerly suffer death for the same:

This Garden of Eden, in the Mystery, O man! is in thee; in whom God has
placed the manifestation of him self, and has brought forth the budings of his
glory; and any of these thou may Eat; but there is a Tree in the midest of
this Gard^n of which thou may not eat; which is thy heart, O man! this must
^e reserved wholly to the Lord; this God calls for, Prove. 23.28. my son give me
thy heart: that ^s, thou must ascribe nothing to thy self; but give over al man
in to my hands, and willing to be no more, then I will be in thee; and to know
no more then I shall know for thee; this is, that forbidden Tree that God would
not have us eat of: but whole man, with his wisdom, Reason, Judgment,
Affections, Will and Understanding, must be given to the Lord: but now comes
this Serpent our subtle fleshly wisdom, in us; and that thinks much to let God
be all, do all and have the glory of all: ^ut it would feign see with its own
eyes, and ^ee a God unto its self; so it forsakes all the ^est of the Trees,
which God has given it to ^ate of; namely, the manifestation of God in ^he
soul; and takes of its own fruit, and eats ^f that feast that flesh has
provided; and so ^orsakes the fountain, and runs to the broken Ci^ernes; Jer.
2.13. and thus our eyes comes to ^ee opened; and we see no longer light, in
Gods light; but with the eye of self and reason, saying to a stock, thou art my
Father, and to a ^one, thou have brought me forth; Jer. 2.27. that is,
^tributing nothing to God, but all to fleshly ^isdome; with which we have
Adulterated and Harlotrized from the Lord.

Thus O man! thou see what that great Whore is, and where she lies; even in
the inmost closets of thy soul. Now that thou may be farther convinced,
that this wisdom of the flesh, is the Antichrist, the great Whore: do but
first consider the Names, and secondly the Nature of her.

Eirst, her Names in Scripture are diverse, a first, she is called Antichrist,
which is as much as to say, against Christ: Now man as a creature is not
against Christ; but the wisdom of the flesh in man, this is against Christ,
and so, consequently the great Wore, or Antichrist.

Secondly, She is called Babylon, in Scripture, Rev. 17.5. Rev. 18.2. which is
as much as to say, confusion, now all confusion that (...) wrought either in
Pope, Presbyter, or any other particular State, is by the wisdom of the flesh
therefore this is that great Babylon.

Thirdly, She is called that wicked one, (...) These. 3. ver. 8. Now all the
actual wickedness that proceeds from the sons of me^ flows from that
original within, even the wisdom of the flesh; therefore the wisdom o^ the
flesh, is that great wicked one, which is t^ be destroyed.

Fourthly, She is called the Mother of Harlo^^nd abominations of the earth,
Rev. 17.5. No^ what is the Mother of Harlots, surely this cannon ^ either the
Pope, or any other particular ^tate; for if the Pope be the Mother of Harlots,
^en I demand who, or what, is the Mother of is Harlotry? Then what, or who, is
the Mo^er of Harlots? Why she is in us all in a mystery; (...) is the wisdom
of the flesh in man, which ^ the Mother of all the abomination which is
ommitted against the Lord.

This is that Aanti-christ; this is Babylon; ^ere is the wicked one; this is
the Matron of all ^iquity; out of the womb of fleshly wisdom ^roceeds all that
actual transgression that is ^ommitted against the Lord: All outward
ap^earances of sins, are but the Bastards of this Whore, the children of this
strange Woman, and ^he Brats of this great Adulteress; and happy, ^ea, thrice
blessed shall that man be called, who shall take and dash these children of the
Whore against the stones; This man is Christ, who shall come in power and great
glory in a Christian, and destroy, and dash in pieces the conceptions,
bringings forth, and appearances of fleshly wisdom in us: as we shall show
more at large hereafter.

Thus we have endeavored to discover the whore what she is by her Names given
her in Scripture; whereby thou may understand, that the Whore does not
consist of any outward State or fleshly appearances to thee: but upon her
Forehead; which is her most op^ and palpable workings, there is written
Mystery.

2. That this great Whore may yet mo^ fully appear to be the wisdom of the
fle^ in thee, do but consider the nature of the Whore in brief, and so we
shall have done wit^ the first quaere, Namely, What the Whore is?

Now the Nature of this whore is two-fould^ 1. Opposing; 2. Exalting; both
which you may fin^ attributed to Antichrist, or the Whore: in tha^ 2. These. 2,
4. she apposeth Christ or God; and therefore called Antichrist: Now see O man
(...) whether this Whore be not thy fleshly wisdom (...) look into thy soul,
and behold and see, how opposite thy fleshy wisdom, is to any thing that is
good or goodness: what means those often resistings of the Spirit in thee, O
man? See thou not how the whore deceives thee? What conception, bringing
forth, or appearance of God is there in thee, but the wisdom of the flesh,
seeks to devour it, by violent attempts and oppositions, therefore the text
says ver. 17.6. That the whore was drunk with the blood of the Saints; and
Martyrs of Jesus: How has this mystical whore the wisdom of the flesh,
martyred the appearances of Christ in thee, so that indeed she is drunk with
the blood of many a sanctified motion of the Spirit in thee? The wisdom ^f the
flesh is, that mystical Saul, that hunts sf ter the blood of David; which is,
the tender ^ppearance of God in the soul; this it is that sucifieth the Lamb a
fresh, and puts him to o^^n shame; and all this is done by that blou^^ whore
that harbors in thy bosom.

The wisdom of the flesh is, that bond-slave, ^^at always presents wisdoms
Children and the ^^ildren of the free Woman; which are the bring^^gs forth of
Jesus in thee; In a word, this is ^^at great Red Dragon, spoken of in Rev.
12.3, (...) who stands before the Woman; which is, a ^^ristian, under the
panges of the new birth, ^ady to be delivered of the blessed child Jesus; whose
heart, God is begetting himself, in (...) own form and Image: this I say, is
that ^^agon, even the wisdone of the fiesh, which is ^^dy to devour the sweet
Babe, even Jesus, with (...) form and feature in the soul, and endea^^rs to
make it an obhortive:

^^is is that mystical Heroad, that seeks the ru^^of the appearance of God in
our flesh: and ^s you see what the opposing nature of the ^ore is; who for her
bloody opposition asnst the manifestations of God in his peo(...) shall have
blood to drink, when she shall ^ound worthy.

^. We now proceed to the other qualifica^n of the Nature of this whore; which
is, a High, Proud, Lofty, asspiring Nature; being manifested by two things:

1. In that she will get into Gods Temple^; (...) These. 2.4. 2. In that she
will therein exa^ her self above all that is called God, and she will be a god
to her self: Behold O man! (a^ it were in a glass) the true Viseognime an^
perfect Portrature of thy fleshly wisdom.

First then, consider, that thy heart is tha^ Temple of God, where this great
Whore siteth therefore, mind the Apostle 1. Cor. 3.16. Kno^ ye not that ye
are the Temple of God; as also Ch^^ 6.19. Now, thou being this Temple of Go^
thy fleshly wisdom is that Antichrist; tha^ Whore, that sits in thine heart;
thou art th^^ Beast, that this Whore rides upon, Rev. 17. (...) for the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 49.12. that M^ being in honor, abides not; but is like
the heast the perishes: here may thou see, O man! the pri^ of the wisdom
of the flesh, that no plac wi^^ serve her, but Gods Temple the heart of man that
God has set apart for the praise of his glor^ does this Whore make her Beast,
by bringi^^ it to be subject to her dominion; this Temple of God, tobe that den
of the every: whi^^ God has made for his own honor and di^nity.

Secondly, the exalting Nature of the who is seen, not only by her climing up
into Go^ Temple, and so becomes that Lucifer, that fell down to hell: but also
by her behavior in Gods Temple; She exalts her self above all that is called
God; She sits as God in Gods Temple, in a place where She has no right to Rule
and govern:

Behold here, O Christian! another proper Emblem of the wisdom of the flesh in
thee: How does this Whore, this Mystical Babylon exalt her self above every
appearance of God in thee; in so much as her Tail draws the third part of the
Stars of Heaven, and casts them down to the Earth, which is in me? That Reason,
Will, Affections and Judgment, which are as the civil powers and lights of
the soul, all these are drawn after this beast: so that indeed, She now is
the Lady of the Kingdoms, Jsa. 47.7. nay, ver. 8. I am, and there is non else
besides me: this wisdom of the flesh is that which will not allow the Child
Jesus any room in the Inn of thy heart: but thrusts him into the Manger; which
is, under the meanest thoughts, poorest respects, and lowest love of thy soul:
but in the mean time, this whore her self takes the largest rooms, and highest
chambers; that is, She is most supreme in thy affections; with the greatest
love, honor, and respect that may be: thus does this whore the wisdom of the
flesh, exalt her self as God; yea, and that in Gods Temple; where She has no
right to rule and govern; for the Apostle tells us that we are not our own: but
are bought with a Price; that is, we are to own no Lord, but he that has
bought us: to render no obedience or servitude to any, but to that God who in
our flesh has Redeemed us; according to the Commandment, Thou shall have none
other gods but^e: but self, flesh, and creature will be God in Gods Kingdom;
which causes God to take up a complaint against his people of old; Have I
been a barren wilderness unto thee; or a Land of darkness; whersore then say
my people, we are Lords, we are Lords? and we will come no more after thee?

Now the creature running astray from the Lord, commits fornication with the
great Whore the wisdom of the flesh; attributing all Power, Glory, Salvation
and happiness, to selfish wisdom: and therefore Babylon says on this wise,
Jsa. 14.13. I will ascend into Heaven; I will exalt my throne above the Stars
of God: which is, when the wisdom of the flesh is exalted above the highest
sphere of divine light in the soul: nay, ver. 17. I will be like the most High.

Behold O man! the aspiring, exalting nature of thy carnal wisdom: The
wisdom of the Serpent would needs have Adam to be as God; and to see by his
own eyes, and to walk by his own light; which Serpent is nothing in the Mystery
but the wisdom of the flesh, carrying the soul above that center that God has
seated it in; causing thee to walk by her blaze, and not in Gods light to see
light; to hate, scorn, and put a mean estimation upon any motion of God or
goodness; always thinking thy way the best, and thy council the safest; and
thus does this Whore thy fleshly wisdom, exalt her self above all that is
called God in thee; and sits as God in thy soul, which is Gods Temple. So much
for answer to the first question; namly, what this great whore is.

Now thou, having attained some spiritual discovery of this whore, both by her
Names and Nature; it remains, that we proceed in answer to the second
question: which is, Namely;

How this Whore works, and what pretenses She deludes the soul by:

Now therefore, know O man! that this whore works in a mystery; upon her
Forehead is written Mystery, Rev. 17.

When Antichrist, or thy fleshly wisdom is most apparent in any sinful
action; yet in that appearance, She is very Mystical: So that sindeede, upon
her most open workings in the heart; there is written Mystery:

It is a property of a Strumpet to pretend what she does not intend to her
Lovers: be^old a Character of the Mother of Harlots, thy fleshly wisdom; She
is very subtle of heart; Prove. 7. She always pretends, what she never
intends: So that here, all is well in the History; but meare deceit and
delusion in the Mystery: this whore, She will present a glorious show; but
there is nothing but wickedness and Harlotry intended:

This is that Spiritual Judas, that will Betray thee with his salutations: you
shall find this whore in a religious Dress, many times; that hereby she may
deceive the heart of the simple: Observe how the Harlot in Prove. 7. beguiled
the young Man; She caught him, and Kissed him; ver. 13. and with an impudent
face, said unto him; I have peace Offerings with me; this day I have paid my
vows: this whore in the Mystery, is thy fleshly wisdom; and thou art this
simple young Man; who art deluded by her. Behold therefore, O man! the
impudency, and bouldness of this spiritual Whore; She is not ashamed to show
her Forehead to thee: But here is a Mystery all this while, that thou see
not.

Now therefore know, Oh Christian! that this whore appears to thee in all thy
spiritual performances and Sacrifices to the Lord: if thou do but observe,
thou shall see her appear in Prayer, in Humiliation, in Fasting; nay, in all
outward Ordinances; thou shall see thy fleshly wisdom in all these things,
steal thy heart from the Lord, by attributing something to form, flesh, and
creature: so that we are apt oft-times to bless our selves in our spiritual
performances, and sing a Requiem to our selves in our fleshly forms; so that
hereby, all our duties are but the Sacrifices of the Whore, the vows of our
fleshly wisdom, which She appeared in, to delude us:

Now, woe and alas for us! that ever we should be deceived by this whore, in
those things wherein we think is least appearance of her; but here is plainly
seen her mystical apparition:

This whore meets thee, O man! in all thy religious performances; and there
does She attribute all the goodness of all that is done, to her self; and thou
also give consent to it; and to commit Fornication with her: hence it is that
the woman is said, Rev. 17. to have a Golden Cup in her hand, full of
abominations, and filthiness of her fornications; a golden Pot, but a bitter
potion.

This Serpent, our fleshly wisdom, appears to us with her speckled Skin; but
within her, there is deadly Poison: Beware then of this whore, in all her
glorious appearances, and golden manifestations; for all this is but to ensnare
thy heart with her treachery: the wisdom of the flesh will meet thee many
times arrayed in Purple, and Scarlet; colored, and decked with Gold; which in
the Mystery, are nothing else but shows of glory to thee: She will meet thee
in good performances; and there she will salute thee; and tell thee that thy
good duties have prevailled with God for thee; and She will tell thee, because
thou art under such an outward form, and carnal dispensation, that therefore
thou art better then other Christians, which enjoy God in a more spiritual
making out of himself: thus She will endeavor to make thee drink of her
Fornication, by proposing her golden Cup to thee: and thus poor s^duced man,
commits folly with himself; or his own wisdom in all outward worship
whatsoever, forsakes God, in praying, fasting, mourning, and all outward
forms; and is carried away more with the decency, order and trimnesse of the
whore, in an outward dispensation; then the Power and life of Godlyness, that
God requires in a Christian: and so much shall suffice for the setting forth of
the first delusive pretense of the Whore; which is, to array her self in her
glory, the better to effect her design upon the poor creature.

2 The design of Antichrist, or thy fleshly wisdom, is always to bring thee
out of love with God: O! its death to the whore, when she sees that thou
desire to be constant to thy Husband Jesus; who has espoused thee to
himself; and therefore, She is still laboring to bring thee out of love with
Christ, and God:

And this She labors to effect, by causing of thee to think that God does not
love thee; that so hereby, She might estrange thy heart from the Lord.

It is the work of this Serpent, to raise in our hearts hard thoughts of God:
all poor afflicted souls, whoever you are that grieve under the pangs of an
accusing conscience; harken, behold and consider! how the wisdom of the flesh
deludes you, by causing you to look upon God in the glass of flesh and
creature; and so hereby, to apprehend him to be what he is not:

Poor soul, thou tellest me there is no mercy in a Christ for thee; and
prithee why so? Oh, Alas! God loves me not, he is offended at me, and
displeased with me; I have been so vile a sinner against him.

Now all this while, the poor soul does but look upon God according to the
dictates of selfish wisdom; and so it apprehends God to be like it self: Thou
thoughest (says God) that I had been altogether such a one as thy self:
Because we are angry with God many times, therefore we are apt to think God is
froward with us; whereas, God is love, says the Apostle; Ephesians. 1. John, 4. and
therefore God tells us, that his thoughts are not our thoughts, nor our ways,
his ways; Jsa. 55.

The wisdom of the flesh eudeavours to put out, and extinguish the light of
God in a Christian; whereby the soul might see God to be purely Love and mercy;
and will propose its own glass to the creature; which renders God to be what
he is not, to man's apprehension:

So that when the soul would fain be refreshed, with the comfortable aspect of
Gods presence; then comes fleshly wisdom, and tells the soul it must not behold
God according to his Love; but according to its own Iniquity; and so here by,
dasheth the soul upon the rock of desperation; in so much that the poor
creature now concludes, that God is angry with him, and is resolved not to show
him mercy.

Now when the Whore has thus estranged the heart from the Lord, by persuading
the soul, that either, God is not able, or willing to help it in its misery:
then She propoundes her own way to the creature; She will persuade the creature
never to go to God again; but rather with the Prodigal, to go and feed
upon the Husks; as namely, upon Prayer, fasting, or some outward and carnal
Ordinances: and here the soul estranged from the substance, commits Adultery
with the Whore, in subsisting on the Shadow; forsaking the fountain, running to
the broken Cisternes; and so commits a great evil against the Lord: and thus
poor naked man runs from God, as from an enemy, behind the trees of his own
creating; and before he will be beholding to God for a clothing, he will
cover him-self with the Figleaves of his own fleshly wisdom, and so commits
Adultery with the Mother of Harlots: and now thou see another delusive
pretense of the whore, by raising hard thoughts of God in thee, by bringing
thee out of love with the Lord thy Husband; that so She might the better steal
thy heart from God and Rob him of his due and propriety.

3 This Mother of Harlots, thy fleshly wisdom will propose her self to be all to
thee, that so She may draw thy affections after her; She will tell thee that
she can supply all thy wants and relieve al thy necessities, and therefore thou
need not to be beholden to God for any thing; She will tell thee with Adam,
that She can give thee the knowledge of good and evil; and she can open thy
eyes, and She it is that gives thee any thing; therefore the text says, Prove.
9.13. A foolish Woman is Clamorous, She is simple and knows nothing: this
foolish Woman is thy fleshly wisdom, O man! for the Apostle says The wisdom
of the fiesh is foolishness with the Lord: which although it be foolish,
simple and to knows nothing, yet She is very clamorous; that is, her voice
must chiefly be harkened un^^ if the still, small voice of the spirit utter if
self in thy Soul, how does the clamor of thy foolish fleshly wisdom as it
were outcry, and drown the utterings of God in thee; therefore the Text says
ver. 14. that She sits in the door of her house, and the highest Places of the
City, to call Passengers who go right in their way; who so is simple let him
turn in hither, and as for him that wants understanding, She says; Stolen
waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.

Alas! poor self seduced man that reads this History, and see not that thou
thy self art the very person intended; know therefore that thou art this
passenger, who whilst thou art traveling right on thy way to seek after
Christ, art deluded by the clamor of this strange Woman; whilst thou art
seeking after wisdom, She bids thee turn in hither, she has wisdom and
knowledge for thee; although indeed she is simple and knows nothing: Oh Sirs!
how wise would self be, when it is nothing but folly in the abstract.

And thus O man! thou art invited to Babylons banquet, and runnest after the
stolen waters of the Whore, thy fleshly wisdom; which stolen waers, in the
Mystery, are nothing else but the depriving of God of his due in all his works
in the soul; when God brings forth his wisdom and divine light, in the soul,
then flesh and self will tell thee that all proceeds from them; and so steal
Gods propriety from him; and thus, Man runs from God and is estranged from the
Lord, and eats his bread secretly with the harlot.

And this (in my apprehension) is a third delusive pretense of the whore, so to
show her self to the creature as if all fullness were treasured in her; in whom
indeed is nothing but vacancy and emptiness: thus does this whore draw us from
the Lord, our lover; who has ever bin constant to us, and that in the very
height of our inconstancy to him.

It is the design of God in us, to bring us to live upon his fullness, and to
feed upon those divine dainties which he will carve out to us: and what soul
is it, that in the time of his constancy to the Lord ever wanted any thing?
nay, what spiritual refreshments and incomes of divine glory have our souls
tasted of, while we have kept in our Fathers house?

But when once Jeshurem waxes fat, and kicks; when once we, prodigal like,
forsake our Father, and think that there is enough in self and creature to
subsist upon: when once we begin to loath the Heavenly Manna, Christ Jesus, and
to esteem more of the Fleshpots, Garlic and Onyons of Egypt, the raw and
rank discovery of this Whore, of bondage in us; when we prefer the husks of
Swinish self, and wisdom, before the dainties of our Fathers Table; truly we
shall at last come to know the want of divine joy and comfort:

Know therefore, O Man! that in all thy wanderings from the Lord thy full
fountain, to self thy broken cistern; thou in the mean time, art drawn by the
whore thy fleshly wisdom, to yield to her wickedness, by her flattering lips
She forces thee, Prove. 7.21. and thou go after her as a silly Ox to the
slaughter, till a Dart strike through thy Liver, which dart is one of the fiery
darts which the Apostle speaks of; even the woundings of conscience, the
gnawings of the Worm in thee: And this is that spiritual death, which thou
have brought upon thy self, by commiting Adultery with the whore, thy fleshly
wisdom; who has stolen thy heart from the Lord, by atributing all fullness to
her self in thee; and now She leaves thee, as not being able to help thee in
thy woe, distress and misery: and so much shall suffice for the discovery of a
third delusive pretense of the whore; whereby She deceives the heart of the
simple man.

4 This Whore, the wisdom of the flesh is very changeable in her appearances;
it is the policy of a Harlot to suit her self to the humor and fancy of her
Lovers; that so thereby She may still retain and keep them in her favor:

Even so it is with the spiritual Whore, the mother of Harlots, thy fleshly
wisdom; which will still be moving and changing her self in her appearances to
thee, that so her design may be carried on the more subtly; therefore the
Text says Prove. 5.6. Least thou should ponder the paths of life, her ways
are moveable, thou can not know them: Behold here, as in a Glass, the Nature
of this whorish Woman, the wisdom of the flesh! how moveable is She in all the
puttings forth of her self to man; if thy heart leads thee to all manner of
Palpable prophanness this whore will encourage thee to this course of life; and
She will tell thee that there is time enough yet to be sorry for thy misdeedes;
and if through the motions of goodness, thou beginnest to Ponder of thy
Wickedness; and therefore art resolved to mend thy wicked courses, and to be
more Morally Virtuous for the time to come: this Whore will move with thee
hither also; She will lead thee forth to the presence of many a good Moral
action, as to extend Alms, to feed the Hungry, to Cloth the Naked, to Visit
the Sick, and to leave of thy old Vices thou have formerly lived in; all this
She will be well contented with: She will be willing with Saul, to kill part of
the spoil, some open Vices and Palpable prophannesse; but Agag and the fattest
of the Cattle, the chief lusts of thy heart, She will work yet under; that in
the Mystery must be spared: thus the Whore will conform her self to man; nay,
if thou art brought by higher light, to see that Godlyness does not consist
only in refraining from some open Vices, and embracing their contrary Virtues;
but there must be Religion, as well as Morallity looked after: and therforenow
thou art resolved to take upon thee some outward Profession of Christianity:

This whore will change her appearances to thee here also; She will come forth
to meet thee with her Peace Offering and her Vows; She will move with thee to
Fasting, Prayer, and Humiliation, provided, that all this while thou attribute
the glory of all to her self; She will move as high as any outward Ordinance
with thee; and all this is lest thou should ponder the Path of life:

Lest thou should question this whore in her Wanton gesture and gaudy
Attire, She will behave her self more Religiously, and Adorn her self more
demurely; that so hereby She may the more cunningly draw thy affections after
her: and thus poor seduced Man is Mistically misled, by the flatteries of
this whoreish Woman: and in the mean time he thinks he serves God: and this is
a 4th pretense of the Mother of Harlots, to move and change in all her
appearances to thee, that so by her conformity to thee in every respect, She
may yet keep thy affections entire to her self.

5 It is the property of this strange Woman, thy fleshly wisdom, to render
Christ to be at a distance from thee, in all her fornications with thee:

If Man in all his adulteries from the Lord, did but serioufly consider and
really understand, that his first lover Christ Jesus is in him, and sees him
in all his strayings from him; and how he eats his bread secretly, with the
wisdom of the flesh; surely he would be ashamed of his folly, and would not
dare thus to commit Harlotry in the sight of his spiritual lover, and this the
wisdom of the flesh knows right-well: and therefore labors might and maine
to render Christ at a distance from the creature; that so the soul might not be
afraid to commit fornication with her.

Therefore, it is the Language of the whore, Prove. 7.19.20. The good man is not
at whom, he is gone into a far country; and behold the Language of this
Mystical Strumpet, the wisdom of the flesh! She will persuade thee that thou
may take alittle liberty to sin, that thou may exalt self alittle, in
religious performances; for God sees thee not, he is in Heaven, and not in thy
heart: and thus, Man being deluded by the flatteries of this Whore, becomes
that Fool who has said in his heart there is no God; that so he might
Magnify, Diefie, and Worship self in Gods stead:

Self and flesh will not own the Manifestation of God in the Soul, when the
Lord lets forth the beams of his glory into the heart of man, and does as it
were draw up the soul to a higher Center, by giving it some taste of the Powers
of the World to come: it is the work of thy fleshly wisdom to extinguish this
divine light in the soul, and as it were to corrupt the Stomach, and put the
mouth out of taste; that so it might not relish or digest those divine dainties:

And notwithstanding those open appearances of Christ in thee, yet, the wisdom
of the flesh will tell thee, that the good man Christ Jesus is gone abroad, he
is at a distance from thee: This Whore will be contented that thouth should
know any thing but Christ Jesus and him Crucified in thee; She is willing that
thou^ should know Christ Naturally, but not spiritually; Christ in the
History; but not in the Mystery; Christ for thee, but not Christ in thee: it is
possible for a man to know very much of the flesh of Christ, to be acquainted
with the History of Godliness, to live under carnal Ordinances and fleshly
dispensations, to talk and dispute upon high Principles, to be higher in the
understanding of the Scriptures then others, by the Head and shoulders with
Saul; and yet for all this, he may in all these things commit Adultery with the
whore; all these things may be to him no more, then the Sacrifices and the
Vows of this spiritual Whore, the wisdom of the flesh: he is not the true
Professor, therefore, that can Read, Hear, Fast and Pray, and Worship God in
an outward dispensation; but those are the true Circumcision that Worship God
in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh:

He is not a Christian indeed, that does by the power of nature, believe what
is Naturally and Historically reported of Christ in the Scripture, but he that
by the power of the spirit, believes all this History to be verified in him in
the Mystery: for there is a History, and a Mystery of Christ; the History is
Christ for us, the Mystery is Christ in us, Col. 1.27.

Now that Power of Nature which is implanted in man, is sufficient for the
giving credit to whatsoever Christ is, or has been for us, but not for what
Christ is in us; this must be by a power equal with that which raised up Jesus
from the dead, Ephesians. 1,

Thy fleshly wisdom will be contented thou should be acquainted with what
Christ has done for Thee, but She will not endure to let Thee see him in Thee:

First, She is willing to let Thee understand that Christ has been made flesh
for Thee, but not that the word is made flesh in Thee; that is, that this God
has by his own power begotten himself, and brought forth himself in his own
likeness in Thee; that thou art this virgin that is over-shaddowed with power
from on High; and have the immortal seed of God in Thee; which Immortal Seed
by its own power; brings forth its own self in thy soul; by the puttings
forth of the motions of the spirit in thee: this thy fleshly wisdom will not
let Thee behold the wisdom of the flesh in that Serpent, Rev. 12.15. that
casts out his flood after the Woman, or a Christian, in whom Christ is by the
power of the Spirit borne and brought forth; this flood in the Mystery is,
nothing in me, but the overflowing of the wisdom of the flesh, the
inundations of finfull self and creature, that flow into the heart of man; this
Spiritual Serpent, hereby endeavoring to drown and destroy, both Christ and a
Christian, at once as it were; both the Passive Mother, and the Active Babe on
a sudden; such an enemy is the wisdom of the flesh to Christ in us:

This flood of iniquity, these over-flowings of the wisdom of the flesh in us,
is that great River Euphrates, that must be dried up, that way may be made for
the King of the East, Christ Jesus, to ruinate great Babell in man's heart: and
thus you see briefly, how the wisdom of the flesh is an enemy to Christ borne
in us.

2. She cannot endure to let us see the dying of this Christ in us; although
we are the very Persons that Crucifieth the Lamb a fresh, and put him to open
shame; yet She will persuade us otherwise: and thus poor self-seduced man,
Crucifies his Savior every day afresh; and yet is so deluded by himself,
that he sees it not:

Consider then O man, that thou art this Spiritual Jerusalem, where Christ is
slain; thou art that Judge, that condemnest Christ in the motions of his
Spirit; and let Barabhas, or thy base lusts, go uncontrouled: all the
faculties of thy soul, and the powers of the inner-man, misled by the wisdom
of the flesh, are as it were the voice of the People, Crucify him, Crucify
him: thy sins are those spears that Pierce Christ in spirit, in thee: and thus
O man! thou art the daily Cross of thy Savior: and how happy should thou
be if thou did discern all this; that so thou might look upon him whom
thou now piercest and mourn for thy iniquity: but the design of this whore,
thy fleshly wisdom, is to darken thy eye from beholding of this; She will
rather tell thee, that the good man is not at home, Christ is not in thee in
his Sufferings:

And thus poor man, misled by the Whore, becomes that deceitful Pilate that
washes his hands of the blood of this innocent Spirit, whom it has
dispitefully Crucified.

But Secondly, Christ may be said to dye in a Christian another way: which also
this whore cannot endure we should see and behold; and that is, when Christ
dies in flesh to us, and in us; for some times Christ lives in fleshly
appearances of him self in a Christian; some Christians, the highest discovery
of Christ that they have attained unto, is fleshly forms, and fleshly
Ordinances; and thus many a christian enjoyes Christ as really, and as
comfortably, as the Disciples did the Natural flesh of Christ; now Christ he
would needs dye, depart, go away from his disciples in the flesh, that so he
might come in a higher, and more glorious dispensation to them; even so,
ofttimes Christ does likewise dye in a christian, to all outward and fleshly
dispensations: and this death the wisdom of the flesh cannot endure that the
soul should discern; how often does God go out of all low appearances to a
Christian? Insomuch that a poor Christian many times, can find no Christ in
his forms, no comfort in ordinances, no joy in duties and performances; but
with Mary, stands weeping at the Sepulcher, or those dead dispensations where
Christ is buried; and can see no appearance of Jesus in them; but all this
while it seeks the living amongst the dead: and thus Christ dies in a Christian
to all fleshly appearances, many times: And truly, look what sorrow fell upon
the spirits of the poor disciples, for the departure of their Lord (in the
flesh) from them; the like sorrow and grief, falls upon that Christian, from
whom Christ is departed in all outward dispensations:

Christ compares that present estate and condition of the disciples, to a Woman
in Travel Joh. 16.21, 22. and ye now therefore have forrow, says Christ:
Behold O Christian, the lively Image of our condition! when Christ crucifies
his own flesh to us, in all those outward dispensations, wherein formerly we
have enjoyed God.

Happily, heretofore we have seen much of God in our outward formal
fellowships one with another, in fleshly Ordinances; as Baptism of water, and
breaking of bread; but now happily Christ is crucified in all these things to
us; and we find nothing but dead flesh there; nothing that can administer any
spiritual comfort in any of these things; see nothing but form and bare
Flesh, bare Water, bare Bread, and Wine; in so much that we now confess, that
our highest seize of the knowledge of Christ, has been but a knowledge
after the flesh; now here lies Christ crucified to all these things, and the
soul dead to its wonted discoveries:

Now the design of thy Fleshly wisdom, is to darken this death of Christ in
Thee; She cannot endure that the Soul should move out of its fleshly
discoveries; for She loves the outward order, and fleshly decency of all these
things; and therefore She Will tell Thee, that Christ must be found here, or no
where; and thus keep the Soul in bondage to her self; in so much, that the
poor creature goes again and again to his outward worship, and yet finds no
living Christ there; nor is possessed with any more comfort in them, then
proceeds from the power of the flesh; whereas indeed the Soul should be willing
to wait in this dead condition, for the return of the Spirit; to lie empty
and bare at the gate of mercy, out of all those formal dispensations, from
whence Christ is departed; waiting for the Comforter: and therefore my council
is, to all those who see Christ dead to all such carnal and fleshly
dispensations in them: Christian, wait upon the Lord and thou shall renew thy
strength; Christ must have his time to lie in the grave, hidden from thee in
all his appearances to thee; but this know, he will see thee again, in a more
Spiritual discovery of himself; it is but a while, and he that shall come,
will come, and will not tarry; and will take thee up into himself, above these
Types and Figures; he will be thy Water, and Bread and Wine to thee; he will
bring thee to the enjoyment of the Substance, and thou shall no more live upon
the Shadow; thou shall live upon the kernel, and not always be cracking upon
the shell; For if we be dead with Christ, we shall also live together with
him; but be sure in the mean time, that thou beware of the Whore, least She by
her appearances to thee in all outward Worships, make Thee believe that Christ
is living in all those things wherein he is dead and buried. And thus in
brief, you see that this Strumpet, the wisdom of the flesh, is an enemy to
the discovery of Christ in us. And now methinks, by this time we may see who
is the great Antichrist that John speaks of, in his first Epist. 4. Chap. 3.
ver. That every spirit that believes not, or denies Christ come in the flesh,
is Antichrist: and what is it now, that denies Christ come in the flesh? If
thou wold'st know Christian, what this Antichrist is, and where She lies; thou
need not go far to discover it; thou need not go to Rome, Canterbury, or
Westminster; but thou may find that Antichrist in Thee, denying Jesus to be
come in thy flesh:

Oh, all ye that would feign show your selves professed enemies to this
Antichrist, that man of sin; who seeks to destroy Root and Branch, all those
in whom you conceive there are the appearances of him; Return, Return O man!
into thy own Bosom; and there behold him lying secretly, in thy own soul;
there is the Antichrist, that denies every manifestation of God in thy flesh;
this is the Whore that Thou daily commit'st Fornication with all; this is the
Babylon, whose Downfall will be joyous to the Saints; this is the Heretic
and the Schismatique; this it is that makes Rents and divisions amongst us: and
therefore we ought every one of us, to desire God to subdue the wisdom of the
flesh in us; and to wait upon the Lord until he comes to show us the
Judgment of the Spiritual Whore, this Antichrist in us: and not so much
desire the downfall of either Pope, Presbiter, or Independent, or any other
State whatsoever; but to desire the ruin of this Mystical Babylon; which is
the Mother of all our Harlotry from the Lord: And so much shall suffice for
Answer to the Second question, which is, Namly, how the Whore works, and what
Pretenses She deludes the soul by?

We proceed now in order to a third question, Namly,

3. How the Soul comes to attain to a sight of her?

In which, we shall first propose the way that God does usually take to
discover this Whore to a Christian.

2 When the Soul sees her,, How and in what manner it apprehends her?

First for the way that a Soul comes to attain a sight of her by:

If then, thou would know the way how a Christian comes to a spiritual
sight of Flesh and Self; know, that God must deal with Thee as he did with
John, Rev. 17. When God would show John the Judgment of the great Whore, and
give him a discovery of the whore; he takes him ver. 3. and carries him away
in the spirit, into the Wilderness; and then says John, I saw a Woman, etc.

First then know, that thou can never behold self aright, till God take thee
up, or catry thee away in the spirit; the spiritual man, says the Apostle,
sees all things; discovers all things; and Judges all things: so much as the
Lord spirituallizeth a Christian, so much he sees into himself, and discernes
and beholds this Mystical whore, the wisdom of the flesh, in himself: and now
he judges and estemes of her as that whore, that Adultress with whom he has
(in all his ways and Worships) adulterated from the Lord:

Therefore the Apostle says, that the spirit searches all things, 2 Epist.
Cor. 1. Chap. So long as the soul lies under the veil of the flesh, so long
self is undiscovered to him; for while the creature lies wrapped up in the
Mantle of nature, it is in a spiritual slumber or sleep; and lies as one
passive, under the workings of the wisdom of the flesh; rock't a sleep in the
cradle of fleshly security: But now when God speaks by the small and still
voice, yet powerful utterance, of the Spirit in a Christian; Come up hither;
when God takes a Soul up beyond self and creature; in so much that now the
creature sees all but vanity, below Christ: now I say, the creature comes to
some discovery of himself; but never before.

That man that will view the breadth and length of a City at once, must not
always be walking about in the streets; but he must essay to get up to the top
of some mountain that lies above it; and so the City shall be discovered to
him, with its breadth and length: even so it is with the spiritual Babell,
which is in thee Oh man! even the wisdom of the flesh: thou must be taken
above it ere thou can truly and really discover it.

2 Thou must be carried away in the spirit; carried quite away from all Power,
Policy, Strength, Motion and Action of the creature:

3 The place whither thou must be carried; that is into a Wilderness; which
is, into a lost condition, to sin and self: never does the soul attain to a
real sight of the flesh, till the Lord by his Spirit does (as it were) loose
the soul to it self: when the creature comes to be at a loss in it self, in
all its fleshly performances; not knowing where to have recourse; but sees that
his narrow fleshly heart, is so wide a wilderness, that he is lost in the many
turnings and windings thereof; now the creature comes to behold his Spiritual
Adulteryes; now he sees into what a lost condition he is fallen; and how the
whore all this while, in all his duties, worships, forms and disciplines, has
stolen his heart from the Lord, his first lover and tender Husband: Paul was
carried away by the spirit into this Wilderness, Colos. 3. ver. 7, 8, 9. he
professes ver. 7. That what things were gain to him, he counted loss for
Christ; yea doubtless, says he ver. 8. and I count all things but loss, for
the excellency of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of
all things, and do count them but dung: that I may win Christ: Paul never
knew himself, nor creature excellency aright, till God showed him the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ; and when he comes to see the worth of
Christ, then he see; himself in a wilderness; and in this wilderness, or lost
condition, he spies the vanity of all that was flesh below Christ; so that now
when God carries away a soul in the spirit, and loses it, as it were, to its
self; and lets loose the beams of his own glory upon it; ravisheth the heart
with his own beauty, catches him up as it were into the third Heavens, and
shows such divine excellency as it never yet apprehended; the soul by the
clear aspect of this beatificall vision of God; begins now to see the vanity
and deformity of it self, and is (as it were) in as great amazement of spirit,
as the man doubtless was, who was borne blind from the womb, and yet now comes
to see the Sun; or as one that has been shut up in a dark Dungeon, and now
comes to walk in the light, even thus it is with poor man in the highest glory
and excellency of the flesh; when God sends forth the beams of that Sun of
righteousness upon poor Man, how dark he beholds himself to be, as he stands
in relation to all fleshly excellency, when God shows him the worth, value and
excellency of himself in a Christ; what loss dung and dross does a Christian
esteem those things to be, though formerly never so glorious and excellent;
and therefore Paul now no longer desires to be found in his own excellency, or
in himself, but says he ver. 9. That I may be found in him, not having my
own righteousness which is by the Law; but that which is by the faith of the
Son of God: the sight of Christ's excellency it does so fully discover self and
flesh to the Christian, as that now he loathes the scarlet color, the glorious
atire of the Whore, even all its golden performances, her gilded vows and
sacrifices.

O all ye poor souls! who are apt to place your glory in any thing below
Christ; and to hang your righteousness upon your Prayers, fastings, mournings,
or any outward Ordinances, alas, how far are you mis-taken! who when the Lord
comes to carry you away in the Spirit, to see all your glory in Christ, your
righteousness in him; you will then see the odiousness of every thing below
Christ, which thou have wondered after; thou will then desire that God might
find thee in this Wilderness, quite out of self; that there may not be any
hoof of the Beast in thee; but that thou may wholly be incorporated into
Christ; in whom thou now see thy glory to consist: And thus you see, what the
way is, that God uses to discover self, or this Whore, the wisdom of the
flesh, to the soul.

Secondly, Let us consider how and in what manner the Soul beholds this Whore.

A poor creature whom the Lord has carried away, or taken up into the Spirit;
that now lives and walks in the Spirit, he sees and beholds himself, not as he
was wont to do formerly; happily thou wast wont to see a glory and excellency
in things that were below God; but now on the contrary how loathsome is every
thing, that comes short of the divine excellency of Christ: happily heretofore
thou have seen some worth in thy prayers, and in thy tears, some
esteemablenesse in thy duties and performances, some glory in thine own
righteousness; but now thou see all these things, which before were counted
gain, to be but loss unto thee; thou beholdest all thy own righteousness to be
but as a Menstrous cloth, and as a filthy ragge: happily heretofore thou
boastest of thy pedigree with Paul; of the Tribe of Benjamin, and of the stock
of Israel; that thou art descended from such a reformed Church; from such
visible dispensations; so that as touching all legal worships, outward forms
and Ordinances, thou may be nominated a Pharisee; but now thou see the
lowness, and weakness of these fleshly things, wherein thou have formerly
boasted; now thou rejoycest that thou have attained to the knowledge of that
Christ, which is, the end or substance of all these fleshly things unto thee;
so that now thou have no confidence in the flesh any longer; but art become one
of the true circumcision, that worships God in the Spirit, and rejoices in
Christ Jesus; in a word, this spirituallized Christian, sees all below Christ
to be but the garment of this spiritual Strumpet, that she uses to appear in
to deceive him; he now sees the Whore, and her various pretenses, and how she
has formerly deceived him in her several dresses; he sees her not only in her
gaudy attire, but in the height of her modesty, even in her religious garment;
so that now he sees how the wisdom of the flesh makes use of all outward
worship, forms and Ordinances, to deceive the heart of the simple.

Finally this Spiritual Man, has the same discovery of his whorish wisdom,
as John had, Rev. 17, from the 3, to the 7. ver.

1. John he saw the Woman sitting upon a scarlet colored Beast; truly when God
carries thee away in the Spirit, thou will behold thy self to be the Beast,
that this Mystical whore, the wisdom of the flesh, does thus vassallize man in
his fallen condition from God; as it were Satan's Pack-horse to act all his
designs of wickedness.

This Beast had seven heads and ten horns; these seven heads and ten horns,
are seven Mountains and ten Kings the Scripture says; which in me, are
nothing but those powers of man which God has endued him withal; as Reason,
Will, Affection, Vuderstanding and the like; and all these ver. 13. do with
one consent give and ascribe their power to the Beast, or poor beastialized
man; and this Beast man, imployes all these with their power to make war
against the Lamb, Christ Jesus, ver. 14. and so here is a discovery of poor
misled Man, sighting the battle of the Whore, his fleshly wisdom: all this
does the Christian apprehend in himself, when the Lord carries him away in the
Spirit of his glory.

2. John saw the Woman, ver. 4. arraied in purple and scarlet color, deck with
Gold Pearls and precious Stones: Truly Christian, when the Lord takes away
this falce glassie eye of flesh from thee, and endues thee with Spiritual
eyesight from himself, thou shall see this whore, thy fleshly wisdom in all
this her glory and excellency in Thee; for all these Golden Pearls and
precious Stones, and Scarlet colors, are but the trimmings of the whore, that
She usually puts on and clothes her self with all, when She comes out to meet
the Sons of men; that so hereby, She might with the more facillity dazzle the
eyes, infatuate and bewitch the senses, of her Spiritual lovers: but now when
God takes up a Soul into Spirit, then flesh is as it were unclothed to the
creature; and now the Soul looks not at her glorious shows, which formerly
has bewitched his heart; but he sees and knows that under that Golden habit,
there walks this subtle Harlot; under this Speckled Skin, there is a Venomous
Viperous Serpentine Carkcas: the man whom God has Spirituallized, when the
wisdom of the flesh appears in him in her glory, clad with excellency, and
adorned with all her beautiful Robes; yet all this while he sees her Naked and
bare: the spirit teaches him to look inwardly, and not altogether outwardly:
and this is such a Mystery that the poor carnal heart cannot discern,
because he looks fleshly and carnally; and has not yet received this
Spiritual eyesight from above.

3. But then, John saw the Woman having a golden Cup in her hand, full of
abominations and filthynes of her Fornications:

Now that Soul which God wrapes up in that spirit of glory, he beholds this
whore in him; and sees how She has deluded him by her golden Cup, to taste of
the wine of her Fornications; for this Golden Cup in the whores hand, is (in
the Mystery of it) the Gilded pretenses, and Golden appearances of the
wisdom of the flesh; in which pretenses there is contained, the wickendesse of
her abomination, and filthynesse of her fornication.

A man catched up, and carried by the spirit, to walk in the light of Christ
and to live in the purity of God, sees him-self (as it were) now awakened out
of the drunken sleep of the Whore; newly Risen out of the defiled Bed of the
flesh; from the spiritual Vomits, Swinish abominations, and Beastly
uncleanness that he before wallowed in.

4. Again John saw, ver. 5. what was written upon the Woman's Forehead:

Truly, until such time as the Lord takes a Soul up into spirit, though the
wisdom of the flesh appear openly to him, though She shows her very
Forehead, yet he cannot discern her in her appearances; but now, when God
has caught the Soul into spirit, and carried him away in the spirit; then he
sees the whore in her apparitions; he beholds Mystery in the Forehead, or
palpable workings of the whore; Mystery in all her specious pretenses: and
notwithstanding all her shows of Glory; yet he sees, She is indeed and in
truth Babylon the great: the great confused Whore, which breeds all that
confusion of spirit in a Christian; all that commotion, disturbance, and
outcries that are in the heart of man; all those heavy, sad and disconsolate
thoughts that man is possesed with all; all that disorder that many a time is
in the soul; every hard thought of God; every dispairing Imagination; all the
gnawings of conscience in the Creature: so that (I say) he now sees her to be
that great Babel, or confused Whore, who is the Mother of Harlots, and
Abominations of the Earth.

5. But then lastly, John saw the Woman drunk with the blood of the Saints,
and Martyrs of Jesus: Truly, this is the very phisiognome and Portraiture of
the whore, to a Christian that is carriepaway in the Spirit, he now comes to
behold her a drunken bloodthirsty Whore; he now sees how the whore has
martyred the bringings forth of Christ, slain and crucified that Man Jesus
afresh: he sees how the Whore is drunk with the blood of the Lamb in him: In a
word, the Saint truly spirituallized, beholds self and flesh, to be the most
hateful, detestable, loathsome thing in the world to him; look how loathsome
and injurous a man's vomit is to his stomach, even so loathsome is self to that
Christian; from whose stomach God has fetched up all the corrupt flesh, by
bringing the soul to be lovesick of Christ, with the operative Pills of his
blessed Spirit: O how hateful now is the golden Cup and sweet Wine of the
whore, to a spirituallized man; in so much that he now loathes and abhors
himself in dust and ashes; nay, indeed he begins now to wonder at himself, in
his own shame and folly; as the Text says, ver. 5. that when John saw the
Whore he wondered with great admiration; truly, the same is the condition of
every Christian, who by the carryings away of the spirit, comes to a spiritual
sight of this whore, the wisdom of the flesh; he now wonders that he should
be drawn to commit folly, by so filthy a Harlot: he now wonders that such a
bulk of filthynesse, such a Mountain of wickedness, and spring of bitterness,
should be in him, and he never till now able to discern it: he now wonders
that ever the lenity and Mercy of God, should so long bear with him in all his
Adulteries with this swinish whore: he now wonders that God at last has
brought him to such a sight and disocvery; he admires to see where he is, and
where he was; that God has brought him from flesh, to live in spirit; from
darkness, into his mavelous light; from the ways of sorrow, to that high
way, the Lord Jesus,

And thus you see, briefly, how, and in what manner, the Soul beholdes this
Mystical Whore, the wisdom of the flesh: And so much shall suffice for the
third question, Namely, how the creature comes to attain to the sight of her.

We proceed now, in order to the fourth question, which is, Namely,

When, and how She shall be destroyed?

Now in brief, to Answer to this, and so draw to a conclusion of the matter; I
thus reply,

Ans. If then O man! thou desire to know how, and when this spiritual Whore
shall be destroyed: It shall be done in the day, and by the coming and
appearance of Jesus in Thee; this day is the last day; and this coming, is the
second coming of Jesus:

Now as concerning this last day, know this O man! that its nothing for thee to
read the History of the last day in Scripture, and there to see what shall be
done in that day that God will glorify himself in the Saints, and be admired
in all them that believe; that then God will thoroughly purge his floor; and
the Saints shall be like him, for they shall see him as he is: Now I say, it is
nothing to know this in the History, except we know it in the Mystery of it:

Thou art therefore to expect, Jesus to come to Judgment in Thee; and the end
of the world to be in Thee: thou art to wait for the return of this Jesus in
spirit; which shall come to thee as he did to John, and show Thee the Judgment
of the great Whore in Thee; for there is nothing that shall happen or fall out
to thee, in relation to the day of Judgment, which shall not be verified in
thee, in this life: though it may be, not in the same manifestative measure or
fullness, as it shall be hereafter.

As first, One sign of this last day is, that there shall be wars, and rumors
of wars, Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom: now
here Christian thou may behold the last day to be at hand, here is God and
Magog at battle with the Lamb; what is it that makes all that envy, variance,
strife, sedition, emulation in the world, but the second, or spiritual
appearance of Je us in his People; the coming of Christ in his Saints, is not
to bring peace, but a sword amongst us; I confidently say, that this last day,
this spiritual appearance of Christ in men and women, is the very original of
all these commotions that are amongst us; insomuch that now here is, the Father
hating the appearance of Christ in the Son, and the Son likewise in the Father;
the Mother in the Daughter, and the Daughter in the Mother; one Brother
sheathing the sword in the bowels of another, because the last Day dawnes, and
the Star of glory is risen more in one then in another; here is Cain killing
Abel, because his sacrifice is accepted of the Lord, and the other is not: I
tell thee Christian, the more the whore will bestir her self: she will not
only raise outward but inward war against thee: which inward insurrection and
rebellion, is a symptom, that the day of Judgment is at hand in thee. John
tells us Revel. 17, 14. That the kings of the earrh, shall make war against the
Lamb; which Kings in the mystery, are but the Kingly governing powers of thy
Soul, which are assembled together in thee to this Spiritual battle of Gog
and Magog, to gage war against the innocent Lamb Christ Jesus in Spirit: but
the Lamb shall over come them, for he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; all
the power and policy of the flesh, shall at last yield their power to Christ,
and shall consent to the just Judgment of the whore, thy fleshly wisdom; but
till this strong man the flesh be cast out, by that stronger then he, Christ
Jesus, there will be nothing but war and confusion in thee; so that indeed now
the Serpent is come down with great rage in thee, knowing that he has but a
short time; the more nigh the coming of Christ is, the more this Serpent spits
out his venom; this Antichrist, this whore will the more earnestly bestirre
her self, knowing that it is but a short time to her judgment. St. John tells
us Revel. 12.7. That when the woman had brought forth her man child which was
to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron, the woman upon the birth of this man
child fled into the wilderness, and when the woman was in the wilderness,
then says John, I saw war in Heaven, Michael and his angels fought against the
Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his angels (and what is all this to me?) truly
Christian, me thinks this war in Heaven is a sure symptom of the day of
Judgment, the end of this world in us, when God has by his own power brought
forth this man Jesus in us, and has given him power to rule and reign in this
woman, or weak passive Christian, the Soul presently upon the birth or
bringing forth of Jesus in it, is imediatly in a wilderness, or lost in it
self, and lies as one amazed at this sudden work of the Lord; and in this
bewildred condition of the creature, Satan he gages war upon it, shoots his
fiery darts at it, pursues the woman with Herod, and seeks to devour both
Christ with the christian also, now therefore christian, know that thy Soul is
this Heaven, where this great battle is fought; thou being in a lost bewildred
estate, as not knowing which way to escape the woundings of Satan, and the
fiery darts of the wicked, but stand as a senseless lifelesse mark for thy
spiritual enemies to shoot at: but Michael thy spiritual Prince Christ Jesus,
he fights for thee against that Dragon, that whore, that antichrist, that
labors to devour thee; so that thou art that poor passive that lies stone
still whilst the Serpent stings thee, and the Dragon exercises his cruelty
upon thee, till at last this Michael our Prince Christ Jesus, has by his own
power and strength, cast out and so routed this Dragon this old Serpent, verse.
9. That now his place is no more found in Heaven or in thy soul; and thus
may thou see Christ Judging the Whore, this Serpent in thee, insomuch, that
now this loud voice is uttered from Heaven, or the Soul of a Saint, as in verse.
10. Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the
power of his Christ: whereas before, nothing but the dreadful voice of hell,
wrath, anger, fury, and judgment, nothing but wars and rumors of wars heard
in thy soul: yet now the day is come, Christ is come to Judgment in us, and
has condemned the whore in us, now the voice of salvation is heard in thee,
whereas before thou apprehendest God, as David did sometimes to have shot the
arrows of his wrath at thee, and to have battered thy soul in pieces, by the
thundering Cannon of his wrath; yet now thou see there is a cessation of
these tumults in thee, and thou now see that sweet messenger of God the
eternal Spirit, drawing near toward thee with its white Flagge of peace,
joy, comfort, and salvation bringing comfort unto thee, by telling thee thy
warfare is accomplished, thy iniquity is pardoned, and thon have received
double at the Lords hands for all thy sins, (and then further) now strength is
come also, which is another part of the voice from Heaven, alas how feeble and
how weak, faint, and unable was the Soul before the spiritual resurrection of
it? for the birth of this Child Jesus in it, is the regeneration, or new birth
of a Christian: the wilderness the woman fled into, is that mortified dead
lost estate of a Christian: the Grave where the Soul is buried to every living
action; and the overcomming or conquering of the Dragon, or the spiritual
serpent, the wisdom of the flesh; is the resurrection of a Saint, or that
spiritual day of Judgment of the whore in us: Now as Jesus raised up himself
by the power of the Father from out of the bowels of the earth, so by the
strength and power of this Jesus, who is the resurrection and the life, a
Christian rises out of this dead condition; and so her mortal putting on
immortality, and corruption putting on incorruption, here is death swallowed up
in victory. The Christian now as he has formerly been planted with Christ in
the likeness of his death; so likewise now, in the likeness of his
resurrection: it bears now no longer the image of the first dead Adam, but is
risen in the likeness of Christ, out of earth and flesh, which formerly he was
involved and buried in, and by his rising again, overcomes the Dragon by the
blood of the Lamb, kills the great Goliath, the wisdom of the flesh, and this
is all by the strength of that Strong man Christ Jesus, who is entered into his
temple, or the heart of man, and silences all these earthly rumors and
commotions in him; and so is the second part of the voice from Heaven
fulfilled, Now is come not only salvation but strength.

And then Thirdly, The Kingdom of God that is come also, and the power of his
Christ: our Savior taught his Disciples whilst he was in the flesh, and knew
him only after the flesh, I say, he taught them to pray, thy Kingdom come; so
that the Kingdom of Christ, in that sense, was not yet come to the Disciples;
even so it is with every poor Christian that has attained to no more
knowledge, then the flesh of Christ can teach them; that do not know Christ any
other ways, then by the beholding of his fleshly substance; as Christians do
in all outward and fleshly ordinances; that see no more, nor know no more of
Christ, then Bread, Water, and Wine, and outward forms and order can teach
them; the Kingdom of God is not come to them yet: while the Woman was in the
Wilderness, the Kingdom of God was not come in her; but when She, by the
strength of God was Risen, and had overcome by the blood of the Lamb; then She
cried, now the Kingdom of God is come: the Woman was fed in the wilderness,
ver. 6. in our low and lost estate, God he feeds us with milk; because the
Kingdom of God, Christ in the measure of the Spirit is not yet come to enable
us to bear stronger meats, in the wilderness, or weak condition of Saints,
God feeds them with manna; but when he brings them into Canaan he then
compasses them about with the flowings of Milk and Honey: this Canaan, is
Christ, the true Rest of a Christian; the Kingdom of the Father in the Saints;
who draws up the Soul from these low dispensations, by degrees as it were,
till he has seated it in himself; brings the Soul out of the fleshly knowledge
of himself, into spiritual discoveryes of his Excellency: so that now the
Soul prays no more in the imbecility of the flesh, thy Kingdom come: seeks
no longer in fleshly Forms and Ordinances for the kingdom; for it is already
in them, and they live in the enjoyment of it: Now is come Salvation, and
strength and the Kingdom of God, and the power of his Christ: the Dragon and
his Angels, they fought to establish their Kingdom in the Soul; but the Lamb
has overcome them, and set up his Kingdom in the Christian; And the Kings of
the earth, as namely, the powers of the creature bring all their glory and
Honor unto it: thus you see that the whore shall be destroyed, in the last
day, at the Second coming of Christ in us; and likewise, I have discovered unto
you one Sign of the last day, or day of Spiritual Judgment; which is, those
Combats, Wars and Commotions that are in a Christian: I will but instance
two particulars more, and so shall draw to a conclusion.

Therefore, Secondly, a second sign or symptom of the last day, is the
Desolution of the World; how that the Earth, and all that is therein, shall be
burnt up; the Son turned into darkness, the Moon into blood; the Stars
shall fall from Heaven: and thus God will shake the Heavens and the Earth; and
men's hearts shall fail them for fear; expecting the end of such sorrowful
beginings: Even thus it is with, and in a Christian, at the aproaching of the
spirit of Christ in him; the World begins to be dissolved: the World is said
ver. 3. to be placed in man's heart; which World in man's heart, shall be
dissolved by the Fire of the Spirit of Christ; the Heavens and the Earth, are
Mystically in man; and the Waters, with their Ebings and Flowings, are to be
seen in the Mystery, in man; here is God deviding the Light from the Darkness,
to be seen in man; the waters below, from the waters above the Firmament: all
this is fullfilled Mysteriously in man; in whom God separates himself, who is
pure and light, from the darkness and nothingnesse of the creature: The Fouls
of the Air, and Fishes of the Sea, are Mystically in man; as namely, those
flying Fantasies, and swimming Notions of the creature; in a word, here is every
thing bringing forth Fruit after its Kind in man; And all Gods creation, good
in its own kind, in this first World, which is in man's heart.

But now this first World, this first Creation must be dissolved; what ever
excellency God has endued man with all, in this first creation; what ever
maturity of Wit and ingenuity, the Lord has lent man; how high so ever, and
how large so ever, the Lord has Naturallized the creature; yet all this
excellency shall vanish away; all this worldly glory, as I so call it, shall be
cosumed and burnt up: but alas! how hardly is this believed! how impossible is
this to carnal man, that all this goodly creation and work of God in his
nature, should be anihilated; that Reason, Natural understanding and wisdom;
nay, Nature it self, should be consumed: but this is the Lords act, his
strange act, his work, and wondrous work, in a Christian:

Now therefore, consider Christian, that this is but the old World, or first,
or lowest manifestation of God in thee; which old world must pass away and be
no more: John tells us that he saw a new Heaven and a new Earth, Rev. 21.1. for
the first Heaven and the first Earth was passed away, and there was no more
Sea; what is all this? Truly Christian, in me its thus much, when this day
dawnes, and this day Star, Christ Jesus arises in our hearts; when the morning
Sun, even Jesus breaks forth upon us in his Glory, Warmth and Splendour; then
begins this world within us to be dissolved; the Heavens and the Earth in us,
begins to melt with the fervent heat of this Sun, and fall away to nothing:
and the Lord instead of these frames, a new Heaven and a new Earth: So that,
all that was Nature and pure Reason, and Ingenuity, is quite dissolved; and a
new work wrought in the Soul; that takes up the heart above its former
excellency and glory; although that were good in its kind, yet God will please,
by the more glorious discoveries of himself, to drown all this former
Creation; and to beget all things new in the Creature: and then not only the
Heaven and the Earth passed away, but also there was no more Sea.

This Sea, or these Waters in man, are those great overflowings, and
inundations of Nature; the swellings and roarings of proud self and creature;
this deep silence shall be dried up, by the heat of the Sun of Righteousness:
These Waters are the very Throne of the Whore, or the very Seat of the wisdom
of the flesh; now when this Sea shall be dried up, then there shall be a place
no longer for this Spiritual Whore found in Heaven, nor yet in the Soul of a
Saint.

Oh, what cause of Joy is here for all the Saints, yea, what eager pantings
after the power and Kingdom of Christ, should this beget and operate in us, to
consider, that in the day of Christ the whore shall be destroyed in us, the Sea
shall be dried up, and the Heavens and the earth shall pass away.

If any man yet shall ask when this last day shall come, and the end of the
world shall be accomplished? I answer then with Christ, That this generation
shall not pass away, till all these things be fulfilled, all these things thou
must expect to be fulfilled in thee, even in this life, O thou Christian,
although happily not in the fullness and glory as shall be hereafter.

Tell me therefore, O thou experienced Saint! whose conscience can testify all
these things to be true: how has the appearance of Christ in thee, many a
time, confounded as it were all thy natural vigor and power? how has it
spoiled Principalities and powers, the might and dominion of all natural
excellency? how have thou seen thy self out of thy self as it were, beyond
and above that earth thou have been in formerly; wrapped up with Paul, in the
third Heavens as it were, beholding that Glory, that all thy old created light
could never discern; living for a time in that peace of God which passes all
understanding! Nay shall I yet further tell you, at the second coming of
Christ in us, our Sun shall be turned into darkness, and our Moon into blood,
our Stars shall fall from their Center; All that light of reason and nature;
all those fleshly meteors; as also fixed Stars, which have appeared at their
several seasons in man, which did discover something of God to him; in a word,
all the inferior, with the superior discernings of God, that the creature
has had formerly, shall be extinguished, and shall appear to him to be but
darkness and obscurity: the Sun or the superlative light, shall be turned into
darkness, and the Moon, or that light which guides the more obscure part of
man, shall be turned into blood, and confusion; and God will now create a new
world in us; old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new in
us: when the Apostle had been treating of the dissolution of the world, in the
2 Pet. 3, chap. he comes to mind the Saints of the mystery of that history,
verse. 13. Nevertheless (says he) we, according to his promise, look for new
Heavens and new earth, wherein dwells righteousness, although this old
foundation and Fabric shall be dissolved, and Christ, that day of the Lord,
shall come even as a thief in the night, and deprive us of all the excellency
of our present station; waste, destroy, and burn up all our Gold, Silver, and
precious stones, consume all the Glory of our present being, yet says he here
is one comfort, we look for a new Heaven and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness, God never confounds the old, but he brings a new, the manner of
Gods new creation is, to new modelize the heart, to new mould the creature, to
create a new Christian, as it were to spirituallize the Christian; in a word,
it is to swallow up the soul in himself, to drown, confound, and bring to an
end, all creature glory, in his own incomprehensive excellency.

So that the Saints are said to be that new Jerusalem that came down from God,
deck^ and adorned with the Glory of God only, as (...) Bride adorned for her
husband:

They are called new, because Christ in them has created a new world; this new
Jerusalem had no temple in it of it self, but the Lord God and the Lamb were
the temple of it; truly that soul in whom the Lord God has mad^ this
desolation of creature excellency, and has created all things a new; this new
Jerusalem or new Christian, has no temple but Christ. I^ typical Jerusalem
there was a temple, but Christ prophesied, That there should not be one ston^
left upon another, that should not be thrown down, Matthew. 24. Even so when
God creates all things new in a Christian, he will demollish all that was in
his stead, before he came to establish his new creation; and he will make
himself the temple of a Christian: what ever the soul sees in any outward
things, as Forms, Ordinances, Worships and the like, yet Christ will destroy
and throw down, and bring to naught these things, and make himself all this,
and much more to the Christian: and thus you may see the day of Judgment in a
Christian: here you may see Christ sending his spirit into the worldly heart of
man, convincing it of Judgment, because the prince of this world is judged in
him.

I proceed now, to the third discovery of the last day, which is, namely, The
destruction of Antichrist, or the downfall of the whore; which does yet further
manifest to us, that this last day is in us; the coming of this day of Jesus;
and the appearance of this Star in us, is the last day of the whore in us: no
sooner does Christ appear, but down falls the Kingdom of the serpent, our
fleshly wisdom; and therefore if thou would know how this Antichrist shall
be destroyed, the Apostle tells us, 2 These. 2, 8. That the Lord shall consume
him with the breath of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming; This
bright coming of Christ in us, shall dispell that darkness, and discover that
fogge that withholds or hinders the revelation of the whore; Christ will
then put aside this veil which is before this varlets face, namely, all her
specious pretenses, and shows of glory. Christ is that mountain spoken of in
the 25. Isa. In whom God shall destroy the veil of the covering that is cast
over all people: but this must be fulfilled, when this mountain Christ Jesus,
shall be established upon the top of the mountains in our souls; or when
Christ by his own power has seated himself in us, above every high thought,
and vain imagination; when the child Jesus is given to us, and has gotten the
government upon his shoulders; this is the time of the whores demolition in us;
I say it is the work of Christ by his coming in a Saint, to discover the
Whore to him, to take away that veil of flesh, and those mists of obsurity,
which this harlot has interposed between her self and the soul: when the day
dawnes, the darkness vanishes away; even so, when this day, Christ Jesus
dawn^s in thy heart; when day breaks, as I may so say, in thy soul, then begins
the darkness in thy heart to flee away; and now thou come to be one of the
Children of the day. In a word, now thou can see, discern, and distinguish,
and before thou couldes^ not: alas sirs! a poor soul that walks in darkness,
and sees by no other light but by the blaze of self, and by the sparks of his
own fire; he may be compared to a man that sees by candle light, who cannot
discern one color from another: even so it is with all natural men, they are
not able to see what is good from evil, or what is light from darkness: O the
palpable blindness of all poor creatures, in whom this day, Christ does not
appear! this, it is to have eyes and see not, ears and hear not.

This sad obscurity of a man that walks not in the light, may fitly be
compared to that darkness which might be felt; the soul feels many times,
what his blindness is, how it deprives him of the beatificall vision of God;
brings him to wander from the way, Christ Jesus causes him many times to
stumble at that stumbling stone; and all this is because the day is not dawned
as yet: but now, when the Sun of righteousness arises in the Soul, why then,
here comes light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, and
now this light guides the soul into the way of peace: It is said of new
Jerusalem, Revel. 21. That it needed not the light of the Sun, or of the Moon,
for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb was the light thereof; all
which in me is thus much, when God comes to create a new Heaven and a new earth
in a Christian, when he comes by the power of that regenerating spirit, to make
his Jerusalem a new Jerusalem; in this new estate, he will give her new light
to walk by, so that now the Saints shall have no need of the old Sun, or the
old Moon; no need of the old light of reason and nature, but here is new light
brought forth now in the soul; the new light is Christ, or the Lamb, who by the
radiant beams of his splendour, fills the soul with the glory of the Father,
and destroys, or distinguishes all other inferior lights in the soul. We live
in a generation, wherein both Press, and Pulpit, does cry down new lights; and
truly I cannot much blame them that so do, because as yet they walk in the
light of the old Sun and Moon, and are to be comprehended, under the notion of
old Jerusalem; but tell me now? when the Spirit of Glory has darkened this Sun,
and turned this Moon into blood; quite confounded and brought to nothing, the
highest sphere of this natural excellency in them, when this old Jerusalem
comes to be made new? then you shall hear a new voice, crying up the new
light of God manifested in them; O Christian; I tell thee thou art a thrice
happy man, whom the Lord has made the Lamb a light unto thee; this Lamb light,
is an innocent light, a righteous light, a pure light, a discovering light; it
is this light that discovers the hidden and obscure whore, unto thee; it is the
light of Christ that uncovers, and strips the whore stark naked before thee,
of all her glory and excellency; so that now thou beholdest her out of her
purple and scarlet color, even in her very nakedness and shame: And thus you
see how Christ in his day, in a Christian, does first of all discover the whore
to him.

But Secondly, in this last day or Sun rising of Christ in a Christian, it is
the work of Christ to destroy, as well as to discover this whore in us, as it
is the property of light to destroy darkness; so it is the property of Christ
to destroy antichrist in the day of his appearance: it will be the work of
Christ by his coming in thee, to root out that spirit of antichrist, head and
tail, root and branch; insomuch that there shall not be left one hoof of the
beast in thee: when John saw the Angel come down from heaven endued with
great power, Revel. 18.1. Who enlightened the earth with his glory, immediately
he heard this voice, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation
of devils, the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful bird; all which teaches me thus much, that when that Angel of the
everlasting lasting covenant Christ Jesus, is by the Father sent down into the
hearts of his Saints, who comes by the power of his Spirit, and enlightens the
earth or earthly man with his glory: when the earth is filled with the
knowledge of the Lord; when the glory of this Sun comes to enlighten and
beautify our earthy hearts; then is the time of Babylons downfall; now is the
season of the whores destruction; now is the Saints time of Halelujah; now
rejoice over her thou Heaven, and all the holy Apostles and Prophets, for God
has avenged you on her: verse. 20. The Prophet Malachy tells us, chap. 4. That
the day comes that shall burn as an Oven; this day is Christ Jesus, who indeed
shall so baptize us with the holy Ghost, and Fire, as that he shall consume and
burn up, waste, and destroy all the appearances of the Whore, the wisdom of
the flesh, and therefore the same prophet tells us, Chap. 3.34. That he shall
sit as a Refiners fire, and as Fullers Soape, and he shall purify the Sons of
Levi, that they may offer to the Lord, an offering in righteousness; this day
must burn in us; this Jesus must be a refiners fire to us, before we shall see
the downfall of mystical Babylon: the work that Christ has to do in us, is
to destroy mortallity, and to cloth us with immortality, to destroy this
corruption, and to cloth us with the incorruptible righteousness of himself.

After the downfall of the whore, Revel. 19. John tells us, verse. 8. That there
was granted to the Lambs wife, that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
clear and white, etc. In which I observe, first, the love of Christ to the
Soul; Christ did first of all by his blood and passion, purchase the Soul to
himself, to the end that she should be a constant Spouse unto him; but she
has adulterized from her husband; committed harlotry from her first lover; and
has taken part with antichrist against him: upon which adultery, the jealousy
of the Lord arises in himself, and as jealousy is said to be the rage of a
man, so the Lord (as I may say) in the rage of this jealousy, comes, and
destroys this antichrist, kills sin in the Christian; sheaths the sword of the
spirit in the bowels of this spiritual antichrist; breaks the head of this
serpent in us: but yet notwithstanding, entertaines this adulterized creature
into his love and favor; does yet once more espouse her to himself, by a
fresh act and manifestation of love and favor: you may see an emblem of this
love in Hos. 3.1 where God commands the Prophet to go with a message of love,
to the woman that had played the harlot with him; Go, yet love a woman beloved
of her friend, yet an adultresse: though she an adultresse, yet I am her
friend; though she an harlot, yet I send love greetings toward her: though she
has been unconstant toward me, yet I will own her to be my wife, my Spouse,
my beloved; and therefore the text says, that it was granted to the Lambs
wife, that she should be arrayed in linen, clean and white: which likewise
dictates to me,

2. In the Second place, the purity that this day of burning, Christ Jesus in
Spirit, works in the heart of his People; he does not only take from it the
garment spotted with the flesh, but likewise, Clothes it with the shinning
Robe of righteousness; he does not only empty a Soul of its own corruption;
but likewise fills it with his glory: beautifies it with his own adornings: O
Fair, beautiful, amiable creature! whose beauty and excellency consists in
Christ that divine center of bri^htnesse and glory: this will send a Saint to
the depth of admiration; behold! what manner of love has the Father bestowed
upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God? that God should thus by the
power of the Spirit, consume all this dross and coruption in us; and bring us
by that divine light to see our union with the Father, in the Son; and to see
the glory of our Adoption in Jesus; and to behold our selves in the flesh of
our elder Brother, at the Right Hand of the Father? this is mercy past
discerning, and worth admiration!

Thus will God in the power of his Spirit, Judge this spiritual Whore in us;
and ease us of the vassallage, and servitude we were in to our own selves:
thus shall the brats of this spiritual Babylon, the wisdom of the flesh, be
destroyed by that happy man, Christ Jesus.

God says, Jsa. 17.12. concerning this destruction of Babylon, That he will
make a man more precious then fine Gold, or the Golden wedge of Opher; this man
is Christ, who in the day of his power, and in the confounding of this
Spiritual Babell in us, shall be made unto us, more precious then the highest
creature excellency: never till now, will the Saints come to value and to prize
Christ, till they see what he does in them.

Now, how beautiful upon the mountains, are the feet of them that bring glad
tidings of good things; that publishes Salvation; that says unto Zion, thy
God raineth? Thy Messenger upon the Mountains, is Christ Jesus; who comes
Leaping over the mountains, and skiping over the hills of difficulty; that lies
in the way, and appears in glory to his Spouse or beloved Christian, and
declares the message of glad tidings to him; Namely, That his warfare is
accomplished, that his iniquity is pardoned; the battle between Gog and Magog
and the Lamb is finished; and the Lamb or innocent Spirit, has overcome all
by his power and strength; and now likewise he declares to Zion or the soul of
a Saint, that his God raineth; now is come the Kingdom of our God, and the
power of his Christ; therefore Halelujah; for Babylon is fallen, the Whore is
destroyed; God has now put into the hearts of the Kings of the Earth (or
powers of earthly man) to hate the whore, and reward her as she has rewarded
them; and therefore again, Halelujah, for the Lord God omnipotent reigns, and
the Kingdoms of the whore are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his
Christ.

All that remains behind therefore, is but one word of application, which
shall be but only my exhortation to al poor souls that are groaning under this
burdensome task and Egyptian bondage of the Whore: doubtless their are many
to whom these my poor endeavors may offer themselves; whose portion it is to
groan under this spiritual vassallage, to labor under this bodyof death.

Oh Christian! whatever thy condition be, cast not away thy confidence; but
wait upon the Lord, and thou shall renew thy strength; expect the return, or
Second coming of Christ in thee; pray daily, that Christ's Kingdom may come in
thee; that the Lord would establish his own Throne in thy heart; expect the
coming of the Messenger of the Covenant into his Temple, or thy heart; even
the Lord Christ; whom thou seek:

Oh! Labor to see that Christ is approaching near thee, though the clouds of
sin and wickedness hinder the sight of him; know also, that this spiritual
Son, Christ Jesus will break away the clouds; will dispell the mists of
iniquity in thee^; and will break out upon thee, in his full warmth and
splendour; and will bring thee to walk in the light of his glory.

It was said of Abraham, that he saw the day of Christ, and was glad; how
gladly then should the Saints expect, and spiritually see this day to be at
hand in them; In which they shall be freed from that burden which they now
undergo? Shall I tell thee yet farther, for thy comfort O Christian! this
Jesus that comes, will come, and will not tarry: The Lord sees thee in thy
poor weak condition; he takes notice of those many foiles that thy wicked
heart gives thee; he hears thy sighings, cries, and groans; he yearns after
thee; he makes haste to come unto thee so quickly, as may conduce to the
advancement of his glory, and thy Souls further peace and comfort.

Thus in brief, I have discovered to you, in some measure, the Mystery of
iniquity which works in all of us; the great Whore; the spiritual Babylon,
with her Rise, and her Downfall.

In which poor Treatise, I desire that those to whom it shall come, would thus
understand me; that I do not in any wise seek hereby to set up my own
opinion, as Antichrist, above others; but do only declare what I conceive from
good Reason, to be the manifesttative mind of God unto me: And in all my
Mystical applying of any Scriptures; I would not be thought hereby to
endeavor the overture of the History; but only so much of the History, as I
see verified in me, in the Mystery: I have presumed in my present light, to
declare to all men: what is of God, in my weak endeavors, I desire him to
make known; by the declarative power of his spirit: what is of self, I desire
to have a heart to disclaim it, when the Lord shall manifest it unto me; and
so I commit my Labor to him, from whence only, I expect a reward: desiring
nothing from any man, but a favorable construction of that which I have
declared to all men, in the bowels of love and affection.

For my own part, I am one that waits for the Kingdom and power of Christ,
to be manifested in me: I desire to see farther the glorious dawnings of
Jesus, and risings of his glory in me; and looking for, and hasting to the
coming of the day of Jesus; in which, all old things shall pass away, and all
things shall become new

and that which I conceive in this condition is the best course for my self to
take, I shall likewise fasten the same advice upon all others.

Who is amongst you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his
Servant, that walks in darkness, and sees no light, let him trust in the
name of the Lord, and stay himself upon his God.

December. 12. 1647. Jos. Salmon.

FINIS.

