An exact RELATION Of that famous and notable VICTORY Obtained at
Milford-Haven against the Earl of Carbery his Forces; by the Admiral and
Vice Admiral of the Irish Seas.

The manner of the Fight, the taking of the Town of Tinby, two Ships and four
Castles, with their Ordnance.

Also a List of the Names of the Commanders taken, with six or seven hundred
common Soldiers now prisoners: With their several Letters and Summons sent to
the abovesaid Town and Castles, and their Answers.

Written by Captain WILLIAM SMITH Vice Admiral and Commander of his Majesty's
Ship the Swallow employed in that Service: And by him presented to the right
Honorable ROBERT Earl of Warwick, Lord high Admiral of ENGLAND.

Printed according to Order.

London printed by Moses Bell, 25. July 1644.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord:
IN the proceed of the Flect on our Irish Voyage, you may be pleased to take
notice, that on the 18. January 1643. we set sail in Plymouth Sound, and after
much foul weather and contrary winds beating about the Lands end, it pleased
God to bring part of the Fleet safe to Anchor in Milford-Haven on the 23. of
the same, viz. the Leopard Regent, the Swallow, the Leopard Merchant,
Providence Merchant, and Crescent Frigot, and within three days after the
Prosperous and the two Lerpoole Vessels came to Milford. But through the
neglect of Captain Plunket and Captain Williams, the said Vessels were
necessitated to continue for the space of seven weeks at Milford, it being
their charge to have conveyed them to their desired Port. And at our arrival
we found at Anchor in the Haven the Globe of Bristoll, and a small ship which
arrived at Milford eight days before we came in, and had brought from Bristoll
Ammunition to fortify the Harbor, as great Guns, Powder, Bullet, and other
Provisions, and had landed them at Prickspill, which lies on the North side of
the Harbor, where the enemy had made a Fort and fortified it; into which Pill
the Globe and the other Ship having made us from the mouth of the Harbor let
slip and run. And my Admiral in pursuit came before the Pill, where were
exchanged diverse Shots, but no hurt done on either side: The Admiral
perceiving no considerable service or execution could be performed on the Fort
or Ships, they being drawn about a neck of Land behind the Fort, he came to
Anchor before it within shot, and the Swallow a head of him, and the rest of
the Fleet a head of the Swallow inclining to the Southside. Some three days
after in the night the enemy drew a Gun out of the Fort to the Westward of the
Pill, and at break of the day began a morning salute to the Swallow, who to
gratify their courtesy answered them; and after many shot their Gun split,
and so they withdrew it away. At that time it proved very stormy weather, in so
much that our Ships hauled home their Anchors, wherefore upon the first
opportunity the Leopard and Swallow were enforced to weigh and come to Anchor
on the South Side before Angle, a Birth where usually the Kings Ships ride when
they come into that Harbor. But shortly after the Admiral sent the Prosperous
and the Leopard Merchant, to ride before the Pill, to hinder (if it were
possible) the strengthening of their Work, which daily the enemy assaid to do:
From the Ships were diverse shots made daily at their Works, as also from the
Fort at the Ships, but no considerable damage received, only the Leopard
Merchant received a shot in her quarter, which dropped into the Masters bed. And
to annoy the Fort the more, the Admiral (with the joint consent of the
Commanders) built a Fort on the South side over against the Pill, and placed
therein a Demy-Cannon, wherewith we played into their Works, which was a great
encouragement unto many in the County to adhere unto the well-affected party
(who at that time were very weak.)

Thus having presented to your Lordship with our proceedings at Sea, in and
about the Harbor, you may be pleased to take a view of the correspondence we
held ashore, both with the ill and well affected. After our happy arivall, I
call it happy, in respect of the great deliverance it pleased the most mighty
Preserver of all things to afford to the distressed Inhabitants of Pembrooke,
and the well-affected Gentlemen of that County. The next morning after we came
to Anchor in the Haven, Colonel Langborne and the Major of Pembrooke came
aboard the Leopard, and informed my Admiral with the feeble condition the
well-affected party was in, as also of the strength, power, and insolency of
the adverse party: For after the enemy had fortified the North side of the
Harbor, and intending to fortify the South side within a day or two, had not
our arrival frustrated that design. The Enemy presuming on their strength,
cast off their sheeps clothing, in which they had so long deluded the people,
and demonstrated themselves to be like unto the rest of their Consederates
(Ravening Wolves:) The Earl of Carbery having voted that after the Harbor was
fortified, he would plunder the Town of Pembrooke, and the Houses of the
Gentlemen who had adhered to that party, and that their persons should be put
to death by cruel tortures; the Mayor of Pembrooke; they said, should be put
into a barrel of nails and brought to Prickspili, and from the top of a hill
should be rolled down into the Sea. This report so terrified the Gentlemen,
that they fled from their houses and hid themselves in obscure places (in
disguise) and sent their wives and children to Tinbie, where his Lordship then
lay, humbly to supplicate his Lordship to grant them protections that their
Houses might not be plundered nor their persons abused by the rude Soldiers,
among whom there was a reverent aged Gentlewoman, the wife of one Master
Griffith White, who had in her house eight sons and eight daughters who were
Virgins, and four small grand Children in all number 20. with diverse servants
both Male and Female: This Gentlewoman pressing his Lordship to commiserate her
sad estate in case her house should be plundered, desired his protection,
assuring his Lordship that whenever he would be pleased to give her husband
leave to wait on him, she did not doubt but that her husband would give his
Lordship ample satisfaction in all his lawful demands. His Lordship replied,
He would find a time to speak with her husband, but as for a Protection he
would grant her none. The Gentlewoman, with tears in her eyes, desired his
Lordship to look on her children, who in point of honor he stood engaged to
protect, as also the chastity of Matrons and Virgins, the which (without his
Lordships protection) she said must undoubtedly be violated, and her family
perish. To which his Lordship answered with diverse reproaches and some Jeasts
among, That it were better her children and Family should perish, then that the
King should want means to perfect his design. To which she said, The King
could not want, if His Majesty would be graciously pleased to be content with
what God and the Laws of the Land have provided. At which his Lordship flung
out of the room, leaving the Gentlewoman with tears in her eyes, and so she
departed to her house full of grief and pensive thoughts. A passage from his
Lordship of so barbarous a deportment, that I believe History can scarce
parallel to have proceeded from any Heathen: And if these be the loyal
Subjects who fight for the Gospel, the Kings Honor, and the Subjects Liberty,
I leave it to every man's judgment to determine.

The lamentable condition of the well-affected, being by the Admiral and
Commanders disputed; It was demanded of Colonel Langborne and the Major, what
force the well-affected party was able to raise, to oppose his Lordship: It was
by them replied, that they could not raise above 40 Horse, and about 60 Foot;
Then it was demanded, in case there should be 200 Seamen landed well armed,
whether they would join with them in endeavoring to drive his Lordship out of
the County, for unless they would be active, they must resolve to prepaire to
go away with the Fleet, in regard a consumption of Victuals would force us to
depart that harhour; The Colonel and Major, with the well-affected Gentry,
like gallant men, who had rather dye then outlive the honor of their Country,
or to see the ruin thereof, by a Jesuiticall and Popish Faction, resolved to
put themselves under the providence of the Almighty, and with the help of our
Seamen to affront the Enemy, the which was without delay put in execution: And
on the 13 of February we fell on a Garrison of the Enemies, in a strong hold
called (Stackpoole) the Manor house of one Master Roger Lo^t, one which with
our great Guns, having made a breach after 8 hours assault, we took with the
loss of two men, and many wounded on both sides; shortly after they fell on
another Garrison of the Enemies, called (Troyffloine) lying within a mile of
Tinbye, out of which Town his Lorship issued with about 100 Horse and Foot,
intending to have relieved Troyffloine, and faced our Forces, on whom we let
fly a piece of Ordnance, whereat his Lordship wheeled about with all his
Forces, and ran into the Town; Our Forces persecuting there assault upon the
Garrison, took it, and therein 40 Horse, and 150 Arms, with the loss of two
men on our side, and six on the Enemies. God giving our small Forces this good
success, they retired to Pembrooke to refresh their men, and to enable
themselves for a more potent design on the Enemy, intending to oppose their
whole body which consisted 1200 men, foot and horse, which lay in and about
Haverford-West, then his Lordships Rendezvouze; but his Lordship hearing of
this design, having fortyfied Haverford-West, and placed most of his strength
there; his Lordship like a valiant Commander with 20. Horse, some foot, and 4.
field peecs (ran away) telling the rest of the Commanders that he road unto
the adjacent County to raise more forces, and that he would suddenly return.
Now when our men were refreshed and 6. field pieecs mounted on Carriages, with
Wagons to convey there Ammunition and Victuals, they resolved to fall on the
fort at the Pill, and on the 22. of Feb. Colonel Langborne and the Major of
Pembrooke sent aboard the Admiral, to desire that our boats might be sent to
the passage to convey over on the enemies side there Artillery, Wagons, and
Provisions, the which was done on Friday the 23. And about three of the clock
in the morning they were all landed, consisting of about 300. Horse and Foot,
with six field Pieces of Ordnance, who proceeding on their march, their Horse
in the front, advanced before the Pill; about twelve a clock at noone our
Ships also were at Anchor before the Fort, the Leopard Regent and the Swallow
road to the Westward, and the Prosperous and the Leopard Merchant road to the
Eastward, plying our Ordinance into the Fort, and when our land forces had
drawn up their Artillery, they played into the Fort from a hill which lay to
the Eastward of it, and were answered again; The Horse and Foot did skirmish
from their Ambuscodoes, but on this day no man was either slain or hurt on
either side, night coming on, caused a Cessation: Our land Forces quartering
about their Artillery, lay in the field before the Fort, it being a bitter cold
night. The next morning being Saturday, the 24. by break of the day, from our
Ships and land Forces, we began to plye our Ordnance, from the Swallow was a
shot made into the Fort which took off the head of one man, and the
posteriours of another, of which he dyed the next day; our Horse and Foot
behaved themselves valiantly that day, and beat the Enemy from their
Ambuscadoes, and with the Enemy entered their Fort; and then the Enemy cried
quarter, the which our Commanders in Immitation of their Heavenly Father, who
is the God of mercy, granted far above their deserts and spared their lives,
who had formerly voted that if they should prove Conquerours, they would kill
the Dogs, and ravish the Bitches, and drown the Whelps; most inhumaine
language! did it not proceed from those that adheare to the Beast? And
therefore proper for them to speak diabolical and beastiall language. In the
Fort were taken. Arms 160. peecs of Ordnance 18. Soldiers 240. Commanders 26.
their names and qualities are expressed in the Schedule annexed. In the Pill
were taken two Ships, viz. The Globe of Bristoll, in her 12 pieces of Ordnance,
and by a shot from the Globe, was one of the Swallow men slain on the shore
by his own folly, the (other Ship called the Providence, had belonging to her
10 great Guns, but the enemy had carried them to Haverford-West; In the taking
of this Fort, the protecting power of the Almighty, I hope by us shall never
be forgotten, for it was his own arm that got the Victory, to whom be
ascribed, all honor and glory for ever and ever; for in taking thereof, there
was not one man slain either by Sword or small shot. When the Enemy was
routed, some of their Soldiers sed to Haverford-West, and informed the
Commanders there, of the loss of the Fort, and that all their Commanders and
Soldiers therein were taken Prisoners: At which news, it is reported Sir
Henry Vaughan, with the rest of the Commanders, began to rage and swear, (like
madmen) and as a Bear robbed of her whelps, ran up and down the streets,
(crying) beat up our Drums, gather our Horse and Foot together, for we will out
this night and be revenged of the Round-headed Parliament Dogs; and having with
this bravado drawn their Forces into a body, being about 450. Sir John
Stepney the Governor of that Town, like a prudent Overseer went into the
Churchyard to see if he could discern our Forces to approach toward
Haverford-West; about half a mile from the Town he discovered a heard of
young black Bullocks coming toward him; those horned beasts so amuzed the
Knight, that being afraid of his own shadow, his Worship ran to the head of
their Forees, and swore (Gods wounds) the Round-headed Dogs were coming; at
which report they marched out of the Town, and calling to mind the valiant
example of their Lieutenent-Generall Carbery, they wheeled about and ran
away: The Boys of the Town perceiving them to run, fell on their Rear, and
took from them 60. Muskets. This disorder in the Rear made those in the Front
believe that the Roundheads were at their heels indeed, the fear thereof
metamorphosed all her cousen Taffies into Mercuries, and with winged speed
every man fled for his life, some threw away their Arms, and those that had
the charge of the Powder flung it into the River; and in this manner was the
Town of Haverford-West surrendered, verifying that saying of the Kingly
Prophet David, The wicked flies when no man pursues them: when the enemy
fled, they left behind them in Haverford-West 100. red Coats which were never
worn, a quantity of Victuals, and 10. pieces of Ordnance, all which argued,
they wanting nothing but a good Cause to maintain.

Now our Forces being again refreshed, having a Demy-cannon and a
Demy-culverine mounted on field Carriages and being supplied from our Ships,
with Powder and all other Ammunition, they marched toward Tinbye the sixth of
March, on the same day the Swallow and Crescent Frygot, with the Prosperous
Merchant, set sail from Milford, and came to anchor before Tinbye, where I
summoned the Governor and Major, to surrender the Town for the service of
King and Parliament, but receiving a negative answer, I desired the Governor
and Major, to send out of the Town all the women and children, for unless
they would comply, I must in discharge of my duty use my utmost endeavors to
force them thereunto: The same night our land Forces came within two mile of
the Town, from whence Colonel Langhorne sent aboard the Swallow, and desired
me to summon the Town, the which I had done before his Letter came, and
returned the Colonel their answer, and receiving no satisfaction from the
Governor or Major, the next morning about eight of the clock we began to play
into the Town with our Ordnance from our ships, and about one a clock in the
afternoon our land Forces came before the Town, and having placed the; r
Demy-cannon within a quarter of a mile of the Town they fell to battery, and
so we continued three days; the small shot on both sides performed well, the
Town was maintained with brave resolution, and more bravely assaulted by our
Seamen and Land-men, presenting their naked bodies even in the face of danger;
Commissary Gwine Governor of that Town, showed himself to be a man of
undaunted spirit, issuing out of the Town bringing up his small shot to make
good their Ambuscadoes, and his valor exposed that Town to unavoydable
misery, in voting he would neither give nor take quarter; but I may say of his
valor as S. Paul said in another case, to certain Christians in his time;
Shall I praise him for this, no, I praise him not; for all our actions that
tend not to the glory of God, lead us to our destructions; to which indeed this
resolution of his had almost brought him, for leading on his men to face our
small shot, who plied their Muskets so fast, that his men forsook him, and
himself received a shot under his right pap, which enforced him to retreat
alone in a orderly pace; he was no sooner entered the Town, but the Master
Gunner thereof was also slain, in which we must not omit to manifest Gods
providence toward us; for our small shot having forced the Enemy out of their
Ambuscadees, pursued them also to the Towne-gate, their Gunner having laden a
piece of Ordnance with case shot, and watching for such an opportunity, having
travysed the Gun, said to those that stood by. You shall see me make a
slaughter of these Round-beads: At which words, a small shot from our Forts hit
him in the head, after which he he never spoke more; whose fall so daunted the
Enemy, Commanders, and Soldiers, that forthwith they cried out for quarter:
The first that forced their entry into the Town was C. Peter Whittie, with his
company of Seamen and sub-ordinate Officers, Lieutenant Green and Ensign
Dodson, with Lieutenant Colte, who led on the Swallow men, and immediately
after them Colonel Langhorne with his Troops of Horse. This Town of Tinbie
was held by the judgment of the most Judicious almost impregnable, it being
not to be entered but by single foil, wherein were taken between three or 400
Prisoners, as many Arms, 7 pieces of Ordnance, all which were taken on
Saturday the 9 of March, and on Sunday the 10. Carew-Castle was surrendered, in
which was consummated the total subduing of that Malignant and insulting
Party. In the County of Pembrooke, wherein the Lord of Hosts gave his servants
the Victory over his and their Enemies, which gives us just cause to put our
confidence in him, and in that comfortable Ejaculation expressed by holy David,
to cry and say, by this we know, That thou Lord favourest us, in that thou have
not suffered our Enemies to triumph over us.

The true Relation of him, who is a most humble and faithful Servant in this
great Work, according to the trust reposed by your Lordship.

A List of the names of the worthy valiant Commanders now in action in the
County of Pembrooke, in the service of the King and Parliament, which opposed
the Earl of Carbery.
ROwland Langhorne Colonel, and Commander in chief. Simon Thelwell Colonel,
and Voluntier. Thomas Langhorne Sergeant Major. Captain Rice Powell. Captain
Walter Cuney. Captain John Poyer. Captain Peter Whitty. Lieutenant Owgin.
Lieutenant Richard Ienes. Coronet Powell.
A List of the names of the Malignant Commanders taken prisoners at the Pill,
with their inferior Officers in the County of Pembrooke, by those gallant
Commanders above specified, viz.
John Barlow Esquire, Master of the Ordnance, and Captain of a troop of Horse.
Captain Edmond Bradshaw. Captain John Bradshaw. Captain John Butler.
Captain Arnold Butler. Captain William Mary-Church. Captain John Price.
Captain Francis Edmonds.
From the Earl of Carbery we took in this action four Castles, 53. piece of
Ordnance, about six or seven hundred soldiers, as many Arms, and the whole
County of Pembrooke totally subdued, and unanimously have taken the Covenant,
and there is great hopes that Carmarthen and Cardiganshire will comply with us.

Commanders run away from Haverford-West.
SIr Henry Vaughan Major-Generall of the Army. Sir John Stepney Knight and
Baronet, Governor of Haverford-West. Sir Francis Floyde Knight, Captain of a
troop of Horse. James Martin Captain of a troop of Horse. Captain John
Edwards.
Commanders taken at Tinby, with their inferior Officers.
John Gwyn Governor of Tinby, and Commisary of the Army. David Gwyn Colonel.
Thomas Butler Lieutenant Colonel, and high Sheriff for the County of
Pembrooke. Captain George Lewis. Captain Thomas Methell.
A Letter sent in general to the Gentlemen of the County of Pembrooke, at the
request of the well-affected.
Gentlemen,
AS in duty bound, I have always in all fidelity highly honored my King, and
ever been a lover of my Country, and as I stand engaged. God has called me to
be a servant to both; and in discharge of the trust imposed, I am come hither
to desire your compliance in the protection of the Gospel in its inherent
purity, as also the Kings honor, with the Subjects liberty, a work that every
good Christian and loyal Subject ought to be active in, with tender of both
his life and fortunes, in which you have the obligation of our Savior to save
you harmless, who says, If any man shall hazard his life or fortunes, or what
is most, dear unto him for my sake, shall undoubtedly preserve them: And for
your Counter security, you have three Kingdoms in the body of the Parliament
engaged. Now why stand you gazing like the timorous Israelites on the host of
the Philistims? Did not a little youth, David by name, being inspired with the
Spirit of God slay their Champion, and overthrew that idolatrous Host? And
shall a Jesuiticall and Popish Army, with a malignant party at odious in the
sight of God as those cursed Philistims, make you dismayed? No, be comforted,
God and the State has presented unto you a more probable means of deliverance
in sending this Fleet to your preservation, consisting of twelve warlike Ships,
with store of Ammunition and Land Forces, the major part whereof is not yet
come in, occasioned by foul weather at Sea; but upon the first opportunity of
wind and weather undoubtedly will arrive; and by Gods assistance I am
confident. That if the Gentlemen of this County will join with me in my
endeavors, I make no doubt but we shall drive that Malignant rout (who
endeavor to inslave this Nation under the yoke of the Antichristian beast) not
only out of this County, but consequently out of the Dominion of Wales:
wherefore I shall desire the Gentlemen to give me their speedy resolutions; and
if any of them shall not comply, let such look for no favor from me, if it
shall please God to send us the victory, but what Gods enemies and destroyers
of the Country deserve. And let not any man's heart be afraid, for God has
promised to be with his in his protecting power, even to the end of the world,
to whose protection I commit you all: And expecting your Answer, I remain and
rest

Ever ready to engage my life with you in this great work,


Not answered.

A Copy of the Declaration of the Honorable Houses of Parliament now sitting
at Westminster, bearing date the first of February coming to my hand, I caused
diverse Copies thereof to be taken, and with the Letter following I sent one to
Pembrooke, another to Haverford-West, and one to Tinbie.
Gentlemen,
THat you may see with what sincerity of heart we desire you may be reduced to
a right understanding of the unhappy condition you are now in; we shall not
neglect neither our Pen nor Sword, the one to discover unto you the strong
delusions of that Antichristian beast, with whom it is foretold in holy Writ,
That the Princes of the earth shall join in confederacy, as also they with him
undoubtedly must perish, and many millions of poor souls so misled. Oh be
wise, and timely prevent such certain ruin by uniting your selves with the
true Professors of the Gospel, by whom God has said, he would pull that beast
from his Throne, and they shall reward him sevenfold for all the evil he has
done unto the Saints. Now if you shall join with us in this great work, then
shall our Swords be active in your preservation; and for your more ample
satisfaction we shall present you with a most perspicuous Perspective, wherein
you may perceive the perfect way both to your Terrestrial and Celestial
felicity, being a Copy of the last Declaration of the Honorable Houses of
Parliament; tho which if you please to peruse with a discerning judgment, you
may see with what zeal and care those Worthies of our Land have endeavored to
remove from your eyes those Antichristian mists, through which (as with an
Ignis fatuus) you have been so long misguided. And because we know that the
Patient thirsts after the Cure, we refer you to the application of the means
presented in that Declaration; the which if they may give you that satisfaction
as may make you truly happy in joining with us, our endeavors are fully
satisfied, and you shall ever find us yours,

Richard Swanley. William Smith.



The Summons to the Town of TINBIE.
Gentlemen,
IN a former Letter unto you, wherein was presented the late Declaration of the
Honorable Assembly of Parliament; We the Commanders of His Majesty's Ships,
desired your Resolutions, whether you would comply in the contents thereof, and
join with us in the preservation of the Gospel, the Kings Honor, and the
Kingdoms Safety, to expel the Forces brought into the County by the Earl of
Carbery, but receiving no answer, We are now come before your Town, to let
you know, that unless you forthwith yield obedience thereunto, We shall use
our best endeavors to force it. In which, if it shall please God to deliver
you into our hands, you must expect no other favor then what is due to
Traitors, both to God and their Country; wherefore I advise you seriously to
consider, and wisely to provide for your present and future safety, and let us
receive your speedy Answer, that by your timely adhearing to us, you may
prevent the demolishing of your Town, by the battering it about your ears
with our Ordnance, and hoping you will preserve it as also the effusion of much
blood by your sweet compliance, We remain and rest

As you may give us cause, your faithful Friends to protect you.
Postscript.
We further declare, That if the Commanders and Soldiers shall join with you
in the surrendering of your Town that they shall have quarter for their lives
and to go whether they please, or continue and be received into the service of
King and Parliament.




Their ANSWER.
Gentlemen,
YOurs we formerly received, with a Declaration their enclosed, which was
required from us before we could peruse the contents thereof, which was the
cause of our not returning any Answer thereunto, yours of this present we have
received: Wherein you desire us to complye with you for the preservation of the
Gospel, and His Majesty's Honor, which is the work we have vowed to
maintain with our lives and fortunes; and so doing, we hold our selves true
Subjects, to God, our King, and Country. And whereas you threaten the
demolishing of our Town, which is not ours to dispose of, but His Majesty's,
all which we pray you to take into your serious considerations, as also the cry
of the effusion of much innocent blood; for Anesweare from the Commanders and
Soldiers, we refer you to th- Letter you shall receive from the Governor of
the Town and Fort. Thus with our best respects, we take leave, and rest

Tinbie 6th March, 1643./44. Your ever loving Friends if you please, Richard
Wyett Major. David Hamond. Richard Prichard. John Rogers. Francis Long.



The Summons of the Castle of Tinbie.
Gentlemen,
THese are to require you, that upon sight hereof, you immediately yield up the
Fort to the use of the King and Parliament; and so doing you shall be received
into the protection of that Assembly and enjoy the benefit of Loyal Subjects.
But in case you shall continue in your Rebellion you must expect to be
proceeded against as Traitors to your King and Country, and enemies to God and
the Protestant Religion; For if you shall make one shot at the King and
Parliaments Ships, not one of you shall escape for his life if it shall please
God to give us the Victory. Consider of it, and let me receive your
Resolutions, in which if you please you shall find me

Your faithful Friend to preserve,


Their ANSWER.
Gentlemen,
THis Town we hold as loyal Subjects to the Kings Majesty's use, for defense
thereof we have his Majesty's gracious Commission, which we will endeavor to
maintain with the hazard of our lives and fortunes against all opposers, by
what color or pretense soever. This is the resolution of

John Gwynn. David Gwynn. Thomas Botler.



FINIS.

