AN OLD MOULD TO CAST NEW LAWS BY; COMPILED By the Honorable Sir Thomas Smith
Knight, Doctor of both Laws, and one of the Principal Secretaries unto two
most worthy Princes, King EDWARD, and Queen ELIZABETH. Reprinted out of the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND, by a friend to old Books, and an Enemy to new
Opinions. TOGETHER, With King JAMES His Declaration to both Houses at
White Hall, of the Kings Power in the Parliament of Scotland in making Laws.
March 31. 1607.

Remember the days of old, Consider the years of many Generations; ask thy
Father, and he will show thee, thy Elders and they will tell thee.

Deuteronomy. 32. 7. Vir bonus est Quis? Answer is made,
Qui consulta Patrum, qui Leges juraque servat.
Printed, M.DC.XLIII.

OF THE PARLIAMENT, and the Authority thereof.
THe most high and absolute power of the Realm of England consists in the
Parliament. For as in War where the King himself in Person, the Nobility,
the rest of the Gentility and the Yeomanry are, is the force and power of
England: so in Peace and Consultation where the Prince is to give life, and the
last and highest Commandment: the Barrony or the Nobility for the higher: the
Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen and Commons for the lower part of the
Commonwealth, the Bishops for the Clergy be present to advertise, consult, and
show what is good and necessary for the Commonwealth, and to consult together,
and upon mature deliberation every Bill or Law being thrice read and disputed
upon in either House, the other two parts, first each a part, and after the
Prince himself in presence of both the parties does consent unto, and
allows. That is the Prince's and the whole Realms deed: whereupon justly no
man can complain, but must accommodate himself to find it good and obey it.

That which is done by this consent is called Firm, Stable, and Sanctum, and
is taken for Law. The Parliament abrogateth old Laws, makes new, gives order
for things past, and for things hereafter to be followed, changes rights and
possessions of private men, legitimateth bastards, establishes forms of
Religion, alters waights and measures, gives form of succession to the
Crown, defines of doubtful rights, whereof is no Law already made, appoynteth
Subsidies, Tails, Taxes and impositions, gives most free pardons and
absolutions, restores in blood and name, as the highest Court, condemns or
absolveth them whom the Prince will put to that trial. And to be short, all
that ever the People of Rome might do, either in Centuriatis Comitiis or
tributis, the same may be done by the Parliament of England, which represents
and has the power of the whole Realm, both the head and the body. For every
English man is intended to be there present, either in Person, or by
Procuration, or Attorney of what Pre-eminence, State, Dignity or Quality soever
he be, from the Prince (be he King or Queen) to the lowest person of England.
And the consent of the Parliament is taken to be every man's consent.

The Judges in Parliament are the King or Queens Majesty, the Lords Temporal
and Spiritual, the Commons presented by the Knights and Burgesses of every
Shire and Borough Town. These all, or the greatest part of them, and that with
the consent of the Prince for the time being must agree to the making of Laws.

The officers in Parliament are the Speakers, two Clerks, the one for the
Higher House, the other for the Lower, and Committees.

The Speaker is he that does commend and prefer the Bills exhibited into the
Parliament, and is the Mouth of the Parliament. He is commonly appointed by the
King or Queen, though accepted by the assent of the House.

The Clerks are the keepers of the Parliament Rolls and Records, and of the
Statutes made, and have the custody of the private Statutes not Printed.

The Committees are such as either the Lords in the Higher House, or Burgesses
in the Lower House, do choose to frame the Laws upon such Bills as are agreed
upon, and afterward to be ratified by the same Houses.

Of the form of holding the Parliament.
THe Prince sends forth His rescripts or writs to every Duke, Marquess,
Baron, and every other Lord Temporal or Spiritual, who has voice in the
Parliament, to be at his great Council of Parliament such a day (the space
from the date of the writ is commonly at the least 40. days) he sends also
writs to the Sheriffs of every Shire, to admonish the whole Shire to choose two
Knights of the Parliament in the name of the Shire, to hear, and reason, and
to give their advice and consent in the name of the Shire, and to be present at
that day: likewise to every City and Town, which of ancient time has been
wont to find Burgesses of the Parliament, so to make election that they may be
present at the first day of the Parliament. The Knights of the Shire be chosen
by all the Gentlemen and Yeomen of the Shire, present at the day assigned for
the election (...) voice of any absent can be counted for none. Yeomen I call
here (as before) that may dispend at the least 40s. of yearly rent of free land
of his own. These meeting at one day, the two who have the more of their
voices, be chosen Knights of the Shire for that Parliament: likewise by the
plurality of the voices of the Citizens and Burgesses, be the Burgesses
elected. The first day of the Parliament the Prince and all the Lords in their
Robes of Parliament do meet in the Higher House, where after prayers made,
they that be present are written, and they that be absent upon sickness, or
some other reasonable cause, (which the Prince will allow) do constitute under
their hand and Seal, some one of these who be present, as their Procurer, or
Attorney, to give voice for them, so that by presence or Attorney and Proxy
they be all there, all the Princes and Barons, and all Archbishops and
Bishops, and (when Abbots were) so many Abbots as had voice in Parliament. The
place where the assembly is, is richly Tapessed and Hanged, a Princely and
Royal Throne as appertains to a King, set in the midst of the higher place
thereof. Next under the Prince sits the Chancellor, who is the voice and
Orator of the Prince. On the one side of that House or Chamber, sits the
Archbishops and Bishops each in his rank; on the other side the Dukes and
Barons.

In the midst thereof upon Woolsacks sit the Judges of the Realm, the Master
of the Rolls, and the Secretaries of State. But these that sit on the
Woolsacks have no voice in the House, but only sit there to answer their
knowledge in the Law, when they be asked if any doubt arise among the Lords. The
Secretaries do answer of such Letters or things passed in Council whereof
they have the custody and knowledge, and this is called the Upper House, whose
consent and dissent is given by each man severally, and by himself, first for
himself, and then severally for as many as he has Letters and Proxies, when
it comes to the question, saying only content or not content, without farther
reasoning or replying. In this mean time the Knights of the Shires, and
Burgesses of the Parliament (for so they are called that have voice in
Parliament, and are Chosen as I have said before to the number betwixt three
and four Hundred) are called by such as it pleases the Prince to appoint,
into an open great house or chamber by name, to which they answer: and
declaring for what Shire or Town they answer, then they are willed to choose an
able and discreet man, to be as it were the mouth of them all, and to speak
for, and in the name of them, and to present him so chosen by them to the
Prince: which done they coming all with him to the Bar, which is at the
nether end of the upper House, there he first prayseth the Prince, then makes
his excuse of inability, and prays the Prince that He would command the
Commons to choose another. The Chancellor in the Princes name does so much
declare him able, as he did declare himself unable, and thanketh the Commons
for choosing so wise discreet and eloquent a man, and wills them to go and
consult of Laws for the Commonwealth. Then the Speaker makes certain
requests to the Prince in the name of the Commons, First, that His Majesty
would be content, that they may use and enjoy all their Liberties and
privileges that the Commons House was wont to enjoy.

Secondly, that they may frankly and freely say their minds in disputing of
such matters as may come in question, and that without offense to His Majesty.

Thirdly, if any should chance of that Lower House to offend, or not to do or
say as should become him, or if any should offend any of them being called to
that His Majesty's Highness Court, that they themselves (according to the
ancient custom) might have the punishment of them. And fourthly, that if there
came any doubt whereupon they shall desire to have the advice, or conference
with His Majesty, or with any of the Lords, that they might do it; all which
he promises in the Commons names, that they shall not abuse, but have such
regard, as most faithful, true, and loving Subjects ought to have to their
Prince.

The Chancellor answers in the Princes Name as appertains. And this is all
that is done for one day, and sometimes for two. Besides the Chancellor, there
is one in the upper House, who is called the Clarke of the Parliament, who
reads the Bills. For all that comes in consultation either in the upper
House, or in the nether House, is put in writing first in paper, which being
once read he that will, rises up, and speaks with it or against it, and so
one after another so long as they shall think good: That done, they go to
another, and so to another Bill. After it has been once or twice read, and
does appear that it is somewhat liked as reasonable, with such amendment in
words and peradventure some sentences, as by disputation seems to be amended,
in the upper House the Chancellor asks, if they will have it engrossed, that
is to say, put into Parchment: which done; and read the third time, and that
eft-soones, if any be disposed to objected, disputed again among them, the
Chancellor asks if they will go to the question; and if they agree to go to
the question, then he says, here is such a Law, or Act concerning such a
matter, which has been thrice read here in this House, are ye content that it
be enacted or no? If the not contents be more, then the Bill is dashed, that is
to say, the Law is annihilated, and goes no farther. If the contents be the
more, then the Clarke writes underneath: Soit baille aux Commons. And so when
they see time, they send such Bills as they have approved, by two or three of
those which do sit on the wool-sacks to the Commons, who asking license, and
coming into the house with due reverence, says to the speaker: Master
speaker, my Lords of the upper House, have passed among them, and think good
that there should be enacted by Parliament such an Act, and such an Act, and so
reads the titles of that Act or Acts. They pray you to consider of them, and
show them your advise; which done, they go their way. They being gone, and the
door again being shut, the Speaker rehearses to the house what they said.
And if they be not busy disputing at the time in another Bill, he asks them
straight way, if they will have that Bill, or (if there be more) one of them.

In like manner in the lower House, the Speaker sitting in a seat or chair for
that purpose, somewhat higher, that he may see, and be seen of them all, has
before him in a lower seat his Clarke, who reads such Bills as be first
propounded in the lower House, or be sent down from the Lords. For in that
point each House has equal authority to propound what they think meet,
either for the abrogating of some Law made before, or for making of a new. All
Bills be thrice in three diverse days read, and disputed upon before they come
to question. In the disputing is a marvailous good order used in the lower
House. He that stands up bare-headed, is understanded that he will speak to
the Bill. If more stand up, who that is first judged to arise, is first heard,
though the one do praise the Law, the other dissuade it, yet there is no
alteration. For every man speaks as to the Speaker, not as one to another,
for that is against the order of the house. It is also taken against the order
to name him, whom ye do confute, but by circumlocution, as he that speaks
with the Bill, or he that speaks against the Bill, and gave this and this
reason. And so with perpetual oration, not with alteration, he goes through
till he have made an end. He that once has spoken in a Bill, though he be
confuted strait, that day may not reply, no though he would change his opinion.
So that to one Bill in one day, one may not in that House speak twice, for
else one or two with alteration would spend all the time; the next day he may,
but then also but once. No reviling or nipping words must be used. For then all
the House will cry it is against the order, and if any speak irreverently or
seditiously against the Prince or the privy Counsel, I have seen them not
only interrupted, but it has been moved after to the House, and they have sent
them to the Tower. So that in such a multitude, and in such a diversity of
minds, and opinions, there is the greatest modesty and temperance of speech
that can be used. Nevertheless with much dulce and gentle terms, they make
their reasons as violent, and as vehement the one against the other, as they
may ordinarily, except it be for urgent causes, and hasting of time. At the
afternoon they keep no Parliament. The Speaker has no voice in the House, nor
will they suffer him to speak in any Bill to move or dissuade it. But when any
Bill is read, the Speakers office is, as briefly and as plainly as he may, to
declare the effect thereof to the House. If the Commons do assent to such
Bills as be sent to them, first agreed upon from the Lords thus subscribed, Les
Commons ont assentus; so if the Lords do agree to such Bills as be first
agreed upon by the Commons, they send them down to the Speaker, thus
subscribed, Les Seigneurs ont assentus: if they cannot agree, the two Houses
(for every Bill from whence soever it does come is thrice read in each of the
Houses) if it be understood that there is any sticking, sometimes the Lords to
the Commons, sometimes the Commons to the Lords do require that a certain of
each House may meet together, and so each part be informed of others meaning,
and this is always granted. After which meeting for the most part, not
always, either part agrees to others Bills.

In the upper House they give their assent and dissent each man severally by
himself; first for himself, and then for so many as he has Proxy. When the
Chancellor has demanded of them, whether they will go to the question, after
the Bill has been thrice read? they saying only content or not content,
without further reasoning or replying, and as the more number does agree, so is
it agreed on or dashed.

In the nether House none of them that is elected, either Knight or Burgess
can give his voice to another, nor his consent or dissent by Proxy. The more
part of them that be present only makes the consent or dissent. After the Bill
has been twice read, and then engrossed, and est-soones read and disputed on
enough as is thought, the Speaker asks, if they will go to the question, and
if they agree? he holds the Bill up in his hand, and says, as many as will
have this Bill go forward, which is concerning such a matter, say, yea. Then
they which allow the Bill, cry yea, and as many as will not, say no: as the cry
of yea, or no is bigger, so the Bill is allowd or dashed. If it be a doubt
which cry is bigger, they divide the House, the Speaker saying, as many as do
allow the Bill, go down with the Bill, and as many as do, not sit still. So
they divide themselves, and being so divided, they are numbered who made the
more part, and so the Bill does speed. It chances sometime that some part of
the Bill is allowed, some other part has much controversy and doubt made of
it, and it is thought if it were amended it would go forward. Then they choose
certains Committees of them who have spoken with the Bill, and against it, to
amend it, and bring it again so amended, as they amongst them shall think meet:
and this is before it is engrossed, yea and sometime after. But the agreement
of these Committees is no prejudice to the House. For at the last question they
will accept it or dash it, as it shall seem good, notwithstanding that
whatsoever the Committees have done.

Thus no Bill is an Act of Parliament, Ordinance, or Edict of Law, until both
the Houses have severally agreed unto it after the order aforesaid, no nor then
neither. But the last day of that Parliament or Session, the Prince comes in
Person in His Parliament Robes, and sits in His State, all the upper house
sits about the Prince in their States and order in their Robes. The Speaker
with all the Commons House comes to the Bar, and there after thanksgiving
first in the Lords name by the Chancellor etc. And in the Commons name by the
Speaker to the Prince, for that He has so great care of the government of His
People, and for calling them together to advise of such things as should be for
the Reformation; establishing and ornament of the Commonwealth. The Chancellor
in the Princes name gives thanks to the Lords and Commons, for their pains
and travailes taken, which he the said Prince will remember and recompense when
time and occasion shall serve, and that he for his part is ready to declare his
pleasure concerning their proceedings, whereby the same may have perfect life
and accomplishment, by His Princely authority, and so have the whole consent of
the Realm. Then one reads the Titles of every Act, which has passed at that
Session, but only in this fashon: An Act concerning such a thing, etc. It is
marked there what the Prince does allow, and to such he says Le Roy, or La
Royn le vults And those be taken now as perfect Laws, and Ordinances of the
Realm of England, and none other, and as shortly as may be put in Print,
except it be some private cause, or Law made for the benefit or prejudice of
some private man, which the Romans were wont to call Privilegia. These be only
exemplified under the Seal of the Parliament, and for the most part not
Printed. To those which the Prince likes not he answers Le Roy or La Royne
saduisera, and those be accounted utterly dasned and of none effect.

This is the Order and Form of the highest and most authentical Court of
England, by virtue whereof all those things be established whereof I spoke
before, and no other means accounted availeable to make any new for feiture of
Life, Member, or Lands of any English man, where there was no Law ordained for
it before.

King JAMES His Declaration to both Houses at White Hall, of the Kings power in
the Parliament of SCOTLAND in making Laws. March 31. 1607.
IT has been objected as another impediment, That in the Parliament of
Scotland the King has not a Negative voice, but must pass all the Laws
agreed on by the Lords and Commons.

Of this I can best resolve you, for I am the eldest Parliament man in
Scotland, and have sat in more Parliaments then all my Predecessors. I can
assure you, that the form of Parliament there is nothing inclined to
Popularity. About a twenty days or such a time before the Parliament,
Proclamation is made through the Kingdom, to deliver into the Kings Clark of
Register (whom ye here call the Master of the Rolls) all Bills to be
exhibited that Sessions, before a certain day. Then are they brought unto the
King, and perused and considered by Him; and only such as I allow of are put
into the Chancellors hands, to be propounded to the Parliament and none others.
And if any man in Parliament speak of any other matter, then is in this form
first allowed by me, the Chancellor tells him there is no such Bill allowed by
the King.

Besides when they have passed them for Laws, they are presented unto Me, and
I with my Scepter put into my hand by the Chancellor, must say, I ratify and
approve all things done in this present Parliament: And if there be any thing
that I dislike they race it out before: If this may be called a Negative Voice;
then I have one I am sure in that Parliament.

If I have spoken evil bear witness of the evil, but if well, why smitest
thou me?

Ioh. 18. 23. If I have said any thing amiss tell me.

Eras. Paraph. FINIS.

