A SABBATH Of REST to be kept by the SAINTS here: OR, A Treatise of the
Sabbath, and such Holy and Religious Duties as are required for the
Sanctification of it.

Exodus 31. 13. Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a Sign between me
and you, throughout your Generations, that ye may know that I am the Lord that
Sanctify you. The Great SABBATH of REST, That remains to be Kept by God's
SAINTS Hereafter.

Deuteronomy. 12. 9. Ye are not yet come to the Rest, nor to the Inheritance that the
Lord your God gives you. 2 These. 1. 7. To you that are troubled Rest with us,
when the Lord Jesus shall be Revealed from Heaven with his Mighty Angels. Heb.
13. 14. Here have we no continuing City, but we seek one to come. Delivered in
Diverse Sermons, upon Heb. 4. 9.

By Nicholas Smith, Master of Arts, and Vicar of Braughing in Hartford-shire.

London, Printed by J. R. for Samuel Crouch, at the Corner of Pope's Head Alley,
next Cornhill. 1675.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. Line 7. eyes for eye. Ibid. l. 18. sins for sin. p. 4. l. 1. chose for
chosen. p. 6. l. 10. day left out. p. 15. l. 3. Christan for Christian. p. 18.
l. 20. for to be left out. p. 20. l. 31. Sabbath for Sabbaths. p. 22. l. 34.
look for seek. p. 26. l. 16. a is le^t out, Psalm for a Psalm. p. 28. l. 8.
looking for seeking. p. 28. l. 11. Man for Men. p. 30. l. 27. a left out,
Sabbath for a Sabbath. p. 31. l. 6. weeks for weekdays.

To the READER.
CHristian Reader, How much the Laws of the Church and Kingdom are violated by
Papists and Sectaries, thou can not be ignorant: The spreading Contagion of
Schism and Heresy does dilate it self through the whole Land, and the Evil is
so Universal, that to the Worlds eye it seems Remediless and past Cure. The
several Sects that have of late days sprung up, are so frequent and common in
all places and parts of the Kingdom, and the numbers that adhere to them are so
many, and the stream runs so strongly for them, that a toleration has been
thought necessary, and Liberty has been granted to the several Sectaries to
have their Public Meetings; and it was thought as necessary by Rulers and
Governors, that the Papists likewise should have a toleration in their
Religion, though they were not permitted to have their Public Meetings or
Meetingplaces. The Sectaries of late days having been found as dangerous and
pernicious as the Papists, and their Practices rather more than less
Destructive to the Public Peace of the Church and Kingdom. But now His Sacred
Majesty and both Houses of Parliament, having by joint Consent made the Laws of
the Church and Kingdom binding to all; and having thought it necessary not to
admit of any Toleration, and having Declared against all Backsliding to Popery
or Schism. I have assumed the boldness to manifest to the World, that nothing
can more conduce to the Public Peace of this Miserable Distracted Kingdom,
than to have the Laws of the Church and Kingdom Observed without consenting to
any Changes or Alterations whatsoever: And hope that this Sermon will find
Acceptance of those who are in Authority, and likewise of all Pious Christians
who are for the Laws of the Church and Kingdom. But yet I do Confess, I do
after a despairing manner settle my self to this Task. We have been heretofore,
and are still, (by God's just permission for our sins) so miserably Afflicted
by Papists and Sectaries, that I am out of hopes of prevailing; and were it not
so, that I did more trust in Divine help and assistance, than in Humane, I had
never set Pen to Paper to Write. In this clear Light of the Gospel there could
not be such Opposition of the Laws of God and the Land as there is, if there
were not some Papists and Sectaries who go against their Consciences, and
resist the Truth. But it is to be that there be some such amongst us, who stand
for the Truth, the Religion, and Laws Established. The good God open our Eyes
to see our sins, and give us Grace to Judge our selves, that so the time may
come, when God may see their sins to be greater than ours; and Discover and
bring to light their Treacherous Practices, their secret sins, and underhand
workings, so as may make for his Glory, the public Peace of the Church and
Kingdom.

Those Ignorant Papists and Sectaries, who are fraudulently circumvented, and
unawares seduced by Crafty Heretics and Schismatics, who lie in wait to
deceive; I pity them, and pray unto God for them, that he would open their Eyes
to see their Errors, and amend their sins, and hope that God may touch the
Hearts of some of them, and cause them to give over their slandering and
iraducing of those who persuade them to Obedience, and be willing themselves to
be Obedient to the Laws of the Church and Kingdom, and Labor to win others to
Submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake: And pray for
those, whose Hearts desire and prayer for them is, that they might be Saved.
That so they, with all Saints, praying for those of the Magistracy and
Ministry, who stand for the Laws of God, the Church, and Kingdom. We may have
Peace among our selves at home, and with our Enemies abroad; and the Church of
God may have Peace, and be Edified, walking in the fear of the Lord, and the
Comfort of the Holy Ghost. This shall be the Prayer of him, who is one of the
meanest of the Household of Faith, and desires no other Honor, than to
Subscribe himself.

A Servant of the Church, and of all Saints. Nicholas Smith.

A Sabbath of Rest, to be kept by the Saints here; Or a Treatise of the
Sabbath, and such holy and Religious Duties, as are required for the
Sanctification of it.
Heb. 4. ver. 9. There remains therefore a rest to the People of God.
GOd that made the world and all things therein, seeing ^ne is Lord of Heaven
and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with
^e^s hands, as though he needed any thing. He is independent, He stands not
in need of our Praises, or of our Prayers. If Churches be pulled down,
Churchmen cast off, the means allotted to God's worship and service either
embezled, or employed to profane uses: They that do these things they may
hurt themselves, they cannot hurt God. God receives no additional perfection
by men's honoring him, by their adoring and worshipping him. If Temples be
built, His Name called upon, His Sabbaths sanctified, and the means allotted to
his Worship and service employed to that use for which it was ordained: so that
men honor God with their substance, and with the first fruits of their
increase: God his happiness is not hereby increased. He was happy when these
things were not done, and will be happy when these things shall again cease to
be performed: but yet if the world continue, and the great Sabbath of rest be
not at hand, God will put an end to these things, and his Temples shall not
always be profaned, his Ministers continually despised, neither will he ever
suffer wicked Hypocrites to fight against him with his own weapons, or profane
Atheists to take away the means consecrated to his service, and employ it to
profane uses: but he that is Lord of the Sabbath is Holy, and will have his
Holy Days, and his Sabbaths to be sanctified. There remains therefore a rest
to the people of God, or as it is in the original (...) a keeping of a Sabbath.
The rest that is here properly meant, it is that great Sabbath of rest that
shall be kept unto God by all those that depart in the faith, they shall keep a
perpetual Sabbath unto God, and shall for ever sing. Heavenly Allelujahs unto
him, with the Holy Angels in Heaven: But yet in regard this great rest is set
forth and expressed in the phrase of a Sabbath keeping, I hope I shall not
impertinently gather from hence, that all those who look to keep an eternal
Sabbath unto God in Heaven, they should think of this allusion, and consider
that there remains a rest, a keeping of a Sabbath unto the people of God on
Earth, and that none shall keep a perpetual sabbath unto God hereafter, but
they who sanctify his sabbaths here. The sabbath of rest that is to be kept to
God here, as it has reference to that great sabbath of rest hereafter, I may
place it in a rest from sin. There is none that lives and sins not, and for
men altogether to rest from sin here in this world, it is impossible: but the
Scripture speaks of wicked men and sinners that they are tumultuous and
raging, that they are like the raging Sea that casts up mire and dirt
continually: restless are their imaginations that are Isa. 57. 20.
unconverted, who give free sway and scope unto themselves in sin. The thoughts
of their hearts are evil, and that continually, Genesis 6. 5.
they imagine mischief upon their beds and when it draws to light, they
practice it. They have eyes full of Mich. 2. i. 2 Pet. 2. 14. Job 24. 14. 15.
16.
Adultery, that cannot cease to sin: yea as Job speaks, The eyes of the
Adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, no eye shall see me, and disguiseth
his face. The Murderer rising with the light kills the poor and needy, and
in the night is as a theif, in the night they dig through houses which they had
marked out for themselves in the day time: day and night they labor and rest
not from sinning. This labor must be given over and a spiritual rest embraced.

Men must strive against sin and oppose it, and never give over till they have
quieted and appeased their tumultuous and disorderly affections, so that they
have vanquished the strength of sins the prevailing power of it, so that they
do not suffer any sin, the least sin (of which they are convinced in Conscience
that it is sin) to reign or rule, or bear sway in their hearts: and if they
fall, out of infirmity, (as who is there that lives and sins not) yet they
are grieved for their failings and fallings, rise again by repentance, and
continually ask God forgiveness for what they have done amiss.

This now is a rest from sin, a keeping a perpetual sabbath unto God; beside
this rest from sin, men must rest unto God, have leisure times to serve him: It
is the principal end of our Creation, God made us for this end, to serve him,
and that they ought to set apart some time for the service of God, this is
engraven in the hearts of all men living. For the determinate time that God
has appointed for his Worship and service, (as for certain he has after a
special and more peculiar manner sanctified and set apart some time for that
end) we cannot be so well guided by the candle of nature, as by the light of
the word. The Scriptures then every where, but especially in the fourth
Commandment tell us of the rest of the Holy sabbath, which the Lord of the
sabbath has severed and set apart for his own use: one day in seven God has
chose and set apart for himself. It received its confecration, and was set
apart to be a day of rest unto God upon this ground and reason, because that
God in it rested from his works of Creation. The Church of God in the Apostles
times, did change the day in memorial of our Savior his Resurrection: because
that on the first day of the week, Christ did rise from the dead and rested
from the great work of our Redemption. Though there be no express precept in
Scripture for the altring of the day, yet that the Apostles in their practice,
were guided by the spirit, it is confessed by all Protestant writers that are
Orthodox: I will allege one for all, Zanchie after he had related it out of
Justin Martyr his Apology to the Emperor Antoninus, how the Christians were
wont to meet on the Lord's day, to hear the word and receive the Sacraments,
and to perform other Holy and Religious exercises, he thus concludes. Ex his
liquet Apostolos per spiritum sanctum, vel potius spiritum Sanctum per
Apostolos, festum solennitatemque Sabbati, in diem dominicum transtulisse: From
this it is manifest that the Apostles by the spirit, or rather the spirit of
God by the Apostles, did transfer the festivity and solemnity of the sabbath
unto the Lords day: but yet though the day be changed, yet the keeping one day
in seven by consecrating it to the service of God, making it a rest from sin,
and a rest unto God by, performing in it Holy and Religious exercises (which is
the morality of the fourth Commandment) is still retained. We are then to keep
Holy one day in seven, not only upon the ground and Reason which is laid down
in the fourth Commandment, because that in six days God finished the works of
his Creation, and rested the seventh.

But we are likewise strengthened and confirmed in keeping our Christian
Sabbath, which is likewise one day in seven, in regard that on that day Christ
did rise from the dead, and rest from the great work of our Redemption: So that
the morality of the sabbath is so far from being taken away by the change of
the day, that it is hereby more strongly strengthened and confirmed. That one
day in seven should be kept Holy is the morality of the fourth Commandment:
beside the sanctifying one day in seven, it is requisite that the sollemn day
for God's service be kept in its season, and God requires not that any 7th.
day of our own devising should be celebrated, but he looks and expects that
such a seventh day be kept as he has appointed. The seventh day from the
Creation, was the day Commanded of God, and for the time that God required it,
this and no other was to be celebrated. The People of God before the Law, and
after the Law given in Mount Sinai, were to keep the seventh day from the
Creation and no other.

It may be objected that the Sun, which is the measure of time, and of days, it
stood still in the days of Joshua, it went backward in the days of Hezekiah,
so that that particular seventh day from the Creation which was first
celebrated, could not be punctually observed by the people of God under the law.

To this I answer, That so long as the people of God under the Law, did
according to common computation keep the seventh day from the Creation, without
any willful varying from God his institution, from the intent and meaning of
the lawmakers, (who neverrequireth of menimpossibilities) they could not be
said to be guilty of the breach of the fourth Commandment, though they did not
observe that numerical identical day from the Creation, which was first
celebrated. He that made the law may change the Law, and he that made time, in
his hand times and seasons are, and he may change them according to his own
pleasure. The spirit of God by the Apostles did change the seventh day from the
Creation, into that seventh day which we now celebrate in memorial of our
Savior's Resurrection, and the seventh day from the Creation has forfeited
its right, and is become a common working day, by his appointment in whose
hands times and seasons are, who changes them according to his own pleasure,
and now the day sanctified and set apart for God, is our Christian Sabbath, the
Lord's day, the first day of the week, this and no other is to be sanctified,
and whosoever they be that are Christians, acquainted with the Scriptures and
the word of God, or the practice of the Church in the Apostles times, if they
set apart any other 7th. day to be sanctified, as the day of God's institution,
beside that which we now celebrate, they make themselves liable to God's
displeasure in this world, and to his eternal indignation in the world to come.

It may be objected against our Christian sabbath, that that particular seventh
which the Apostles instituted by the spirit, or rather the spirit by the
Apostles, it has not continued without change to some, and it is a question
whether it can be continued without change to any: it is observed that men in
traveling to some places of the World, (and some Christians have occasion to
Travel for necessary traffic) lose one day in a year: yea Astronomers that
observe the motion of the Heavens, and the measure of time, do observe, that
there is continually some loss, or at least some change of time: so that that
particular seventh day that was first instituted (we supposing a seventh day to
be set apart) could not successively long continue without some change or
alteration.

To this I answer, Whether they be travelers, or who else they be, if they do
not wilfully transgress nor purposely vary from God's institution, but
according to common computation reckoning time according to the custom of the
place where they live, and the persons with whom they converse, do celebrate
the first day of the week, the Lord's day, the seventh day which the spirit of
God by the Apostles did Command, without choosing any other seventh day of
their own heads, (if I say) as near as they can they keep themselves to God's
institution* they cannot be said to offend against the morality of the fourth
Commandment, whereby God has set apart a seventh day of rest in memorial of
his resting from the works of his Creation, neither can they be said to
transgress God's Command by the Apostles, whereby he has instituted this
seventh day which we now sanctify as a day of rest in memorial of our
Savior's rest from the great work of our Redemption.

I shall illustrate this by a plain similitude taken out of Scripture. God
Commanded the Children of Israel to keep Numb. 9. 10.
the passover unto him at a set time of the year, upon a set day of the month,
they were to keep it in the first month, upon the fourteenth day of the month:
it so fell out that certain men were defiled by the dead, they inquired of God
by Moses whether they were so necessarily tied to the day, that they might not
keep the passover at all, if they did not keep it on the day wherein it was
enjoined to be kept: answer was returned, that if any were unclean, or were in
a journey a far off then he might alter the time, and whereas the prescript
time for keeping the passover was the 14th. day of the first month: the time
might be altered and the passover kept on the fourteenth day of the second
month, but if a man were clean and not in a journey, and should forbear to keep
the passover at the set time appointed, he should be cut off from the people
of God, because he brought not the offering of God in his appointed season. If
necessity constrain, and men be in a journey traveling, or the change of times
be such, that that particular seventh day instituted, cannot successively be
continued, or punctually observed, God does not tie men to impossibilities, nor
yet to great inconveniences; and if men do not wilfully transgress, nor vary
from God's institution, but according to common computation, as near as they
can, keep the seventh day instituted, for certain they keep God his Sabbaths
and observe his Ordinances; But if men be not in a journey traveling, and be
not hindered from keeping (according to common Computation) the 7th. day
instituted, and will upon their own heads keep the Jewish Sabbath, the seventh
day from the Creation, the sabbath that is now cancelled, or think it
sufficient to keep any day of their own devising, without observing of the
Lord's day according to the Lord's Ordinance, they exclude themselves from the
Communion of Saints, and without serious and unseigned Repentance, make
themselves liable to God's wrath here, to his eternal displeasure hereafter,
for not keeping the Lord his Rest, nor Sanctifying the Sabbath in its appointed
season. It may be Objected, that the Church of God is still guided by the
Spirit, and if the Spirit of God by the Apostles did change the Day that was
first Instituted by God; which was the Seventh Day from the Creation, into that
Seventh Day which we now Celebrate: May not the Church of God change it again
from this Seventh Day to some other? To this I Answer, that it cannot be
supposed, that there should be such ground and reason for the change of the day
as there was in the Apostles Time. The cause of the change of the Day, it was
in memory of our Savior's Resurrection, because that on that Day he rested
from the great work of our Redemption. I suppose therefore in regard the like
Reason of a Change cannot be given, the Spirit of God will not again guide the
Church to alter the Day. I shall propound a Question more profitable, which
tends more to Edification; and that is, whether God's Consecrating a Seventh
Day to himself, and Commanding a weekly Sabbath to be Sanctified; whether this
take away the Service of God on Holy days, or on other days of the week? To
this I Answer; that our weekly Sabbath is severed and set a part, and after a
peculiar manner Sanctified for God's Use; but yet we ought to provide for the
Service of God in some manner and measure every Day in the week, but especially
Holy Days and our usual Festivals they ought solemnly to be kept, and
Religiously Observed: though there be no day of Divine Institution which God
has expressly Commanded to be kept Holy but our weekly Sabbath, yet all hold
that more time should be allotted to his Service, and the Equity of
Constituting Holy Days* of serving God on the week days, of Pray^ng unto him
Publicly, Privately, in his House, in our own Houses; these things are
grounded on the Fourth Commandment. I shall first prove it concerning
Holy Days, that God's Commanding a weekly Sabbath, after a peculiar man^er to
be Sanctified, it does not inhibit, but rather command a solemn Observation of
our usual Festivals. To this opinion Mr. Calvin inclines, Non sic s^ptenarium
numerum Lib. 2. in cap. 8. sect 34.
moror, ut ejus servituti Ecclesiam restringam, neque Ecclesias dannavero quae
alios conventibus suis solennes dies habeant, modo a superstitione absint. I
stick not so (says Mr. Calvin) to the Number of Seven, that it should bind the
Church to the bondage of the seventh day: Neither will I condemn Churches that
have other Solemn Days for their public Meetings, Aret. (...). com. de
feriis.
so they be void of Superstition. To this Aretius consents, Vt alii alios
dies adderent Sabbato feriandos, nihil in hac revitii in esse judicamus: That
some should add other days to the Sabbath to be kept holy, we do not think
this to be amiss. And Vrsin in his Catechism, having propounded what is
required in the Fourth Commandment, returns this Answer; Vt ego cum aliis
precipue Festis diebus coetus divinos frequentem; That I with others
(especially on Holy Days) should be present at solemn Assemblies and Divine
Meetings. Sermon on Job. 10. v. 22.
Dr. Donn sometimes Dean of Paul's, has delivered his Opinion agreeable to
this, Though God has taken a seventh part of our time in the Sabbath, yet he
takes more too, for he appoints other Sabbaths, other Festivals; and in all
Sabbaths there is a cessation. To this agrees Bucer, having spoken of the
Sanctification of the Lords day, he further adds, it is agreeable to our
Piety to sanctify other Festivals also, to the Commemoration of the Lord his
chief works, whereby he perfected our Redemption, as the day of our Saviors
Incarnation, Nativity, Epiphany, the Passion, Resurrection, Pentecost. Besides
our usual Festivals and solemn days of Rejoicing, (which though they be
appointed by men, yet the Equity of constituting them is grounded on the Fourth
Commandment,) no reasonable man nor good Christian will deny, but some time
may, but some time ought to be appointed every day in the Week for the Service
of God. In Towns and Cities where People may conveniently meet, that they ought
to resort to the Temple and the House of God, to offer unto him their Morning
and their Evening Sacrifice, and worship him in the Beauty of Holiness, this is
a thing so just and reasonable, that I hope I need not tell those who do this,
that they do but their Duties; for their own Consciences w^ll tell those who
live in places where they may do it, that they ought to pray publicly every
day in the week, and attend upon God's service continually. We are not so happy
in Country Villages, that we should meet publicly every day in the week to
worship God in the Beauty of Holiness. And for People that live in unwalled
Towns and Country Villages, if they keep the Church duly on Sundays and
Holidays, Week-dayes Prayers are required of them but at some times in the
year, and when they are required, it is not required that they should pray
every day in the week: It is truth, Masters of Families should be mindful of
Houshold-piety, and there are none but they should pray in their own persons
continually: such a Sabbath of Rest should be sanctified to God continually,
and it is grounded on the Morality of the Fourth Commandment. I shall conclude
in the words of Mr. Greenham, in his Treatise of the Sabbath, though no day
ought to be separated from God's use, the Sabbath ought to be severed from all
other uses, and wholly consecrated to him. Men ought to keep their settimes of
Prayer, and pray privately every day in the week in their Houses, and with
their Families; and men ought publicly to attend upon God in his House, and
privately be at leisure for holy Exercises on Holy days. All Holidays are
not, but if some be so severed for holy Exercises that they are as carefully
kept, and as religiously observed to the worlds eye, as our Christian Sabbath;
yet if men, through heedlesness and inadvertency do some slight works of their
Callings in them, and do not those things purposely in contempt of Authority,
for certain this is not so heinous a sin, that men need to task themselves with
a days or a weeks Repentance for it; and if men be at leisure for holy and
religious Exercises on Holy Days, no doubt but on these days they may be at
leisure for themselves, and have some time to recreate and refresh themselves
on Holy Days, especially those of the meaner sort who have no other times of
Recreation. Holy Days, they are not so severed for holy and religious
Exercises, but some works may be done in them, if they be not done in contempt
o^ Authority; and at fitting and convenient times lawful Sports and Pastimes
may lawfully be used in them, especially by those of the meaner sort. Other
working days, they are not exempted from God's Service, we are bound to serve
God in them, and to pray unto him, but yet these are Our days, God has given
them us to follow our necessary Occasions and worldly businesses; No day that
may properly be termed God's day, but the seventh day, of his Consecration, our
weekly Sabbath, this is the day which God after a peculiar manner has
sanctified, and he requires that we after a special and more peculiar manner
should observe it and keep it Holy. Rest from Labor, from worldly businesses
and Employments is required on the Sabbath; Men must not follow the works of
their calling, but must as near as they can abstain from all corporal labor.
They must likewise rest from sin, as on all days, so more especially on Gods
Holy day; they must abstain from following their own ways, from finding their
own pleasure, and from speaking their own words. They must likewise work the
works of Righteousness, and be carefully employed in holy and religious
Exercises. Necessary works there be which may lawfully be done on the Lords
day; such things as concern men's necessary Nourishment may be done; and no
doubt but men may provide for the dumb Beasts on the Sabbath, and loose the Ox
and the Ass from the Stall to be watered, yea some persons are privileged to
do the works of their Calling on the Lords day. Our Savior tells us, how
that on the Sabbath day, the Mat. 12. 5.
Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath and are blameless. And no doubt but
the Ministers of the Gospel may do the works of their Calling on the Lords day,
yea, if they beat their brains, and busy their bodies; the more carefully they
are employed in the works of their Calling on the Lords day, the more
acceptable Service they perform to God. It is a thing exceeding painful to
those who study for their Sermons, to perform their Ministerial Function in
instructing the people. Their Mind does labor, and they are greatly b^sied on
such Lords days as they do preach unto the People; besides, it is a weariness
to their Bodies to read Prayers, to administer the Sacraments to multitudes,
and to do other Duties belonging to their Place and Callings: But yet working
on the Lords day, is a Duty belonging to their Place and Callings, and an
acceptable Service it is to God, if it be performed carefully and conscionably
as it ought. Besides works of Necessity there are works of Charity, which all
men (but especially those that are of Ability) ought to perform. The Visiting
the sick, the relieving of the Poor, and doing Offices of Charity for those
that are in distress. It was usual with the Primitive Christians on every Lords
day to make Collections, and do Offices of Charity. Physicians (no doubt) may
ride and take Journeys on the Lords day, temper Potions and administer Physic
to the Diseased. Beside works of Charity, which have ever been in use, and may
lawfully and laudably be done, works of Piety are proper for the day, I purpose
more particularly to insist upon these, and show how the Sabbath ought to be
consecrated to such works, and be spent in holy and religious Exercises, so
that men should be at leisure for God on that day. It is a Day greatly to be
observed unto the Lord, and men should think of it before it comes, there is a
Memento prefixed before this Commandment, Remember the Sabbath to keep it
holy; and St. Mark calls the day before the Sabbath the Preparation, Mar. 15.
ver. 42. because it was usual with the People of God to prepare themselves for
the Sanctification of the Sabbath, (as it is the Duty of all good Christians)
on that day they should lay aside all earthly Cogitations and worldly
Businesses, and separate themselves to the service of the Lord, and perform all
such holy and religious Exercises as are required on the day. As on all days
men ought to pray in their own Persons, and with their Families, so more
especially on the Lords day they ought to sanctify themselves, and prepare
their Families for the Sanctification of the Sabbath, and for performance of
such holy and religious Exercises as are required in God's House, as likewise
for such Duties as are required to be performed in their own Houses. I shall
briefly run over the public Performances, the holy and religious Exercises
that are required in God's House; and then likewise touch upon those that are
required in every man's own house. Men should with fear and reverence assemble
themselves in the House of God, the Place where his Honor dwells, there
after a special and more peculiar manner to worship him on the Lords day.

The first and special public Duty required, and of greatest concernment for
the Sanctification of the Sabbath, is the Praying unto God in the House of
Prayer, the pouring out Supplications to him, the offering up to him every
Sabbath day a Morning and an Evening Sacrifice, worshipping him in the Beauty
of Holiness with the Congregation of the Faithful; this is a Duty which cannot
be omitted, and that of all other Duties it is most especially required for the
Sanctification of the Sabbath, I think I shall easily prove. In the 56th
Chapter of the Prophecy of the Prophet Isaiah, ver. 2. the Prophet sets it
forth, That blessed is the Man that does this, and the Son of Man that lays
hold of it, that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it. I, but you will say,
How shall we keep the Sabbath from polluting it? and what is a special Means to
sanctify it? If you read that Chapter, and consider seriously of the
Blessedness which God bath pronounced upon those that keep his Sabbaths, you
must needs see that a principal means of sanctifying his Sabbath, whereby to
procure the like blessing upon your selves, is to pray unto God in his House,
upon his Holy Day: in verse. 4. Thus says the Lord of the Eunuchs that keep my
Sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and lay hold of my Covenant,
even to them will I give in mine House, and within my walls, a place and a Name
better than of Sons and Daughters; I will give them an everlasting Name which
shall not be cut off. Also the Sons of the Strangers that join themselves to
the Lord, to serve him, and to love the Name of the Lord, to be his servants,
every one that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and takes hold of my
Covenant; even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and make them joyful in
my House of Prayer: Their Burnt-offerings and their Sacrifices shall be
accepted upon mine Altar: For mine House shall be called a House of Pray^r to
all People. When God by the Prophet speaks of his accepting the
Burnt-offerings of the Strangers of the Eunuchs, the words are meant of the
offering up to him the calves of their Lips, these are the Offerings that he
will accept, no doubt but the words are to be understood of the Sacrifice of
Praise, of the Oblations of Prayer, as is manifestly proved by that which
immediately follows; Mine house shall be called an house of Prayer to all
People: Yea, he that sees not that the principal Means of sanctifying God's
Sabbath is to pray unto God in his House of Prayer, he must needs be a stranger
to the Scriptures, and the Word of God. If then you will indeed sanctify God's
Sabbath by performing in it holy and religious Exercises, be persuaded to tread
his Courts, and be present continually at Divine Service: Slight not Divine
Service, and say not, (as it is the common custom of most men in these times)
If we go up to Gods House we shall hear there only a few Prayers; but say
rather on the contrary, If we go up to Gods House, we shall there say our
Prayers with the Congregation of the faithful, worship God in the Beauty of
Holiness, which is a principal Means of sanctifying Gods Sabbath, and a Duty
which of all others God will most especially reward.

The Word of God it should be publicly read on the Lord's Day; this is a holy
and religious Exercise that is proper for the day, and so necessary for the
Sanctification of the Sabbath, that it cannot be omitted. It was usual to read
something out of Holy Writ to the People every Sabbath day, as you may see by
that which is alleged by St. Paul, Act. 13. 27. Where he sets it forth,
that the Rulers of the Jews condemned our Savior because they knew not the
voices of the Prophets which were read every Sabbath day; By this place of
Scripture it is plain, that it was in use to read something out of the Law and
the Prophets every Sabbath Day. This Custom it has been solemnly kept and
religiously observed by the Christan Churches and reading of the Scriptures as
it is a Religious Exercise proper for the Day, and necessary for the
sanctification of the Sabbath, so it is of great use, and tends much to
Edification. Our Church has wisely appointed and religiously constituted, that
some of the Psalms of David should be read every Sabbath Day: There be likewise
Lessons appointed to be read every Lord's Day, two at Morning and two at Evening
Prayer, one out of the Old, another out of the New Testament: Epistles and
Gospels are appointed to be read on every Sabbath thoroughout the year: Where
there is no Preacher, or when the Minister is not prepared to Preach, there be
godly Homilies and fruitful Exhortations appointed to be read unto the People:
If then you desire to sanctify the Sabbath, by performing in it holy and
rel^gious Exercises, you shall do well to attend to the Word of God publicly
read, hereby you shall gain Knowledge in the Scriptures, and be fitted and
prepared to receive the engra^ted Word of God which is able to save your
souls: Yea, the Reading of Homilies is a kind of Preaching, and if it be
carefully and conscionably used, no doubt but it may be as effectual
(peradventure more effectua) for the Conversion of Souls, than most Sermons
that are preached in these times. Think then of this holy and religious
Exercise, how proper it ^s for the day, how necessary for the sanctification of
the Sabbath, and let no Lords day pass without coming up to the Temple, to hear
the Word of God publicly read unto you. The Word of God publicly preached,
expounded unto the people by those that are set apart for that Office and
Function. It is the usual, the ordinary Means of Salvation; and when it is
despised and contemned, God will not work without it. It is then a Religious
Exercise of great use, and of all other days the Sabbath is most proper for
it: Yet this I must say, (for I conceive it is the truth) though the Sabbath be
most proper for this Exercise, yet this Exercise is neither so proper nor so
necessary for the Sabbath, that it should be impossible that the Sabbath should
be sanctified without it: This I shall easily evince out of the Scriptures; in
Acts 13. 15. we read, how that after the reading of the Law and the Prophets,
the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto Paul and Barn^bas, saying, Men and
Brethren, if you have any Word of Exhortation to say unto the People, say on,
If it had been a custom of the Church to have Preaching in every Synagogue on
every Sabbath day, no doubt but the Reader that read there had been prepared to
preach: Neither would the Rulers of the Synagogue have desired the Apostles, if
they had any word of Exhortation to preach, but rather would have said, You are
Ministers, and Men of God, always prepared to Preach, and therefore there is
no doubt to be made, but you have a Sermon and an Exhortation in readiness.
Though then it may be collected from hence, that these Rulers were willing to
accept of a Sermon when they did meet with such Ministers as were prepared to
preach, yet for certain, their questioning with the Apostles whether they were
prepared, did show that they did not hold Preaching so necessary, that the
Sabbath could not be sanctified without it. Where the Word of God may be had by
one or more able Ministers, that the Word of God may he preached twice every
Sabbath, thrice every Sabbath (if the Custom of the place be to have so many
Sermons) this I will not deny. But that there must be Preaching every Sabbath
day, in every Congregation, this I think it cannot be proved. Some Ministers
have made the world believe, that the Sabbath in no place can be sanctified
without preaching of Sermons, and have wrought people to such an esteem of
Sermons, that all other of God's Ordinances are disesteemed, so that no other
holy and religious Exercises can find any place in the places where they are
admitted, but only Sermons: Yea they have turned Oratoria into Auditoria,
Houses of Prayer into Houses of Preaching, and in all places where they have
come, have brought all holy and religious Exercises on the Lords day out of
use, but only a Psalm and a Sermon. God did never yet send such plenty of
Laborers into his Harvest; that there should be such store of able and painful
Preachers, that Sermons should be Preached every Sabbath day in every
Congregation. For my part, I will pray unto the Lord of the Harvest, that he
would send Laborers into his Harvest, and could heartily wish, that all the
Ministers belonging to every Congregation in the Kingdom were indeed Prophets,
that they could Preach every Sabbath day, or would Preach painfully, and
Conscionably, though they Preached seldomer. But this, I say, it is impossible
that the Kingdom at this time should be thus Happy: And some Ministers by
buzzing in the ears of People, that Preaching of the Word in every
Congregation, on every Sabbath Day is necessarily required by the Word of God,
have made the whole Kingdom miserable: yea, they have brought the Ordinance of
God into contempt by their idle babbling, and lazy prattling, who Talk much and
often, but Preach seldom.

But I beseech you, beloved, let not the abuse of God's Ordinance by some,
cause you to neglect the Lawful Use of it: For Preaching, it is the Power of
God unto Salvation; a Sabbath Days Exercise, which of all others is of greatest
Use for the Conversion of Souls, for the bringing Men from Darkness to Light;
from Blindness and Ignorance, to the Knowledge of God, and of his Son Jesus
Christ. Be persuaded then, hear the Word of God every Sabbath Day when it is
publicly Preached, and never miss the Sermons; love those Ministers that
Preach Painfully and Conscionably; and despise not those who Preach often, and
plead earnestly for Preaching, though you know, and are assured, that some of
them are but lazy Preachers, lest happily you be found despisers, and contemners
of the Ordinance of God.

There are other Holy and Religious Exercises which are required on the
Sabbath Day: Catechizing the Youth, and the Instructing them in the Principles
of Religion; if it be not necessary on every Sabbath Day, yet it is on some
Sabbathdays very seasonable; and People should at seasonable times on some
Sabbath Days, send their Servants and their Children to be Instructed in the
Principles of Religion, and to be Catechized.

The Receiving of the Sacraments are Holy and Religious Exercises, to be
performed (if possibly it may be) on the Lords day. It was usual with the
Primitive Christians on every Lords day to eat of that Heavenly and
Soul-refreshing Manna, the Body and Blood of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. And hereupon was that usual and Ordinary speech amongst them,
Celebrasti Dominicum, sumpsisti Dominum; thou did keep the Lords day, thou
did feed on thy Lord and Savior, eat his Body, and drink his Blood. It is
not in use with us on every Lords day to Celebrate the Lords Supper, yet this
is a Duty often to be performed, as St. Paul sets it forth to the
Corinthians, first Epistle, 11th. Chapter, and we should as often as
conveniently we can, Sanctify the Lords Day, by Receiving in it the Lords
Supper.

The other Sacrament of Baptism, it should likewise (if with convenience it
may) be Administered on the Lords day, for the Sanctifying the Sabbath, by
performing in it this Holy and Religious Exercise, for it is a means to put
People in mind of the Vows and Promises that they themselves did make to God in
Baptism.

I have been something longer than I made Account, in Treating of those
Public Religious performances that should be performed in Gods House. I shall
but touch upon those that should be performed in every Man's own House.

Private Meditation upon the Word of God, whether Read or Preached; this is a
Duty that careful Christians ought Conscionably to perform in their own Houses.
When they are Retired to their Houses, and are private by themselves, they
should digest by Meditation the good Word of God; Treasure it up in their
Hearts, to bring forth the Fruit of it in their Lives and Conversations. If
they come into Company, and have Occasion to Discourse with any, whether in
their own Houses, or with others in theirs: They should endeavor to break off
all Discourse of Earthly Affairs, and Worldly business, and should Reason of
the Scriptures, of things concerning their Salvation: On the Lords day
especially they should think of St. Paul's Exhortation to the Eph^sians, Chap.
4. ver. 29. And let no Corrupt Communication proceed out of their Mouths, but
such as is good, to the use of Edifying, that it may minister Grace to the
Hearers. At leisure times they should Catechize and Instruct their Children on
the Lords day, Read in their Families the Word of God; talk of it when they sit
in their Houses, and walk before their Families in the ways of God's
Commandments. When they have performed all these Duties, they should shut up
the Sabbath with Prayers and Supplications, and as near as they can, spend the
whole day in Holy and Religious Exercises. If we did our Duties as we ought, we
should indeed so Sanctify God's Sabbath, that in it we should neither think
our own thoughts, nor speak our own words, nor do our own works. But the best
fall short of their Duties, and do not Sanctify God's Sabbath according as he
requires; they may hope to be so happy in Heaven, but they can never be so
Holy on Earth; yea, the good God will pardon those that set their hearts to
seek, and to serve him, though their failings and fallings are great and many,
not only on week days, but on the Lords day; yea, he is an indulgent Father:
And such things as are reputed by some to be great sins, as the Carriage of
Beds, and the bearing of Burdens, and the selling Wares, in those of the meaner
sort, he will look upon them as no sins, or as very small Infirmities. If men
fall out of Infirmity, and are grieved for these things, and are wary, and
watchful over themselves how they fall into those sins for time to come; Or
else do these things at the Command of their Governors and Superiors, who
they know would not Command them such things if they did not know that they
were such works of Necessity as may be done on any Sabbath Day, or such works
of Necessity, as must be done on that Sabbath Day as they Command them. And he
will not see concerning some that are Persons of Quality and Fashion, Ministers
and Magistrates, that they are not frequent in performance of Holy and
Religious Exercises: And if they be drawn in to Feast and Banquet on the Lords
day, and do Profane the Sabbath by foolish talking, and vain jesting; yet if
they Repent of their failings, of their fallings, and do not wilfully profane
the Sabbath themselves, nor nourish others in the contempt of Holy and
Religious Exercises; he will pardon and forgive those sins, for he considers
of the Temptations that some have to sin, of the pullbacks and hindrances that
they have to Piety. And again, he is very strict and precise, a severe Judge,
and will see in some of the meaner sort such things as seem to the Worlds eye
to be very small Infirmities; the gathering of sticks, and playing in the
streets, and note them as heinous sins; yea, he will not see that those that do
those things keep the Church duly, and are frequent in Religious Exercises; if
they do these things out of Hypocrisy, to bear themselves out in their
presumptuous wickedness. And he will note some that are Persons of Quality and
Fashion, how they profane the Sabbath by idle Discourse and vain talking, and
will not observe it in them that they are frequent and often in the performance
of Religious Exercises. If they make Religion a Cloak for their Malice, and
will not Repent of this sin, but are obstinate to have all Men as frequent and
often in performance of Holy and Religious Exercises as themselves; for he
considers of the Opportunities that some have to do good, of the helps and
encouragements that they have to Piety. Yea, the Merciful God has a care of
the dumb Beasts, and one of the Reasons why he has Ordained a Sabbath, is,
that they should rest every seventh day, and not be over-harrowed with working.
And much more has he a care of reasonable Creatures; he has Ordained a
Sabbath of Rest, not merely out of respect to himself, that he should be
Served, and his Sabbath Sanctified by performing in them Holy and Religious
Exercises, but he has a respect to Servants and Day Laborers, and has
Ordained a seventh day of Rest, that Servants and Day-Labourers might have some
time to rest from Labor as well as their Masters. So it is set forth in the
5th. of Deuteronomy. 14 ver. the latter part of the verse, one of the Reasons why God
has Commanded a Sabbath of Rest to be kept Holy, is, that the Manservant and
the Maidservant may Rest as well as thou. If thou be a Master of a Family,
thou may when thou will Rest from Labor: God has appointed a time when the
Manservant and the Maidservant may do this as well as thy self, and that is
upon his Sabbath of Rest: Now, thy Manservant and thy Maidservant may Rest as
well as thou; yea, thou art bound in equity and Conscience to favor thy
Servants, and after a special manner give them Rest on the Lords day. Not that
Servants or Laborers are exempted from Sanctifying God's Sabbaths, by
performing in them Holy and Religious Exercises: But this I say, if they keep
the Church duly, and show no distaste or dislike of Household Piety, but are
willing to hear the Word read, and to Pray with their Masters on the Lords day
when they are required; They should in Mercy and Compassion to them, give them
some time wherein they may rest from Labor, and have a Relaxation from
Spiritual and Divine Duties. The Spirit truly is willing, but the Flesh is
weak, and Masters of Families cannot so Sanctify God's Sabbath, that they
should spend it wholly in Religious Exercises; and therefore they should not
wonder at their Servants, if they be willing on the Sabbath Day to have some
time, wherein they may Rest from Labor, and have a Relaxation from Spiritual
and Divine Duties. Yea, the wisdom of Governors, considering the impossibility
that all the world should be wholly devoted to Holy and Religious Exercises on
the Lords day, did think fitting to permit Day-Labourers, Menservants, and
Maidservants to recreate themselves at seasonable times on the Lords day, lest
while they Rested from Labor, and were vacant from Spiritual and Divine
Duties, they should run out into Riot and Excess, or into some worse sins.

This Toleration of sports and pastimes on the Lords day, did no more disprove
the Morality of the Sabbath, nor no more prove sports and pastimes on the Lords
day to be Lawful, than the Statute that stinteth Usury at a certain sum in
the hundred, proves Usury to be Lawful by the Word of God: Whereas the Statute
is express, that no Man should Collect from that Statute, that that Usury, or
any Usury was Law-Lawful in Religion and Conscience.

But it has been Objected heretofore by some, and it may be will be Objected
again, That there was never any Law made heretofore for the toleration of
Sports and Pastimes on the Lords day. Because there is an Act of Parliament
that does expressly forbid that no Persons should go out of their own Parish to
use any sports and pastimes whatsoever.

To this I Answer, that it was usual in times of Popery, of blindness, and of
Ignorance, Many Parishes did meet at one Parish to Celebrate Bacchanalian
Feasts, and to have tumultuous Assemblies, Drunken Wakes, and Disordered
Meetings. And the wisdom of Governors did prudently provide against this
mischief. But it may be probably Collected, and reasonably Concluded, that the
Honorable Assembly, the High Court of Parliament, by prohibiting People to go
out of their own Parishes to use sports and pastimes on the Lords day, did
tacitly yield, that if they did keep themselves within their own Parishes,
they might* at seasonable times use such sports and pastimes on the Lords day
as were judged Lawful on other days. But if the Honorable Assembly, the High
Court of Parliament, shall Declare that this is not the meaning of that Act,
and shall hereafter with the consent of his Sacred Majesty, make an Act against
Peoples using all sports and pastimes whatsoever, as well in their own
Parishes, as out of them: It becomes me and all peaceable Sons of the Church,
to judge, That no body ought to tolerate themselves, or to countenance or
encourage others in the use of any sports and pastimes on the Lords day,
whether in their own Parishes, or out of them. But yet this I say, the Holy Man
Job, in the Profession of his Innocence, Job 31. 13. lays it down, How he did
not despise the Cause of his Manservant, or of his Maidservant when they
contended with him: And Masters of Families, while they look to restrain their
Servants from using sports and Pastimes on the Lords day, they should take heed
how they constrain them to work. It is usual with some Masters of Families, who
seem to be very Pious, very watchful over their Servants, that they use no
sports and pastimes on the Lords day, they very frequently constrain them to
work on the Lords day: Set them to mend, yea, to make Hedges, no necessity
constraining: Yea, many times they set them to Brew, and do Actions as painful
and laborious as any are done on the week days. Masters of Families if they do
Observe in their Servants a care of Religion and Piety, that they are willing
to be present at Divine Duties, Publicly at Gods House, Privately in their
Houses; they should be compassionate toward them, allow them some times to
refresh themselves, to rest from Labor on the Lords day: Yea, they should be
thus Merciful to the dumb Beasts, for God many times hears the groans of
their Ox and their Ass, and much more will he hear the Cry of their Servants,
when they cry against them: They should be more Compassionate to them; in the
bowels of Compassion they should look upon their Servants, and esteem of them
as their Fellow Servants in Christ Jesus; and think that God has made them
Lords, not Tyrants over them, to cause them to drudge and droyl without any
Intermission.

Besides times of Rest on the Lords day, which they ought* and are bound to
allow their Servants, they should think of it, and allow them sometimes to
recreate themselves: The Church has Constituted Holy Days, and though they
ought principally to be kept, by performing in them Holy and Religious
Exercises, yet without doubt sports and pastimes at seasonable times may be
used on these days: And Merciful Masters, if their Servants keep the Church
duly, and be present at public Prayers on Holy Days, they should allow them
Liberty to Recreate themselves on these days, to use sports and pastimes. None
of us can Sanctify a Sabbath of Rest as we should in this World; we should
Serve God on week days, on Holy Days, but especially on the Lords day; we have
many failings and fallings, and fall short of our Duties: Let us bear with one
another Infirmities, and the good God shall pardon all our Infirmities, and
accept of our weak and imperfect Serving him.

APPLICATION.
I Have spoken of a Sabbath of Rest, and indeed we should all the days of our
Life keep a Sabbath unto God: We should Rest from sin, pray unto him always,
and be constantly devout: But the day that he has Sanctified and set apart for
his Worship and Service, we should above all days remember that, after a
peculiar manner Sanctify it, and spend it in Holy and Religious Exercises.
This is the King, the Queen of Days, and of all other days ought to be had in
chiefest estimation. It is a great Error of the Papists, when they cause the
Maid to Exalt her self above the Mistress, the Handmaid to Rule over the
Queen, and suffer every petty Holyday to justle the Lords day out of Doors.
Yea, it was usual with us in times of Blindness and Ignorance: Many Parishes
did Meet in one Parish to Celebrate Bacchanalian Feasts; yea, they did bring
their May-Lady into the Church in time of Divine Service, and did take off the
minds of People from Religion and the Service of God, causing the Lords day to
be Celebrated with more Foolish vanities than ever the Heathens Celebrated the
Feasts of their Belly-god Bacchus, or their Lascivious Lady Venus. These Times
of Ignorance God winked at, but now he Commands all Men every where to
Repent: Yea, be persuaded to Consider of it, and take heed of all backsliding
to Popery. It is usual now in such places where the Romish Religion Rules and
bears sway, the Lords day is Celebrated with little Piety in God's House, and
with more profaneness out of it. And yet I beseech you, suffer the word of
Exhortation, let us not so Oppose Papism, that we should run into the contrary
extreme of Atheism. The Papists they do so slight the Lords day, that they
prefer every Ordinary Holy Day before it. And we (or at the least, the greatest
part of us) do so highly magnify the Lords day, that we have thrust all other
holy days out of the Calendar. We should Serve God on week days, Come up to his
Temple too to serve him, and to Pray unto him on Holy Days: There be other
Sabbaths besides the Seventh day of Gods Institut on, and God requires, not
only that we hear the Instruction of him our Heavenly Father, and keep Holy
his Sabbath, the Seventh day, which he has expressly Commanded to be
Sanctified: But he requires that we forsake not the Laws and Constitutions
that the Church our Mother gives us, concerning the Sanctifying of Holy Days,
for these likewise are God's Sabbaths, though Constituted by the Church; and
God requires that we keep his Sabbaths, and Reverence his Sanctuary. We should
serve God on week days, come up to his House, and serve him on Holy Days, and
after a special manner Sanctify the Seventh day of his Consecration: But we on
the contrary have polluted God's Sabbaths, profaned his Sanctuary, and
notwithstanding the noise that is made of Holy and Religious Exercises on the
Lords day, the Lords day was never less hallowed. Shall I show you how it was
of late days, when there was no King in Israel, but every body did that was
right in their own eyes. Public Forms of Prayer, wherein People might join
with the Priest, on the Lords day, where they were used, they were very much
scorned and contemned, and in most places quite given over. And on week days,
and on Holy Days not permitted at all to be used.

The Word of God where it was publicly read was very much slighted, and in
many places not read at all. So that People for want of having the Scriptures
and the Word of God read unto them, were kept in more blindness and Ignorance
than they are in the Papacy.

Public Catechizing of the Youth at seasonable times, and the reading of
Homilies, for the Instructing of People in the Principles of Religion, they
were despised as things unprofitable, and of no use at all.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper in many places, and most Churches it was not
publicly Administered for many Years together.

The Sacrament of Baptism a prejudice was wrought against it, and People were
made to believe, that they ought not to Baptize their Children, or bring them
within the Covenant. Since it has pleased God to restore us to Government, and
the Blessings of it, the same design (as it is greatly to be feared) is still
underhand carried on, and some that seem to Conform and be Obedient to the
present Government, under a pretense of their love to Piety, and their Care of
en to perform Holy and Religious Exercises, seek to make themselves and their
followers Independent, that is, not subject to any Temporal Magistrate, or
Ecclesiastical Governor. We will be so Charitable, as to believe, that they
did heretofore often Fall and Pray and perform other Holy and Religious
Exercises themselves in private, And receive the Sacrament in public with
their own Companies. But they did bereave the World of the use of all God's
Ordinances in public but Psalm and a Sermon. And no doubt of it, but diverse of
them do now pray in private, read the Word of God in their Families, Catechize
and Instruct their Children and perform other Holy and Religious Exercises very
frequently in private, and I cannot believe that any virtuous Religious
Governor, either in Church or Commonwealth, means to trouble them for, or
disturb them in these things. If those of the Clergy among them will say, the
public Prayers of the Church, after that manner that they are enjoined to say
them, and will read the Scriptures in public, and the Homilies of the Church,
so as to work people to a love of them, and of the good Instructions therein
contained, and not read them after that manner, as to cause them to be scorned
of the multitude; and not neglect public Catechizing, but perform it according
as it is enjoined to be performed. And they of the La^ty will work themselves
and others to a Reverend esteem of these public Religious Duties, and
diligently frequent them, and Carefully and Conscionably use them, as in
Obedience to God's Laws and Men's they ought: And both the one and the other
will give over their private Conventicles, and giddy Meetings, and not slander
the present Government, nor traduce the Governors, nor draw scorn and contempt
upon all public Religious Duties that are enjoined by Authority (except
Sermons) as things that have all things of Man, and nothing of God in them:
They that are Religious amongst them, shall not be discountenanced by
Magistrates, or any Body else for their Piety and Godliness. Of those who have
been heretofore, and are still opposite to the present Government, and labor
to work others to be of their mind and Opinion. Many are Ignorant Persons, and
as they have no will to pray in public, so they have no skill to pray in
private, and are taken in only to bear up the Train of the Faction. Others of
them (whatsoever others Report of them, or they Report of themselves) they are
wicked, profane, ungodly Persons, their sins apparent and conspicuous, obvious
to every Eye; and though their absenting themselves from, and their slighting
of public Religious performances, causes them to be noted of the Faction to
be Saints; yet their private Religious performances are neither so frequent,
nor so fervent that any should take notice of them but themselves, and those of
their own Faction. Some well meaning Men there be among them, both of the
Clergy and the Laity, who love and practice Holy and Religious Exercises in
private, and are not, nor would not be any great Enemies to them in public:
But that the Grandees of Faction work upon them, and make them believe that the
public Religious Duties required by the Laws, (because enjoined) have more of
Man in them than of God, and are therefore Superstitious and unlawful to be
done. To say the Truth (though all of them do not often perform Holy and
Religious Exercises, and others of them are so Ignorant, that they cannot at
all perform them) diverse of them they were heretofore, (...) no doubt but they
are still very frequent and often in the performance of Holy and Religious
Exercises: But Religion abused has done a great deal of harm, and it is
greatly to be feared, that some of them did heretofore, and do still resist the
Truth against their Conscience. If Men Fast and Pray never so often, if they do
it for bad ends* and wicked purposes. These their Religious Actions are turned
into sin unto them. And if Man be never so frequent in performance of Holy and
Religious Exercises in public, in private. If they do these things that they
may subvert the present Government, and make Peoples hearts disaffected to it:
All their Religious performances, though never so specious in the Eyes of Men,
are yet abominable in the Eyes of God: Yea, such Persons who use Holy and
Religious Exercises out of Policy, not out of true Piety, looking thereby to
bring about their evil and wicked designs, They have caused Religion and
Religious Duties to be loathed and hated, so that Men's hearts turn against the
use of God's Ordinances: Indeed it should not be so, Man should not therefore
abstain from, but they should therefore often use God's Ordinances themselves
in Truth, because they are so often abused by others in Hypocrisy: And for
certain it must be such who honor God in his Ordinances, and often use them
that must keep Hypocrites from abusing them; defeat and bring to light their
Treacherous practices, and their Treasonous designs, whereby they seek to undo
both Church and Commonwealth. A great many of profane and ungodly persons and
people there are, who are wicked without show of the contrary, who as they do
often meet on weekdays at Inns, Taverns, and Alehouses, and spend their time
in Rioting and Drunkenness, Swearing and Cursing, and profaning God's Holy
Name, to the dishonor of Religion, and discredit of the Gospel of Christ. So
many times they have their riotous meetings at the same places on the Lords
day, sometimes in the time of Divine Service, to the grief of all good Men, and
to the scandal and Offense of all Godly Christians.

Indeed they seem opposite enough to Hypocrisy, and very willing and desirous
they are that they should be Reformed, who cloak Treason under the show of
Religion. But Magistrates, and those that are in Authority, hold it fitting
that they should first Reform their own Lives, and set a better example of
Holiness, before they seek the Reformation of others: Yea, it is plain, that
most of such dissolute and disordered persons, they do (for the most part)
rather rail and revile Hypocrites for being Religious, than use any Legal or
Lawful means; whereby to reduce them from their Hypocrisy; yea, though foam
stayed, sober, virtuous Persons, whom Necessity forces into their Company, do
Legally and Lawfully Oppose Hypocrisy, and Labor to prevent the spreading
Contagion of it, and they by their Example learn to do the like; and have been
wrought and persuaded to be willing to jeopard their Lives against those who
put the Face of Religion upon Rebellion: Yet it is plain enough, that the
greatest part of them did heretofore, and it is to be feared that under
pretense of Opposing Hypocrisy, they do still rail and revile virtuous Priests
and Prelates (whose Lives are continual Sermons) for Piety and Godliness. And
were heretofore, and it is to be feared are still Enemies to Godly Magistrates,
against whom they have nothing justly to Object, but their laudable endeavors
in seeking to reclaim them from their profaneness and ungodliness. It is a
thing greatly to be desired, that they who are guilty of dissoluteness and
debauchedness, and are openly Profane Persons, wicked without show of the
contrary: It is, I say, a thing greatly to be desired, that they would be
persuaded to believe it. It is not others often abusing of Holy and Religious
Exercises, that has set off their hearts from a Love of Piety and Godliness,
but it is their own dis-using themselves from, and not accustoming themselves
to Holy and Religious Exercises, that causes them to loath them themselves,
and makes them hate and detest them in others. And their profaning God's
Sabbaths by swilling and bezeling, by Cursing and Swearing, those beastly Vices
which cause them to be taken up in the Lips of talkers, and branded with a Note
of Infamy; what is the Reason that they do not daily and continually Repent of
those sins, that so they should prevail against them, and get ground of them
every day? But because they will not hearken to the good Instructions of God's
Ministers persuading them to leave them: Nor Obey the wholesome Laws of Godly
Magistrates seeking to reclaim them from them: But especially because they will
not hearken to the good Motions of God's Spirit moving them to Repentance, but
put off God continually with delays and procrastinations. Well, if all these
means do not work upon them, to cause them to leave these sins, constantly and
continually to Repent of them, and daily to practice Piety, and Serve God in
public, in private. If God have not already, it is much to be feared that he
will e're long give up some of them unto a feared Conscience, a heart that
cannot Repent: And this Spiritual Judgment they will find it to be worse than
all Temporal Judgments and Afflictions whatsoever. Briefly, for a Conclusion,
among those that Covet an Opinion of Holiness, and desire to be reputed Saints,
there be many Hypocrites. And of those sinners of whom our Savior speaks in
the Gospel, That he came not to call the Righteous, but them to Repentance;
there are but few true Penitents who constantly Repent of their sins, and have
any settled Acquaintance with God by Prayer. So that what with openly profane
Persons on the one side, and ungodly Hypocrites on the other side, the Peace of
the Church and Commonwealth is so much troubled and disquieted, that if God
help not, it is not in the Power of Man to Remedy and redress those things. If
the Lord of the Sabbath do not cause his Sabbaths more carefully to be
Sanctified, and bring it to pass that Holy and Religious Exercises on the Lords
day, on Holydays, on Week days be more in use than now they are. They that are
true Christians in most places had need to pray unto God, that they may keep a
Sabbath unto him in Heaven, for there will be no keeping of Sabbath to him on
Earth: And thus I should pass from this Allusion, as the words put us in mind
of a Sabbath that should be kept to God on Earth, to speak of them as they have
reference to the Sabbath that shall be kept to God in Heaven.

A Prayer.
O Almighty Lord God, the Holy Lord God of Sabbath, thou searchest the Hearts,
and tryest the Reins, and from thee no Secret can be hid: Thou see and
know that some there be, who under pretense of Religion, have, in a manner,
Destroyed and over-thrown all Religion. They have caused thy Sabbaths to be
despised, thy Worship and Service on Weeks, and on Holy Days to be neglected,
and all public Religious performances to be slighted and contemned. Forgive we
beseech thee, the multitudes that were heretofore, and are still fraudulently
circumvented, and ignorantly drawn in to be partakers in these things. Open
their Eyes to see their Errors, and give them Grace to Repent of them. Grant
that they may frequent the Solemn Assemblies on week days, on Holy Days, on the
Lords day; and those Holy and Religious Duties that are enjoined by Authority,
work in them a love of them, and inc^ine their Hearts to use them with Care and
Conscience, as they ought. Who they be that did heretofore, and do still resist
the Truth against their Conscience, we know not, neither will we Judge. But O
Lord of Hosts, that tryest the Righteous, and see the Reins and the Heart,
pull them out for Judgment: Take, we beseech thee, the Matter into thine own
Hands, and be pleased to Discover and bring to light their Treasons and
Treacheries, and all other their Secret Vices which they Cloak and hide under
show of Religion. The multitudes of openly profane Persons, who are wicked
without show of the contrary, open their Eyes to see how much it concerns
them to hearken to the good Instructions of thy Ministers, to Obey the
wholesome Laws of Godly Magistrates, and let them not continually resist the
good Motions of thy Holy Spirit moving them to Repentance; lest by despising
these means which thou usest for their S^^vation, they bring upon themselves
the Spiritual Judgment of hardness of heart, which will be worse than all
temporal Plagues and Judgments whatsoever. And O Lord, if thou have not
determined to lay the Land Desolate, and to destroy Man and Beast out of it:
(as even this heavy Judgment we have just cause to fear, hangs over our heads
for our sins,) be pleased to hear the Prayers of those who Serve thee in Truth
and Sincerity, and grant that the Infection of Hypocrisy may spread no
further, and that the Leprosy and Plague of sin may be abated. And Bless the
Endeavors of those that are truly Pious and Religious when they Legally and
Lawfully Oppose Hypocrites in their painted Vices, and prosper them when they
seek the Reformation of Capital and Scandalous Crimes in openly profane
Persons, that so the Judgments which we have just Cause to fear, hang over our
Heads, may be averted from us, and this we beseech thee to grant, for Jesus
Christ his sake, to whom, with thee and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor and
Glory now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
IAM willing to believe that this Sermon, or Treatise of the Sabbath will be a
means to hinder the spreading Contagion of Schism and Heresy, and if it find
that Acceptance with the World as I hope it may: I shall be encouraged to
Publish such other Sermons of the same Text, as I have prepared for the Press;
the Heads whereof I have proposed in the following Page. But if my hopes
deceive me, and the World do still continue so to favor Sects and Sectaries,
that what is done, does not; and what is proposed is not likely to make any
thing for the public good. It is my desire, that some other would find some
better Expedient for the Common good, than what is here done, or proposed to be
done; and I shall willingly surcease, and trouble my self nor the World no
further, but cheer my self, with Solon, in this Consideration, Solonis dictum:
O Patria ego dictis and factis tibi opi^ulatus sum atque ita domum abiit in
posterum quieturus.
that I have not been wanting to do what I could for the good of my Country,
though it has not had that success as I hoped it would. And shall only humbly
beseech Almighty God, who is alone able, that he would be willing for Jesus
Christ his sake, to Remedy and redress what is amiss.

Heb. IV. 9. There remains therefore a Rest unto the People of God.
THese words are a Summary and brief Conclusion, and the Apostle does infer and
conclude from what he had before delivered, that the People of God shall be
happy; and does describe that wherein their Happiness does consist. Now then
that you may see the Felicity of Gods chosen, rejoice in the gladness of his
People, and give thanks with his Inheritance, I shall propound unto you four
Grounds of Doctrines to be insisted upon.

First Ground of Doctrine. In regard the reward that is promised unto us in the
Life to come, is set forth unto us by the keeping of a Sabbath, I shall Observe
unto you that the Happiness and Felicity of Man consists in the Service of
his Maker, in doing his Will, and keeping his Commandments.

Second Ground of Doctrine. God ever had, now has, and ever will have a People
upon Earth, whose hearts are set upon this thing, and will by no means be taken
off from Serving him, and glorifying their Creator.

Third Ground of Doctrine. Though the hearts of God's People be whole within
them, and their intentions right placed, and they intend the Service of God
above all things, yet they have their failings and their fallings, their
weaknesses and Infirmities, and fall short of their Duties, and their heart is
not so right in all things that they should attain unto this Happiness in this
Life.

Fourth Ground of Doctrine. That which must Comfort God's People against all
discouragements, their fallings into sin, and their failings in Duties, is the
consideration that such a Happiness they shall enjoy in the Life to come, such
a keeping of a Sabbath remains unto them, that they shall never Offend God by
sinning against him, or fa^l in their Duties in Serving him.

FINIS.

