THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr WILLIAM MOORE, Late fellow of Caius College, and
Keeper of the University-Library: As it was delivered in a Sermon preached at
his funeral-solemnity, April 24. 1659.

In St Mary's Church in CAMBRIDGE; by THO. SMITH, B. D. his successor.

HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA


Printed by John Field, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1660.

To My ever-honoured Friend, CHARLES SCARBOROUGH, Doctor of Physic, and the
rest of Mr Moors pupills.
Most dear friends and fellow-pupils;
I Here present unto you a description of our Tutour, as it was taken in
shorthand. I believe that Mr Smith (toward the end of whose Sermon this was
inserted) would have been persuaded to have printed this whole Sermon, if M^
Moor's executours had not told him, how they observed, that in such discourses
the only thing regarded by the Reader is the life of the person, especially in
these times, wherein few mind any thing but news.

I remember that when our Tutour had read over a book writ by D H. he said,
That if he had been to write a tract on that subject, he would have said the
same things with that author. And therefore I here make bold to send you also
the last words of Dr Hammond, which are newly come to my hands, because I have
heard some (who were intimate with them both) say, that they knew no men more
like in judgment and temper then M* Moor and that holy personage: So that if
you desire our Tutours works, you may be pleased to read this Doctors, till
his shall be published; which I hope some of his pupills will do ere long, and
not leave all the toil to Mr Smith.

I have transcribed many of them, but am leaving England; and so must commend
them to you, and you to God: beseeching you to pray for me, and to look upon
these not only as the last words of my Tutour and Dr Hammond, but of me also,
unless you hear further from the unworthiest of your fellow-pupills,

Charles Bertie.
Middle Temple, May 8. Anno CAROLI II. 12o.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr William Moor.
Reverend and beloved;
BE pleased to suffer me (who never yet commended any man out of the pulpit) to
say a little of this Mr William Moor, newly interred here Not in Caius
College, as he desired, because Mr Dell would not suffer him to be buried by
the Liturgy, which was his last request.
before us, under that very stone whereon he was wont to kneel down in prayers
to Almighty God.

He was a person, who had that of Solomon continually before his eyes, Eccles.
9. 10. What ever good thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might; for
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither
thou go: or rather, he had the life of the Blessed Jesus in his daily
meditation and practice. You can scarce name the good or piece of knowledge or
wisdom, wherein he was not eminent: one of the ablest that ever I met with,
not only in the knotty pieces of Divinity, Cases of conscience, and
Chronology, and all ingenuous sciences, especially History and all kind of
Antiquity (which, if any thing, must bring the men of this age to their wits
again, when all is done) but also in Anatomy, Physic, Mathematics, and the
like. Those who are the most eminent for all these now in England being of his
education.

But above all I must admire his piety to God, signified in every particular
that I could observe. And I think I had more the happiness of his company (and
so greater opportunities to note his behavior) of late years, then any here
present, except his own family, having been with him almost every day for these
seven years last past. Cardinal Bellarmin (in his second book of Dying well,
and eighth chapter) is so ingenuous as to blame those Romanists, who begin with
their Sacraments when they have done with their Physic; and says, Sacramentum
conferretur aegrotis quando periculose aegrotare incipiunt; that it is a very
dangerous custom (though it is seldom otherwise) that men send not for the
Priest till the Physician has given them over. This our friend (quite contrary
to them, and such as Asa) sought to the LORD first, and then to the Physician.
To the LORD, and that (after a strict examination of his soul) in those two
main parts of divine worship, Prayer and the Holy Eucharist. No sooner had the
disease seized upon him in an extraordinary manner, but straight he spoke of
the sixth chapter of St John's Gospel, and those (...) mysteria, and told me and
diverse others, that he was of his good friend Mr Herbert Thorndikes mind
concerning that chapter, viz. That it must needs be a prediction of the Holy
Eucharist: which the first Nicene Council thought the most necessary viaticum;
and after them the whole Christian world (not excluding Calvin, Zanchy, and
others of the Reformed) till some late novelists arose: who would persuade us
that Christ had no true Church upon earth before these times. And he received
the body and blood of our Savior with expressions of as much outward reverence
as ever I beheld, (which several here present can witness) and doubtless his
external deportment was but a necessary consequence of his inward devotion.
Which also appeared by his zeal and frequency in prayer to Almighty God: not
omitting to humble himself in a decent (...) dedicate to that purpose (as you
know the Primitive Christians did) through every day of his life, even when he
was not able to go, but crept and was led to it: not omitting the very last day
of his pilgrimage, when he could not without help move his foot over the
threshold.

As he testified his reverence to God in doing, so in suffering. Though his
sickness was very painful (caused by an ulcer in his bladder) yet who ever
heard him complain in that or any other trouble? All that I heard of it from
his mouth, was this; When one told him that he could not but be in great pain;
he answered, My Savior was in far greater pain for me. In his sickness he
spent the most of his time in reading and meditating on the passion of Christ,
desiring to throw aside other learning, and to know nothing else but Jesus
Christ and him crucified: and this knowledge was his ballast kept him steady
and courageous; for he never abhorred any thing more than the humors of this
age, simulation and dissimulation; so that if ever any man had a window into
his heart, that all the world might know his most secret thoughts, Mr Moor had.
In these changing times wherein men pride themselves in menstrua fide and
anniversaria (as Tertullian speaks) in a religion that alters as often as the
moon, or take up with the year at most (and then persecute their neighbors for
not being as very Protei as themselves) who dare whisper that Mr Moor was not
constant to that religion, which upon a strict rational examination he took up
in his younger days? sticking close to that faith into which he was baptized,
the true ancient, catholic, and Apostolic Church of England, whose doctrine
is contained in the 39 Articles, the Book of Homilies, and our He was the last
who read it in Caius Colledge-Chapel.
LITURGY, which he looked upon as the only probable medium to reunite the
shattered pieces of decaying Christendom. In this Religion he lived, and in
this he died; commending his soul (in my hearing) to God with a loud voice, in
those our prayers which De modo orandi. Edit. Maire, p 115.
Erasmus, and Precum. p. 302. fol.
Gilbertus Cognatus say, do savor of an Apostolical spirit; and while both his
hands and eyes were lifted up to heaven, his soul peaceably departed. Thus died
Mr Moor, as David, in a good old age, threescore and ten; full of days (I will
not say riches and honor, but) full of that which David says is far beyond
them, peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost.

Shall I tell you how he added to his true faith virtue, 2 Pet. 1. 5? as that
word signifies courage and constancy in well-doing, and conforming our actions
to the rule which our consciences approve. He would often say, That if men would
generally take courage, and show themselves barefaced (without mask or vizard)
and profess what they do indeed believe; it were the only way to secure
themselves and all others, and make those few that be factiously bent unable to
hurt them; but that foolish fear has always betrayed, and brought evil upon
men, from the time of the Gnostics till now.

To this virtue he added patience, an admirable submission to all manner of
Superiors, though perverse; a most meek and quiet spirit under what governors
(Ecclesiastical or Civil) soever. Which I note the rather, because I see some
men write large books, and many disputations, to prove that the members of the
old English Church are not to be suffered in any civil society: which books and
disputations are (in my opinion) far better confuted by such lives as Mr Moors,
then by volumes.

And to patience how did he add brotherly kindness! A true Samaritan. Every man
was his neighbor; loving to all, I cannot say to his enemies, because I never
heard he had any, for he walked so far from offense toward God and man, that he
attracted the love or wonder rather, even of the froward. And though in these
unhappy times difference in religion (as it is the nature of it) has caused a
vast difference in most men's affections, yet I cannot hear of any one man that
spoke one single word against Mr Moor; nor do I remember that I have heard him
speak ill of any one man or woman; but I have heard him in general blame the
men of this age for pulling down -- and looking into other men's faults more
then their own. He would say, that he had often heard an apt proverb, After a
good dinner, let us sit down and BACK-BITE our neighbors: the discourse of
most men now adays being nothing else. And I confess I have seen him very often
(both in sickness and health) upon the mention of schism, heresy, or
sacrilege, shake his head, and profess that he would not have had the least
finger in the ruin of the Church of England for a million.

But let us go to the College. Ask those who were his contemporaries in
Gonvile and Caius concerning him, and you shall hear them (beside all this)
wonder at his contentedness, his joy in the most private condition (the most
mean and toylsome employment) from first to last. Though he had as many fair
opportunities for preferment offered him as any man, yet he slighted them all,
trampling this world under his feet: saying, that since he was but a passenger
here, it was a folly not to behave himself as a traveller in an inn; a madness
to set his mind on such things as there is no use of at his journeys end;
adding, that God sent no man hither to get money.

His contemporaries will tell you, how far he was from disturbing the peace of
the Society wherein he lived, from beginning or fomenting any faction or
sedition in the House. That he never asked any Fellow for his vote, nor
politickly (as the custom is) enquired before hand what other men would do in
any election, nor spoke one word for any pupil of his own either to get a
scholarship or fellowship (and yet even lately he had five or six senior
fellows at once in Caius College his own pupils) but he went on his own road,
chose that man whom he in his soul thought fittest for the place, fall how it
would; and so his vote often stood alone, doing no man any good. And though some
laughed at his singularity, he had his reward within and above, which told him
that a time would come ere long, when it would be declared by strange effects,
that wealth was never the greatest happiness, nor worldly policy the best
counselor, that to lie and forswear for a good cause was no piety, and to do
wickedness for the glory of God was ill worshipping him. In a word, that there
would come (as sure as that God is true) a day of visitation; when we shall all
be judged not by the flexible rules of our factions or interests (non est
judicium Dei sicut hominum) but by the straight regularities of the Word of
God, by the rules of S. Paul, and justice and charity, by the laws of the
nation and our local statutes.

And thus he brought up his pupils, not choosing the richest (such as be
ordinarily the tulips of the University, stay a while, only to show themselves
and see fashions) but such as were of the choicest parts though never so poor,
and such as he thought he was likely to do most good upon: with whom he took
more pains usually in one day then many do in a month, knowing that doing good
to them he did good not only to single persons, but sometimes to whole
families, whole parishes, whole Counties; and he made it his business to
principle them in true Religion as well as learning. And now here be pleased to
behold and admire the strange blessing of God upon his precepts and example;
though I know many scores of his pupils (some in this and some in other
nations) yet I never knew any who continued not firm to those good principles
which his Tutour Moor instilled into him (quo semel est imbuta recens-)
notwithstanding all the temptations of schism and heresy, on the right and on
the left, both from Rome and Amsterdam, (...), except only one.

I should transgress the bounds (though not of your patience, yet I am sure) of
the time, if I should tell you now of his alms, which are almost incredible.
Where is the poor man from whom he turned his face? or where the poor pupil
that ever he turned from the College for lack of money? and yet what alms he
gave was in the most private manner he could devise. (...). how communicative
was he? how ready to lend any thing he had, even the choicest of his books or
Manuscripts, to any man in Town or Country that would make good use of them.

I must not stand to tell you what pains he took to collect our University
Statutes (now scattered in many scarce legible Manuscripts) into one body, how
he was cheerful without lightness, grave and serious without distrust,
sorrowful for nothing but sin, delighting in nothing but doing good. And by
that ye may trace his footsteps wherever he went: It Is well known that he was
through his whole life a diligent collectour and transcriber of the choicest
Manuscripts which he could possibly purchase by love or money; All these he
gave to Caius College. While he was in the University library, how diligent he
was for the public good from first to last, what incredible pains he took
there for you, and for how trifling a recompense ye all sufficiently know. And
when the sharpness of his disease would not suffer him to frequent that place,
he delivered to me a catalogue of all the Manuscripts in that library (except
the Oriental) writ every word with his own hand; which I am to deliver into the
public library, as soon as it is open again.

But my strength fails, and will not suffer me to tell you half the excellent
things I have heard from him, seen by him: his modesty (he could scarce
moderate an Act without blushing, even when his almond tree did flourish) his
temperance and sobriety in diet and apparel, abating all superfluities, and
even robbing himself to bestow upon the poor (remembering the causal particle
for: Matt. 25. 35. For I was hungered and ye gave me meat, for I was naked and
ye clothed me) his retiredness, his contentedness, his humility -- you see I
can but name them; nor shall I need when they are known to most of you as well
as to my self: especially to that numerous company of his pupils who had the
happiness of the Queen of Sheba to be perpetually at the elbow of our Solomon.

Ye who lamented him to his grave; give me leave to speak to every one of you
(dear friends) particularly (as methought I heard him on his deathbed) in the
words of the dying Roman. Non est amici defunctum vano ejulatu deflere, sed
quae voluerit meminisse, quae mandaverit exequi, It Is not the part of a friend
to bewail a dead friend with vain lamentation, but to remember what he advised
and to perform what he commanded. There is not one of you who had any relation
to him that were in the sad condition with most other Gentlemen whose follies
are termed wisdom, who are applauded when they talk vainly, and are let alone
when they do shameful things: No, every mothers child of you was as sure to
meet with his portion of sage and sober counsel as of his diet. And (in your
hearing) he often lamented the misery of our English Gentry, who are commonly
brought up to nothing but hawks and hounds, and know not how to bestow their
time in a rainy day, and in the midst of all their plenty are in want of
friends, necessary reproof, and most loving admonition.

And now when the Preacher has done all the use that most men make of such
discourses as these (or indeed of any sermons) is to pass a censure. I doubt
not but some of you will say I have spoke too much, others that I have said too
little of him de quo praestat nihil quam pauca dicere. And for the first, I
confess I am so far of my reverend friend Dr Jeremy Taylers mind, as to be no
friend to funeral sermons: but I know M^ Moor was such a person, that if the Dr
himself were in my stead this day, he would say far more of him then I have
done: that he was a man of whom though I had said nothing, and though he have
no tombe-stone here before you, yet he cannot want a monument or a remembrance
while Caius College stands, while we have an University or public- Library,
of which we never before had such a custos; and I believe hereafter never shall.

THE LAST WORDS Which were writ by the Reverend, Pious and Learned Dr HAMMOND:
Being Two PRAYERS for the Peaceful re-settlement of this Church and State.
Prayer I.
O Blessed Lord, who in thine infinite mercy did vouchsafe to plant a
glorious Church among us, and now in thy just judgment have permitted our sins
and follies to root it up; be pleased at last to resume thoughts of peace
toward us, that we may do the like to one another. Lord, look down from
heaven, the habitation of thy holiness, and behold the ruins of a desolated
Church, and compassionate to see her in the dust. Behold her, O Lord, not only
broken, but crumbled, divided into so many sects and fractions, that she no
longer represents the Ark of the God of Israel (where the Covenant and the
Manna were conserved) but the Ark of Noah, filled with all various sorts of
unclean beasts: and to complete our misery and guilt, the spirit of division
has insinuated it self as well into our affections as our judgments; that
badge of Discipleship which thou recommendedst to us, is cast off, and all the
contrary wrath and bitterness, anger and clamor, called in to maintain and
widen our breaches. O Lord, how long shall we thus violate and defame that
Gospel of peace that we profess? how long shall we thus madly defeat our
selves, lose that Christianity which we pretend to strive for? O thou which
make men to be of one mind in an house, be pleased so to unite us, that we
may be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

And now that in civil affairs there seems some aptness to a composure, O let
not our Spiritual differences be more unreconcilable. Lord, let not the
roughest winds blow out of the Sanctuary; let not those which should be thy
Ambassadors for peace still sound a Trumpet for war: but do thou reveal thy
self to all our Eliah's in that still small voice, which may teach them to
echo thee in the like meek treating with others. Lord, let no unseasonable
stiffness of those that are in the right, no perverse obstinacy of those that
are in the wrong, hinder the closing of our wounds; but let the one instruct in
meekness, and be thou pleased to give the other repentance to the
acknowledgment of the Truth.

To this end do thou, O Lord, mollify all exasperated minds (take off all
animosities and prejudices, contempt and heart-burnings) and by uniting their
hearts prepare for the reconciling their opinions. And that nothing may
intercept the clear sight of thy truth, Lord, let all private and secular
designs be totally deposited, that gain may no longer be the measure of our
Godliness, but that the one great and common concernment of truth and peace may
be unanimously and vigorously pursued.

Lord, the hearts of all men are in thy hands, O be thou pleased to let thy
Spirit of peace overshadow the minds of all contending parties; and, if it be
thy will, restore this Church to her pristine state, renew her days as of old,
let her escape out of Egypt, be so entire, that not an hoof may be left
behind: But if thy wisdom see it not yet a season for so full a deliverance,
Lord, defer not (we beseech thee) such a degree of it, as may at least secure
her a being. If she cannot recover her beauty, yet O Lord grant her health,
such a soundness of constitution as may preserve her from dissolution. Let thy
providence find out some good Samaritans to cure her present wounds. And to
whomsoever thou shall commit that important work, Lord, give them skilful hands
and compassionate hearts; direct them to such applications as may most
speedily, and yet most soundly, heal the hurt of the daughter of Sion; and make
them so advert to the interests both of truth and peace, that no lawful
condescension may be omitted, nor any unlawful made: And do thou, who art both
the wonderful Counselor and Prince of peace, so guide and prosper all pacifick
endeavors, that all our distractions may be composed, and our Jerusalem may
again become a City at unity in it self; that those happy primitive days may at
length revert, wherein Vice was the only heresy; that all our intestine
contentions may be converted into a vigorous opposition of our common enemy,
our unbrotherly feuds into a Christian zeal against all that exalts it self
against the obedience of Christ. Lord, hear us, and ordain peace for us; even
for his sake whom thou have ordained our Peacemaker, Jesus Christ our Lord.

Prayer II.
Evening.

O Most gracious Lord, who do not afflict willingly nor grieve the children
of men, who smitest not till the importunity of our sins enforce thee, and
then correctest in measure, we thy unworthy creatures humbly acknowledge that
we have abundantly tasted of this patience and lenity of thine. To what an
enormous height were our sins arrived ere thou beganst to visit them! and when
thou could no longer forbear, yet mastering thy power, thou have not
proportioned thy vengeance to our crimes, but to thy own gracious design of
reducing and reclaiming us. Lord, had the first stroke of thy hand been
exterminating, our guilts had justified the method; but thou have proceeded by
such easy and gentle degrees, as witness how much thou desiredst to be
interrupted; and show us, that all that sad weight we have long groaned under,
has been accumulated only by our own incorrigibleness. It Is now, O Lord,
these many years that this Nation has been in the furnace, and yet our dross
wastes not but increases; and it is owing only to thy unspeakable mercy, that
we (who would not be purified) are not consumed; that we remain a Nation, who
cease not to be a most sinful and provoking Nation. O Lord, let not this
long-suffering of thine serve only to upbraid our obstinacy, and enhanse our
guilt; but let it at last have the proper effect on us, melt our hearts, and
lead us to repentance.

And oh, that this may be the day for us thus to discern the things that belong
to our peace! that all who are (yea, and all who are not) cast down this day in
an external humiliation, may by the operation of thy mighty Spirit have their
souls laid prostrate before thee in a sincere contrition! O thou who can out
of the very stones raise up children unto Abraham, work our stony flinty hearts
into such a temper as may be malleable to the impressions of thy grace, that
all the sinners in Sion may tremble; that we may not by a persevering obstinacy
seal to our selves both temporal and eternal ruin, but instead of our mutinous
complaining at the punishments of our sins, search and try our ways, and turn
again to the Lord. O be thou pleased to grant us this one grand fundamental
mercy, that we who so impatiently thirst after a change without us, may render
that possible and safe by this better and more necessary change within us; that
our sins may not, as they have so often done, interpose and eclipse that light
which now begins to break out upon us.

Lord, thy dove seems to approach us with an olive branch in her mouth, oh let
not our filth and noisomness chase her away; but grant us that true repentance
which may atone thee, and that Christian charity which may reconcile us with
one another. Lord, let not our breach either with thee or among our selves be
incurable, but by making up the first prepare us for the healing of the latter.
And because, O Lord, the way to make us one fold is to have one shepherd, be
pleased to put us all under the conduct of Him to whom that charge belongs; bow
the hearts of this people as of one man, that the only contention may be who
shall be most forward in bringing back our David. O let none reflect on their
past guilts as an argument to persevere, but to repent; and to make their
return so sincere as may qualify them not only for his but thy Mercy.

And, Lord, be pleased so to guide the hearts of all who shall be entrusted
with that great concernment of settling this nation, that they may weigh all
their deliberations in the balance of the Sanctuary; that conscience, not
interest, may be the ruling principle; and that they may render to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods; that they may
become healers of our breaches, and happy repairers of the sad ruins both in
Church and in State. Grant, O Lord, that as those sins which made them are
become National, so the repentance may be National also; and that evidenced by
the proper fruits of it, by zeal of restoring the rights both of thee and thine
Anointed. And do thou, O Lord, so dispose all hearts, and remove all obstacles,
that none may have the will, much less the power, to hinder his peaceable
restitution. And, Lord, let him bring with him an heart so entirely devoted to
thee, that he may wish his own honor only as a means to advance thine. O let
the precepts and examples of his Blessed Father never depart from his mind; and
as thou were pleased to perfect the one by suffering, so perfect the other by
acting thy will; that He may be a blessed instrument of replanting the power
instead of the form of Godliness among us, of restoring Christian virtue in a
profane and almost barbarous Nation. And if any wish him for any distant ends
(if any desire his shadow as a shelter for their riots and licenciousness) O
let him come a great but happy defeat to all such, not bring fuel but cure to
their inordinate appetites; and by his example as a Christian, and his
Authority as a King, so invite to good, and restrain from evil, that he may not
only release our temporal, but our spiritual bondage, suppress those foul and
scandalous vices which have so long captivated us, and by securing our inward,
provide for the perpetuating our outward peace. Lord, establish thou his throne
in righteousness, make him a signal instrument of thy glory and our happiness,
and let him reap the fruits of it in comfort here, and in bliss hereafter; that
so his earthly crown may serve to enhanse and enrich his heavenly. Grant this,
O King of Kings, for the sake and intercession of our Blessed Mediator, Jesus
Christ.

THE END.
The manner of Dr H's death.
D* H. Hammond, whose works (both of charity and learning) praise him in the
gate, was about the beginning of April 1660. seized with a fit of the stone;
which at first put him to acute pain, but soon after changed it self into a
languishment and sorenes over the whole body, attended with nauseatings and
vomits (usual symptoms in such cases) and a suppression of urin for three
days, then a fit of bleeding, etc. Thus he remained till April 25 when a second
fit of bleeding came. After it succeeded a faintness, which increased till one
a clock at night, which began a perpetual day to him, and to us as great a
darkness as the remove of such a luminary could create to the Church.

His disease (though of the acutest kind) was, in a manner, without pain. His
soft departure would make a Christian in love with death: for whereas at other
times he was upon the like occasions subject to a lethargick stupor; now he had
his intellectuals perfect to the last, and breathed out his soul in a Veni
Domine Jesu.

FINIS.

