A PATTERN OF FREE GRACE; OR,

The exceeding Riches of the Free Grace and Mercy of God in Christ, to
Believing and Repenting Sinners.

By the example of that admirable Convert, or rather miraculous mirror of Gods
wonderful Love and Mercy, in saving the Repenting Thief on the Cross.

Wherein is excellently handled the Doctrine of true Repentance; the exceeding
Sinfulness of Sin; with the desperate danger of final Impenitency; with the
certainty of Salvation to repenting Sinners by Christ.

By that Godly and Faithful Servant of Christ and his Church, Samuel Smith,
Minister of the Gospel, and Author of The Great Assize, and David's Repentance.

Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will he
hardneth. London, Printed for John Andrews, at the White Lion near Pye-Corner,
1658.

Courteous Reader,
BE pleased to take notice that there are five other godly Treatises extant of
this pious Authors: viz. The Great Assize. David's Repentance. David's blessed
Man. Moses Prayers. And The Practice of Godliness, The Christian duty.

An excellent Book likewise called The Silver Watch-bell.

Also a most pious and comfortable Treatise, entitled; The Everlasting Joys
of Heaven, or, The blessed Life of a Christian in Grace here, and in Glory
hereafter: very seasonable for these times.

Also an excellent Sermon, called Christ's first Sermon, or, the Necessity,
Duty, and Practice of Repentance, opened and applied: a very godly Book, and is
but three pence price.

There are likewise seven other small Books, all of them very godly, and very
comfortable for thy soul. One is entitled, The Charitable Christian. Another,
The Plain Man's Path way to Heaven, directing ever one how they may be The
third, The Devils disease; or, the sin of Pride arraigned and condemned. The
fourth, The dreadful Character of a Drunkard. The fifth, The Black Book of
Conscience: or, Gods High Court of Justice in the Soul. The sixth, The Fathers
last Blessing. The seventh, Doomesday at hand. All very necessary for these
licentious times. Each of them being but of two pence price: and are to be sold
by John Andrews, at the White Lion near Pye-Corner.

THE ADMIRABLE CONVERT.
Luke 23. verse. 39.40. etc. ANd one of the evil doers, which were hanged,
railed on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thy self and us.

But the other answering rebuked him, saying, Do thou not fear God, seeing
thou art in the same condemnation?

We indeed are justly here, for we receive the due reward of our deeds, but
this man has done nothing amiss.

And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom.

And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me
in Paradise.


OF all Doctrines to be preached, none more necessary then the Doctrine of
true Repentance; which as it is most necessary to life and salvation, as our
Savior witnesses, saying, Luke 13.5.
Except ye repent, ye shall all perish; So never more neglected, then in these
times, wherein too many of Isreal's Watchmen bend themselves, not to serve to
the edification of the faith of the Church, as to disturb the peace thereof,
wherein the malice and policy of Satan, in the purest Churches, to corrupt
the purity of doctrine, has been ever seen.

But to leave such as weary themselves and Hearers with knotty questions,
tending rather to strife then edification, therein many times to get a name of
profunditie, they lead their people rather into a labyrinth, then work them to
true piety.

It is the Doctrine of true repentance we have now in hand; and herein of that
Admirable Convert, or that Mirror of Gods mercy, the Thief on the Cross;
whose example as it is full of consolation unto the godly, so no one example of
Gods mercy in the whole Scripture more abused by wicked and licentious men.

Before we come to these particulars, it will not be amiss that we first cast
our eyes upon the Lord Jesus Christ himself, who as the Prophet Isaiah says,
Is^. 53.12.
was numbered with transgressors.

And as Saint Luke observes in this Chapter:

Verse. 32. There were also two other malefactors led with him to be put to
death.

Verse 33. And when they were come to the place which is called Caluary, there
they crucified him, and the Malefactors, etc.

There were four kinds of death in use amongst the Jews, The four kinds of
death in use among the Jews.
as capital punishments for capital offenses.

First, stoning, a kind of death commonly inflicted upon Blasphemers, Stoning,
Leuit. 24.14. Deuteronomy. 17.7.
and Idolaters, where the hand of the witness was first to be upon him.

Secondly, Beheading. Beheading


Thirdly, Burning.

Fourthly, Strangling, Burning. Deu. 21.22
which punishment was afterward changed by the Romans into crucifying;
Crucifying Deu. 21.23.
which kind of death was above the rest full of pain, ignominy, and
reproach; and therefore reserved for grand Malefactors. The manner whereof was
this: The body was to hang on the tree till night, and before the Sun was
set, the same was to be taken down and buried. This kind of death was branded
with a curse by God himself: He that is hanged, is accursed of God.

And for the nature of this kind of death, without all question it was
performed with much torture and pain, the Arms being stretched out, and
fastened unto the tree, with nails which pierced both hands and feet; in which
miserable torture and pain, the crucified was to remain and abide till death.

And if it should be inquired why the Jews did so earnestly urge Pilate that
Christ might be crucified, no question it was done (in respect of them) because
this kind of death was the most ignominious, bitter, and reproachful, such was
their malice against Christ.

And herein something would be observed concerning 1. The Jews inflicting. 2.
Christ suffering. 3. The nature of the death, crucifying.


The malice of the wicked great against Christ and his members.
in these Jews we may take notice of the implacable rage and malice that is in
wicked and ungodly men against Christ and his members. No wild beast is more
savage and cruel then wicked men are, yea and that against the most innocent.
Here is Christ Jesus himself, the Object, Abject, and Subject, of the malice
of merciless men, who thought they could never show cruelty enough upon Christ.

Of them it may truly be said, Destruction and calamity are in their ways,
and the way of peace they have not known.

And hence is it that in the Scripture, wicked men are resembled unto Lions,
Bears, Wolves, Foxes, and Beasts, Mat. 7.15. Cant. 2.2. The. 3.2. Pro. 12.10
2. King. 8.11.
yea such kind of beasts as are of a cruel and devouring nature: yea as
Solomon says, The very mercies of the wicked are cruel. What a greeting was
there betwixt Elisha and Hazael; the very sight of Hazael caused the man of God
to weep, foreseeing the cruelty that he would exercise upon the people of
Israel: Their young men (says he) will thou slay with the sword, and rippe up
the mothers with child, and dash their children against the stones. We may see
this in Pharaoh, Exodus 2. Mat. 2.
in Herod, in Haman, who regarded none, neither age nor sex: besides the
woeful experience of the truth hereof, the godly daily find in the world.

Neither is this a thing to be wondered at; peace and of love: But by the spirit
of Satan, 1. Pet. 5.8.
who is full of malice, and hunteth still after blood, going about continually
seeking whom he may devour; who is compared in the Scripture to a Lion, Reu.
12.
Dragon, and old Serpent, and a Murderer from the beginning. Now it is Satan
himself that works in the wicked, he blows the coals, and wicked men are
but his Instruments to serve his turn.

As also in respect of the Godly themselves, Esaias. 59.15
Whosoever refraineth from evil, makes himself a prey. The very piety and
holiness of life, that is to be seen in the Godly, is matter for the malice
of wicked men to work upon, this bred the quarrel betwixt Cain and his
Brother; 1 Ioh. 3.12
Abel was more righteous then himself, this stirred up Cain against him.

Seeing then that there is such an implacable hatred in the wicked against the
Righteous; and conspire against them. Was not this foretold in the first age of
the world, Genesis 3.15.
I will put emnitie between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed? And was not this again confirmed by Christ himself, now in the last
age of the world; Mat. 10.34
I came not to send peace, but the Sword? I am come to set a man at variance
against his Father, and the Daughter against the Mother, etc. Never then let us
wonder at it, but rather magnify the goodness of our God, that is pleased
thus to limit, and bound the malice of the wicked, without whose special
providence we could not live amongst them.

And indeed it should teach us to be wise as Serpents, ground our Savior
warns thus, Behold, I send you forth as Lambs amongst Wolves, Mat. 10.16
be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves. Wisdom and
Simplicity is required of all Gods people. We are to walk warily every where,
and look well unto our selves that we be not made a prey unto them.

And because our enemies are deep in Council, wicked and unreasonable men. 2
These. 3.2
All our hope and confidence must be in him, 2 Samuel 24.13.14.
and let us pray with David, that the Lord would rather take us into his own
hand to correct us, and not suffer us to fall into the hands of men, for with
him there is mercy. Ps. 103.14
He remembers whereof we be made, he considers that we are but dust. And
indeed in this has the Lord heard and answered his people, that howsoever for
our sins we have tasted of the Lords Rod, by Famine, Pestilence, strange
diseases, unseasonable weather, etc. Yet the Lord has not made us a prey to
malicious and wicked men, whose very mercies are cruel, and whose insatiable
thirst, is for the blood of the Saints, which if the Lord should do at any
time, which we may justly fear by reason of our sins, we shall then be
brought to see a manifest difference betwixt the chastisments of a merciful
God and loving Father, and the bloody cruelties of merciless men. Hitherto of
the malice of the Jews.

For the second, shameful, ignominious, and reproachful Death. Note we hence.

That it may be the portion of faithful men, Godly men many times suffer as
malefactors.
yea the best Christians to suffer as Malefactors, here is Christ Numbered with
Transgressors, crucified with two Thieves. 1 Reg. 22.27. Ier. 32.2. Genesis 39. 2 Timothy 1.16.
So is Micha sent to the prison, Jeremy to the Dungeon, Daniel to the den,
Joseph punished as an Adulterer, Paul imprisoned for preaching the Gospel, and
the Baptist beheaded, Mar. 6.27.
yea the better the Christian, the more obnoxious and liable to wrongs, and it
must needs be so;

First, For it was through the envy of the people that Christ was put to
death, Mat. 27.18
for they had no just accusation against Christ; How often does Christ clear
his innocence, what evil have I done? and which of you can reprove me of sin?

Secondly, We have found this man a pestilent Fellow, Luk 23.2.
and an enemy to Caesar.

But the maine ground hereof is this,

Rome, who will allow no Church but such a Church as is flourishing and visible,
and measure the truth of it, by the flourishing light and reputation of
Ecclesiastical order, as if Christ has changed his cognizance, the Cross and
the taking up of the Cross, to the Imperious lifting up of the Scepter, or the
Crosiar, now more dreadful then the Scepter.

Secondly, He trusted in God let him deliver him. Let us see what his religion
and forwardness will now avail him; But thus deals the Lord many times with
the best Christian, whilst a wicked man is suffered to run on to destruction.

Thirdly,

And to this end consider further. First that herein we shall be but
conformable unto Christ our head, Motives to suffer wrong.


Secondly, that can be laid upon us by the wicked, cannot take away due
innocence, nor make us unhappy. I will not part with my innocence until I dye,
says Job.

Thirdly,

Thirdly, shameful, painful, and most accursed, to be Crucified. This kind
of death was pronounced accursed by God himself. Deuteronomy. 21.23. Gal. 3.13.
He that is hanged is accursed of God: and so says the Apostle, He was made a
curse for us.

Now Christ in the providence of God his Father was to dye this accursed death,
Christ died an accursed death.
this shameful, painful, and most ignominious death.

And herein it is requisite that we should not look so much upon the malice
of the Jews, of Herod, or of Pilate, of the High Priest, or of the people, for
these all were but the Lords Instruments, to serve his purpose and decree, Act.
4.27.28.
as it is said, Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and people of
Israel, were gathered together for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy council
determined before to be done.

But why was Christ to dye this kind of death above al other?

There are many reasons wherefore Christ was thus to dye,

First, Council of God that it should be so. Act. 2.23.


Secondly, Messiah, and Savior that was promised of old, unto the Fathers, for
so says Christ: Io 8.28.
When ye have lift up the Son of Man then shall ye know that I am he.

Thirdly, Types in the time of the Law, Leuit. 10.15. Leuit. 7.20
concerning Christ. As namely the Heave offering, which was to be lift up and
shaken from the right hand unto the left, signifiing indeed the spreading
abroad of Christ's arms on the tree.

And that of Isaac laid upon the wood, Genesis 22.10
with the brazen Serpent erected upon a pole, Number. 21.8
all which were lively Types and figures of Christ.

Fourthly, Mesiah to come, might have their period and determination in him.
viz.

They pierced my hands and feet. Ps. 22.17.
And again,

They shall deliver him to the Gentiles, and they shall mock him, and scourge
him, and crucify him.

Fifthly,

Who has borne our shame, suffering with two Malefactors.

Pain, being racked and disioynted Psalm. 22.14.

The curse, being hanged on a tree.

And thus indeed in all these respects it was expedient that Christ should thus
be crucified, and suffer this kind of death, That the Scripture might be
fullfilled, Io. 18.32.
signifying what death he should dye.

But especially it was most expedient that Christ should suffer this shameful,
ignominious, He was made under the law, Gal. 4.4. Gal. 3.13.
that he might redeem them which were under the law, that we might receive
the adoption of Sons.

Now this curse and malediction of the law has Christ undergone for us,
according to that prophecy of old: Esaias 53.4.
He bare our infirmities, and carried our sins. He was wounded for our
Transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, he made his soul an
offering for sin, the chastisment of our peace was upon him.

And thus was Christ made under the law, the law deeming and reputing Christ
the Transgressor, and inflicting upon him both in soul and body, the whole
curse and malediction of the law. And indeed the wrath of God for the sins of
the world lay so heavy upon him as that it pierced his very soul: For had
Christ suffered only in body, then had he only overcome a bodily death, and
then were our estate most miserable.

But our sins having deserved not only a bodily death, but even the second
death, the death of body and soul; it was therefore necessary that Christ
should satisfy the wrath and Justice of his Father for both.

And indeed whence was it that when that his bitter death approached, he began
to be so sorrowful and heavy? whence was it that he said unto his disciples,
My soul is heavy, etc. whence was it that he fell so often upon his face and
prayed, Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me?

Whence was it that an Angel was feign to come from heaven to comfort him?

Whence was it that he prayed groueling his face to the earth, when his sweat
was drops of blood trickling down to the ground?

Whence, I say, was all this, but from those bitter pangs that he felt in his
soul; his soul being made an offering for sin?

But how could God be just in punishing an innocent for the nocent?

We must consider Christ in his sufferings, not as a debtor, surety and a
pledge betwixt God and us, who had undertaken for us: Therefore he suffered not
as guilty in himself, but personating us that were guilty.

Now it stands with the course of Justice to lay the debtors action upon the
Surety, especially being willing and able to satisfy the same.

But Christ's death was short,

This proceeds from the dignity and worth of the person that does suffer,

Seeing then that Christ was thus to undergo this accursed death, day bear the
shame, curse, and punishment due for thy sins. Oh the misery of every
impenitent sinner! were this duly considered, it would dampe all the present
pleasures of the wicked, and set them on work to make their peace with God.

Secondly, crying out in the perplexity of his soul, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? This will let us see sin in the ugly face thereof.

And last of all, Paul, Romans 8.33
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen: It is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, etc. We have
therefore cause to rejoice in the Cross of Christ above all things, and to say
with Paul, I desire not to know any thing, but Christ and him crucified.

And thus much for Christ's sufferings.

Now we come to those two Malefactors that were crucified together with Christ.

(39. And one of the Thieves that were hanged, etc.)
Before we come to handle these words, two doubts are to be removed.

In Moses Law thest was punished with restitution, Exodus 22.1
If a man shall steal anoxe, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it, he shall
restore fine oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep.

It may then be demanded, How thest amongst the Romans, and so likewise
amongst us, comes to be punished with death?

This was a Judicial Law for a time,

Besides our people are more cruel then they were, and therefore more sharper
punishments are to be provided.

But some conceive that the word in the original is to be understood of such
theft as is joined with murder, (...)
and so to be understood of day-theeues, or robbers by the way side.

But Saint Matthew has it thus, The thieves cast it in his teeth: Mat. 27.44
as if both of them had been against Christ.

This is but More Scripturae, the Scriptures phrase, one number put for
another, like that of Saint Matthew, When the disciples saw it, Ioh. 12.5.
that she poured a box of ointment upon his head, they had indignation. Now
Saint John says, that this was but one disciple, Judas.

Or else it may be answered thus: That both were wicked at the first, and at
last one repented and converted, leaving his railing and mocking, and believes
in Christ.

VERSE 39. And one of the evil doers which were hanged, rayled on him,


WE have here first of all the graceless and impenitent Thief, acting his
part upon the stage of the Cross.

Wherein are obseruable, 1. The person, (An evil doer.) 2. His behavior
(rayled.) 3. On whom, (on Christ.) 4. In what manner.


1. Calling the truth into question, (If thou be Christ.)

2. Scoffingly desiring deliverance from him, (Save thy self and us.)

Here we have first of all to behold a graceless, wicked, Person.
and impenitent wretch, suffering with Christ, and crucified together with him;
howbeit the cause of their deaths was much different. Christ dyed innocently;
this impenitent does suffer justly for his wickedness: so that though the
punishment seemed to be alike, the cause was not alike. Note hence,

That not the punishment but the cause makes a Martyr. Not the punishment but
the cause makes a Martyr. Non poena sed causa, etc.
What though this Impenitent were put to the like public shame, and dyed that
cursed and cruel death that Christ did, he suffered justly for his deserts,
and his public punishment and shame was but the stipend of his sin? 1. Pet.
4.15.
Let no man (says Peter) suffer as an evil doer. For what comfort can we have
in such kind of sufferings: But when we shall suffer wrongfully, or in the
cause, or for the sake of Christ, then may we have comfort. This made those
holy servants of Christ, Act. 16.25
Paul and Sylas, to rejoice in prison, and to sing Psalms, as if they had
accounted their sufferings their greatest glory and happiness. It Is true, to be
a prisoner is matter of no praise or commendations. But to be a prisoner of
Jesus Christ, or for Christ, this is it that wipes away the stain and blot.
And hence is it that the Apostle Paul often mentions the cause of his
sufferings, as his sufferings: Ephesians. 3.1.
Phil. 1.
Paul a prisoner of Jesus Christ, or for Jesus Christ: because it was for
Christ's lake that he suffered. Thus we read that Joseph lay bound in prison,
Genesis 39.20
with the rest of the Kings prisoners, howbeit the causes were not alike. Gen
40.3.
So Joseph again with Pharaohs Baker and Butler was cast into the same prison,
howbeit Joseph falsely accused by his adulterous Mistrisse: The other suffer
justly for their deserts.

Though I give my body to the fire, 1. Cor. 13
says the Apostle, that I burn, and have not love, it profits one nothing.
It is not the pains of martyrdom, nor all the torments in the world that will
make a Martyr, if we suffer as cuill doers, and not for well doing. And it it
must needs be so: For,

It is not the punishment but the cause that approues us to be faithful
bearers of the Cross. affection, but of the indignation of God toward us.

And surely this may serve to stop the mouths of our adversaries of Rome,
canonized for Saints, who suffered indeed as Traitors, against their Prince and
country, and deserved rather to be marked out with the black coal of Infamy
and shame to posterity, then once to have their names mentioned with the least
respect of honor.

And what shall we say to the order of the Franciscans that is amongst them, an
order that makes profession of voluntary misery, as if herein they did approve
themselves to be the true disciples of Christ. Alas herein even Baals Priests
and Mahomets Deruices out-bid them: they do something like Disciples, but yet
they come short. He that will be my disciple (says Christ) let him take up his
cross and follow me. Cyprian observes, that the first Martyrs of the new
Testament were children; so the cause of our martyrdom and sufferings should
carry in it the innocence of children.

O but,

O but stay a while, shall never go unrewarded with God. But we must look well
to our own consciences, that they do not misinforme us, and conspire together
with Satan to work our ruin: for, Ier. 18.
The heart of man is deceitful above all things, who can know it? And Satan
himself is not more dangerous and deceitful unto a man's self, then his own
heart, and therefore we must bring our consciences to the word, and see that
they be rightly informed there, else we can have no comfort in our
sufferings. But these suffer indeed most justly, and that for their rebellions,
idolatry, disobedience to authority, etc. and so as evil doers, to whom no
promise of true comfort in such sufferings belongs.

Secondly, that whatsoever trouble or affliction soever we meet withal here,
that we look still to the cause of our suffering, that it be good, and not
evil, as Saint Peter exhorts: 1. Pet. 4.15
Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or
as a busy body in other men's matters: yet if any man suffer as a Christian,
let him not be ashamed. Many a man is smitten with the tongue, and lies under
shameful reproach, some for their pride, some for their cruelty,
couctousnesse, uncleanness, etc. and albeit their own consciences cannot but
plead guilty to these enormities, yet they think they have said enough for
themselves, when they say that good men have been abused and reproached; yea
Christ himself, say they. This I grant to be most true, in Christ and good
men, they did indeed suffer disgrace and reproach in the world. But did they
deserve it? Surely no.

Had they deserved it, they could have had little comfort in their sufferings;
And know that thou being guilty of those sins, the which the world does
justly brand thee withal; it is just with God, thou should bear the shame
thereof with men, either to bring thee to the sight thereof, and repentance for
the same, or else to thy further obduration and hardening in sin against the
day of vengeance.

It is then but a foolish speech that is so common in the world, that when men
suffer any indignity from the hands of others undeservedly, to say, If I had
deserned such things, it would never have grieved me. Surely had thou
deserved them, thou had much cause to grieve; But Christians must take up the
contrary note, I rejoice in this that I deserved it not.

And last of all, Purgatory here in this life; when as, alas, they suffering
for sin, these present miseries are but an earnest, and foretaste of the
eternal judgment which is reserved for them hereafter.

(And one of the evil doers that were hanged.)
This impenitent Thief, howsoever he had escaped long in a course of sin, at
last comes to shame, and to a miserable end. And indeed God has joined these
two together, Sin and shame, and will in this example teach all men unto the
end of the world, That

Sin and shame are companions, and go not far asunder. Sin and shame go
together.
Howsoever a sinner for a time may thrive and prosper in a course of sinning,
yet this is but for a time; the Lord at last will overtake them with his
judgments. Howsoever a wicked man may prolong his life in wickedness, Eccl.
7.15.
yet destruction at length shall overtake the sinner. Sin and the punishment
of sin are inseparable companions; if the one go before, the other will
follow after. The Lord threatened Adam, Genesis 2.17.
that if he transgressed the commandment, he should dye the death. As God had
a time to threaten, he found a time to execute the punishment. Genesis 4.7.
We may see this in Cain, If thou do well (says the Lord) shall thou not be
rewarded? If thou do evil, sin lies at thy door. The old world that lay
weltering in all manner of abominations, the Lord at last remembered them with
a judgment from above. Genesis 19.5.
The like of Sodom and Gomorha. The people in the wilderness murmured against
Moses and Aaron, Numb. 21.5.6.
the Lord therefore sent fietie Serpents and Scorpions amongst them. Yea Gods
Church and people themselves, when they have sinned against God, the Lord has
visited their iniquities with the rod, and their sins with scourges. David
numbered the people in the pride of his heart, 1. Sam. 24.
God meets with David in the same, in weakening the number of them. 2. Sam. 12.
So are David's sins of adultery and murder, punished with several
punishments from the Almighty. But why should I spend time in so clear a
truth, God has sent his Judgments upon men, and Angels, kingdoms and
commonwealths, houses and families, persons and places, all have tasted of the
Lords rod, when once they have sinned against him. And this proceeds

First of all, evil in the wicked to deserve punishment for the love of sin:
Genesis 18.25.
for God forbid, but that the Judge of all the world should do right.

Secondly, it is grounded upon the providence of God, Aquin.


Thirdly, in regard of the good of Gods Church, it is necessary that God
should thus punish sin, course of sinning by his justice, men would live like
Beasts, Lions, Wolves, and Tigers, Yea these ravenous Beasts would not make
more hauock, then wicked men; Exo. 14.25
if God had not met with Pharaoh what had become of Israel? if God had not met
with Haman, Hest. 7.6.
what had become of the Jews?

But we see that wicked men do not always come to shame for their sins here
in this life.

It is their greatest punishment not to be punished. Nibil est infoelicius
fo^licitate peccantium, etc. Aug.


Secondly, wicked men are punished whilst they are spared; for what greater
punishment then to be given over to their own hearts lusts.

Thirdly, it is a sign that God reserues such for a more fearful punishment
after death.

Seeing then that shame does thus accompany sin as an inseparable companion,
howfoeuer God many times suffers long. This shows in the first place the
lamentable estate of all wicked and impenitent sinners, who lie in sin and
wallow in all manner of ungodliness, their condemnation does not sleep.
Howsoever the wicked now are secure, and put from them the thoughts of sin, and
the punishment due for the same, yet so long as the sinner slands guilty of
sin before the Lord, there is a most certain expectation of judgment.
Indeed such is that evil disposition in the heart of man, that as Solomon
says, Because sentence against an evil work is not presently executed, Eccl.
8.11.
therefore the heart of the Sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. But
what follows, ver. 12.
though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, etc.
it shall not be well with the wicked.

And again, Woe to the wicked, Esa. 3.11.
it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him.
There is nothing more certain then punishment to the sinner.

Secondly, sin brings with it shame and punishment, it is time for us to
look about us, and let us take heed of security, and labor to please God
with reverence and fear, Romans 12.29.
For our God is a consuming fire.

Thirdly, Say ye (says the Lord by his Prophet) to the righteous, Esaias 3.10.
it shall be well with him, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings.

The consideration of this, comforted Paul over all his troubles, I have fought
a good fight, I have finished the course; henceforth there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7.8.
which Christ the righteous Judge shall give me in that day, and not to me
only, etc. Let us then rest upon the gracious promises of our God, being
assured that covenant he has made with his, is surer then the covenant with
day and night of the Sun and of the Moon, he is Yea, and Amen, in all his
promises, and as jealous of his Truth with his servants, as of his justice with
the wicked.

Rayled on him.
We have heard before how the sin of this Malefactor has brought upon him
shame, His behavior.
and God in his justice has now overtaken him in a course of sinning, and
brought upon him his deserved punishment, his sinful wretched life, has now a
miserable and cursed death.

We are now to come to his behavior at the time of his death, He railed on
Christ.

First, the Evangelist observes how this Impenitent at this time of his death
fell to rail upon Christ. He is so far from being humbled in the sense of
his sin, or in any penitent manner to make confession of the same, consideting
that now he was from a temporal to come before an eternal Judge, and from the
condemnation of the one, to pass under the condemnation of the other, as that
he grows worse by his punishment and becomes more desperately sinful, He
railed on Christ. Note hence,

That when the Lord shall overtake the wicked with his judgments, Afflictions
make the wicked worse.
which might bring them to the sense of their sin and repentance for the
same, as we shall see hereafter in the Penitent, they do but make the wicked
worse. Does this wretched and miserable man, now that the Lords hand is upon
him, come to see his sins, and bewail his former sinful course, confessing
and crying down his own abominations, entreating for mercy at Gods hand in
the pardon of the same, surely no; But his heart is more obstinate, Romans 1.5.
and his conscience more hardened and becoms seared as it were with a hot-yron,
he has now a heart that cannot repent but becomes more desperately Genesis 15.16
wretched and sinful, Mat 23.32.
still more and more to his last breath. And this is usually seen in the
wicked daily, notwithstanding the Lords corrections upon them: they proceed
from evil to worse, until they have at length filled up the measure of their
iniquities, unto their eternal destruction.

When the Lord convicted Cain of his cruel and unnatural* murder of his own
brother, Genesis 4.13.
how bare he the Lords reprehension? did he resolve into tears of repentance,
did he confess his fault, and crave pardon at Gods hand? Nothing less. Nay
rather did he not complain of God, that his punishment was over severe? My
punishment is greater then I can bear.

We may see this in Pharaoh, in those ten plagues the Lord brought upon him
and his people; Exodus 10.
they were so far from humbling him, as that they made his heart still more
obdurate and hard unto his own destruction. Even so the people of Israel, the
more the Lord afflicted them in the wilderness, the more they murmured: The
more they were smitten, the more they fell away: insomuch as the Prophet takes
up this complaint of them: O Lord thou have smitten them, I^^. 5.3.
but they have not sorrowed: Thou have consumed them, but they have refused to
receive correction: They have made their faces harder then a rock, they have
refused to return. Even so the holy Ghost brings in those Antichristian
Idolaters, in the time of their misery knawing their tongues for sorrow, and
blaspheming the God of heaven for their pains and for their sores, and
repented not of their works to give God the glory. Ier. 6.
As silver that is put into the fire, if nothing come out but dross, is found
Reprobate silver: So the wicked not refined in the furnace of affliction, show
themselves but reprobate men. Whereas the godly, as we shall see hereafter in
the Penitent Thief, the fire of affliction purges their dross, and makes
them purer ever after, like good Hezekiah, and David, who being once rightly
humbled, recounted ever after their foregoing sins to the grief of their
hearts, and wounding of their souls. And it must needs be thus: for,

First, Romans 1.28.29.
as a man that is possessed with a Frenzy, is insensible of wounds, or
stripes, or blows, be they never so mortal, but laugheth and sporteth
himself in the midst of them all: So even so is it with a sinner possessed
with a spiritual Frenzy, 1. Tim. 4.2.
he has no seeling at all of his sins, his conscience is dead and benumined.
And therefore as the estate of that sick man is most desperate, who is not
sensible of his disease: So is the case of a sinner, that perceives not the
rod of God, when he strikes.

Secondly, Hos. 6.1.
to be humbled by them, and to return unto God, is the work of grace
accompanying the cross, and to be found only in the godly, who are quickened
thereby in all holy duties. So David, Psalm. 119.71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted. For it is with affliction as it
is with the Word, when they fall upon a gracious heart, they are by Gods
blessing very fruitful and profitable: but but when they light upon a hard
heart, they are by accident very hurtful, and harden the same more and more to
destruction. As the Sun shining upon the wax does soften it, and upon the
clay does make it more hard, and as by one and the same heat, a sweet smell
is drawn out of a precious ointment, Tantum interest non qualia sed qualis
quisque patiatur. Aug.
and a noisome smell out of any putrid matter; So does the word and affliction
produce different effects in the hearts of men, it skils not what the
affliction be, so the matter on which it works be good.

This shows the misery of all wicked and ungodly men, night time, he goes
still further and further from his way, or like a cold stomach that turns
the best food into putrefaction. Even so the most excellent things of God, such
as are the Word, Sacraments, and those afflictions which the Lord uses many
times, as a means to humble the godly, these are all of them abused by the
wicked to their destruction. Romans 8.28.
For as all things work together for the best of them that love God: so by the
rule of contraries, all things work for the worst of the wicked; They corrupt
all things, they defile all things.

Oh the misery of a wicked man, that whether he enjoy weal or woe, prosperity
or adversity, are still posting to hell, and hastening their own destruction.

Secondly, may by the rule of this Doctrine, take trial of our hearts, and so
consequently of our estates, by considering the use we have made of our
afflictions; often has the hand of God been upon us, on some in one kind, and
on some in another, let us consider how we have behaved our selves under the
same, Esaias 26.9.
have we learned righteousness. When Gods judgments have gone abroad, have
they given us occasion to search and try our ways, and to turn unto the Lord?
Lam. 3.40.
this is a good sign of a gracious heart; but if we find upon due
examination, that the Lords hand has no whit humbled us, but that we find our
hearts as hard as before, and we the same when we came out of afflictions we
were when we first came into them, a fearful sign of a graceless heart.

Thirdly, this gives us sufficient warrant what to judge of that man, who in
time of affliction, has cast off to seek the Lord, has murmured, blasphemed,
sought to the Physician and not to God, if affliction better them not, their
case is miserable.

(Rayled on him.)
Thus he goes on from one sin to another, from evil to worse, and his last
sin, his reuiling and reproaching of Christ, worst of all. And herein will
teach us,

That when a wicked man begins once to fall away from God. When the wicked
begin once to fall away from God, they have no stay of themselves.
They have no stay of themselves, but proceed on still, from one sin to
another, never resting until at length they come to the height of all
wickedness and profaneness. We may see this clear in this present example,
this wicked and graceless man, giving himself up to a sinful course of life,
living by Theft, rapine and much cruelty toward others, he rests not there,
but falls to railing and reproaching the Lord Jesus Christ himself.

And thus indeed the corruption of our nature is like those heavy bodies, which
being thrown up, move more slowly at the first, the motion of the air
hindering and restraining them, but the nearer they come to their place the
earth, the swifter they move; So sin moves slowly at the first, by reason it
is restrained by fear or shame, but the nearer it brings the sinner to the
grave or to hell, the swifter it moves and the more hardly restrained, it comes
with such a violent swinge, it is hardly staid, as here in this man who was
most wicked, when he was nearest his end. This truth may further be cleared by
diverse examples in the book of God, not only in the wicked, but also in the
godly themselves, who have made a fearful progress in sin, when once they
began to fall from God, thus was it with Eua, when Satan had once prevailed
with her, Genesis 3.
to lend an care unto his charms. First she saw the fruit, and set open her
eyes, the casements of her soul, by the which the devil wound himself into
her heart. Secondly, she desired. Thirdly, took of it. Fourthly, she eat
thereof; Still the further the worse. Thus was it with Cain, Pharaoh, Saul,
Judas, etc. If we examine their sins and fallings away from God, we shall
sinde that all was not upon a sudden, neither did Satan set upon them with
his noysom temptations all at the first; But brought them on by degrees,
according to that of the Prophet; Ier. 9.3.
they bend their tongs like their bow to lies, but they are not valiant for the
truth upon the earth, for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not
me, says the Lord. Again, the Lord complaining of his people that they made
not the right use of their afflictions, says, Why should ye be stricken any
more? Esaias. 1.5.
ye will revolt more and more. Yea this is true, not only in the wicked, but
even in the godly themselves, as we may see in Jonas, the Lords Prophet. Jonas
1.
In David, who fell from one sin to another, and the last the worst. Mot. 26.70
Of Peter, that from a bare denial of Christ fell to curse and to swear, that
he knew not Christ. Besides, I dare say that he is but a titular Christian,
that finds not this truth in some degree or other by woeful experience in
himself. And this thing so comes to pass.

First, swept and garnished, Luk 11.
by evil thoughts and sinful imaginations, fit to entertain Satan, Satan
will then bring with him seven spirits worse then himself, and these will
enter in and dwell there, and so the later end of that man will be worse then
the first.

Secondly, as does a Canker, 2 Pet. 2.17
which we see infecteth one member after another, until at last it has won
the whole body: our Savior compares it to a piece of leven which is of a
diffusing nature, that will sower the whole lump, so is it with sin, when it
shall once be entertained, it is like a shameless Guest, it will grow impudent
and will not easily be shaken off.

Thirdly,

It is the mercy of God unto his people, that whenever they sin against him,
they may have a monitor within them, that will give them no peace in sin; That
sin becomes not sweet in their mouths, as Job speaks of the wicked; But when
a man shall relish sin, and go on in a licencious course without check of
conscience or any controlement such a one is not far from destruction;

And last of all, in regard of God himself, Noah, My spirit shall no more
strine with man's spirit. Gen 6.
Of all the judgments, the most fearfulest, when the Lord shall cast of a sinner
his care, lay the raines in the neck like a father whose son has run riot
long, and by no means will be reclaimed. This is a sure forerunner of
destruction. O then happy and thrice happy is he that sins least, next he
that returns home soonest; but most woeful is the ^state of him that comes
once to be hardened in sin, that with Jeroboam, has sold himself to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord.

Seeing then that we see thus the cursed nature of sin, Cain, Pharaoh, Saul,
Judas, etc. if we should trace these men's fallings off from God step by step,
we shall see from what small beginnings sin took root in them, and being so
entertained, increased in them daily more and more, God more and more forsaking
them, their corruptions daily more and more increasing; and at last breaking
out into open rebellion against God, and open desperation against their own
souls. Oh the misery of a sinner, thus forsaken of God! Oh the misery of that
soul that once comes to be remorslesse in sin! Poor souls, these are in
misery and see it not; are under Gods wrath, and regard it not. Lay before
these their misery in regard of sin, beseech them with tears, exhort them by
the tender mercies of God, threaten against them the judgments of the Law,
offer unto them the promises of the Gospel, entreat them by the death of
Christ, and the warmest blood that issued from his blessed side; All these
things will no way affect them, nor any whit move them, but as Job speaks of
the Leuintha^, His heart is harder then the nether millstone: that is, the
state of those whom God has once left to hardness of heart, and given up to
reprobatc sense, whose heart does not quake and tremble to consider these
things.

Secondly, like thy own shadow; thou can not shake it off when thou
would: this the godly have found most true by woeful experience in
themselves, how hard a thing it has been to overcome any sin that has
been entertained with them any time, if it be but some idle oath, or unsavory
speech that they have used, how hard a thing is it to leave it: Which shows
how wonderfully such men deceive their own souls, that will seem to stint
themselves in sinning, as if they had power in themselves to leave sin at
their pleasure. These very thoughts show that thou art in bondage under some
corruptions, and art in the power of Satan, and so in danger of destruction.

So then we must destroy sin whilst it is an egg, and smother it in the
first conception, as we destroy the young whelps of the prey. For as the
Apostle shows, Lust conceived brings forth sin, and sin when it is
finished, it brings forth death. Wherein the holy Ghost teaches us how
dangerous a thing it is, to give the least entertainment unto sin; it is like
a Bird called the Lapwhing, which is no sooner hatched, but it runs abroad.
And indeed sin is much easier kept out then cast out: It shall then be our
wisdom to heed our selves betimes, and ever to look to our watch, that we
may prevent sin even at the first motions and occasions thereof: an high
point of heavenly wisdom.

Rayled on him.
Sinful and wretched was the life of this man, and cursed and wretched was his
death, not only in respect of the nature of his death, which it is true was a
cursed death to be crucified; Deu. 21.23
But also in regard of his fearful end that he made, that he should dye thus
blaspheming of Christ. But it is not to be wondered at, for it was answerable
unto his life. And herein will teach us.

What a dangerous thing it is to live wickedly: A sinful life has commonly a
cursed death.
for commonly as the life is, so is the death; a good life, a good death; an
evil life, commonly an evil death. Here is a woeful end, and a fearful
spectacle of a wretched life: as his life was void of grace, so was his death
void of comfort; his life was wretched, his death was damnable.

And this was not only in respect of his body, but also in regard of his
soul, the which no doubt went from the Cross to Hell, as it was said of
Judas, that He went to his own place, Act. 1.25.
that is, to hell. And indeed the Scriptures afford us diverse examples of
wicked and ungodly men, such who as their lives have been wretched and
sinful, so have died wretched and miserable deaths. Pharaoh a sworn enemy to
Gods Church and people, Ex. 14.25.
what a fearful end came he unto with his people, being overwhelmed in the
sea, Hest. 5.6.7
and there perished. Haman, a great Favorite under the Persian king, an enemy
to Gods Church and people, came himself to dye that death he had prepared for
Mordecai, and fell himself into the same pit he had made for others. Thus do
we read of Gods heavy judgment upon Balshazzar, Dan. 5.5.
the king of Babylon, at his royotous feast, abusing the holy vessels of the
Temple profanely, the Lord at the same time ouertooke him with his judgments.
The like of Ahab and Iesabel, 1 Reg. 21.
the story makes mention of their fearful ends, the very dogs did eat
Iesabel, that bloody and butcherly Queen, that had murdered so many of the
Lords Prophets. The like we read of Saul, that having in his life time
persecuted David, at last fell upon his own sword. The like of Herod, that was
devoured with lice. Of Judas, that in the days of our Savior Christ had
played the close and cunning hypocrite, what a fearful end came that wretch
unto at last; the Text says, He hanged himself: Mat. 27.5.
perceiving at last what a horrible sin he had committed in betraying the
Lord of life, he judged himself unworthy of life. Now as his life was wicked,
his death was wretched; for besides that he made away himself, and so became
the cursed instrument of his own death: The Lord showed a strange token upon
him at his death, for when he was hanged, He burst asunder in the midst, Act.
1.18.
and all his bowels gushed out. There is a Tradition that says, that when
Judas was dead, he stunke so noysomely, that no man could come near him; and
yet this was not all, for as the end of his body was miserable, so was it also
in regard of his soul: for the Evangelist observes, Act. 1.15.
That he went to his own place, that is, to hell, there to remain for ever,
to be tormented with the devil and his Angels. And the like may be said of
Ahitophel, Absalom, Ananias, Act. 5.
and Saphira, etc.

And besides the examples of Gods judgments out of divine Writ, of those whose
lives as they have been wicked and ungodly, so their deaths have been cursed
and miserable, Ecclesiastical histories afford us infinite. Eelix Earl of
Wartemberg, having a long time been a most cruel persecutour of Christ's
Church, swear to his companions at a supper, that ere he dyed, he would ride
up to the spurs in the blood of Lutherans. But the same night the reuengefull
hand of God stroke him, even in the height of his malice and cruelty, that he
was strangled in his bed with his own blood. Stephen Gardener, in Queen
Mary's days a bloody persecutour, sitting at dinner at the very time when
Ridly and Latimer were burned at Oxford, Acts and Mon. Fox.
he gloried and rejoiced exceedingly thereat; But the hand of God incontinently
stroke him, that he was carried presently to bed; where his body was inflamed
by reason he could not expel his urine, and his tongue mightily swollen, and
black, hanging out of his mouth most fearfully, and so miserably dyed.

The like we read of Bonner, Morgan, Thornton, etc. who having been cruel
persecutours, God brought them to shameful and miserable ends.

Yea our own experience daily does manifest this truth unto us, that such as
have lived vitiously, riotously, and wickedly, what miserable deaths they many
times come unto. How many filthy adulterers has God cut off, with filthy
rotten and loathsome diseases, causing rottenness to enter into their bones,
and bringing them to miserable ends. How many beastly drunkards, that have
been inflamed with their strong drink, has the Lord cut off in the very
midst of their drunkenness, and so have dyed most shamefully and miserably.

How many murderers has the Lord pursued, whom none else could accuse, and
made the malesactours themselves confess their horrible facts, and all to
bring a sinful and wretched life to a shameful and miserable end. Surely the
Lord is wonderful in his indgements. Oh that men were wise to lay the same to
heart!

But we see many times the wicked,

It is true, Their-houses (as Job says) are peaceable, and without fear: and
the rod of God does not always fall upon them. What then? Is their case any
whit the more happy? Does not prosperity slay the fool? And what are all the
pompes and pleasures of the wicked, but as a blazing Star, presaging ruin
and destruction. And what though the wicked pass their time in pleasures, and
fear no evil, does security prosit any? will a man envy him that goes to
execution in a Satin suit? Is not their destruction the nearer at hand, and so
much the more fearful when it comes?

Secondly, Faith, hope, and a good conscience; Job 27.8.
But What hope the wicked (says Job) when God shall take away his soul?
meaning indeed he has no hope.

O but these men dye peaceably,

So may a wicked man do and yet go to hell, David observes) then the very
beast in death; Man (says he) shall not continue in honor, but is like the
beasts that dye. And indeed there is many times little difference betwixt the
death of a beast, and that of a wicked man, save the one has many times a
pillow under his head, and the other dies in a ditch. Pro. 11.7.
When the wicked dye, all his hope perishes.

But we see that a wicked life does not always bring a cursed death: what time
soever a sinner does repent, etc.

I answer, Thief? Must this extraordinary example now be propounded as a
president for ever? that was but once, miraculous, and wrought upon special
occasion; So may thou look again for the renting of the stones, the
opening of the graves, and the raising of the dead, and to see again those
other miracles of Christ, that did accompany that conversion of his. And for
further satisfaction consider,

First, that it is not impossible, Thiese, that he had never heard Christ's
Sermons before, or had any outward call before this time, that now he came to
suffer with Christ: and so his sins being of ignorance, might excuse in part,
as Paul speaks of his, The Lord showed mercy, 1 Timothy 1.13
because I did them ignorantly. But now thou can not plead this ignorance,
inasmuch as thou have lived under the Gospel, and have had an outward call by
the preaching of the same.

Secondly, urged for a general practice, especially in so weighty a thing as
the salvation of the soul is; The other Thief that lived as he did, died not
as he did; but our Text shows his miserable end, that he died impenitently,
blasphemously, and desperately: and so have we like wise seen even now proved
unto us the miserable end of many more, whose lives as they have been sinful,
so their ends have been fearful. If Satan then, or thy own sinful corrupt
hear, shall go about to persuade thee at any time, that though thou take thy
sway and swing in sin now, thou may hereafter, when thou will thy self,
repent with the good Thief^, and so be saved; Answer Satan thus, and tell thy
heart from me, that it is a thousand fold more probable, that thou shall dye as
thou have lived, impenitently, wickedly, desperately, with the Impenitent
Thief, and so be damned rather, then to have such a singular grace given thee,
and mercy showed at the last hour, to repent with the penitent Thief, and so
be saved.

But God has said, That at what time soever, etc.

It is most true that at what time soever, etc.

But though the Lord say at what time soever a sinner does repent he will blot
out, he does not say at what time soever a sinner does sin he will give
repentance, Repentance is Gods gift, proving (says the Apostle) if at any
times God will give the^ repentance. Qui promisit poenitenti veniam, Non promi
sit peccanti poenitentia^. Aug.
And though God give forgiveness ever to the penitent, he does not ever give
repentance to the sinner. And if the Lord give not this gist and grace of
repentance, it is impossible for a sinner ever to repent. Nay when the Lord
has once in the Gospel made tender of grace and salvation, conuincing our
judgments and bringing sin to sight, with the wages of sin, which is the wrath
of God, and destruction of soul and body for ever; And with all tendering us a
gracious pardon in the blood of his Son, and that upon our true repentance, he
will be again reconciled unto us; which tender of grace and mercy offered,
when it shall be on our part rejected, and men shall perfer their own sinful
lusts before their peace, and by their obstinacy and wilful rebellion in sin,
trample under foot the blood of the Lord Jesus; the time may come, nay the
time will come, when thou would feign repent thee of thy sins, and can
not: the Lord then may give thee up to hardness of heart, and final
impenitency.

And therefore dally not with sin, presume not to repent at thy pleasure; But
break off thy sins be time by repentance, and remember that God will not be
mocked, Whatsoever a man sows (says the Apostle) that shall he reap. The
whole life of a Christian should be but a preparation for death, for in dying
well does consist the well fare of a Christian for ever; Now it is in grace in
some sort as it is in nature, the seed cast into the ground must have some
time to root, to battle, to spring and to bring forth fruit; and according as
the seed is, so is the crop; we must sow in tears, if we will reap in joy.
And largly in the one, Modica sementi detractio est magnum messis detrimentum.
Bern.
if we will reap abundantly in the other. Again, men do not sow tares and
look to reap wheat; Besides, never was there seen a Seed-time, Spring,
Summer and Harvest, come together.

O then! why should Satan and our own sinful hearts thus delude us, to
think that we may reap the crop of glory in heaven, and never sowed the
seed of grace on earth. Whereas God has joined these two together, grace and
glory; Without holiness, no man shall see the Lord.

To return now to the uses.

Seeing this is so then, that an evil life has commonly an evil death, then
the madness of those men is to be mourned for, as Samuel mourned for Saul,
that flatter themselves in their sinful courses, that they shall at last dye
happily, when they have had no care nor conscience in their lives to live
holily. Indeed I confess that heaven has many well willers; who would not go
to heaven and avoid the torments of hell? Cursed Balam himself can wish that
his soul might dye the death of the righteous; Numb. 23.
though he had no regard at all to live the life of the righteous. But these
are but bare wishes, in the wicked, they cannot properly be called desires,
because they come but from some sudaine passion in the heart, when the thoughts
of death, Judgment, or Hell, possess them.

Whereas the desires of the godly are ever joined with the means conducing
thereunto: such as are the daily hatred of sin, grouth in mortification,
daily increase of heavenly knowledge, faith, repentance, and the like. But
these men separate those whom God has joined together, grace and glory. And
though their lives be never so vile, wretched, and sinful, presume that it
shall go well with them in death. No question this Impenitent Thief could not
but see that his sinful course of life; and his heart must needs smite him
sometimes for the same. And what might be the answer he gave his heart, every
man may judge, that though he ran a sinful course for a time, yet he would
repent at last, and become a new man. Thus is it now with the drunkard,
swearer, usurer, yea the prophanest living; for none can be so desperately
sinful, but sometimes their hearts smite them, and they answer them still with
a late repentance, as if repentance were in their power. But at last comes
death and ouertakes the sinner, and now is he taken as a Bird in the snare; Now
he sees when it is too late, how Satan and his own cursed heart have kept him
hudwinkt, and now in stead of confession of sin, and sorrow of heart for
their former abominations, and calling on God by earnest and hearty prayer,
all which they promised unto themselves at this time; Behold here in this
Impenitent Thief, hardness of heart, and final impenitency, yea he falls to
mocking, and blaspheming the Lord of life, from whom salvation comes.

Can thou hear these things, thou that art a drunkard, swearer, unclean
person, that lie and live in thy sins, and not have thy heart tremble
within thee? I will conclude with that of Moses, O that men were wise, Deuteronomy. 29.
then would they consider their latter end.

Secondly, Psalm. 73.
Mark the upright man, and behold the just, the latter end (says David) of
that man is peace. They shall enter upon peace, Isa. 57.2.
and shall rest in their beds. Who? Every one walking before the Lord in
righteousness:

So Paul, I have kept the faith, 2. Tim. 4.
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. Thus run then
the promises of blessedness in death to such, and such only who walk with
God in a holy life.

But we see sometimes even of those holy Brethren that have lived so purely and
so godly; in death they have raged and blasphemed, yea and behaved themselves
as men in desperation.

It Is true, may be the nature of the disease, as the Strangury, Colique, burning
Fever, and the like, that may cause this distemper in the best: Now they are
but the words of distemper, and not spoken out of reason or judgment, neither
will the Lord impute them unto his servants: Romans 11.1
For will God cast away his people? God forbid. Neither can man's changeable
tongue alter Gods unchangeable decree.

Or at the most such distempered words uttered by the godly at last, are but
forced through some violent temptation of Satan, which the devil shall answer
for, and not the godly; neither conclude the want of love to God, or deliberate
purpose to sin, but rather humane frailty, which shall not hinder true
happiness.

On him.
That is, on Christ, On whom.
he rayled not on his fellow that was a Malefactor with himself: no, they
were as Simeon and Leui, brethren in iniquity; But upon the most innocent, the
Lord Jesus Christ himself.

Herein teaching us,

That none are more obnoxious and liable unto disgrace and reproach then the
godly are, None more liable to disgrace then the Godly are.
yea the better the Christian, the more subject to the reproach of wicked men.
Let no man then that is religious and godly indeed, think that he can escape
the mockeries and derisions of the wicked; it is the portion of the Lord Jesus
Christ himself, he undergoes this at the hands of sinners, yet does patiently
bear it. This was David's case: Psalm. 21.7.
All they that see me laugh me to scorn. They shoot out the lip, they shake
the head, saying, he trusted in God, Psalm. 69.12
etc. And again, They that sat in the gate spoke against me, and the
drunkards made songs of me.

This was Jobs case, Job 30.1.
They that are younger then I mock me. This was the case of the Prophet Esaias,
Behold I and the children whom the Lord has given me, Isa. 8.18.
are for signs and for wonders in Israel.

Thus complains the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 20.7.
I am a derision daily, every one mocketh me.

And this was the complaint of the Apostles of Christ, We are made a spectacle
unto the world, 1. Cor. 4.9.13.
to Angels and to men: being defamed, we entreat; we are made as the filth of
the world, and are the of-scouring of all things unto this day. And in the
Catalogue of those worthies the Apostle makes mention of, whom the world was
not worthy of; this was part of those trials and sufferings they underwent for
Christ's sake: Others were tried by cruel mockings, and scourgings, etc. And
indeed why should any think this strange? do but consider,

First, Colassions before their calling: they were enemies unto God. Col. 1.21.
And that which the Apostle Saint John observes of cursed Cain, is true in
some measure of every wicked man: 1. Ioh. 3.12.
Cain was of that wicked one, and slew his brother, and wherefore slew he him?
because his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous: yea the very
piety, zeal, godliness, and unblameable conversation that is in the
righteous, is not the least cause wherefore wicked men are so wrathfully
displeased with them: their own deeds being evil, and they loving darkness
more then light, hence is it that they hate the children of the light: Ye are
chosen out of the world, therefore the world hates you. Ioh. 15.19.
Whereas If ye were of the world, the world would love her own.

Secondly,

1. Hereby wicked men are brought to a greater measure and degree of
wickedness and hardness of heart, and so hasten their own destruction.

2. By this means to break off (if it be possible) the weak Christian from
this godly course, by the manifold crosses and afflictions that Satan lays in
the way of such, and by the which many thousands are discouraged.

3. At the least, to stagger the best in their holy walking, that they may not
so cheerfully go on in their Christian course, so constantly and so cheerfully
as otherwise they might.

Thirdly, Heb. 11.36
Others were tried by mockings, etc. And thus will the Lord have the faith,
patience, constancy, and obedience of his servants, made manifest unto others
to the praise and glory of his own grace, and the encouragement of others.
Reu. 2.10.
Behold the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried,
and ye shall have tribulation ten days. But be thou faithful unto death, and
I will give thee a crown of life.

Now then seeing this has been the state of the Fathers, Our light
afflictions which are but for a moment, Acts 5.41.
works for us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory.

Secondly, evil doers: for then the shame of the world, and the reproaches of
the wicked, yield no true comfort. 1. Pet. 2.12
For what glory is it (says the Apostle) if when ye are buffeted for your
faults, Verse. 20.
ye take it patiently: But if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it
patiently, this is acceptable with God. To suffer wrongfully, and to suffer for
Christ and his truth sake, shall never go unrewarded with God. Blessed are ye
(says our Savior) when men revile you, Mat. 5.11.12.
and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
Names sake: Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven.

And to the end we may bear this burden of reproach and disgrace for Christ
the more easily, How to bear the reproaches of the wicked with comfort.
consider we,

First, the more reproaches thou shall undergo by the wicked, the more
conformable thou art unto Christ,

Secondly,

Thirdly, Heb. 12 3.
what would we do when the Chain were fastened to our loins, and we carried
to the stake? this is not to resist unto blood.

Fourthly, faith, patience, zeal, and sincerity shall be found unto praise and
glory in that day.

On him.
Christ now in misery and in great distress, this Impenitent does add unto
his sufferings, which added greatly unto his sin. A man (says Job) in
affliction should be comforted: Thus should he rather have pitied Christ, and
put under his shoulder at this time, to have helped him, to have borne this
burden.

Certain women meeting Christ carrying his own Cross toward Golgotha, Luke
23.27.
pitied his case and wept, and lamented for him. It is the Apostles rule, Heb.
13.3.
Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them. He should rather have
been another Simon of Cyren, by comforting him being afflicted. But this man
is so far from ministering unto Christ any comfort at this time, as that he
adds to his sorows, It is a great sin to add affliction to the afflicted.
Note hence,

That it is a great and a heinous sin to add affliction to the afflicted.
That this was the case and condition of the Lord Jesus at this time; the
Enangelists make it most clear. First by the railings and reproachings of the
chief Priests and Elders, saying unto Christ at this time, Mat. 27.39.40.
He saved others, himself he cannot save: If he be the King of Israel, let him
come down and we will believe in him. He believed in God, let him deliver him,
if he will have him.

Secondly, of the Passengers, Mar. 15.29
Ah thou that destroyedst the Temple, and buildst it in three days, save thy
self. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross.

Thirdly, of this Impenitent Thief now crucified with Christ, If thou be the
Son of God, save thy self and us. All which, no doubt, added greatly to the
sufferings of Christ, now at this time of his Passion.

And indeed amongst all other the sins of this Impenitent Thief, this was
not the least, that he should thus at this time burden the Lord Jesus with his
reproaches, which was sorely pressed down before. And for this, let the
Moabites be an example unto us, whom the Lord grievously plagued for this
sin: Moab shall be in derision, Ier. 48.26.27.
for did thou not deride Israel, as though he had been found amongst thieves?
The meaning is, The Lords people being in adversity and sore distress, Moab
was so far from comforting them, as that they derided them in their misery.
And this the Lord complained of by his Prophet against the Shepherds of
Israel, that they had not strengthened the weak, Ezekiel. 34.2.4.
nor healed the sick, nor bound up the broken. And this, no doubt, added much
to David's grief, that at the time of his banishment and exile by Absalom, his
rebellious and most unnatural son, his enemies concluded against him thus,
There is no help for him in his God. Psalm. 3.2.
This was the sin of cruel Pharaoh and his people, Exodus 3.
exercising all manner of cursed cruelty against the Lords people. Whose
afflictions, when none else would pity, the Lord laid them to heart, and sent
them deliverance.

And this was the great fault of Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar, Jobs three
friends, that beholding Job, this servant of God, so sorely oppressed with
misery, instead of supporting him under that heavy burden, they charged him
for an hypocrite, and so added unto his sorrows. And hence is it that Job
reproues them, saying, Job 6.14.
A man in affliction ought to be comforted of his neighbors. And for this very
cause the Lord cursed the men of Meroz, for that the Lords people being in
misery and distress, they came not in to their succor. And our Savior
shows how he will charge the wicked at the last day, with this very sin,
when he will say unto them, I was hungry, Mat. 25.40
and ye fed me not: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and
ye visited me not. All which testimonies, as a cloud of witnesses, conclude
this truth, that to add to the miseries of the afflicted, and not to veeld
them comfort in time of distress, is a grievous sin. And there is reason for
it. For,

First, heart of man in time of affliction, then for a man to perceive himself
to be despised, and cast off of others. And no doubt it was not the least of
those sorrows that wounded the heart of our blessed Savior, that he could
say as it was prophesied of him before, I am a worm and not a man, Psa. 22.6.7
a shame of men, and the contempt of the people. All they that see me have me
in derision, etc. And thus also complains the Church in time of misery, Our
soul is filled with the reproach of the wealthy, and with the despitefulnesse
of the proud.

Secondly, sorrows. For Satan is ready still to take advantage of these
times, when the godly are most perplexed, and rejected of all, to solicit them
with dangerous temptations even to despair, and no doubt but the Apostle Saint
Paul was well acquainted with Satan's subtilty herein; and therefore commands
the Corinthians to comfort the incestuous person, and why so? lest he be
swallowed up of too much heaviness. 1 Cor. 2.7.


Thirdly, times of affliction, that they suffer not alone, but have others
sympathizing with them, who are ready to put under their hands, and by their
godly counsels, comforts, prayers and supplications, are ready to help to bear
up the burden that they sink not.

And indeed, we often find this rule of our Savior verified amongst men,
with what measure weniete to others, Mat. 7.3.
the very same shall be measured to us again. If we show that godly and
Christian charity to comfort others in their distress, we shall not our
selves want comfort in our greatest need, as we shall see in the penitent
Thief hereafter.

If then in time of our afflictions, us over al our sorrows, it may teach us
to magnify the name of our good God, and to esteem of our afflictions the
more light and burden so much the more easy, and learn to bear them the more
patiently, seeing the Lord has laid his hand far more heavy upon others, as
Christ here, and most justly might have laid his hand as heavy upon us.

Secondly, mourn with them that mourn, and be like affected one toward
another, and the rather for that it declares a man to be a lively member of
that mystical body, whereof the Lord Jesus Christ is the head, who is
affectionate toward all his members. Whereas the want of this affection
argues that we are dead members, and were never truly ingrafted into that
body.

And last of all, in Christ thus railed upon and reproached by this wicked man,
we may see unto what a near ebb the Lord brings his people many times here in
this life, God brings his children often to a low ebb in this life.
namely to be left destitute of all worldly help and comfort, and yet
notwithstanding remain still highly in Gods favor: we may see this in Job,
whom the Lord brought full low even to the dunghill, a man notwithstanding
highly in Gods favor. We may see this in David, Ps. 3.
in the Prophets, Apostles, yea the Lord Jesus Christ himself is made here,
the object of wicked men's malice. And this the Lord does,

To magnify his own mercy, I create comfort, says the Lord by his Prophet.
As all things were created of nothing, so when there is no seeing ground of
comfort, God creates it out of nothing, that his grace may be the better
welcome to his afflicted children.

Which should teach us, strong help, who will not break the bruised reed nor
quench the smoking flax; Whose nature is to pity men in misery, and has
promised to be with his servants in six troubles and in seven, Heb. 13.
and never to leave them nor forsake the^.

Secondly, Aramites, yet as Elisha said, there are more with us then against
us. Upon him therefore let us labor to fasten all our hope, and then
notwithstanding our miseries, we shall sinde comfort, and let us know, that it
were ill for us that we had no judgments, except it were so well with us to
deserve none.

VERSE 39. If thou be Christ save thy self and us,


THIS Thief was not acquainted with the nature of Christ's Kingdom, In what
manner.
which was not earthly, as he thought but spiritual; he thought that Christ
had spoken blasphemy, because he had called himself the Son of God, yea and as
he conceived all those miracles that Christ had wrought, were not wrought by
his own power, but by that power of the devil. And because he did not deliver
himself from the Cross, he concluded that he could not be the Son of God.
But that could Christ have done at this time, but he would not, because his
time was now come to suffer. So that if Christ had now come down from the
Cross, it would not have proved him so much to be the Son of God, as being
dead, and buried, to raise himself from the dead.

For he was declared mighitly to be the Son of God by his resurrection from
the dead, it was a more glorious work to raise up Lazarus from the dead, then
if Christ had restored him to health, being but sick on his bed. So in Christ,
it was a more glorious work to raise up himself from the grave, then if he had
saved himself alive, being on the Cross.

But yet notwithstanding all his divine preaching and glorious miracles that
Christ wrought by the which he declared himself mightily to be the Son of
God, this impenite^t wretch ouerlooks them all, and calls the truth of God
into question, Calling the truth into question.
If thou be Christ? where we have first of all to observe.

How great and how dangerous the sin of infidelity is, Infidelity a dangerous
sin.
it ouerlooks all the grounds of a man's comfort, such as are Gods power,
wisdom, goodness, mercy, etc. and calls them all into question. No doubt this
man had heard of the same of Christ, and of those glorious miracles that he had
wrought, the same of Christ went far and near, he could not be ignorant that
he was reputed the Son of God; for so says he to Christ: If thou be the
Son of God. And yet notwithstanding all these, his heart is shut up in
unbelief, by which means the way that leads unto life and salvation,
through faith in Christ, through his infidelity is barred up against him. This
was the sin of our first parents, albeit God had said, Genesis 3.3.
Ye shall not eat thereof, neither shall ye touth it, lest ye dye. As the
woman confessed to Satan, yet for want of faith to believe the truth of Gods
word, they eat the forbidden fruit, and so brought Gods wrath upon them and
their posterity.

This was the sin of the Israelites, who albeit they had experience of Gods
power and might in bringing them out of Egypt, and that miraculous deliverance
showed them from the cruelty of Pharaoh, and that through the Red Sea: yet
upon every light occasion called they still Gods love, power, goodness and
mercy into question, as if they had no experience at any time of the same. Thus
then they murmr in the wilderness, Numb. 11.18.19. Psalm. 78.19.20.
when they wanted meat, Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? Can he
prepare flash for his people? Howsoever this people were guilty of many
sins, yet this, this sin of Infidelity was that sin that in so special
a manner provoked the Lord to wrath against them; for so says the Text: Psa.
78.21.
Therefore the Lord heard and was angry, and the fire was kindled in Jacob, and
also wrath came upon Israel. But what might be the reason thereof? Because they
believed not in God, Verse. 12.
and trusted not in his help. And albeit the Lord swear unto their Fathers,
that he would give unto them the Land of Canaan: Deuteronomy. 1.8.
yet of all those that came out of the land of Egypt, and had seen his
miracles upon Pharaoh and his people, there did not one of them above the age
of twenty years, come into that good Land. What might be the cause? Surely
they stood guilty before the Lord of many sins, such as were their idolatry,
whoredom, etc. but above all other, that which the Lord was most of all
displeased at, was their Infidelity, for so says the holy Ghost, Heb. 3.19.
They could not enter in because of unbelief. This appears likewise in the
example of that Prince in Samaria, that would not believe the Prophet touching
the great plenty which he prophesied should be in Samaria, 2. Kin. 7.1.
that a measure of fine flower should be sold for a shekel in the gate of
Samaria: His infidelity did not only deprive him of the fruition of the
plenty, but was punished with the loss of his life. For the people trod him
in the the gate, and he dyed. 2 King. 7.20.


Another memorable example hereof we have recorded by the Evangelist; Mark. 6.5.
That when our Savior came to the City of Nazareth, there to preach, and to
show his power, the Text says, He could do no great works there: Verse. 6.
and what might be the reason, Mat. 13.58
Because of their unbelief. The Infidelity and unbelief that was amongst
them, did after a sort bind the hands of our blessed Savior, that he could
not do the good he desired amongst them.

This doctrine might be further insisted upon by the examples of Gods
judgments upon his own children, as the Israelites who for this sin were
broken off. Romans 11.20
Of Zachary, that doubting of the Lords promise by his Angel, that Elizabeth
his wife should bear him a Son, Luke 1.20.
was for this sin of his smitten dumb. By all which testimonies and examples
it is most clear, how heinous this sin of Infidelity is. And it must needs
be so.

First, infidelity credits none of these. 1. Ioh. 5.10.
He that believes not God, has made him aliar. Then the which, what greater
disgrace can be put upon any, then to give him the lie?

Secondly, Infidelity is a mother sin, and is the cause of many other evils
and enormities in the hearts and lives of men; And hence is it that the Apostle
ioynes these two together, an evil heart, Heb. 3.12.
and an heart of unbelief, as the cause, and the effect; for as Faith is a
mother grace, and produces fear, love, obedience, etc. So where insidelitie
bears sway, there must needs all manner of impiety reign and abound.

This serves first of all to let us see in what a cursed and miserable estate
and condition, infidelity; Such men can never please God in any thing they take
in hand. For, Romans 14.23 Heb. 11.6.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. And without faith it is impossible to
please God. Their hearing of the Word, receiving of the Sacraments, prayer, and
the like holy duties are all abomination to the Lord, when they are not done
by a believer. To an unbelieving heart, neither the power of Christ's merits,
nor the infiniteness of Gods mercy, Word, Sacraments, can never profit, but
all tend to the destruction, and the increase of the condemnation of an
unbeliever.

Secondly, Infidelity above all other sins is such a stumbling block in out
way, strikes at God and all his attributes, and seems to put the lie upon them
all; makes the Word, Sacraments, prayer, and all other the ordinances of God,
unprofitable unto a man; O how should this provoke every man, even as he
tendereth the salvation of his own soul, to take heed of this sin. O
unhappy If was this unto this poor man, that shut up heaven gates against
him. Take we heed of that thought at any time that shall seem to question the
truth of Gods word. But rather let us labor daily more and more to have our
hearts confirmed against all diffidence and distrust of God.

Save thy self and us.
These words were spoken in an ironicall and taunting manner, Scoffingly
desi^ing deliverance
after the manner of the chief Priests and people, who mocked our Savior
likewise at this time, saying, Mar. 15.29
If thou be the King of Israel, come down from the Cross. And again: He
saved others, Mat. 17.29
himself he cannot save. This impenitent thief trades in their steps, and
follows their example, and mocketh Christlikewise. Whence we may note:

First, Evil examples dangerous.
how powerful examples are with men, either to the imitation of that which is
good, or evil. As men meet together, usually they traffic together, by their
interchange of words and manners, whether they be godly or wicked. But
especially of great men, and men in authority, their examples being evil,
hurt many. As the Chief Priests, and Elders, here, they giving such an evil
example in mocking Christ, no marvel though the common people do the same
likewise. We may see this in Herod, in this Chapter, when he began to offer
indignity to our Savior, the Men of war, yea all his train were ready to do
the same. 1. Kin. 22.24.
Let Ahab but declare himself no friend to Micha, the Lords Prophet, and
Zidkijah the Kings Chaplain, will dare to sinite him on the face. So true is
that of Solomon, Pro. 29.12
If a Prince hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked. We may see this by
daily experience, that they that associate themselves with those that are vile
and sinful, savor of their manners, and are made worse by them. Pro. 13.10
He that walks with the wise, shall be the wiser. But he that uses the
company of fools shall be the worse. Yea Gods people themselves, when they have
lived in sinful places, and have had to do with wicked persons, they have
received some blurs and blots of their filthiness, and have not escaped free
from their sin, but have made good that of Solomon, He that touches pitch
shall be defiled. We may see this in Joseph, Eccl. 33.
who living a while in the Court of Pharaoh, how quickly had he learned to
swear, By the life of Pharaoh. And we know that it was in the high Priests
Hall, and amongst the high Priests servants, that Peter had learned to curse
and to swear.

And for this cause the Lord gives that straight charge unto his servants
concerning Babylon, Come out of her my people, Reu. 18.4.
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues. And so likewise when the people of Israel were to come into the Land
of Canaan amongst an idolatrous people, the Lord charge them after this
manner, Thou shall make no covenant with them, Exodus 23.32.
nor with their gods, neither shall they dwell in thy land, lest they make thee
sin against me. And again, Deuteronomy. 7.2.
Thou shall make no marriages with them: Thou shall not give thy daughter to
his son, nor take his son to thy daughter: And the reason is given, For
they will cause thy son to fall away from me. And how true the word of the
Lord herein was, the event made it manifest; for they, neglecting the Lords
commandment, the Psalmist says, Psa. 406.35
Were mingled amongst the heathen, and learned their works.

And hence is it that when the Prophet David would approve himself unto God
faithfully to serve him, Psalm. 11.63
he declares the same by this, that he was A companion of all them that feared
him, and kept his precepts. And again, Psalm. 119.115.
Away from me ye wicked, I will keep the commandments of my God. Intimating
thereby, as it may easily be gathered, that David could not set himself as he
should to the performance of any good duty, so long as any wicked men were
about him. So that it is a most clear truth, that the examples of wicked men
are very powerful to draw men into sin, and by being companions of such to
bring them to partake of their evil ways. And the Reasons I take to be these.

First, Visa movent maxim.
it is ready to take fire with the least spark, the least occasion, or
provocation, especially the examples of others, are dangerous excitements unto
evil.

Secondly, all that have fellowship with them, that their own sins may not
appear so exceedingly sinful unto others. And this our Sauiourobserueth to be
that height of wickedness in the Pharisees, that They would compass sea and
land to make one Proselyte: Mat. 23.15
and when he was made, they would make him twofold more the child of hell then
themselves.

Thirdly, Fret like a gangrene. And indeed the souls of men are more subject
to the contagion of sin, then their bodies can to any manner of disease.

This serves then in the first place justly to blame and condemn such as are
careless of their company, Atheists, Papists, yea be they as profane as Esau,
all is one to them, as if there were no danger at all to be corrupted by such;
and indeed such men need not Satan to tempt them, for they will tempt
themselves. Which they do, whilst without a calling they remain in the
company of wickedmen. Such men proclaim to the world that they make no
conscience of sin, for did they, would they not then make conscience of the
occasions of sin?

Secondly, Pro. 1.15.
My son (says Solomon) walk not in the way with them, refrain thy foot
from their path; Yea if it lie in our power to remove them, and to banish them
our presence. Psalm. 101.
So David, I will not suffer any evil person to abide in my house: He that
tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. Many wise men, by such have been
seduced; many strong men by them have fallen; and many who began to walk in
the ways of godliness, have by this means fallen back again, when they
have been daily conversant with those who have been enemies to godliness.

But may we not sometimes,

Yes,

First, that we rush not into their company without a calling; for it is
lawful to hold commerce with them in the affairs of this life, for otherwise
we must out of the world.

Secondly, that we be not silent at sin, but by one means or other, at the
least by a frown in our brows, show our dislike at their ways.

Thirdly, that we get our hearts to be grieved within us for their sins, as
Lot was with the Sodomites, Whose righteous soul was vexed with their
abominations.

If thou be Christ,
Secondly, we may note further in this Impenitent Thief, thus scoffingly
desiring deliverance by Christ;

That it is a note of a wicked and graceless man to be given to mocking,
Property of a wicked man to be given to mocking.
and that such a one is come to a wonderful height of sin. And surely this
is such a kind of sin that is found for the most part in the most dangerous
and desperate wicked men. Cain was a mocker: Genesis 9.22.
Ismael was a mocker, notorious wicked men. The Athenians mocked Paul, Act. 17.
What will this babbler say? The Scribes and Pharisees notorious wicked men,
these mocked Christ, Hayle King of the Jews. Mat. 26.68
The Jews mocked the Apostle Peter, when he had preached the word of life unto
them, saying, These men are full of new wine. Act. ^.12.
When the wicked man comes (says Solomon) then comes reproach. Prou. 18.3
Psalm. 25.15
None scoffed more at David, then the Abiects: and the Drunkards made songs of
him. The children of Bethel mocked the Prophet, saying, 2. King 2.22.
Go up thou bald head. This was the complaint of the Prophet Jeremy: Ier. 20.7.
O Lord (says he) I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me. And this was
the complaint of that holy man Job, Job 30.1.9.10.
speaking of the most notoriously wicked of his time, says that he was their
songs, their daily talk, yea they spared him not to spit him in the face. And
when the Prophet David comes to speak of that growth in sin, in wicked men,
as it were the top of all iniquity and impictie, Psalm. 1.1.
he describes the wicked thus: He sits in the seat of the scorner. By all
which testimonies it may appear that it is a clear evidence and demonstration
of a notorious wicked man, to be give over to this sin of mocking. And it
must needs be so. For,

First, Fools and folly; now in what esteem are the godly with the wicked,
but as fools? and religion it self, what is it esteemed but as Foolishness,
1 Cor. 1.21.
to those that are natural men? and therefore it is no marvel though the
godly be contemned and reproached, and their best performances scorned and
derided.

Secondly this proceeds from the abundance of malice and corruption that is in
the hearts of wicked men: for so says Christ, O generation of vipers, Mat.
12.34
How can ye being evil speak good things? for out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks. Cursed language, evil speaking, mocking and
reproachful speeches is the natural language of wicked men, being led by the
spirit of darkness: their words and actions must needs be sinful and wicked,
that must tend to utter darkness.

This may teach us then how to judge and esteem of such men as are given over
to this sin, namely, as notoriously wicked: for when David speaks of the
degrees of sin and sinners, by a gradation, Psalm. 1.1.
the Seat of the scorner, he places in the last place as worst of all. And yet
it is lamentable to how many we have amongst us, that glory in the dexterity
of their wit, and think it their praise that they can break some witty jest
on others, that may cause laughter; but such do but glory in their shame. Let
such be admonished in time, to break off this sin, by repentance, for
seldom or never does it escape the reuengefull hand of God. What became of
Cain, Ismael, the two and forty youngsters, that mocked Elizeus the Prophet?
What became of this desperate malefactor that mocked Christ? Yea, let it be
observed, and we shall find it true, that such as have been guilty of this
sin, that have been mockers of the Word of God, of Gods Ministers, and of
the professors of the Gospel, whether some token, or other of Gods vengeance
has not overtaken them, even here in this life, wherein the Lord does usually
show his indignation against this sin.

Secondly,

And last of all, their tongues, so let us be masters of our ears, by the use
whereof we may learn to contemn contempt it self.

(Save thy self and us.)
It is not the pardon of his sins that this Impenitent Thief desires at
Christ's hands, but deliverance from his temporal punishment; Sin affects him
not, but the punishment of sin. Note hence.

That wicked men in time of affliction are more troubled with the punishment,
Wicked men are more troubled for their misery then their sin
the effect of sin, then with sin it self, the cause of punishment. They cry
out, not against their sins, but against their punishment: Genesis 4.
My punishment is greater then I can bear, says Cain. Exodus 9.
Pray ye to the Lord that this plague may be removed, says Pharaoh to Moses.

And this we may see by experience daily of many that complain of their
miseries, their crosses, and afflictions; but never complain of their sin,
the cause of all. And whence is this? But from,

That doting respect which they bear to themselves,

It may serve then for the trial of our own hearts during the presence of any
affliction. It is a brutish thing to cry only for want; the young ravens, the
young Lions do as much: we must grieve principally for the withdrawing of Gods
favor and countenance from us, above all crosses or losses, or any other
outward misery that can or does betide us. We must say as Mephiboseth to David,
Let Ziba take all the lands, it is enough that I see the Kings face. A generous
spirit, whose ancestors were attainted, cares not so much for the restitution
of his lands, but of his honor, of his blood: So must it be with a Christian,
to be restored again into Gods favor when we have sinned, must be the
principal thing we labor and seek after. Hitherto of the Impenitent Thief.

VERSE 40. But the other rebuked him, saying, Do thou not fear God, seeing
thou art in the same condemnation?


HItherto we have heard the fearful estate and condition of the Impenitent
Thief, whose life as it was wretched and miserable, so was his death fearful
and damnable. Wherein we have seen, that an evil life has commonly attending
it an evil death.

Now follows in order the be hauiour of the Penitent Thief at this time,
that was crucified on the right hand of Christ, who is so far from railing on
Christ, by the example of the high Priest and Elders, or with his Fellow the
Impenitent Thief, as that he justifies Christ, becomes a witness of Christ's
innocence, pleads his cause against his malicious enemies, reprooueth his
fellow, and makes a public profession of his own faith, in a public
auditory; that for his part, he looked for life and salvation only through
this crucified Christ, whom the world contemned.

And herein indeed sets forth the almighty power of Christ, both in respect
of his Deity, that was able thus to convert a soul in so miraculous a manner
without means; as also in respect of the power and efficacy of his death, and
passion, which declares it self most powerfully in the conversion of this
man, both in the powerful work of Mortification, and vinification, destroying
and killing in him the works of the old man, and working in him true
godliness; The blessed fruits and effects whereof will appear in the process
of this History.

(But the other rebuked him.)
Here we have two malefactors both of them guilty of one and the same sin,
and both of them brought to one and the same shameful death; yet the one left
and forsaken of God, the other had this mercy showed him, even at the last to
be converted by Christ, and so saved. Note hence, first the general
Instruction, and herein first,

That the Lord many times of his infinite mercy does call home of the most
desperate and wretched offenders, God can make of great sinners great Saints.
and makes of great sinners great Saints. Yea where there is true repentance,
it is not the greatness of sin, the numberless number of our sins, no nor
the long continuance in the same, that can any whit hinder us of his mercy. Yea
the Lord has of all sorts and conditions of men, some that belong unto the
election of grace, and appertain unto his glorious kingdom. Here we have an
example of Gods merciful dealing toward a most desperate malefactor, one
that had spent his life in a most desperate course of sinning, yet now at last
brought home by repentance. What a fearful estate was Paul in before his
conversion, Act. 9.
a grievous persecuter and bloud-succour, yet called of God, and made an
instrument of much good in his Church: Heb. 11.
Rahab an Harlot that came of cursed Cain, a Cananite, of a cursed people, of a
cursed City, yet had mercy showed her, and is honored with a blessed memory
in the Catalogue of Gods Saints for her admirable faith.

Jonas the Lords Prophet, Iona^ 1.
how foully and fearfully fell he: 2. Sam. 11.
And so David likewise in the matter of Vriah; yet upon their repentance
restored again to favor. Mary Magdalene branded with a brand of notable
infamy, yet is she one of the witnesses of Christ's glorious resurrection. And
why should this seem strange unto any, since,

First, Romans 9.
I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy.

Secondly, his friends; and such as have been bloudly persecuters, blessed
Preachers: and great and grievous sinners on earth, blessed Saints in heaven.

Thirdly,

This serves first of all to magnify the wonderful wise dome and goodness of
God, Brand plucked out of the fire.

Secondly, not as sometimes they were, according to their present condition,
and not as in times past. The Apostle reckoning up many horrible sins that
were committed amongst the Corinthians, says, Such were some of you, 1 Cor.
6.11
but now ye are washed, now ye are sanctified. It is indeed a common fault in
the world, the false and infirmities of Gods servants are still laid in their
dish, albeit they have given good testimony of their hearty sorrow and true
repentance for the same. It is not seven years that can wear out of mind
such a sin in such a one; the world keeps Registers of such men's faults, and
as occasion serves, still they shall hear of it. This is not the Lords manner
of dealing with us.

Thirdly, thou do not know what is to come; a man that should have seen this
penitent Thief, how vile and sinful he lived, even to the end, that now a
shameful and miserable death does overtake him, could not but have thought him
in a wretched and miserable case. So likewise Paul, he that should have seen
him trotting and trudging up and down from Office to Office to get his
Commissions sealed, to commit unto prison all that made profession of Christ,
could not but have thought him with Simon Magus, to be in the gall of
bitterness. O but stay a while, this is one of Gods secrets that belongs
unto him; he in whose hands are times and seasons, has his time to call home
those that belong unto the election of grace, in the mean time we may not
pass a final doom upon any.

Indeed when I see a man live a dissolute life, living in drunkenness,
swearing, usury, etc. and in all manner of profane courses, I may say this man
is in the way to destruction, but yet there may be a time wherein the Lord may
call home such a one. I may come to a tree, and say, here is little fruit, or
no fruit, or bad fruit, but I cannot say with Christ, Never fruit grow on thee
any more, Luke 11.
for God may show mercy at last upon their unfeigned repentance.

And last of all this may be a forcible motive unto us, merciful dealing now
at last with this poor penitent upon his repentance, the Lord does freely
receive him again to favor.

Be not then out of heart, albeit thou art compassed about with many
infirmities, wrong not the Lord, neither wrong thy own soul, as to think it
will be too late for thee at last to return unto him. It was a curfed speech
of a cursed wretch, Genesis 4.
My sin is greater then God can forgive: no, no, labor for a broken and a
contrite heart, and the Lord in mercy will cover all thy sins.

And indeed this is the true use we are to make of all the false and infirmities
of Gods children a^ they are recorded in Gods book, not to encourage us in a
course of sinning by their examples; The true use of other men's falls.
but,

First, to put us in mind of our weakness, David, Peter, Jonas, and the like
worthy stars in the Church have fallen, whither shall we fall if the Lord shall
but a little leave us unto our selves.

Secondly,

But the other rebuked him.
Wonderful are the fruits of this Penitents repentance and faith, believing,
confessing, giving testimony of Christ's innocence, rebuking his fellow,
accusing himself, and hoping above hope in this crucified Savior, whom all
the world contemned, and despised to find life; the particulars whereof now
follow in order.

But whence was this, that he is become such a worthy confessor, excusing
Christ, and pleading his cause, who so lately before by his sinful and
wretched life, had so dishonored him? No question this proceeded from the
Lords free grace and mercy showed unto him, giving him to see his sins, to be
humbled for the same, and by a lively faith to lay hold on Christ. It was
Christ that had first looked on him with the eye of mercy, that had in him no
merit, before he could behold his godhead now at this time veiled, and he
himself so much abased. He was by nature in the same estate and condition with
the other malefactor, guilty of the same sin, overtaken with the same
punishment, and so had perished everlastingly, had not the Lord Jesus, of this
stone, made a son of Abraham, and framed his heart anew, making a difference
through grace, where there was none by nature, for so was it his good pleasure.

The instruction we may learn hence, then, is this, All men are alike by
nature, until God make a difference by grace.
that by nature there is no difference betwixt Gods children, and wicked men,
until the Lord make the difference by grace; we are all hewed out of the same
rock that the vildest wretch and cursedst Canihal was that ever breathed;
until the Lord do frame the heart anew, we are all folded up in the state of
nature, and are the children of wrath, as well as others. Do but consider what
the Scripture speaks of this particular, that we are all by nature the
children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Eze. 16.
that our father was an Aramite, and our mother a Hittite; such as we are
indeed, without the covenant, without God in this world. Corrupted with
iniquity from the womb, Psalm. 51.7. Job 14.4.
conceived of vneleane seed; yea, all the faculties of our-soules, how are they
depraved through this original corruption.

The understanding is blind, Ephesians. 4.18.
Having their understandings darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them.

The will is froward and rebellious, Romans 7.15
what I would, that do I not, but what I hate, that I do, having not so much
power to think that is good.

And the same is true of our affections, 2. Cor. 3.5.
which are likewise disordered, being set upon transitory things which profit
not, and altogether auerse from heavenly things, inasmuch as the Apostle says,
Romans 3.23.
We are deprived of the glory of God; Having in us no inclination at all to any
thing which is good; but rather indeed an inclination to all things that are
evil. Genesis 6.3.
And in this miserable estate and condition does the Lord find us, when he is
pleased to call us, as we may see in Saul, Zacheus, Acts 9. Luke 19. Ioh. 7.
Mary Magdalene, this penitent Thief, and of all the faithful, it is God Who
works both the will and the deed, Phil. 2 13.
and that of his own good pleasure. 1. Cor. 47.
Who separateth thee (says the Apostle) or who causes thee to differ? It is
the Lord that makes this difference betwixt us and wicked men. Yea we shall
find the whole work of grace, of Conversion, and salvation, to be wholly
attributed unto him: he is the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the
beginning and the end, that is all in all, in the work of our salvation.

First, Election, which is the ground and foundation of al grace, Election.
this comes from him: Epees. 1.5.
He has predestined us to be adopted through Jesus Christ in himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will.

Secondly, Vocation.
outwardly by the word, and inwardly by the Spirit: this proceeds likewise from
him, and his free and undeserved grace and favor alone. 2. Tim. 1.9.
He has saved us, and called us with an holy calling; Gal. 1.6.
Not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace.

Thirdly, Faith.
by the which we come to lay hold upon and apply Christ and his righteousness
unto our ownesoules in particular; Heb. 11.6.
and without which we cannot please God. Now from whence have we this grace
truly to believe? Ephesians. 2.8.
for By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God.

Fourthly, will, what power, Obedience
or ability soever we have, for any holy duty. Ezekiel. 36.27, 28.
A new heart (says the Lord) will I give you, and a new spirit will I put into
you. I will take away the stony heart out of your body, and I will give you a
heart of flesh: I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes.

Fifthly, comes from him, otherwise Paul may plant, 1. Cor. 3.6.
and Apollo water, but all in vain: I have planted, and Apollo watered, but
God gave the increase.

Finally, Perseverance.
this is likewise from him: I will give them one heart and one way, Ie. 32.4.41
that they may fear me for ever. I will put my fear in their hearts, and they
shall not depart from me. And That God who has begun that good work, Phil.
1.6.29
will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. So that it is he that is the
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, that is all in all in the matter of
grace and salvation. So as we must say with the Church, Isa. 26.12.
O Lord thou have wrought all our works for us.

And it must needs be thus. For

First, glory of this work of our conversion and salvation, and none other.
That all matter of glorying in our selves might be taken away; and that we
might say with the Psalmist, Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name
give the praise. He will have the glory of his own work, and the praise of
his own mercy, and will teach us to go out of our selves, and to say with
Paul, By the grace of God, I am that I am.

Secondly, Our daily bread: he owes us naught, and they are but his own gifts
and graces given unto us, that he crowns with glory.

This serves first of all to humble us in the sense of our own spiritual
poverty and misery, O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us
shame. Let Popery stand aloft, and presume to divide with God, in regard of
their own Free will, works, Merits, and disposition that is in their own
hearts to receive grace. Far be it from us so to do, who are not able of our
selves to think a good thought.

Secondly, 2. Tim. 2.25.
Proving if at any time God will give such repentance unto life. For seeing
that our calling and conversion, yea every good gift is from God, what are we
that have received grace our selves, truly to repent and to believe, that we
should judge out Brethren, As they are such are we, God has showed us mercy,
why may not he that is rich in mercy; show the like mercy unto them? Let us not
then despair of any, but pity them in their spiritual miseries. And if they
be fallen down, let us put under our hands, and help to raise them up
again. The Lord would have this mercy showed unto the very Ox and Ass in the
time of the Law, being fallen under it burden; how much more to our Brother.
And we must pray for the conversion of such a one, Proving if at any time God
will give them repentance unto life.

Thirdly, whereby grace comes to be wrought, such as is the preaching of the
Word especially, by the which ordinarily the Lord works repentance, for
sin, faith in Gods promises, and all other graces.

And last of all, that we give unto God the praise of his own grace, since
that whatsoever good thing we have, it comes from him.

But the other rebuked him.
We have here in this Penitent a pattern of a man, that makes the right use
of his afflictions and troubles, they bring him nearer and nearer unto God.

The Impenitent Thief, as we heard before, now falls to the blaspheming of
Christ, having his heart hardened, and his conscience seared within him, he
becomes by his afflictions more and more desperately sinful. But in this
Penitent behold we the happy fruit of sanctified afflictions, they humble
him, bring him to see the errors of his life past, set him on work to
confess and bewail his sins, and to be an earnest suter unto Christ for
mercy. Note hence,

That afflictions, Afflictions of excellent use to bring men to God.
they make them better, and bring them nearer unto God. I grant that
afflictions in their own nature are evil, being the fruits of sin, neither
do they of themselves produce such happy effects in any; but then only when
the Lord works together with affliction by his Spirit, Non paena sed remediu^
delinquentis Ambros.
altering and changing the nature thereof, they become through Gods mercy not a
punishment but a remedy against sin. This is confessed by David, Psalm. 119.67.
Before I was afflicted I went astray, But now have I kept thy Word; Meaning
indeed, that his afflictions had humbled him, and made him walk more awfully
toward God. We may see this in Hezekiah, Isa. 38.
it was his affliction that humbled him, and caused him to recount with
himself the errors of his life past. Manasses in prison and captivity is
brought home, that was like an untamed heyfer, in time of prosperity walked
stubbornly and rebelliously against God. This truth is confessed by Ephraim,
Thou have chastised me, Ier. 31.18.19.
and I was chastised as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, etc. After I was
afflicted, I smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed, and even confounded, because I
did bear the reproach of my youth. How often did the Lord cause the Israelites
to be afflicted, and in the time of their affliction still they sought unto
God, Psalm. 107.10.13.
and cried unto him. And this is it the Lord further threatened against his
people, I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, Hos. 5.15.
and as a young Lion unto the house of Judah. I, even I, will tear, and go
away, and none shall rescue. I will go and return to my place, till they
acknowledge their offenses, and seek my face, for in their afflictions they
will seek me early. I might instance this truth by diverse the like examples,
as that of the Prodigal, Luke 15.
who ran riot a long time till his patrimony was nigh spent, and then happy
famine, that caused him to look home. Act. 16.27
And that hard-hearted Iayler that never thought he could show cruelty enough
against those innocent Lambs of Christ, it was the earthquake that caused his
soule-quake, and happy affliction that brought him home.

Neither is this a thing to be wondered at, that sanctified afflictions should
produce such excellent effects in Gods people: for,

First, David, Psalm. 142.4.5.
I looked on my right hand, and behold there was none that would know me, al
refuge failed me, and none cared for my soul, then cried I unto the Lord, etc.

Secondly,

Seeing then that afflictions are of such excellent use to bring men to the
sight of their sins, last place, and if that fail, Ier. 6.
the cure many times proves hopeless and helpelesse; as silver metal being
put into the fire, if nothing come out but dross, it is found to be reprobate
silver: so men that have been fined in the furnace of affliction, if they be
not humbled and brought home by the same, these will be found reprobate men,
and the Lord will cast such off as a desperate people, Esaias 1.
Wherefore should ye be smitten any more? for ye fall away more and more,
says the Lord.

Secondly, in time of affliction, will confess their sins, cry down their
former evil ways, and make vows and covenants with God of new obedience like
unto Pharaoh, Exodus 10.
I and my people are sinful. But when the rod of God is removed, and they
delivered, with Pharaoh they return again unto their old sins, like the dog
unto the vomit. These men use repentance, as many a man uses an old garment,
which they put about them in time of a shower, but cast it away again as soon
as the weather is fair; or as many of our Papists use our Churches, when they
fear any trouble, they fly thither for shelter. Whereas the child of God
being once truly humbled, walks the more holily and obediently before God for
ever after.

Thirdly, sanctified unto a man, that produces this happy fruit of conversion
unto God. This should teach us to be earnest with God in prayer, especially in
times of affliction, that he would be pleased to sanctify the same unto us,
and to second his corrections with the inward working of his own spirit,
whereby we may be moved to lay the same to heart, and to bring forth fruits
worthy amendment of life.

But the other rebuked him.
The Evangelist setting out the conversion of the penitent Thief, shows his
behavior at this time, namely that he did not only leave off his stealing as
before, but is now exercised in the contrary good, rebuking his fellow, and
seeking by all means possible to stop him in a course of sinning; and herein
will teach us,

That unto true repentance, To cease from evil is not sufficient, we must do
good. Psalm. 34.13.
but we must do good. In the work of true repentance, these two ever go
together, Depart from evil, and do good. David there joins these both
together. Esaias 1.17.
So Esaias the Prophet, Cease to do evil, learn to do well. And even herein
does the Penitent show the truth, and the fruit of his conversion, according to
that precept of the Apostle Paul, Let him that has stolen, Ephesians. 4.
stealt no more, but let him labor with his hands that which is good. And this
truth is further cleared by the practice and example of all Gods people, how
vile and wretched soever they were in the time of their ignorance and
unregeneracy, yet being called and converted, have not only left their former
evil ways, but put in practice the contrary virtues. See here the mercy and
compassion of this poor Penitent, he is now as rich in mercy and compassion
toward the poor soul of his brother, as ever he was before full of cruelty;
yea, such was his compassion toward him, that he seems to neglect himself,
his present pain and misery that now he suffered, and falls to reprove his
fellow, makes a hearty acknowledgement of their sinfulness, and the equity of
that their deserved punishment.

We may see this in Paul, Acts 9.
whose conversion kept him not only from persecuting the Church as in times
past, but set him on work to build up the walls of that Sion he had labored
before to pull down.

The Tailor, Acts 16.27
of a bloody, cruel, and merciless tormentor of Paul and Sylas, after the
earthquake and soule-quake, that he came to see his sin, and to be truly
and thoroughly humbled for the same, how pitiful and compassionate became he
unto them, washing their wounds, and entreating them with all kindness and
louc.

This was the whole tenor of the Baptists Sermon, Mat. 3.10.
Now is the Axe put to the root of the tree, every tree that brings not forth
good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. He does not say every tree
that is barren, or that brings forth evil fruit, but every tree that
brings not forth good fruit.

Merosh is accursed, Judge. 5.23.
why? not for joining with the Midianites against Israel, but because the men
of that city came not out to help the people of God. And our Savior shows
what his manner of proceeding shall be with wicked and ungodly men in the last
day; he will say unto them, Mat. 25.
Come ye blessed, etc. not because they did not this or that cuill, but
because of this and that particular good, as the feeding of the hungry, the
clothing of the naked, etc. And this is indeed that special privilege that
belongs unto all the commandments of God, that where they are propounded
negatiuely, they include an affirmative duty; and where they be propounded
affirmatively, they include likewise a negative part; and there is a curse
imposed as well for the breach of the one, as the other. Gods righteous law
being violated and broken, as well by the omission of the good commanded, as by
the committing of the evil condemned. And thus was the Fig Tree accursed by our
Savior, not because it brought forth evil fruit, but because it brought not
forth good fruit.

And the reason hereof may be taken from the nature of grace, Mat. 7.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? says our Savior;
implying that so long as the heart is sinful and corrupt, all manner of
sinful and corrupt abominations spring therehence: But when it comes once to
be renewed and changed, A good man (says he) out of the good treasure of his
heart, brings forth good fruit.

Secondly, show forth the power of him that has called us put of darkness
into a marvelous light. Ephesians. 1.


And surely this meets with the vain conceit that so many in the world are
possessed withal, Luke 18.
nor Swearer, and yet far enough from the kingdom of heaven, all this is but a
negative Christianity, which will not prove a man the child of God. This
Penitent Thief did not rail on Christ as the other did, but that was not
sufficient to prove his conversion; but we see to the utmost of his power, he
maintains Christ's innocence, and labors to stop the current of sin in
others; few in these days proceed to this degree of Christianity: to plead
the cause of Christ against all gaine-sayers, and to stand out for the truth,
to rebuke others, when they hear them blaspheme, or any ways dishonor God;
such cold friends has Christ and his truth now a days.

Men think they have done enough if they join not with the enemies of the
truth, and run not with others into the same excess of riot; but the Lord
will judge him an evil man, that does no good, and will in the last day
proceed against such. I was hungry and ye fed me not, naked and ye clothed
me not, etc. The very omission of that good men might have done, shall be
brought in in evidence the last day to condemn the wicked. Oh that our eiuill
honest men (as the world reputes them) would consider this, and lay this truth
to heart, that in their outward civil conversation they show themselves but
half Christians, and if they join not the doing of good, to their abstaining
from enill, they can never approve themselves for sound Christians before God,
nor look for the reward of the just at last.

Secondly, These things be done to the green tree, what shall be done to the
dry? If the not doing of good shall be punished so severely, where shall the
ungodly and sinner appear? Psalm. 50.22.
O consider this ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver you.

And last of all, Job, against his friends accusation, that charged him for an
hypocrite. I was (says he) a Father unto the poor, I restrained him not of
his desire, Job 31.16.17.19.20.
nor caused the eyes of the widow to fail. I did not eat my morsels alone,
but the fatherless did eat thereof, etc. I saw none perish for want of
clothing, nor any poor without covering: But their loins blessed me because
they were warmed with the fleece of my sheep. So Hezekiah being by the Prophet
summoned to death, whereunto does he retire himself now for comfort but to
this; his care and conscience in his life to walk with God: Isa. 38.
Remember Lord that I have walked before thee in truth, and with an upright
heart. And never let us think that we have prosited aright in the school of
Christ, or as we should, till we have learned by well-doing to get the
affirmative part of Christianity, as well as the negative, wherein we shall
find true comfort, and approve our selves as Christians indeed.

(But the other rebuked him.)
But was not this Penitent Thief guilty of the same fact with the other,

This Penitent Thief though a sinner, Ezekiel. 18.22.23.
If the wicked (says the Lord) will turn from his sins he has committed,
etc. All the transgressions that he has done shall not be mentioned unto him:
But in the righteousness that he has done he shall live.

And it is said of Josias, 2. Kin. 23.25.
that he first returned himself unto the Lord, and then caused his Subiect^ to
return.

Or else it may be answered thus. This Penitent thief though in other
respects he were as faulty as the other: yet he was not guilty of that sin
of mocking of Christ, the which he reproved in his fellow; and so in that
respect was fit to reprove the other. And herein will teach us, that

He that rebukes another must not be guilty of the same fault in himself. He
that rebukes another, must not be guilty of the same fault himself. Ioh. 8.7.
Romans 2.21. Mat. 7.5.
We must cast the first stone at our selves. Thou that teach another,
teach thou not thy self? Thou hypocrite (says our Savior) first cast out
the beeme out of thy own eye, so shall thou see clearly to pluck out the
meat out of thy Brothers eye. Judah hearing that his daughter in law Thamar was
with child, said, Let her be burned. Ge. 38.24.
But when the pledges, the seal, the cloak, and the staff, were showed, he
knew himself faulty, and then, She is more righteous then I. So that he that
is guilty himself, is not fit to censure others. In the time of the Law he
that had a blemish must not offer the bread of the Lord. Leu. 21.21.
To show that the Preacher in regard of gross sins must be unblameable. It
is a dangerous thing to sentence another to hell for drunkenness, usury,
swearing, etc. and yet be guilty our selves in an high nature of the same
crimes. Surely the Lord will say to such at the last, as to the evil servant
in the Gospel; O thou evil servant, out of thy own mouth I condemn thee. Such
are their own Judges, and the Lords own mouth, who will proceed against them
accordingly. Neither is this to be understood only of public persons, such
as Magistrates and Ministers are, whose functions and callings are to reprove
sin in others; but even of private men also, such as this Penitent Thief
was, their condemning of the faults of other men redounds unto themselves, and
they being guilty of the same, pass the sentence therein upon their own
souls. Romans 2.1.
Therefore art thou inexcusable O man, whatsoever thou art that condemnest, for
in that thou condemnest another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that
condeninest do the same things. And as this is the duty of every man that
reproves another, first to look unto himself that he be not guilty of the
same fault; So especially are the Ministers of the Word tied unto his duty.
Tit. 1.7.
A Bishop (says Paul) must be blameless, as the Steward of God. And he
exhorts Titus, Tit. 2.7.
in all things to show himself a pattern of good works. Number. 8.6.
Thus the Lord in the time of the Law commanded the Levites should themselves
first be cleansed before they served in the Temple: How much more now in the
time of the Gospel, does the Lord require this sanctity of life in his
servants? Now the Reasons do further clear the necessity hereof. For,

First, Iethre exhorted Moses his son in law to appoint officers in every
City, he showed what manner of persons they should be, namely, Men fearing
God, Exodus 18.21.
and hating covetousness. For indeed, how could they either reprove or correct
that in others, whereof they themselves were guilty; neither can the Minister,
or any other, so freely and faithfully reprehend those faults in others, lest
the proverb be returned upon them, Physician heal thy self. Luke 4.23.


The second reason may be drawn from the great danger that such men are in,
Moses, an holy servant of God, whom the Lord sent to be a guide and deliverer
of his people: and going down into Egypt the Lord met him by the way to have
slain him; and the reason was this, he had not circumcised his son Eliazar,
according to the commandment. Now the Lord would not have him to circumcise
his Church abroad, that made no reckoning of circumcising his family at home.
Woe be to them that are offensive in life, that lay stumbling blocks before the
people.

Thirdly, grace of God to others, though they themselves have no part therein.
Yet it cannot be but the wickedness of Elies sons will make the Lords
sacrifices to be abhorred of the people. 1. Sam. 2.17.


This shows then what conformity does best become the Minister of Christ,
namely, Vrim and Thummim, which must ever go together. The Apostle Peter
requires these two things of an Elder, 1. Pet. 5.2.3.
To feed the flock of Christ, and to be an ensample to the flock. For then
the Lords building goes on well, when these two go hand in hand together. For
alas, we see that practice preuailes above precepts; and examples are more
powerful then rules, either to the imitation of that is good, or detestation
of that is evil. Now when those that should shine as stars in the Church,
shall walk inordinately, though they preach the word as Indas did, are neither
so profitable in the Church, nor shall they themselves escape damnation. And
therefore let this admonish us all of what calling or condition soever, to
look well to our selves, and first to pluck out the beam out of our own
eye, Mat. 7.5.
that such reprehensions and admonitions we shall use toward others, may
neither be retorted with shame upon our own heads, 1. Cor. 11.1 Phil. 3.17.
1. The. 1.6
nor prove unprofitable unto our brethren. For how shall the people follow
their Pastors, when they make no conscience to walk before them in the ways
of godliness? Hitherto of the general Instructions.

Robuked him.
We come now to his reprehension, The manifestation of his conversion,
as the same is a fruit of his conversion; and that appears in that great care
he had over his sellow, to keep him from sin, In rebuking his fellow.
and to bring him if it were possible to the participation of the same grace
and mercy that he himself had received. Note we hence first of all,

That it is a true note of a true convert to stop others in a course of sin,
True note of a true convert to stop others in a course of sin. Genesis 4.
every man stands bound as much as in him lies to keep others from sin. It
was a cursed speech of cursed Cain, Am I my brothers keeper? Every man is in
some sort his brothers keeper. It is the Lords own chargegiuen unto his people,
Leuit. 19.17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall reprove him. How
frequent have the Prophets and the faithful servants of God of old been in
this duty: Esaias for this cause was accounted so contentious a man, that nothing
in the land could please him. Ier. 15.10.
So Jeremy, woe is me that my mother has borne me a man of strife. This was
likewise Ezechiels case, an argument of his faithfulness in reproving of
sin, that he met with so much envy and hatred from the world.

This care the Lord Jesus Christ himself, the chief Shepherd and Bishop of
our souls, manifested toward his Apostle Peter; Luke 22.31.22.
Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to winnow thee, but I have prayed for thee
that thy faith fail not. And does likewise inioyne him that had received so
great a mercy from Christ, that he should show the like mercy to his brethren,
saying, Heb. 3.12.13.
When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. To this purpose serves that
of the Apostle, Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart
of unbelief, in departing from the living God, but exhort one another daily
whilst it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. And this is taught by our blessed Savior, when he
teaches us to pray thus, Mat. 6.
Lead us not into temptation: wherein our Savior will teach us that it ought
to be the care of every Christian to desire, to pray for, and by all means
possible, to labor that our brethren be kept from sin: and this was Christ's
own practice in that prayer of his he made for his Disciples, Ioh. 17.11.
Verse 15.
That God would keep them from evil. I pray not that thou should take them
out of the world, but that thou would keep them from evil: and indeed the
ingemination and doubling of the petition, shows the wonderful care he had of
his people. And to this purpose excellent is that of the Apostle Saint James,
Brethren (says he) If any of you do err from the truth, Iam. 5.19.20.
and one convert him, let him know that he which conuerteth a sinner from the
error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of
sins. There can be no greater testimony of a gracious heart, and that the
work of regeneration and sound conversion is wrought in a man, then by
testifying his care over his brother, to keep him from sin. And on the
contrary part, it is a note of a false Prophet, and of a graceless heart, to
wink at the sins of others. Thy Prophets have looked out vain Lam 2.14.
and foolish things for thee, they have not discovered thine iniquities, to
turn away thy captivity.

But the reasons will make it more clear.

First, they are our brethren, this may be one forcible reason to persuade us
to the practice of this duty, to stop them in their course of sinning. They are
our brethren, and they are in some sort committed to our keeping, and if we
shall suffer them to sin without rebuke or reprehension, insomuch that they
perish, the Lord will say to us, as sometimes he said to Cain, where is thy
brother? Genesis 4.10.
when it will be in vain for us to post off the matter with am I my brothers
keeper? for the Lord for this sin will proceed against us as he did against
Cain, What have thou done? The voice of thy Brothers blood cries unto me from
the earth: When it shall be in vain for any man to plead, they never offered
violence to the lives of their brethren, since they never sought to stop and
restrain them in their sinful courses, but suffered them to go on in all
manner of sins, without reprehension.

Accessories by the law, are as deep we say in the sin, as the principal,
yea, and many times suffer with the malefactor: thus is it with sin, so
dangerous a thing it is to be silent at the committing thereof.

Secondly, James adds two other most excellent motives or reasons to persuade
unto this duty, Iam. 5.20.
Hereby we shall save a soul, and coner a multitude of sins. Then the which,
what more noble or honorable service can a Christian perform either toward
God or man.

First, to save a soul, Luke 15.
the very Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner; the promise is, that
such a one shall shine as the stars in the firmament, Dan. 12.3.
and indeed this is such a work whereunto all the faithful must addict
themselves, according to that measure of grace given them, and that petition we
put up daily, Thy kingdom come. When we shall labor to be instruments to
enlarge that kingdom of the Lord Jesus, and bring others from sin, to God,
otherwise indeed we do but mock God, like as if a husbandman should pray,
Give us this day our daily bread, and never set his hand to the plough, nor
cast his seed into the ground.

Again, what a blessed thing is it to help to cover sin, yea, a multitude
of sins, which those shall do, that are any ways a means to bring others
to the sight of their sins, and to repentance for the same: for alas, such is
the policy of Satan, and such is the corruption of every man's heart by nature,
that they seek by all means possible to cover their sins. But how? even as
Adam his nakedness, with fig-leaues, that can never shelter them from Gods
wrath. So every man seeks something or other to cover his sins, but the
best way to have sin covered, is first to uncover them. Ier. 31.18.
After I was converted, I smote upon my thigh, says Ephraim; Psalm. 51.3.
so David, My sins are ever before me, and what followed, Against thee only
have I sinned. Happy man Nathan that did so uncover sin, that GOD might cover
them.

Thirdly, stop others in a course of sin in regard of himself, lest he
bring upon his own head the sins of other men. Now every man has enough to
answer for of his own, though he become not guilty of other men's sins.

But how may a man be charged with the sins of others?

This is done three ways, in Heart. Word. Deed.


First, in heart, How many ways a man becomes guilty of the sins of other men.
and that three ways. First, when though he neither commit the evil
himself, nor approve of the same being committed by others, yet if he mourn
not in his heart for the same sin, In heart.
to see how God is dishonored, and how greatly the soul of the offender is
endangered, he becomes guilty of this sin. This was the fault of the
Corinthians, for the which Paul reproues them, who when they saw the incestuous
person, who had sinned so foully, they sorrowed not, nor grieved as they ought
for that sin. Psalm. 119.136.
A contrary example we have in David, My eyes gush out with water, because men
keep not thy law: and of righteous Lot, whose righteous soul was grieved at
the abominations of the filthy Sodomites.

Secondly, Paul's sin before his conversion, he cast no stone at Stephen
himself, yet he consented unto his death, as himself confessed, Acts 7.58.
Acts 22.20
and held the clothes of them that did stone him, and in this regard was
guilty of his death.

Thirdly, suffer sin and the sinner to pass without reproof. And thus was
Eli faulty in not punishing his sons, for which sin the Lord punished him.
And thus offends the Minister in not reproving the sins of those, over whom
the Lord has set him, and so likewise the Magistrate in not punishing
offenders under him. Yea, Eze. 3.17.
and this is the sin of all such as can with patience hear the Lord
dishonored, his Name blasphemed, his Sabbaths profaned, and all manner of
impiety committed, Act. 18.15 16.
without any reproof at all, like unto Gallio, will not trouble themselves
about such things, whereas the Lord does require this at the hands of every
Christian, that have themselves obtained mercy by admonition, exhortation,
reprehension, and by all other helps and means, to show mercy to others to
stop them in the course of sin.

Secondly, In word.
a man may be guilty of the sins of other men in word, and that three ways.

First, 2 Samuel 11.15. Mar. 6.29.
by counselling another to evil, and thus became David a murderer by the
letter he sent unto Ioab in the matter of Vrich; and thus the mother of the
Damsel became guilty of the Baptists death, by councelling her daughter to
require his head.

Secondly, Luke 11.40.
will speak good of evil, and justify the wicked for a reward: in which
regard it were well with them, they were as lame of their tongues, as
Mephibosheth of his legs. Esaias 5.20.


Thirdly, by applauding another in evil, and soothing them up in their sins,
against whom there is a curse gone out from God, Eze. 13.18
Woe unto them that sow pillowes under men's arme-holes.

And lastly, In Deed.
in Deed, and that two ways.

First, when albeit they be not the immediate instrument in sin,

Secondly, Psalm. 50.21
when a man shall familiarly converse with such as are known to be
notoriously wicked, such receive no small encouragement to go on in their
sinful course, when notwithstanding all their abominations, they are not
rejected of others.

But the Lord says unto the Prophet, Ezekiel. 3.17.
Son of man, I have made thee a watchman, and thou shall warn the people
from me. It seems there that it is peculiar unto the office of the Minister,
to admonish and reprove others. And we know it is the exhortation of the
Apostle, Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called. Heb.
13.17
And again, They watch for your souls as they that must give account unto
God. What then have private men to do with reproving others for sin?

To teach and preach publicly in the Church is the peculiar office of the
Minister, even to their Minister himself in private, as Paul speaks unto the
Golossians, Say ye to Archippus, take heed to thy Ministry to fulfill it.

But is every man to be rebuked at all times that deserves rebuke?

No, Rebuke not a scorner, Solomon, or a drunkard, when the wine is in his
head. 1. Sam. 25.
Abigal would not tell Nabal of his drunkenness then, every time is not sit, a
man must observe the fittest time, and watch his opportunity.

Now this impenitent Thief was a dying, this was a fit time for his fellow to
reprove him, and for him to receive a rebuke, or else never.

There is a time for all things, Eccl. 2.
says Solomon, and a word spoken in due time is like an Apple of gold, and
picture of silver. Christ chose the fittest time to teach the people, and to do
good, and that in the Synagogue upon the Sabbath. Act 9.31.
So the Church having peace did then edisie themselves. And indeed the children
of this world are wiser in their generation then the children of light.
Potiphars wise chose the sit time to provoke Joseph to lust, Genesis 39.11
Joseph was alone in the house. Esau chused the fittest time to be revenged on
his brother: The days of mourning for my father will have an end, and then I
will kill my brother. In the affairs of this life, men are wise to take the
fittest opportunity. The Crabsish desiring to feed on the Oyster, cannot
perforce open the shell, therefore watches opportunity till the oyster
opens himself against the Sun, and then puts in his claw. This wisdom
ought to be in every Christian to take the fittest opportunity to the doing
of good.

But he is my superior whom I hear swear,

Indeed I grant there may be a preposterous zeal and boldness in man, See Mr.
Lapthorne his spiritual Alms.
then to reprehend their superiors, lest they passing the bonds of their
calling, do justly exasperate them against them; for as Magistrates, Ministers,
parents, and masters, by Gods ordinance are to rebuke, reprehend, and punish;
So Subjects, people, children, and servants by the same rule are to advise and
advertise: And thus did the servants of Job deal with their master, Job 31.
and Job says, that he durst not contemn the advice of his servant, or maid,
when they contended with him. A reproof to such must be used as a sour pill
covered over with sugar, that it may the more easily be taken down: Brethren
(says the Apostle) if any man be overtaken with a fault, Gal. 6.1.
ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. (...)
A metaphor, as the original signifies, borrowed from Surgeons, which with a
sleight of hand put a shattered bone into its place, before the party be
almost ware of it.

This serves for the just reproof of those that can see men run a licentious
course, others swear and blaspheme the name of God, rail upon Ministers, and
speak evil of the good way of righteousness, without any zeal for God, or
compassion to the souls of their brethren. Many there be that will never
rebuke sin in their brethren, until God revenge it from heaven, whereas if
they had met with due reprehension of their faults, they might happily have been
brought to repentance, and so have prevented those plagues.

Or if men do speak of the sins of others, it is behind their backs in the
most vildest and disgracefullest manner that may be. These rather show
themselves to be of the generation of cursed Cham, that uncovered the
nakedness of his father, then of Gods people that mourn for the sins of
others, and in brotherly love seek by all means possible, to recover them
into the state of grace. No doubt it pierced this Penitent Thief to the heart,
to hear him blaspheme and rail on Christ, he can by no means bear it. But
howsoever his own grief was great, and pain grievous, he seems to neglect
all, and falls to the rebuking of his fellow, sinning against God; this will
a grations heart do. And woe to that man that can with patience hear God
dishonored, that is not affected with the sins of other men, such are far
enough from the work of grace and conversion, and from that Christian
compassion that ought to be in us toward others, to save a soul, to cover a
multitude of sins, or to free themselves from the sins of other men.

Secondly, admonish every one in the fear of God to make conscience of this
duty, that we admonish one another, and seek to convert one another from going
astray, this is the truest testimony of love, we can show to others. For
indeed no man loves naturally, that does not love spiritually; for by how much
the more excellent the soul is above the body, by so much the more excellent
is the love to it, above that of the body. And indeed this will be a sound
witness unto our hearts, of our love toward others, in that we have
admonished our brethren, and sought by all means possible to recover them from
their sinful ways. It shall be a precious balm that shall not break their
heads. Neither may these thoughts hinder us that we have no hope to prevail by
our admonitions and reprehensions, this we are not so much to look after, as
the conscionable discharge of our own duty. And thus far we are sure we
shall glorify God, to be witnesses of his word and truth; when the wicked in
the last day shall be put to silence, not being able to plead ignorance, or
that they had no warning.

And let us know that the Spirit of God blows where it lists, and the Lord
can even of Lions, Tigers, and Cockatrices, make at his pleasure to become the
sheep of Christ: of Abraham an Idolater, he can make the Father of the
faithful; of bloody and barbarous Manasses, he can make an humble Convert;
and of a persecuting Saul, he can make a painful preaching Paul: and of a lewd
graceless Thief, an holy confessor. Let none therefore be discouraged,
because of the lewdness of the person, seeing the Lord is able, and many times
does call home of the sinfullest of men.

And last of all, Heb. 13.22
To suffer the word of exhortation, and to labor to keep under all repining
thought and evil disposition that is in their hearts, which bewray themselves
never more, then when they are admonished or reproved for sin; and doubtless
Satan himself blows the coals, knowing that it is an excellent means to
recover a sinner out of his power. O how hardly is a reproof digested by a
natural man, that has not the work of grace in him! It is found often true
which Solomon says, Reprove a scorner and he will hate thee. A sharp reproof
is more hardly digested then the bitterest pill; men would not be disturbed in
their sinful courses. But if the Lord love thee, he will send thee one
faithful friend or other to reprove thee. And surely it is a fearful thing,
and a sign that God has cast off such a soul his care, and that he intends
to glorify himself in the destruction of such a one, that is suffered to go
on in sin without controllment.

Let the righteous smite me friendly (says David) and reprove me. And well
fare that heart that can so willingly suffer a reproof. The sweetest meats are
not always the wholesomest, neither are the sharpest reproves worst for the
soul. He is a miserable man that if his neighbor shall tell him of his
enemies purpose to kill him, should hate him for his pains; much more wretched
and miserable is the case of that man, that being put in mind of the danger of
sin, how his soul is like to be made a prey unto Satan, will requite this
warning with displeasure. Let us not be such spiritual fools, Pro. 13.24.
He hates his son, that spares the rod, says Solomon. The best kindness
is to smite while there is hope, and to reprove betimes ere it be too late.

But the other rebuked him.
Here we have a true pattern of a true penitent, and look what affection and
disposition is here wrought in the heart of this Penitent toward his fellow,
the same affection and disposition is wrought in some measure in all those, to
whom the Lord has vouchsafed the like grace. Now his care is manifested
toward his fellow in this, to bring him if it were possible to the sight of
his sins, and to repentance for the same. And herein will teach us,

That true repentance and conversion unto God, A true Convert desires that
others may partake of the same grace
begets in the heart of a godly man, a desire of the like grace toward others.
There is no one truth more apparent throughout the whole Scriptures, then this.
How Gods people being themselves converted, and having this grace given them to
repent and believe, have endeavored to bring others to the knowledge of the
truth likewise. Thus the faithful in the Primitive time of the Church, having
tasted themselves, and seen how gracious the Lord is, they provoke others to
embrace the same grace, together with themselves. Come (say they) let us go up
to the mountains of the Lord. Esaias 2.3.
A true convert cannot but proclaim the goodness of God unto others. Come
(says David) and I will show you what God has done for my soul. Psalm. 66.16
Gods grace is like fire in the bones, as says the Prophet. His Word was in my
heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, Ier. 20.9.
and I was weary of forbearing, and I could not stay. Christ forbade the two
blind men in the Gospel that were cured of their blindness, straightly that
they should tell no man; but what says the Text, When they were departed, Mat.
9.30.31.
they spread abroad his fame in all that country; They could not for their lives
conceal it: so Andrew when he had found Christ, he had no rest till he had
acquainted Peter. The like we may see in Philip toward Nathaniel; Ioh. 1.41.
Verse 45.
we may see this in David, who having petitioned the Lord in this wise, Psalm.
51.12.13.
Make me to hear the voice of joy and gladness, etc. what follows, Then
will I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto
thee. The woman of Samaria leaves her pot behind her, Io. 4.28.
and runs into the town, that as she had received Christ, she might bring the
tidings of joy to her neighbors, to provoke them also to see and to hear
Christ.

And what might be the reason wherefore Matthew the Publican invited so many to
his house when Christ was to come thither? Luke 5.29.
no question he had this good intent therein, that they also that came thither,
might reap some good by Christ.

These are those rivers of waters our Savior prophesied of, Io^. 7.37.
that should flow from the bellies of true believers, even to the refreshing of
the dry and barren hearts of others, to cause them to bring forth also the
fruits of righteousness. This will grace do.

We may see this likewise in Onesimus, whom Paul sent back unto his Master
Philemon with this testimony, that howsoever in times past, that is, before his
conversion, he was unprofitable, yet now says Paul, is profitable to thee and
me.

No Usurer is more forward to put out his money, as it comes into his hand,
for an increase, as is the child of God to improve the grace received for the
good of others. And it must needs be so,

First, in regard of the nature and property of grace it self, which is of a
generatiue nature, producing grace; this Talent cannot be hid or kept close in
the heart without profit or increase. Indeed the common gifts of the spirit,
such as are given many times to the wicked themselves, these are not so
profitable, because they are but common gifts; but where the sanctified graces
of Gods spirit are, They are (says the Apostle) given to edify withal, and
these are never idle nor unprofitable in the heart of a true believer. As none
are more desirous of wealth then the rich, so they that have grace, are ever
seeking for a further increase thereof.

Secondly, viz. that the body of Christ might be edified; hence is it that the
Lord Jesus does so straightly inioyne Peter, When thou art converted, Luke
21.32 1 Pet, 4.10
strengthen thy brethren; and again, Let every one as he has received a gift,
minister the same one unto another, as good disposers of the graces of God. And
indeed God does never give to any of his servants any spiritual grace, for his
own private benefit alone, but that he might be a good Steward and Disposer
of the grace of God, for the good of others. And hence is it that the Apostle
concludes of the grace bestowed upon him, 2 Cor. 1.4.
that God had comforted him, that he might comfort others with the same
comfort.

Thirdly, there is no service that a Christian can do in the Church, that has
the like promise of recompense or reward, as that which extends to the souls
of men. Let him know that he that has converted his brother, Iam. 5.20.
has saved a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins, and again,
Dan 12.3.
They that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever. The mercies that men shall show here unto the bodies of the Saints,
shall bring with them a sure reward. He that shall give but a cup of cold water
unto a Disciple, Luke 10.
in the name of a Disciple, shall not lose his reward. How much more shall the
feeding and refreshing of hunger-starued souls with the bread of life, that
are ready to perish, be plentifully rewarded with him?

Seeing then that where there is the work of grace and true conversion, Would
we have the comfort of our own conversion and repentance, do but question thy
own heart how thou stand affected toward those thousands in Israel, that
yet are held in miserable bondage under Satan, and power of darkness,
wallowing in the blood of their own souls. Can thou mourn for these as
Samuel did for Saul? do thou pity them in their spiritual miseries, and
do thy bowels earne within thee toward such? And do thou labor to the
utmost of thy power and according to thy calling, to bring home those that go
astray, to the knowledge of the truth? do thou take all opportunities that
are offered unto thee, by admonition, instruction, and reprehension, to set
forward the Lords work herein? Surely there cannot be a more certain note of
the truth of grace in thy heart, and of thy own conversion, then this: When
thou art converted, (says our Savior to Peter) Strengthen thy brethren. No
man can truly desire and indeuer the spiritual good of another, that has not
tasted of the work first in himself. But if on the contrary part, upon this
examination thou find that there is in thee no touch at all of grief for
the sins of other men, thou layest not their miseries to heart: the horrible
sins of the times, such as are whordome, pride, drunkenness, swearing,
profanation of the Sabbath, etc. These things do no whit affect thee nor
trouble thee, surely thou have cause to mourn in secret, and to be humbled for
the hardness of thy own heart, for as yet the work of grace is not wrought
in thee, for if it were, it would manifest in this, to labor the spiritual
good of others.

Do^ but consider the truth of this point in the example of this Penitent
Thief, that had the least time that ever we read of, or heard of, to manifest
the fruits of his repentance in, and we shall see that howsoever his time was
short, and he was now to mind the everlasting welfare of his soul, yet he is
not unmindful of the spiritual misery of the soul of his Brother, by
rebuking him for his blasphemy, by putting him in mind of his sin, and the
equity of that his deserved punishment, that was now inflicted upon him, and
all to this end, if it were possible, that his heart might be touched with
some remorse for sin, and he be brought to repentance for the same. There is
no grace in that heart that does not indeuer this in some measure of life.

Secondly, Simeon and Leui, are brethren in iniquity, that provoke one
another, come let us cast in our lots together: that are Satan's spokesmen, and
solicitors to draw men into sin. And those again that are so far from
laboring the spiritual good of others, as Ismael-like, by reproaches and
disgraces, lay stumbling blocks in the way of others, to hinder them in their
Christian courses, like the Scribes and Pharisees, against whom our Savior
pronounces a woe, because they entered not into the kingdom of God themselves,
nor suffered those that would.

And last of all, this may provoke all unto this duty, and to labor to approve
the truth of their own conversion, by laboring to be instruments of the
spiritual good of others. And this duty rests upon all, Reu. 1.6.
for we are all a kingdom of Priests, and have received a holy accomptment of
the Father. So especially, the Ministers of the Word, whose sacred calling calls
for this duty, they are in a special manner to look unto it; they are to
preach the Word in season and out of season. 2 Timothy 4.2.
Sow thy seed (says Solomon) in the morning, and let not thy hand rest in the
evening, for thou know not which shall prosper: God calls not all at the
same hour, but some at one time, and some at another; neither does he make
the Word effectual at all times at the first hearing, for the strong man armed
will not quickly leave his Luke 11.
possession. But many live long under the ministry of the same, before they
believe and embrace it, yet at the last God touches the hearts of many, to
attend and to be saved. What though they do not find that comfortable return
of their labors: are not some to lay the foundation, and others to raise up
the building? Is not the Word to be the savor of death to some, as it is to be
the sweet savor of life to other-some? Is not their reward with the Lord, Esa.
49.4.5
and their recompense with their God? And unto this day must Parents and
Masters be provoked to set forward the Lords work, by the conscionable
performance of Oeconomicall duties, they must be helpefull unto the Minister
this way; it is not enough for them to bring their people to Church, and to
cast them off so unto the Minister, his burden is too great if thou help not.
The Apostle calls Philemon, Phil. 1.
his fellow labourer: no doubt it was in regard he so fitted and prepared his
family for Paul's ministry. And for this, many of Gods worthy servants are
highly commended in the Word, as Abraham, Genesis 18. Iesh, 24. Acts 10.
Iosuah, Cornelius. The Parent and Master is as straightly charged with their
families, as the Minister with the congregation: and if any under them do dye
for want of instruction, the Lord will require the blood of such a one at their
hands.

VERSE 40. Do thou not fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation?


HItherto we have heard the Reprehension, of the Penitent Thief in general.
He rebuked him.

Now the Evangelist comes to set down the particulars of his reprehension,
with those several arguments and reasons to make the same the more effectual:
for he that is to deal with rebellious and obstinate sinners, had need to
bring with him very moving and effectual arguments to dissuade from sin.

Now his arguments are:

1. A persona: From the nature of the person against whom he rayled. God.

2. A timore Dei: From the fear of God, the want whereof was the cause of his
blasphemy.

3. A praesente miseria: From his present misery, Knowing thou art in the same
condemnation.

4. A iusto, iudicio: From the equity of his punishment, We are instly
punished.

5. Ab innocentia Christi: From Christ's innocence, This man has done nothing
amiss.

All which being duly consiclered, are very powerful motives and arguments,
to set on his reprehension, and to make the same the more effectual.

And thus does this Penitent manifest the truth of his conversion by many
blessed fruits and effects thereof: The particulars whereof follow.

Fear thou not God?
q. d. O wretched man that now suffering the due reward of thy sin, should
thus blaspheme an Innocent, even the Lord Jesus Christ himself, from whom
salvation comes. Even him before whom thou art shortly to appear, to give an
account of all thy evil deeds; is there no fear of God at all with thee, that
thou so maliciously blasphemest? Thus he takes him up roundly, and lets him see
who it was that he blasphemed, and whence it was that he brake out in this wise
against Christ; The want of Gods fear.

Fear thou not God?
He does not say, Do thou mock; But, Fear thou not God? Because he would
give him to understand, against whom his sin did extend and reach it self,
namely, God himself.

For no doubt the Impenitent Thief was of the same opinion with the common
people, A persona.
that Christ was a mere man, and that his reproachful speeches reached not so
high as God. And therefore this was his first argument he takes up to make his
reprehension so much the more effectual, that in railing against Christ, he
rayled against God; his sin did reach up to God himself. Note we hence,

That the mockings, reproaches, The afflictions of the godly reach unto Christ.
and persecutions done against the godly, reach unto God himself. Whosoever
mocketh a servant of God, mocketh God himself. When Saul being a Pharisee
persecuted the Church, the voice from heaven was, Act. 9.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Let no man put me to business (says
Paul) for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. Even so all those
raylings of Sennacherib, Whom have thou reproached and blasphemed? 2. Kin.
19.22.
and against whom have thou exalted thy voice? and lifted up thine eyes on
high, even against the holy one of Israel. And our Savior shows that he
takes whatsoever is done unto his members, Mat. 25.
as done unto himself, whether good or evil, and accordingly rewards the
one, and punishes the other. So that whosoever mocketh or reproacheth a
servant of Christ, mocketh Christ himself in them. Of this before. Now the
reasons are.

First, that is betwixt Christ and every true believer; he is their head, they
his members. Now what member does not sympathize with the other member, in
every natural body, either in weal or woe? If one member suffer (says the
Apostle) all the members suffer with it. Thus is it in the mystical body.

Secondly, Zach 2.
He that touches you, touches the apple of my eye, says God. He is
therefore called their Father, their Rock, their Yower, and their strong
Refuge.

Which serves to discover unto us, at last to bring down judgments upon them.

Secondly, Yet he that dwells on high is mightier: who partaketh with them in
all their sufferings.

And last of all,

Fear thou not God?
As before this Penitent has reproved the horrible blasphemy of his fellow: A
timore Dei.
so in these words he goes on to show and to discover unto him from what a
filthy and stinking fountain the same proceeded, namely, from the want of Gods
fear in his heart.

So that he leads him from the stream to the fountain, and from the fruit
shows him the bitter root from whence those blasphemies sprang, namely, this,
the want of the fear of God in his heart. And herein will teach us,

That the want of the fear of God is the cause of all sin. The want of the
fear of God the cause of all sin. 2. Kin. 17.34.
From this evil fountain does flow all the evil that is in the world; They
fear not me, says the Lord. Such men must needs run headlong into all kind
of wickedness, for what should restrain them, when the fear of God is
wanting? By a Prosopopeia the Prophet David brings in the transgressions of
the wicked, speaking thus: Psalm. 36.1.
The transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear
of God before their eyes. The open profaneness of wicked men seemed to
proclaim this openly in the ears of the Prophet, that such bade defiance to
al godliness, and wanting the fear of God, we may see the further behavior
of such in the latter part of that Psalm. So Paul having reckoned up a bedroll
of many horrible sins, he adds this as the cause of all, The fear of God
is not before their eyes. Romans 3.18.


Abraham knew this full well, when he caused Sarah to say she was his sister,
Genesis 20.11
that the men of Gerar would not care to commit any sin: Why? Because the
fear of God was not in that place. And what may be the reason that at this
day men break out, Hos. 4.2.
as the Prophet speaks, into lying, killing, whoring, etc. The reason is
plain, the fear of God is wanting.

On the contrary, where the true fear of God is, it will fence a man from
sin. Joseph confirmed the timorous hearts of his brethren, that they should
fear no evil at his hands, why? Genesis 42.18
I fear God, says he: this was it that fenced the heart of Joseph against
the allurements of his adulterous Mistress. Genesis 39.10
This kept the Midwines of Egypt from laying hands upon the Infants of the
Hebrews, the Text says, The Midwiues feared God. Exodus 1.17
And The fear of God (says Solomon) is to depart from evil. This makes a
man to live always in Gods presence, to be the same before God that he is
before men; and to be the same before all men that he is before some; to be the
same in the darkness, that he is in the light; and to be the same in the night
that he is in the day.

And hence is it that the Lord himself does so earnestly wish for this thing
in his people: O that there were such an heart in them, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
that they would fear me always, etc. as the only thing that keeps the
heart upright with him, and fenceth the same against all sin. Whereas when
this fear of God is wanting, such a one is fit for any sin, lies open to
every assault of Satan, and cannot escape cuill.

And the reason hereof is taken from the nature of Gods fear,

But what manner of fear is this,

There is, I confess,

Whereas that servile and slavish fear that is in wicked men, looks only to
the punishment, as the gally-slaue to the whip, and that many times does
terrify him; as for sin it self, it does no whit trouble him; nay, as
Solomon says, It is a pastime to the fool to do wickedly.

But may not Gods children abstain from sin for fear of Gods wrath,

I answer, needle, that makes way for the thread to follow. And thus have the
godly at first feared God, even for his judgments sake, as Paul testifies
when he says, Romans 8.15.
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again. Wherein is
employed, that there is a time wherein the children of God fear God for his
judgments: but now, says he, Ye have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby
ye cry, Abba, Father: and that is the spirit of freedom and of boldness. So
that the child of God is not always held under that slavish fear, but comes
at last to fear God out of love to him, and abstaineth from sin not so much
for punishment sake, as for the detestation he bears to it, and because it
offends so good and so gracious a God. Yea though there were no hell at all
to punish sin, yet would he not willingly commit sin out of that awful
respect he bears to so good a God and loving Father in Jesus Christ.

Now because this love is not perfect in the child of God, neither any other
grace whilst we live here, there will be still a remnant of servile fear
remaining even in the best, as Job says, Punishment was fearful unto him.
Job 31.23.
Neither are they exempted from all fear of Gods judgments, in as much as the
remembrance hereof is an excellent preservative against sin. Psalm. 119.120.
So David, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments. David had in him a sonne-like fear of God, fearing him out of
love; yet in the second place, he stood in awe of his judgments.

This serves then first of al to discover unto us in what a wretched and
miserable estate and condition such men are in, Romans 3.12, 13, 14, 15.
Mark the Apostle, Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they
have used deceit, the poison of Aspes is under their lips: whose mouth is full
of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood, destruction and
misery is in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known. But what
might be the reason of all these vile and filthy abominations? the Apostle
subioynes, There is no fear of God before their eyes. Abraham knew this when
he caused Sarah his wife to dissemble, and to say she was his Sister, and
therefore woeful and miserable is the estate and condition of such, whom the
Lord has thus given over to themselves and to their own hearts lust, and want
this holy fear to preserve them.

Secondly, God, that we may truly say, The Lord is our fear, Esaias 8.13.
our dread. This will fence us from sin, and arm us against every evil way,
such are freed from those vile abominations wherewith the lives of all wicked
men for the most part are tainted withal. Yea, the fear of God is such an
excellent thing, that all the duties we owe unto God, Eccl. 12.13
are comprehended therein; Let us hear the end of all (says Solomon) fear
God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man.

Yea, The privileges that belong to them that truly fear God.
to such belong all these excellent privileges and prerogatives.

First, they shall not want any temporal good thing, O fear the Lord O ye
his Saints, Psalm. 34.9. Psalm. 112.3
for there is no want to them that fear him.

Secondly, The secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him. Psalm. 25.14.


Thirdly, Psalm 34.7.
The Angels of the Lord encampe round about them that fear him.

Fourthly, Mal. 3.16.
A book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord.

And last of all, Psalm. 31.19.
O how great is the goodness which God has laid up for them that fear him!

All which may be so many moti^es to stir us up to get this fear of God, which
has the promise of this life, and the life to come, and to whom alone so many
excullent privileges belong and appertain.

Seeing thou art in the same condemnation.
In these words we have his third Argument, Argument.
to dissuade his fellow from that his railing on Christ, and this is taken from
his own present misery; A presenti miseria.
Thou art (says he) in the same condemnation, q.d. Fie upon thee most
desperate wretch! Is this the behavior meet for him that is now going to give
up his last account before the great Tribunal, and that Judge of all the
world, before whom thou art shortly to appear to give account of all the
actions of thy life past, especially of this thy blasphemy against the Lord
Jesus the innocent? And herein as before, this penitent Thief shows an
excellent fruit of his own repentance, pressing his fellow with this Argument,
the consideration of his present misery, and punishment that was now upon him,
Thou art in the same condemnation: Note we hence,

That punishments and afflictions, Afflictions that summon to death, should in
a special manner cause men to look home.
especially such as summon to death, should in a special manner cause us to
look home, humble us, and cause us to break off our sins by repentance, and
when they produce not this effect, especially when death approaches, and we are
to come to appear before the Lords Tribunal, it is a sign indeed that the
heart is desperately wretched and sinful. It is the maine end wherefore the
Lord does send afflictions to bring men home by repentance; thus confesses the
Church, Lam. 3.39.40.
Man suffers for his sin, let us search and try our ways, and turn unto
the Lord; and again, Come let us return unto the Lord, Hos. 6.1.
for he has wounded us, and he will heal us, he has smitten us, and he will
bind us up. The happy fruit thereof, David confesses by that comfortable
experience he had in himself, Psalm. 119.71
saying, It is good for me that I have been in trouble, that I may learn thy
commandments. When we are judged, (says the Apostle) we are chastened of the
Lord, 1 Cor. 11.32.
that we should not be condemned with the world. The Rod makes the child to
stand in awe of the Father, and the Scholar of the Master, and the Blewnesse
of the wound, Pro. 20.30
(says Solomon) serves to purge the evil. 2 Chro. 33.12.
When did Manasses repent, was it not when he was in tribulation? When came the
Prodigal son to himself, Luke 15.
and got the happy resolution to return again to his Father, was it not when
he was pinched with the famine. It was in the time of adversity, that the
Israelites remembered GOD to be their strength, who in times of prosperity,
rebelled against him. Judge. 6.
Ephraim may thank the Lord for his corrections, that he was reclaimed and
brought to see his own disobedience and rebellion against God, Ier. 31.18.10.
Esa. 38.14.
who was as an untamed Hayfer. The like we may see in Hezechiah, in Job, and in
all Gods people: if there be any faith, any hope, any grace at all in the heart
of man, now is the time for the exercise thereof, when afflictions, especially
such as summon to death and judgment; are upon us. It seemed unto this godly
Penitent, a most heinous thing indeed in his fellow, yea, the height and top of
all impiety, that now the hand of God was upon him, and he so shortly to
depart this life, and to make his last account before the Judge of all the
world, that he should in this reproachful manner blaspheme an innocent, even
the Lord Jesus Christ himself, before whom he was shortly to appear, and to
give account of all the things that he had done in the flesh.

But what shall I say? There are some whom all the torments in the world cannot
move or make them better; sickness, poverty, shame in the world, all the
buffettings of Satan, or miseries that can be thought upon, alas, move them
not, nor any whit affect them, to work remorse of conscience, compunction or
sorrow for sin, to make them any whit the better. But what may be the reason?
can any affliction press out of the creature, that was never in it? If a whole
mountain were laid upon a dry or rotten stick, will it yield any sap? no,
no, it will first be ground to powder. The impenitent Thief for all his misery
that he was in, or thoughts of death, or of judgment, that now were upon him,
is not brought to the least remorse of conscience for sin; but the Penitent
Thief he being under the same affliction, yields the sweet sap and liquor of
faith and repentance; he confesses his sins, pleads Christ's cause, and
compassionates the misery of his fellow, and shows most admirable fruits of
repentance. Yea, if there be any grace at all in the heart of man, now is the
time for it to show it self, otherwise we perish without hope.

Seeing then that afflictions should thus make us to look home, will
manifestly appear. This shows the misery of every wicked man, that as he has
been a stranger from the life of grace in life, so must needs want the comfort
of grace in death; as they have lived, so commonly they dye; and in them that
is verified oftentimes that is said of Nabal, their hearts dye like stones
within them, like unto a beast: Or else as they have minded the world, their
lusts and pleasures; of these things they speak, and their minds run after
them even to the last. Behold here in this impenitent Thief, a spectacle
wherein every wicked man may behold himself; as he was graceless and
wretched living, he speaks naught but the language of hell dying, as his
life; so was his death, wretched was he lining, and cursed and miserable is he
dying.

Secondly,

VERSE 41. We indeed are justly punished,


IN these words, Argument.
the Penitent comes to his fourth Argument, to dissuade his fellow from
reuiling of Christ, and this is drawn from the e^^ity and justness of their
punishment and present misery, A Iusto Iudicio.
We indeed are justly punished, for we, etc.

Q.d. This present death we are now to suffer, be it never so vile,
shameful, ignominious, or accursed, we ought with patience to bear the same,
for therein we are but justly punished. Our sins we have committed, and
wherein we have continued, have brought upon our heads this deserved
punishment. Micha 7.9
We ought therefore to bear with patience the Lords wrath, because we have
sinned against him.

And herein we have another admirable fruit of his faith and repentance:
confessing, 1 His sin. 2 Gods justice.


We are justly punished,
The Penitent Thief, He confesses his sin.
falls into a hearty confession of their sins, and herein likewise manifests
the truth of his repentance. And will herein teach us and all men unto the end
of the world.

That unto true repentance, Unto true repentance, confession of sins is
necessary.
where the heart is truly and thoroughly touched with compunction and sorrow
for sin, it will tune the tongue, and set it on work, about the hearty
acknowledgement of the same. This Penitent herein may be an excellent pattern
unto us, who manifests herein the fruit of a wounded spirit and a broken
heart, in the sense of sin, he sticks not to shame himself, that God may
have the glory, making a humble and hearty acknowledgement of his sin, and
the world therein a witness of his unfeigned repentance, and indeed, to such
only belongs the promise of remission of sins. Pro. 28.13
He that hides his sins, shall not prosper, but he that confesses them,
and forsakes them, shall find mercy.

And again, 1 Io. 1.9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. And hence is it that we shall
find the servants of God very frequent in this duty, in the times of their
humiliation and conversion unto God. Thus Daniel confesses his own sins,
and the sins of the people, Dan. 5.9.
We have sinned (says he) and have committed iniquity, and have done
wickedly; yea, we have rebelled, and have departed from thy precepts, and from
thy judgments. Thus Ezra, that Noble and religious Scribe; Ezra 9.6.
O my God, I am ashamed and confounded to lift up my eyes to thee, for our
iniquities are increased over our heads, and our trespass is gone up to
heaven. So Esaias the Prophet, We have all been as an unclean thing, Esaias 64.6.
and all our righteousness is as filthy clouts, and we do all fade like a
leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have taken us away.

An excellent and admirable example whereof we have in the Prophet David, who
when Nathan the Lords Prophet had convinced him of his sins, he presently
falls to the confession of them, 2. Sam. 12.13.
I have sinned against the Lord, etc. And in that Penitential Psalm of his,
Psalm. 51.2.
penned of purpose to make known unto the world that his unfeigned repentance
for the same, he is very exact that way throughout the whole Psalm. This
appears in those Conuerts won unto the Church by the Ministry of the
Baptist, Mat. 3.6.
They were baptized of John in Iordane, confessing their sins. And of those
Conuerts of Ephesus, Act. 19.18.
it is said, that Many that believed came and confessed, etc. The like
acknowledgement is made by Paul of his misled life, whilst he lived in the
state of a Pharisee, 1. Tim. 1.13 18.
I was (says he) a blasphemer, a persecuter, and an oppressor, etc. And
excellent to this purpose is that of the Prodigal son, Luke 15.18.
a lively pattern of a true Penitent, and a lively picture of a reclaimed
sinner, having run riot a long time, and by affliction at last brought to
know himself. What is his resolution but this, by his confession to make
satisfaction to his Father whom he had offended: I will go to my Father, and
say, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, etc. And as his
resolution and purpose was, so was his practice. And indeed true repentance
cannot be silent, when the heart is truly pricked it cannot forbear, it is
like a vessel full pent with liquor, if it have not some vent it will break;
it is one of the most sovereign salues for sin. Yea, Erroris medicina est
confessio.
as an Ancient well observes, The bands of sin are loosed when they are
confessed. Nothing does more bewray a broken heart within, then an open
acknowledgement of sin. What led that poor Publicane to that remorsefull
supplication mixed with confession, God be merciful to me a sinner. Luke 18.13.
A lively representation of the true contrition that was in his heart, that he
held himself but vile and sinful in Gods sight.

And indeed as nothing can be more needful and necessary to testify the
inward sorrow of heart for sin, then an hearty acknowledgement of the same:
so there is nothing more contrary to the corrupt nature of man, then in this
sort to shame himself, to give God the praise. And therefore it is a good
observation of an Ancient, Mirentur quicunque volent, etc. Gregor.
Let men admire what they please in other men, I know (says he) through the
infirmity of our nature, that the godly find it an harder thing to confess
sin after it is committed, then to repress it before. Surely it is no small
evidence of grace in the heart, when a man is thrust forward, readily to
confess his faults to God, and unto man, as the case may require, by whose
advice and prayers he may receive comfort. The reasons follow.

First, David, when he says, Against thee only have I sinned. Psalm. 51.4.
The sin of David was the shedding of the innocent blood of Vriah, and the
defiling of his wife. But yet the violating and breaking of Gods most righteous
Law, wherein God became to be offended, was it that went nearest the heart of
David. Now if all sin be against God, it is requisite that we should make
confession of the same to him.

Secondly, If we confess our sins, 1. Ioh. 1.9.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. Now as we expect that the Lord should show us mercy in the
pardon of our sins, it is requisite that we should perform those conditions
which are required on our part, namely, to come unto him in an humble
acknowledgement of the same.

Thirdly, it is he only that has power to forgive sins. This truth is
confessed by the Scribes and Pharisees, whose judgments howsoever they were
corrupt in many things, yet were sound in this, Mar. 2.7.
Who can forgive sins (say they) but God only? Now reason would that we make
confession of our sins only to him that has power to forgive sins. But
this is only in God, therefore to him must we go to make confession of the
same.

Fourthly, the reason that Iosuah urges unto Acan, Ios. 7.19.
My son, I pray thee give glory to God, and confess thy fault. Where he
ioynes these two together, Gods glory, and the confession of our faults. For
sin indeed does not serve more to the dishonor of God, then does an hearty
confession of the same, serve to his honor. And this is the reason why Gods
servants having sinned, have been content to shame themselves, by confessing
the same, knowing indeed it would bring so much glory to God.

Fifthly, penitently, and heartily, it will be a corasiue unto his heart all
the days of his life after, and make him to dread those sins that bring such a
tail of sorrow with them in the end.

Sixthly, David is led unto this duty to make an hearty confession of his
sins, Psalm. 51.4.
That thou (says he) may be justified in thy sayings, and true when thou
iudgest. Nehe. 1.7. Dan. 9.5. Ezra 9.6.
This is clear likewise in those excellent prayers of Nehemiah, Daniel, Ezra,
etc.

And last of all, suites we put up to God, for never is a poor sinner more
earnest in his requests for mercy, then when he is most sensible of his own
misery, and in the sense thereof has been led to an hearty acknowledgement
of the same. This makes men importunate suitors, Dan. 9.19. Ezra 9.6. Nehe. 1.11
Mat. 15.
such as will have no nay, as it appears in Daniel, Ezra, David, the
Cananitish woman, and the like.

This serves first of all to reprove diverse abuses about the performance of
this duty of confession of sins, Auricular confession of sins in the ears
of the Priest, and that upon pain of damnation, Radford his Directory page 114.
for these are their own words: Every one under the pain of damnation is bound
to confess to a lawful Priest his sin; A doctrine that has not one
Scripture in all the book of God, urging the necessity of such a confession.
Nay contrarily to many a one many a time, did our Savior give absolution of
sin, where there was no particular confession thereof made unto him: as that
man in the Gospel that was sick of the palsy, upon Christ's sight of his
faith, he pronounced thus, Mat. 9.2.
Son thy sins be forgiven thee. And so to penitent Mary, testifying her
repentance for sin by her abundant tears, Ioh. 7.
our Savior pronounced, Thy sins are forgiven thee. But this is a subtle
net which our Adversaries, like cunning Fishers of men, have framed to catch
men's goods, to enrich themselves, to discover men's secrets, even in the
Councels of Princes; and for the Priest to know where to have one for his turn.

But does not Saint James say, Iam. 5.18.
Confess your faults one to another?

This is the Scripture I confess that is principally urged by our Adversaries,
Auricular confession. But by this Scripture the Priest is bound as straightly
to shriue himself to the penitent, as the penitent to the Priest, for S. James
requires it as a mutual duty.

Indeed that there is a lawful and commendable duty to be performed amongst
Christians in confessing of their faults one to another, was never denied by
us, it is that we often call upon and provoke men unto. But yet in these two
cases especially.

First, Cases of private confession
in private and personal injuries and wrongs done one to another, it is
requisite that we should come and confess our faults one to another, and to
seek forgiveness, and to labor a reconciliation.

Secondly, in case of trouble of conscience, to the end we may not sink under
the burden thereof, or any way give advantage unto Satan to have the greater
power over us, it is an excellent thing to disburthen our souls by confession
of our particular sins unto some godly Minister, or some faithful Christian,
that is known to be a man of wisdom and conscience, able to minister
comfort: in these cases it is a most commendable duty.

But we hold it not as a matter of absolute necessity to confess unto men, as
the Church of Rome does, neither do we tie this duty to the Priests ear, but
hold that it may be performed also to a faithful Christian, albeit but a
private man who is able to minister a word of comfort, and to bear another
burden in love.

Secondly, Confession. Feign they would have God to pardon their sins, but
they yet never framed any Indictment against themselves; feign they would
escape the judgment of God, but they cannot endure to judge themselves. And of
these there are four sorts.

First, We are all sinners. And, God forgive us, there is none without sin.
But yet they never came truly to see any one sin, how sin has made them
guilty of Gods wrath and vengeance, and without repentance, makes them liable
unto everlasting damnation: this knowledge of sin whilst they are ignorant
of, there can be no true joy nor hearty acknowledgement of sin, and so no
hope of pardon. It is the knowledge of the Word we know, that brings men to the
sight of their sins, to an hearty acknowledgement of the same to God, and
teaches them how to pray for the pardon of the same, which whilst men remain
ignorant of, it is impossible to perform these duties aright.

Secondly, Gehezi, 2 Reg. 5.25. Acts 5.3.
who being questioned of his Master, Thy Servant went no whither, says he; and
this was the behavior of Ananias and Saphira, who rather then they would
glorify God by confessing their fault, sinned yet more and more, by lying unto
the holy Ghost. We have too many of such amongst us, that unless you be able
to testify upon proof, will hardly be brought to confess any thing: wherein
the policy of Satan does notably appear, to take away shame where it should
be in the committing of sin, and to put it where it should not be, in the
confession of the same. Whereas a true confessor will be his own greatest
enemy, racking his sin to the utmost pin, that God may have the glory, and
the sinner his deserved shame.

Thirdly, this is that corruption we have drawn from our first Parents. How
did Adam post off the matter to his Wife, when the Lord expostulated the matter
with him; Genesis 3.12.13.
The woman (says he) whom thou gave me, she gave me of the fruit, and I did
eat. And the woman, she laid the blame upon the Serpent, and thus sin is
poasted off from one to another. Thus is it now, no sin can be so vile, but
men are ready to plead for it, and therein hold a buckler over Satan's head,
for fear he should receive a blow. Drunkenness, say they, is but good
fellowship, whordome and uncleanness but a trick of youth, covetousness and
usury but good husbandry: Thus pay they one debt with another, Culpa cum
defenditur geminatur.
and by excusing and defending of sin, make themselves more inexcusable, and
their sins unpardonable.

And yet we have a fourth sort of wicked men, that outstrip all that went
before, and they are such who are so far from confessing their sins, as that
they brag and boast of their vile abominations; how they laid up such and such
to sleep at such a time, what pranks they played elsewhere, some for
Drunkenness, some for uncleanness, some for one wickedness, and some for
another, who glory in their shame, and whose damnation does not sleep. From
whence should I fetch the charity to hope of the conversion and salvation of
such a one? Surely if the Lord give not a great measure of repentance, the very
blackness of darkness is reserved for such at the judgment of the last day.

And last of all this may serve to exhort us, one in the fear of God, seek to
get to our selves this testimony of our unfeigned conversion; By making a hearty
confession of our sins unto God. Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the kingdom of heaven, says our Savior: it is not every slight
confession of sin that will serve the turn; nothing is more common in the
world, then to hear men say, I am a sinner, and all men are sinners, and the
like, these are grown words of course; this and more then this has been the
confession of Cain, Pharaoh, Saul, Judas, etc. and yet were damned: if then we
would speed better then these did, we must learn to confess better then they
did. And that we may do so, regard is to be had unto three particulars.

First, Properties of true confession.
that our confession of sin proceed from a good ground, from a heart that is
truly humbled, and broken in the sense of sin. For there is nothing can be
more acceptable unto God, then the hearty confession of a sinner, a confession
that comes from a broken heart. So David, A broken and contrite heart, Psalm.
51.17
O God thou will not despise. Such was the confession of the Publican, God be
merciful to me a sinner. He fetched up his conversion from his heart. That
confession of sin that comes but from the mouth, and not from the heart,
returns unto us again empty, without comfort, being in Gods esteem but a
maimed sacrifice, a lame offering that is not accepted with him; and hence it
is that all those formal confessions of hypocrites and wicked men, It must be
hearty.
have fled to God, and confessed their sins, when the rod of God has been
upon them, as upon Pharaoh, Saul, Judas, etc. and that for fear of further
punishment, and not out of hatred against sin, has been in Gods esteem
most abominable, no way moving the Lord to pity, nor to compassionate his
creature in their misery.

Secondly, We must confess our particular sins.
it is requisite that we should come to particulars, not summing them up
together in a gross sum, but laying them open in the special kinds
thereof; even as a Patient that is sick, lays open unto the Physician, every
particular of his infirmity, in what place the grief is, in what manner it
holds him, when and how he is troubled; and thus have the servants of God
done in their confession of sin, and have found comfort therein: thus David,
Against thee have I sinned, Psalm. 51.4.
and done this evil in thy sight. David did not post off the matter with a
general acknowledgement, we are all sinners, and so am I, but he confesses
his particular sins, and prays God to deliver him from bloud-guiltinesse: 2 Samuel 24.10.
I have sinned exceedingly in that I have done. So Paul confesses, that he
was a Persecuter, a Blasphemer, and an Oppressor. 1 Timothy 1.13
And no question this was the reason why Peter in that Sermon of his unto the
Jews, pressed so hard upon this point, Ye are they which have crucified the
Lord of life; Acts 2.23: 36.
That hereby he might bring them to the knowledge and acknowledgement of their
special sins. This is it that wounds the heart to the quick, humbles the
soul, and gives sound testimony that the repentance of such a one is true and
unfeigned. And this is it indeed, that puts the difference between that formal
confession of sins that is to be seen in hypocrites and wicked men, who will
not stick at a general acknowledgement of sin, as we have heard before,
whereas the godly Christian, and penitent soul, is ready to charge himself
before God with the particulars of his faylings, and disobedience before him.

Thirdly, unto true confession, A resolution for the time to come to forsake
sin.
there must be joined a purpose and resolution in heart for the time to come,
to leave and forsake sin: for this is all in all in the matter of confession,
for otherwise wicked men themselves have gone very far in the bare duty of
confession. No question Cain, Pharaoh, Saul, Judas, for the matter of
confession did it very freely; yea, they could very willingly have confessed
much more against themselves, when the judgments of God were upon them, and
their consciences were upon the rack. But this proceeded not out of
indignation against sin, as displeasing unto God, but out of the sense of their
present misery, as it may appear by their relaps into the same sins, when Gods
hand was removed. That confession of sin was never sound, Confessio sine
emendatione est professio peccati. Esaias 55.7.
that produces no change nor alteration in the life of the confessor. Let the
wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and
return unto the Lord, etc. It is an excellent thing with good Senacherib so to
confess, Ezra 10.23
as that we may make a covenant and league with the Lord, never to have to do
again with those sins we have made confession of unto him. This is the
condition Samuel makes with the people, If ye be come again unto the Lord
with all your heart, 1 Samuel 7.3
put away (says he) the strange gods from amongst you. And this has been
ever the blessed fruit of sound confession of sin, and of true conversion unto
God in all Gods people.

Justly punished,
How far this Penitent charge himself in regard of his sin, Clears Gods
justice.
we have heard before in his hearty confession of the same.

The next remarkable thing to be observed in this Text, is his subscribing
unto that their deserved punishment. We are justly punished, for we receive
the due reward of our deeds.

q. d. Thou art greatly deceived to think that because we three do suffer
punishment alike, that therefore our deserts are all alike, no, This man has
done nothing amiss, or worthy of this death, for he suffers as an innocent;
But we for our parts, suffer righteously, and by reason of our evil deeds that
we have done, receive but our deserts.

Behold we here again another admirable fruit of his repentance, and
conversion unto God, that he can and does so readily and willingly subscribe
unto his deserved punishment, without any manner of grudging or repining. And
herein also will teach all men unto the end of the world,

That Gods children, Godly submit themselves ^o Gods seuerest corrections
without repining.
submit themselves to Gods seuerest corrections without grudging or repining.
This Penitent Thief herein may be a lively pattern and example of the true
disposition that is in every true convert. That when they shall once come truly
to see sin, they can with all readiness submit themselves unto Gods seuerest
corrections without repining, acknowledging that therein the Lord is most just
and righteous: thus this Penitent here, howsoever, says he, our punishment be
sharp and shameful, bitter and cruel, yet our mouths are stopped, and we
have nothing to plead for our selves: For we receive the due reward of our
deeds. He acknowledges the Lord to be just and righteous in laying of that
punishment upon them. This disposition we find to have been in Job, who being
laid in the dust, and brought full low, by reason of Gods hand; This is
recorded to his everlasting praise: Job 1.22.
In all this did not Job sin, nor charge God foolishly: That is, he did not
any way question Gods justice, in dealing so severely with him. I do not deny
but that some weakness did break out from him that way, as it does many times
in the best of Gods servants, but this was at that time when the burden of his
sorrows did oppress him; but he afterward corrects his error, Job 39.37.
Once have I spoken (says he) but I will answer no more.

This we may see in Hezekiah, who when the Prophet Isaiah had denounced the
Lords judgment against him, Isa. 39.8.
namely, that all those goodly treasures that he, in the pride of his heart,
had showed unto the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon, should be carried away
into Babylon, does he repine and murmr against the Prophet for this tidings?
Does he any way go about to excuse his fact, that it was but that Courtlike
entertainment fit for an Ambassador of so great a Prince, or the like. Surely
no, but he buckels handsomely to the judgment threatened, being conscious unto
his own sin, and says, The word of the Lord is good that thou have spoken.
Excellent to this purpose is that of the Prophet David, when Nathan the Lords
Prophet had denounced those several judgments against him and his house, that
the Infant conceined in adultery should die, that his own wives should be
defiled, that the sword should never depart from his house. How does David
behave himself in the midst of all these judgments threatened, does he
complain that the Lord dealt hardly with him? No. But falls to the confession
of his fault, taking all upon himself, accusing himself, and excusing the
Lord, Psalm. 51.4.
Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. And the
reason hereof is added, That thou might be just when thou speak, and true
when thou iudgest.

q. d. I dare not say, that thou have in the least respect dealt hardly with
me, insomuch as I have deserved that all these judgments should light upon
me: Even so at other times when he tasted of Gods rod. Never child was more
submissiue to the corrections of a Father, then David was. Memorable is that
speech of his, Psalm. 119.75.
I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are good, and that thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled.

To this accords the example of old Eli, when Samuel told him, 1 Samuel 3.18.
That the Lord would do a thing in Israel, that whosoever should hear thereof
his ears should tingle. Meaning indeed the judgment the Lord would bring upon
him and his house: how does he behave himself under this heavy denunciation
threatened, It is the Lord (says he) let him do as it pleases him. By which
answer of his, we may collect how sensible he was of his own sin, in his
indulgent behavior toward his sons, and takes the same as a just punishment
from heaven upon the same.

Of this spirit, no doubt, savors that of the Prodigal, Luke 15.
I will go to my Father, and I will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and before thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy son. Read we
over the prayers of Gods Church and people, at such times as Gods wrath has
broken out upon them, and his judgments have layne heavy upon them. Have they
not still acknowledged the Lord to be most just? Thus Ezra in the behalf of
the people. Ezra 9.10
Now our God what shall we say, for we have forsaken thy commandments. Neh.
9.33.
Thus Nehemiah, Surely thou art just in all that is come upon us. Dan. 9.7.
Thus Daniel, O Lord righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us shame. Yea
Micah personating the whole Church, and people of God, in times of great
affliction and sore adversity: Mich. 7.9.
I will bear with patience the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him. By which examples and diverse more of that kind, recorded in Gods Book,
we may see the property of a true convert, and of an heart truly humbled
forsinne, it can willingly and readily take all upon it self, and still
acquit the Lord of injustice, or hard dealing, when his judgments lie most
heavy upon them.

Whereas on the contrary, if we look upon the behavior of wicked men, when
the Lord most justly has overtaken them in their wickedness, we shall hear
them grudging, repining, and complaining, as if the Lord were not just in
punishing them so severely, Genesis 4.13.
My punishment (says Cain) is greater then I can bear. Saul, can plead for
himself, 1. Sam. 15.20.
as if his punishment were not just. And so the Prophet Malachy brings in the
wicked pleading against God: Mal. 1.6.
Wherein have we despised thy Name? or wherein have we been stout against him?
As if the Prophet had taken his aim amiss, and done them great wrong, to
charge them on that wise. O the wickedness that is in an impenitent heart! The
point is clear and plain, the reasons briefly are,

First, He rewards every man according to his works, Psalm. 62.12.
says the Psalmist. God does not proceed against any in judgment upon malice,
or upon suspicion, but upon just ground, before whom all things are open and
naked. And hence is it that the Lord pleads this his integrity and justice
against the people of Israel, Are not my ways equal? Eze. 18.2.
and are not your ways unequal?

Secondly, Psalm. 39.9.
I was dumb (says David) and opened not my mouth because thou did it.

And again, My soul keeps silence unto God. The godly cannot but know, that
they are their sins that have provoked God to anger, and provoked him to
displcasure. Lam. 3.39
Man suffers for his sin. And the consideration hereof does humble them,
and cause them to bear with patience the Lords corrections.

Seeing then in this Penitent Thief acknowledging that his punishment to be so
just,

Hereby then we may take good trial of the integrity of our own hearts, and
of the truth of our own repentance. Has the hand of God been upon us at any
time in any kind, whether on our bodies by long and tedious sickness, or any
other misery on our goods, names, estates, of what kind soever, how have we
behaved our selves, and been affected under the same? Corrupt nature in this
case will be ready to stand upon terms of justification, as if we were
hardly dealt withal. But a sanctified spirit and gracious heart can willingly
stoop unto God, Isa. 39.8.
and say with Hezekiah, The word of the Lord is good, which thou have spoken.
Neh. 9.33.
And with good Nehemiah, Lord thou art just in all that is come upon us.

If in times of affliction and adversity, we have behaved our selves in this
sort; This is a good testimony unto our own hearts, of the true humiliation
and conversion of the same unto God. But if on the contrary part upon trial
had, we find that we were never yet so sensible of our sins, nor
apprehensiue of our misery, to know and acknowledge that we have deserved at
Gods hand his sharpest plagues, and seuerest corrections, so that in the
midst of them all we could say, Lam. 3.39.
It is the Lords mercy we are not consumed; We can have no sound comfort in our
souls, that the true work of grace and conversion is wrought in us.

Secondly, from repentance and true conversion, which go on sleepily in a
course of life, and are not humbled when the Lord corrects.

And last of all we are taught here,

But this man has done nothing amiss.
In these words we have the third proof that manifests the truth of this
Penitents conversion, Justifies Christ's innocence
and that is his justifying of Christ's innocence. This man has done nothing
amiss. Argument. A^ innocer (...) tia Christi.
And this is that fifth and last Argument that he uses to his fellow, to
dissuade him from reproaching of Christ, and so to stop him in his course of
sin, and this is taken from Christ's innocence.

Q.d. Wretched man that thou art, think thou that because this man suffers
the like punishment with thee and me, that therefore his cause was alike? no,
We are justly punished. The most righteous God has now justly overtaken us in
our sinful and wretched course of life, and now we reap but the just reward
of our own works. But this man, what evil has he done? he suffers as an
innocent, he has done nothing worthy this cursed death. And herein as before,
we see the admirable fruit of his faith and repentance, that now at this time,
when all mocked Christ, Pilate condemns him, Judas betrayeth him, the
Disciples forsake him, and Peter denies him, that now at this time he should
stick thus to Christ, and acknowledge his Deity in the lowest degree of his
humiliation; this was the fruit of an admirable faith indeed: whose example may
commend unto all men a most necessary duty.

That every faithful Christian should be ready at all times to speak for
Christ, A true Christian must at all times speak for Christ.
to stand up in the defense of the truth, and not to suffer his name to be
blasphemed, nor his word or truth to be dishonored. And surely the
circumstance of time makes much for the commendations of the faith of this man,
that now that Christ was so vilified, contemned, despised, put to this cruel
shameful, ignominious and reproachful death, that in this so low a degree of
his humiliation, he should acknowledge his Godhead, and stand up in the
defense thereof. This must needs be an admirable fruit of a singular faith.

This made much for the commendations of the Church of Pergamus, that she held
fast Christ's Name, and denied not the faith, Reu. 2.12.13.
Even where Satan had his throne. So when religion is every where despised,
then to love it with David, is a blessing of blessings; with Noah, to be
upright, and of good conversation, when all flesh had corrupted their ways,
Genesis 6.
this was praiseworthy with God; when idolatry and all manner of superstition
and profaneness does abound, is maintained, graced, countenanced, then to
keep up the pure worship of God with Eliah, where there could not be found
that had not bowed the knee to Baal; this must needs show admirable fortitude.
Thus must all Gods people do, confess and profess Christ, not only in
prosperous times, and in times of prosperity, whilst religion is graced and
countenanced by authority, but even at such times also when it seems to be
most dangerous. It is an easy matter to profess the Gospel in prosperous
times, whilst we have wind and tide with us; but then is the truth of our
profession manifested in times of adversity. The field proves the Soldier,
the Mariners skill is best seen in a tempest, so is the truth of a Christian
profession, in the times of the hottest persecution. Mat. 24.
And hence is it that our Savior does acquaint his Disciples aforehand of
those troubles that should happen unto them, to the end they should not give
back, but confess him to the end. And how resolute the Apostles were, this
way, we may see afterward, who being conuented before the Council, and
commanded to Preach no more in the name of Jesus, answered thus, Whether it be
right in the sight of God, Acts 4.18.19.
to hearken unto you, more then unto God, judge ye. So Paul, when Agabus
through the spirit of prophecy, had told him of the troubles that should befall
him at Jerusalem, his friends began to dissuade him from going up thither, to
the intent he might escape that danger, but behold that godly resolution of
that holy servant of God. Act. 21.13.
What do ye weeping and breaking my heart? I am ready not to be bound only,
but also to dye at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

We may see this again in those three worthies mentioned in Daniel, who held
out the light of their holy profession, Dan. 3.
not only when they were in favor with the King, but even at that time also
when the furnace was making ready to consume them. This was also the godly
resolution and practice of Daniel himself, not to shrink back, but to go on
in his godly course, even to the extreme hazard of his own life.

And for this we have a cloud of testimonies by the Apostle unto the Hebrews,
of whom he speaks thus, Some were racked, some tormented and afflicted, Heb.
11.35
not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection. And
this is observed to have been the great weakness of the Apostle Peter, Mat.
26.70
that when Christ was apprehended, he being in the High Priests Hall, should
so shamefully deny Christ, and that at the voice of a silly Girl. And of
Nichodemus, Ioh. 3.
that howsoever he had a great love to Christ, yet was ouer-awed by the Jews,
that he durst not come to Christ in the day time, but in the night, whereas
true faith surmounts all the difficulties of this life, rests only upon Gods
promises, and is content to follow Christ, even to the top of Mount Caluary,
there to suffer with him. And great reason,

For first this argues Christian courage and resolution, Mat. 10.32
He that loses his life (says Christ) for my sake, shall find it: and
again, whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before
my Father which is in heaven: but whosoever shall deny me before men, him also
will I deny before my Father which is in heaven

Secondly, Luke 22.28. Mat. 13.
the other in time of temptation falls away. Many could be content to follow
Christ with Zebedeus sons, so long as Christ has any temporal honor to give,
but to pledge Christ in the bitter cup of affliction, and to take up his Cross
and to follow him, this proves a hard saying, who can bear it?

This shows then first of all, skin. In peaceable times they will seem very
forward and zealous professors, but when any trouble shall arise for the truths
sake, most shamefully pull in their heads again. Many such cold friends has
Christ and his truth now a days, like Joseph of Arimathea, Ioh. 19.38
who was one of Christ's Disciples, but he carried his religion securetly and
covertly for fear of the Jews. Io. 9.
And as the Parents of the blind man, to whom Christ had given sight, he durst
not confess all that he knew of Christ, he was ouer-awed likewise by the
Jews. And thus is it with many a man, the fear of their Landlord, or some
great man in the Country that is a Papist or an Atheist, upon whom he has some
dependency, and whose displeasure he is not able to bear, does make him pull
in his head, that he dares not be too forward that way. These men are like
Simon of Cyrene, who bare the Cross, but suffered nothing: So these wear the
cognizance of Christ, but will suffer nothing for Christ. O this is a grievous
and a fearful sin, I would commend unto such a one, these places of
Scripture to be duly thought upon.

The just shall live by faith, Heb. 10.38
but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.

The fearful and unbelieving shall have their portion in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, Reu. 21.8.
which is the second death.

Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, Mar. 8.38.
and of my words, among this adulterous and sinful generation, him shall the
son of man be ashamed of when he comes in the glory of his Father, with
all his holy Angels.

O that these things were duly thought upon, how would they make us tremble to
consider how upon every light occasion we are ready to pull in our heads, every
threat, every mock and disgrace, enery frown of a mortal man, that is but
dust, is ready to make us stagger in the good way of righteousness, and to
abate our zeal in our holy profession. An evident demonstration, that the
zeal of the Lords house has not yet consumed us.

Secondly, Deity, when all besides scorned and derided him, never to think
thou have profited aright in the School of Christ, if either fear, or shame
abate thy zeal, or cause thee to deny that truth thou have professed, or any
way to estrange thy self from the professors of the same, especially in time
of their afflictions. Heb. 11.25
It was Moses praise, and an argument of his love to God and his people, that
he could choose rather to share with them in their present afflictions, then to
enjoy the pleasures in Pharaohs Court. There is no one thing that does yield
more sound comfort unto a man's own soul then this, that he has stood for
Christ and his truth; and howsoever such a one may meet with troubles and
persecutions here, he is faithful that has promised, Mat. 5.12.
Great shall be your reward in heaven. He that loses his life for my sake
shall find it, says Christ. And therefore as Caesar's eye made his soldiers
prodigal of their blood: so Gods eye that always is upon us, and his cause
which principally ought to affect us, should cause us stand to his truth above
our own credit, liberty, life, and all.

But this man has done nothing amiss.
It came not to pass but by an extraordinary providence that this Penitent
Thief should in this wise give testimony unto Christ's innocency, especially at
this time of his wonderful abasement, when all contemned and despised him,
Judas betrayeth, Pilate condemns, the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Elders
mock and revile him, the common people and passers by wagge their heads at
him, the other Thief reproacheth him, yet in the midst of them all here is
one that will take his death on it, that Christ dyed an Innocent. Note we hence,

That in all ages, and from time to time, In all ages God has had some
witnesses of his truth.
God has had some that have given testimony unto his truth. At all times he
has had some to defend him, and clear his innocence: in times of the horest
persecution some that stick fast to the truth, when others deny him.

No doubt this could not but be a corrafiue at the very heart of the high
Priest and Elders, and people that pursued Christ to this death, to have this
man thus to acknowledge Christ. For it is commonly a matter of great weight
whereon one takes his death.

So in rebuking, exhorting, admonishing, or any other duty, when one urges it
dying, it leaves the greater impression behind it. The brethren of Joseph can
plead this to their brother: Genesis 50.16
Thy father (say they) commanded a little before his death, that thou should
forgive the trespass of thy brethren. Here we have the last words of a dying
man, now leaving the world, and going to give up his last account; and behold
this is the testimony he gives of Christ, This man has done nothing amiss.

When Gods truth has been most of all oppugned and resisted, God has had at
all times some witnesses of his truth. When Antichrist should most of all
flourish, I will give power (says the Lord) unto my two witnesses, etc. Reu.
11.3.
Let Jeremy be cast into the dungeo^, Ie. 38.8.
the Lord has a Ebedmelech to plead his cause to the King, and to be a means
of his delivery. If the Scribes and Pharisees go about to condemn Christ,
Nichodemus will plead his cause whatsoever come of it. Let Christ be mocked
and derided of all, yet this poor Penitent confesses him to be the Lord of
life, Luke 23.50
and will take his death upon it, that Christ dies an Innocent. Yea when they
sat in council to condemn Christ, there is in the company one Joseph a good
man and a just, That consented not unto his death. When Christ was risen again
from the dead, he appears to the two Disciples that went from Jerusalem to
Emaus, that they might give testimony of the truth of the same. So are Mary
Magdalene, Luke 24.
and Mary the mother of Ioses, made witnesses likewise of the truth thereof.
And for the further clearing of this truth, the Apostle Paul says, 1. Cor. 15.6
He was seen of more then five hundred brethren at once. The Reasons are.

First, though others regard it not, and his truth to flourish and to remain
to posterities. 1 Pet. 1.24.
All flesh (says the Apostle) is grass, and the glory of man as the flower of
the field: The grass withers, the flower fades away, but the Word of the
Lord endures for ever.

Secondly, Saul, Acts 9.15.
a preaching Paul, and appoint him to be a witness of his truth, to bear his
Name unto the Gentiles, that had been a persecuter of the same: yea, as Christ
says, Luke 19.40
If these should hold their peace, the stones would cry.

But why should Christ make choice of such mean witnesses to give testimony
to him and his truth?

For two respects.

First, Why Christ chooses such weak witnesses to give testimony to him and
his truth.
that he might have the glory of the work, who commonly chooses the weak and
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the mighty, putting this
treasure in earthen vessels,

Secondly, Christ, and the kingdom of Antichrist. The kingdom of Christ does
not stand in need of humane power, of earthly and carnal props to lean upon;
but is supported with Gods almighty power, which watches over it continually.

Whereas the kingdom of Antichrist must have all the wit and policy of man to
support it, Equivocation, deuilish plots and practices, such as are, Gun powder
Treasons, murdering of kings, etc. or else it could never sland.

This lets us see the wonderful care God has of his Church and truth, Spain,
Germany, Grance, Boh^mia, England, etc. to oppose that Antichristian pride.

As also to teach us that when we shall see the Church of God in her wane, he
opened the mouth of this Thief, to give testimony unto Christ. As in the time
of the Prophet Elias, the Lord had seven thousand that never bowed the knee
unto Baal. He can never want mouths to confess him, that out of the mouths
of very babes and sucklings, ordains such strength to perfect his own praise.

Hitherto of his speech to his Fellow, and therein of the three first
testimonies of the truth of his Repentance and conversion unto God.

VERSE 42. And he said unto Jesus,


FRom his speech to his fellow, rebuking him, and justifying the Lord Jesus, he
comes now to direct his suite to Christ, Lord remember me, etc.

It was a temporal deliverance and corporal life the blasphemous Thief
desired, Save thy self and us: and because he judged Christ to be Man only,
and not God, and so not able to give this, therefore he blasphemed him.

But the Penitent Thief that lives by faith, and not by sense, beholds Christ's
glorious power, even in this low degree of his humiliation, and through faith
raises up himself to the hope of a better life. Not regarding so much a
temporal life, or corporal deliverance, so that it might go well with his
soul in death; and therefore prays, Lord remember me, etc.

And herein, as before, he manifests likewise the admirable fruit of his
faith and repentance; whether we consider the condition of the person of this
Supplicant, or petitioner, or of Christ himself, to whom he sues for mercy.

First, if we consider the Supplicant, or petitioner himself, a man not
trained up in the School of Christ, but rather in a den of Thieves, a man
given unto all manner of Rapine, like a ravenous beast upon the prey, living by
cutting of throats, theft, and the blood of men: for such a wretched creature
as this, to be brought at last to see his sins, and to repentance for the
same, and to seek so earnestly for mercy for his soul, this must needs declare
the almighty power of God.

Secondly, if we consider withal the condition of Christ himself at this
time, to whom he directs his suit, even crucified Christ; Betrayed by Judas,
condemned by Pilate, mocked of Priest and people, denied by Peter, forsaken at
this time of all his Disciples, for the Text says, They all forsook him and
fled. At this time, I say, to acknowledge Christ's Deity, to perform divine
honor unto him, by praying unto him, was wonderful indeed.

Had he in times past heard Christ preach, and been familiar with Christ, or
his disciples, had h: heard his heavenly word, or seen those glorious miracles
that he had wrought. Happily there might have been wrought some grace in the
heart, which howsoever it might be kept in for a time as fire raked up in the
ashes, yet now at last, at the time of his death might revive. As it was the
case of Peter, who had forgot Christ's words, Mat. 26.
which said, Before the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice. Yet afterward
the Text says, He remembered the words of Christ: then had not this been so
much to be wondered at. But this being the first meeting and greeting, the
first sight he got of Christ, who suffered now the same cursed, shameful, and
ignominious death, together with him, this could not but make greatly for the
commendations of his admirable faith.

Before we come to the particular handling of the words, we have a twofold
instruction to be handled in general.

First then we may note, what a happy progress this Penitent makes in the
ways of godliness, and in the work of repentance. He grows up still in
Christ, and goes on from virtue to virtue, and from one measure and degree of
grace unto another, as it were by steps and stayers ascending up into Gods
kingdom: first, he rebukes is fellow: secondly, confesses their sins:
thirdly, clears Christ's innocence: And now again makes earnest supplication
unto him, and herein will teach us,

That a daily growth and increase in grace is necessary unto salvation. True
grace is known by the growth in grace.
True grace will show it self by the daily growth in the measure and degrees
thereof. Where grace is well used, it will increase. It is not with grace, as
it is with the material things of this life, the more they are used, the more
they decay; but grace is of a generatiue nature, one grace well used, and
rightly improued, brings forth another: We glory in tribulation (says the
Apostle) knowing that tribulation works patience, Romans 5.3.4.
and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed.
This duty of daily growth and increafe in grace, is often urged and pressed in
the Scriptures: We beseech you brethren, 1 These. 4.4
and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that ye increase more and more: 2 Pet. 3.18
So Peter, grow in grace; and again, Heb. 6.1. Pro. 1.5.
Let us be led forward toward perfection. A wise man will hear and increase
in learning, says Solomon. Gods Church in the Scripture is compared to an
Orchard or a Garden, the Ministers of the Word are Planters and Waterers, and
all the faithful are trees of righteousness, and such as are thus planted in
the Courts of the Lords house, Psalm. 92.14
they bring forth much fruit in their age, and are fat and well liking. The
blessing upon the Creatures was increase and multiply. Genesis 1.22.
Even so the blessing on the new Creatures is, Grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

This is excellently shadowed out unto us by Ezechiels vision of waters, Eze.
47.12.
which increased more and more, which shadoweth out unto us the power of the
Word in the hearts of believers in the time of the Gospel. And wheresoever
these waters should come, they should cause admirable fruitfulness. And this
is that which our Savior notes, that his Father is the Husbandman, himself
the Vine, every true believer, a branch of this Vine. And such (says he) my
Father purges, Ioh. 15.1.
that they may bring forth more fruit. Solomon co^pareth the righteous to the
Sun that shines more and more unto the perfect day. Pro. 4 18.
The point is clear, neither is there any duty whereunto a Christian is more
urged and pressed in the Scripture then this. And the reasons are,

First, the time will come, when he that has the greatest measure of
knowledge, faith, repentance, etc. shall find the same little enough to keep
the head above the water, when a man shall come to combat with death, The king
of fears, and to wrestle with Satan's temptations.

Secondly, Luke 8.18.
To him that has, shall be given, whereas wicked and ungodly men, which have
but the outside of religion only, the Lord will take from such that they
seemed to have.

Thirdly, our sinful, vile, and vain conuersations, to the end we might serve
him in righteousness and holiness all our days. Again, he has planted us
by the rivers of waters, even his sacred Word, with the daily dewes, and
spiritual moisture flowing from the same, he daily waters our souls.
Besides all this, he has come unto us with the pruning knise of his
judgments, and corrections of all sorts, both national and personal, to
shred off sin and corruption, and so many superfluous and luxurious branches,
that hinder fruitfulness; so as the Lord may plead with us as with his people
of old, Esaias 5.
What should I have done more that I have not done? All which may provoke unto
this duty.

And last of all, newborn Babes. As newborn Babes, 1 Pet. 2.2.
desire ye the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. Now
infancy and childhood of all other ages, is an age of growing. It were a wonder
in nature, to have an infant live, and not grow: the Word truly heard and
received, breeds no such staruelings.

Again, the Scripture compares a Christian to a building. Now what is it to
lay a foundation of a work, and not to build upon it? If it be not followed,
we see it comes to nothing. Thus is it with the building up of the inward man.

Is this daily increase and growth in grace so necessary, lost their first
love, and have fallen away from that measure of love, zeal, and other graces,
that appeared in them in times past? Surely the estate of such men is
lamentable and fearful, If they (says Peter) after they have escaped from
the filthiness of the world, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
through the acknowledging of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, are yet
tangled again therein, and overcome, the latter and is worse with them, then
the beginning; for it had been better for them not to have acknowledged the
way of righteousness, then after they have knowledged it, to turn away from
the holy Commandment given unto them, but it is come unto them according to
the Proverb, The dog is turned unto his own vomit, and the Sow that was
washed, to the wallowing in the mire. This was the case of Demas, Hymeneus, and
Philetus, 1 Timothy 120 2 Timothy 2.
mentioned by Paul to Timothy; they were counted famous in their times, yet at
last fell away. But woe be unto Satan for his malice, and woe be unto such
men for their backsliding, the estate of such is fearful.

Secondly, Laodicea was sick withal, who thought themselves rich, and
increased in wealth, and needed nothing, no more knowledge, no more grace:
whereas indeed they were miserable, poor, and blind, and naked, the very
opinion of sufficiency shows our penury.

Do thou put forth thy child to Nurse, thou desire that it should thrive
and prosper, and not stand at a stay; if it prosper not, every one will say,
the child will not continue long. Thus is it with us, when the Lord shall
feed us with the wholesome milk of the Word, and we daily lugge the breasts of
our Mother the Church, and yet profit not, but stand rather at a stay, as
ignorant as before, as dull, heavy, and untoward in holy performances as
before. O this is a fearful sign of a spiritual consumption: and this we
may fear will follow in the end, that God at last will be provoked to give
such a one over to hardness of heart, and to reprobate sense, that have made
no better a use of the grace that has been offered unto them.

And last of all,

Bur how shall I know whether I increase in grace yea or no?

Thou may know it by these signs.

First, God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. Humility is a
Mothergrace, as we thrive in it, we prosper in all other graces. Whereas on the
contrary, where pride grows, it is like a noisome weed in a garden, true
grace does there wither, and the best plants can never prosper.

Secondly, and withal a good digestion.

Thirdly,

VERSE 42. And he said unto Jesus,


THe penitent Thief having given good testimony of his repentance for sin,
is now qualified to pray, for now is he humbled, made meek and gentle, his
heartis fitted and prepared for this duty. Note hence, that

None can pray aright, but the Penitent, None can make an effectual prayer but
the penitent. Iam. 5.18 Psalm. 32.6.
such as are truly and thoroughly humbled for sin, these are qualified for
this duty. The prayer of a righteous man avails much, says Saint James.
Therefore shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee. It was the
Church that made prayer unto God for Peter. Act. 12.
When the children of Israel had humbled themselves from morning until
evening, and wept before the Lord, then were they qualified to ask counsel of
the Lord. Judge. 20.23.26.


The Lord had respect to Abel and his offering: Genesis 4.4.
but unto Cain and his offering had he not respect. Abels person was first
accepted in Christ, before his sacrifice could be. This is that the Lord
requires of his people, Isa. 1.16.
Wash you, make you clean: put away your evils out of my sight, etc. And then
what follows, Verse. 18.
Come let us now reason together, says the Lord, though your sins were as
scarlet, they shall be made as white as snow, etc. As for the prayers of the
wicked, Pro. 15.8.
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination unto the Lord. But the prayer
of the righteous is his delight. Hos. 7.14.
Though they cry unto me, I will not hear them. What might be the reason? see
it in the verse going before: Ier. 11.11.
They turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers, which refused to
hear my words. The blind man acknowledged this truth, Ioh. 9.30.
God hears not sinners. Whereas on the contrary, Psalm. 51.17
A broken and contrite heart God will not despise. Prou. 15.8.
The prayers of the righteous are his delight. And it must be the supplication
of Job, Job 42.8.
that God will accept of in the behalf of his friends. And there is reason for
it.

First, A good tree (says he) brings forth good fruit: Mat 7.17.
but an evil tree brings forth evil fruit. He must be a good man that
makes a good prayer, a bad man cannot make a good prayer. For such as the root
is, such is the fruit.

Secondly,

Thirdly, Abba, Father. Now they must be the breathings of Gods Spirit, Romans
8.15.
which God will acknowledge: That is the language the which God does
understand. Now wicked men wanting this spirit, what reckoning and account can
God make of the prayers of such a one?

Fourthly, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. And again, Heb. 11.6.
Without faith it is impossible to please God. Faith is the salt of the
Sanctuary that must season all our sacrifices, and gives us a comfortable
assurance, that they shall find acceptance with God.

That ye may beleene in the name of the Son of God. 1. Ioh. 5.13.14.
And this is the assurance, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us. Faith is all in all to make our prayers accepted. How many came to
our Savior in the days of his flesh to be cured, some of one disease, and
some of another? And what is Christ's answer, but this: According to thy faith,
2 These. 3.2
so be it unto thee. Now All men have not faith, says the Apostle. It is
called the Faith of the elect, because none are betrusted therewith but the
elect of God: and so it must needs be they, and they alone, that can pray
effectually.

And last of all, Pro. 1.24.
Because I have called (says the Lord) and ye have refused: ye shall cry and
call, and I will not answer. And this stands with the distributive Justice of
Almighty God, that God should deal with them as they have dealt with him.

This serves then to set out unto us the misery of every wicked and ungodly
man, is provoked by him daily, his very prayers themselves are turned into
sin. Pro. 28.9.
He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his very prayers are
abominable. The Lord does rank this man's prayers amongst the bed roll of his
sins; Thou that art a drunkard, a swearer, a beastly liver, thou that live
and lie in thy sin without repentance, thou did never all the days of
thy life make an effectual prayer unto God, the Lord never heard thee in mercy
in any petition thou did ever put up unto him. But thy very prayers were
ever turned into sin, and became abominable unto him: thou want the Spirit
of God to enable thee to this duty. For it is the breathing of that Spirit that
God will acknowledge. O the misery of an impenitent sinner, that whether he do
those things that are forbidden, or those things that are commanded, is still
posting to hell, and hastening his own destruction.

If an impenitent sinner sin thus even in praying unto God,

I say not so, Isa. 1.14.
My soul hates your new Moons, and your appointed feasts, etc. What then,
must they observe these solemn feasts no more, because the Lord hated them?
No. What then? Take away the evil of your doings from before my eyes. Verse. 16.
Repentance will remove the cloud, and that partition wall that is betwixt God
and us, and give our prayers access before him.

Secondly, and Saints to do him service, though thou serve but for his justice
upon whom he may glorify himself in thy everlasting confusion; and so will
the Lord be glorified by the wicked at last.

Thirdly, Penitent here; By confessing our sins unto God, by giving good
testimony of our unfeigned sorrow and repentance for them, with a godly
resolution of newness of life. That we first wash our hands, and so come to
his Altar. For if we regard wickedness in our hearts, the Lord will not hear
us. Sin stops Gods ears, that he cannot hear, and is that cloud that
hinders the access of them into his presence. Now what can be more
uncomfortable unto the soul of man, then this? Not to be heard in misery, when
Satan shall tempt us, sin disquiet us, troubles oppress us, death affright
us; what is now the last refuge of a poor soul, but to fly unto God by
prayer. Now, alas, when our prayers shall become abominable, and turned into
sin, who is then able to put to silence the voice of desperation?

And on the contrary part, what can be more comfortable then when troubles and
miseries shall corn, sickness, and death it self shall approach, that we may
have free access unto the throne of grace, there to power out our souls into
his bosom. The very thoughts hereof comforted David over all his sorrows, I
shall (says he) find trouble and heaviness, but I will call upon the Name of
the Lord, O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my soul.

And last of all, Favorites, they are seldom or never denied in their suites
unto God; they have ever access into the presence chamber of the Almighty;
they prevail for themselves and others, being in grace and favor. Surely
howsoever the world does judge and esteem of Gods people, there is not a
wicked man living but fares the better every day, for their sake. They are
they that, with Moses and Aaron, are ever and anon ready to stand in the gap
to turn away the Lords wrathful indignation against a Land and people. Thus
much for the general Instruction.

Lord remember me when thou come, etc.
The next thing we are to observe, is the Prayer it self, Lord remember me,
etc.

Though faith which is the life of the soul be hidden in it self, yet it is
perceived by the fruits thereof. As we see the natural life is a secret in
nature, yet perceived by the Symptoms of life, such as are motion, breathing,
etc. And as the sap in the root is secret, yet perceived by the blossoms and
fruit that the same sends forth; Even so is that spiritual life in the soul,
made manifest by the blessed fruits and effects thereof, such as are affiance
in God, prayer, etc.

Now the faith of this Penitent is admirable in two respects. The faith of the
Penitent, admirable in two respects.


First, in respect of the things believed.

Secondly, in respect of the circumstances thereunto belonging, which makes the
same so much the more admirable.

The things he professes here to believe touching Christ, are

1 That he is a Lord.

2 That he is a King, howbeit that his kingdom be not of this world, but
spiritual in the hearts of men.

Secondly,

First, In respect of the Petitioner.
in respect of the Petitioner, such a one that had not been brought up in the
school of Christ, but rather in a den of theenes, having none to instruct him,
having not heard Christ's heavenly doctrine, nor seen those glorious miracles
that he wrought, and yet notwithstanding to acknowledge him thus to be a Lord,
and a King: this serves greatly for the commendations of his faith.

Secondly, In respect of the Petitioned,
in respect of the Petitioned, and that is Christ, now at this time so much
abased, despised, forsaken, yea, of his own Disciples themselves. Now there is
no healing of the sick, no giving sight to the blind, no raising up of the
dead. At this time I say to acknowledge Christ's Deity, and to seek at his
hands for a kingdom, must needs show his faith to be admirable.

(Lord)
The first title that he here assigns unto Christ is, Christ a Lord two
ways.
he calls him Lord.

Now Christ is a Lord, 1 In himself, 2 In his relation to us.


First, In himself Ioh. 1.3. Heb. 1.3.
in himself, and so is he Lord over all, blessed for ever. Both in respect
that he gives essence and being unto all things, sustaining all things by his
Almighty power.

As also for that he is the Sovereign Lord of all, Luke 2.11. Acts 10.36
and therefore called Lord of the Angels, much more of all other inferior
creatures.

Yea, the title of Sovereignty, to be called Lord, is so proper unto Christ,
as that many times in the Scriptures, he is called by no other name. As that of
the Apostle Saint Paul. 1 Cor. 6.14 1 Cor. 12.3
God has raised up the Lord; and, no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but
by the holy Ghost: and again, 1 Cor. 8.6.
Unto us there is but one God, which is the Father, in whom are all things, and
one Lord Jesus Christ.

Yea, this is that title which Christ does assume and take unto himself, as a
proper name, by the which he will be known of us. Ye call me Lord and Master,
Ioh. 13.13.
and ye say well, I am so.

Now this title of Lord does most truly and properly belong unto him, Christ
Lord in himself, in four respects.
because he is Lord indeed, and that in four respects,

First, by right of creation, For all things were made by him, Ioh. 1.3. Col.
1.15.
and without him was made nothing that was made.

Secondly, Heb. 1.2.
by right of inheritance, for he is made Heir of all things.

Thirdly, Capite, and only durante beneplacito, so long as he shall please.

And lastly, 1 Cor. 12.5
Though there be differences of administrations, yet there is but one Lord, and
it is he that is sole Monarch, and only Potentate over the whole earth, and
is therefore called King of Kings, 1 Timothy 6.15
and Lord of Lords.

Secondly, In his relation to us: four ways.
as he is Lord in himself, so is he also in his relation to us, and that
four ways.

First, power of hell, to whom we were once in bondage. Now he redeernes us
with his blood, and pays that matchless price for us, and thereby makes us
his own; We were not redeemed, (says the Apostle) with corruptible things, 1
Pet. 1.18 19.
as Silver and Gold, but with the precious blood of Christ.

Secondly, I will marry thee unto me for ever; Hos. 2.19.
yea, I will marry the^ unto me in righteousness, in judgment, and in mercy,
and in compassion. And again, Ephesians. 5.23.
As the Husband is the Wines head, so Christ is the head of the Church.

Thirdly, Heb. 1.3.
Sustaining all things by his mighty power. For as he has redeemed us out of
the power of Satan, he leaves us not without any further care, but still
watches over us for good: for if the wings of his special providence were not
spread over us, and mercy compassed us about, we had not lived to this present
hour, but our bodies long ere this had been in the grave, and our souls in
hell.

And last of all, peculiar people, cast upon him only to be cared for.

So then consider we Christ as a Redeemer, as a Husband, as he that has
undertaken for us, and his Church likewise as his peculiar people, cast upon
him by good right must Christ needs be Lord.

But how can Christ be such a Lord, Phil. 2.7.
by the name of a Servant? He took upon him the form of a Servant.

Christ is to be considered as a Mediator, Esa. 37.35.
a Servant unto his Father, because he faithfully served him therein, being
first sent of God, and therein became obedient unto his Father in all things.
Yet this does no whit derogate from Christ's dignity, who still remained a Lord
in himself, and Lord over us his redeemed ones.

The uses arising hence are these.

First, Lord in himself, and such a Lord over us, we are taught to esteem of
him accordingly, and to yield up all holy obedience unto him. Does not the Lord
require it upon this very ground: Mal. 1.6.
If I be a Lord, where is my fear? Luke 6.46
And again, Why call ye me Lord, and do not the things I command you? And
because an hypocrite may yield Christ this homage in words, to cry Lord, Lord,
Mat. 7.21.
we must by our deeds yield up our selves as servants to obey him in all
righteousness.

Secondly, Pro. 19.2.
for without knowledge, the mind is not good.

Thirdly, Lord, should work our hearts to contentation in all estates and
conditions of life whatsoever, whether weal or woe, prosperity or adversity.
It was a godly resolution of old Eli, when he heard of that strange judgment
the Lord would bring upon his house. 1 Samuel 2.18.
It is the Lord, let him do as it pleases him. He kisseth the rod like a good
natured child, and submits himself to the Lords sharpest corrections
without repining. And this was David's case when the Lords hand lay heavy upon
him: I became dumb, Psalm. ^9.
and opened not my mouth, because it was thy doing. And so the Church in great
affliction and distress: It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, Lam.
3.40. Job 1. vlt.
because his compassions fail not.

And last of all, Lord, and has undertaken for us, Children can do this,
having earthly fathers, and servants can do this, that have earthly Masters
and Lords over them; Why then should not Gods people do this with hope and
boldness, especially seeing he has commanded us to cast all our care upon
him, Genesis 17.1.
being God alsufficient.


Secondly, as he acknowledges Christ to be a Lord, yea, the Sovereign Lord of
all, so does he likewise acknowledge him to be a King, yet so as that his
kingdom is not of this world, Lord remember me when, etc.

This regal and Kingly office of Christ, Christ is a King.
is clearly manifested throughout the whole Scripture.

I have set my King upon my holy mountain. Psalm 2.6.


Christ takes this honor unto himself, Mat. 28.18 Esaias 9 7.
All power (says he) is given me in heaven and earth.

And again, he has upon his garment, and upon his thigh, a name written, The
King of Kings, Reu. 19.16 Luke 1.33. Dan. 2.44. Dan. 7.1^. 1 Cor. 15.24.
and Lord of Lords. Thus the Evangelist Saint Luke, He shall reign over the
house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be no end.

Again, that this kingdom of Christ is not of this world, otherwise then in
the hearts of men, but it is a spiritual and celestial kingdom; so Christ,
Ioh. 18.36. Romans 3. Ioh. 6.15.
My kingdom is not of this world: though he were Heir apparent unto the
Crown, and kingdom of Israel, being the seed of David, Luke 12.13
yet he withdrew himself when the people sought to make him King, and refused
to determine cases of Inheritances betwixt brethren.

Now there are many things peculiar unto Christ, The things peculiar unto
Christ and his kingdom.
wherein he excels all the Kings of the earth.

First, in regard of the excellency of his person,

Secondly, King of Kings, Reu. 19.16 Psalm. 2.8.
from the ends of the earth. Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession.
Alexander never saw many parts of the world, much less subdued them; but
Christ is King over all; Acts 10. Col. 2.9.
yea, he reigns and rules over Angels, principalities and powers.

Thirdly, of all Princes, he has conquered sin, death, hell, Col. 2.15.
Satan, and has spoiled Principalities and powers.

And last of all, 1 Timothy 1.17
His Kingdom shall have no end. Other Kings and Kingdoms have their periods,
and determination, but thus is it not with this King and Kingdom, for he is
The King eternal, immortal, invisible, and only wise God.

Now the uses are,

First of all, Job, to acquaint our selves with God, and with the statute laws
of his kingdom, Subjects must not be ignorant of the Princes laws. To plead
ignorance, will not purchase immunitie from punishment, if men offend against
the laws of the kingdom. All Gods people must be acquainted with Gods will
revealed in his Word. Mat. 28.20. Heb. 12.25.
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I command you. See that ye
despise not him that speaks, for if they escaped not which refused him that
spoke on earth, much more shall we not escape, if we turn away from him that
speaks from heaven.

Secondly, Royal generation, a peculiar people unto the Lord, and therefore
are to show forth the power of him that has thus called us out of darkness,
into the marvelous light. And herein to approve our selves for his Subjects
and People, by our holy conversation in the world. He has chosen us, Ephesians. 1.4.
that we should be holy and without blame before him in love.

Thirdly, The means to enlarge Christ's kingdom.
we are to labor by all means possible for the coming of Christ's Kingdom;
that is, for the enlargement thereof in the world, in the hearts and
consciences of men. Christ's kingdom of power, Christ's kingdom of grace, and
his kingdom of glory.

Now the means are either, External, or Internal.

The External means for the enlarging of Christ's kingdom, External.
are, 1 The Word. 2 The Sacraments. 3 Discipline.


The Word is the Scepter of Christ's kingdom.

The Sacraments are the Churches magnacharta, confirming the Covenants betwixt
Christ and his people.

And Discipline is the due execution of Christ's laws for the encouragement of
the good, and reclaiming of the evil.

The Internal means for the enlarging of this kingdom of Christ is,
Internal.
the effectual working of Gods Spirit, without which no outward means
whatsoever can be effectual. And therefore God is earnestly to be sought unto
by prayer, to second his own ordinances by the effectual working of his own
Spirit, that the same may be effectual for the building up of the elect, and
the gathering together of the body of Christ. And this is that which all good
Subjects must desire and labor for, every particular man according to his
place, Princes and Magistrates especially. Then Ministers who are the
Dispensers of Christ's Laws, yea and all people, for herein shall we approve
our selves true and loyal Subjects indeed to Christ our King.

And thus have we seen how Christ is both Lord and King. And now for this
poor Penitent thus to behold Christ's excellency and glory at this time when
he was at the lowest ebb of his humiliation, I say, to behold Christ's Godhead
when it was most veiled, in such a death to behold life, and in such ignominy
and reproach, to behold such glory; this makes greatly for the commendations of
his faith.

Had he in times past been conversant with Christ, had he heard his heavenly
doctrine, or seen those glorious miracles which he wrought, as the disciples
did, there might happily that seed be fallen into his heart, that howsoever
buried for a time, as it was the case of Peter, yet at last might bring forth
this happy fruit. But this being the first sight that he got of Christ, for
ought we know, and that at such a time, when Christ is most of all abased, and
when all his Disciples had forsaken him. Surely this must needs declare the
almighty power of God in him, and commend his faith and conversion to be
admirable indeed. But this will faith do, the nature whereof is,

To raise a man above this life. True faith raises up a man above this life.
or to judge of things according to the outward appearance, but to believe Gods
Word, and things incredible, and in some sort impossible, against sense, and
above reason. Thus was it with this Penitent Thief at this time. What great
things believes and confesses he here of Christ, against all sense and
reason, that he was Lord and King of heaven and earth, able to give eternal
life and salvation to whom it pleased him, when there was no outward appearance
of any such power in Christ, but rather indeed of the contrary. This shows the
wonderful force of faith; yea he believes above hope, and contrary to hope,
having no ground at all in natural reason to persuade him thereunto.

Faith (says the Apostle) is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.
and the ground of things hoped for. Where outward sense and natural reason
takes place, there faith is not exercised. It is the excellency of faith to
believe where we see not, when we shall come to walk (as the Apostle says) by
faith, 2. Cor. 5.7.
and not by sight. Yea when outward sense and natural reason fails, then does
faith most of all bestir it self. Fortifying it self daily in all the
attributes of God, such as are his wisdom, power, truth, justice, etc. We may
see this in Abraham in the very act of sacrificing his son Isaac, Genesis 22.2.
in whom the promise was made. He consulted not with flesh and blood, what
should become of the same, if Isaac should fail. But his faith looked up
higher, even unto Gods power, faithfulness, and truth, and stays himself
thereon.

We have a Catalogue of examples in this kind, mentioned by the Author of
that Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.
who manifested the truth of their faith by believing the promises in the
midst of the extremest dangers.

And the reason is, faith of every true believer rests it self upon two
immovable props, Gods power, and Gods truth.

Gods power, was the ground of that admirable faith that was found in Abraham,
Heb. 11.19
in sacrificing of Isaac, He accounted that God was able to raise him up, even
from the dead, from whence also he received him after. And the consideration of
Gods truth is excellent to the same end. He is a God of truth and cannot lie,
Mat. 5.18.
he cannot deny himself: Heaven and earth shall pass away, yet shall no one
jot or tittle of his word pass away.

Seeing then the nature of faith is such, Penitent, that albeit Christ at this
time was in extreme ignominy and reproach, yet acknowledges him to be Lord,
and King: How many forts of me^ want true faith.
this serves to show then how many thousands in the world deceive themselves,
and are far from true faith.

First,

Secondly, Eccl. 9.2.
No man knows either love or hatred of that that is before him. Whereas the
child of God that has faith indeed, rests upon Gods bare word, though for the
present he see no performance.

Thirdly, Where are the promises of his coming? They never tremble before the
Lord until his rod be upon them. Whereas the godly man that has says indeed,
he knows that there is an unchangeable certainty in Gods threatenings, and
seeing the sword coming hides himself.

Secondly, Impenitent Thief from the consideration of Christ's wonderful
abasement, and that common reproach that he now lay under, from all sorts
concludes that he could not be God. He is led as a beast only by sense,
Christ appearing now without form or beauty. Isa. 53.
So depraved are our judgments by nature, in things appertaining unto Christ's
kingdom. But this Penitent Thief is led by another principle, he beholds
Christ not with fleshly eyes, but with the eyes of faith, and so, even in his
lowest degree of humiliation, beholds him as Lord, and King: here is the
strength and power of saving faith indeed.

Lord remember me when thou come,
This Penitent being now to leave the world, and to go to give up his last
account unto God, for all the things he had done in his body, 2. Cor. 5.10.
whether they were good or evil: he commends his soul unto God in prayer, and
therein shows an excellent fruit of his faith.

And in prayer presents Christ unto him, under such names and titles as may
strengthen his faith, and minister unto him a comfortable expectation to be
heard and answered in those things he prays for. Now the only thing he
desires at this time is, that since he must now leave the world, to go to a
place of an everlasting abode, where he must hear that he never heard, and
must ever hear; where he must see that he never saw, which he must ever see;
and feel that he never felt, which he must ever seele, that Christ whose
power he acknowledges to be all-sufficient, being Lord and King of heaven and
earth, would now in mercy remember him. Note hence,

That we must so consider of God in prayer, In prayer we must see God
alsufficient in those things we ask of him.
as that we may see him to be God all-sufficient in those things we desire of
him. It was mercy for his soul after death that was the thing this Penitent so
much desired. And so that it might go well with it, he never seeks at Christ's
hands any corporal or temporal deliverance, as his fellow the Impenitent
Thief does. But this, O this is the thing that he principally does desire
above all things in the world, that Christ would in mercy remember him when he
came into his kingdom. And to the end he may have hope in death, and that
this his request may be graciously heard and answered by Christ, Genesis 17.1.
he beholds Christ at this time to be God all-sufficient, every way able to
grant his desire, he sees and acknowledges him to have all the power in
heaven and earth, able to give salvation at last. And thus whatsoever our
requests are that we put up unto God, it is an excellent thing, so to conceive
of God, and such his glorious attributes, as his power, wisdom, truth, love,
mercy, justice, etc. as that we may still behold him as God all-sufficient in
those things we seek of him.

An excellent example whereof we have in the servant of Abraham, Genesis 34.12
who being sent by his Master to provide a wife for his son Isaac, goes
first unto God in prayer, to prosper him therein. And in prayer presents God
unto him according to his covenant and promise he had made with his Master
Abraham, O Ichouah thou God of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good
speed this day, and show kindness unto my master Abraham. This we may
observe likewise to have been in the Apostle Paul, in diverse and sundry
prayers of his that he made unto God, as when he exhorted the Romans to
patience and consolation. He prays that the same gifts and graces may be
bestowed upon them, and in prayer sets God before his eyes, as God
all-sufficient, in those particular things: Romans 15.4.5.
Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be like minded one
toward another. Again, the same Apostle in the same Chapter, calls him the God
of hope, Verse. 13.
The God of hope fill you with all joy, etc.

We may see this in the Prophet David, who when he was to pray against the
enemies of the Church, beholds God to be all-sufficient, to take vengeance
upon them, Psalm. 94.1.
O Lord God to whom vengeance belongs, thou God to whom vengeance belongs,
show thy self.

Thus the Church when they heard that Peter was cast into prison, go presently
unto God in prayer, and therein strengthen themselves in the consideration of
Gods power. This being an act wherein the same might be made manifest in Peter's
delivery; Lord, thou art a God, who have made heaven and earth, the Sea and all
that in them is, etc.

So the Apostle Saint Paul exhorting the Corinthians to mutual peace, live in
peace (says he) and the God of peace and love be with you. We may see this in
all the Apostles at such times as they made choice of one in the rome and place
of Judas. They pray that God would direct them therein. Acts 1.24.
Thou God which know the hearts of all men, show which of these two thou
have chosen. The reasons are,

First, Pro. 15.8.
The sacrifices of the wicked are abomination unto the Lord, but the prayer of
the righteous is his delight. And this is indeed to glorify God in his
attributes, who delights in his servants, that can make a right use of them.

Secondly, small encouragement unto them to be earnest in their suits unto
them. Now all fullness and sufficiency is in God. What thing do we stand in
need of, wherein there is not an al-sufficiency in him? How many distinct acts
of his wisdom, power, goodness, mercy, justice, etc. has he left us
examples of in his Word, and all to support our weak faith when we pray unto
him.

Thirdly, Mat. 15.
who will not be said nay at Christ's hands, albeit she had never so many
discouragements by Christ himself at the first, and afterward by his
Disciples. She saw Christ's al-sufficiency, that he was able to help. Nothing
does better stablish and settle the heart of the child of God, against
doubtings and fears, and work feruency, integrity, and confidence, all which
are most requisite in prayer, then the due consideration of this, that God is
all in all, in the very thing it self we seek unto him for.

This serves first of all to condemn that horrible practice of the Church of
Rome, effectual prayer unto God.

Secondly, a God of mercy, and Father of all consolation and comfort. Stand
thou in need of his power to help thee? Present him unto thy mind, even at
the first entrance into thy prayers, as a powerful God. And so likewise for
his wisdom, truth, justice, etc. We ever seek those things most constantly
and comfortably, when we know them to be had at his hands, from whom we seek
them. This being carefully observed of us, we shall find it a strong prop unto
our faith, and an excellent means to kindle affection in us, and so a thing
most useful and necessary in prayer.

Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom.
These two Thieves make two different requests unto Christ; His desire it self.
the one for a corporal and temporal deliverance, If thou be Christ, save
thy self and us. The request of the other is, that his soul might be saved
in the day of the Lord, Lord remember me, etc. according to the inward
principle of the heart, so goes the desire. They that are carnal, are carnally
minded, but the spiritual man is spiritually minded, and his desires are
principally after spiritual things.

And herein will teach us,

That the salvation of a man's soul is the thing that every man, The salvation
of the soul is principally to be desired.
next unto the glory of GOD, ought principally to desire. This Penitent had
taken care of Gods glory before, by justifying Christ's innocence, and now in
the next place, he looks after the salvation of his soul, that it might go
well with that in death: yea, by how much the more excellent the soul is above
the body, by so much the more careful ought a man to be of the salvation of
the one above the other. Our greatest care must be, that it may go well with
our souls at death.

We may suppose this penitent Thief, speaking thus at this time. O Lord,
inasmuch as my life has been wretched, it is just with thee that I should now
at last suffer this shameful and cursed death. It is not life that I desire,
but am willing to embrace the sentence of death, and the rather, for that I see
it is thy good pleasure it should be so. This is the only thing I now desire,
that when this life shall have an end, and I shall come to appear before thee in
thy kingdom, that thou would be pleased in mercy then to remember me.

Now if all Gods children be led by one and the same spirit, and so are alike
disposed in respect of spiritual good things; it must necessarily follow that
this longing desire after life and salvation, that was in this Penitent, is
wrought in some measure in the hearts of al those that are under the same hope,
and they are able in the witness of a good conscience, to say as he did here,
Lord remember me, etc.

This affection was in the Prophet David, when he says, O Lord, I have longed
for thy salvation. And indeed what other thing then the souls future
happiness, can the Scriptures intend in these and the like places, exhorting
us to seek for wisdom and knowledge, as for silver. Pro. 2.4.
Of searching for it as for treasures: of striving to enter in at the straight
gate, Luke 13.24 Ioh. 6.17.
of laboring for that meat which shall endure to everlasting life, of running
to obtain, and the like, what is meant I say in all these, but the salvation
of the soul above all other things? This was old Simeons desire, Luke 2.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc.

This affection we find to have been in those Jews converted at Peter's
Sermon, Men and Brethren, Act. 2.37.
(say they) What shall we do to be saved? being convinced in their judgments
of that their heinous sin of crucifying the Lord of life, they came trembling
unto the Apostles, fearing what would become of their souls.

We may see this in that poor perplexed Iaylor, who came trembling in to Paul
and Sylas, Act 16.30.
with his, Sirs what shall I do to be saved? This truth is further cleared
unto us by Christ's prayer he has left unto us, where we are taught to pray
first of all, Thy kingdom come, Mat. 6.
before, Give us this day, our daily bread. And this is observed to have been
the commendations of that wise Merchant, that sold all that he had, to buy the
Pearl, Mat. 13.44
as knowing that it would make him rich unto salvation. I might give diverse
other instances and examples, but these are sufficient, to show what is the
disposition and affection of all Gods people. Theirs are hungry souls, theirs
are longing hearts; and the maine thing they so much desire is, the salvation
of their souls.

Whereas on the contrary part, carnal men, like the Impenitent Thief, Hag.
1.2.
prefer a temporal deliverance before an eternal; Like those Jews who
preferred their own private gain, before the building of the Temple. Heb.
12.16
Like Esau a mess of pottage, Mat. 8.24.
before the Birth right. Like those Gadarens, their hogs before Christ: And
like that young man in the Gospel, who went away sorrowful, Mat. 19.
choosing rather to hazard his soul then to part with his wealth. Now the
grounds are these.

First, Peter speaking of the inheritance of eternal life, 1. Pet. 1.4.
calls it, Immortal, undefiled, and that which withers not, reserved in
heaven for us. Wherein he secretly compares the things of this world, with
those that are reserved for the faithful after this life: and shows that all
things here are corruptible, but the things of the life to come are
incorruptible. And hence it comes to pass, that wisdoms children make choice
of heaven and heavenly things, above all transitory things whatsoever.

Secondly, our Savior shows the necessity hereof, Mat. 16.26
saying, What shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and to lose his
own soul? Were it not better for that man that he had never been borne? what
then can deserve the chiefest of a man's care, if not this?

Thirdly, Corn, and wine, and oil: Whereas the godly that have another
principle within to direct them, desire especially Gods countenance and grace
with David, But Lord grant me thy countenance, Psalm. 4.6.
etc.

This serves first of all to reprove the great and general neglect of that, of
an opinion, that it is either a thing most easy, or a thing indifferent to be
saved. For the things of this life we see the excessive care, the wonderful
labor and pains that men take early and late, by Sea and by Land, putting
their bodies many times to that labor they would not willingly put their beast
unto, and all for fleeting and transitory things, that will not, that cannot
profit in the evil day; which caused the Prophet to complain thus: Wherefore
do ye lay out your silver, Isa. 55.2.
and not for bread; and your strength, and not being satisfied? Who can
sufficiently bewail this madness, and cry down this folly? The cares of this
life, like Pharaohs lean kine, Genesis 41.10
has devoured the care of heaven. Such men can never lift up their minds unto
heaven, that account the earth and earthly things their chiefest Treasure; give
them enough of this world, and let him that will take the world to come. None
are farther out of the way, nor destitute of true wisdom, then those men are.
What are they better then fools, that prefer a piece of rotten wood that
shines in the night, before the finest gold of Ophyr? Oh let us take heed,
lest while we condemn this as madness and folly in other men, we prove not
our selves the greatest fools.

Secondly, Penitent we make sure work for a better life. There is nothing
concerns a Christian more then this, to get good assurance unto his own
soul, that he shall be saved at last.

We dwell here in houses of clay, and our eyes on every side of us do behold
the uncertainty of all earthly things. Why then should our thoughts be so
taken up, for these frail bodies of ours, which are but slaves to death, so as
in the mean time we neglect our precious souls, which have an everlasting
being? why should we exalt the body so high, that must lie so low, and moulder
to dust and ashes, die and rot in the grave, and make no reckoning of our
souls that live for ever, wherein we may be truly blessed indeed?

O did we know the consequence of this one thing, and how much it concerns
us, to seek the eternal welfare of our souls, as Christ said to the
Samaritanish woman, Ioh. 4.10.
If thou knew the gifts of God: we would come unto the Ministers of God with
that question of the trembling Jews, and perplexed Iaylor, Sirs, Act. 16.30
what must we do to be saved? What comfort can a man take in any thing, that
wants comfort in this? This is that one thing that is so necessary, this is
that good part that shall not be taken from us.

But it will be said, Number. 23.10.
Did not Balaam desire to die the death of the righteous? And does not our
Savior tell us of many that shall say, Lord, Lord, open unto us? Mat. 7.21.


I answer, it is most true: wicked, as well as in the godly, in those that
shall perish everlastingly, as well as in those that shall be saved at last.
And therefore it will be requisite to observe, the difference betwixt the
wishes of the wicked, and the desires of the godly, in this weighty point of
salvation.

First, The difference betwixt the godly and the wicked in their desiring
salvation.
this proceeds not from the like ground in these two sorts of men. In all Gods
children that shall be saved in the end, this desire of theirs springs from a
true sense and feeling of their own wretchedness and misery through sin, that
he is the child of wrath, and firebrand of hell by nature, lies under Gods
wrath, and is in danger of eternal destruction. The thoughts of this his
present misery, and fearful condition by nature, sets him on work to seek
delivery. And in reason it must be so, for unto a condemned person, that looks
every hour to be executed, the Princes pardon must needs be most acceptable,
yea he would prefer that above all the world besides: So is it with a poor
sinner, once thoroughly convicted in his conscience for sin, he can prize the
favor of God in Jesus Christ in the pardon of the same, more then all the
world besides. Whereas the Person that is full despises the honey comb. Pro.
27.7.
And this is the estate of natural men, they are not sensible of their own
spiritual misery by reason of sin, but are Frozen upon the dregs, Zeph.
1.12. Deuteronomy. 29.19 Reu. 3.17.
bless themselves in their own hearts, and know not that they are miserable,
and poor, and blind, and naked. And hence is it, that the desires of such men
are cold and slight in comparison of the other that are sensible of their
misery by reason of sin.

Secondly,

Whereas of the wicked, that of Solomon is most true, Pro, 13.4.
The sluggard lusts, but his soul has naught. And again, The desire of the
slothful stays him, for his hands refuse to work.

Thirdly, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? showed that
he wished well to heaven, and the salvation of his soul: But being required
by Christ to sell all that he had, and to give to the poor, and to follow
Christ, Mat. 19.
the Text says, He went away sorrowful. Which showed plainly, that he loved
his wealth better. Whereas the desire of the godly is such, as that they
prefer eternal life, and the salvation of their souls, above all things in
the world besides. So David, Many say, who shall show us any good? But Lord
grant me thy countenance, thy favor, and grace. Where David opposes his
desire against the desire of worldlings; and shows that howsoever worldly men
desire chiefly worldly things, he for his part did chiefly desire Gods
countenance, favor and grace in the pardon of his sins, above all the world
besides. And indeed unto such does the promise of eternal life belong and
appertain; for so says the Lord, Ier. 29.13.
Ye shall seek me, and find me, because ye shall seek me with your whole
heart.

Fourthly, Mat. 6.33.
above all earthly and transitory things; whereas it is the property of wicked
and ungodly men, to put it off, until the day of grace be past, Luke 13.25.
even till the Master of the house be risen up, and has shut to the door.

Fifthly, eternal life and salvation, not by moods and fits, but throughout the
whole course of their lives. All their thoughts, words, and actions, savor of
grace within, and tend unto heaven, and the furtherance of their eternal
happiness. Whereas with the wicked, it is not so with them, for if they desire
eternal life and salvation, it is no constant desire, but by fits, either when
the Word, or some affliction or other has kindled such a good motion for the
present within them, but by and by, like the morning dew it goes away. Hos.
6.4.


And last of all, desires freedom from misery, the effect of sin, then from
sin it self, the cause of misery: whereas the child of God is as earnest
with God for strength against his corruptions for the time to come, as the
pardon of his sin past: David is as earnest with God to stablish him with his
free spirit, Psalm. 51.12.
as to wash him from his sin.

Well then to conclude this point, would we have any comfort in our own
souls, that we are amongst the number of those that hunger and thirst aright
after eternal life and salvation, that our desires prove not to be like the
vain wishes of the wicked, that shall not profit them in the end. O let us
then try our selves, and examine our own hearts by the rule of this doctrine.
Are we truly sensible of our own wretchedness and misery, by reason of sin?
have we used all holy helps and means, whereby we may come to the
comfortable assurance thereof unto our ownesoules? Have we learned to prize
eternal life and salvation above all the world besides? have we made use of
all opportunites that God has offered unto us for the getting of grace into
our souls? has this desire of ours been constant, and not by fits only? and
have we as earnestly sought at Gods hand, strength against our corruptions, as
the pardon of our sins past? These things indeed may minister unto us a
comfortable assurance that our desire of eternal life and salvation has been
true, has been unfeigned, such as shall not miss of salvation in the end.

Whereas if on the contrary part, we never yet truly saw our misery, by reason
of sin, have ever slighted Gods ordinances, preferred the world, our profit
and pleasures, before the everlasting salvation of our souls; have made no
account of the season and opportunity of grace offered, have neither constantly
desired, nor for future times sought strength of God, against our corruptions;
know we that our desires were never true and unfeigned, but such as may be in
wicked men, that shall miss of salvation in the end.

When thou come into thy kingdom. The time when.

As this Penitent Thief at this time acknowledges Christ's Deity, that he was
Lord and King, and desires as we have heard before, principally, mercy for his
soul, that it might go well with it in death or after death. So now he comes
to the time wherein especially he desired to be remembered of Christ: n. when
Christ should come into his kingdom.

Q.d. O Lord now is the time of thy humiliation, wherein thou art pleased to
undergo the punishment for the sins of all the elect, and to bear the
burden of thy Fathers wrath, and all to free thine from the wrath to come. I
know this price will be paid, and this misery thou now suffer for sin,
will be over; and thou thy self again restored into thy glorious kingdom,
there to live and reign for ever. I beseech thee now hear me against that
time, The happiness of a Christian not to be looked for here, but hereafter.
when thou come thither.

Note we hence,

That the happiness of a Christian is not to be looked for here, but
hereafter. The fruit of repentance, of righteousness, and of holiness, is not
to be looked for here, but hereafter. The Christian has not his happiness in
present possession, but in reuersion. In hope and expectation are they kept
here, living by faith: as the Heir being not of ripe years, is not possessed of
the inheritance, but after death they come then to be possessed of that glorious
inheritance laid up for the Saints. This does this Penitent Thief acknowledge
here in this his request to Christ, as if he should say; O Lord it is not life
for a time which cannot be long, that I so much stand upon, since death I have
deserved, I am willing to dye: but it is this I specially desire above all the
world besides, that when this life shall have an end, I may have a resting
place in thy kingdom. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, 1 Cor.
15.19.
we are of all men most miserable. And this the holy Ghost observes as an
admirable fruit of the admirable faith of the Primitive Fathers, Heb. 11.13 14.
who albeit they received not the promises, but saw them a far off, were
persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers
and Pilgrims on earth, declaring plainly that they seek a Country. 1 Ioh. 3.2.
Now we are the Sons of God, (says the Apostle) But it does not appear what
we shall be. It is true, the Lord gives us now the first fruits of the spirit,
the earnest of our inheritance, which is peace with God, and peace in our own
consciences, and joy in the holy Ghost, to comfort the hearts of his servants,
and to cheer them up in their pilgrimage. But the full fruition of their
happiness is not to be expected here, but in heaven. This made the Apostle
Paul to say, Phil. 3.3.13.14.
I forgot that which was behind, and reaching forth unto those things which
are before. I press to^ard the mark for the price of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus, as knowing that the happy recompense of reward was not to be
looked for here, but hereafter. And the reason is,

First, we know but in part, and therefore can believe but in part, can be
sanctified but in part, and so cannot be capable of the perfection of our
happiness, 1 Cor. 13.9
till all our imperfections be done away, and our sanctification shall be
perfected.

Secondly, Let not him that puts on his Armor rejoice, but him that puts
it off: for this battle ends not, until death come, when then we shall be
out of the Gunshot of Satan's temptations, and set free from all the enemies
of our peace.

Besides,

Seeing then that the happiness of a Christian is not to be looked for here,
to use the world, as if we used it not, and not to pitch our Tabernacle here,
but rather to resolve that heaven is our portion and our inheritance, Heb. 11.13
and therefore as Strangers and Pilgrims, we should seek and provide for an
abiding City.

Secondly, Col. 3.2.
and to set our affections on heavenly things, and not on things below; nothing
can more dishonor a Christian, then this, to make the world his chiefest study
and care, whereas the Lord has reserved us for a more durable and lasting
inheritance.

When thou come into thy kingdom.
This Penitent Thief, albeit truly humbled for his sins, and obtaining
mercy at Christ's hands in the pardon of them, as we shall see hereafter, yet is
not freed from his remporall punishment, but suffers with Christ. And herein
will teach us,

That release from temporal afflictions does not always follow true
repentance; Release from temporal afflictions does not al ways follow true
repentance.
but many are punished temporally, that are not condemned eternally. We may
see this in that manner of the Lords dealing with Adam and Eve after they had
sinned, God made with them a covenant, that The Seed of the woman should bruise
the Serpents head: Genesis 3.15.
which was a clear promise and prophecy of Christ, by whom he was again to
be restored into favor. Yet notwithstanding, Cursed be the earth for thy
sake. And, In sorrow shall thou bring forth, etc. This we may see in Moses, Deu
34.5.10.
an excellent servant of God, and so often styled in Scripture, a man highly in
Gods favor, to whom God spoke face to face, a Ruler, and Savior, unto his
people Israel. Yet for his sin the Lord would not suffer him to go into the
land of Canaan. I do not doubt of the salvation of Miriam, the sister of Moses,
that repined against Moses, because she was no Prophetess, or at least in that
authority as Moses himself was: yet God stroke her with the Leprosy. Though
the Lord pardoned the sin of David upon his true repentance, 2. Sam. 12.10.11.
yet the sword is sent against his house, and his own wives are defiled. We
may see this in the Israelites, in their iourneying toward the Land of Canaan,
for whose sin of murmuring against Moses and Aaron, Psalm. 90.
the Lord brought heavy judgments upon them, until they were almost wasted
and consumed. And thus dealt the Lord with the Church of Corinth, for their
want of their godly preparation in coming to the Lords Table, the Apostle tells
them, 1 Cor. 11.30.
For this cause some are sick, and some are weak, and some are fallen asleep.

And it must needs be thus.

First, David, Hezekiah, Manasses, etc. that they might for future times keep
the better watch over their own hearts, and over their own ways, since sin
brings with it more bitterness at last, then sweetness at first: and herein
preuents more heavy judgments, which otherwise they would draw upon
themselves.

Secondly, David's example, Noah, Peter, etc. and yet the Lord did sharply and
severely correct them. How much more would they be encouraged by their
examples, if the Lord had any whit spared them therein.

The consideration whereof,

Secondly, upon them, as Christ himself had? Does not Hezekiah complain that
the Lord bruised his bones like a Lion? Esaias 53.
And Job likewise that the Lord set him as a mark to shoot at, and that the
venom of the arrows of the Almighty had drunk up his spirits?

And so likewise for the Church of God, how many patheticall complaints does it
put up in times of misery, as in the whole book of the Lamentation, and
elsewhere, of whom it is said, Thou feedest them with the bread of tears,
Psalm. 80.5.
and give them tears to drink in great measure. And again, in what a
miserable condition was the Church in, when the Prophet complains of it thus:
Psalm. 29.2.
The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of
the heaven: and the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the earth. Their
blood have they shed like water, etc. and yet notwithstanding precious in Gods
account.

Hitherto of the Penitent his request unto Christ. Christ's answer follows.

VERSE 43. And Jesus said unto him,


HItherto of the Penitents Petition. Now follows Christ's answer, Verily I say
unto thee, etc.

Wherein are obscruable,

1. Christ's asseueration, (Verily.)

2. Person to whom, (Thou.)

3. Promise it self, (Shall be with me.)

4. Place (Paradise.)

5. Time, (This day.)

And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, etc.
The word Englished here, Verily, in the original is, Amen, and is seldom or
never translated either in the Greek, Latin, English, or any other language.
It is used often both in the old and new Testament: And the use thereof is
twofold.

First, it is used for an earnest wish and desire of the heart: and thus when
David had appointed Solomon to be Ruler over Israel, 1. King. 1.36.
Benaiah the son of Iehoida answered David, saying, Amen: therein testifying
his unfeigned desire that it should be so. And thus in those solemn cursings
which the Levites must pronounce with a loud voice in the hearing of the
people; The people to signify that their assent thereunto, to every particular
thereof must say, Amen. And thus it is used in our Church at the shuting up of
our prayers, wherein we testify our desire to be heard and answered in those
things we pray for.

Secondly, the same is used again for an earnest affirmation and asseueration,
as in that speech of our Savior unto Nichodemus, wherein the word is twice
together repeated, Amen, Amen, Dico tibi, Job. 3.11.
etc. Verily, verily, I say unto thee. And is there in that place, as also in
this, in the nature of an oath, wherein our Savior will assure Nichodemus, and
also this Penitent here, of the undoubted certainty of that he spoke, and
promised, binding his promise here for the further confirmation of his faith,
with a kind of oath, Verily I say unto thee.

The Doctrine that from hence may be concluded for our Instruction, It is a won
derful hard thing truly to believe.
is; How difficult a matter it is truly to believe in Christ. Christ promising
this Penitent forgiveness of sins, the salvation of his soul, and that that
very day he should be with him in Paradise. He is feign for the further
confirmation of his faith, to use this asseueration, Verily, and all to
persuade him of the truth of his promise. To believe aright in Christ, is not a
work of Nature, nor a thing that a natural man in himself is disposed to,
but it is a supernatural work of Gods Spirit. Phil. 1.
To you it is given to believe, says Paul, yea it is a work of Gods Almighty
power: Ephe. 1.19
That ye may know the greatness of his power to us ward who believe, according
to the working of his mighty power. This made the Prophet Isaiah to complain,
and to say, Esaias 53.1.
Lord who has believed our report, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been
revealed? The old world would not believe Noah's preaching. Genesis 6.
Neither was Lot regarded of his sons and Sodomites, Genesis 18.
but he seemed unto them as if he had mocked. We may see this in Gideon, he
was a man sent of God to be a deliverer of the people of Israel, the Lord had
assured him by his Angel that he would deliver Israel out of the hands of the
Midianites by his hand. Yet he is so hardly brought to believe this, as that he
asks a sign: Judge. 6.14.36.
If thou will save Israel by my hands, as thou have said, behold I will put a
fleece of wool in the threshing place, etc. The like we have in Sarah, albeit
she had heard the promise that God had made to Abraham her husband, Genesis 17.16
that God would give her a son, Genesis 18.12
I will bless thee (says God) and give thee a son. She laughed at it. Which
was as much as if she should have said, This is a jest indeed. We may see this
most clear in the people of Israel, though the Lord from time to time had
given good demonstration of his love, power, goodness, and mercy toward
them, which might have caused that people for ever to have trusted in his
help, and never to have despaired of the same in time of their greatest need.
Yet still when the outward means of their deliverance failed, they believed
not Gods promises, insomuch that the Lord again and again complains of
them: Number. 14.11
How long will this people provoke me? How long will it be ere they believe
me? for all the signs which I have showed among them? And, How often did they
provoke him in the wilderness, and grieved him in the desert?

The like example of man's imbecilitie and weakness in believing the promises
of God. We may see this in Zachary, the father of the Baptist, who bewrays
his infidelity in this, that could not be induced to believe the Angel
touching a Son which Elizabeth his wife should bear unto him. Luke 1.13.
Which promise the Angel amplified for the further confirmation of his faith.
First, by his Office, he should go before Christ. Secondly, from the graces
of God which should be bestowed upon him, and the effects of his Ministry.
Notwithstanding all this, Zachary remains still incredulous and distrustful,
saying unto the Angel, Whereby shall I know this? The Angel had assured
Zachary before, that the Lord had heard his prayer, Fear not Zachary, for thy
prayer is heard. And yet he is hardly brought to believe the promise. The like
we may see in Peter, a man full of faith, and the holy Ghost; in so much that
when Christ bade him come upon the Sea, Ma. 1.8.
he left the ship, but a wave arising, his faith failed him. And thus was it
with the Virgin Mary, when as the Angel came unto her, and told her that she
had found favor in the sight of God: Luke 1.39.
How shall this be (says she) seeing I know not a man? It seemed to her a
strange thing, that she should have a child when she had not companied with a
man. So that let the Lord promise immediately by himself, by his Angels, or by
men, yet are we hardly brought to believe: So hard and difficult a thing in the
heart of a man faith is. Neither is this a thing to be wondered at.

For first, plants that grow in the garden of our hearts naturally: Ephesians. 2.8.
No it is not of our selves (says the Apostle) it is the gift of God. Nature
has furnished us with no principle at all concerning Christ, concerning
eternal life, or the salvation of our souls. And hence it comes to pass,
that because the means whereby God usually works faith in our hearts, and so
consequently salvation, seem unto our carnal reason to be unlikely, we
presently reject them, like Naaman, when he was commanded to wash in Iordane
seven times: Are not (says he) Admah and Pharphar, 2. King. 5.
rivers in Damascus, better then all the waters in Iordane? Even so that by
Christ's death we should come to life, by his shame that we should come to
glory; by his stripes that we should be healed; Isa. 53.5.
and that the Gospel should be the word of reconciliation, that has no
estimation for wisdom or authority in the world: O how hard a thing is this
to bring our corrupt hearts to believe this?

Secondly, 1 Cor. 1.23.
That the preaching of Christ crucified, was to the Jews a stumbling block,
and to the Greeks, foolishness; yea, 1 Pet. 2.8.
Christ himself is to some a very Rock of offense. How then is it possible
that such should ever attain this saving grace truly to believe?

And last of all, Phil. 1.
To you it is given to believe. And when the Apostles preached the Word, the
Text says, Acts 22.
As many as were ordained to eternal life believed, and is therefore called
the faith of Gods elect. As for wicked and ungodly men, the Apostle concludes
of such, 1 These. 3.2
All men have not faith.

Seeing then it is so hard and difficult a matter, Romans 10:
For how can they believe on him on whom they have not heard? yet persuade
themselves that they have faith as well as the best, as if it were so easy a
matter truly to believe, which indeed no less power must effect in us, then
the mighty power of God. Ephesians. 1.19.
Such men do wonderfully deceive themselves. How many have we amongst us that
live in gross and palpable ignorance, and turn their backs upon the
ordinance of God, having no delight therein, living in all manner of open
profaneness, these men must needs be strangers from the covenant of promise,
and howsoever they may brag of their hope of eternal life, yet as the Apostle
says, They are without hope, Ephesians 2.2.
without God in the world.

Yea, but they believe, say they, all the Articles of the Christian faith, and
repeat them daily. But this may be a dead and vain faith, when it does not
work by love of piety toward God, and charity toward men. And
notwithstanding all this, the Lord will profess against such in the last day,
Mat. 7.22.
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

Yea, but they come to Church, hear the Word, receive the Sacrament, pray to
God, and mean well, though they be not so precise and forward as others are. O
but consider that of the Apostle, Without faith it is impossible to please God.
And again, The word which they heard, Heb. 4.
profited them not, because it was not mixed with faith in them that heard it.
It is faith that is all in all, that gives acceptance to all our service we
do unto God, Heb. 11.6.
and without faith it is impossible to please him.

But how may I know that my faith is true,

First, outward performance of holy duties and the like, which may be in a
natural man, and an unbeliever.

But by those proper fruits of faith, which are peculiar only to the elect;
Such as are an inward love of God, of his Word, and Children, a willing
subjection of the heart and life to Gods will renealed, a constant communion
with his Majesty in prayer, etc. which are the proper fruits of a true
believer, and evermore flow from a justifying faith.

Secondly, Acts 15.9.
and purifying the conscience daily from dead works, and inclining the same
daily to the performance of the duties of holiness readily and chearefully.

Secondly, faith is all in all in the matter of salvation; yea, salvation it
self in attributed thereunto, Believe and thou shall be saved; Acts 16.
where that is attributed to the instrument, which belongs indeed to the
principal efficient to show the excellency of this grace in it self, as also
the necessity thereof in those that look for life and salvation. This is that
will stid us in the evil day, this gives us to participate of the new
covenant, and will assure our hearts of the full fruition of everlasting life
at last: Ioh. 3.16.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me, has everlasting
life: where Christ binds his promise of everlasting salvation only unto the
believer, with the like asseueration he does unto this Penitent here, Verily
this day thou shall be with me, etc.

And last of all, they were like men in a dream. Psalm. 126.
Only we are to take heed that we do not please our selves, or rest in any
such doubtings, for that will be marvelous uncomfortable, but to labor to
come out thereof, and to get assurance, which is done by frequenting the
public ministry of the Word, whereby faith is begotten and increased in us,
by the reverent use of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Romans 4.11.
for that is the Seal of the righteousness of faith, by renewing of our
repentance daily, and by keeping a more strict watch over our lives, whereby
we shall come daily more and more to be settled and stablished in our holy
and precious faith.

Verily I say unto thee,
The next thing we are to observe in Christ's asseueration, is the certainty of
his promise, the which to persuade this Penitent unto, Christ is pleased to
bind with a kind of oath, verily. q. d. Thou shall not need to doubt, or any
way call into question that I now promise unto thee, that thou shall be this
day with me in Paradise, for I assure thee thou may rest upon it, that I
will make good my word therein; though thou see me now without form or
beauty, forsaken of all, and accountest thy self unworthy of such a mercy,
Verily I say unto thee, this day, etc.

That we may observe in the next place is, that

There is an unchangeable certainty in all Gods promises, There is an
unchangeable certainty in all Gods promises. Mat. 24.
his Word shall surely be accomplished: Heaven and earth shall pass away, but
my Word shall not pass away. He is not as man, that he should lie, or the
son of man that he should change. Has he said it, and shall he not do it?
who has resisted his will? He is most just in all his promises he makes
with his servants, and will in his due time accomplish all his judgments
threatened against the wicked, he is yea and Amen, Reu. 2.
The faithful and true witness. I will not falsisie my truth (says the Lord)
My covenant will I not break, Psalm. 89.33
nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. We may see this in the Lords
manner of dealing with his servants, as to Abraham, David, and the rest. Thou will (says the Prophet) perform thy truth to Jacob, Mic. 7.20.
and mercy to Abraham, as thou have sworn to our forefathers in old time. Mal.
3.6.
I am the Lord, and change not, and therefore he is called Jehovah, one, that
as he has his being of himself, and from himself, so gives he the being to
all creatures, that have their being, so likewise gives he being to all his
promises. This is that Iosuah observes concerning the Lords promises made unto
the people of Israel, Ios. 21.44.
There failed nothing of all the good things which the Lord had said unto the
house of Israel, but all came to pass. We may see this in that first covenant
and promise God made with Adam having sinned, Genesis 3.15.
The seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head; what though the same
promise seems to be forgotten, it being almost 4000. years after, Gal. 4.4.
wherein God made the same good. Yet when the fullness of time was come, God
sent his Son. We must not tie the Lord to any time when to help, he
knows the fittest and the best time to relieve his distressed servants.

Neither are we to be discouraged, though we be not by and by delivered out of
misery. The people of Israel were promised deliverance out of captivity, yet
it was a long time first. David was delayed so long, before deliverance came,
as that he cries out, Psalm. 13.
How long will thou forget me? God deals with men herein as a Physician
deals with his Patient, when he requires wine in the fit of a burning
Fever, I will not give it, says he, not because he will never give him wine,
but because he knows when it is best to give it, thus deals he with his
servant, making choice of the most seasonable time to send comfort.

And as the Lord will in his due time make good his promises unto his children;
so will he also make good those his denuntiations of judgments against the
wicked. What became of his denuntiation against the old world in the days of
Noah? Genesis 7.
As God had a time to threaten, he had a time also to punish. What became of
that judgment the Lord threatened against Jericho, Ios. 6.26.
that the man should be accursed of God that should go about to reedisie that
cursed City: That he should lay the foundation in the blood of his eldest
son, and rear up the gates thereof in the blood of his youngest son. What
though this Judgment seemed to be forgotten many hundred years, did not the
Lord make the same good afterward in Hiel? 1. King. 16.34.
And so likewise concerning the Prince of Samariah, that would not believe the
Prophet, touching that plenty the Lord would give in that City, 2. King. 7.
the judgment threatened for his incredulity was afterward inflicted upon him.

Though the Lord be full of lenity, to keep off his hand a long time from
the wicked, yet all his judgments shall be accomplished in their season; and
in the end the Lord will pay them home. For whatsoever he has said in his
Word shall surely come to pass. Though it go well with the wicked a while, and
they flourish like a green Palm Tree, though their Cow calue in due season,
though they have riches, and leave Inheritances to their babes; yet there is a
day of reckoning, when all things that God has threatened shall be
accomplished.

And the reason hereof may be drawn from the unchangeableness of Gods nature.
Mal. 3.6.
I am the Lord and change not. Cursed Balaam can acknowledge this truth,
perceiving in himself how he was led by an ouer-ruling hand to bless Gods
people when he feign would have cursed them. God is not (says he) as man that
he should lie, Number. 23.19.
neither as the son of man that he should repent. Has he said, and shall he
not do it: has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? Job 23.13.
He is (says Job) of one mind, and who can turn him? He does what his mind
desires.

Secondly, God of might: able to do whatsoever he will in heaven and earth. So
says God of himself to Abraham, I am God all sufficient. Genesis 17.1.
Genesis 35.11
The same esaith he to Jacob, I am God all-sufficient, grow and multiply. Our
Savior Christ says, Mat. 19.26
With God all things are possible. Most plentiful be the places that commend
unto us the power of God, and all to show that nothing can hinder him from
executing the purpose of his own will.

Seeing then that there is such an undoubted certainty in Gods Word, of Christ
in the flesh; the calling of the Gentiles, etc. So shall it be touching all
those promises that are not yet accomplished. Such as are,

The calling of the Jews; what though now they be cut off for a time, through
their unbelief, Romans 11.
God has promised to graft them in again; and he will make good his promise.

The overthrow of Antichrist, That has made all Nations drunk with the wine
of her fornication: What though now she sit as a Queen, and says, I shall see
no more sorrow, God will bring her plagues upon her in that day, when he will
visit her in wrath, and render vengeance upon her, for all her spiritual
whoredoms she has committed, and innocent blood of the Saints she has shed.

The resurrection of our bodies, what though now they moulder to ashes, and
taste of corruption, they shall not perish in corruption, but the Lord Jesus
shall raise them up in the last day, and make these vile bodies of ours like
unto his glorious body.

The coming of Christ to judgment; What though the cursed Atheists of the
world say, Where is the promise of his coming, 2. Pet. 3.4.
for since the beginning all things continue alike? Yet the day of the Lord
will come as a Thief in the night. And he that has promised to come, will
come, and will not tarry.

Yea, for whatsoever we have a promise, say, I know whom I have believed. 2.
Tim. 1.12
His word is unchangeable as himself is, who is truth it self, and cannot
lie.

And as this yields matter of comfort and consolation unto the godly, in the
undoubted expectation of his promises that are yet to come; So serves it also
to set out unto us, the misery of all wicked and ungodly men, every impenitent
and hard-hearted sinner, for God will not dally with us, but will in time make
good all his threatenings he has denounced against sin and sinners; for God
is unchangeable, true in the one, as in the other: he tendereth his Justice as
he regards his mercy. Oh the misery of every impenitent and hard-hearted
sinner, that lies in sin, and so under the curses of the Law, he is as sure
one day to partake of the same, as if he were under them already. And indeed if
the question were asked, what difference there were betwixt the damned in hell,
and the impenitent on earth: I know none other but this, the one is a reaping
the reward of sin, the other is a heaping up of wrath against that day: the
certainty of judgment is to them both alike. O that all wicked and ungodly
men could but see their happiness, that that day is not yet come upon them,
but that the Lord does yet afford them a season of grace, and time to repent
in; and that they would remember Solomon's Proverb, A prudent man foreseeth the
evil, Pro. 22.3.
and hides himself. It is righteousness that delivers from death. Whereas
Riches avail not in the day of wrath: Pro. 11.4.
nor no outward thing can profit in the evil day.


As Christ was pleased to compassionate this man in this time of his misery,
pardoning his sins, and receiving him into savor; so he would have him
persuaded of his love herein, and no way to doubt or question the truth of his
promise. Verily I say unto thee,

Gods children as they have Gods Word to assure them of the pardon of their
sins upon their repentance, Godly must labor to be persuaded of Gods love
toward them.
so it is his pleasure that they should believe the same his promises unto life
and salvation, and no way to doubt of the truth thereof. This is the tenure of
that covenant of grace God makes with his Church. This shall be my covenant,
Ier. 31.33.34.
I will make with the House of Israel, after those days, says the Lord, I
will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will
be their God, and they shall be my people, etc. And they shall all know me from
the greatest of them to the least of them. It is the speech of the Spouse that
speaks thus, Can. 2.16.
My beloved is mine, and I am his. The Church there was thoroughly persuaded of
Christ's love: again, Behold (says Saint John) what love the Father has
showed unto us, 1 Ioh. 3.1. Ver. 2. Ver. 14.
that we should be called the sons of God. Now we are the Sons of God, etc.
and hereby we know, etc.

But this Thiese might know this,

Yes verily this comfort is not intayled and appropriated to this Penitent
only, to make their calling and election sure, 2 Cor. 13.5
and to work out their salvation in fear and trembling; and for the further
clearing of this truth, consider

First, Hab. 2.5.
according to that of the Prophet, The just shall live by his own faith.

Secondly, then one man can be nourished by another man's feeding. The just
shall live by his own faith. No faith is of that nature that it is ever
exercised about applying of Christ, his merits, his righteousness and
obedience to the soul of every true believer.

Thirdly, the Seals of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11
and these we know are delivered in particular to every one, thereby to assure
him of Christ, the pardon of his sins, and the salvation of his soul in
particular.

The uses follow.

This serves then in the first place to let us see what an uncomfortable Tenet
that is in the Church of Rome, salvation, other then coniecturall, unless it
be made known unto him by special revelation; nay, more by the Council of
Trent, he is in danger of an Anathema, that is, to be accursed, that shall
affirm that he is assured of his salvation. He that will be a Papist, is
bound by the rule of that religion, to the end and period of his days to live
in suspense, a most uncomfortable religion, and then the which, what more
uncomfortable Doctrine, it being the breaknecke of all true comfort unto a
Christian soul.

We teach and hold that a Christian may doubt, which is not his virtue,
inasmuch as doubting is opposite unto says, and therefore if the one be
commanded, the other must needs be forbidden. They teach and hold that we must
doubt, and let him be assured, says the Council, if he either think or
endeavor any certainty or assurance. Miserable comforters are they, as Job
says of his friends: and herein what do they else, but rob God of his glory,
and deprive a Christian soul of his chiefest joy.

Now I would not be mistaken, as though I meant that the comfort and assurance
of a Christians salvation, were so firm and certain, as that the same were
never intermixed, and ouer-clouded. There is no such assurance in this life to
be looked for, nay rather Gods people have felt much fear and doubtings in
themselves. Hezechias complains, Esa. 39.
that the Lord had bruised his bones like a Lion. And David is full of
complainings, Psalm. 31.22 Psalm 77.7.
I am cast out of thy sight, will the Lord show no more favor? and has he
shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? And again, Psalm. 69.3.
My eyes faint for waiting so long upon my God. Nay, I dare add this further,
that he which never doubted of his salvation, had never true faith to believe
aright the pardon of his sins, and the assurance of his salvation, for had
thou faith, thou might assure thy self that Satan would winnow thee.

But what manner of assurance then is this you speak of?

Not an assurance that is free from doubtings and fears, it, but to settle it
the more: and thus the Lord by suffering the faith of his chosen sometimes to
be shaken, will have their hearts rooted and grounded in him, whilst they
learn to deny themselves, and to rest in him their strength.

Secondly, role themselves upon the beds of roses, Can.
as she confesses, and that to cause them so much the more cheerfully to
serve him. This may serve for our instruction to try our hearts, and to see
whether the work of grace and of faith be wrought in us. It is the advice of
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.5
Prove your selves whether ye be in the faith: and how shall we do this, but
by making particular application unto our selves of those things we believe.
In the matters of this life it is cucry man's care to doale upon certainties,
for tenures of lands, for Conueyances, Leases, etc. Council is entertained,
and every word therein is scanned, men will not deal but upon good grounds.
But alas, for the matter of our chief inheritance, how simply do men deal
therein, they are content to rest upon a bare hope, and think that a Lord have
mercy upon me, will serve the turn. What means the Apostle to say, Give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure: but to show that a Christians
chiefest care must be for this.

But how may a man come to this assurance of his salvation?

We must get good evidence and assurance of our faith in Christ, As many as
believed in him, Ioh. 1.12.
to them gave he this power to be made the sons of God, even to them that
believe on his name. And again, We are saved by faith. No man can have the
spirit of adoption, that wants faith to believe.

Now for the obtaining of this grace of saving faith, the ordinary means is
the preaching of the Word: Romans 10.17.
faith comes by hearing, and the Gospel is called the word of faith: upon
that then we are to attend with all care and diligence, as we look to get
faith, and so consequently, the salvation of our own souls.

Secondly, we be in the state of salvation or not, Romans 8.16.
His spirit bears witness to our spirit that we are the sons of God.

Now concerning this testimony of Gods spirit, I will not make my self so
skillful to define what it is, it is better felt then expressed. The Prophet calls
it The hearing of a voice behind us, Esa. 38.21.
whereby the heart comes to be persuaded of it reconciliation with God.

But how shall I know that my persuasion is not presumption?

There be two special marks whereby we may distinguish betwixt them.

First, that undoubtedly is the voice of Gods spirit, when comfort and
assurance is felt in the heart, after such time as the heart has first been
humbled and cast down in the sight and sense of sin; Psalm.
My heart (says David) is as wax, it is molten in the midst of my body, for
in the time of a man's security, when he has little or no apprehension of
sin, then for a man to hope well, and to conclude of his own salvation, is
no strange thing; nothing is more usual in the world amongst mere natural men
that never felt the smart of sin, then to brag and boast of this assurance
of salvation: but alas, they raise up this building but upon a sandy
foundation, which will never stand in the time of try all: for it is Gods
manner of dealing usually in this work of man's salvation, to lay full low, whom
he intends to advance full high; by sorrow to bring them unto joy, by death
to bring them unto life, and by their humiliation for sin, to bring them to
glory: so that when a man has once truly felt the smart of sin, when a man
has once combated with Gods wrath, and the terrors of hell have possessed his
soul, here is a good foundation to build the hope of heaven upon, for
humiliation is the ground of exaltation, and after this to stay a man's self
upon the promise of God in Christ, is undoubtedly the voice of Gods spirit, a
token of true comfort, and a note of true joy.

Secondly, attended the poasts of the Lords Sanctuary, etc. This is undoubtedly
the voice of Gods spirit, and not of presumption. But if on the contrary part,
thou never yet feltest such grief of heart for sin, thy conscience did never
yet torment thee in the sight and sense of sin, neither have thou ever had
any delight in the Lords Sabbaoths, nor the duties of holiness, etc. O deceive
not thy own soul, thy hope of heaven, of eternal life and salvation is mere
presumption, and no true assurance.

Thou shall be with me
The next thing we are to observe, To whom.
is the person to whom the promise is mad, and that is the Penitent that had
confessed a good confession, and had given so good testimony of his faith in
Christ, acknowledging his deity at this time, when all the world despised him,
and resting on him alone for life and salvation, to him is the promise made,
Thou shall be with me.

Whence we may note first of all, The prayers of the godly very effectual with
God.
The wonderful force of the prayers of the godly, how powerful and effectual
the same are with God. Such as lay a good foundation in humiliation for sin,
and have labored by true repentance their reconciliation with the Almighty,
these are they that prevail most of all with God in prayer. See we this in the
example of this poor Penitent, who having given good testimony of his true
repentance and conversion unto God, how powerful is he in prayer, what a
gracious answer does the Lord give unto him, Verily, thou shall be with me.
The best way to have our wills satisfied and our requests granted, is to be
godly, for to such is the promise made. God is near to all that call upon him,
Psalm. 145.18.19.
yea to all that call upon him in truth. He will fulfill the desires of those
that fear him, he also will hear their cry and will help them. We may see
this in the Lords merciful dealing with the people of Israel, who being sore
oppressed by the Canaanites, who took of them prisoners, they humbled
themselves, and besought the Lord, and the Text says, Number. 21.3.
The Lord heard the voice of Israel. Yea the Lord to testify that his ready
disposition, to hear and to grant the prayers of his servants, declares by
his Prophet, saying, Before they call I will answer, Isa. 65.24.
and whilst they speak I will hear. Thus David, Psalm. 120.1
I called upon the Lord in trouble, and he heard me. The faithful being suitors
unto God, are always sure of good success, yea many times above that they
ask or think, as we shall see hereafter in this Penitent, that the Angel
tells Cornelius, a godly man, Act. 10.4.
that his prayers were heard. Yea the more Gods people can get their hearts to
be broken and humbled in the sense of their sins, the more powerful and
effectual are their prayers with God. A broken and contrite heart, Psalm. 51.17.
O God, thou will not despise. This David found by comfortable experience in
himself, that when in the pride of his heart he had numbered the people, for
whose sin the Lord sent that grievous plague upon them. When he humbled
himself, before the Lord, confessed his sin: 1. Chron. 21.17.27.
It is I that have sinned: But what have these sheep done? How suddenly upon
this did the Lord command the Angel to put up his sword? When Israel was in
great affliction and distress, still They cried unto the Lord in their
troubles, and the Text says, Psalm. 107.10.
He delivered them out of their distress. How powerful were the prayers of
Moses against the Amalekites, Exodus 17.
that Israel prevailed all the while the hands of Moses were held up, and he
besought the Lord in the behalf of the people. Yea Ioash does acknowledge that
the prayers of Elisha, 2. King. 13.14.
an holy Prophet of God, stood his kingdom in more stead, then all the
chariots and horsemen of Israel could do.

Neither is this to be wondered at, that the prayers of the faithful are of
this force with God to prevail with him. For,

First, chosen ones the Spirit of supplication and prayer; Zach. 12.
Which does so enable the faithful unto this duty, that they will have no nay,
or receive no repulse at Gods hand, according to that of the Apostle; 1. Ioh.
5.14.15.
This is the assurance we have in God, that if we ask any thing according to
his will, he hears us. And if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask
we know that we shall have the petitions we desire of him.

Secondly, Ask, and ye shall have: seek, Mat. 7.7.
and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one
that asks, receives, etc. This is indeed the very groundworke and foundation
of the Christian prayer, namely, Gods promise, which is as true and
unchangeable as himself is, without which we could never so confidently come
unto him.

But many of the godly have prayed much and often unto God,

God does not forget his servants, Abraham a promise of a son by Sarah, this
Abraham expected, ten, twenty, yea almost thirty years, who would have
thought all this while that God had forgot his promise? but yet we know at last
in a seasonable time God remembered the covenant and promise that he made with
Abraham, and Sarah had a son. The Lord promised the posterity of Abraham the
Land of Canaan, yet in what a miserable bondage were they in, in Egypt under
Pharaoh, and that for the space of four hundred and thirty years; who would
not have thought that surely God had not remembered his promise to Abraham? yet
at last the Lord brought them out with a mighty hand and stretched. out arm.

But what might be the reason of the Lords dealing with his people after this
manner?

Doubtless God delayeth to answer the requests of his servants till a more
seasonable time; wine. The Lord, in whose hands are times and seasons, chooses
ever a fit time to answer the requests of his servants.

Secondly, Jews but acknowledge Gods goodness toward them in the time of
Hester, when they were all appointed unto death, when besides all hope the Lord
sent them deliverance? How could Israel but acknowledge his mighty power and
stretched out arm, when they came out of the land of Egypt, when the Sea was
before them, the Egyptians behind them: the mountains on each hand of them,
and they left void of all humane help and means to escape? Exodus 15.
Now was it a seasonable time for the Lord to step in, that his own power
and stretched-out arm might be seen. At what a low ebb did the Lord bring
Daniel, Dan. 3.
and those three worthies, when one in the Lions den, the other in the fieric
furnace, when all hope of deliverance was past, and humane help failed, then
was his power most seen, and then was deliverance most seasonable.

Thirdly, and valor till then cannot be known.

If the prayers of Gods servants be thus powerful and effectual with him,
Hanna and Zachary had often prayed for children, yet obtained not
Notwithstanding they prayed still, and at last the Lord heard them. So Daniel
he was in heaviness three weeks of days, Dan. 10.12
and to his thinking God heard him not, yet the Lord heard him indeed from the
first day, as he said to Daniel, From the first day that he had set his heart
to understand.

Paul when the prick of the flesh was given unto him, the messenger of Satan
was sent to buffet him; he therefore besought the Lord that it might depart
from him. But he received this answer, 2. Cor. 12.7.8.9.
My grace is sufficient for thee, my power is made perfect in thy weakness.
Paul was heard though not at the first: and therefore when we shall pray for
some blessing of the Lord, which we stand in need of, or when we shall crave
power of the Lord over some unruly affection of ours; though we have not answer
by and by, yet we are not to leave off. This Christ teaches us when he says,
Shall not God avenge the elect, Luke 18.
that cry day and night unto him? Mark there Christ's sweet application of that
unrighteous Judge, to teach us to continue our suites, and to hold out, and
then we shall not miss in the end.

Secondly, privilege of Gods Church and people, that no man should say, Man.
3.14.
It is in vain to serve the Lord, and what profit is it that we have kept the
commandments, and have walked humbly before him? It is sure to go well with
them, they are in great credit and esteem in the Court of heaven; they are all
Favorites to the great King of heaven and earth, and he has commanded such at
all times, to have free access unto him, and to enlarge their desires with a
promise of a gracious answer, Ioh. 16.24.
Ask (says our Savior) and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.
What though for a time they lie under troubles and sorrows, miseries and
afflictions, Romans 8.37.
Are they not herein more then conquerours through him that has loved them?
The present miseries of the faithful cannot hinder their happiness, but
through the Lords goodness they shall make way to their everlasting felicity.

Let all Gods people then walk worthy of this calling, and take heed that they
no way forfeit his favor and love. There is no comfort like unto this in this
life, at all times to have free access into Gods presence, and to have a
comfortable return of our prayers, to obtain health in sickness, rest in
trouble, safety in danger, joy in sorrow, comfort in adversity, yea hope in
death, and assurance of future happiness with this Penitent here when we
depart hence: then the which what greater royalties and privileges can there
belong to any?

Thirdly, all Gods people to be frequent in this duty, The righteous cry, and
the Lord hears and delivers them out of all their troubles. And again,
Psalm. 81.10.
The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous fly unto it, and are
helped. The Lord does call upon us that we should call upon him. Psalm. 50.15
Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and deliver thee.
This is the only refuge of a Christian in time of trouble and distress. Only
care must be had, that we be earnest and constant in our suits, For the
prayers of the righteous auailes much, Iam. 5.16.
if it be fervent. God delivers the poor when he cries. Psalm. 72.12.
If we would have hearing, there must be crying. God pours forth floods of
grace: But upon whom? Isa. 44.3.
On the thirsty ground. Indeed many pray, and prevail not, because they do it
so drowsily and carelessly, the Lord defers to keep them, because they are not
fit for help, they strive and wrestle not with God as Jacob did, and this is
the reason that the godly many times are not answered in prayer.

Thou shall be with me

Many were the offenses of this man, and of long continuance, yet mercy in a
moment takes them all away: very sweet and comfortable may our lesson be,

That the sins of the Penitent cannot hinder their salvation, The sins of the
Penitent cannot hinder salvation.
but the Lord is merciful to great sinners when once they come to see their
sins, and truly convert and turn unto him; we may see the truth hereof in
this present example. Here we have an example of humane frailty, of a man led
by the sway and swinge of his own corruptions, one that had run riot a long
time, living by rapine, cruelty, cutting of throats, shedding of blood, and in
all manner of excess, without God in this world, led by the god of the world,
yet now at last received into favor. It skils not what our sins are, or how
great they have been, but how true our sorrow and unfeigned our repentance is:
repentance going before, mercy ever follows after. This the Prophet teaches
in the name of the Lord, Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your
doings from before my eyes, cease from evil, etc. Come now and let us reason
together says the Lord, Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow, and though they be red like crimson, etc. The same the Lord
declares by his Prophet Ezechiel, Eze. 18 21 22.23.
where he says, If the wicked will turn from the sins he has committed,
and keep my statutes, and do the thing that is lawful and right, he shall
surely live and not dye. This truth is further cleared by that of Job, God
(says he) looked upon men, Job 33.27.28.
and if one say I have sinned and perverted righteousness, and it does not
profit me, he will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life
shall see the light. Yea, this is the thing that Solomon prays for in that
excellent prayer of his at the dedication of the Temple, If they turn unto
thee with all their hearts, 1 Reg. 8 47
in the land to the which they be carried captives, and return, and prey unto
thee saying, We have sinned, we have transgressed and done wickedly, then
hear thou their prayer in heaven, etc. Consider the example of Manasses, 2
Chro. 33.12.13.
how desperately wretched and sinful soever he had been, yet in his
captivity, returning unto the Lord with all his heart, found mercy with him.
Luke 17 48 Act. 16.26.
Of Peter that denied his Master, of Paul that persecuted the Church, of David
that committed Adultery and Murder, of Solomon that fell to idolatry, of Mary
Magdalene, out of whom were cast seven devils, of the Jews that crucified the
Lord of life, Act. 2.37.
of the Iaylour, etc. All which repenting of their sins, and returning from
their iniquities, had their sins pardoned, and were themselves received into
favor: neither is this a thing to be wondered at, for,

First, says the Apostle, If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Upon
this ground, the holy Apostle terms that which God will bestow at the day of
account upon the elect, a Crown of righteousness, and that which shall be
conferred upon them by that righteous Judge, not because the works of the
faithful are meritorious, as the gloss of the Papists is upon that place, but
because of the Lords merciful promise made unto every true believer in Christ,
and having made himself a debtor by promise (says an Ancient) it is agreeable
to justice that he should perform the same.

Secondly, only. Esa. 33.24.
Thy people that dwell there shall have their iniquities forgiven: Yea, it is
part of that promise God has made to those that are within the covenant. The
days come says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant, for I will forgive
their iniquity, and remember their sins no more.

A third reason may be taken from the nature of true repentance, debt, forigue
us our debts; Repentance is a cancelling of that band, and a discharging of
that debt.

Seeing then that the sins of the penitent cannot hinder their salvation,
Noah's Dove, a messenger of glad tidings unto the godly, and that which may
yield singular comfort to every penitent sinner. Is thy heart truly humbled in
the sense of thy sins? is it thy chiefest grief and sorrow that thou have
offended so good and so gracious a God and Father in Jesus Christ? does thy
spirit droope and groan under the burden of thy transgressions, so as thou
abhorrest thy self with Job, Job 42.6.
and repentest in dust and ashes? Thou can pass the sentence of condemnation
against thy self, acknowledging that if the Lord should do thee justice, he
might justly condemn thee for ever. Consider then for thy comfort, this being
thy case, God cannot withold from thee comfort, it cannot stand with the rule
of justice to deny thee mercy. Nay, more, thou may in a holy boldness
challenge God of his word and promise, which it cannot stand with his honor
and justice not to perform. God should not be just in his promises, if he
should not pardon the sins of the penitent.

O how may this comfort the hearts of such as mourn in Sion, that hang down
their heads as being ashamed to lift up the same to heaven, that go mourning
all the day long; let such comfortably apply this doctrine unto themselves.
Thou desire nothing more in all the world, then Gods favor, his countenance
and grace, and it is thy greatest grief that thou inioyest it not: Remember to
thy comfort, Christ will not quench the smoking flax, Mat 12.20
nor break asunder the bruised reed; he can as well deny himself, and cease
to be God, as to deny mercy to those that truly see their sins, are humbled
for them, and sue unto him for the pardon of the same. And for thy further
comfort herein, consider that thy sins, whatsoever they have been, have been
but the sins of a poor, weak, and frail man, and the mercy thou shall have
in the pardon of them, is the mercy of a God, even of a God of mercy, betwixt
which there is no comparison.

But does not God without repentance, grant remission of sins,

I answer, that remission of sins,

First,

Secondly, beleeuc, are not of our selves, neither are they common to all, but
they come from God, proving (says the Apostle) if at any time God will give
them repentance unto life. 1 Timothy


Thirdly,

Secondly, through the deceitfulness of sin: take we heed that we do not
abuse his patience and forbearance, or take occasion of liberty to turn this
grace of his into wantonness: Romans 2.4. Romans 6.1.2
Shall we sin (says the Apostle) because grace should abound? God forbid.
Nay rather let us know that they that wait upon lying vanities, Ion. 2.8.
forsake their own mercy. The longer that any remain in the mire of sin,
the faster they stick therein; Reu. 3.
God will not at all times offer the like mercy, neither will he ever stand and
knock at the door of our hearts; let us then lay hold upon the opportunity
offered, lest our repentance at last come too late.

Thirdly, to be like unto God, and show that we are children of such a
Father, by our long sufferance toward our brethren that iniure us. There is no
one thing that does more manifestly declare the image of God to be renewed
within us, then this propensenesse and ready disposition to forgive the
injuries of our brethren.

How carnestly does the Apostle persuade unto this duty, when he says, Put on
therefore as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering, forbearing one another, etc.
And to this end Christ propounds that parable in the Gospel, of the King
taking account of his servants, and therein shows the merciful dealing of him
that had ten thousand talents forgiven him, yet would take his fellow by the
throat for ten talents; and therein will teach us that if we would have
pardon at Gods hand for the greater, we must forgive the lesser, whereas such
as will not forgive the injuries of others, this shows that they are stamped
with the very image of Satan, who was malicious and a murderer from the
beginning, and indeed there shall be judgment merciless to him that shows
not mercy.

Shall be with me
Here we have the promise it self, Promise it self.
which is to be with Christ in his glorious kingdom. That in as much as by
faith he was able to discern Christ's Deity in this base and low degree of his
humiliation, and by a lively faith did rest on him alone for life and
salvation. Christ will not suffer his faith to fail, nor himself to be
disappointed of the end thereof, but grants him his hearts desire. Verily thou
shall be with me. The Instruction is,

That they that in misery seek unto God, They that in misery wait upon God,
shall not miss of comfort in the end.
and rest on him, shall be sure of comfort in the end. There is no labor lost
in seeking and serving of him, but howsoever their present miseries are great,
yet as Mordecai said to Hester, Deliverance will come. Let thy heart be in the
fear of the Lord continually (says Solomon) for surely there is an end, Pro.
23.17.
and thy hope shall not be cut off. Psalm. 37.37
So David, Mark the upright man, and behold the just, the latter end of that
man shall be peace. Pro. 11.7.
Whereas the hope of the wicked shall perish. And as Job says, Job 17.8.
What hope has the hypocrite when God shall take away his soul? Meaning
indeed he has no hope. And again, There is no peace to the wicked, Isa.
48.21.
says my God. So that the condition of Gods people, even in their deepest
adversities and miseries, is far better then the condition of the wicked, in
their chiefest prosperity: For the one is sure that the end of his life will
end his misery, and finish his sorrow, and enter his possession of everlasting
felicity. Whereas the candle of the wicked at last shall be put out, and their
fleeting pleasures which they have had for a time here, shall bring at last an
eternal weight of torment, as our Savior says, Woe to you that laugh, Luke 6.
for you shall wail and weep. Would we have some examples for the further
clearing of this truth? How many miseries did the Israelites go under, and that
for the space of four hundred and thirty years, yet at last the Lord gave
them rest in the promised Canaan? How long was David persecuted before he came
to the kingdom, and after, yet at last the Lord gave him rest? Again, how
sore were his inward fears and terrors by reason of sin, yet at the last
filled with comfort? How dealt the Lord with Job, both in respect of his
outward man, and temporal estate, of a great Prince the Lord brought him to
the dunghill. And for his soul, does he not often complain, that God Had set
him as a But to shoot at. And that the Arrows of the Almighty had drunk up
his spirits, yet at last dyed peaceably? And there is reason for it.

First, Call upon me in the time of thy trouble, Psalm. 50.15
and I will hear thee, and deliver thee. Which promise of his the Lord has
ever made good from time to time, putting an end at last unto the miseries of
his servants, and giving them rest: and in this regard there is nothing in all
the world more sure and certain, then the good success of the hope of
Christians, it never misseth of that it aymeth at, for their hope which is the
Anchor of the soul, has faith for the ground of it, Romans 5.5.
whereupon it fasteneth it self. And further, Gods truth and faithfulness to
assure them of the truth thereof.

Secondly, David concludes the help and deliverance of Gods people in
distress, Psalm. 10.17.
Lord (says he) thou hear the desire of the poor: thou preparest their
heart, and thine ear inclines thereunto.

Thirdly, God delaying to help his servants by and by in time of misery and
distress, does provoke them to pray so much the more earnestly and frequently
unto him, drawing away the heart from the world, and causing the soul to have
the more secret communion with the Almighty, and so must needs bring comfort
in the end:

Seeing then that those that seek unto God, case were desperate: For in due
time they shall reap, if they faint not. What though for a time they bear the
burden and the heat of the day, when the Evening comes they shall not miss
of their reward; and then they shall see, and acknowledge with the Apostle,
Luke 21.18
That these light and momentany afflictions which are but for a season, shall
bring with them an eternal recompense of reward. In the mean time let us
possess our souls in patience: tarry the Lords leisure, and wait upon him;
our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. After all the boisterous storms
in this life, wrestlings against sin, Satan, and our own corruptions, and
against malicious and wick^d men, Deliverance will come, and the godly shall
find it most true in the end, that they that wait upon him shall not be
ashamed.

Secondly,

Thou shall be with me.

That is, with the soul of Christ, for his body went from the cross to the
grave, q. d. Since thou have confessed my name, and desire principally the
fruition of me, thou shall be satisfied in the thing thou desire, Thou shall
be with me. Note hence,

That the souls of the faithful after this life have the fruition of Christ,
The souls of the faithful in death are gathered to Christ.
and are gathered unto him. So soon as the soul goes out of the body, it
goes immediately to heaven, or hell. The Scripture makes mention but of two
ways, the broad, and the narrow, and these lead but unto two places, either
to endless bliss, or into Everlasting torment; there is a Paradise you see
here for the Penitent, Luke 23.43.
or an Abraham's bosom for a Lazarus. And there is again a Gulf of hell for
the Glutton, Luke 16.
or Everlasting torment for the Impenitent. No third place can be found in all
the Scripture.

So Paul, I desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ. The faithful can be no sooner dissolved, or their
souls set at liberty, but they are gathered unto Christ. As for the wicked,
with Judas they go to their own place, Act. 1.
that is, to Hell, out of which there is no redemption.

And it must needs be so, Ioh. 17.24.
Father I will that those thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they
may behold my glory which thou have given me.

This meets with the doctrine of Purgatory so much urged, Rome, as the most
gainfullest doctrine of their Church. It is wonderful to see how the great
Rabbis of that Church are troubled about this fire of Purgatory, both what it
is, where it is, how long it shall burn, the conditions of those persons that
shall have that favor to come into it, and the like: some holding one thing,
some another. Some hold it to be Saint Patrickes hole in Ireland: some, Etna,
that Mountain in Sicily, that burns continually: or in the Popes Kitchen,
they should say, where there is indeed a true fire, maintained daily by the
Fees that come in by that imaginary fire.

But what shall I say, it is a doctrine that as it has no footing at all out
of the word of God; so were the Primitive Fathers themselves, either strangers
unto it, Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 21. Chapter 26.
or doubtful of it. Augustine who lived four hundred years after Christ,
plainly shows, that in his time it was not received, Tertiumlo. cumpenitus
ignoramus.
nor believed for any Article of faith, and in some places of his writings he
absolutely denies it.

Fisher, sometimes Bishop of Rochester, ingeniously confesses, That there is
no Scripture to prove Purgatory; Ross. contra assert. Luth.
and may we not justly deny that for the which there is no Scripture to prove
it? Nay more, he confesses, that seldom or never any mention is made of
Purgatory, either among the Greek or Latin writers.

Nay rather the Scriptures teach the contrary, Legate qui volet Graecorum
commentarioset nullu^ qua^tum opinor de Purgatorio sermone^ inuenies, etc. Isa.
57.2.
as that of Isaiah, They shall enter upon peace, and they shall rest upon their
beds, every one that walks before the Lord in righteousness. And amongst all
those sacrifices that were appointed in the time of the law, for the Prince,
for the Priest, and for the Congregation, Leu. 5.6.
all were appointed for the living; and none that ever we read of were
appointed for the dead. Doubtless either God was very forgetful of them, or
else this Doctrine of Purgatory was not hatched.

When Paul directs the Church how they should carry themfelues toward the
dead, Phil. 3.
he gives no direction at any time to pray for the dead. Saint John says,
Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord. And the holy Ghost adds further,
Reu. 14.13:
From henceforth they rest from their labors. Now to enter upon peace, and to
rest from their labors, and yet to suffer hellish torrments for many years,
are things incompatible, and cannot stand together. Besides Christ has
promised rest, and refreshing to those that are heavy laden, and come unto him,
saying, Come unto me all ye that travail, Mat. 11.28
and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Now what refreshing and rest is
this, to fry in the flames of Purgatory?

Surely the Scriptures know no such third place, but that the souls of the
righteous, so soon as ever they depart out of the body, they go with the soul
of this Penitent here into Paradise, or into heaven the place of everlasting
joy and felicity. And the souls of the wicked go immediately to Hell, a place
of everlasting torment, there is no middle place betwixt these. But as there
are but two sorts of persons, so there are but two sorts of places. Besides it
stands not with the rule of Justice, that the soul should be punished without
the body, since the body and the soul were copartners together in sin. But
the Church of Rome knew well enough what it did to broach this doctrine, and
what they do in maintaining the same at this day. But we will leave them and
come unto our selves.

This may serve for matter of singular comfort and consolation unto the godly,
O my soul return thou unto thy rest, for the Lord has been beneficial unto
thee. And say with David, Psalm. 23.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none
ill, for thou art with me. This, this is it that makes the true believer look
death in the face, and supports him against the fears of the grave, an assured
persuasion in death to be gathered unto Christ, yea it is a true note of an
honest heart, so to walk with God in life, as willingly and cheerfully to
embrace the sentence of death at last. Whereas on the contrary, it is a note of
a soul soyled with corruption, or else endued but with a small measure of
sanctification, to be kept under the continual fear of death.

Paradise.
The Scriptures make mention of a twofold Paradise, Place.
Terrestrial and Celestial: The Terrestrial or earthly Paradise, is that
Paradise in the which Adam was placed by God himself, a place of excellent
felicity, beauty and glory, and out of the which, both Adam and his posterity
after him, Genesis 2, 8.
even unto this day were cast by reason of their sins. There is besides this,
the Celestial Paradise, or the kingdom of heaven, into the which the Lord
Jesus Christ, the second Adam, was now to enter, and does promise this Penitent
here the fruition thereof with himself, whereby is meant indeed the happy and
blessed estate of glorified souls in the kingdom of heaven, as it appears
plainly by that of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 12.
that when he was caught up into Paradise, he was caught vpindeed into the
third heaven.

But why does our Savior call heaven by the name of Paradise?

In regard no place on earth could better resemble the kingdom of heaven, and
of all delight, and therefore did most fitly shadow out the variety and
excellency of those delights and pleasures in the kingdom of heaven. And
herein will teach us,

That in heaven there is the perfection of all happiness, In heaven is the
perfection of happiness.
of pleasure and delight.

The great pleasures in the garden of Eden, where there were trees of all
sorts, and Rivers for pleasures and delight, does most excellently shadow out
unto us, those pleasures reserved for the Saints in Gods kingdom; which
happiness of every true believer shall in the last day appear to the whole
world, to men and Angels, when he shall come as the Apostle says, 2 These. 1.10.
To be glorified in his Saints, and to be made marvelous in all them that
believe. There is to be looked for, the perfection of their glory, especially
when the bodies of true believers shall come to be glorified with their souls;
for so says the Apostle, Phil. 3.21.
He shall change our vile body, and make it like his glorious body, and then
their bodies and souls joined together, and glorified together, must needs
enjoy the perfection of their happiness and glory, and for the hastening of
the consummation thereof; the Saints under the Altar cry, How long Lord, Reu.
6.10
as indeed expecting and longing for the full fruition of that glory.

This happiness and glory what it is, if we had the tongues of men and Angels,
we are not able to express it; the Apostle terms it A most excellent, 2
Cor. 4.17
and an eternal weight of glory, when he shall appear, we shall be like unto
him, (says Saint John.) 1 Ioh. 3.2.
The Church is compared to a Bride, and the Lord Jesus Christ to the
Bridegroom; Reu. 19.8.
now what can be imagined here, that can yield more joy and contentment, then a
marriage day, when the marrled couple enjoy the sweet content in the fruition
of each other. Thus are true believers decked and trimmed with the white robes
of Christ's righteousness, as a Bride, suitable and fit for so pure and
glorious a Bridegroom.

This lets us see then in the first place, within, and fightings without. There
they shall rest from their labors, and enter into the joy of their Lord, there
to enjoy him, in whose presence is the fullness of joy, and at whose right hand
there is pleasure for evermore, such as the Apostle says, The eye has not
seen, 1 Cor. 2.9.
the ear has not heard, etc. We have in our times seen many glorious sights,
our ears have heard of greater, but our hearts are so large, that they many
times conceive great things indeed, and yet the happiness of the Saints in
heaven, surpasses them all. And therefore what wonderful thing thou see at
any time, say that this is not it, for the eye has not seen it; what
wonderful thing thou have heard of, say this is not it, for the ear has not
heard. Yea, whatsoever thou art able to comprehend in thy heart, say that it is
not it, for the heart is not able to conceive.

Now what greater happiness can betide any of Gods servants, then to be raised
up to such a state of glory, as neither eye has seen, ear has heard, etc.
When the Queen of the South beheld the glory of Solomon, his attendants, the
order of his house, diet, servants, and the like, she concludes thus, 2 Reg.
10.18:
Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants that stand before thee
always, etc. Did she pronounce such to be happy, that stood continually
before Solomon, and heard his wisdom? O how great then shall be their
happiness that shall come to behold the blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and
holy Ghost; what joy will be there, when we shall see those ten thousands
praise the Lord day and night? And if Peter, James, and John, upon Mount Tabor,
were so ravished, as that they desired to pitch their Tabernacles there: O what
raptures and joys may the godly expect, when they shall see and enjoy the Lord
Jesus Christ their beloved Bridegroom, not upon Mount Tabor, but upon Mount
Sion, not to be separated suddenly asunder, as the Disciples were there, but to
enjoy the full fruition of Christ for evermore! 2 Cor. 12.2 Mat. 25.
This is called the third heaven, the Bridegroomes Chamber, an everlasting
habitation, lightened with the glory of the Lamb. Reu. 19.5. Reu. 21.23.
The company there, Saints and Angels, the time of their abode, for ever and
ever. The happiness of the souls of the Saints after this life.


Furthermore, these things do manifest the happiness of the souls and bodies
of the St. there.

First, whereas here in this life we cannot but provoke the Lord daily by our
sins, the very consideration whereof is a dagger to the hearts of Gods
people, and makes them to cry out with the Apostle, and to say, O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? there they shall cease
to sin; and shall be wholly joined to the Lord in truth and righteousness,
never to displease him any more.

Secondly,

Thirdly,

And for our bodies at that day, they shall likewise be freed from sin, from
corruption, and from all the miseries and infirmities that cleave unto them
here, And be made like unto his glorious body. Phil. 3.21.


O how may this affect our hearts with a longing desire of that time, Romans 8.
when this glory shall be revealed. Surely, if we look for a part in this
kingdom of heaven, wherein is all perfection of happiness, we cannot but
desire the coming of the same, and to cry and say with the Church, Come Lord
Jesus, Reu. 22.20.
come quickly.

This day
Here we have the fifth and last circumstance in this Text at first propounded,
Time when.
and that is the time when this promise shall be fulfilled, This day. Verily
this day thou, etc. q.d. what though thy misery be great, and torment grievous,
that thou suffer, yet thy time is but short, thy deliverance is at hand,
verily this day, etc.

Where we may note first of all, the Lords bountiful liberality toward his
servants that seek unto him in time of misery. This Penitent desires only to
be remembered of Christ, when he should come into his kingdom, but Christ
promises more, This day shall thou be with me.

God gives more many times unto his children, God many times gives more then
his servants ask.
then they either ask or think; he is many times larger in giving, then they
in desiring. It was but to be remembered when Christ came into his kingdom,
that the Penitent requires, Christ promises him not only to be remembered,
but also to be with him, to be with him this day, to be with him this day in
Paradise. God is usually more liberal in giving, Genesis 33.9.10.
then his servants in desiring. Jacob desires only food and raiment at Gods
hands, but God gives him more, as Jacob himself confesses: God gave him two
bands, and abundance of goods, and cattle besides. 1 Reg. 3.9.13.
Solomon desires only an understanding heart at Gods hand to govern his
people, God gives him not only wisdom according to his desire, but abundance
of wealth besides. 1 Samuel 2.8.
Hannah intreates the Lord to take from her the curse of barrenness, and to
give her a son, the Lord granted her more then she desired, he gave her many
sons afterward.

How many came to our Savior in the days of his flesh, some sick of one
disease, and some of another, desiring help, whom our Savior did not only make
whole of their infirmities, but also pronounced that their sins were forgiven
them. Luke 19.
Zacheus came only but to see Christ, and he obtaines not only the thing he
desired, in getting a full sight of Christ, but he has this honor, to talk
with Christ, to inuit him to his house, yea more then all this, to have his
soul everlastingly saved by Christ.

Neither is this a thing to be wondered at, Ephesians. 1.7. Psalm. 23.
says that he is rich in grace, a most bountiful master, making the cup of
his servants to ouerflow, and is therefore called the Father of mercy, 2 Cor. 1.
and God of all consolation.

Seeing then that God is so liberal a master, motive with us, to bring
christianity into request, inasmuch as we serve such a bountiful master.
Servants commonly inquire after such masters, and will desire to live in such
places, where they shall be bountifully rewarded. This we are sure of, that
the Lords servants shall be bountifully rewarded with him, he is ever better
then his word unto his people. Why are we then so backward in our suits unto
him? Are we in misery and distress? As a father pittieth his children, so has
the Lord compassion on them that fear him. O but I am unworthy of mercy: God
gives mercy, not for our merit, but it is his free gift. O but I am a great
sinner, and provoke him daily? He remembers whereof we are made, he
considers that we are but dust. He has said it, and he will do it. He will
fulfill the desires of them that fear him, Psalm. 145.18.
he also will hear their cry, and will help them.

Secondly, Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the time of thy trouble, and I will hear thee and deliver
thee. Do wicked men persecute us? does Satan continually solicit us? do our
corruptions prevail with us? do the thoughts of death and of the grave
affright us? yet still we have the bosom of a loving Father to fly unto.
Behold this Penitent now at this time, astonished no doubt at the sight of
death, and thoughts of his account he is to make before the great tribunal. O
happy he that could now fly into the bosom of his Savior, as the Dove to the
Arc, that elsewhere could find no rest. Now may he sing that sweet Requiens
unto his soul, Return unto thy rest O my soul, for the Lord has rewarded
thee. We shall not need to fear any excess in faith, as if we could believe
more then the Lord would, or could do unto us; for his grace is ever more
plentiful then our petitions; he gives more then we ask, having his hand
ready to give, before we can get our mouths open to desire.

This day.
As Christ is pleased to answer his servant, and to grant him the thing he
prays for: So it is a thing remarkable, to consider in the circumstance of
time, the speedy performance of the Lords promise, This day. q.d. thou shall
not only be remembered of me, which is the thing thou desire, but thou shall
even this present day have an end put unto thy misery, and thy soul received
into glory. Note hence,

That a man may be in misery and joy in an hour. A man may be in misery and
joy in an hour.
Though the afflictions of Gods servants are many times sharp and grievous,
yet the Lord makes them many times but short and of small continuance. Psalm. 94.
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. The
miseries of the righteous are neither durable nor incurable. In the multitude
of the sorrows of my heart (says David) Thy comforts have refreshed my soul.
The Lord does as well foresee their arrival, as their launcing forth; and the
end of their troubles, as the beginning of the same. Many are the troubles of
the righteous, Psalm. 34.19
but the Lord delivers them out of all. And indeed,

If the Lord should not deal thus with his servants, break the bruised reed,
nor quench the smoking flax.

Secondly,

Thirdly, life it self is not long, long where life is so short.

This serves then to teach us in all our miseries still to wait on God,
Penitent here; for, as Mordecai said to Hester, Deliverance will come. There is
nothing more sure and certain, then the deliverance of Gods people out of
misery. As God makes provision for his children of correction as of food, and
not at sometime to taste of correction, is a sign rather of a Bastard then of
a Son: So will the Lord see to them, that they shall not want a seasonable
deliverance.

Let no man then say in time of prosperity, Psalm. 30.6.
I shall never be moved. Neither let any say in times of adversity, I shall
never be restored. For God can turn thy night into day, thy heaviness into
joy, and thy mourning into gladness, and all in a moment of time. Oh but thou
have lain long among the pots, and thou have often sought the Lord. What then?
By so much the more precious will deliverance be, and thou fitted to praise
his name, when the Lord shall deliver thee.

This day.
The last Instruction we are to observe hence is, Such as have showed mercy in
an evil day, shall find mercy in the evil day.
That they that show mercy in an evil day, shall themselves find mercy in the
evil day.

Christ being now to suffer, and lying under many reproaches: This poor
Penitent pitieth Christ in his misery, pleades his cause, and clears his
innocence, This man (says he) has done nothing amiss. And now Christ shows
mercy to him, in time of his greatest need. The Penitent pitied Christ, and
commiserates his misery being an innocent. Christ pitieth the Penitent in time
of his misery, and receives him to mercy. That which our Savior had formerly
taught his disciples, Mat. 3.7.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy: he makes good to
this poor Penitent. His mercy to Christ, is recompensed with mercy from
Christ. Onesiphorus, that good man, showed mercy to Paul, 2. Tim. 1.16.
He often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain: but when he was in
Rome, he sought me diligently, and found me. What then? The Lord grant unto him
that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day. Verse 18.


An excellent example whereof we have in Ebedmelech, who understanding that
Jeremy was in prison, Ier. 38.9.
and there ready to perish for hunger: He pleades his cause unto the King, and
procures his delivery. The Lord remembered this kindness of Ebedmelech, Ier.
39.17.
I will deliver thee in that day, says the Lord. Ios. 6.17.
Rahab showed mercy to the Lords servants when they searched the land of
Canaan, hid the spies, and preserved their lives. This kindness of hers is
requited with the safety of her own life.

The Shunamite that was so kind unto Elisha, 1 King 17.10.
making such provision for him in his travail, loses nothing by it in the
end; her mercy to him, is recompensed with mercy to her and hers.

And Christ shows how he will proceed in judgment at the last day, with
wicked men, Mat. 25.
I was hungry, etc.

And the reason hereof is,

Secondly, of those that have been relieved, to pray unto God for such, as
have been such instruments of their comfort, and to praise God for them; by
which means the Lord is moved to show mercy.

This teaches all Gods people to lay hold upon all opportunities that shall
be offered unto them, Jobs comfort, that The bowels of the hungry did bless
him. Pity the distressed in their need, and the Lord will pity thee in thy
greatest need. Do we not desire mercy in the hour of death, and in the day of
judgment? The way to find mercy then; is to show mercy now; otherwise, There
shall be Judgment merciless to him that will show no mercy. Iam. 2.13.


FINIS.
A Short view of such Doctrines as are enlarged with their Reasons and Uses, in
this Book.
Doctrines. THe malice of the wicked great against Christ, and his members.
Page. 6 Doctrines. Good men many times suffer as malefactors. Page. 13
Doctrines. Christ died an accursed death. Page. 18 Doctrines. Not the
punishment but the cause makes a Martyr. Page. 32 Doctrines. Sin and shame
go together. Page. 41 Doctrines. Afflictions make the wicked worse. Page. 51.
Doctrines. When the wicked begin once to fall from God, they have no stay of
themselves. Page 59 Doctrines. A sinful life, has commonly attending it a
cursed and miserable death. Page 71 Doctrines. None more subject unto disgrace,
then the godly are. Page 93 Doctrines. It is a great sin to add affliction
to the afflicted. Page 103 Doctrines. God brings his children often to a low
ebb in this life. Page 111 Doctrines. Infidelity a dangerous sin. Page 115
Doctrines. Evil examples dangerous. Page 124 Doctrines. Properties of a wicked
man to be given to mocking. Page 132 Doctrines. God can make of great sinners
great Saints. Page 143 Doctrines. All men are alike by Nature, until God make
a difference by grace. Page 153 Doctrines. Afflictions of excellent use to
bring men to God. Page 164 Doctrines. To cease from evil is not sufficient; we
must do good. Page 172 Doctrines. He that rebukes another, must not be guilty
of the same fault himself. Page 183 Doctrines. A true note of a true Convert
to stop others in a course of sin. Page 191 Doctrines. A true Convert desires
that others may partake of the same grace Page 216 Doctrines. The afflictions
of the godly reach unto Christ. Page 233 Doctrines. The want of the fear of
God the cause of all sin. Page 237 Doctrines. Afflictions that summon to
death, should cause a man to look home. Page 250 Doctrines. Unto true
repentance, confession of sin necessary. Page 257 Doctrines. Godly submit
themselves to Gods seuerest corrections without repining. Page 285 Doctrines. A
true Christian must at all times stand for Christ. Page 298 Doctrines. In all
ages God has had some witnesses of his truth. Page 310 Doctrines. True grace
is known by the daily growth in grace. Page 322 Doctrines. None can pray
effectually, but the Penitent. Page 334 Doctrines. Christ a Lord. Page 349
Doctrines. Christ a King. Page 356 Doctrines. True faith raises up a man above
this life. Page 365 Doctrines. In prayer we must see God all-sufficient in
those things we seek of him. Page 372 Doctrines. The salvation of the soul
is principally to be desired. Page 381 Doctrines. The happiness of a Christian
not to be looked for here, but hereafter. Page 401 Doctrines. Release from
temporal afflictions does not always follow true repentance. Page 407
Doctrines. It is a wonderful hard thing truly to believe. Page 416 Doctrines.
There is an unchangeable certainty in all Gods promises. Page 431 Doctrines.
Godly must labor to be persuaded of Gods love. Page 443 Doctrines. Prayers of
the godly very effectual. Page 457 Doctrines. The sins of the Penitent
cannot hinder their salvation. Page 471 Doctrines. They that in misery wait
upon God, shall not miss of comfort in the end. Page 482 Doctrines. The souls
of the faithful in death are gathered unto Christ. Page 489 Doctrines. In
heaven is the perfection of all happiness. Page 498 Doctrines. God many times
gives more then his servants ask. Page 506 Doctrines. A man may be in misery
and joy in an hour. Page 512 Doctrines. Such as show mercy in an evil day
shall not miss of mercy in the evil day. Page 515

