Ingratitude Revenged: OR, A POEM UPON THE HAPPY VICTORY OF HIS Majesty's Naval
Forces AGAINST THE DUTCH; June the 3. and 4. 1665.

Under the Auspicious CONDUCT of His ROYAL HIGHNESS, JAMES DUKE of YORK, Lord
High Admiral of England, etc.

Non ego ventosae plebis suffragia venor,
Contentus paucis lectoribus. --
Horat. LONDON: Printed by T. J. for Dixy Page, at the Turks-head in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange, 1665.

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS, JAMES Duke of York and Albanie,
Earl of Ulster, Constable of Dover Castle, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports,
Governor of the Town of Portsmouth, Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, Lord High Admiral of England, Ireland and Wales, and the Dominions and
Islands thereto belonging, of the Town of Calis, and Marches of the same; of
Normandy, Gascoigne, and Aquitane; And One of His Majesty's Most Honorable
Privy Council.
May it please Your Highness,
THough I may be supposed to undertake vainly, like him, who would needs read
Lectures of Martial Stratagems to the Great Carthaginian, yet Your Highness his
innate Candor, and Command in the late Happy Victory, obliged me to prostrate
these Lines at Your feet. And in this Pamphlet is as much dutiful Affection, as
if it were a greater Volume of the Authors, who humbly implores the honor to
subscribe himself,

Your ROYAL HIGHNESS Most obedient Servant, William Smith.

INGRATITUDE REVENGD.
SCarce had poor Holland baffled potent Spain,
When she usurps upon the spacious Main;
And (oh ungrateful!) first affronts that Crown,
Whose Power alone kept her from sinking down,
Whose kinder pity and relieving grace,
Stamped High and Mighty on her Brazen-face.
So the revived Snake seeks to destroy
That Life, by which she did her own enjoy.
No sooner had our mis-imployed Sword
Dissolved their Yoke, expelled their Natural Lord,
But (oh perfidious!) these Dutch Fishermen
Their Patrons quite forget, demonstrate plain
How they will requite us. And our Merchants find
To whom in the Indies they had been so kind.
Their baseness had un-sheath'd our King James
Sov'reign's Blade,
If the High and Mighty had not quickly made
Humble Requests for Peace; which got, how soon
Broke? witness Lantoree and Poleroon,
And that unparalled dire Cruelty
AMBOYNA saw, of all the Epitomy.
Not any Heathen, any Christian Prince,
But breaking Leagues, they have abused since;
And if their sly Endeavors had not failed,
The World from Holland must have all retayl'd.
His Sacred MAJESTY now taking Care,
A Nest of Pirates should not Christians scare,
(A Crew of Infidels, that domineers
In thieving Tunis, and in proud Argiers)
With the Dutch contracts by joined Power t'invade
These Vile Obstructors of all Public Trade.
But (oh! the like can any Age produce?)
These treacherous Toads with Argiers strikes a Truce;
Intending to make LONDON stoop as low
To pedling Amsterdam, as Antwerp now.
When Reparation's sought for, with fresh throngs
They do require us of renewed Wrongs,
And will with Arms, and armed Fleets maintain,
Forgetting their last Fate, their Pride again.
All this yet our Heroic Neptune views
With un-disturbed looks, no passion shows;
Yet does at last with a Majestic Frown
Tell them, Mine Here must vail to the English Crown.
Now is His ROYAL HIGHNESS out at Sea,
And wondering Thetis is amazed to see
Whole Forests float upon her face,
Whilst her soft Bosom moving Castles grace.
Neptune displeased to find his Tritons caught
Within a Wooden City, laboring sought
To make's Escape, cries out; Here Is one that reigns
Over me, and binds my vaster arms in chains;
Here Is he, who Rules as far as Winds do blow,
Or winged Fleets upon my Surface go;
Whose weighty Navies make my shoulders crack,
Whose daring Subjects plough my ample back,
Who have touched all by their Discoveries,
That rising, or that setting Phoebus sees.
Then his affrighted head th'astonish'd God
Sunk down again into his moist Abode.
Now had kind Zeph'rus with auspicious Gales
Stretched out our Canvas, filled our pregnant Sayls,
And in triumphant order wafted over
Our well-mann'd Fleet to view the Belgian shore,
Our still-victorious Flags there riding, made
The poor Dutch Lion shrink into a shade.
Straight angry Corus does usurp the Deep,
Their Festivals the wanton Porpus keep,
Presaging Storms; but ours, some Tackling lost,
Recover safe again the British Coast:
These Storms at last the bragging Dutch bring out,
Storms or more kind or cruel, is a doubt,
Which though permitting to join with their Friends,
Hurried them on to their approaching ends.
Saturday the 3 of June, at three of the Clock in the morning. 1665
Unwilling Phoebus slowly hastened,
As very loath to leave his Eastern Bed:
Desiring rather to eclipse his Ray,
Than view the Slaughters of the ensuing day.
Heavens smaller Lights then seemed to cease to burn,
Dreading the ancient Chaos might return.
And now our Fleet bears up, enraged (they say)
That Winds and Ocean were more calm than they.
The Cyclades you might have then believed,
Torn from their firm Foundations, had been heaved
On the rude Waves; or that vast Mountains had
Strongly against Mountains there encountered;
Or two unfixed Towns, or floating Woods,
Or Islands rolling on the curled Floods.
The War-presaging Trumpet and loud Drum,
In horrid accents tell the Dutch We come;
Who after Brandy-wine and Gunpowder
Had well provoked their duller Souls draw near,
Such Morning-Draughts Sarmatians never take,
Nor those that border on Meotis Lake;
The Dutch those Cannibals intend to outvie,
As well in Barbarism, as in Cruelty.
The Tiger, Lion, Elephant and Bear,
The Leopard, Wolf, the Boar, the Dog appear
Fiercely advancing, threatening bloody strife,
With an aspect far grimmer than the Life,
Making depressed Amphitrite show
A salvage Wilderness, or like unto
Old Rome's great Circus, where these beasts did breathe
Their last, in acting serious parts of Death.
The Tempest-breathing Brass soon spoke aloud,
Muffling Day's Visage in a dusky cloud,
Forthwith involving in a sable Cloak
Contending Fleets, whilst Seas lay hid in smoke;
And from its angry Mouth fierce Bullets fly,
Impartial Messengers of Destiny.
If some old Greek, or Roman Poet had
But heard this dismal Noise, and viewed the sad
And never-equall'd Slaughters here, no words
Had now been left us in the famed Records
Of Troy or Thebs; Ulysses still had lay
Forgotten in his Native Ithaca:
Aeneas too had un-remembred come
From the Sigiean shore to Latium;
Sicilian Aetna never had kept such coil,
Nor the loud Cataracts of Seven mouthed Nile.
Fiercely each Ship in a resolved Rage,
All terrors of grim Death forgot, engage;
Upon each other a tempestuous Shower
Of fatal Broad-sides never-ceasing power,
Whilst meagre Death (but then in Purple clad)
Is satiated with the wounds they made:
Cross Charon rails at him with winged feet,
Because he had not rigged him out a Fleet,
Or tallow'd his old Boat; Legions of Ghosts
Vex the old Sculler, fill the Stygian Coasts.
The sense of Hearing is by hearing crossed,
All Fear by too much cause of fear is lost;
The loud-mouthed Cannons roaring silenced then
The groans of wounded, and of dying men:
Naught left but Valor, here is no way to run,
No means approaching Dangers left to shun,
Here all men know (if they come any more)
Their hands, not feet, must bring them to the shore.
Here might be seen a helpless Pine, had got
'Twixt wind and water an unlucky Shot;
But whilst the colder Element steals in,
She burns; then a grand Combat does begin
Between old Neptune and the God of Fire,
Till in the conquering Waves he must expire;
Mean while her men need take no care for Graves,
Both crackling Flames, and rough devouting Waves
Are ready; Death sits in's Majestic weeds,
The furious Bullets take away their Heads;
Next comes a whistling Chain-shot, sweeps away
Hundreds from Vulcans rage into the Sea;
Though different Planets, various Aspects reigned
When they were born, they center in one end.
Let antique days forget their Actium now,
The stout Agrippa and Augustus too,
And let the Legends never more be seen
Of mad Antonius, or the Egyptian Queen;
Nor let the Austrian Prince Lepanto name
His Naval Conquest, nor the Turkish shame.
Audacious Opdam toward the Duke does stear
His Gouty Limbs, included in a Chair,
Kindly salutes with his Broad-sides, and then
His Highness sharply answers him again;
His ROYAL HIGHNESS on whose Conquering Brow
So many Naval Coronets shall grow.
Here Is Eight of theirs with Four of ours engaged;
Saturday, 5 in the evening.
Never till now thus dire Bellona raged:
One Ball by a sad inauspicious blow,
Muskerry, Boil, and loved Falmouth slew,
Close by His HIGHNESS, who undaunted stood,
Although besprinkled with their purple blood.
Now Opdam's wounded, when a happy Shot
Alters the Scene, and spoils the present Plot.
Oh happy Shot! whose sure unerring blow
Relieved His HIGHNESS, and procured too
Brave Smith an Honor, and a lasting Name,
To live in the Eternal Books of Fame;
Whilst Opdam's End, or the Oriana's Fate,
Shall be lamented by the Hogen State.
Now Opdam's Ship takes fire, high thunder spoke,
Belching up horrid Waves of flames and smoke,
Obnubilating the disturbed Skies,
A pitchy Cloud of Powder roaring flies.
Not so the vast Enceladus does roar,
Shaking the Basis of the Trinacrian shore,
When from hot Aetna's subterranean Caves,
Huge cinder'd Rocks, curled Flames and Fumes he heaves.
This Tempest bears up all; torn Members there
Of half-dead Mortals fly in the yielding Air,
Using an Art beyond Dedalian skill,
To mount Air's Regions with no feathered Quill;
Men, Decks, Guns, Tackling, broken Planks and tall
Masts, in the same Chaos are evolved all;
And into Step-dame Thetis must fall low,
As Phaethon into the River Poe.
Now might be seen upon the liquid Plain
Two Foes, though swimming, fierce to engage again,
Struggling together, till both loose their breath;
Poor souls! though foes in life, yet friends in death.
Two brothers shaking hands forsake the light,
Both slain together, take their last Goodnight,
And dying thus in their own blood they lie,
Truly conjoined in Consanguinity.
Here Is one whose Arms are gone, (then useful Limbs)
Yet wanting them (alas!) a while he swims,
Thinking to catch kind Planks; till out of breath,
And wearied, armless he embraces Death.
But you thrice Noble, thrice Illustrious Souls,
Whom immaturer Destiny Enrols
Dear Victims to your grateful Countries good,
Who for your KING and Country spent your blood,
How must we mourn you! Oh! those colder Waves
VVhereon you died, whereon such horror raves,
Are scarce with all their brackish Floods, Supplies
Enough to furnish our lamenting Eyes!
These HEROES knew it was a gallant toil
To lose their Lives to save their Native Soil.
These were our Decii; let our Matrons mourn,
Let the Peoples Hearts be their eternal Urn;
And, though the chiller Seas Entomb them now.
Tell the next Age what they, and theirs do owe
To such Deserts! whilst in a doleful Knell
We give our Salve, and our last Farewell.
Oh happy Worthies! if my humble Pen
Could here have reached the old Poetic Strain,
You should have lived! -- Yet your lasting Fame
Shall be Eternized by a purer Flame.
The Dutch thus worsted, and five Admirals slain,
Nine taken, Eighteen sunk, they strive to gain
The Texel with the rest; but many come
A great way short of their desired Home.
But oh! GREAT SIR, the Title's due to You, To His Majesty.

Of Britains Parent, and its Refuge too!
In Your long, happy, and successful Reign,
Saturnian Ages will return again.
You many careful Nights (Great Prince) do make,
That we may all our rest securely take.
You by Your Royal Care and Wisdom, know
To guard us from our selves, and from our Foe.
The proudest Nations on the Globe must Greet,
With stooping Sayls, each Vessel of the Fleet;
Whilst by most Potent Princes, YOU alone
For the World's feared Neptune shall be known.
And You, Illustrious Sir, by whose great Care To the Duke of York.

And happy Conduct we successful are,
How many Naval Honors, Triumphs you,
And Rostrate Columns does your Country owe?
A Herd of Sheep with such a Chieftain might
Tigers subdue, and Leopards put to flight;
How can the Mastiff e're be conquered,
Whilst there is a Royal Lion for his Head?
When Thetis saw you furrowing her Plains,
We may suppose she used these kinder strains.
Here Is He, whose early Glories do outrun
The envied Luster of my Warlike Son;
Whose worth in Honors-Field one hour declares
Greater, than he attained in ten years.
And, oh Heroic Prince, your Conduct too To Prince Rupert.

Subdues proud Holland, with our Hearts also;
This Happy Victory can do no less,
Than Crown your former Labors with Success.
Brave Sandwich, Lawson, Ascugh, Holms, their Glory
Shall in our Annals have a living Story,
With all the rest of those bold Worthies, who
Revenged their injured Country on its Foe.
And You, the Noblest Patriots, ever were To the Two Houses of Parliament.

Within those Walls, your wise foreseeing Care,
With liberal hearts provide for fresh Supplies,
Knowing in Money War's best Sinews lies.
What shall not England now not dare to do,
Embraced both by her Sovereign and You?
And thou, oh stately City, whose fair face To the City of London.

Minerva, Mercury, Bellona grace,
Whose Arms and Arts astonished Europe owns,
Whose Trade the frigid and the torrid Zones,
Whose double-named River kindly brings
[As Tribute] useful, and all precious things,
Rich Indian Harvests, what is rare or strange,
Whilst his transparent Stream's the Worlds Exchange,
Thy helping hand was here. What though London Frigate.
that is gone
Which bore thy Name? thy willing heart builds one
Greater than She, whom angry Fates no more
Resolved should terrify the Belgic shore.
Oh may thou flourish still secure from Foes,
VVhilest lucid Thames in his Meanders goes
Through reedy Banks; but slowly hastening thus,
To the Embraces of Oceanus.
FINIS.

