Britain's Glory, AND ENGLAND'S BRAVERY.

Wherein is showed The Degrees of Honor from the Prince to the Peasant; with
the Honor of the Nobles, and Previleges of the Commons; the proper Places and
Precedence of all Persons from the Throne to the Bondsman; more particularly in
Coronations, Processions, Feasts, Funerals and other great Assembly: As also
Honor of Arms, Power of Heralds, Signification of Charges in Coat Armor; with
an Armorial Dictionary, explaining the Terms of Heraldry. And an account of all
the Orders of Knighthood in Christendom, and of the Weights and Measures of
England.

To Which is added A Continuation of the Historian's Guide, from November,
1687. where the Third and Last Impression ends, to June, 1689.

Being the Collections and Observations of Benjamine Smithurst.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar,
near Devereux-Court, 1689.

A TABLE TO Britain's Glory, etc.
CHAP. I. OF the Distinction of Titles, page 1 The Name of Gentleman in
general. Of the King. Nobles. Commons.
CHAP. II. Of the King's Most Excellent Majesty. 4 Coronation. Anointing.
Scepter. Globe. Ring. Bracelet. Sword. Robes. Diadem, and the Stones. Crown:
Offering days. Collar days.

CHAP. III. Of the Prince. page 9 Of the King's Child en.
CHAP. IV. Of Dukes, 10 CHAP. V. Of Marquesses, 13 CHAP. VI. Of Earls, 14 CHAP.
VII. Of Viscounts, 15 CHAP. VIII. Of Barons Spiritual and Temporal, 16 CHAP.
IX. Of Noblewomen, 20 Queen-Sovereign. Queen-Consort. Queen-Dowager.
Princesses. Dames. Gentlewomen. Alien women.
CHAP. X. Of Injuries to Noblemen, 23 CHAP. XI. Knight of the Garter, 24 The
Names of the Knights, 1685. The Names of the Knights, 1689.
CHAP. XII. Knights Bannerets, 29 CHAP. XIII. Knights Baronets, 31 CHAP. XIV.
Knights of the Bath, 33 CHAP. XV. Knights Bachelours, 37 Degrading of Knights.
CHAP. XVI. Knights of the Round Table, 41 Other Orders of Knighthood, viz.
Knights of St. Andrew, or the Thistle in Scotland, 42 Holy Sepulcher in
Jerusalem, 44 Hospitallers, ib. Templers, 45 St. Lazarus in Jerusalem, 46 St.
Bass, or St. Bassil, 47 St. Katharine at Mount Sinai, ib. The Martyrs of
Palestine, ib. Oak in Navarre, 48 Lilly of Navarre, ib. Band in Spain, 49 Dove
in Castile, ib. Fish Scale in Castile. ib. Lilly in Aragon, 50 Mountjoy, ib.
Acon, or Acress, ib. St. James in Galici^, 51 St. Saviors in Aragon, ib. St.
Julian, or of Alcantara, 52 Callatrava in Castile, ib. Tuxillo, or Trugillo,
ib. Our Lady and St. George, ib. St. Mary de Merced in Aragon, 53 Rosary in
Toledo, ib. Golden Fleece, 54 D'Avis, ib. St. Michael's Wing, 55 St. James, 55
Knights of Christ, 56 Jesus Christ in France, ib. Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel,
57 St. Michael, ib. Holy Ghost, 58 The Gennet, 59 Crown Royal. ib. Lady of the
Star. 60 Thistle of Bourbonne, ib. The Porcupine, 61 Cressants of Anjou, ib.
Ermin in Bretaigne, ib. St. Mary the Glorious of Italy, 62 Holy Ghost at Rome,
ib. Angelick of St. George, 63 St. Peter at Rome, ib. St. George at Rome, 64
Pius at Rome, ib. Loretto at Rome, ib. Glorious Virgin Mary at Rome, ib. Jesus,
now at Rome, 65 De la Calza in Venice, ib. St. Mark in Venice, 66 St. George at
Genoa, ib. Precious Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ at Mantua, 67 St. Stephen
of Florence, ib. Knot in Naples, 68 Argonaute of Naples, ib. Ermin in Naples,
ib. Annunciation in Savoy, 69
Knights of St. Maurice, 70 St. Maurice, and St. Lazarus, 71 Bear in
Switzerland, ib. Tutonick Order of Prusia. 72 Gereon in Germany, 73 St. George
in Austria, ib. St. Michael the Archangel, ib. St. Anthony in Haynault, 74
Tusin Order in Bohemia, ib. St. Hubert in Gulick, 75 St. James in Holland, ib.
St. Brice, ib. The Seraphim, 76 Aramanta, ib. Elephant in Denmark, ib. Of
Christ, or Sword in Livonia, 77 White Eagle in Poland, ib. Dragon in Hungary,
ib. Sword in Cyprus, 78 St. Anthony in Aethiopia, ib. Burgundian Cross in
Tunis, 79 Broom-Flower in France, ib. Ship in France, 80

CHAP. XVII. Esquires, ib. CHAP. XVIII. Gentlemen, 82 By Ecclesiastical
Preferment, 86 By Military Profession, ib. In the Civil State, 87
CHAP. XIX. Yeomen, 90 CHAP. XX. Artificers and Laborers, 92 CHAP. XXI.
Precedence, 93 CHAP. XXII. Procession at a Coronation. 98 CHAP. XXIII.
Proceeding on the Coronation day, 102 CHAP. XXIV. King's going to Parliament in
State, 105 CHAP. XXV. Coronation-Feasts, 107 CHAP. XXVI. Royal Feast at other
times, the K. present, 111 CHAP. XXVII. Funerals. 112 CHAP. XXVIII. Proceeding
of the Funeral of a Gentleman, Esquire, Knight, or Baronet, 114 CHAP. XXIX.
Precedence of a Nobleman's Funeral, from a Duke to a Baronet. 115 CHAP. XXX.
Heralds, and their Duty, 116 CHAP. XXXI. Heraldry, 121 CHAP. XXII. Ordinaries,
126 Charges Common, 132 CHAP. XXXIII. Abatements. 152 CHAP. XXXIV. Points in an
Escoucheon, 156 Terms of Art explained, 157 Weights and Measures, 169

Brittain's Glory, WHEREIN Is showed the Degrees of Honor, from the Prince to
the Peasant; the Honor of the Nobles, and the Privileges of the Commons, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Distinction of Titles.
THe Name Gentleman is of such account, that it is given as a proper Title to
all persons, from the King to the lowest Degree of those that bear Coat Armor;
and also to many, who though they can claim no Right to the Bearing of Coat
Armor, yet claim a Right to the Title of Gentleman, by virtue of the Place or
Office which they hold: But, as in the Body Natural the Members are disposed to
several Offices for the preservation of the whole; so in the Body Politic, a
Distinction of persons is accounted necessary for the preservation of the
whole; and such is the Policy of this Realm (especially,) that for the better
Government thereof, they have made a threefold Division of persons, viz.
Sovereign, Nobles, and Commons.

1. The King is our Sovereign Monarch, under which name a Sovereign Queen is
comprehended.

2. Under the Name of Nobles are comprehended the Prince, Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, called Lords Spiritual and Temporal.

3. By the Commons are understood the Knights of the Garter, (if no otherwise
dignified,) Knights Bannerets, Baronets, Knights of the Bath, Knights
Bachelours, Esquires, and Gentlemen, together with Yeomen, Artificers, and
Laborers.

And though our Law does not call any man Noble under the Degree of a Baron,
yet many there be which make a Distinction between Nobiles Majores, which is
from the Prince to the Baron, and Nobiles Minores, which includes all from
under a Baron to the Gentleman, and leaves the rest to be called Commons.

When we say the Nobles of the Land, the King is not comprehended by the Common
Law, he being the Fountain of all Nobility; but is by the Civil Law.

The Nobility are known by the name of the Peers of the Realm, or Barons of
England; for anciently the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Viscounts, did sit
together in the King's great Counsel of Parliament, as Barons, by which is
understood the whole Body of the Nobility; and though there be different Robes
worn at their Creation, yet in Parliament the greatest of the Nobility wear the
same Robes with Barons, only the Dukes, Marquesses, etc. wear more or less
Furrs upon their Shoulders, with some difference in the Furr, that is set as
Fringes, or Edgings on their Robes, and take place according to their Dignity;
of which more particularly anon.

Besides, it is observable, that in Cases criminal, all Degrees of Nobility are
tried by Barons, as well as those of their own Dignity, or Degree, as their
Peers, and Barons are tried by Nobles of a higher Degree: as well, as those of
their own, as in all such Cases is well known.

It may be here noted, That no English man receiving any Title of Honor from a
foreign Prince, can use the same in England, But (if he have no other Title
from the King) must in all judicial proceedings be named by his name of
Baptism, and Surname; excepting only the Honor of Knighthood which is to be
born in all places: And this is the same in Scotland, or Ireland, as well as in
other Lands.

CHAP. II. Of the King's Most Excellent Majesty.
THe Title used by the Kings of England (as those of France, and Spain, and
some few others) is Dei Gratia, which is to be understood simply as having his
Authority from none but God; he is styled, Deffender of the Faith, which was
anciently used by the Kings of England; but Anno. 1521. confirmed to them by a
Bull from Pope Leo the 10th in King Henry the 8th's time, and by Act of
Parliament made Supreme Head of the Church of England, and he, as all other
Kings, writes in the plural Number.

The Ceremonies at our King's Coronation are more than are used in many other
Countries; as the Anointing with Oil, (which is said by some to be of a
thousand years standing) and has a Priest's Garment, called a Dalmatica, or
Colobium, put on, him to show he is both King and Priest: He has an Emperial
Crown set upon his Head at his Coronation by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
which is a peculiar Prerogative belonging to that See. The King has also many
other emblematical Ensigns and Ceremonies at his Coronation, which has these
following proper Significations:

1. At his Coronation, first he has the Priest's Garment, or Dalmatica, put
upon him, to show his Power in the Church.

2. He is anointed with Oil to show his Person is Sacred; on the Head to show
Glory, on the Breast to signify Sanctity, on the Arms to emblemize Power,

His Ensigns of Regality are these:
1. In his Right Hand is a Scepter, to show Justice.

2. In his Left Hand a Globe with a Cross on it, called a Mound, used ever
since Edward the Confessor, signifying, that the Faith of Christ is to be
owned throughout his Empire.

3. A Ring is put on his Finger, whereby he is wedded to his People, and
denotes Faithfulness.

4. He has a Bracelet put on his Hand, the Emblem of good Works.

5. A Sword is born before him, to signify Vengeance.

6. He has purple Robes, to attract Reverence.

7. On his Head he wears a Diadem Triumphant, to blazon his Glory; in which
Diadem some take notice of twelve precious Stones, and show their
Significations as follows:

1. Say they, the first is a Tophaz, whose Rays seem to partake of the Colors
of most sorts of precious Stones; by which the King is warned to exercise all
Virtues.

2. A Smaragd, or Emrauld, of a pure green, and shows that Justice is an
ornament for a King.

3. A Sardick, whose Color is like red Clay, (it is in the top of the Crown,)
whereby the King is put in mind, that though he be the highest, yet he is but
Clay.

4. A Crysolite, which shines like Gold, sending forth (as it were) flames;
this exhorts the King to show Wisdom and Prudence in his Actions.

5. A Chalcedon, which is strong and hard by Nature, and shows that the King
should be of Fortitude, and courage of Mind.

6. An Hyacinth, which shows like Water when the Sun shines upon it; it
teaches Temperance, etc.

7. A Jasper, of a dark Grass-green, and teaches the King to provide more for
his Peoples Sustenance than his own.

8. A Chrysoprasus, whose Color is like Gold, somewhat mixed with green,
thereby advising the King to Wisdom, and to aspire to heavenly things.

9. A Berill, of a pale Green, showing that a Prince ought to have heavenly
Contemplation, and to abhor Epicurism.

10. A Sapphir, of a light Blew; it instructs the King to Continency, and
Chastity.

11. There is an Amethyst, of a purple or Violet Color, advising the King to a
faithful Discharge of his Royal Function, and so give a good Example to his
People.

12. The Last is a Sardonyx, which is black at bottom, red in the midst, and
white above, and shows a King ought to be Charitable, Humble, and Sincere.

The Imperial Crown has not been long in use with us; for formerly the King
wore a Coronet composed of Spires, or points, until Henry the 3d. who first
wore the Imperial Diadem.

There are twelve Days which are called the twelve Household or Offering Days,
on which the Nobles attending at Court, and Knights of the Garter, wear their
Robes, and the Besant is given to the Lord Steward; the Days are as follows:

On these four Days the King offers Gold, which is given by one of the
White-staff Officers, viz.

1 Christmas Day, 2 Easter Day, 3 Whitsunday, 4 All Saints Day.
These two Days the King offers Gold, Myrrh, and Frankincense.

1 New Years Day, 2 Epiphany.
On the Six Days following the King offers only Gold: 1 The Purification, 2 The
Anunciation, 3 The Ascention-Day, 4 Trinity Sunday, 5 Midsummer-Day, 6
Michaelmas-Day.


The King's Collar Days without offering are the Sundays and Hollydays in the
twelve Days of Christmas, all the Apostles and Evangelists Days, the Coronation
Day, the King's Birth Day, the 5th of November, St. George's Day, Monday and
Tuesday in Easter Week, Monday and Tuesday in Whitsun Week.

CHAP. III. Of the Prince.
THe King's Eldest Son and Heir Apparent from the Day of his Birth is entitled
Prince of Wales; and since the happy Union of the Kingdoms, his Title has been
Magnae Britanniae Princeps; but he is usually called by the former Title of
Prince of Wales: He is, as the King's eldest Son, by his Birth Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, and as Eldest Son to the King of Scotland he is
Earl of Rothsay and Senchall of Scotland from his Birth; but he is created
Prince of Wales. At his Creation he is presented before the King in Princely
Robes, who puts a Coronet of Gold upon his Head, a Ring on his middle
Finger, a Verge of Gold into one Hand, and his Letters Patents, after they are
read, into the other Hand: His Mantle which he wears in Parliament is doubled
with five Doublings upon his Shoulder, and his Cap of State is indented at
Bottom: His Coronet formerly was composed of Crosses and and Flower-de-luces
mixed; but since the happy Restoration it was solemnly ordered, that the Son
and Heir Apparent to the Crown of England, should bear his Coronet of Crosses,
and Flower-de-luces, with one Arch, a Ball and Cross thereon, as the King's.

By Order of Common Law the King might levy a reasonable Aid of his Subjects
for the Knighting his Eldest Son at the Age of fifteen years, and to marry his
Daughter at seven years, which Aid was twenty Shillings for every Knight's Fee,
and as much for every twenty pounds per Annum in Soccage; but this is now laid
aside.

CHAP IV. Of Dukes.
THe Title and Degree of Duke has been of more ancient standing in the Empire,
and some other Nations, than in England; for the first English Duke was Edward
the Black Prince, who was created Duke of Cornwall, Anno. 1337. by which
Creation the eldest Son of the King is Duke of Cornwall from his Birth, or his
Father's coming to the Crown. A Duke takes his Name a Ducendo, from Leading,
being at first a Leader of the Royal Army; but now it is a Title given by Kings
to Persons of high Blood, and excellent Merit; and at this day the Sovereign
Princes of some Countries are called Dukes, as of Moscovoy, Savoy, Florence,
Saxony, etc. At their Creation they have two Ensigns of Honor (and so have
most other Noble men) to signify their Duty. First, their Heads are adorned
with a Chapeau, or Head Attire of Scarlet Color, doubled or lined with Ermin:
And, Secondly a Sword, which is girt about him, which shows his readiness to
serve and defend his Prince; his Mantle over his shoulders is guarded with four
guards or Folds of Ermin; his Coronet is of Gold, set round with Leaves; the
Cap is of Crimson (but not indented as the Prince's is, unless he be of the
Blood Royal,) and his Verge is of Gold: Dukes of the Blood Royal have their
Coronet's composed of Crosses, and Flower de-luces, and are reputed as
Archdukes.

A Duke tantum (or no more but Duke) takes place before Marquess, and Earl; but
if a Duke be Marquess, and Earl, or either of them, then he shall take place
before such Duke tantum. Note; Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, at their Creation
are girt with a Sword, (or else it is put over their Shoulders) which
Viscounts, and Barons, have not.

A Duke out of the King's or Prince's presence, may have a Cloth of State
hanging down within half a yard of the Ground; his Duchess may have the same,
and her Train born up by a Baroness. No Earl, without Permission, ought to wash
with a Duke.

Dukes Eldest Sons, by the Courtesy of England, are from their Birth styled
Marquesses, (and the younger Sons Lords,) and and take place of Viscounts, but
not so privileged by the Laws of the Land. A Duke has the Title of Grace;
being written unto, he is styled Most High, Most Noble, and Potent Prince; also
Right Noble. Dukes of the Blood are styled, Most High, Most Mighty, and
Illustrious Princes.

The Ceremonies at his Creation are these: He has his Sur-coat and Hood, and
is led between two of the Noblest Persons present, not being above him; a
little before him on the Right Hand goes an Earl with the Cap of State, and
Coronet on it; on the other side an Earl with the Verge: Just before him one of
the greatest Estate (as Marquess, etc.) bearing his Sword, and before him an
Earl bearing his Mantle, and Robe of State; all which Nobles must be in their
Robes. His Title is proclaimed twice, and Largus thrice: His Honor is
Hereditary, (as is all the Nobles, unless otherwise Provided in their Patent,
which is rare.) Lastly, a Duke may constitute six Chaplains.

CHAP. V. Of a Marquess.
A Marquess (by the Saxons called Marken Reeve, i. e. a Governor or Ruler of
the Marches) has the next place of Honor to a Duke. This Title came in first
by Richard the 2d. who created Robert Vere Marquess of Dublin, whereas before,
they that governed the Marches were entitled Earl of March, (which Marches
were those Grounds between England, and Wales, and are now reduced into the
Counties and Shires of Monmouth, Brecknock, Radnor, Denbigh, and Mountgomery.)
At his Creation he is honored with a Coronet of Gold, composed of a Strawberry
Leaf, and a Point pearled of equal hight round; his Mantle has three folds, or
doublings, and a half; his Eldest Son is by Courtesy called Earl, or Lord of
his Father's Title, his younger only Lord John, Thomas, or the like. His Title
is Most Noble, Most Honorable, and Potent Prince: If the King, Prince, or a
Duke be absent, he may have a Cloth of State to reach within a yard of the
Ground; his Marchioness may have her Train born up by a Knight's Lady in her
own house, but not in the presence of a Duchess; his eldest Son shall wear as
many powderings as an Earl, but must give place to an Earl, and his Wife to a
Countess, but may sit above all Marquess Daughters, the Eldest whereof is born
Countess, and the rest Ladies.

At his Creation he must have his Surcoat and Hood: He is led by Marquesses,
his Sword, Cap, etc. are born by Earls.

CHAP VI. Of an Earl.
THE Dignity of an Earl, is either local, or personal; local, as from some
place, as Oxford, etc. or personal, as Earl Marshal, Earl Rivers, etc. Hugh
Lupus was the first Hereditary Earl, Anno 1067. made so by William the First,
who created him Earl of Chester, and gave him Jura Regalia within the said
County.

An Earl is created by Letters Patents, and adorned with a Cap of Honor, and a
Coronet of Gold, composed of Leaves, and Points pearled; the Leaves lower than
the Points: He has his Hood, Surcoat, and Mantle of State, with three Guards
of Furr, being Ermin, upon his Shoulders, (though some say it ought to be
white;) he is girt with a Sword also. When the King writes to a Duke, Marquess,
or Earl, he styles them Cosins, though of no Kin.

Formerly they had the Title of Prince, but now it is, Most Potent and Noble
Lord, Right Honorable, Truly Noble, etc. Out of his Superiour's presence he
may have a Cloth of State fringed, but without Pendents; his Wife may have her
Train born by an Esquire's Wife, but not in the presence of a Marchioness.

CHAP. VII. Of a Viscount.
THe next Degree of Honor is a Viscount, formerly a name of Office under an
Earl, who being the immediate Officer of the King in the County, and his
personal Attendence at Court often required, he had his Deputy to look after
the Affairs of the County; which Office is now called Vice-comes, or Sheriff;
but in the 18th of Henry VI. it became a Degree of Honor, conferred upon John
Beaumont by Letters Patents, as all since are: He has his Surcoat and Mantle,
which has two Guards and an half of white Fur: His Coronet is set round with
Pearls, or Balls, close to the Ring, without number, but close together: He
has the Title of Right Honorable, Truly Noble, Potent Lord, etc.

He may have a Traverse in his House, except in his Superiour's presence; his
Wife may have her Train born up by a Woman out of her Superiors presence, in
their presence by a Man.

CHAP. VIII. Of Barons, or Lords, which are Spiritual and Temporal.
THe next and lowest Degree of Nobility, is that of a Baron, which is twofold,
Lords Spiritual, and Temporal; but first of the Lords Spiritual, or Bishops.

1. By Lords Spiritual are meant only the Suffragan Bishops, for the
Archbishops are accounted of the prime Nobility of the Kingdom, of which we
have two, viz. of Canterbury, and York.

1. The Archbishop of Canterbury had formerly great Honor; so that no Legate,
or Nuntio from Rome could exercise any Legantine Power, without the King's
special License; else he was accountable to the Archbishop of Canterbury. In
General Councils he had place before all Archbishops, at the Pope's right Foot,
and at home was reputed the second Person in the Kingdom, or first Peer of the
Realm, having Precedence of all Dukes, (not of the Royal Blood) and of all the
great Officers of State. He has Power to summon the Archbishop of York, and
the Bishops of his Province to a National Synod: He is styled (even by the
King) by the Grace of God, and writes himself by Divine Providence, as does the
Archbishop of York, (whereas other Bishops write by Divine Permission:) He has
the Title of Grace given him, as Dukes have, and of most Reverend Father in
God, and Metropolitan of all England. The Coronation of the King has anciently
belonged to him, it being resolved that wheresoever the Court was, the King and
Queen were the proper and Domestical Parishioners of the Archbishop of
Canterbury. The Bishop of London is accounted his Provincial, the Bishop of
Winchester his Chancellor, and the Bishop of Rochester his Chaplain: He has
under his Jurisdiction twenty one Suffragan Bishops, seventeen in England, and
four in Wales: His Clergies Tenths are 65.1 l. -- 18 s. -- 2 d. -- his
Archbishopric is valued in the King's Book at 2816 l. -- 17 s. -- 9 d. He may
qualify and retain eight Chaplains, which is two more than a Duke may.

2. The Archbishop of York, pretended anciently to have all the Bishops of
Scotland under his Inspection, and that they should receive their Consecration
from him, and swear Canonical Obedience to his See; (he is allowed to write
himself Metropolitan of England, but not of All England, as Canterbury does;)
but at length the Bishops of Scotland would not acknowledge any such Power to
him, and disowned all Obedience to him, and had Archbishops of their own, Anno
1466. leaving him in England but four Bishops: His Bishopric is now valued at
1609 l. -- 19 s. -- 2 d. And the Tenths of the Clergy to 1113 l. -- 17 s. -- 9
d. 10 b. 1. qu. he has Precedence before all Dukes not of the Royal Blood, and
before all great Officers of State, except the Lord Chancellor, or Lord
Keeper. He has the Title of Grace, and most Reverend Father in God; and he
writes by Divine Providence: He has the Honor to crown the Queen, and to be
her perpetual Chaplain, and has great Privileges, only Durham has a peculiar
Jurisdiction, exempt from the Sea of York.

Having made this Digression, we come next to speak of the Suffragan Bishops,
who though they have some peculiar Precedencies amongst themselves, yet in
general they are esteemed as Barons, and from thence have the names of Lords
Spiritual. In their own Courts they have power to judge, and pass Sentence
alone; and therefore they send forth their Writs in their own name, and not in
the King's: In whatever Princes Dominions they are, their Episcopal Dignity and
Degree is owned: In Parliament they Vote in all things, except in matter of
Life and Limb. They have the Title of Lord, are styled Right Reverend Fathers
in God, and write by Divine Permission: They may qualify 6 Chaplains (which
are as many as a Duke,) and are Barons and Peers of the Realm: And as Spiritual
Barons precede all under the Degree of a Viscount, and are placed on the King's
Right Hand in Parliament. All Churchmen are prohibited the wearing of Swords,
and a Priest the Order of Knighthood.

2. Of Barons Temporal. We may observe that the word Baron is variously
derived; some from the Greek (...), some from Baro, which is the same with Vir
in Latin, and with Varon in the Spanish; so that Baron signifies a notable or
principal man; thus anciently the Burgesses of London were called Barons, as
those of the Cinque Ports now are: but leaving the Name to speak of the Person,
a Baron (the Archbishops excepted) is a Dignity next to a Viscount, and though,
according to Cambden, they are not by our Common Laws allowed to be of the
Degree of Nobility, yet this of a Baron may be by Tenure; for the Title of
Baron by Patent (which is under the Broad-Seal of England) is Status, Gradus,
Dignitas, and being by the King's Writ summoned as Members of the higher House
of Parliament, they are thereby made Nobles and Peers of the Realm. As they are
Barons, without any other Distinction, they wear a Coronet, (by the Ordinance
of King Charles the 2d.) having six Balls or Pearls set close to the Border at
equal distance, and have their peculiar Parliament Robes, which have two
doublings of white Furr. Thus far of Noble Men.

CHAP. IX. Of Noble Women, and first of the Queen.
THere are three sorts of Queens.

1. A Queen-Sovereign, to whom the Crown descends by Birthright, and is equal
in Power to a King; if she marry she is Sovereign to her Husband, and he her
Subject, (in England,) though he be an Emperor.

2. The Queen-Consort: She has very great Privileges, and the Laws set so high
a value on her, as to make it High Treason to conspire her Death, or violate
her Chastity; her Robes are the same with a Sovereign Queen: She sits in State
by the King, keeps her Court, and has the same General Officers as the King
has; though she be an Alien, she needs no Act of Parliament to natralize her,
the Crown taking away that defect: She has the same Honor performed to her
that the King has, as well from Foreigners as Subjects.

3. The Queen-Dowager: She has the same Honor done to her also, and takes
place next the Queen-Consort; nor does she lose her Title of Queen, though she
marry a private Gentleman, as Queen Katharine, Widow to Henry the 5th. who,
though she married Owen Tudor, Esquire; yet she maintained her Action at Law, as
Queen of England: So in King Edward the 6th's Time Sir Thomas Seymer, Lord high
Admiral, having married the Queen Dowager to Henry the 8th. she denied
Precedence to her Sister in Law, the Lord Protectour's Wife, as belonging to
her as Queen, which was aggravated so high, that it proved the untimely Deaths
of those two famous Men.

The King's Daughters are all Princesses; the Eldest is called the Princess
Royal, and her Royal Highness.

All Noble Men's, Baronets, and all Knights Wives are in Writings called Dames,
(whence comes the name Madam.) Esquires and Gentlemen's Wives are called
Gentlewomen.

Noble Women are so either by Descent, Creation, or Marriage; all which shall
remain Noble, although they marry under their Degree.

If a Gentleman, or a Peer, marry a Wife of ignoble Birth, she shall enjoy the
Title and Dignity of her Husband all her Life; but it is by the Courtesy, not
by the Law of England, to give it her after her Husband's Death.

If a Woman of Blood marry a mean Person, he is not at all advanced, but she
shall retain her own Honor; and if she be an Heiress, and have a Child by such
ignoble Person her Son may bear her Coat Armor; but this is disputed by many,
and denied by some, yet there are Examples of it, but are too long to recite
here.

An Alien Woman married to a Peer, can have no privilege by her Husband, unless
she be naturalized.

The King may create any Woman to any Title of Honor by Letters Patents to
them and their Heirs, which Heirs shall enjoy all the Titles and Honors due to
their Mothers; as, if she be a Duchess, he shall be a Duke, etc. and many Men
have claimed Titles of Honor and Dignity in Right of the Wives, by marrying
the Sole Heiress of a Nobleman who had those Honors: And the Children of
those persons so claiming have enjoyed the said Titles in right of their
Mothers, but if they have no Children, the Husband loses the Title.

CHAP. X. Of Injuries done to Noble Men.
THus far briefly of the several Degrees of Noble Men, of whom the Laws of this
Land are so careful, as to make provision in a most especial manner to
preserve their Honor and Reputation indempnified, and therefore in the 2d. of
Ric. II. Chap. 1. it is enacted, That all spreaders of false and reproachful
Words and Lies against the Nobility, Prelates, and great Men in public
Offices, (the offender) shall incurr the Punishment ordained by the Statute of
Westminster, Chap. 33. which ordains, That the offender be imprisoned, until
he have found the first reporter: And in the 12th of Rich. II. Chap. 12. it is
enacted, That if the Offender does not (or cannot) find the first reporter,
then he shall be punished by Advice of the Council. In the first and second of
Philip and Mary it was enacted, That the Justices of the Peace in the Shire,
County, City, or Town Corporate, shall have full Power to hear and determine
the Causes abovesaid, and that besides such Penalties as shall be inflicted by
such Justices, etc. on the offender, every Noble Man, Prelate, or great
Officer, against whom such scandalous Words, false News, or Lies are spread or
spoken, may prosecute the offender in an Action of Scandalum Magnatum, and
recover Damages.

If any Noble Man or Gentleman's Coat Armor, or Sword, etc. at the solemnizing
of his Funerals be set up in the Church for the Honor of the Deceased, and is
by the Incumbent (or any other) taken down by pretense of Right, as Offerings
due to him, or if they be otherwise defaced by any other Person, he or they may
be punished as Malefactors, but the Action must not be brought by the Widow,
but by the Heir, as Defender of his Ancestour's Honor.

CHAP. XI. Of Knights of the Garter.
WE proceed to those Degrees of Honor that are less Noble, and accounted
amongst Commoners. The first of which the Knights of the Noble Order of the
Garter; they are called the Knights of St. George and were instituted by King
Edward the 3d. Anno 1350. which was fifty years before the Order of St. Michael
in France, 229 years before the Order of the Holy Ghost in France, 80 years
before the Order of the Golden-Fleece in Burgundy, and 209 years before that of
the Elephant in Denmark.

The Ceremonies of this Order are many, and too long to recite; the occasion
was, that King Edward the 3d might more firmly unite the hearts of his
principal Peers and Friends to him in the French Wars, the Number is 26,
whereof the King is Sovereign; and upon the Death of any one, another is to be
chosen by the King: The Honourableness of this Order appears by the many Noble
Personages who have took up this Order; there having been eight Emperors,
seven Kings of Portugal, five Kings of Denmark, three Kings of Naples, two
Kings of Scots before the Union, two Kings of Sweden, besides many of the
German and Italian Princes.

August the 25th 1685. The Knights of this Order were as follows.
King of Denmark. The Sovereign. King of Sweeden. Prince of Orange. Prince
Elector of Brandenburgh. Prince George of Denmark. Duke of Ormond. Duke of
Buckingham. Earl of Oxford. Earl of Strafford. Duke of Albemarle. Duke of
Beaufort. Earl of Bedford. Duke of Southampton. Earl of Mulgrave. Duke of
New Castle. Earl of Danby. Duke of Grafton. Duke of Richmond. Duke of Hamilton.
Duke of Somerset. Duke of Northumberland. Duke of Norfolk. Earl of
Peterborough. Earl of Rochester. Earl of Feversham, then Installed. Knights of
this Order, as they are April 1689.
King of Denmark. The Sovereign. King of Sweeden. P. Elector of Brandenburgh.
Prince George of Denmark. Earl or Oxford. Earl of Strafford. Duke of Beaufort.
Earl of Bedford. Duke of Southampton. Earl of Mulgrave. Duke of Newcastle. Earl
of Danby. Duke of Grafton. Duke of Richmond. Duke of Hamilton. Duke of
Somerset. Duke of Northumberland. Duke of Norfolk. Earl of Peterborough. Earl
of Rochester. Earl of Feversham. Earl of Sunderland. Duke of Ormond. Duke Fred.
Mares. de Schomberg. Earl of Devonshire.

They wear, as their daily Habit, the Immage of St. George, encountering the
Dragon, set with Pearl and precious Stones, hanging in a blew Ribbon always
about their Neck; they have also a Garter enamelled with Gold, Pearl, and
precious Stones, with a Motto, Honi soit qui mal y pense, embroydered upon it;
which is fastened with a Buckle about their left Leg, from whence they are
called Knights of the Garter: King Charles the first added to these, that all
these Knights should always wear on the left side of their Cloaks, or Coats, a
Star of Silver, embroidered with the Escouchen of St. George. ( viz Argent a
Cross Gules) encircled with the Garter; without these they are not to appear in
public.

The Robes more peculiarly belonging to the Order, are a Cassock of Crimson
Velvet, lined with white Sarsenet, a Mantle of purple Velvet, lined with white
Sarsenet also, on the left Shoulder whereof is an Escouchen of St. George,
embroidered and encircled with the Garter and Motto; these are only worn upon
St. George's Day, and when it shall please the Sovereign to celebrate the
Ceremonies of the Installment, at their Feast, and on the King's Offering days,
if in Court, and have no other Title of Honor.

To each Knight belongs a Collar of the Order, made of pure Gold, weighing 30
Ounces Troy; composed of Garters and Roses enemalled, Red, (and White since
Henry 7th,) and since the Union of the Kingdoms mixed with Thistles; which
Collar has the Image of St. George, set with precious Stones appendent, and
worn over all their Robes at St. George's Feast, and over their Cloaks or Coats
on the King's Offering days; they take place according to the Seniority of
their Installment; and if they have no other Titles, which is very rare, they
succeed Barons.

Their Officers are a Prelate, which is allways the Bishop of Winchester, a
Chancellor, a Register, a King at Arms, and an Usher, called, the Black Rod,
which was added by Henry 8th.

CHAP XII. Of Knights Bannerets.
THese are called by some Equites Vexillarii or Cheviliers a Banier, and is a
most ancient Order, being instituted by King Edward the first, and always
conferred upon the most deserving men for their signal Valor, who in process
of time (as some say) obtained the Names of Barons, and were admitted into the
Peerage, and their Heirs enjoyed their Titles: But certain it is they always
retained some Ensigns of Honor equal to the Nobility, being allowed to bear
Arms with Supporters, which none under the Degree of a Baron are to do: They
take place before the younger Sons of Viscounts and Baronets, and are of such
esteem, that diverse Esquires, and Knights Bachelors have served under them.

This Order in France was Hereditary, but with us it is only for Life to the
meritorious Person, yet esteemed as a Glory and Honor to the Family. The
Ceremonies of their Creation is most Noble; the King (or his General, if the
King be not present,) after a Victory obtained, does at the Head of the Army,
drawn up in Battalia, under his Royal Standard, attended with all his Nobles
and Field Officers, receive the Person to be Knighted, led between two renowned
Knights, or men at Arms, having his Pennion of Arms in his Hand; and before him
the Hearalds, who proclaim his valiant Achievement, for which he is counted
worthy to be made a Knight Banneret, and to display his Banner in the Field:
Then the King says unto him, advances toy Banneret; and then he causes the
point of his Pennion to be rent off: Then the new Knight having the Trumpets
sounding, the Nobles and Officers accompanying him, he is attended to his Tent,
where they are nobly treated.

A Banneret thus made may bear his Banner displayed in the Royal Army, and set
his Arms thereon with Supporters, as Nobles do. The last of this Order was Sir
John Smith, so made after Edg-hill-Fight, for his valiant rescuing the King's
Standard from the Rebels.

CHAP. XIII. Of Baronets.
THis is the lowest Degree of Hereditary Honor, and in that case succeeds
Barons: It was Instituted anno 1611. in the 9th of King James the First: They
are created by Letters, Patents, under the Great Seal of England, to him and to
his Heirs Males; yet sometimes it may be otherwise entailed; but this is rare,
and must be inserted in the Patent. The Intention of this Order was for the
propagating a Plantation in the Province of Vlster in Ireland; toward which
they were to lend their Aid or maintain 30 Soldiers each for 3 Years in
Ireland, after the rate of 8d. per Day. They have Precedence of all Knights,
except those of the Garter, Knights Bannerets, and Knights being privy
Counselors. In all Writs, Commissions, etc. they are are styled Baronets, and
the Title of Sir added to their Names, and of Lady to their Wives: They take
place according to the Priority of the Date of their Patents, unless the King
insert a Clause to the contrary, which is very rare. Those admitted are to be
of good Reputation, and whose Grand father (at least) by the Father's Side bore
Arms; and he must be of the yearly Estate of 1000 l. de claro.

They, or their eldest Son, may receive the Order of Knighthood at the age of
21 Years, and they shall bear on a Canton (or on an Escoucheon, which can be
best placed on their Arms) the Arms of Vlster, Argent, a Sinister Hand in Pale,
Couped at Wrist, Gules. In the Royal Army they have place in the Gross, near
the Royal Standard, and are allowed some peculiar Solemnities for their
Funerals.

CHAP XIV. Of the Knights of the Bath.
THey are called Knights of the Bath from the manner of their Creation, and
also Knights of the Holy Trinity from the Medal which they wear, which is three
Crowns, with an Inscription about it, which was formerly, Tria Numina juncta in
Vno: But at King James the First his Coronation the word Numina was left out;
and so it alluded to the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
which were then joined in one.

They are usually made at the Coronation of a King or Queen, and at the
Creation of a Prince, or Duke of the Royal Blood; as at the Creation of Henry
Prince of Wales, and Charles Duke of York: These Knights says Froysard, as
quoted by Bloom, were first created in Anno. 1399. but Elias Ashmole Esquire;
thinks them more ancient, and that Henry IV. who was then King, did not
constitute, but rather restore the ancient manner of making Knights, and made
it peculiar to the Knights of the Bath, which has continued so ever since.
They are assigned no Statues; neither are they to wear their Robes but upon the
time of Solemnity, except a red Ribbon worn cross their left Shoulder, (as
those of the Garter do a Blew,) with a Medal above mentioned; and upon a
Vacancy, their number (which is uncertain) is not supplied. They are created
with many and Noble Ceremonies, and have had Princes, and the prime of the
Nobility of their Order. The principal Ceremonies are these:

The Person is first sent for by the King, (and at his coming to Court, the
King usually Knights him with the Sword of State,) where he is honorably
received by the chief Officers and Nobles of the Court, and has two Esquires
to wait upon him, and convey him to the Chamber appointed, (and see him no more
that day,) where he is entertained with Music; then a Bath is prepared by a
Barber, who is to trim him, and then the King is informed that he is ready for
the Bath; then is he instructed by the most grave Knights in the Order and Fees
of Chivalry, the Music all the while playing at the Door; then they undress
him and put him naked into the Bath, at which time the Music ceases, and one
of the grave Knights says to him, Be this an honorable Bath to thee. From the
Bath he is conveyed to his Bed, which is plain without Curtains, etc. as soon
as he is dry they shall help to dress him, putting over his inward Garment a
Russet Robe with long Sleeves, and an Hood like an Hermits; the Barber the mean
while takes away the Bath, which, with all that belongs to it, and the Collar
about his Neck, is his fees. He is then conducted to the Chapel with Music,
where being entered, the Knights and Esquires shall be entertained with Wine,
and Spices, and take their leave; then the Priest and the two Esquires, with
the new Knight, perform a vigil till almost day, with Prayers and Offerings,
beseeching God (and his Blessed Mother) to make him worthy of that Dignity; and
being confessed, he shall hold a Taper in his hand until the reading of the
Gospel, at which time the shall deliver his Hood to one of the Esquire, and the
Taper to the other Esquire, and a Penny must be laid on the Altar, on or near
the Candlestick; and when the priest comes to the Words Verbum caro factum est,
he, while Kneeling, shall take the Taper and offer it to God, and the Penny to
him who is to make him a Knight: Prayers done, he is conducted to his Chamber
for some repose, until the King's Pleasure be known, then being dressed he is
led into the Hall, being girt with a Girdle of white Leather without Buckles, a
Coif upon his Head, a Mantle of Silk over a Kirtle of Tartarin, tied with a
lace of white Silk, and a pair of white Gloves hanging at the end of the Lace;
(all which is the Chandlers Fees) then mounting on horse back, the grave
Knights conduct him up the Hall to the King (with his Sword, and his Spurs
hanging at the pomil, carried before him) where the Marshal and the Usher
meeting him, desire him to allight, and the Marshal shall take his Horse for
his Fee; being brought to the second Table, with his Sword and Spurs held
upright before him, the King asks for the Sword and Spurs, which being showed
by the Chamberlain, the King takes the right Spur and gives it to the most
Noble Person there, and wills him to put it on the Person's heel, and the
Knight himself puts on the other, then the King taking the Sword, girds it
about him, and putting his Arms about his Neck; says, Be thou a good Knight,
and kisseth him.

The Knight thus made, is conducted back to the Chapel, where kneeling, with
his right hand laid upon the high Altar, he promises to defend the rights of
the Holy Church until his Death, and ungirding his Sword he offers it to
God: At his going out the King's Master-Cook stands ready with his Carving
knife in his hand; Saying, I the King's Master-Cook am come to receive thy
Spurs for my Fees; and if you do any thing contrary to the Honor of
Knighthood, (which God forbid) I shall hack your Spurs from your heels. Then
the Knight is conducted into the Hall, where he sits at Table with the Knights
that are there, and rising again, he retires into his Chamber, where his Robes
are taken off, and he is clothed in a Blew Robe, having a Lace of white Silk
upon his left Shouldier, which ought to be worn upon all his Garments, until
he has gained some Renown in feats of Arms; or else some Princess or great
Lady cut it from his Shoulder. After dinner he is conducted by the Knights into
the King's Presence, to return him thanks for these Honors; and taking his
leave, with craving Pardon for any miscarriage, he is dismissed by the Title of
Knight of the Bath.

CHAP. XV. Of Knights Bachelours.
THE Title of Knight is a Word taken from Horsman-ship, as their several Names
in diverse Languages signify, the Italians and Spaniards call them Cevalieri,
the French Chevaliers, the Britains Margagh, the Germans, Rutters, and our
Ancient Saxons Cinht, whence some observe that Cinht signifies a Servant, and
Rutter a Rider; and so it signifies one that serves on Horseback, to
distinguish them from Cinht, or Knecht, which is the common Name of Servants;
but the Romans called them Miles, or Soldiers: They are as ancient as History,
and have the Title of Sir attributed to them. No man can be born a Knight, but
it is an Honor conferred on them by the Prince, either to encourage them to
his Service, or as a reward for Service done, chiefly for his Valor in Battle;
and he keeps his Title in all Countries wherever he comes, contrary to all
other Degrees of Honor.

In Ancient time the manner of making or dubbing of a Knight was with great
Honor, as in King Arthur's time we find it thus: The King commanded a large
Stage to be erected in, or near some Cathedral Church, and thereon was set a
Chair of Silver, covered with Green Silk, in which the Person to be Knighted
was placed; then he was demanded whether he was of a healthy Body, and able to
undergo the Travel required in a Soldier, also whether he were a man of honest
Conversation, and what credible Witnesses he can produce to affirm the same:
Then the Bishop or other Chief Prelate took the Bible, and holding it open
before the Knight, in Presence of the King, and all others, spoke these words:

Sir, You that desire to receive the Order of Knighthood, shall swear before
God, and on this Holy Book, that you shall not fight against this Mighty and
Excellent Prince, that now bestows the Order of Knighthood upon you, unless
you shall be commanded so to do in the Service of your own King, for in that
Case having first yielded up the Collar, Device, and other Ensigns of Honor
now received, it shall be lawful for you to serve against him without Reproach
or Offense to all other Companions in Arms; but otherwise doing, you shall
incur Infamy, and being taken in War, shall be subject to the pains of Death.
You shall also swear, with all your Force and Power to maintain and defend all
Ladies, Gentlewomen, Orphans, and distressed Women. And you shall shun no
adventure of your Person in any War wherein you shall happen to be. This Oath
being taken, two of the chief Lords led him to the King, who drew forth his
Sword, and laid it upon his Head, saying, God and St. George (or any other
Saint whom he pleases, but commonly St. George,) make thee a good Knight. Then
came Seven Noble Ladies in white, and girded on his Sword, and four Honorable
Knights put on his Spurs: Then the Queen (if there) took him by the right Arm,
and a Duchess or greatest Lady by the left, who led him to a seat, having three
Ascents, and there seated him; the King siting on his Right hand, and the Queen
on his Left, the Lords and Ladies siting on the three Steps under the King and
Queen; where being entertained with a Noble Banquet, the Ceremony's ended.

Of Degrading of Knights.
Examples of this is rarely found, it being used only for great and notable
Offenses against Loyalty and Honor, and then he was Armed Cap-a-Pee, and
placed on a high Scaffold in the Church, where the Priest sung some Funeral
Psalms, as though he had been dead; then they take off his Helmet, and so by
degrees the rest of his Armor: Then the Heralds proclaim him a disloyal
Miscreant, and throw him down with a Rope tied about him over the Stage: Other
ways there has been, as the reversing their Arms, seizing their Equipage,
cutting the Spurs from their Heels; and breaking their Sword over their Heads,
but of late they had Marshal Law executed upon them.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Knights of the Round Table.
THis Order was founded by King Arthur, Anno 516. who after many Glorious
Actions abroad, did at his return constitute this Order of Knighthood, being
(as some say) twenty four in number, (some say more,) amongst whom he himself
was chief; and for avoiding controversy about taking of place he caused a
round Table to be made, from whence they took their Name, which is (said to be)
the same that now hangs up in Windsor; none were admitted but such as made
sufficient Proof of their Prowess, and were renowned for their Virtue and
Valor.

Their Articles were, to be allways well Armed for all occasions, and ready to
assail Tyrants and Oppressors, to defend Widows, Maidens, and Children, and to
relieve those in necessity, to maintain the Christian Faith, to aid the Holy
Church, and to protect Pilgrims, to advance Honor, suppress Vice, to bury
Soldiers that want Sepulchers, to ransom Captives, deliver Prisoners, and to
help toward the cure of wounded Soldiers, hurt in the Service of their King
and Country, to record all noble Achievements, that it might remain for ever
to the Honor of their Order; if complaint was made to the King by any Lady,
Gentlewoman, or other Person oppressed or wronged, one or more of these Knights
were without delay to redress the same, were it at home or in Foreign Lands; if
any Foreign Knight came to Court with desire to show his Prowess, one of these
Knights ought to be ready in Arms to answer him, and also that every one of
them should be ready to instruct young Lords and Gentlemen in the Exercises of
Arms: They had no Robe that is mentioned, nor any Officer but a Register.

Knights of St. Andrew, or of the Thistle in Scotland.
Achaius (by some Hungus) King of the Picts, the night before his Battle with
Athelstone, King of England, saw in the Sky a bright Cross, like that whereon
St. Andrew suffered Martyrdom; and the day proving successful to him, the
Picts and Scots ever since have bore the said Cross in all their Banners and
Ensigns; from hence it is thought this Order took it is beginning, Anno 810. the
principal Ensign of this Order, is a golden Collar composed of Thistles,
intermixed with Annulets of Gold, to which hangs the Figure of St. Andrew,
with his Cross, and this Motto, Nemo me impune lacessit; but for their common
Ensign, they weara Purple Ribbon, to which hangs a golden Thistle, crowned
with an Imperial Crown, within a Circle of Gold, with the abovesaid Motto. The
grand Day of meeting is on St. Andrew's day, and in St. Andrew's Church, their
number 13. in allusion to Christ and his twelve Apostles, they are to be richly
apparalled, and in their Parliament Robes, having St. Andrew's Cross within a
blew Roundel, embroidered on the left Shoulder; and in the center of the Cross,
a Crown composed of Flower-de-luces of Gold.

This Order, after it had continued above 700 Years, was wholly laid aside,
after the Reformation which happened in the Reign of Mary Queen of Scots, and
not restord again until King James the 2d. did by a Patent dated at Windsor,
May the 29. 1687. restore this Order again, appointing his Chapel Royal in his
Palace at Holy-Rood-house, to be the Chapel of the Order, instead of St.
Andrew's Church, which was ruined in the said Reformation. They are appointed
to be of the most Noble Men in Scotland, His Late Majesty being Sovereign, who
appointed them a Secretary.

Knights of the holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem.
This is held the most ancient of all those Orders that took their beginning in
the Holy Land, beginning about Anno 1099. some say Philip King of France
instituted it; but the better say it was Baldwin, the first King of Jerusalem,
who made his regular Canons Knights of this Order: Their Duty was to guard the
Holy Sepulcher, to relieve and protect Pilgrims, to fight against Infidels, to
hear Mass every Day; their Ensign was two red Crosses united in one. When the
Christians were expelled the Holy Land these Knights settled themselves at
Perugia in Italy, but by the Bull of Pope Innocent 8th anno 1484. they and all
their goods were annexed to the Knights Hospitallers at Rhodes.

Knights Hospitallers.
They were instituted Anno 1099. by one Gerrard of Toulouse, and had large
Privileges granted them by Baldwin the the 1st. who created them Knights, and
obliged them to use their Arms against the Infidels, but the Saladine having
won Jerusalem, they retired into Acres which being also taken, they seized upon
the Isle of Rhodes, where they continued until Solomon forced them thence,
anno 1522. after which they betook themselves to the Isle of Maltha, where they
still continue. Their Habit is black, with a white Cross near the left
Shoulder; they vow Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity; since they have been
endued with many Dignities, and are divided into three classes, viz. Knights,
Ecclesiastics and Servants: The Great Master has his Title, the Illustrous
Prince of Maltha, and Goza, both which with Tripolis, was given them by the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, anno 1530.

Knights Templers.
They began about anno 1118. after which the King of Jerusalem gave them a
Palace, adjoining to Solomon's Temple, from whence they took their Name. They
wear a white Garment with a red Cross, and vow Obedience, Poverty, and
Chastity: They were to fight against the Infidels, but at length they grew very
Rich, and then exceeding Proud, and fell from the Obedience of the Patriarch of
Jerusalem to the Pope; but they increasing in Riches and Pride, were by him, or
with his consent, turned out all their Possessions, their Riches seized upon,
and themselves imprisoned, and some executed, but some think it was more for
love of their Lands, than any Crime they had committed, having, as Dr. Heylen
observes, sixteen thousand Lordships in Europe. The Temple in London was
theirs, where many of them lie buried, and those that have been in the holy
Wars, or fought in the Holy Land, lie with their Feet a cross.

Knights of St. Lazarus in Jerusalem.
They were first only a Brotherhood of religious Monks, and became an Order of
Knighthood in St. Bassil's time: They were to take care of persons infected
with the Leprosy, and had a famous Hospital in Jerusalem, called St. Lazarus:
After a while the Saracens, by their Incursions, had almost extinguished them;
but when the latter Princes joined together in the holy War, these religious
Men did great Service, and found such esteem of Baldwin the 2d. that they
gained great Honor under their great Master; and about Anno 1150. they first
made their Vows of Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity, before the Patriarch of
Jerusalem, and submitted to the Order of St. Benedict. They wear a green Cross,
and are to prove themselves born in Wedlock, of Christian Parents, to be
Gentlemen by Father and Mother, and of an unblamable Life.

Knights of St. Bass, or St. Bassil.
These were founded under the Rule of St. Bassil, and were also called Knights
of St. Mary: Their garment was Sky-colour'd, and a golden Cross on their
Breast, in the midst whereof was the Picture of St. Bassil. They were all
Servants to the King of America.

Knights of St. Katharine at Mount Sinai.
They were Instituted about 1063. and were to defend the Sepulcher of St.
Katharine, and to secure the passages for the Travelers who came thither for
Devotion. They follow the Rule of St. Bassil the Great, and wore a white
Garment; some Remains of this Order are still in being, though almost ruined by
the Turks.

Knights of the Martyrs of Palestine.
These followed the Rule of St. Bassil, and on their Garments wore a red Cross,
in the midst whereof were the Pictures of St. Cosmas and Damian, their Patrons:
They exercise all Acts of Charity to sick folks that were Strangers, they
redeemed Captives taken by the Saracens, buried the Dead, etc.

Knights of the Oak, in Navarr.
The Moors having almost overrun Navarr, Don Gratio Ximenes, leaving his
religious Life, took upon him to conduct Navarr Army, anno 722. and as he was
Marching out against the Moors, there appeared to him on the top of an Oak, the
form of a Cross, which was adored by an innumerable company of Angels in this
Battle; he obtained so signal a Victory that the People elected him King, and
soon after he instituted this Order of Knighthood, investing therewith the
Nobles of this Kingdom who were obliged to defend the Christian Faith, and to
own Obedience to the King. Their habit was a white Garment, and thereon a plain
red Cross, set on the top of an Oak in its Verdure.

Knights of the Lilly of Navarr.
Gracius the 6th King of Navarr, lying very sick of a languishing Disease, sent
to diverse places to have Prayer made for his recovery; and in the mean time
there was found in the City of Naiera, (where he usually kept his Court,) the
Image of our Lady issuing out of a Lilly, with her Son in her Arms, (says the
Legend,) and soon after the King recovered, and in Honor thereof Anno 1048. he
erected this Order, consisting of 38 Knights, himself and Successors being
Sovereign: They wear ordinarily a Lilly embroidered in Silver on their Breasts;
and on feastival Days a double Chain of Gold, interlaced with the Gothish
Letter M, having an enamelled Lilly in an oval Medal. Their Habit is white.

Knights of the Band in Spain
Were erected by Alphonso King of Spain, Anno 1366. who, for his Security
against his many Enemies, instituted this Order: They wear a broad red Ribbon
cross their left Shoulders, from whence they take their Name.

Knights of the Dove in Castile
Were institued by John the First, King of Castile, Anno 1379. Their Collar was
composed of Pieces, representing the Sun in his Glory, to which hung a golden
Dove, enamelled white, and encircled with Rays.

Knights of the Fish Scale in Castile.
John the 2d. King of Castile, erected this Order to assist him against the
Moors, Anno 1420. their Ensign was a Cross composed of Fish Scales, from whence
they took their Name: They were obliged to fight against the Moors, to
accompany the King in his Wars, and to dye in the defense of Christianity.

Knights of the Lilly in Aragon.
These were erected by Ferdinand King of Aragon, Anno 1403. and dedicated to
the Blessed Virgin: Their Collar was composed of Bough-pots, filled with white
Lillies, interlaced with Griffons.

Knights of Mount joy.
They were instituted in the Holy Land, to fight against the Moors and
Saracens, and lay in Garrison in a Castle on a Mountain near Jerusalem: They
wore a short red Mantle, and on their Breast a white Star, with five Rays; they
observed the Rules of St. Benedict; but when the Holy Land was lost they
retired into Spain, where, after some time, they falling to decay, were
incorporated into the Order of the Calatrava.

Knights of Acon, or Acress.
They lived in the City of Acon, and releived and defended the Pilgrims that
went to the Holy Land: They wore a black Garment, whereon was a white Cross
Pattee; they followed the Rule of St. Augustine, and after the loss of
Palestine, they retired into Spain, where, in process of time, they were
incorporated into the Knights Hospitallers.

Knights of St. James in Galicia.
This Order is of the greatest esteem in Spain; they were instituted to drive
the Arabians out of Castile; their Number was 13. and a Governor, and had for
their Ensign a red Cross in form of a Sword, with an Escallop Shell on it: They
have now a great Master, and have power to remove any, and choose another. They
meet on All Saints day, and have great Revenues.

Knights of Saint Saviors in Aragon.
They were instituted Anno 1118. by Don Alphonso, to endeavor the forcing the
Moors out of Aragon, and were composed of Spanish and French Nobility: They
wore a white Mantle, and on the Breast a red Cross; but when the Moors were
expelled, their Revenues were joined to the Crown.

Knights of St. Julian, or of Alcantara.
They were instituted Anno 1176. in Alcantara in Castiglia, on the River Tago,
where they had a stately Church, and great Revenues: Their Habit was black, and
on their Breast a green Cross. Their first great Master was Ferdinand the
Second, King of Leon and Galicia.

Knights of Callatrava in Castile.
This Order is ancient, being instituted by Sanchio the 3d. King of Toledo,
about 1158. and took its Name from their Place: They wore a black Garment and a
red Cross on their Breasts.

Knights of Truxillo, or Trugillo.
They took their Name from their Seat, which was Trugillo in Spain, and were
instituted before the Year 1227. but the true time of their Institution, or
Habit, is not certainly known.

Knights of our Lady and St. George.
They arose upon the dissolution of the Knights Templers and were instituted by
James the 2d. King of Aragon and Valencia, Anno 1317. for defending his Kingdom
against the Moors: They wore a black Habit, with a plain red Cross, vowed
Conjugal Chastity, and followed the Rule of those of Callatrava, to whom they
were subject.

Knights of St. Mary de Merced in Aragon.
They were instituted by James the First, King of Aragon, Anno 1218. and had
their Name from the Benefit that the Christians might expect from them. Their
annual day was Saint Lawrence; their Habit a Coat and Scapular of ordinary
white Cloth, garnished with Ribbons and Cordons, wherewith it was fastened to
their Necks; and on the upper part a Cap, or Hood, which covered half their
Heads: They professed Conjugal Chastity, and Obedience to Superiors.

Knights of the Rosary in Toledo.
They were instituted by Roderick, Archbishop of Toledo, to resist the Moors in
defense of the Catholic Religion: They are continually to say the Rosary of
the Blessed Lady, and were of the Dominican Order; their Ensign was the Figure
of our Lady of the Rosary upon a Cross, quarterly, Argent, and Sable.

Knights of the Golden-Fleece.
They were instituted by Philip Duke of Burgundy, and Earl of Flanders, Anno
1429. Their first Number was 24. but were increased afterward by Charles the
5th. St. Andrew is their Patron: Their Habit is a Cassock of Crimson Velvet,
over it a Mantle of the same, lined with white, which opens on the right
Side, and is turned up over the left Shoulder, embroidered round with a Border,
Flames, Fucels, and Flecces, with a Hood of Crimson Velvet: The Collar which
they always are to wear is of Gold, wrought with Flames, Fucels, and golden
Fleeces: The lawful Duke of Burgundy is Great Master, or Sovereign of the
Order, who has absolute Power to bestow it on whom he pleases; but whosoever
enters into this Order must renounce all other Orders of Knighthood, except
the Emperor, and those Kings, Princes, and Dukes, who are Sovereings of their
own Orders. They have a Chancellor, a Treasurer, a Register, and a King at
Arms, called Toizon D' Or. Their meeting day is the second of May.

Knights D' Avis.
These were instituted by Don Alphonso Henriquez the First, King of Portugal,
and were at first called Knights of St. Mary Evora, and not long after Knights
of D' Avis, from a Castle of that Name: Their Badge is a Green Cross Flory, and
they follow the Rule of St. Benedict: None are admitted into this Order but
such as are Gentlemen by Father and Mother two Descents.

Knights of St. Michael 's Wing.
The same Don Alphonso Henriquez, having obtained a great Victory against the
Moors, he in honor of St. Michael, his tuteler Saint, (who appeared on his
right side fighting against the Moors,) instituted this Order of Knighthood,
Anno 1171. Their Badge was a red Sword crossed with a Flower-de-luce, and this
Motto, Quis ut Deus? They were of the Cistertian Order, and were to defend the
Country against the Incursions of the Moors.

Knights of St. James
Were instituted by Don Denis the Sixth, King of Portugal, 1310. by whose help
he cleared his Country of the Moors: They profess Conjugal Chastity,
Hospitality, and Obedience: Their Ensign is a red Sword; their Habit white, and
none are admitted but Gentlemen of Blood.

Knights of Christ
Were instituted in Portugal, under Don Denis the Sixth above, by Pope John the
22d. who gave them the Possessions of the Knights Templers in Portugal: They
follow the Cistertian Order, and wear a black Habit, with a Cross Pattee,
Gules, (upon the Breast,) charged with another Argent.

The Knights of Jesus Christ in France.
They were instituted by Charles King of France, and Richard the Second, King
of England, for recovery of the Holy Land: They had diverse Officers, and
professed Obedience, Conjugal Chastity, and Poverty: Their habit was a sad
colored Coat of Cloth, reaching to the Calf of their Leg, girt about them
with a Girdle of Silk, or Leather, two Fingers broad, a red Cap, and over all a
white woolen Coat, with a red Cross of woolen Cloth, about two Fingers broad,
upon the Breast, from top to bottom, and came round their Waste: Their number
were a thousand, each Knight had an Esquire Armed at all points, and three
Varlets, one to carry his Helmet and Lance, another his Coat of Mail, and the
third to lead his Sumpter.

Knights of the Virgin Mary of Mount Carmell.
They were instituted by Henry the Fourth of France, and confirmed by Pope Paul
the Fifth 1608. They are to be the choice Gentlemen of France, and are to
attend the King in War to fight against the Enemies of the Roman Church, and
vow Obedience and Chastity; they consist of a hundred Knights, and hold their
Feast anually on the 16th of July: Their Badge is a Cross of eight points, of a
tawney color, with a white Border sewed on the left side of their Cloaks, and
the Figure of the V. Mary of Mount Carmell, encircled with Rays of Gold, placed
in the midst, and embroidered: They wear the like Cross of Gold, enamelled,
hanging about their Necks in a tawney Ribbon.

The Knights of St. Michael.
They were erected by Lewis the Eleventh of France, An. 1469 in memory of an
Apparition of St. Michael upon the Bridge of Orleance, when that City was
besieged by the English: Their Habit is Doublet, Hose, Shoes, Scabard, Cap,
Band, and Feather, all white; the Surcoat with Slieves is Cloth of Silver;
over all a Mantle of the same, tied upon the right Shoulder, and turned up over
the left, bordered about with an Embroidery of Cockles and Knots; over all the
Collar of St. Michael, which is very rich, unto which hangs the Picture of
St. Michael: Their number at first were but thirty six, now much increased;
they meet on Michaelmas day; the King is Sovereign, and they have a Treasurer,
a Chancellor, a Register, and a Herald, named Monsan Michael.

Knights of the Holy Ghost
Were instituted by Henry the Third of France, 1578. in honor of Whitsunday,
on which day he was elected King of Poland: There number is an hundred,
(besides the King who is Sovereign;) in which number are four Cardinals, five
Prelates, a Chancellor, a Provost, a Master of the Ceremonies, a great
Treasurer, and a Scribe: Their Feast day is the first of January: Their Robe is
black Velvet, embroidered with Flower de-Luces of Gold and Silver, with knots
of Gold between sundry Rings, or Ciphers of Silver, and Flames of Gold, in
Imitation of the cloven Tongues; a Mantle of green Cloth of Silver,
embroidered as the other, tied on the right, and turned up on the left, both
lined with Orange colored Satin; their Hose, Doublet, and Feather were white,
but their Bonnets black; over all a Collar of the Order, being the same with
the Embroidery work, at which hangs a Cross, with the Figure of a Dove in the
center thereof.

Knights of the Gennet.
Some esteem this the most ancient Order in France, and instituted by Charles
Martial, High Steward of France, Anno 726. They were sixteen in number, and
had a Collar of Gold made of a Triple Chain, interwoven with enamelled red
Roses, and at the end whereof hung a Gennet of Gold, black and red, on a bank
of Flowers all enamelled, etc.

Knights of the Crown Royal
Were erected by Charles the Great, Son to King Pepin, Anno 802. for honoring
of those amongst the Frezons who had been valiant in the Army against the
ancient Saxons and Lombards: Their Ensign was an Imperial Crown, which these
Knights wore upon their Breast: They were invested with a military Belt, and a
box on the Ear.

Knights of the Lady of the Stan.
Instituted by King Robert of France, Anno 1022. in Honor of the Virgin Mary:
They wore a Mantle of white Damask, lined with light Carnatian Satin, and
Surcoats of the same; on their left side they wore an embroidered Star of Gold:
Their Collar was much like that of the Gennet, at which did hang a Figure of a
Star; but many Persons of no merit being admitted into this Order, it was
discontinued under Charles the Seventh of France.

Knights of the Thistle of Bourbonne.
Were erected by Lewis the Second, Duke of Bourbone, on New Years day, 1370.
Their number was twenty six, of which himself and Successors are Sovereign:
Their Habit was a Mantle of Sky-colored Damask, lined with red Satin, and
broad Welts of Gold embroidered on the Collar; the Bonnet was of green Velvet,
with a Tassel of Gold, and crimson Silk, hanging at the Band; the great Collar
was of Gold enamelled with green, to hang in an oval; the Picture of the
blessed Virgin, their Patroness, with the Head of a Thistle, enamelled green
and white; they daily wear a Girdle, or Belt of watchet Velvet, embroidered
with Gold, in the midst of which was wrought the word Esperance.

Knights of the Porcupine,
Instituted by Lewis Duke of Orleance, An. 1393. They were twenty four, besides
the Founder: Their habits were Surcoats of violet Velvet, over which were
Mantles of watchet Velvet, lined with Carnatian Satin; there Collar was formed
of golden Chains, whereto hung a Porcupine of Gold, upon a hillock of Grass and
Flowers.

Knights of the Cressants of Anjou.
Erected by Rene Duke of Anjou, King of Jerusalem and Sicily, Anno 1464. Their
Patron was St. Maurice, the King and his Successors were Sovereigns: Their
Mantle was Crimson Velvet, on the right side whereof was a golden Cressant,
whereon was writ L'oz, enamelled; and to this Cressant was fast'ned as many
small pieces of Gold in forms of Columes, and enamelled red, as the wearer had
been present in Battles and Sieges.

Knights of the Ermin in Bretaigne.
They were instituted by Francis the First, Duke of Bretaigne, consisting of
twenty five, of which himself was Sovereign: Their Habit was a M^ntle of white
Damask, lined with Carnatian, and a Surcoat of the same; the great Collar was
of Gold, composed of Ears of Corn, Saltier wise, at the end whereof hung the
Mus Ponticus, or Ermin, passing over a Turf of Grass, at the edge whereof was
this Motto, A Marie.

Knights of St. Mary the Glorious of Italy
Were instituted by Pope Urban, An. 1233. out of certain rich Gentlemen of
Modena, and Bolegna, who were fearful of Troubles, etc. Their Habit was a
white Cassock and a Russet Mantle, and for their Badge they had a Purple Cross
Pattee on their Breast: They lived with their Wives, and were obliged to fight
against Infidels, and to protect Widows and Orphans.

Knights of the Holy Ghost at Rome
Were founded by Innocent the Third, about 1198. They were obliged to bring
certificates of their Gentility: They profess Obedience, Chastity, and Poverty;
they have a Master, and follow the Rule of St. Augustine: Their Habit is a black
Mantle, on the left side, whereof (as also on their Breast) they wear a
Patriarchal Cross, with twelve Points, their Revenue is 24000 Ducats daily,
with which they do great Acts of Charity.

The Angelick Knights of St. George,
Said to be first instituted by Constantine the Great: Their Ensign was a
Collar of Gold, to which was fastened a Cross of the same, and thereunto the
Figure of St. Georges. They were in Number 50 of the Noblest Persons in his
Empire, to whom he gave the Standard Labarum, or Imperial, and a Collar of
Gold: They were confirmed by Pope Leo the First, Anno 456. who assigned them
the Rule of St. Bassil; they now live in great splendor near Venice, owe no
Subjection but to the Pope, with whom they sit at Table, and have many great
Privileges: Their Patron is St. George, and their Protectress is the blessed
Virgin: Their Habit is a white Garment, and on the left side a red Cross flory,
made of Velvet, in the midst of which is the Labarum embroidered in the form of
the Letter X. with the Greek Letter Alpha upon one Arm of the Cross, and the
Omega on the other.

Knights of St. Peter at Rome.
They were instituted Anno 1520. by Pope Leo the tenth, their number was 400.
who were assigned to wear in an oval of Gold the Figure of St. Paul.

Knights of St. George at Rome
Were erected by Pope Alexander the Sixth, Anno. 1498. their Ensign was a Cross
of Gold, entowered with a Circle of the same, in form of a Crown.

Knights called Pius at Rome,
Instituted by Pope Pius the Fourth, 1560. Their number at first was 375. but
afterward increased to above 530. Their Ensign is the Effigies of St. Ambrose,
which they wear about their Necks, hanging on a Chain of Gold.

Knights of Loretto at Rome
Were instituted by Sixtus Quintus, Anno 1687. whose Ensign was the Figure of
our Lady of Loretto hanging on a Gold Chain.

Knights of the Glorious Virgin Mary at Rome.
Took their beginning from three Brethren of Spella in Italy, surnamed
Petrignanoes, Anno 1618. and confirmed by Pope Paul the Fifth, who gave them
great Endowments, making himself and Successors their great Master, appointing
them the Rule of St. Francis D' Assise: Their Habit is a white Mantle, on the
left side a Cross of blew Satin embroidered with Silver, and bordered with
Gold, having in the midst a circle, wherein is this Motto, In Hoc Signo Vincam,
and within it the Letters S. M. (for Sancta Maria:) From the Circle issues
forth twelve Rays, the ends of the Cross are like a Flowerde-luce, on each a
Star, which may signify the four Evangelists, as the 12 Rays do the 12
Apostles.

Knights of Jesus, now at Rome,
Were instituted An. 1320. by Pope John the 22d. at Avignon in France, and much
enlarged by Paul the Fifth: Their badge is a plain red Cross within a Cross
Pattee, Gold, which hangs in a golden Chain.

Knights De-la-Calza in Venice
Were instituted about 1400. in honor of the Inauguration of Duke Michele
Stelo, consisting of Noblemen and Gentlemen: Their Habit, which they wore on
solemn days, was a Crimson Senatour's Vest, and their Ensign was a Sun on a
Shield, which they also used as their Seal.

Knights of St. Mark in Venice.
They are ancient, being instituted about 828. and are created after the manner
of our Knights Bachelours, being dubbed with a Sword, and their Title a bare
mark of Honor, conferred upon Persons who have merited well of this
Commonweal by the Duke, and also by the Senate, for their great worth: They
wear for a B^dge of Honor a Gold Chain over their Shoulders, on which depends
a Medal with the Arms of Venice, which is the Emblem of St. Mark, viz. a Lion
with Wings expanded, holding in his right Paw a drawn Sword, and in his left an
open Book, with this Motto: Pax tibi Marce, Evangelista meus.

Knights of St. Geo. at Genoa.
This Order was instituted by Frederick the III. Emperor, and dedicated to St.
George. Their Ensign is a plain red Cross, fastened to a Gold Chain, which they
wore about their Necks.

Knights of the Order of the Precious Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ at
Mantua.
This Order was instituted about 1608: by Gonzago IV. Duke of Mantua; for the
greater Glory of his eldest Son's Nuptials: They consist of 20 Knights, of
which the Duke was Sovereign, or great Master: Their Collar is composed of
Ovals of Gold, some the length one way, some another, in one of which were
these words, Domine Probasti, and on the other Flames of Fire, about a
Crusible, full of Ingots of Gold; at this Collar hung another Oval of Gold,
whereon were two Angels standing, one on each side, holding a Chalice crowned,
and on the Table of it was enamelled, three drops of Blood, and about it this
Inscription, Nihil isto triste Recepto.

The Knights of St. Stephen at Florence
Were instituted by Cosmo Duke of Florence, Anno 1561. Their Orders are like
those of Malta; the Duke and his Successors are great Masters: Their Habit is a
long Mantle of white Camlet, and on the left Breast a Cross of Crimson Satin,
bordered with Gold, which is their Ensign; and on feastival days they wear a
Ribbon about their Necks.

Knights of the Knot in Naples.
Instituted by Lewis Prince of Tarentum, about Anno 1351. They were composed of
70 of the Noblest Lords in Naples, together with some Strangers: Their Habit
was white and their Ensign a true Love's Knot, intermixed with Gold.

Knights of the Argonaute of Naples.
These were instituted Anno 1382. by Charles the III. King of Naples, for the
advancement of Navigation, (after some,) are to preserve Amity amongst the
Nobles, (after others,) who were the persons invested with this Honor: Their
Habit was a white Garment, and their Ensign was a Ship tossed in a storm, with
this Motto, Non credo Tempori.

Knights of the Ermine in Naples.
Were institued by Ferdinand the First, their King, upon the discovery of a
Plot against his his Life, by his Brother-in-Law the Duke of Sessa; wherein the
King showed himself so merciful, that he not only set his Brother-in-Law at
Liberty, but made him a Knight of this Order, amongst others the Nobles of this
Realm: Their Collar was of Gold, intermixed with Spots of Dung, to which hung an
Ermin with this Motto, Malo mori quam foedari.

Knights of the Annunication in Savoy.
This Order was instituted by Amedeo the 6th. Earl of Savoy, Anno 1362. in
Memory of Amedeo the first Earl, who valorously defended the Isle of Rhodes
against the Turks, and won those Arms which are now born by the Dukes of Savoy,
viz. Gules, a Cross Argent: They are a very Honorable Order, and have very
large Endowments; they at first consisted of 15. of which the Founder was
Sovereign, which Number was enlarged to a greater: Their Habit is a purple
Mantle, seeded with Roses, and Flames, in Embroidery of Gold and Silver,
fringed with Gold, and lined with Cloth of Silver, and tissued blew, under
which instead of a Surcoat is worn a white Satin Suit, embroidered with Silk,
the Breeches are like Trouses, and reach half way of the Thigh: Their Collar is
of Gold, on which are engraven the letters F. E. R. T that is, Fortitudo Ejus
Rhodum Tenuit: To this Collar hangs a Tablet, wherein is the Figure of the
Annunication, which is their daily Badg, and is worn about their Shoulders.

Note that these five Orders, viz. the Gartar in England, the Golden Fleece in
Flanders, St. Michael in France, the Holy Ghost in France, and this of the
Annunciation in Savoy, are reputed most Honorable, and in Token of their
Excellency, above all other Degrees of Knight hood, are adorned with great and
rich Collars.

Knights of St. Maurice.
Amadis the the 8th Duke of Savoy, with ten of his Court Knights, retired
themselves into a Desert, and soon after, in Anno 1434. did he procure this
Order to be instituted in Honor of St. Maurice, and were subjected to the Rule
of St. Augustine: Their Habit was an Ash Color, or gray Gown and Chaperon, the
Slieves faced with red Camlet, a Vest of the same, girded with a golden Girdle;
and on the Breast of the Mantle a Cross Pomattee, of white Cloth or Taffety.
The Duke was Master of this Order, which he kept nine years, and then was
chosen Pope; which he also kept nine years, and then resigning, returned unto
his former Life.

The Knights of St. Maurice, and St. Lazarus
Were erected by Emanuel Phillibert, Duke of Savoy, Anno 1572. and were
confirmed by Pope Gregory the 13th. the Dukes are the grand Masters: They are
obliged to set out two Galleys for the papal Service against the Turks: Their
Habit is a Gown of Crimson Tabby, with a long Train, and wide Slieves; it is
edged about with white Taffety, a Cordon, with a Tassel of white and green
fixed to the Collar: Their Ensign is a green Cross of St. Lazarus, charged with
a white Cross of St. Maurice, tied to a Gold Chain or Ribbon.

Of the Knights of the Bear in Switzerland.
Frederick the 2d. Emperor, erected this Order Anno 1213. at the Abbey of St.
Gall, on the 16th of October, where the Abbat was made Patron of this Order.
Those that were to be invested, were girded with a military Belt, (the Sword
being first consecrated at the Altar,) and adorned with a Collar of the Order,
and a Chain of Gold, which was given them by the Founder, to which Chain hung
the Figure of a Bear in Gold, (on an Hillock,) enamelled with black, which
Title is taken from St. Vrsus of the Thebane Legion, who was Martyred before
the Temple of the Sun at Solevrre in Switzerland.

Knights of the Tutonick Order of Prusia
Were first instituted by a wealthy Gentleman of Germany, who dwelt at
Jerusalem after the Christians had taken it, where he kept great Hospitality;
amongst those that frequented his House and Hospital, there were some that
agreed to erect a Fraternity, and having chosen a great Master, about Anno
1190. they imitated the Knights Templers in their military Employments, and the
Knights Hospitallers in their Works of Piety, and Charity, and were afterward
confirmed by Pope Celestine the 3d. They were very valiant, and subdued many of
the Infidels; having their Conquest for their Reward. In Anno 1340. they began
to build Castles, and Churches, their Riches being so great, that they might
compare with diverse Princes for Men and Money; but in 1525. Albertus being
great Master, left them, and though they at last chose another great Master,
yet they never rose to the height and esteem they were formerly in; but have
now advanced their Order much, since the late War with the Turk, and their
great Master, grows daily in greater esteem: Their Habit is a white Mantle, and
on the Breast a black Cross, charged with a white one, Potence.

Knights of Gereon in Germany
Were instituted by Frederick Barbossa, Emperor, consisting only of German
Gentlemen: Their Habit was a white Gown, and thereon a black Patriarchal Cross,
set on a green Hill. They follow the Rule of St. Augustine.

Knights of St. George in Austria.
These were erected by Frederick the 3d. Emperor, Anno 1470. Their Habit is
white, on which they wear their Ensign, namely, St. George's Cross. They
profess conjugal Chastity, and Obedience to the Grand Master.

Knights of St. Michael, the Archangel,
Were instituted Anno 1618. by Charles Gonzaga Duke of Mantua; and the Year
following were received at Vienna, and in 1624. were confirmed by Pope Urban
the 8th. Their Habit was a white Mantle, over which they wore a shorter of blew
Silk; their Buskings were blew, their Cap of black Silk, and a Cross of Gold of
eight Points, hung in a blew Ribbon about their Necks, on one side having the
Picture of the Virgin-Mary, and the other that of St. Michael. On the left Side
of the white Mantle was a Cross, embroidered with blew Silk, and Gold; in the
midst of it was the Figure of the Blessed-Virgin, with her Son in her left Arm,
and a Scepter in her right, Crowned with 12 Stars, and surrounded with the Rays
of the Sun, and a Cressant under her Feet; all which was encircled with the
Cord of St. Francis, and from each end of the Cross issues a Flame of Gold.

Knights of St. Anthony in Haynault.
They were instituted by Albert of Bavaria, Earl of Haynault: Their Ensign was
a Golden Collar, after the fashion of an Hermit's Girdle; to which hung a
Walking-staff and a Bell.

Knights of the Tusin Order in Bohemia
Were instituted by the Arch Duke of Austria, for extirpating the Heretics out
of their Territories. Their Habit was red, and their Ensign a green Cross.

Knights of St. Hubert in Gulick.
This Order was instituted Anno 1473. by Gerard, Duke of Gulick, in Honor of
St. Hubert, Bishop of Liege; who dyed Anno 727. There is no certain account of
their Habit, etc.

Knights of St. James in Holland.
They were instituted in the Year 1290. by Florentius Earl of Holland, who
invested 12 of his principal Nobles Knights of this Order. They had a Collar of
Gold, or military Belt of Silver, and gilt, adorned with 6 Escallops, to which
hung the Figure of St. James the Apostle.

The Knights of St. Brice
Were erected by the famous Queen Bridget of Sweeden, Anno 1366. who endowed
them with a great Revenue: They were confirmed by Pope Urban the 5th. who
assigned them the Rule of St. Augustine; and for their Ensign a blew Cross of
eight points, and under it a Tongue of Fire.

Knights of the Seraphim.
These were instituted by Magnus the 4th. King of Sweeden, Anno 1334. Their
Collar was composed of patriarchal Crosses of Gold, and of Seraphims enamelled
red, at the end whereof hung the Figure of our Savior, or of the Virgin-Mary.

The Knights Amaranta
Were erected Anno 1645. by Christian Queen of Sweeden, in Honor of a Lady of
that Name, celebrated for Virtue; Their Ensign is a Jewel of Gold, composed of
two great A, one reversed, enriched with Diamonds, within a wreath of Laurel
leaves, banded with white, whereon is this Motto, Dolce nella memoria, which
they wear either hanging at a Gold Chain, or at a Crimson or blew Ribbon, which
they please.

Knights of the Elephant in Denmark.
Christian the First, King of Denmark, being at Rome, Pope Sixtus the 4th
invested him with this Order, and ordained him and his Successors chief: They
are obliged to perform Acts of Piety and Charity: Their chief Ensign was the
Figure of an Elephant, on whose side within a Roundal was represented the Crown
of Thorns with three bloody Nails. This is worn on high Days; but usually they
wear about their Necks a blew Ribbon, to which hangs an Elephant enamelled
white, and set with five large Diamonds in the midst.

Knights of Christ, or of the Sword in Livonia.
They were instituted by Albert, Bishop of Livonia, about 1200, they imitated
the Teutonicks, to whom they were joined Anno 1237. but in the Year 1561.
Gothard, their great Master, surrendered all their Lands, Charters, and Rights,
etc. unto Sigismund the 2d. King of Poland; for which the said King gave him a
Dukedom, to him and his Heirs for ever.

Knights of the white Eagle in Poland.
They were erected by Ladislaus the 5th. King of Poland, Anno 1325. Their
Ensign was a white Eagle crowned.

Knights of the Dragon in Hungary
Were instituted by Signismund the Emperor, Anno 1418. on Festivals they wore
a a Scarlet Cloak, a Mantle of green Silk, with a double Chain of Gold, or a
green Ribbon, to which hung a Dragon dead, with broken Wings, enamelled with
variety of Colors, but the Ensign which they daily wore was a green Cross
flory.

Knights of the Sword in Cyprus.
Guy of Lusignan having bought the Isle of Cyprus of Richard the First, King of
England, for an hundred thousand Crowns of Gold, Anno 1195. when he first
possessed it he instituted this Order, consisting of 300 Barons: Their Collar
was of round Cordons of white Silk, woven in Love-knots, and interlaced with
the Letters S. and R. to which hung an Oval of Gold, wherein was enamelled a
Sword, the Blade Silver, the Hilt Gold; and about the Oval was this Motto,
Securitas Regni. The King himself was great Master of the Order.

Knights of St. Anthony in Aethiopia
Were instituted by Prester John, about the Year 370. and dedicated to St.
Anthony, Patron of that Country: They followed the Rule of St. Bassil; and for
their Habit they wear a black Garment: Their Ensign is a blew Cross in form of
a Letter T. They vow to defend the Christian Religion, to yield Obedience to
their Superiors; they observe conjugal Chastity, but do not marry without
License from their Abbat. The eldest Son of a Noble Man cannot be admitted, but
the second Son may; and if a Man of any Degree have three Sons, he is bound to
enter one into this Order, except he be a Physician.

The Knights of the Burgundian Cross in Tunis
Were erected by Mulleasses, King of Tunis, Anno 1535. Their Ensign was a
Burgundian Cross, to which was added a Steel, striking sparks of Fire out of a
Flint, with this Inscription, Barbaria. This Badg hung to a Collar of Gold.

Knights of the Broom-flower in France
Were erected by Lewis the 9th. Their Collar was composed of Broom-flower Cods,
mixed with Lozenges, enamelled with Flower-de-luces; at which hung a Cross
formy-flory, with this Motto, Exaltat Humiles.

Knights of the Ship in France.
They were instituted by the aforesaid Lewis the 9th. Their Collar was composed
of double Escallops, and double Cressants, interwoven with a Medal hanging to
it of a Ship under Sail.

Many more Orders might be added, as of the Cock and Dog in France, the Order
of the fair Lady in the green Field, the Order of the Sword and Military Belt
in Sweeden, whose Collar was composed of Sword and Belt; many there are also in
India, and in diverse other places, which, because of their uncertainty, are
omitted.

CHAP. XVII. Of Esquires.
KNighthood is a Dignity, but Esquire is a name of Worship, and in old time
every Knight had two Esquires to attend him, who bore his Armor, and kept
allways close to him: They held certain Lands of him in Escuage, as the Knight
did of the King by Knight's Service; but now Esquires are divided into five
Ranks: The first, and principal, are the eldest Sons of Viscounts and Lords:
The Second, all other Noble-men's younger Sons, with the eldest Sons of
Baronets, and Knights: The Third, are those that are Select Esquires of the
King's Body: The Fourth, those to whom the King gives the Title to, (or
creates Esquires by putting a Silver Collar of S. S. about their Necks; and in
former times they had a pair of Silver Spurs put to their Heels, thereby
distinguishing them from Knights, who had the guilt Spur;) and to the first
born Sons of these only does the Title descend; they are now the Esquires that
attend the Knights of the Bath: The fifth and last, be those that have any
Superior public Office in the Kingdom; as High Sheriff, Justice of the Peace,
Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Majors, etc. or such as serve the King in any
worshipful Calling: But such as are Esquires, or Gentlemen by place only, when
they lose their Place, they also lose their Title.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Gentlemen.
THis Title is of such account, (as is aforesaid,) that it is a general Name,
even from the Sovereign to the meanest Person who either bears Coat Armor, or
is employed in some eminent Office in Church or State; and many there be, who
having by Providence rose from a mean condition, and obscure original, to
possess large Demeans, have vain-gloriously usurped the Title of Gentleman to
themselves; and so imprudent (I might have said impudent) have some been, that
because their Surname have bordered upon the Sir-names of some Person of
worth, they have laid down their own paternal Names, and assumed the Names of
those Gentlemen so near to theirs, and born their Coat Armor, and in time have
pretended to be of the same Family.

Some derive the Name Gentleman as a Compound, partly from the French word
Gentile, that is, one born of honest Parents, to which the Saxon Word Man is
joined, and so make it Gentleman, which may signify a man well born, and under
that Name are all comprehended that are above Yeomen, Merchants, or Artificers,
the Ancient Saxons called them Edelmen, or Noble Men. Which shows that
Gentlemen take their beginning from something that they have done (in War or
Peace,) for which the King (who is the Fountain of Honor) does think them
worthy of such Honor, which shall continue to their Posterity: But sometimes
it so happens that many Persons do claim the Title or Appellation of
Gentleman, either from the Places they hold, or from some excellent Art or
Science they profess; as those that study the Laws of the Land, or profess
themselves Masters in the liberal Sciences: And indeed, if he can live without
Manual labor, and bear the Port and Charge of a Gentleman, he shall not only
be called so by others, but think himself so indeed: And any such that has not
a true Pretense to a Coat Armor, may have one assigned them by the Appointment
of the Heralds, whose Posterity may enjoy the Title of Gentile. But to be more
particular, we shall find this Title to be ranked under nine Heads or Degrees.

1. A Gentleman of Ancestry, who is called a Gentleman of Blood.

2. A Gentleman of Blood, and not of Ancestry; which is in the third Degree.

3. A Gentleman of Coat Armor, and not of Blood, which is he that first
bears the King's Device, given him by the Heralds: If he have Issue to the
third desscent, such Issue is a Gentleman of Blood, but none under.

4. A Gentleman of Armor not given him, as when the King gives a Lordship to
a Yeoman and his Heirs for ever: If the Family to whom the Lordship did belong
be extinct, the Person so admitted may bear the Coat Armor of the said Lord,
being Approved of by the Heralds; but if the Family be not extinct he cannot,
only he shall be accounted a Gentleman, and may have a Coat appointed him by
the Heralds.

5. If a Christian Man, in the Service of God and his Prince, kills a Heathen
Gentleman, he shall bear his Coat Armor (except the said Heathen be a Knight
Banneret,) and use the same Achievement without any difference, save only in
the Word or Motto of the Infidel, and his Issue in the fifth Degree shall be a
Gentleman of Blood; but no Christian Man can bear another Christians Coat: Yet
if an English Man in the Field, when the Banner royal is displayed, do put to
flight, take Prisoner, or by Fire or Force slay any Gentleman enemy to his
Prince, the English Man shall honor his own Coat in the sinister quarter with
ded, said Gentleman's Coat; but in matters (...) Combat the Victor may not
challenge his Enemy's Coat, though the Vanquished may lose his: So by the
Courtesy of England, if a Man marry a Gentlewoman, he may bear her Coat, but
his Children may not, unless she be an Heiress, and some doubt that also.

6. If the King make a Yeoman a Knight, he is called a Gentleman of Blood.

7. A Yeoman's Son advanced to Spiritual dignity is a Gentleman, but not of
Blood, unless he arrive to be a Doctor of the Law, and then he shall be
accounted a Gentleman of Blood.

8. The eight is called a Gentleman Untryall, that is, one who being brought up
in some Abbey, or like Place, and related to the Abbat, etc. does in time obtain
preferment in the same Abbey, etc.

9. The last is a Gentleman Apocryphate, such as being a Footman in the service
of his Prince, is at last advanced to be a Steward, or Clerk of the Kitchen,
etc. though he has no Badg of his own; under this Head are comprised all those
that have any public Office, as above, which take in these three Classes.

1. Gentlemen by Ecclesiastical Preferment are, 1 Vicars General. 2 Guardians.
3 Deans of Cathedrals. 4 Arch Deacons. 5 Chancellours. 6 Treasurers. 7
Chaunters. 8 Doctors, of which Divinity is first, Law next, Physic last. 9
Provosts. 10 Governors of Colleges.
2. In Military Professions these are called Gentlemen: 1 High Constables. 2
Lieutenant Generals. 3 Marshals of the Field. 4 Admirals. 5 Major Generals. 6
Quarter Master General. 7 Treasurer for the Army. 8 Guardians of Frontiers. 9
Grand Esquires. 10 Masters of the Artillary. 11 Colonels. 12 Lieutenant
Colonels. 13 Sergeant Majors. 14 Captains, and all that receive Commissions
from the King.
3. In the Civil State, these are Gentlemen by their Places, 1 The Chancellor.
2 Presidents. 3 Treasurers. 4 Judges. 5 Justices. 6 Chief Officers of the Royal
Palace. 7 Secretary of State. 8 Mayors. 9 Provosts. 10 Bailiffs of Incorporate
Towns, and all those that hold any Place by Patent from the King: But if any of
all these lose their Places, and have no other grounds for their Gentility,
they also lose that too.

Note, that a Freeman of London may write Master, though never so poor or
meanly born.

The Ancient English Gentry, as also the Nobility, which are comprehended in
one, used to live very nobly, using no Traffic, (...) practicing either Law,
Physic, or ^^e like, but living upon their Estates, ^xercising themselves in
Husbandry, feeding Cattle, promoting good Housekeeping, supporting
Hospitality, and were allways ready to serve the King in his Wars; and in these
latter times they live more Nobly than most do in many other Nations, and more
free from serving base Employments. The Venetians, and Genoiese, are great
Merchants, and Traffickers: The Neopolitan, and Spaniards stand so much upon
their punctillios, that they scorn to exercise themselves in any industrious
Profession; but choose rather to live by Oppression and Robbery; nay, the German
will think it no shame nor dishonor to enlarge his Estate by Robbery, which
even in times of Peace they daily practice. The Grecians, Egyptians, Persians,
and many others, count no Man worthy of Honor but their Soldiery, etc. The
French keep too severe a a Hand over their poor Tenants, who are but their
Vassals: Neither are the English Gentry without many and great Privileges
peculiar to their Degree, of which these that follow are some. If a Churl
defame a Gentleman, he has a Remedy in Law (Action injuriarum,) in equal
Crimes a Gentleman shall be punished with more favor than a Churl; and if
condemned to dye, he not to be hanged, but to be beheaded, and to be examined
without Torture. There are ceremonial Respects due to a Gentleman, which are
not to others, in giving of evidence; a Gentleman's Testimony is to be
preferred before a Clown's; in Elections of Magistrates and Officers by Vote,
the suffrage of a Gentleman shall take place; he is excused from base and
servile Offices, and when chosen an Officer for two Citys, he may take his
choice of either. Those that are Noble are not to be put to their Oath, nor
sworn in Juries on Life and Death upon their Peers: A Clown may not challenge a
Gentleman to Combat. In Marriages of Relations, or Guardians of Estates, a
Gentleman is to be entrusted, though there be nigher of Kin. A Gentleman
becoming an Apprentice does not lose his Gentility, and much of the like. Thus
have we run through all those Orders and Degrees of Men, who are styled Noble
or Gentile, who have also more general Notes of Distinction, the better to
distinguish their several Degrees, of which amongst the Nobility that of the
Coronet is most especial, which is mentioned under their several Titles above,
and that of the Helmet extends it self from the King to the private
Gentleman; as, namely,

The Helmet of a Sovereign Prince has a barred Beaver, looking forward, and so
is the Helmet of the Heir Apparent.

The Helmet of a Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount, and Baron, are barred; and
look side-ways toward the Dextre.

A Bishop bears not an Helmet, but a Mitre.

Baronets and Knights have their Beavoir up, or open, and looking forward.

Esquires and Gentlemen have their Helmets close, and looking toward the Dextre.

The Helmets of Nobles stand upon their proper Coronets, but Baronets, Knights,
Esquires, and Gentlemen, place their Helmets upon a Torce, or Wreath of their
Collar; and is always of a Metal and Color.

CHAP. XIX. Of Yeomen.
THose of the Commons, who are under the Title of Gentlemen, are by some ranked
into three Sorts or Classes; that is, Yeomen, Artificers, and Laborers, the
Yeomen are those that have some Lands of their own, and are vulgarly called
Freeholders, especially in some Countries; and of those it is that the
Statutes mean, when they say, that none shall pass in any Inquest, unless they
have Freehold in yearly Revenue: And by these sort of Men all Trials of
Causes in the Country do ordinarily proceed, being Men accounted more apt to
understand and discern in doubtful Cases, than the ruder People, who are used
to servile Labor, etc. Besides, the Yeoman can better allow his time, having
of his own; for many there be that can expend above 200 l. per annum, living
more gentile thereon, than some on greater Revenues. Another Reason (as some
think) why these Men are chosen into Jurors, etc. is because the poorer sort
through need might be easily corrupted.

In old time the Yeomen were famous for Manhood; for our Infantry, which have
been so renowned for Archery through the world, (and that so often conquered
the French,) were composed of Yeoman: They have many peculiar Previleges, which
are allowed to no other Nation; as that no Freeman of England can be
imprisoned, or outed of his Estate, or Possession, without Order of Law, and
just cause first shown: if he be imprisoned he cannot be denied a Habeas
Corpus, and if no just cause be showed, he is to be set at Liberty. No Soldier
can be quartered upon a Freeman (unless it be in a Victualing-house) without
his consent, and no Taxes imposed upon him without an Act of Parliament: The
Yeomanry are not to be pressed to serve in the War, nor are the Train-bands
compelled to march out of the Kingdom, nor to bear their own Arms, finding a
sufficient Person to do it: He is to be tried by his equals, nor can be be
condemned but by the Laws of the Land. These and many other Freedoms make them
most happy, and should engage them to be loyal to their Prince, under whose
Government their Privileges are preserved.

CHAP. XX. Of Artificers, and Laborers.
THe Artificers are next, under which are comprised all Handy-craft-men;
Shopkeepers, and other Tradesmen, which enjoy many Privileges which Yeomen do.
And lastly the Laborers, etc. and Bondmen, who have many more Previleges than
any of their Degree that live in any other Nation.

CHAP XXI. Of Precedence.
1. OF Kingdoms: And herein has been great debates, and will be; for no Age
could yet find it fully determined, the Sword oftentimes being the decider of
that affair. At the Council of Constance, the Ambassadors and Bishops were
placed as follows:

1. The Emperor, to whom was united Bohemia, Hungary, Polonia, Dalmatia,
Grecia, and Croatia.

2. The French had the second place alone, which was disputed by the English.

3. Then the English, to whom was joined Scotland, Norway, Denmark, Sweeden,
and Cyprus.

4. Then the Italians, who had all the Kingdoms subject to Rome, as Naples,
Sicily, etc.

5. Lastly, The Spaniards, who were hardly allowed to be a Nation, but at last
were put into the fifth place; to whom were joined Castilia, Aragon, Majorca,
Navarre, Portugal, and Granado.

Since then the Scene is changed, and sometimes after the Emperor they have
reckkoned France, England, Spain, and this has been the usual account.
Sometimes England has had the precedence, and the Archbishop of Canterbury had
place at the Pope's right Foot: Mr. Howel in his Discourse concerning
Ambassadors gives diverse Reasons for the Precedence of England; That it was
the first Land that was governed by a Christian King; That it has wholly
subdued France; and the Kings of England have been crowned in Paris; That it
has the best Havens in Christendom, etc.

2. The Precedence of the several Degrees in England, are as follows: 1 The
King's most Excellent Majesty. 2 The Prince, when there is One. 3 The Dukes of
the Royal Blood, who are: 1 Sons. 2 Grand-Sons. 3 Brothers. 4 Unckles. 5
Nephews Then the great Officers of the Church, and Crown, as,
4 The Archibishop of Canterbury. 5 Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal. 6 Archbishop of York. 7 Lord Treasurer. 8 Lord President of the
Council. 9 Lord Privy Seal. Then the rest of the Nobility, as, 10 Dukes. 11
Dukes eldest Sons of the Royal Blood. 12 Marquesses. 13 Dukes eldest Sons. 14
Earls. 15 Marquesses eldest Sons. 16 Dukes younger Sons of the Blood. 17 Dukes
younger Sons Royal. 18 Viscounts. 19 Earls eldest Sons. 20 Marquesses younger
Sons. 21 Bishops, which take place according to the Seniority of their
Consecration, except, 1 London. 2 Durham. 3 Winchester.
22 Barons. 23 Viscounts eldest Sons. 24 Earls younger Sons. 25 Barons eldest
Sons. 26 Lords of the Privy Council. 27 Judges; and they, 1 Of the King's
Bench. 2 Of the Common Pleas. 3 Barons of the Exchequer.
28 Masters of Chancery. 29 Knights of the Garter, if no otherways dignified;
which is very rare. 30 Viscounts younger Sons. 31 Barons younger Sons. 32
Knights Bannerets. 33 Baronets. 34 Knights of the Bath. 35 Knights Bachelours.
36 Colonels; first Horse, then Foot. 37 Sergeants at Law. 38 Doctors; 1
Divinity, 2 Law, 3 Physic. 39 Esquires, according to their Degree. 1 Esquires
of the King's Body. 2 The Descendents by the Male Line, from some Peer of the
Realm. 3 Eldest Sons of Baronets. 4 Eldest Sons of Knights. 5 Esquires
attending on the Knights of the Bath. 6 Officiary Esquires; as,
40 Justices of the Peace. 41 Barristers at Law. 42 Lieutenant Colonels. 43
Majors. 44 Captains. 45 Gentlemen. 46 Yeomen. 47 Artificers. 48 Merchants. 49
Retailers. 50 Chapmen. 51 Mariners. 52 Fishermen. 53 Watermen, or Ferry-men.
54 Masons and Builders. 55 Laborers. 56 Bondmen.


Note generally, 1. That these great Officers of Court, of what Title or Degree
soever, besides that of their Place or Office, do take place of all others of
the same Degree or Title, except Secretary of State; that is, if they be Dukes,
they take place of all Dukes; if Earls, of all Earls; that is, 1. Lord
Chamberlain of England. 2. Lord High Constable. 3. Lord Marshal. 4. Lord High
Steward. 5. Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household. 6. Secretaries of
State, if Peers.


Note, 2. These Officers take place as follows: 1. Master of the Wards. 2.
Chancellor. 3. Under-Chancellour of the Exchequer. 4. Chancellor of the
Duchy. 5. Chief Justice of the King's Bench. 6. Master of the Rolls. 7. Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas. 8. Chief Baron of the Exchequer. 9. Judges. 10.
Barons of the Coif.


Note, 3. That Deans precede Chancellours, and they precede Prebendaries, and
Prebendaries precede Doctors.

Note, 4. All Artificers of London take place according to the Precedence of
the Corporation of which they are free, and not by their Trade, or Profession.
The incorporated Merchants take place next after the first 12 Companies, as
some account; then the rest, according to the number they bear, 13, 14, and so
on.

CHAP. XXII. The Procession at a Coronation.
THE most magnificent Procession that I meet with was that at the Coronation of
King Charles II. of happy Memory, which take as follows: From the Tower to
Westminster.
1. The Duke of York's Horse-Guards. 2. The Messengers of the Chamber. 3.
Esquires to the Knights of the Bath. 4. Knights Harbingers. 5. Sergeant Portar.
6. Sewers of the Chamber. 7. Gentlemen Ushers. 8. Quarter Waiters. 9. The six
Clerks in Chancery. 10. Clerks of the Signet. 11. Clerks of the Privy Seal. 12.
Clerks of the Council. 13. Clerks of the Parliament. 14. Clerks of the Crown.
15. Chaplains having Dignities. 16. The King's Advocate. 17. The King's
Remembrancer. 18. Masters of the Chancery. 19. King's Learned Counsel at Law.
20. King's Puisne Sergeants. 21. King's Attorney. 22. King's Sollicitour. 23.
King's eldest Sergeants. 24. Secretaries of the French Latin. 25. Gentlemen
Ushers. 26. Daily Waiters. 27. Sewers in Ordinary. 28. Carvers in Ordinary. 29.
Cup Bearers in Ordinary. 30. Esquires of the Body. 31. Masters of Standing
Offices: as, 1. Of the Tents. 2. Of the Revels. 3. Of the Ceremonies. 4. Of the
Armory. 5. Of the Wardrobe. 6. Of the Ordinance.
32. Master of the Requests. 33. Chamberlains of the Exchequer. 34. Gentlemen
of the Privy Chamber. 35. Knights of the Bath. 36. Knight Marshal. 37.
Treasurer of the Chamber. 38. Master of the Jewel-house. 39. Barons younger
Sons. 40. Viscounts younger Sons. 41. Barons of the Exchequer. 42. Justices of
the Common Pleas. 43. Justices of the King's Bench. 44. Lord Chief Baron of the
Exchequer. 45. Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. 46. Master of the Rolls.
47. Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench. 48. Knights of the Privy Council.
49. Principal Secretary. 50. Barons eldest Sons. 51. Earls younger Sons, 52.
Viscounts eldest Sons. (Kettle-Drums. King's Trumpeter. 2 Pursivants at Arms.)
53. Barons. 54. Maquesses younger Sons. 55. Earls eldest Sons. (Two Pursuvants
at Arms.) 56. Viscounts. 57. Dukes younger Sons. 58. Marquesses eldest Sons.
(Two Heralds in their Coats and Collars of SS.) 59. Earls, and the Earl
Marshal. 60. Lord Chamberlain of the Household. 61. Dukes eldest Sons. (Two
Heralds.) 62. Marquesses. (Two Heralds.) 63. Dukes. ( Clarenceux, Norroy, Kings
at Arms.) 64. Lord Treasurer. 65. Lord Chancellor. 66. Lord High Steward. Duke
of Normandy, and Duke of Aquitain, represented by two Persons. 67. Gentleman
Usher. ( Garter, King at Arms.) 68. Lord Mayor of London. 69. Duke of York. 70.
Lord Great Chamberlain. 71. Lord Marshal, with the Sword. 72. Lord High
Steward. (On each side of these Sergeants at Arms.) The KING. 73. Gentlemen
Pensioners. (Esquires. Footmen.) 74. Master of the Horse, leading a spare
Horse. 75. Vicechamberlain. 76. Captain of the Pensioners. 77. Captain of the
Guards. 78. Lieutenant of the Pensioners. 79. King's Horse guards. 80. The
General's Horse-guards.


CHAP. XXIII. The Proceeding on the Coronation-day.
FOur Drums. Sixteen Trumpets. 1 Clerks of the Chancery. 2 King's Chaplains
having Dignities. 3 Aldermen of London. 4 King's Counsel learned in the Laws. 5
King's Sollicitour. 6 King's Attorney. 7 King's eldest Sergeant at Law. 8
Esquires of the Body. 9 Master of Requests. 10 Gentlemen of the Privy Council.
11 Knights of the Bath. 12 Barons of the Exchequer. 13 Justices of the Common
Pleas. 14 Justices of the King's Bench. 15 Lord Chief Baron. 16 Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas. 17 Master of the Rolls. 18 Lord Chief Justice of
the King's Bench. 19 Sergeant Portar. 20 Sergeant of the Vestery. 21 Children
of the King's Chapel. 22 Gentlemen of the King's Chapel. 23 Prebendaries of
Westminster. 24 Master of the Jewel House. He had Precedence of the Judges,
because he bore the Sword, Spurs, and Ring. 25 Knights of the Privy Council. (
Portcullis, Pursuvant at Arms.) 26 Barons. 27 Bishops. ( Rouge Croix, Pursuvant
at Arms. Blew mantle, Pursuvant at Arms.) 28 Viscounts. ( Somerset and Chester
Heralds.) 29 Earls. ( Richmond and Windsor Heralds.) 30 Marquesses. ( Lancaster
and York Heralds.) ( Clarenceux and Norroy, Provincial Kings at Arms, carrying
their Crowns in their hands.) 31 Lord High Treasurer. 32 Lord high Chancellor.
St. Edward's Staff. The Spurs, born by two Earls. St. Edward's Scepter. A drawn
Sword. Sword Curtana, drawn. A pointed Sword, drawn. 33 Lord Mayor of London. (
Garter, principal King at Arms. Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod.) 34 Lord
Great Chamberlain. 35 Earl Marshal. 36 Lord Marshal, with the Sword of State in
the Scaboard. 37 Lord High Constable. 38 Duke of York. The Scepter, with the
Dove. St. Edward's Crown, born by the Lord High Steward. The Orb, or Mound. The
Patena, born by the Bishop of Exon. The Chalice, born by the Bp. of London. The
KING, supported by the Bishop of Bath and Wells, and the Bishop of Duresme; his
Train born by five Lords, and his Canopy by the Barons of the Cinque Ports. 39
Master of the Robes. 40 One of the Chief Gentlemen of the Bedchamber. 41 Two
Grooms of the Bedchamber. 32 Captain of the Guard. 33 Captain of the
Pensioners.
CHAP. XXIV. The King's going to Parliament in State.
MEssengers of the Court. Esquires to the Knights of the Bath. Gentlemen
Ushers. Clerks of the Chancery. Clerks of the Signet. Clerks of the Privy Seal.
Clerks of the Council. Clerks of the Parliament. Clerks of the Crown. The
King's Chaplains having Dignities. Masters of Chancery. King's learned Counsel
at Law. King's Sergeants. Attorney General. Sollicitour General. King's eldest
Sergeant. The King's Secretaries. Chamberlains of the Exchequer. Gentlemen of
the Privy Chamber. Knights of the Bath. Treasurer of the Chamber. Comptroller.
Some place next Knights Bachelours. Some place next Knights Bannerets, and Some
place next Knights Baronets.
Two Heralds. Barons younger Sons. Viscounts younger Sons. Barons of the
Exchequer. Justices of the Common Pleas. Justices of the King's Bench. Lord
Chief Baron. Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Master of the Rolls. Lord
Chief Justice of the King's Bench. Knights of the Privy Council. Principal
Secretary. Barons eldest Sons. Earls younger Sons. Viscounts eldest Sons. Two
Heralds. Barons. Bishops. Marquesses younger Sons. Earls eldest Sons. Two
Heralds. Viscounts. Dukes younger Sons. Marquesses eldest Sons. Two Heralds.
Earls. Chamberlain of the Household. Dukes eldest Sons. Two Heralds. Marquesses.
Two Heralds. Dukes. Two Kings at Arms. Lord Treasurer. Archbishop of York. Lord
Chancellor. Archbishop of Canterbury. Dukes of the Royal Blood. Garter,
principal King at Arms. Lord Great Chamberlain. Lord high Steward. The KING.
Gentlemen Pensioners. Esquires. Footmen. Master of the Horse, with a led Horse.
Vice-chamberlain. Guards.
CHAP. XXV. Coronation-Feasts.
KIng H. Fourth's Coronation-Feast. The King sat in the middle of the Table,
the Archbishop of Canterbury and three Prelates on his Right hand, the
Archbishop of York and four Prelates on the Left; the K's eldest Son stood on
the Right Hand, with a pointless Sword, the Lord Constable on the Left with a
pointed Sword, both erect, and naked: Before him stood the Dukes of Albemarl,
Surry, and Exeter, and two Earls: the Earl Marshal and his Tipstaves made room
in the Hall, that the Attenders might with more ease serve the Tables. On the
right side of the Hall at Tables set were placed the Barons of the Cinque
Ports, and diverse of the Long Robe; at the Table on the left side sat the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and chief Citizens. After the second Course the King's
Champian entered the Hall with a Herald, and approaching before the King, made
his Challenge three times, and being not answered, retired; but the most
splendid and most exact Coronation-Feast was that of King Charles II.

King Charles II. his Coronation-Feast.
First enters the Clerks Comptrollers, then Clerks of the Green Cloth,
Cofferer.

Six Sergeants at Arms.

1 Earl Marshal. 2 Lord high Steward. 3 Lord high Constable; all three on
Horseback, and in their proper Robes. Six Sergeants. Comptroller of the
Household. The Sewer, and his Assistents.
The Knights of the Bath, who carried up Service, two and two to a Dish,
assisted by the Earl Sewer. Dinner being set on the Table, the King came forth
in his Royal Robes, with the Crown on his Head, his Scepter in his hand, and
three Swords born before him naked; being seated, on his Right hand stood the
three Noblemen, who held the three Swords naked, and erect; on his Left the
Lord Chamberlain, who held the Scepter; at the Table's end, on the left hand
sat the Duke of York in his Robes and Coronet.

Then the King's Champian entered the Hall, on a goodly white Courser, armed at
all Points in rich Armor, having way made for him by the Knight Marshal.

Before him marched, 1 Two Trumpets. 2 The Sergeant Trumpet. 3 The Sergeant at
Arms. 4 An Esquire, carrying a Target, with the Champian's own Arms depicted
thereon. 5 York Herald. 6 The Champian. 7 The Earl Marshal on his left hand, 8
The Lord High Constable on his right, both on Horseback.


The Herald proclaimed the Challenge at the entrance into the Hall, in the
middle of it, and at the Steps at the higher Hall: The Challenge is, That
whoever should deny the King to be the true and undoubted Heir to the Crown, or
that he is not King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, does lie, and
that he the Champian is ready to maintain the same, throwing down his Glove as
a Gage; which done, he retired with his Fee.

The second Course was carried up by the Gentlemen Pensioners.

The third Course by other Servants appointed thereto.

In the body of the Hall, below the State, were placed four Tables, two on each
side; at the first Table on the right hand, next the State, sat the Bishops,
the Barons of the Cinque Ports, the Judges, and the rest of the long Robe,
according to their Degrees; at the second Table below on the right hand sat
the Masters in Chancery, Six Clerks, and the like; at the upper Table on the
left hand next the State sat the Nobility, etc. at the other sat the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and chief Citizens; at a by Table the Officers at Arms, the
Ushers, and Waiters, all in their proper Places, some attending the King,
others their Places, as assigned; each Table had three Courses, besides the
Banquet, with Trumpets sounding each Course.

CHAP. XXVI. A Royal Feast at other times, the K. present.
1 AT the head of the Table sits the King, at the lower end the Princes of the
Blood; before him, or rather on each hand, stand the Carver, Sewer, and
Cupbearer, with the rest of the Gentlemen Waiters, the Ushers making way for
the Strangers who come to behold his Majesty.

2. At the first Table on the right hand are placed the Lords Chancellor,
Chamberlain, Steward, Treasurer, etc.

3. At the lower Table on the right hand are set the Masters of standing
Offices, Master of the Household, Clerks of the Green Cloth, etc.

4. At the upper Table on the left hand sit the Treasurer of the Household, the
Secretaries, the King's Sergeants at Law, Master of the Revels, Dean of the
Chapel, etc.

5. Below them, at the other Table, sits the Lieutenant of the Tower, with the
great Commanders, Captains, etc.

6. At the lower end of the Hall wait the Buttler, Keeper of the Pantry, Clerks
of the Kitchen, etc. with all thing ready, and the King's Guards; there are
three Courses, at each of which the Trumpets sound.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Funerals.
AS Nobles and Gentlemen have in their Life time Honors showed them, as their
due; so after Death they have peculiar marks of Honor belonging to them, which
are not to be given to those of low or ordinary Rank: And therefore especial
care is to be taken, that no indignity be offered to a Mourner, and that the
Herald marshal them according to their Titles, and Worth, at the Funerals of
any Nobleman. And where there is an Officer at Arms (employed,) he ought to
wear the King's Coat; that so the Defunct may be known to have dyed Honorable
in the King's Allegiance: His Heir, who is chief Mourner, is, in the Presence
of all the other Mourners, to receive the Coat Armor, Helm, and Crest,
belonging to the Defunct, whereof the King at Arms for that Province, is to
make Record with the Defunct's Match, Issue, and Decease.

If the Defunct be of the Order of the Garter, and no more, he is to bear his
Garter instead of Compartments: But if he be also a Nobleman, he must bear his
proper Ensigns, as all Noblemen do, besides; that is, Supporters, Coronet,
Sword, Target, Gantlet, Helmet, Crest, and Spurs. All Persons have a certain
length for their Banners, which the Heralds are to instruct them in; and the
higher Degree the Person is, the longer may his Banner be; as, an Earl's Banner
may be two yards long, etc. and also according to their Degrees are they to pay
certain Fees, which are appointed by the Earl Marshal in his Orders, which are
as follows: All Noblemen, Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of
eminent Place, Birth, and Quality, that shall be either silently buried in the
Night, or by Day, without attendence of an Officer at Arms, shall nevertheless
immediately after the Death and Burial of such Defunct, return a true
Certificate of the Matches, Issues, and times of their Decease, with their
Arms, unto the Heralds Office, or to their Deputy or Messenger; for which they
are to pay unto such Office, or Officer at Arms, the Fees under-writ: l. s. d.
For a Gentleman using his Escoucheons 03 6 8 Using none. 02 0 0 An Esquire of
Coat Armor 06 13 4 A Knight 10 0 0 A Banneret and Baronet 13 6 8 A Baron or
Baroness, that ought to have Banner and Bannerols. 20 0 0 A Bishop 25 0 0 A
Viscount, and Viscountess 30 0 0 An Earl or Countess 35 0 0 A Marquess, or
Marchioness 40 0 0 A Duke, Duchess, and Archbishop 45 0 0

All which Sums are to be paid to the Officers at Arms, unless it appears
that the Defunct was not worth a thousand Pound; and in such case to be entered
without Fees.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Proceeding of the Funeral of a Gentleman, Esquire, Knight,
or Baronet.
POor Children; as, of the Hospital, etc. Two Conductors. The poor Men in
Gowns. Gentlemen's Servants in Cloaks. Gentlemen in Cloaks. Gentlemen in Gowns.
Aldermen in Black, if in a Corporation. The Preacher. A Penion of his Arms. The
Helm and Crest. The Coat of Arms. The Hearse. The Chief Mourner. Two
Assistents. Aldermen not in Black. The Master of his Company, if he be free of
any in London, etc. Master of the Hospital. Gentlemen not in Black. Lastly
Neighbors and others.
CHAP. XXIX. The Precedence of a Noblemans Funeral, from a Duke to a Baronet.
TWo Conductors with black Staves. Servants in Cloaks, two and two. The great
Banner (according to the Degree of the Defunct) which is born by Gentlemen
appointed by the Herald. Gentlemen in Cloaks, two and two. Two Banners, born by
Persons appointed by the Herald. Gentlemen, two and two in Cloaks. The Steward,
Comptroller, and the other Chief Officers. Heralds. Ministers. His Sword and
Spurs, Helmet and Crest, Gantlet and Supporters; all born by a Person appointed
by the Heralds. Gentlemen bare headed with his Shield. The Chariot, with four
Banners, etc. born about it by Gentlemen of the Kindred. Footmen bare headed.
Chief Mourners supported. Mourners next of Kindred, two and two. The
Neighbors, etc.
Thus have I run through the several Degrees of Noble, or Ignoble Persons,
according to the best account I can find, and have given you the choicest
Precedents of Precedence that I can procure: I shall only add a few
Observations in Heraldry, which may serve to give some little light to the
Reader in that delightful (though by some contemned) Art.

CHAP. XXX. Of Heralds, and their Duty.
THe Word Herald, is derived from the Saxon Word Here-haulte; and by
abbreviation Herault, or Herald, which signifies the Champian of an Army, and
growing to be a Name of Office, it was given to him, that in an Army had the
charge of Challenging to Battle or Combat: Their Office is very ancient, and of
great esteem amongst the Romans, and other Nations; and amongst us they have
been esteemed as Ambassadors, and sometimes have been made so: However they
are the Messengers of Kings, and great Monarchs; and though they have less
esteem now than in former times, yet their Employment has been honored with
Messages between Potentates, in matters of Honor and Arms: They are to be
Officious and Expert in Coronations, Instalments of Noblemen, in Triumphs,
Justs, Combats, Marriages, Christenings, and Interments: They are to attend all
great Matters of State, and Honor; and by them ought Proclamations to be made
concerning great Matters of State: The Causes of Chivalry, and Gentility, are
referred to their Care, as the right of bearing Arms, Escoucheons, Shields,
Targets, Banners, etc. Correcting of Arms in Visitations, and to observe the
Descents, and Pedegrees of Noblemen, and Gentlemen: They are the
Prothonotaries, and Registerers of all the Acts and Proceedings in the Court of
the High Constable, and Lord Marshal: They have been long established in
England, but, as some think not incorporated until Richard the 3d. who
incorporated them by Charter, and placed them at Coleharbour in Thames Street,
London; from whence they were removed to the place they now enjoy, which was
confirmed to them by Philip and Mary, and incorporated by the Names of Garter,
King at Arms of all England; Clarenceaux, King at Arms for the south parts; and
Norroy, King at Arms for the north parts; and to the other Heralds and
Pursuvants for ever: And that they should have and use a common Seal to sue and
to be sued by, (before this King Edward the 6th. had granted them large
Previleges, of which see at large in Carter, p. 225.) Formerly the Title of
Clarenceaux, was ( South Roy or) Surrey as some say; but the Dukedom of
Clarence coming by Heirship to the King at Arms for the south of England, he
assumed the Title of Clarenceaux, (from Clarence,) and left that of Surrey, and
ever since that King at Arms has been styled Clarenceaux.

But more particularly; there are three Kings at Arms, that is:

1. Garter, Principal, General, and Indefinite.

2. Clarenceaux, King at Arms, for the North of England, on this side the River
Trent.

3. Norroy King at Arms, for the North of England; that is, of all beyond the
River Trent.

The Heralds, which are sometimes styled Dukes at Arms, are six; that is, first
York, second Somer set, third Windsor, fourth Lancaster, fifth Richmond, sixth
Chester. The Pursuvants are four; that, is first Portcullis, the second is Blew
Mantle, third Rouge Dragon, the fourth Rouge Croix; to which are added two
more, who have no certain Names: These Heralds and Pursuvants have power to
enter into all Churches, Castles, Houses, etc. to view all Arms, Recognizances,
and Crests; to make Visitations, and to Register the Pedegrees and Matches of
Nobles and Gentlemen; to punish with Disgrace, or Mulct, such as shall usurp
other men's Achievements, or fancy new ones to themselves, against the Law of
Arms; to reverse or deface them, and proclaim the pretender infamous at the
Assizes, or Sessions. Also such as shall use Mourning, as Gowns, Hoods, etc.
contrary to the Law, to limit all Painters, and other Artificers, in the
setting forth of Arms, (with many more things too tedious to set down.) And
that he may the better know how to give a proper Device, or Coat Armor, he is
to enquire: First, Whether he that would bear them desire them, and honor
Gentility, and will keep them from Dishonor. Secondly, Whether he be able to
declare his Pedigree. Thirdly, He must enquire into his Pedigree, and see
whether he may by Right bear Coat Armor; whether his Ancestors were Gentlemen,
and to give the same with due Augmentation. Fourthly, Whether he be clean of
Life, Just in Promise, cunning in all or any of the liberal Sciences, or has
knowledge in Divinity, or Philosophy. Fifthly, Of whom he has Praise of good
Works done; whether they were Persons of Reputation for Wisdom, or Honesty.
Sixthly, To whom he has done good Service, whether to the King, the Prince,
etc. and what the Service was, whether in War, or as an Ambassador, or the
like.

The Herald is likewise to be very expert in the betroathing of Princes; he is
not to disclose the secrets of Ladies, nor any other, not proper to be known,
appertaining to their own Art; he is to be careful in giving Advice, and to
acquaint the Bearer of Coat Armor, that the end thereof is to adorn his
Family, and to make him show more excellent than others; and therefore not to
do any dishonorable Actions: He must be also able to distinguish their Lines,
and Issues, the better to do right to the Person.

When a King of Heralds is to be made, he is brought unto the King, or Lord
Marshal, led between two Heralds (or a King and a Herald) in their Coats, the
other Heralds and Pursuvants going before in their Formalities, who carry the
several Instruments to be used at the Ceremony; one the Coat, another the
Crown, a third the Patent, a fourth the Bowl of Water, a fifth a Book and a
Sword, a sixth a Book whereon he swears, etc. all making their several
Obeisance; then he kneels down with those that led him, and one holding the
Sword, and Book whereon he swears, the other pronounces the Words; then his
Patent is read, and at the Words, Creamus and investimus, his Coat is put on,
and at the Words, Non violante Nomine, etc. the Water is poured on his Head;
when his Patent is read, the Ceremony is ended, etc.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Heraldry.
THis is a Field too large to be traced through in so small a Volum as this,
and therefore I cannot pretend to show the Art of Blazon, but only (as well as
I can with such Brevity,) give you the general Terms of Art, and Names of those
things which are particularly nominated in this Honorable Science.

Briefly therefore, Armory is an Art whereby we attain to the Knowledge of the
use of Coat Armor, which consists of two general Heads; first Blazoning,
secondly Marshaling.

First, Blazoning is the explication of Coat Armor in such significant Terms,
that the Virtues of the first Bearers may be known, and this is done by
expressing what the Colors, Shapes, Kinds, and Postures of those things are
which are born in Coat Armor, with their Position; by which the true
signification may be known.

Secondly, Marshalling is the orderly placings of several Coats, belonging
(originally) to diverse Families within one Efcoucheon, and the well disposing
of those Ornaments which belong to them in their proper Places without the
Estouchen. Of these in General.

More particular Arms are divided into things within the Escoucheon, and things
without the Escoucheon, those things without the Escoucheon are the Mantling,
Supporters, (where due,) Torce, Helm, Crest, Motto, etc. But not to enlarge on
these things, we shall chiefly speak of those things within the Escoucheon.
First, The Escoucheon must be spread over with some Metal, Color, or Furr,
which do admit of several Denominations, according to the quality of the Person
to whom the Coat does belong; if a King, or absolute Prince, his Coat is
blazoned, or expressed by Planets; a Nobleman's by precious Stones, and those
of lower Ranks, by Colors; which take as under written: Metals and Colors in
Blazon for Gent. under the Nobibility, called By Precious Stones for Nobles,
called By Planets for Kings etc. called 1 Gold or Yellow, Or, O. Topaz Sol. 2
Silver, or white, Argent, A. Pearl Luna. 3 Red, Gules, G. Ruby. Mars. 4 Light
blew, Azure, B. Sapphir. Jupiter. 5 Black, Sable, S. Diamond. Saturn. 6 Green,
Vert, V. Emrauld. Venus. 7 Purple, Purpure, P. Amethyst. Mercury. 8 Orange
color, Ten, T. Jacinth. Dragons head. 9 Murry, Sanguin, Sardonyx Dragons
tail.

The Meaning is only this; if the Coat be a King's, or Prince's, you must say,
he bears Sol, not Tapaz, nor Or; if a Nobleman's, say, Topaz, or Pearl, and
not Sol, nor Or; if a Gentleman's, say, Or, or Argent only, etc.

The two last Colors are counted stainant, yet are born sometimes by good
Families.

All these have their proper significations, both singly by themselves, and
also as they are compounded by themselves, they signify as follows:

Or signifies Wisdom, Magnanimity, Delight, and Riches.

Argent, Innocence, Chastity, and Charity.

Gules, Strength, and Courage.

Azure, Heavenly mindedness, and a Virtuous Disposition.

Sable, Melancholy, and Divine Studies.

Vert, Youth, Gladness, Mirth and Joy in Love.

Purpure, a Law giver, Jurisdiction, Dignity, and Justice.

Ten, Self-Glory.

Sanguin, Over-haste to Battle.

To show the several Significations of these Metals, and Colors, when they are
mixed together, would take up too much room and time; but the judicious may by
a careful Remark make curious Observations, or else let him consult Gerard
Leigh, who is very large on this particular.

The next to Metals and Colors are Furrs, of which some make more, some less;
which take as follows:

1. The first is White, by which Blazon it is known to be a Furr, for if it be
blazoned, Argent, it is understood to be Metal, and so cannot be proper for a
Doubling, or Lining; but if the Bearer have committed Treason, it is called
Littute, from a little Beast, so called.

2. The second is Ermin, and is white spotted with black.

3. Ermins, It is black powdered, or spotted with white.

4. Erminits is like Ermin, only this has on each side of the black spot one
Hair of Gules, or red.

5. Erminois is yellow with black spots.

6. Pean is black with yellow spots.

7. Verry is composed of Argent, and Azure each spot of an equal bigness, one
indented in the other thus:

8. Leigh makes the 8th to be called Vere, and to be of the same spot as the
last, only to differ in Color, this being Or, and Vert.

9. The ninth he says is called Vair, and is of the same spot with the two
last; but it is composed of Argent, and Sable.

These two last are disputable and Lacy, says, that these three are but one,
only when it is to be of Argent, and Azure, it must be blazoned Verry or Vair,
and no Metal nor Color named; but if it be of any other Metal or Color, it
must be named Verry, or Vair, of such a Metal and Color: And instead of these
Guilliam adds another called by him Potent, Counter Potent, because it is like
the Head of a Crutch, and placed one in another thus; and is always composed of
Argent and Sable; this some old Blazoners call Varry Cup, and Vair Tasse; but
Leigh blazons it Meirre.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Ordinaries.
THe Shield thus covered with some of these Metals, Colors, or Furrs, there is
then (unless rare) some Charge laid upon it, which are of two sorts, proper and
common.

Proper Charges are those which more peculiarly belong to this Art, and these
are called Ordinaries, being 18 in Number, (some say 19,) of which 9 are called
Honorable, the other nine, or ten, are called less Honorable.

The more Honorable Ordinaries are, 1. The Cross. 2. The Chief. 3. The Pile.
4. The Bend. 5. The Fess. 6. The Inescoucheon. 7. The Chevron. 8. The Saltier.
And, 9. The Bar.


The Nine less Honorable Ordinaries are: 1. The Gyron. 2. The Orle. 3. The
Pile. 4. The Quarter. 5. The Quarter Sinister. 6. The Canton. 7. The Canton
Sinister. 8. The Flask. 9. The Flanch. 10. The Voider.


These all have an additional Note of Distinction, from the form of those Lines
whereof they are composed; if they are drawn with a plain Line only, they are
only called by their proper Name; but if the Line be uneven or irregular, they
receive an additional Name accordingly. The Lines are these: 1. Invected. 2.
Ingrailed. 3. Waved, or Undee. 4. Nebulee. 5. Crenella. 6. Indented. 7.
Dancetty. 8. Ragulee.


In some Cases Crenella is blazoned Embattellee. But of all these in Order.

1. The Cross signifies Afflictions for the cause of Religion, or being in the
Wars against the Infidels; and of all Crosses the Cross waved shows the
greatest of Afflictions: There are diverse sorts of Crosses, as the Cross Flory,
the Cross Botony, Pattee, or Form, Fitchee, Moline, the Julian, the Jerusalem,
Avalan, Potent, Ragulee, and Trunked Croslets, and Cross Croslets, with many
more; which to describe would be a work of it self.

2. The Chief contains the upper third part of the Escoucheon, and shows the
first Bearer was in Authority, or Place of Command, when he received his Coat,
or had gained the Place by his Deserts.

3 The Pale is the middle third part of the Escoucheon, from top to bottom, and
signifies the first Bearer to be skilled in Mining, and such like Arts.

4. The Bend is drawn from the right Corner at top, called the Dextre Chief, to
the left Corner at bottom, or Sinister Base, in form of a Belt, showing the
first Bearer to be Valiant in War, and one who mounted on the Enemies Walls.

5. The Fess contains the middle third part of the Escoucheon, drawn from side
to side; it is counted a Scarf, and shows the first Bearer a worthy Leader of
an Army, or a great part thereof.

6. The Escoucheon, or Inescoucheon, is when an Escoucheon is depicted in the
middle of the Escoucheon; it shows the Bearer to have won his Enemy's Arms.

7. The Chevron, taken to the the Rafters of a House, from its form, being like
the Ridge of a House, and signifies the first Bearer to be the promoter and top
of his Family, the carryer on or finisher of some great Work, and the shelter,
etc. of his Family.

8. A Saltier is made like the letter X. V^ton says it was an Instrument to
catch wild Beasts, but Leigh, and others, say it was used to scale the Walls of
Cities with. On this Saltier did St. Andrew suffer Martyrdom, as is affirmed,
from whence it is also called St. Andrew's Cross. It shows the Bearer was
honorable at some Seige, did some valiant Exploits against the Picts and Scots.

9. The Bar is like the Fess, but narrower, and shows the first Bearer to be
serviceable in raising of Batteries, or Fortifications, to the damage of the
Enemies, and security of his Prince's Army.

Thus much of the Nine honorable Ordinaries, the less honorable Ordinaries
have also their proper significations; but some of them are very hard to be
described by words, as;

1. The Gyron, which is taken to be that which in Man is called the Groin (and
it is oftentimes so called in Blazon,) they are born many together, generally
eight, sometimes six: They are a note of Unity, and shows the Uniting of many
into one; in the Escoucheon they show thus:

2. The Orle is like the Escoucheon in form, but hollow or void, and only the
edges left; it shows the first Bearer so valiant as to sight until his Shield
was hewn through. In Armory many times Birds, Beasts, Flowers, etc. are set in
this form and must be blazoned an Orle of such or such.

3. The Pile is broad at top like the Pale, but ends in a sharp point at
bottom, showing thereby the first Bearer to be excellent in Fortifications, and
some add rich in Buildings.

4. and 5. The Quarter Dextre, and the Quarter Sinister; it contains a fourth
part of the Escoucheon on the right or left side at top, from whence it takes
its name, and shows the first Bearer to receive an Augmentation from the King,
for service done according to the Charge on the Quarter; or else that he won
his Enemy's Shield.

6. and 7. The Canton Dextre, and Einister, they are of the same form with the
Quarter, and stand in the same place, but lesser something, and signify the
same thing, only the Quarter is given to those that are Nobles, and the Canton
to those that are under the Degree of a Baron.

8. and 9. The Flask and Flanch, are but little different, the Flask being a
little bigger than the Flanch, but are generally used promiscuously under the
Name of Flanch; they are made Semicircular, from the corner at top, to the
corner at bottom, the Bellies of them meeting almost in the middle of the
Escoucheon, and are never born but by pairs; that is, one on the one side, and
the other on the other side; they are both Arguments that the first Bearer was
true and trusty in the Service he was employed in by his Prince.

The Voider is of the same shape, but lesser much, and not circular, being the
proper Reward for a Woman for the like Service done.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Charges Common.
Although some Coats of Arms have one of these alone, some have more, either of
the same or different sorts, and some have other things mixed with them; yet
many there are which have none, but charged with some other things, which
Charges are born sometimes upon these Ordinaries, sometimes by or with them,
and sometimes both upon them, and by or with them; and sometimes you shall have
these Ordinaries born upon or over such other Charges; but this being too
tedious to run through all the variety of Bearing, and the significations of
them, when alone, or compounded, I shall reduce what I have to say to these
nine heads, and be very brief in them all: 1. Angels. 2. Rational Creatures. 3.
Beasts. 4. Fowl. 5. Fishes. 6. Insects. 7. Heavenly Bodies. 8. Trees, Herbs,
Flowers, and Fruits. 9. Things artificial.


Sect. 1. Of Angels.
Angels, Cherubims, or any part of them, signify great celerity in business,
the Messengers of Peace and happy News. Note generally, the whole signifies
more than the parts.

Sect. 2. Of Men.
To bear Men in Coat Armor is honorable; as, 1. For Saints. It shows the
first Bearer was some Bishop, Abbat, or some Person who built or ruled some
Place dedicated to such Saint. 2. Heads show the Bearer to have done Service
against those People whose Head it signifies; as, Saracens, Turks, Moors, etc.
3. Hands or Arms signify Strength and Fortitude in their Bearers. 4. Eyes
signify Judgment and Apprehension. 5. Legs and Feet show the Bearer to be
swift to pursue his Enemies, and are the emblem of Support and Assistence; as,
6. The Heart is of Knowledge and Understanding.

Sect. 3. Of Beasts.
Beasts of Prey are more honorable than Beasts of Chase, and the more
honorable the Beast is, the more honorable the Coat; the Male is more
honorable than the Female, and those that are gilt, or kerved, less honorable
than those that are not; the whole is better than the parts, and the regular
posture than the irregular; those at liberty are better than those that are
not, by being chained, muzled, or the like: and the proper color is better
than different. Of parts; first the Head, if of a Beast of Prey, shows the
first Bearer to head an Army, to be bold and stout; or to destroy or take some
General of the Enemies. Next to Beasts of Prey are the Unicorn, Horse, Bull,
Ram, Goat, Heart, etc. all whose Heads are honorable according to their several
Degrees. Next the Head are the Gambs or Paws, and then the Lions Tails. A Limb
or Member either of Man, Beast, or Fowl, is better erased than couped, and that
better than cabosed; nor are Monsters so honorable as those of true shapes.
The nearer any Coat is to the King's Coat in whose Country he lives, the more
honorable is that Coat.

The Lion shows great Power, Jurisdiction, Mercy, and all other generous
Virtues.

The Unicorn one of Strength and Courage, who will fight it out to the last,
and never yield; yet withal ready to do good to his Enemies: It has
significations of Scotland, etc.

The Wolf shows one who has Power and Parts to assemble many together, and
might first be given to him that brought a Band of his Tenants, Friends, or
Volunteers, to the King's Service.

The Fox signifies one that by Policy and Strategeme has gotten possession of
his Enemies Quarters, or Country.

The Horse shows one bold and valiant, and a Person that by his Example
encourages others: It also shows, that the Bearer might have mounted his
General or Prince in Battle.

The Ass shows the Bearer to be a most industrious and submissive Person.

The Ram one valiant in War, and profitable in Peace, chiefly by his Substance.

The Bull a valiant Person, and one that labors the Ruin of his Enemies.

The Goat one of mean worth, yet politic in War, whereby he subdues his
Enemies.

The Cat shows one that by a constant and prudent care surprises his Enemy, or
by a subtle Strategeme seises those that make Inroads into the Country.

The Dog an excellent Sentinel, and constant adherer to his Prince.

The Boar is given to those that are valiant, but not liberal, and one that
will dye nobly rather than fly basely.

The Hedghog shows one that is expert in gathering Riches, and prudent in
laying hold on all opportunities to secure them.

The Coney shows a Person to be a skillful Pionier, and successful; also good
in making Trenches.

The Squeril shows the first Bearer to be an excellent Treasurer and Purveyor
for an Army.

The Panthar shows a Person of undaunted Courage and Resolution, yet of so
friendly and persuasive a Temper, that all men love him.

The Elephant shows a Man of great Learning and Authority; a wise and sage
Counselor, and one of great valor.

The Camel one that is ready and speedy in business.

The Bear shows one politic and valiant, though perhaps greedy of Gain.

The Ape may perhaps be given to one who first pleased his Prince by his
pleasant and facetious Humor; and also shows one very apt to learn by
Inspection, and imitative.

The Heart shows one carefully politic, who foreseeing the Danger, prevents
it, making good his own Party, and circumventing his Enemies.

Monstrous Beasts are less honorable than others, and show that the first
Bearers might have something in them which was vicious; which though it did not
wholly outvie their Virtues, yet it might be a blemish to the same, and shows
oftentimes Illegitimacy.

The Leopard shows a subtle man, one that would surprise his Enemies by Policy
where his Strength fails; yet withal too violent when he has overcome.

The Griffin shows one valiant, and to make great spoil of his Enemies
Megazines, yet cruel and covetous.

The Dragon or Wivorn shows one that invades his Enemies, not in a main Battle,
but as a Privatier, or one who has Letters of Mart, and subdueth Pirates, or
the like, and will be sure to keep fast what he gets, though unjustly.

The Mantiger shows one to have showed himself most humane and courteous to
all, and withal courageous, yet in his Conquests too much of a cruel Tyrant.

The Sphinx and Harpie the same.

The Bat or Reremous shows a low beginning, but by care and industry to arrive
to great Wealth, and thereby to Honor, yet sneaking, and of a low Spirit.

The Postures of Beasts are differently blazoned, according to the nature of
them; for all Beasts of Prey, or Battle, have one denomination for their
posture, and those of Chase, or the like, have another.

Beasts of Prey and Battle are couchant, passant, guardant, combatant, rampant,
saliant, regardant, coward, double quere, quere inflected, quere renowned, etc.

Beasts of Chase, etc. are said to be lodged, tripant, at gaze, respecting,
mounting, springing, and the like.

Dormant, seiant, endorced, and some others, are common to both.

The Lion dormant shows a Person, who, having been victorious, gives over the
War, and takes his Ease.

Couchant shows the same, but more honorable; one who has given over public
Affairs.

Passant shows one ready for noble Actions, and one of absolute Jurisdiction.

Seiant shows the Bearer to be one placed in some Frontier Garrison; a wary,
watchful Person.

Guardant shows a Person of a vigilant Disposition, who stands upon his Guard
in the midst of his Enemies.

Saliant shows the first Bearer to be a ready and active Person on all
occasions for War.

Rampant shows a Person truly valorous.

Regardant, coward, etc. shows the Bearers to have been most worthy Persons,
but overcome and subdued by some conquering Prince.

Note generally, 1st. That oftentimes the bearing of Beasts show the Bearer to
have subdued an Enemy of the same nature, and the Heads show the same more
properly.

Note 2dly, That whereas in the first of Edward II. and in the seventh of Henry
VI. men that had Lands to the value of 20 l. per annum, were compelled to take
upon them the Order of Knighthood, and though the Heralds were careful to keep
out base born People, who had grown rich, yet many were admitted who were but
of very mean Extraction; whence many Devices were given them which in
enigmatical Signs showed the Quality of the first Bearer, which is not
convenient here to name; and though none received his Arms for his Vices, but
for his Virtues, or Estate, as in those Kings Reigns, and some since, yet those
Persons having Vices which were known, and blemished their other Qualities, the
Heralds would and were to take notice of the same, as above, in Monsters, in
all irregular postures, and many more.

Note 3dly, Many received Coats from their Names; because their other Virtues,
besides their Estates, were not known; and some have received their Sirnames,
and Coat of Arms both, from some quality they have been endowed with; wherefore
it is that sometimes the bearing of Coat Armor, according to the Name, is both
ancient and honorable. I now proceed to Birds.

Sect. 4. Of Birds.
In Bearing of Birds the Female is more honorable than the Male, except the
Cock; proper Colors are better than artificial; Birds of Prey, and those
exercised in flight, are better volant or flying, than closs; Poultry and all
Waterfowl are best closs; also the Martlet; in other things they are the same
with Beasts.

The Eagle signifies true Magnanimity, and one who scorns to stoop to low or
base Actions.

The Falcon shows the first Bearer to be valiant, and one that pursues his
Victory eagerly, and speedily performs a warlike Message.

The Cock shows an Ambassador, or Herald, and a valiant Person, though apt to
brag after Victory.

The Stork is an emblem of Obedience and Gratitude to Prince and Parents.

The Swallow shows one quick and ready to do business, but more serviceable in
Peace than War.

Pigeons show the Bearer to be a faithful Messenger, chaste and loyal; they
argue Holiness and Innocence, bringers of good Tidings, of Peace and Plenty.

The Swan shows a learned Man, Poets, Musicians, etc. a contented person, and
contemner of the World.

An Owl shows Prudence, Vigilance, a watchful temper to prevent a surprise,
yet withal loving Retiredness.

The Pellicane shows the Bearer diligent in instructing and educating those
under his Charge in Learning and Virtues; as, Children, Servants, Soldiers, etc.

The Raven shows a careful Gatherer, but yet fraudulent.

The Peacock signifies a man of splendid Condition, yet vainglorious; possibly
of mean Extraction; if the Peacock be closs, it abates much of the vainglorious
Temper.

The Martlet shows one of a younger Family, who lived and got his Estate by
Industry, not by Inheritance.

The Heads of Birds is the next to the whole, then the Feet or Tallons of Birds
of Prey, the Legs next, the Wigs next, which show Protection, and paternal
Love, and the Feathers last.

Sect. 5. Of Fish.
THE most honorable Bearing of Fish is nayant or swimming, the next springing,
lastly hauriant; sometimes they are fretted, sometimes indorsed, and sometimes
respecting; the Dolphin being best in Heraldry when embowed.

Of the Parts of Fish seldom any is born, except the Head and Shells.

Amongst Fish the Dolphin is most honorable; it shows the first Bearear to be
of a loving and good condition, willing and ready to help.

The Herrin may be accounted next; and shows the first Bearer to be ready to
serve his Prince, but willing to have company.

The Eel, Place, Flounder, etc. shows the Bearer to be possessed of much fenny
and waterish Land; also to be a person that lived close and private.

The Lobstar, Crab, and other Shell fish, show the Bearer to be one, that
though he go willingly to War, yet wants that true Magnanimity of Mind to
venture far; but if he once has obtained any thing by his Valor or Policy,
will rarely let it go again.

The Eschallop Shel is the emblem of Unity and Friendship, and shows the first
Bearer to be a Commander, who by his Valor and Goodness had so united the
Hearts of his followers to him, as not to forsake him in all Attempts wherever
he went.

Sect. 6. Of Insects.
Insects are very rarely born in parts, and amongst them the Ant shows an
industrious, careful, and provident Person, yet of a Temper unwilling to be
observed in the World, and something covetous.

The Be a laborious person, and beneficial to Mankind, generous and
hospitable, but hasty or passionate.

The Snake shows a person who lives a retired, quiet life, yet withal such as
never fail to remember their Enemies when they have opportunity. Likewise the
Adder, and all such Serpents, show the Bearer to be a close, subtle, and
privately mischievous person.

The Butterfly shows a Person who lives splendidly on that which others got
covetously; also a person who though at first by a recluse Life gathered much,
yet spent the rest of his days in pleasure, and seeing the World.

The Gadflie or Humble-bee shows one who came of industrious Parents, who were
beneficial to others, but he lives not up to their Frugality, but upon it, etc.

The Toad shows a man covetous to get, and unwilling to part with what he has
so got; yet of good Understanding, prudent, and knowing.

Sect. 7. Of Heavenly Bodies.
Amongst which the Sun shows the first Bearer to live splendidly, and willing
to do good to all persons: It is the Emblem of Glory.

The Moon shows one willing to do good to others, according to his power,
though he has his Dependency on some other eminent person, and it is augmented
or abated as the Moon is in its Full, Increasing, or Decreasing.

The Cressant shows a younger Family, who in all probability may rife to great
Glory.

The Star is a note of Eminency, and given for some great knowledge in the
Liberal Sciences, or some great Discoveries in the Art of Navigation, etc.

The Mullet is variously taken; some esteem it to be the Rowel of a Spur, and
that those that are pierced are those that are finished, and those that are not
pierced are those that are unfinished; others say, (and they the most,) that
they are a falling Star, or Meteor, (possibly those with five points may be
Rowels, and those with six points imperfect Stars, for Stars have never less
than six points, and those waved, but the Mullet is never waved.) It was
anciently blazoned Esteiles, whereas the Star is termed Estoiles; however this
is certain, that it signifies Honor, and that the first Bearer studied
Divinity, or such things that made him shine in Virtue or Learning.

Clouds show Honor and Eminency, but Uncertainty.

Sect. 8. Of Trees, Fruits, Flowers, and Herbs.
Timber Trees are preferred before others, and among them the Oak is first.

Amongst Flowers the Rose is first, the Thistle next; the Flower-de-luce and
the Lilly follow; of others the manured are more honorable than the wild.

Of parts: The Branches are first, then the Fruit, then Leaves, then Stumps and
Roots, and Trunks last; these all hear part of the same signification with the
Tree to which they belong.

The Oak shows the first Bearer to be a great help and preserver of his Prince
or Country.

The Leaves of Oak, Bays, or Laurel, are given in token of Victory.

A Limb of a Tree couped shows the first Bearer eminent in destroying his Enemy
in his Hold or Fastness; also that he was excellent at Fortifications.

The Rose shows Service done to the Crown of England; or, that the first Bearer
lived upon an hill, according to the British. The Flower-de-luce shows Service
in France. Leaves of Holly shows one serviceable in the Church, yet possibly
sharp and censorious; but I hasten.

Grapes show a person who is instrumental in procuring some eminent
Convocation, which has produced much benefit to the Kingdom.

A Garb or Sheaf shows the first Bearer to be rich in arable Lands, and given
to much Hospitality; the better the Grain, the more noble.

Cinquefoil is ancient, and shows the Bearer to be one that masters his
Affections, and has overcome his Enemies as well by Policy as Power.

Quaterfoil the same, but lower.

Trefoil notes a man possessed of much Meadow, or Pasture Land, and one who
lives in Joy and Content.

Note, Flowers or Leaves sliped, that is, with the Stalks plucked off, are
better than the single Leaves.

Sect. 9. Of Things Artificial.
There are so many, and so various sorts of this Bearing, that to name them
all, if it could be done, would make a whole Volume of itself; and therefore I
shall name but a few of the most common.

A Helmet shows the Bearer to be a man of Command; if full faced, it shows the
more Authority; if sideways, the less.

Castles and Towers show the Bearer to be one that stood much upon his Guard, a
person much assaulted by his Enemies, ghostly or bodily, according to the Field.

Swords and Instruments of War are honorable, and show the first Bearer
exquisite in the use of such Instruments, or to overcome his Enemies by them.

Bridges and Arches show the Bearer to be a Person of great Stability, and
under many sufferings for his King and Country, amidst which he stands
steadfast and loyal.

The Plow, and all Instruments of Husbandry, show the Bearer to be an
industrious person, and very beneficial to the Commonwealth.

Utensils of a Kitchen, etc. show the first Bearer to be a Lover of good
Housekeeping.

Sect. 10. Of Roundles and Drops, etc.
Note, that in Coat Armor there are some things which are all of one form, but
have diverse Names, and consequently several Significations, from their Colors.
Of these the chiefest are Roundles or Drops.

First, the Roundles, (called by the vulgar Balls, and Bullets.) These have
nine several names according to their Nine several Metals and Colors used in
Armory.

1 Yellow, or Gold, are called Bessants. 2 White, or Silver, are called Plates.
3 Red, or Gules, are called Tortuauxes. 4 Blew, or Azure, are called Hurts. 5
Green, or Vert, are called Pomeis. 6 Purple, or Purpure, are called Golpes. 7
Black, or Sable, are called Pellets, or Ogresses. 8 Ten, or Orange-colour,
are called Oranges. 9 Murry, or Sanguin, are called Guezes.
The Bessant shows great profit brought by the Bearer to the King and Country.

The Plate shows the same, but lesser; also Riches in the first Bearer.

The Tortuaux shows the first Bearer to be a Priest, or religious Person, or
one that had done much for the Church.

The Hurt shows one who had received much hurt by his Enemies, but not to
wounding. Guillium calls them Whorts, or, as some call them, Whortle-berries.
Leigh calls them Hurts, or Bruises in the Flesh, which look blew; but he says
in Women they are called Tongue-Moles.

Pomeis shows one abounding in Ortyards and Fruits.

Golps show one who received Wounds in Battle.

Ogresses show a person expert in Slinging, and in those Warlike Engines which
cast Stones and Darts; an Enginier, etc.

Note, When these are of different Colors, as in Coats parted, they are most
properly called Roundles.

There are also Annulets, which are like Rings, and are esteemed the Rings
whereof the Coat of Mail is composed; it is good Bearing, and shows one who
with an united Strength preserved his Prince.

The second thing which is of one shape, but distinguished by the Color, are
Drops, therefore called Gutta; as,

The Gold are called Gutta de Or, or Drops of Gold.

When White, or Silver, then they are called Gutta de Eau, or Water, or Gutta
de Argent, drops of Silver, but not so proper.

The Gules are called Gutta de Sanguin, or Blood.

Azure are called Gutta de Larmes, or Tears.

Black are called Gutta de Poix, or Drops of Pitch.

Again, there is the Fucil, which has four Corners, but the distance between
the upper corner and the lower is much more than that between the sides. It is
much like a quarril of Glass, and called by Geometricians Rhombus.

The Lozenge also, which is of the same form, but not so long, and something
broader.

Lastly, the Mascle, which is just square, standing also cornerwise, but all
open, or hollow within.

The Fucil is taken by most for that which is used in spinning woollen Yarn,
called a Spindle.

The Lozeuge is accounted that physical Composition which is given for Colds.

The Mascle for the Meshes of a Net.

The Fucil may show the Bearer to have more Honor by the Mother-side than the
Father's, or else, that their Riches, etc. sprang from the beneficial
Emploiment of Weaving or Clothing, and many English Armorists blazon them
Weavers Shuttles.

The Lozenge argues the first Bearer to be famous, etc. in the study or
practice of Physic.

The Mascle shows one who was very subtle, and could inveagle and circumvent
his Enemies; as also one who had advanced himself by industry in Fishing.

There is also the Billit, which are Letters folded up more long than broad,
and shows the Bearer to be employed in Embassies, according to the Color, etc.
or Charge, some being charged.

The Steel Gad is much like the Billit, but bends a little out on one side, and
in on the other; it is an argument of great Strength, but of much passion when
provoked.

The Delft is exactly square, it is a Delve or Spit of Earth, and is good
bearing when the Color is not of the Stainant Colors, but then it is a Blot;
else it may signify one that got Riches by gardening, or the like Occupation;
also one who behaved himself well in working of Trenches.

It would fill a very large Volume to speak of all the several things born in
Coat Armor, if they could be all known; and therefore I hope these may be
taken in good part, being already gone farther than at first I intended.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Abatements.
HAving spoken of those things that make Men Honorable, I shall now speak of
those things that do lessen and abate the Reputation of those Persons who have
the Honor of bearing Coat Armor; and these are therefore called Abatements of
Honor, which happens when a Gentleman, etc. does commit some ungenteel Action;
for which the Heralds think fit to set some note of Infamy upon the Party: And
this is that which we vulgarly call a Blot in their Escoucheon: Of these
Armorists reckon nine, which are ever made of one of the Stainant Colors, viz.
Ten or Sanguin; else it is possible that some of them may be Arguments of
Honor as in the Delft, Gusset, etc.

The first is the Delft; it is set in the middle of the Escoucheon, else it is
not a Blot, (it must stand on one of its sides,) and is given to one that
revoketh his Challenge; as if dirt were thrown in his face.

The second is an Inescoucheon reverst, which is a small Escoucheon turned up
side down in the middle of the Escoucheon. This is due to him that
discourtiously entreats Maid, or Widow, etc. against her Will; and also for
him that flies from his Sovereign's Banner.

The Third is called a Point, parted Dextre, that is; when the upper right
corner of the Escoucheon is parted from the whole, and is given to him, who
boasts too much of his Deeds in War.

The Fourth is Point in Point, which consists of two arched Lines, and the
middle ends are joined in the middle of the Escoucheon, and so both pass
circularly to the sides near the Bottom, thereby cutting off as it were a great
part of the Escoucheon, at the lower part; and is given to one that is
unwilling to fight.

The Fifth is called a Point Champane; it is made of one hollow arched Line,
which as it were cuts off, or hides the bottom of the Escoucheon, but more at
each side than in the middle: It is given to him that kills his Prisoner in
cold Blood, and when he may as well save him alive.

The Sixth is called a Plain Point, wherein the bottom of the Escoucheon seems
to be covered by a straight Line, drawn from side to side; and is proper for
him that inventeth false News, or Lies to his Prince; possibly the late French
Ambassador ought to be so served.

The Seventh is called a Gore; it consists of two hollow Lines, one whereof
begins at the upper left Corner, or Sinister Chief of the Escoucheon, and the
other at the middle of the Bottom or Base Point, and so meet in the middle.
It Is proper for him that is a Coward, or Feminine-hearted.

The Eighth is called a Gusset; it is made by drawing a Line a little sloping
from the upper corner of the Escoucheon, about one third of the Breadth, and
then letting it fall perpendicular to the Bottom; it is given on the right
side, to show the Bearer one, who to satisfy his lust neglects his Battle, and
on the left side to him that neglects through Drunkenness.

The Ninth, and last, is when the whole Coat is reversed, or turned upside down
and is proper for a Traitor; and must be blazoned by expressing the Colors to
their common Names, as Yallow, White, Red, Light-Blew, Black, and the like, and
not Or, Argent, Gules, Azure, etc.

Note, That as no Man, having Coat Armor bestowed upon him, can communicate
the same to any of his Relations, as Brothers, Unckles, or the like; nor can
they have any power to use or wear the fame, (whence it often comes to pass,
that several Coats belong to the same Name,) the Coat only belonging to his
Heirs, and those that shall proceed from the first Bearer; so these Abatements
belong to none but to the Person, and his distinct Line; who if they shall by
the opposite Virtues show themselves worthy, the Abatement by the Approbation
and Order of the Heralds, may be taken away.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Points in an Escoucheon.
I Conclude with naming those places in the Escoucheon, which in Heraldry are
called Points, and by which you are to know the several parts and places in it,
which are also Nine. You are to imagine the Escoucheon, as placed before you,
to be worn by the bearer; so that the right side of it answers to your left
hand, and the left side to your right hand, and therefore are called the Dexter
and Sinister sides of the Escoucheon. The Points are as follow: 1. The middle
or center of the Escoucheon is called the Fess Point. 2. The middle between the
Fess point and the top of the Escoucheon, is called the Honor Point. 3. The
right corner at the top is the Dextre Chief Point. 4. The very middle of the
top is the Chief Point. 5. The left corner of the top is called the Sinister
Chief Point. 6. Then between the Fess Point and the bottom of the Escoucheon is
the Nombril Point. 7. The right corner of the bottom is the Dextre Bass Point,
8. The middle of the bottom is the Bass Point. And, 9. The left corner of the
bottom is called the Sinister Bass Point.

There being many words in the foregoing Treatise, which are not here explained
(although most are,) and many other Terms of Art, and some peculiar Charges,
which are not therein mentioned, I have thought good to insert the following
Table, for the benefit of such who are willing to be instructed therein.

Abacat, a Cap of High Estate, worn by some Kings. Abatement, (see Chap. 32.)
Disgrace or lessening of Honor. Achievement, the Arms of any Gentleman, or
Nobleman, with his Crest, Mantle, Helm, Supporters, Motto, etc. Proper.
Adumbration, a shadowing; it is used in Heraldry when a Family is gone to
decay, they may bear their Coat shadowed, i. e. only with the plain Lines, and
no Colors. Adventail, a Coat of Armor. Annulet, a Ring in Armory, the Rings
of a Coat of Male. Avelan, a cross, whose ends are like Nuts, or Philbirds,
therefore called a Cross Avelan. Bar, (see Chap. 31.) less than the Fess, and
many have three in an Escoucheon. Barulet, is a Diminutive Bar, containing a
fourth part of the Bar. Bar, is when a Coat is composed of small Bars, both
Colors being equal; else it must be blazoned Bar of so many. Bars Gemews, or
Gemelis, double Bars, and always born two together. Base, the bottom of the
Escoucheon. Battoon, a wand or ^udgel; it is like a Bend Sinister, reaching
from the Sinister Chief to the Dextre Base, but does not touch either; it is
narrower than the Bend, and is a Note of Bastardy. Bend, see Chap. 31. a Belt.
Bendlet, a diminutive Bend, three may be born in an Escoucheon. Bendy, when the
whole Escoucheon is composed of Bends. Per Bend, is when the Escoucheon is of
two Colors, and parted by a Line bend ways. Bessants, are Quoits of Gold,
valued 3750 l. Sterling. Billit, Letters, Chap. 32. Sect. 10. Blazon, to
describe a Coat of Arms by proper Terms. Botony, see Cross. Border, the edge of
a different Color that goes round many Coats. Cabosed, when the Head of a
Beast, etc. is cut close off, and no Neck left to it. Canton Dextre and
Sinister, see Chap. 31. Castle, is when the Architecture extends it self from
one side of the Field, to the other; and if it have Turrets, they must be named
how many: But if it does extend it self so, it is blazoned a Tower, and if it
have Turrets, they must be called Towered. Chaplet, a Garland or Headband of
Flowers. Checquee, is when it is Chequered of more rows than two. Chevron, see
Chap. 31. Chevronel, a little Chevron. Chief, see Chap. 31. Closs, birds, etc.
when set on their Feet are blazoned Closs, not Passant. Closs, Cost, or
Cottises, are very narrow Bends, and by some thought to be the Ribs of a Man:
They are born on each side the Bend, and some other Charges, but always in
Bend. Combatant, sighting or rampant, face to face; it is only proper to Beasts
of Battle. Complement, the Moon is so blazoned when at full. Compony, or
Compounded, is two rows chequered and no more. Counter, to go toward the
Sinister side of the Escoucheon, or to go back again. Couped, cut smooth off.
Couchant, lying down, proper for Beasts of Prey. Crenella, see Chap 31. in a
Chief, or Fess, or Bar, it is blazoned Embattellee. Coward, a Lion with his
Tail between his Legs, and hanging about his Feet. Cronels, is that which is
put upon the end of a Tilt, Staff, or Spear, in justing. Cressant, a horned
Moon with the Horns upwards. Cross, see Chap. 31. Croslet, a little Cross, when
more than one is born in an Escoucheon. Cross Croslet, when those little
Crosses are crossed at the ends. Cross Flory, has a Flower-de-luce, issuing
out at each end, some call it Patence. Cross Botony, when each end has Balls
or Buttons on them. Cross Pattee or Form, when the ends are broader than the
Bars. Cross Fitchee, when there is a spike in the lower end to stick it into
the Ground. Cross Julian, like a Saltier, but crossed aagain at each end. Cross
Potent, when the ends are crossed like a Crutch, some call it a cross Battoon.
Cross Ragulee, see Ragulee. Cross Moline, when the ends are parted, and turn
outward like the outside Leaves of a Flower-de-luce; it has its name from a
Mill-Link.
Dalmatica, a Priest's Garment; see Chap. 2. Dancette, very much cut or
indented; see Chap. 31. Debruised, oppressed. Delft or Delve, a Spit of Earth;
see Chap. 32. Sect. 10. Displayed, spread abroad. Dormant, sleeping. Doubled or
Doublings. lined or linings.
Eau, water; see Chap. 32. Embatalia, see Crenella. Embowed, bended as the
Dolphin. Enaluron, a Term proper for a Border, or the like, when it is charged
with Birds. Endorsed, back to back, Rampant or upright. Entoyer, a Term proper
to a Border, when charged with dead or artificial things. Enurny, a Term proper
to a Border, and the like, when charged with Beasts. Erased, torn off by
Violence. Escoucheon, a Shield whereon Coat Armor is depicted. Expanded,
Spread abroad or set open. Fess, see Chap. 13. Fillet, that which Women bind up
their Hair with; it is when the Chief has a fourth part of it taken off, as it
were, at the bottom. Fitchee, a Spike to fix into the Ground; see Cross. Files,
Some take them for Points, some for the folds of Garments, others for Candles;
the most likely are Points: they are a note of the elder Family, or Heir to a
Family, when rightly placed. Flanch, the Flanck; see Chap. 31. Flasque, a bent
Bow, some say; see Chapter 31. Flory, see Cross; also any thing that is flowred
on the sides. Formee, Broad; see Cross. Frett, it is as when a Square Frame (as
of a Picture, or the like,) has a stick laid on it from side to side, and
another on the other side, which binds in the first stick by crossing over it,
and, turning again on the other side of the Frame, holds all together.
Frettee, is when several Sticks or Battoons are wadled or woven together, like
our Lattice Windows. Fucils, the French take for Spindles whereon Yarn is spun;
we take them for Weavers Shuttles, and the Dutch for Millpecks; see Chap. 32.
10. Frinbrated, bordered or hemmed.
Gads of Steel, see Chap. 32. 10. Gambs, the Paws of Lions, and Beasts of Prey.
Guardant, when a Beast of Prey looks upon you as it were with a full Face.
Gaze, is the same, and proper to Beasts of Chase. Gemews, see Bars. Gobonated,
cut in pieces. Golps, Wounds; see Chap. 32. Gore, the Gore of a Smock, a Note
of Effeminacy; see Chap. 33. Gussets, the Gussets of a Smock; see Chapter 33.
Guttas, Drops; see Chap. 33. 10. Gyrone, see Chap. 31.
Hauriant, is a proper Blazon for Fish, when they are placed as if they hung at
the Line. Heawme and Timbre, are those things that are without the Escoucheon,
as, Mantle, Crest, etc. Chap. 31. Honor Point, see Chap. 34. Humett, is a Term
in Blazon, when any of the honorable Ordinaries are cut off at ends, so that
they do not touch the sides of the Escoucheon; chiefly the Fess, Bar, and
Chevron. Huns, a Bruise in the Flesh; see Chap. 32.
Inescoucheon, see Chap. 31. Indented, toothed, Chap. 31. Ingrailed, is when
the Heads of the Scallops look inward to one another; Chap. 31. Invected, is
when the Heads look outward from one the other; Chap. 31. Jesant, to lie over.
Knight Service, an ancient Tenure of Lands, by which a Man was bound to bear
Arms in War for the defense of the Kingdom. Lambeaux, see Files. Larmes, Tears;
see Chap. 32. 10. Lodged, a Term proper to Beasts of Chase, as Couchant is to
Beasts of Battle. Lozenges, Physical Compositions; see Chapter 32. 10.
Mascles, Meshes of a Net, Chap. 32. 10. Mullet, an imperfect Star, or
Spur-Rowel; see Chap. 32. 7. Mounting, a Term proper to Beasts of Chase, as
Rampant is to Beasts of Prey. Mound, is the Globe or Ball, with the Cross on
it, which the King holds in his hand when he sits in State. Mouline, the Links
of a Mill. Nayant, swimming. Nebulee, Clouds, or clouded. Nombril, the Navil, a
point in the Escoucheon; see Chap. 34.
Orle, an Escoucheon hewed through; see Chap. 31. Or, Gold, or yellow.
Ogresses, Pellets, Gunstones, or Bullets.
Pale, a Pillar, see Chap. 31. Pallet, a little Pale; three or five may be in
an Escoucheon. Paley, when the whole Escoucheon is composed of Pales. Passant,
a Term proper to a Beast of Battle, and is used when they are walking along, or
passing. Pattee, see Form, or Cross. Pattence-Flory, see Flory; only it is
peculiar to a Cross, which Flory is not. Pierced, when there is a hole in the
Charge, through which the Field may be seen. Pendent, hanging down. Pile, such
as is driven into Foundations when it is extended to the lower end of the
Escoucheon; but when it reaches but half way, it is taken for a Wedge. Plates,
Quoits of Silver uncoined. Poix, Pitch. Potent, see Cross. Proper, the natural
color of any thing. Purflued, a Term proper for those Borders that are
composed of Furr. Purpure, Purple.
Quarters, see Chap. 31. Quere, the Tail of a Beast, chiefly used in the Lion.
Quere Double, forked, or two Tails. Quere Double in Saltier, when the two Tails
turn inward at the ends, and cross one the other in Saltier. Quere Inflected,
when the Tail comes between the Legs, and turns over the Back. Quere Renowned,
elevated over the Head,
Ragulee, when the Branches are cut from the Stock of a Tree, etc. leaving some
part on, like the ragged Staff. Rampant, when a Beast of Battle stands upright
on his hinder Legs. Rebated, the point of a Weapon broken off. Regardant,
looking backward. Respecting, when Fish, or Beasts of Chase, stand upright one
against the other; see Combatant. Reverse, turned the bottom upwards. Ribon,
like a Bend, but very narrow, and does not touch the corner of the Escoucheon.
Roundie, see Chap. 32. 10.
Saltier, see Chap. 32. Saliant, a Term proper for Beasts of Prey, when they
are not so upright as Rampant, it signifies to seize the Prey. Scarp, is a very
narrow Sinister Bend. Seiant, sitting upon the Tail. Shaperoon, a French Hood.
Sliped, is when a Branch or Flower is plucked off from the Stock; and not cut
or couped. Socage, an Ancient Tenure of Land, by doing some inferior service
of Husbandry to the Lord of the Fee. Springing, is proper to Beasts of Chase;
when they leap forward and are placed in the same posture that Beasts of Prey
are when Saliant; in fish it is when they are placed in Bend. Steel Gads, see
Gads; and Chap. 32. Sect. 10. Stole, a long Garment or Robe of Honor, the
Keeper whereof is generally one of the Nobility; and styled Groom of the Stole,
by the Vulgar Groom of the Stool. Ten, Orange Color; a Color Stainant.
Tripant, a Term proper for Beasts of Chase, as Passant is for Beasts of Battle.
Trunked, is when a Tree or the like is cut off, so that the inside thereof is
to be seen, and is also depicted round, both which couped is not. Torce, is the
wreath whereon the Helmet in the Crest stands; and is used in their Coats who
are under the Degree of a Baron. Tortuaux, wafers used in the Sacrament (by the
Papists.) Tower, see Castles.
Vamplet, is that on a Tilt Spear which covers the hand of the Tilter. Verdoy,
is a Term proper to a Border charged with Flowers. Vlster, is the Canton on the
Arms of all Baronets, (which is Argent, a Sinister hand in Pale, couped at
Wrist, Gules,) and so called, because it is the Arms of Vlster in Ireland.
Vndee or Vndaded, waved. Volant, flying. Voided, is when the inner side of an
Ordinary or Charge is taken away, so that the Field is seen through. Vulned,
wounded.
Wreath, see Torce. Waved, see Vndee.
THE Number of the House of Peers is about 200 at this time.

The Number of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, that make up the House of
Commons. are 515.

Of Weights and Measures of England, etc.

Avoir du pois has 16 Ounces to the Pound, 16 Drachms to the Ounce, 112 Pound
make an hundred Weight, and 2000 Pound make a Tun.

Troy Weight has only 12 Ounces to the Pound, but then they are weightier than
Avoir du pois.

The least Measure is a Barly-Corn.

3 Barly-Corns make Inch. 4 Inches make a Handful. 3 Handfulls make a Foot. 3
Foot make a Yard. ^ Yard and a quarter make an Ell. 5 Foot make a Pace. 6 Foot
make a Fathom. ^6 Foot and an half make a Perch, Pole, or Rod. ^0 Perch make a
Furlong. 8 Furlongs make a Mile. 60 Miles make a Degree. 360 Degrees is the
compass of the Earth. 40 Perch in length, and 4 in breadth make an Acre of
Land.
1 Pound Avoir du pois makes a Pint. 2 Pints make a Quart. 2 Quarts a Pottle. 2
Pottles a Gallon. 8 Gallons a Firkin of Ale. 9 Gallons a Firkin of Beer. 2
Firkins a Kilderkin. 2 Kilderkins a Barrel. 1 Barrel and half of Beer measure
make an Hogshead. 2 Hogsheads a Pipe or Butt. 2 Butts a Tun.
One Pound Troy weight makes a Pint of Wine. 18 Gallons of Wine ( Troy weight)
make a Rundlet. 42 Gallons make a Tierce. 63 Gallons a Hogshead. 126 Gallons a
Pipe or Butt. 2 Butts a Tun. 2 Gallons a Peck. 4 Pecks a Bushel. 8 Bushels a
Quarter. 10 Quarters a Wey or Last.
The Worth of Gold.
l. s. d. q. One Pound weight is worth 40 0 0 0 One Ounce 93 6 8 0 One
Penny-weight 00 3 4 0 One Grain or Barly-corn 00 0 1 2 The Worth of Silver.
l. s. d. q. One Pound weight is worth 03 0 0 0 One Ounce 00 5 0 0 One
Penny-weight 00 0 3 0 One Grain or Barly-corn 00 0 0 1

England is in length 386, in breadth 276, and in compass 1532 Miles.

Ireland is in length 303, in breadth 279, and in compass 948 Miles.

Isle of Man is in length 28, in breadth 18, and in compass 91 Miles.

Isle of Anglesey is in length 21, breadth 18, and in compass 81 Miles.

Isle of Wight is in length 22, in breadth 11, and in compass 57 Miles.

Foreign Money.
9 Deniers make an English Penny. 9 Soulx make an English Shilling. 9 Francks
make an English Pound. 1 Gilder makes five Shillings and six pence. 12 Blanks,
or 6 Marvedys make a Stiver, or English Penny. 6 Stivers make 4 Quartoes. 4
Quartoes make a Royal.
Licensed,

James Frazier.

THE Historian's Guide, OR, BRITAIN's REMEMBRANCER.

BEING A Summary of all the Actions, Exploits, Sieges, Battles, Designs,
Attempts, Preferments, Honors, Changes, etc. and whatever else is worthy
Notice, that has happened in His Majesty's Kingdoms, from Anno Dom. 1600. to
this time.

SHOWING, The Year, Month, and Day of the Month, in which each Action was done.

With an Alphabetical Table for the more easy finding any thing out.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook, at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar, 1690.

A CONTINUATION OF THE Historian's Guide, OR, BRITTAIN'S Remembrancer, etc.
1687.
N.
Albemarle arrived at Barbados.

Constantinople.

Dec.
Ireland.

James II. to prize Canaries, to be sold at 18 d. the Quart.

Tho. Shafto executed at Wapping-dock, being condemned by the Admiralty.

Jan.
Bedmar, Envoy from the King of Spain, had Audience.

A Proclamation against Pirates in America.

Berwick made Governor of Portsmouth.

F.


Mar.


Chelmsford to enquire after money levied on Dissenters.

Grafton arrived in the Downs.

Exeter new Charter brought down by the Mayor.

1688.
Apr.
etc.

May


Chatham.

Chester Mail robbed night Coventry.

Froud arrived at Plymouth from the West Indies.

de Lent, Envoy from the King of Denmark, had his Audience of Conge.

Jun.
Canterbury, and six Bishops more, committed to the Tower for Petitioning the
King not to read the Declaration of Toleration in Churches.

Roger Strickland with 20 Sail of Men of War in the Downs.

Canterbury, Bishops of St. Asaph, Ely, Chichester, Bath and Wells,
Peterborough, and Bristoll, were brought to the King's Bench Bar, from the
Tower, (where they were sent the 8th.) and arraigned, tried, and acquitted the
29th of May, Instant.

Prince and Princess of Denmark came from the Bath.

Wales, that was said to be born on Thinity Sunday, about 10 of the Clock in
the morning.

Naples almost ruined by an Earthquake.

Garstorf, Envoy from the King of Denmark, had Audience.

Cattaneo, Envoy from the Duke of Modena, had Audience.

Seignior Zeuglestm, Envoy from the Prince of Orange, had Audience.

viz. W. Leffant, John Rotheram, V. Denn, Sol. Lovell, Sir H. Chancy, W. Moses,
H. Trinder, H. Fuller, and W. Tomson.

Tho. Jifford, Mayor of Exeter, Knighted.

The Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, went to kiss the hand of the young
Prince of Wales, the Recorder did present the Marchioness of Powis, his
Governerness, with a Purse of Gold.

July
Elmes, Esquire; Knighted.

Thames, for the Birth of the Prince of Wales.

James, Duke of Ormond, dyed in the 79th year of his Age, at Kingston-Hall in
Dorsetshire.

Windsor, and went the third of August to Richmond, and on the ninth to
Whitehall.

Aug.
Newcastle upon Tyne.

Samuel Gerrard, Esquire; Knighted.

The Mayor of Scarbrough tossed in a Blanket by a Captain that quartered in the
Town.

Judge Allybone dyed.

Sep.
Robert Vyner dyed.

John Shorter, Lord mayor of London, dyed, and was buried the 12th at St.
Savior's in Southwark.

Belgrade taken by Storm by the German Forces.

John Eyles sworn Lord Mayor of London.

Feversham dyed at Tunbridge.

Beaumont, Captain Paston, and four Captains of the D. of Berwick's Regiment,
were at a Council of War at Windsor cashiered for not admitting of Irishmen
into their Companies.

Tho. Lane, of St. Lawrence Lane, Knighted.

Denmark came from Tunbridge.

Coll. Bevile Skeleton, Esquire; sent to the Tower.

Windsor to Whitehall.

Chatham.

Wales came from Windsor to Whitehall.



Sir Tho. Fitch, that made Fleet-Ditch, was buried at Eltham.





London was restored.

October.
London restored by the Lord Chancellor, and Sir W. Pritchard desired to take
the Chair, but he refused it: The same day the general Pardon came out again
with Alterations.

J. Chapman sworn Lord Mayor of Land.

Wales named at St. James's Chapel, James-Francis-Edward.



The Earl of Derby made Lord Lieutenant of Cheshire and Lancashire.

Orange set sail with 50 Capital Men of War, 26 smaller, 25 fire Ships, 300 fly
Boats, Pinks, etc. for England, but by a Storm that Night was driven back again.

Wales was examined before the Privy Council.

Sunderland put out of the Council and Secretary of State.

Preston made Secretary, etc. in his room.

Nov.
Orange set sail with the Fleet that he had put out on the 19th of October. with
about 100 small Ships more than was then, so here was 500.

Orange's Manifesto.

Dover, and lost a small Vessel of about 100 men.

Orange landed at Torbay, nigh Dartmouth, in Devon, with the Dutch Army, about
15000 men.

Lovelace, and thirteen of his party, were taken at Cyrencester, as they were
going to the Prince of Orange.

Lamplugh, Bishop of Exeter, having left Exeter on the Prince of Orange's
coming, came up to London, and K. James made him Archbishop of York.

James for a Parliament.

Windsor in order to his Journey to Sarum.

James came from Sarum to Whitchall.

Coll. Bevile Skeleton made Lieutenant of the Tower.

James for a Parliament to sit Jan. 15.

The French King's Ordinance for a War with the Dutch came out.

Dec.
James's the Countess Dowager of Ossory.

London, which Allarm spread over all England.

The Rabble up in several places for several days, pulling down Mass houses,
and Papist's houses; (among others,) great mischief done to the Spanish
Ambassadour's: It ceased December. 12.

The Lord Chancellor Jeffreys taken in Wapping, and sent Prisoner to the Tower
of London.

London and Middlesex quiet.

The Lords and Citizens waited on the Prince of Orange at Henley with an
Address.

K. James stopped in a Smack nigh Feversham in Kent; with him, the Earl of
Peterborough, Sir Ed. Hales, etc. Four Coaches were sent for him, and on the
16th he came to Whitehall; on the 18th he left Whitehall, and went to Sir
Richard Head's, nigh Rochester; on the 23d he withdrew for France.

Orange came to Windsor.

The Duke of Grafton assaulted in the Strand at the head of his Regiment: The
person shot dead that assaulted him.

The Lords publish an Order for the quieting of the Irish.

Orange came to St. James's, and his Forces to London.

Orange visited the Queen Dowager at Sommerset-house, and this day the Prince
and Princess of Denmark came to Whitehall.

London waited on the Prince of Orange at St. James's.

Orange published an Order to return the Arms into the public Store, and an
Order about quartering of Soldiers.

Westminster, and ordered F. Guine, Esquire; to sign such Orders as were made by
them.

Orange, ordered the French Ambassador to leave England.

Orange two Addresses; the first, of Thanks, etc. and to desire his Highness to
accept the Government till Jan. 22. next; the second, to issue out Letters to
the Coroners to choose Conventionmen, to sit Jan. 22.

London agreed to the said Address.

Orange gave his Answer to the said Addresses.

Orange put out his Declaration, authorizing Sheriffs, Justices, etc. to act;
the same day his Highness received the Sacrament at St. James's by the hands of
the Bishop of London.

Jan.
Orange published a Declaration for the better collecting the Revenue.

Dartmouth with the Fleet came into the Downs.

Orange published an Order for regular Election of Convention-men.

The Sedgmore Frigot lost nigh Plymouth.

Seth Ward, Bishop of Sarum, dyed.

John Darcy, Heir to the Earl of Holderness, dyed.

James Howard, Earl of Suffolk, dyed.

The Prince of Orange published a Declaration for quartering of Soldiers.

Huntingdon was carried through London in order to her Interrment.

Scotland address the Prince of Orange to take their Government upon him till
March next.

Orange's Declaration for paying the Seamen.

Orange's Order for paying and keeping the Soldiers in order.

Westminster; the Marquess of Hallifax made Speaker of the Lords House, and Mr.
Powle of the Commons: then they desired the Prince of Orange to take on him the
Administration of the Government for a farther time; also, ordered that a
Thanksgiving-day be kept Jan. 31. at London, etc. and Feb. 14. in all England.
The Prince of Orange sent a Letter to the House of Lords about settling the
Government.

Feb.
Feb. 6. to be kept a Thanksgiving-day.

A great number of people go to Westminster to desire the Convention to crown
the Prince and Princess of Orange.

Westminster.

Orange's Proclamation to prevent the abuses in Forests.

and that the Prince and Princess of Orange ought to be King and Queen.

Orange landed at White Hall.

Orange proclaimed King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, by the name
of William and Mary, at London; on the 19th at Rippon, Beverly, Lancaster,
Hartford, Ware, Royston, Baldock, Tri^g, St. Albanes, Stamford, Alesbury,
Wendover, Chesham, Beaconsfield, Rewsborrow, Colebrook, Burnham, Ivingo, Marlo,
etc. the 18th at Bath, Cardigan, etc. the 23d at York, Taunton, etc. March 5.
at Bridgewater, Bristoll, etc. the 6th at Sandwich, etc.

William put out a Proclamation for the collecting of the Revenue to continue
as in December last.

William's Order in Council for alteration of the Royal Family's Names in the
Common Prayer.

William made a Speech to the Lords and Commons at Westminster.

London, and the Clergy of the City, waited on K. William at White Hall.

William's Declaration to order the Irish to lay down their Arms by April
following.

William signed the Act for the sitting of the Parliament, and after, the King
and Queen went to Hampton Court.

John Read's House was robbed at Bracket-hall in Hartfordshire.

Brent. Another for bringing in Arms imbezelled.

Mar.
Maynard, Serj. Rawlinson, and Sir Anthony Keck, are made Commissioners of the
Great Seal of England.

Henry Pollexfen, Esquire; Attorney General.

Sir Geo. Treby, Solicitor General.

Lord Willoughby, Chancellor of the Duchy.

Lord Lovelace, Captain of the Band of Pensioners.

Lord Lucas, chief Governor of the Tower of London.

Sandwich his Funeral.

William Harbord, Esquire; sworn of the Privy Council.

The Brandenburghs got a Victory over the French at Nuis.

The Lords and Commons present an Address to stand by K. William with their
Lives and Fortunes. K. William desires their care of the Dutch, Ireland, and
the Fleet.

Arthur Herbert, Esquire; John Earl of Carbury, Sir Michael Wharton, Bart. Sir Tho.
Lee, Bart. Sir John Chichesly, Sir John Lowther, Bart. of White-haven, and
William Sacheveril, Esquire; Commissioners for the Admiralty.

Gilbert Burnet elected Bishop of Saraum, (in the place of Dr. S. Ward,
deceased) and consecrated at Fulham, by the Bishops of London, Winchester,
Lincoln, Landaff, St. Asaph, and Carlisle.

London made an Address to K. William.

Charles Sedly, Esquire; of Southfleet, in Kent, Knighted.

K. James II. arrived at Kingsale in Ireland, and on the 24th entered Dublin on
Horseback, and the next day published three Proclamations.

William made a Speech in the House of Lords, and passed two Acts.

The Parliament addressed the King to put his Proclamation out against the
Soldiers that disserted.

The Sheriffs of all Counties of England were appointed by K. William.

A Proclamation for Crowning K. William and Q. Mary, and Proclaimed at London
on the 20th, for the Coronation to be on the 11th of April next.

The Convention of Scotland met, and chose Duke Hamilton Speaker, and on the
23d sent their Answer to K. William's Letter, by the Lord Rosse.

John Chapman, Lord Mayor of London dyed.

John Berry came into the Downs with a Squadron of Men of War.

England appointed by K. William.

Pilkington chose Lord Mayor of London for the remainder of the year.

1689.
Mar.
K. William signed the Act for a present Aid of 412000 l..

Coot made Treasurer and Receiver General to Q. Mary.

Geo. Lockhart was shot dead as he came from Church at Edinburgh; he was Lord
President of the Sessions of Scotland.

Apr.


Scotland voted the Throne vacant; and on the 4th, voted to settle the Crown on
K. William and Q. Mary; and on the 10th proclaimed them, and declared against
Bishops, and made a new Oath of Allegiance to K. William and Q. Mary.

William passed three Acts of Parliament at Westminster.

Coll. Cunningham and Coll. Richards shipped their Regiments at Liverpool, in
Lancashire, for Ireland.

Duke Frederick Marshall de Schomberg, and William Earl of Devonshire, made
Knights of the Garter; Dr. Burnet, Bishop of Sarum, sworn Chancellor of that
Order.

William's Declaration to secure all Soldiers of English Pay, though sent
beyond Seas.

Ormond installed Knight of the Garter.

Admiral Herbert sailed with his Fleet from Spithead.

d'Avaux, the French Ambassador, made his public entrance into Dublin, and
had his Audience of K. James II. at the Castle.

Colerain.

Charles, Viscount Mordant, (since Earl of Monmouth,) Henry Lord de la Mere,
Sidney Lord Godolphin, Sir Hen. Capell, Rich. Hambden, Sen. Esquire; made
Commissioners of the Treasury.

Jonathan, Lord Bishop of Bristol, elected Bishop of Exeter.

K. William passed the Act for the Coronation Oath, and 2 Acts more,

Dyed at Rome Queen Christiana of Sweedland.

George of Denmark made Baron of Ockingham, Earl of Kendale, and Duke of
Cumberland.

The Marquess of Winchester made Duke of Bolton.

William Bentinek, Esquire; made Baron of Cyrencester, Viscount Woodstock, and Earl
of Portland.

Viscount Faulconberg made Earl of Faulconberg.

Viscount Mordant made Earl of Monmouth.

Lord Mountague made Viscount Mounthermer, and Earl of Mountague.

Lord Churchill made Earl of Marlborough.

Henry Sidney, Esquire; made Baron Milton, Viscount Sidney, of Sheppy in Kent.

Lord Lumley made Viscount Lumley of Lumley-Castle in Durham.

Lord Cholmondly made Baron of Cholmondly, of Which Malbanch, alias Nantwich, in
Cheshire.

Tho. Pilkington, Esquire; Lord Mayor of London, Knighted.

Sir Geo. Hewit made Baron of James-Town, and Viscount Goran in Ireland.

William and Q. Mary crowned at Westminster, by the Bishop of London, and the
day kept with great Ceremony in most of the chief Towns in England.

Westminster to White Hall, to congratulate their Majesty's on their
Coronations.

Herbert arrived at Kingsale, in Ireland.

George Jeffereys, Baron of Wemm, and late Lord Chancellor of England, dyed in
the Tower of London, and was buried in the Tower privately the Sunday night
following, by an Order his Relations got from K. William.

The Sieur de Schmittan, Envoy extraordinary from the Duke of Brandenburgh had
Audience of the King and Queen, at Hampton Court.

George Booth, Esquire; Sir Richard Temple, Sir John Worden, Sir Robert Southwell,
Sir Robert Clayton, Sir Patience Ward, made Commissioners of the Customs.

William to sapport the Church of England, and to call a Convocation.

Sir Henry Fane, Sir Hen. Ashurst, Sir Hum. Edwin, Tho. Frankland, Esquire; Fran.
Parry, Esquire; John Danvers, Esquire; and John Wilcox, Jun. Esquire; made Commissioners
for the Excise.

Danby made Marquess of Caermarthen.

K. William passed six Acts of Parliament.

William, for a War with France, and the King's Answer to it.

The Baron de Schutz, Envoy extraordinary from the Dukes of Lunenburgh, etc.
had Audience of their Majesty's at Hampton Court.

Two Proclamations came out, 1. To encourage French Protestants. 2. For
prohibiting French Goods.

The Estates of Scotland named the Earl of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery, and
Sir John Dalrimple, to go Commissiones for England, to offer the Crown of
Scotland to K. William and Q. Mary, which was done accordingly, on the 11th of
May, in great solemnity, in the Banqueting House at Whitehall, to which place
the Commissioners came by Post.

Portsmouth the Wolf, from Virginia, having on Board the Lord Howard of
Effingham, Governor of Virginia.

William put out two Proclamations for prohibiting Seamen to serve foreign
Princes, etc.

May
William passed at Westminster the Poll Act, and two more.

A Fight betwixt Admiral Herbert and the French at Bantry Bay in the N.W. of
Ireland.

Scotland adjourned to the 21st instant.

viz. Sir Hen. Pollexfen, Nich. Lechmore, Tho. Rookesby, John Thurburn, Will.
Wogan, Will. Pawlet, Nath. Bond, Gyles Eyres, Hen. Hatsell, John Blencow,
Peyton Ventris, John Powell, Roger Bellwood, John Tremain, John Trenchard, and
John Turton, Esqs;

The same day the Judges were constituted, viz. Sir John Holt, Chapter Just. Sir W.
Dolben, Sir W. Gregory, and Gyles Eyres, Esquire; of the King's Bench; Sir Henry
Pollexfen, Chapter Just. Sir John Powell, Tho Rookesby, and Pe^ton Ventris, Esqs;
of the Common Pleas; Sir Robert Atkinson, Chapter Baron, Sir Ed. Nevile, Nich.
Lechmore, and John Turton, Esqs; of the Exchequer.

John Trenchard, Esquire; Chapter Just. of Chester.

Sir Geo. Treby, Attorney General.

John Summers, Esquire; Solicitor General.

Downs, richly laden.

France came out.

A Proclamation against a Libell called The History of the Convention, offering
100 l. reward to discover Author or Printer.

Scotland for their Deliverance from Popery and Slavery.

William gave his Royal Assent to five Acts at Westminster.



William came to Portsmouth, and on board the Elizabeth Frigot dined with
Admiral Herbert, where he declared his Royal intention to make Admiral Herbert
an Earl; and there Knighted Capt. John Ashby, and Capt. Clouds. Shovell, and
the King returned that Evening to Hampton Court, after giving 2600 l. amongst
the wounded, etc. Seamen.

A great Sally by the Protestants at Londonderry, with success.

George Lord Melvill made sole Secretary of State in Scotland.

Frederick Count de Schomberg made General of all his Majesty's Forces, Master
General of the Ordinance, and of his Majesty's Privy Council, Baron of Teys,
Earl of Brantford, marquess of Harwich, and Duke of Schomberg.

Norwich to serve his Majesty, and about 150 more went by Land to Portsmouth on
the same account.

Robert Casor, Master of the Advice, a Cole Ship, beat two French Prizes.

Robert Wright, late Lord Chief Justice, dyed in Newgate.

Plymouth with the Body of the late Duke of Albemarle.

William's Declaration, with an Order of Council, for encouraging Seamen.

K. William's Proclamation for a Fast to be kept about London, on the fifth of
June, on the 19th all England over.

William gave his Royal Assent to the Act for Toleration of Dissenters, and two
Acts more.

The Estates of Scotland read K. William's Letter to make them a Convention,
which they acccepted with thanks, and adjourned to June 5. and ordered all
their Members to meet then.

Engelenburg, Witsen, Odyck, Citters, and Dyckvelt, Ambassadors extraordinary
from Holland, made their public Entrance, and on the 30th had their public
Audience at the Banqueting House at Whitehall.

William gave his Royal Assent to two Acts of Parliament.

Vice Admiral Almonde arrived at Portsmouth with part of the Dutch Fleet.

The Scanderoon Fleet came to Plymouth.

Albemarle arrived at Plymouth, from Jamaica.

The Duke of Somerset was installed Chancellor of Cambridge, at Northumberland
House in the Strand.

Kirk set Sail from High-lake, nigh Leverpole, with his Forces for
Londonderry.

June
Herbert created Earl of Torrington, and Baron Herbert of Torbay.

Assistant Frigate with fourteen Merchant men from the West Indies, came into
the Downs.

John Ashburnham Esquire; Created Baron Ashburnham of Ashburn-Hall in Sussex.

The Dutch Ambassadors had Audience.

Dutch Fleet of Thirty Capital Ships came to the Spit-head.

Edward Mosely, Esquire; of Lancashire Knighted.

Edinburgh Castle deliverd up, by the Duke of Gourdon.

Spit-head.

Londonderry made another advantageous Sally.

Major General Kirk came to the Lough before Londonderry.

Keyseawreart surrendered by the French to the Duke of Brandenburgh.

London went in a Body to take the Oaths at Westminster Hall.

The Parliament of Scotland met, and passed an Act to ascertain King William's
Authority.

William went to the Parliament at Westminster, and passed Ten Acts.

William's Proclamation to offer one Hundred Pound to discover either Sir Adam
Blair, or Doctor Robert Gray, for dispersing King James's Declaration.

John Studer was executed at Kingston for deserting His Majesty's Service.

William went to the House of Lords and made a Speech to the Parliament.

Sweden's Envoy had Audience.

July
Scotland to take away the Supremacy over Ecclesiastical Affairs.

James Ermendenger made Master of their Majesty's Hand-Guns.

A Plot discovered to have fired Edinburgh, and to have destroyed the Estates,
on the Eight instant, on which discovery about Forty Persons were secured.

Pembroke had Audience of the States of Holland.

Argile-shire in Scotland, from Carrick fergus.

William called by Writ to sit as Barons in the House of Lords, Charles Lord
Dursley, and Robert Lord Viscount Lisle, who took their places.

The Protestants at Inniskilling by a Sally beat a Convoy of four hundred, and
took two Firkins of money, and fifteen Wagons of Ammunition and Provisions.



Robert Serle Esquire; appointed to be Consul of Leghorne.

Schomberg left White Hall in order to his journey to Chester, toward his
Relief of Ireland.

Schomberg came to Chester, being received with great respect, next day viewed
the ground where the Camp was to be.

Plymouth, which came from Ireland.

Scotland, was touched with the Scepter.



Anne of Denmark was brought to Bed of a Son, and on the Twenty seventh was
Christened by the name of William, by the Bishop of London at Hampton Court,
where his Majesty declared him Duke of Gloucester.

William passed nine Acts of Parliament.

Salt Petre.

Martin Wiscomb made Consul of Cadiz, and Saint Mary's.

Londonderry in Ireland was relieved after it was brought to that extremity,
that five hundred ninety one Bombs had been shot into the Town, and six
thousand dyed for want of Provisions, and five thousand fighting men left in
it; the same night the Duke of Berwick with King James's Forces raised the
Siege, and went away burning all places they left behind.

Aug.
Scotland betwixt General Mackay, and the Lord Dundee, where the latter was
killed.

Scotland Adjourned to the eighth of October.

Pope Innocent XI. dyed in the 79th year of his Age, and was the sixth buried
at Saint Peter's Church at Rome, after he had lain three days in the Church for
public view.

Torrington with the Fleet nigh the Isle of Silly, designed for the Coast of
Ireland.

Highlake to Londonderry.

Launceston in Cornwall, did present an Address to King William, being the
first of any County of England.

Schomberg set Sail from Highlake, and on the thirteenth landed at Bangor (in
the North of Ireland) with the English Forces.

Waldeck, with the English, and Dutch Forces, and Marshall d'Humieres with the
French, where near two thousand of the latter were killed.

Dunkell in Scotland.

William Forester, and James Forbes, Esqs; and Clerks of the Green-cloth, were
Knighted at Hampton Court.

Francis Blake of Ford Castle, Knighted at Hampton Court.

Carrick fergus in Ireland surrendered to Duke Schomberg after four days Siege.

The North Male Robbed nigh Newington; in Middlesex.

Walker, late Governor of Londonderry, waited on their Majesty's at Hampton
Court, where the King presented him five Thousand pound as a Reward.

The Earl of Levins is made Governor of Edinburgh Castle.

The Earl of Torrington with the Fleet at Torbay.

Walker late Governor of Londonderry, waited on King William at Hampton
Court, and presented an Address.

Sept.
Chester Male Robbed betwixt Highgate, and Whetstone.

d. in the pound.

Hamilton sworn of his Majesty's Privy Council at White Hall.

Edward Smith Esquire; appointed Consul for the Canary Islands.

East-land Fleet of 34 Sail passed by Weymouth.

October the 19th following.

Dutch Ambassadors had their Audience of leave.

John Holt, Lord Chief Justice of England, sworn of the Privy Council.

Thomas Pilkington continued Lord Mayor of London for the ensuing year.

The King left White Hall toward his journey for New Market.

Octo.
Torrington Sailed out of Torbay to the Spit-head.

New River Water.

The University of Cambridge waited on King William at New Market.

New Market.

Bonn taken by the Duke of Brandenburgh after 55 days being blocked up, and 26
days close Siege.

William returned from Cambridge, and New Market to Hampton Court.

Stillingfleet, Bishop of Worcester, Doctor Patrick, Bishop of Chichester,
Doctor Ironside Bishop of Bristol, were Consecrated at the Bishop of London's
Chapel at Fulham, by the Bishop of London, Bishop of St. Asaph, and Bishop of
Rochester.

Westminster, where King William made a Speech to them.

Portugal was brought to Bed of a Son.

London by the Irish Protestants the Anniversary for the deliverance from the
Massacre in 1641.

William was made free of the Grocers Company, and on the presenting his
Freedom Ralph Box Esquire; was Knighted.

George Davis made Conful of Naples.

Nov.
Richard Lord Coot made Earl of Earls of Bellomont in Ireland.

Falmouth a French Vessel taken going to Ireland, with 4000 Arms, and Powder,
and Officers.

Danes, Sailed by Hull for Scotland.

Spanish Flanders had his Audience.

Thomas Kirk Esquire; made Consul of Genoua.

The Danish Forces arrived at Hull.

l. for apprehending of Edmund Ludlow.

Lambert Blackwell Esquire; made Consul of Leghorne.

Walter Doleman Esquire; made Consul of Alicant in Spain.

l. to discover the Person that offered an Indignity to King William's Picture
in Guild Hall.

Dec.
Thomas Papillion, Simon Macne, John Agur, Humphrey Ails, and James How were
appointed Commissioners for the Victualing their Majesty's Navy.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF Persons, Places, and Things, etc. mentioned in the Historians
Guide, etc.
To this little Book an Alphabetical Table was wanting: To prevent the swelling
of the Book, all contracting possible was to be used; so that you have often
but one word for Place, and Person; and sometimes by Name, othertimes by Title:
In the main I hope it will be useful.

A
ABbington, 12, 148. Abbot, 6, 11. Acts of Parliament, 199, 200, 201, 202, 204,
205, 206, 207. Adderton Heath. 22. Address, 196, 197, 198, 200, 203, 204.
Admiral, 159. Admiral Herbert, 202, 203, 204, 205, 207. Admiral Almonde, 207.
Admiralty, 116, 117, 182, 200. Agur, 213. St. Alban's, 41, 45, 80, 93.
Albemarle, 41, 58, 55, 59, 61, 76, 77, 151, 189, 191, 206, 207. Aldermen, 197,
193. Aldern, 28. Aldgate, 3. Alford, 119. Alisbury, 174. Allarm, 196.
Allegiance, 3, 201. Allen, 49, 50, 75. Allington, 10. Alum, 3. Allybone, 194.
Ambassadors, 139, 148, 166, 167, 168, 169, 171, 172, 173, 175, 176, 178, 179,
182, 183, 192, 193, 196, 197, 202, 203, 204, 206, 207, 209, 211. Amboyna, 7.
America, 78, 192. Andrews, 34, 107. Anglesey, 146. Anjou, 156. Annasophia, 182.
Queen Anne, 6. L. Anne, 12, 15, 92, 111, 135. Anstruther, 10. Appleby, 23.
Appleford, 23. Apprentices, 60, 137, 149. L. Arrabella, 5. Argier, 45, 49, 73,
75, 78, 80, 82, 95, 118, 139, 140, 144. Arlington, 86, 93, 165, 171. Argyle,
12, 42, 43, 44, 196, 170, 204. Argyle-shire, 208. Armagh, 37. Armin, 24.
Arminian, 7. Arms, 197. Armstrong, 160. Army, 13, 33, 36, 37, 38, 39, 43, 106.
Arnold, 120. Arthur, 103. Artillery, 4, 156, 160, 163. Arundel, 7, 8, 11, 24,
25, 149, 150. Ascough, 59, 67. Ashburnham, 207. Ashby, 205. Ashenden, 135.
Ashurst, 190. Astly, 29. Aston, 35, 104. Atkins, 116. Attorney Genesis 200, 205.
Aubigney, 19, 20. Auburn, 23. Ails, 213.
B.
Bacon, 6, 8. Bail, 122, 124, ib. Banbury, 19, 26, 30. Bantam, 142, 143, 145,
146. Bantry-Bay, 204. Barbados, 36, 94, 137. Barbary, 183. Barbones
Parliament, 36. Barnardiston, 158. Barnstable, 23, 29. Basing, 26, 29.
Basing-House, 23. Basset, 141. Bastwick, 12, 15. Bateman, 175. Bath, 2, 28, 43,
47. Bawden, 190. Baxter, 170. Beaufort, 148, 160, 165. Beaumont, 194.
Beddingfield, 102. Bedford, 18, 23. Bedlow, 101, 105, 125, 129. Beeston, 24,
29. Belgrade, 194. Bellasis, 51, 58, 63. Bellingham, 10. Belvoir, 20, 29.
Bennet, 46, 148. Bercly, 15. Berkley, 77, 111, 141, 147. Berkshire, 74. Berry,
110, 145, 201, 209. Berty, 29. Berwick, 13, 31, 32, 184, 186, 192, 194. Best,
162. Bethel, 126. Beverley, 18, 23. Bible Engl. 3, 4. Biddleford, 23. Bishops,
15, 16, 17, 19, 47, 180.192. Bisse, 117. Black-friars, 6. Black Rod, 16, 150.
Blake, 36, 210. Blazing-Star, 50. Blackwell, 212. Blood, 80, 124. Bodman, 118.
Bodwin, 20. Bohemia, 4, 11, 43, 45. Bolton, 25, 29, 201. Bonefires, 119, 1 174.
Bonne, 211. Booth, 38, 148. Bows, 159. Box, 212. Boyce, 103. Brabant, 164.
Brackethall, 199. Braddon, 157. Bradford, 22. Bradshaw, 33, 38, 147. Bramhall,
47. Brandenburgh, 109, 200. Brandford, 19, 206. Brandon, 25, 72, 109. Bredah,
7, 39, 64, 65, 66. Brent, 199. Brereton, 30. Breast, 26. Bridgewater, 21, 28,
63. Brill, 20. Bristol, 8, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28, 29, 116, 165, 201. Britain, 2,
145. British Seas, 11. Brook, 2, 20. Brown, 33. Bruges, 98. Buccaniers, 161.
Buckingham, 8, 9, 66, 81, 86, 119, 124, 136, 185. Buckle, 137. Budah, 179.
Bulstrode, 172. Burford, 25, 34. Burleigh, 26, 32. Burlington, 26. Burnett,
200, 202. Burningham, 20. Burton, 12, 15, 22. Bushel, 35. Butler, 5, 163, 189.
Byron, 25, 30.
C
Cadiz, 7, 209. Caermarthen, 204. Calvert, 6. Cambrey, 96. Cambridge, 42, 62,
64, 81, 97, 119, 138, 142, 144, 211. Canary, 67. Canterbury, 18. Capel, 33, 34.
Cards, 163. Care, 117. Carey, 26, 125. Cargile, 137. Carickfergus, 210.
Carisbroke, 32. Carlisle, 28, 32. Carnarvan, 24, 30. Carr, 4, 68, 83, 127.
Carribee, 60. Carteret, 115, 137, 190. Cartwright, 179. Casor, 206. Castle,
96. Castlehaven, 10. Castlemain, 109, 112, 123, 129. Q. Catharine, 45, 46. L.
Catharine, 82. Catharine Laura, 94. Cavendish, 21. Caversham, 31. Cawdron, 157.
Celier, 112, 115, 123, 126, Chalgrove, 22. Chaloner, 22. Chapel Windsor, 23.
Chapman, 195, 201. K. Charles I. 7, 14, 17, 19. K. Charles II. 33, 35, 69, 165.
Pr. Charles-James, 8, 9. Pr. Charles, 1, 45, 6, 1^ 11, 14, 16, 17, 27, 28.
Royal Charles, 89. Charleton, 89. Charlotte Mary, 147. Charter, 7, 148, 152,
160, 161, 162, 163, 164. Charter House, 4. Chatham, 64, 83, 192, 194. Chatwell,
25. Cheapside, 21. Chelsey-College, 3. Chepstow, 32. Chester, 29, 192, 205.
Chesterfield, 114. Chichester, 20. K's Children, 35. Chinner, 22.
Chipping-norton, 25. Cholmondley, 20, 203. Christ-Church, 82. Christian, 124.
St. Christophers, 81. Churchill, 149, 203. Cirencester, 20, 195, 202.
Clarendon, 43, 66, 68, 103, 122, 165, 175, 183. Clark, 163 Clayton, 118.
Cleaveland, 63. Clergy of Land. 199, 207. Clerk, 2. Clifford, 56, 62, 71, 88.
Cobham, 2. Coffee-house, 95. Coin new, 34. Colchester, 32, 52. Coleman, 100,
101. Colerain, 202. College, 136, 137, 138. College Jesuits, 103. Cologne, 93.
Comet, 5, 129, 146. Commissioners, 63, 199, 200, 202, 203, 204, 205 213.
Common Pleas, 205. Commons, 203, Common Prayer, 26. Commotions about Church
Ceremonies, 12. Conde, 95. Condon, 62. Coningsmark, 141. Consecration, 166.
Convention, 198, 201. Convention-men, 23, 198. Convocation, 43, 201. Conway,
113, 132. Coot, 45, 201. Copredy, 26. Corfe, 29. Cornish, 126, 174, Cornwallis,
45. Coronation, 43, 167. Corporation, 45, Cotterell, 181, 183. Cotton, 170.
Covenant, 21, 24, 43. Covenanters, 13. Covent Garden, 10. Coventry, 13, 49, 52,
60, 66, 86. Council, 116, 138. Privy Council, 106, 131, 179, 184. Council of
Peers, 14. Council of State, 34. Courland, 114. Court, 2, 159. H. Court of
Justice, 33. Court Officers, 165. Cowley, 66. Craven, 133. Creation of Honors,
84. Crew, 24. Cromwell, 29, 34, 36, 37. Crown, 80. Culpeper, 123. Cumberland,
202. Cunningham, 201. Curtis, 116, 158. Cuttings, 52. Cutler, 141.
D.
Dalrimple, 204. Danby, 105, 106, 107, 135, 158, 204. Danes, 212. Dangerfield,
112, 127, 170. Daniel, 154. Danvors, 164. Darcy, 198. Dare, 117, 119.
Dartmouth, 29, 149, 159, 197. Dashwood, 154. St. David, 63. Davis, 67, 212.
Dawson, 123. Dean, 108, 109, 117, 124. Deans, etc. 16. Declaration, 134, 192,
194, 197, 198, 199, 205, 206. Deering, 115. D'Estrees, 90, 99. Defiance, 56.
Delamere, 170, 176. Denbigh, 8, 31. Denmark, 3, 5, 7, 8, 41, 62, 74, 75, 153,
154, 164, 166, 178, 183, 186, 187, 189, 193, 194, 197, 202, 209. Dennington,
26, 29. Derby, 36, 195. De Roche, 61. Desborough, 38, 57. Devises, 29.
Devonshire, 202. De Wit, 87. Digby, 29. Diggs, 8. Disnie, 169. Doleman, 212.
Doncaster, 18, 20. Don John, 111. Dorchester, 4, 23, Dorislaus, 34. Dorset, 3.
Dover, 18, 40. Dover Cliff, 115. Douglas, 59. Downs, 13, 201, 207. Downing, 48,
82. Drapers-Hall, 79. Drummond, 164. Dryden, 114. Dublin, 119, 200, 202. Du
Bois, 151. Dugdale, 102, 103. Dudley, 30. Dunbar, 35. Duncomb, 64, 88. Dundee,
209. Dunkell, 210. Dunkirk, 3^, 37, 46. Dunster, 30. Duppa, 180. Duras, 88.
Durham, 14, 175, 176. Dursley, 28. Dutch, 47, 50, 52. Dutch-Fight, 36.
Duttoncolt, 159. Du Vall, 76.
E.
Earl Marshal, 189. Earthquake, 194. East India, 53, 67, 88, 133, 139, 162.
Edes, 176. Edgar, 72, 121. Edgcomb Mount, 29. Edghill, 19. Edinburgh, 35, 76,
113, 114, 130, 132, 164, 207, 208. Essingham, 204. Elizabeth, 133. Q. Eliz. 1.
L. Eliz. 4. Pr. Eliz. 35. Elliot, 8, 140. Ellis, 5, 129. Elmes, 193. Emperor,
5, 6, 97. Episcopacy, 209. Ermendenger, 208. Essex, 1, 4, 10, 18, 20, 24, 25,
26, 27, 31, 43, 87. Estates Scotland, 204, 206. Evertson, 51. Euston, 87.
Exchange, 3, 14, 35, 67, 75. Exchequer, 88, 205. Excise, 23, 152. Exeter, 23,
26, 27, 29, 192, 193, 195, 202. Eyles, 194.
F.
Fairfax, 28, 30, 31, 35, 117. Falmouth, 52. Fanshaw, 60. Farnham, 33.
Farrington, 30, 135. Fast, 206. Faulconberg, 74, 202. Ferdinando, 5.
Fetherstonhaugh, 36. Feversham, 28, 126, 194, 196. Fienes, 24. Fight, 210.
Finsh, 92, 95. Fire, 61, 62, 70, 78, 79, 80, 81, 85, 95, 104, 106, 109, 117,
132, 148, 151, 159. Fireworks, 3. Fish great, 113. Fishing, 3. Fishmonger,
125. Fitch, 4. Fitzharding, 70. Fitzharris, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136. Flanders,
98. Fleet, 11, 40, 42, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 64, 65,
72, 73, 84, 85, 86, 87, 89, 90, 108, 110, 195, 197, 205, 207, 210, 211, 212.
Fleetwood, 38. Florencce, 1. Fly, 60. Forbes, 210. Forester, 210. Foulk, 104.
Fox, 143. Foy, 29. France, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 30, 42. Freedom, 94. Freeman, 132.
French, 1, 36, 58, 95, 97, 98, 109, 110, 131, 139, 184. French K. 55. Friars,
20. Frost, 157. Froud, 192.
G.
Gadbury, 112, 115, 117. Gage, 26, 27. Gainsborough, 23, 148. Gallaway, 12.
Game, 187. Garrisons, 115. Garter, 85, 96, 126, 131, 133, 134, 156, 167, 169,
170, 171, 185, 186, 202. Gascoign, 109, 117. Gauden, 67. Gaunt, 28. Gayland,
60. Germany, 12. Gerrard, 120, 175, 193. Ghent, 95. Gibbons, 35. Gibbs, 148.
Giles, 121, 122, 123, 124. Glascock, 105. Glemham, 28. Gloucester, 14, 23, 40,
41, 144, 209. Godfrey, 100. Godolphin, 159, 161. Godstow, 28. Goodenough, 146,
170. Goods Prohib. 116. Goran, 203. Goring, 32, 34. Gowry, 2. Grana, 142, 143.
Grand Seignior, 191. Grafton, 24, 130, 140, 145, 149, 155, 187, 192, 196.
Grant, 185. Grantham, 18, 20. Gravesend, 170. Gray, 36, 170. Great Seal, 24,
30. Greenvill, 40. Greenwich, 17, 18. Gregory, 105. Greencloth, 210.
Grocers-hall, 17. Guernsey, 36. Guild Hall, 11, 40, 82. Guilford, 172. Guinne,
114, 197. Guinney, 50. Gunfleet, 64, 65. Guns, 139.
H.
Hague, 40. Haines, 37. Hales, 80. Halifax, 109, 147, 165, 198. Hambden, 18,
22, 158, 175. Hamilton, 13, 25, 147, 201, 211. Hamilton Hill, 28, 34, 189.
Hampton Court, 17, 31. Hanover, 130, 133. Harboard, 200. Harcourt, 107. Harman,
65, 70. Harris, 116. Hartfordshire, 199. Harvey, 37, 72. Harwich, 93, 206.
Hatton, 45. Hawarden, 24. Hawkers, 110. Head, 196. St. Hellens, 61, 74.
Henrietta, 26, 42, 73, 76. Pr. Henry, 2, 4. Herbert, 155, 158, 173, 174.
Hereford, 28, 29. Hertford, 18, 24. Hewit, 37, 203. Hewson, 38. Hide, 35, 113.
Hide-Park, 43. Highway, 135, 166. Highway-men, 150, 163. Highworth, 28. Hill,
105. Holderness, 149. Holland, 34, 48, 68, 82, 83, 92, 93, 124. Hollaway, 152,
155, 159. Hollis, 58, 59, 63, 64, 66. Holmby, 31. Holmes, 50, 51, 60, 67, 83,
109. Holstein, 96. Holt, 211. Hone, 153. Hopton, 20, 25, 29. Mr. of the Horse,
115. Hotham, 18, 23, 26, 27. Howard, 4, 15, 75, 91, 136, 198. Howell, 124.
Howley, 22. Hull, 18. Hungarford, 26. Hungary, 12. Huntington, 18, 28, 150,
175. Huntley, 9. Hurst, 33.
I.
Jamaica, 46, 126, 128. James, 44. K. James, I. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 15. K. James,
II. 62, 196, 200. Royal James, 79. St. James's, 33, 49. Jeffereys, 120, 128,
155, 161, 173, 179, 180, 196, 203. Jenkins, 117, 120, 173. Jenner, 155.
Jerison, 128. Jersey, 36. Jesuits, 100, 103, 108, 109, 110, 118, 121, 136.
Jifford, 193. Indemnity, 41. Ingolsby, 39. Inniskilling, 208. Inns of Court,
11. Inundation, 191. Johnson, 47, 181. Joice, 31. Jones, 155. Jordan, 52. Ipre,
98. Ipswich, 73, 139. Ireland, 10, 17, 43, 47, 67, 77, 84, 113, 191. Irish,
199, 202, 208. Ironside, 212. Isabella, 111. Isis, 30. Isle of Wight, 33, 35.
Judges, 15, 17, 121, 130, 176, 177, 178, 184, 205. Julian, 156. Juxon, 12, 47.
K.
Keck, 199. Keeling, 152. Kelsey, 57. Kendall, 64, 202. Kennedy, 178. Kent, 32.
Keysearweart, 207. King, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 40, 41, 46, 47,
52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58, 60, 71, 73, 75, 78, 79, 81, 82, 83, 84, 90, 91, 93,
100, 104, 105, 109, 110, 111, 116, 118, 119, 121, 122, 125, 126, 127, 131, 133,
134, 135, 138, 142, 143, 144, 145, 147, 149, 150, 151, 154, 155, 158, 161, 162,
164, 171, 173, 178, 179, 181, 186, 187, 188, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194. Doctor
King, 176. Kingsale, 128. King's Bench, 156, 205. Kingstone, 32. Kirk, 135,
207, 212. Knight, 142, 179, 181. Kniveton, 24.
L.
Lamb, 9. Lambert, 38, 39, 46. Lampleugh, 195. Landsdown, 165. Landsdown-hill,
22. Lane, 194. Langdale, 27, 32. Langhorn, 100, 101, 102, 108, 109. Langport,
28. Lapely, 24. Latham, 25. Latimer, 31. Laud, 11, 16, 27. Lauderdale, 76, 77,
84, 147. Launceston, 29, 210. Lawson, 49, 52. Lee, 153. Leeds, 20. Legate, 4.
Leg, 19, 26, 142. Leicester, 16, 28. Leighton, 10, 102. Lenox, 37. Lenthall,
46. Lesly, 13. Lesthithiel, 26. L'Estrange, 27, 132, 167. Letter, 198, 201,
206. K's Letter, 39. Levins, 112, 132, 211. Levison, 30. Libellers, 95. Liberty
of Conscience, 184. Lord Lieutenants, 201. Lilbourn, 12, 36. Lime, 136. Linch,
80, 140. Lincoln, 14. Lindsey, 9, 11, 19, 62, 145. Lisbon, 46. Lisle, 33, 172,
208. Litchfield, 20, 21, 29, 30. Littleton, 28, 77, 116. Liverpool, 201.
Lizzard, 29. Lockhart, 201. Lockier, 34. London, 19, 21, 24, 31, 32, 38, 40,
46, 48, 49, 50, 52, 54, 55, 60, 62, 67, 82, 111, 112, 141, 143, 146, 148, 150,
151, 179, 190, 194, 199. Bishop London, 95. Loyal London, 59. London Bridge,
10. Londonderry, 206, 207, 209, 210. Longford, 25. Lords, 35, 106, 158, 184,
188, 197, 198. Lorrain, 98. Lort, 45. Love, 35. Lovelace, 195. Lowdon, 14.
Lucas, 33, 200. Ludlow, 30, 212. Lumley, 126, 203. Lynne, 23. Lynne Regis, 160.
M.
Macclesfield, 171. Macmahone, 26. Macquire, 27. Maidenhead, 31. Maidstone, 32.
Maile, 177, 178, 186, 210, 211. Malbanch, 203. Malmsbury, 20. Man, 36.
Manchester, 71, 80. Manifesto, 195. Mansfield, 7. Marches of Wales, 44, 45.
Mardike, 36. Marlborough, 9, 19, 52, 203. Marriage, 7, 36. Martins-Fort, 8.
Marston, 33. Marston-Moor, 26. Mary, 95, 97, 169, 183. Q. Mary, 42, 46, 52, 75,
76. Pr. Mary, 16. Lady Mary, 10. Massacre, 196, 212. Massey, 27. Pr. Maurice,
25, 27, 30. May, 135. Maynard, 88, 199. Mayor, 138, 193, 194, 195, 201, 203,
211, 213. Mazarine, 43. Meclenburgh, 98. Melvill, 206. Members Five, 17.
Memorials, 4. Mere, 57. Messina, 98. Mew, 163. St. Michael, 75. St. Michael's
Mount, 29. Middleton, 21, 123, 161. Militia, 17. Millenaries, 2. Milton, 203.
Mings, 52, 55, 56, 59. Modena, 92, 119, 187. Monday, 90, 91, 92. Monk, 38, 39,
40. Monmouth, 68, 72, 77, 90, 91, 93, 108, 110, 111, 114, 156, 169, 170, 203.
Mons, 99. Montague, 7, 41, 82, 203, Montgomery, 204. Montross, 28, 29, 31, 35,
43. Moor, 125, 138, 139, 150, 151. Moorfields, 5. Moorlanders, 21. Mordant, 3,
38, 203. Morland, 147. Morley, 39, 58. Morocco, 75, 140, 141, 145, 146.
Morton-Henmarsh, 28. Moseley, 207. Mount Edgcomb, 29. Mounthermer, 203.
Mulgrave, 93, 114, 123, 125, 171, 174. Munster, 57. Musgrave, 164.
N.
Napier, 132. Naples, 193. Nantwich, 203. Narborough, 108. Naseby, 28.
Navigation, 158. Navy, 13, 32. Nevill, 108. Newark, 18, 25, 30, 73. Newberry,
14, 24, 26. New Castle, 13, 14, 26, 30, 193. New England, 146. Newgate, 206.
New Market, 18, 31. Newport, 1, 56, 71, 88. News, 115. Nicholas, 75. Nimeguen,
95, 99. Noel, 142. Nonconformists, 46, 69, 139. Nonsuch, 53, 55, 73. Norfolk,
167, 189. North, 129, 147, 149, 150, 154, 172, 173. Northampton, 9.
Northumberland, 3. North-West-Passage, 75. Norway, 53. Norwich, 34, 206.
Nottingham, 19, 135, 149, 159, 160, 162. Noy, 11. Nuncio, 190.
O.
Oath, 37, 207. Oatland, 31. Oats, 99, 100, 103, 104, 113, 134, 138, 140, 147,
159, 160, 167, 168. Oates-men, 163. Ockingham, 202. Office Kingly, 34. Ogle,
78. Old Bailey, 41, 56, 70, 103, 116, 153, 173. St. Omers, 96. Pr. Orange, 16,
18, 41, 42, 78, 79, 97, 99, 195, 197, 198, 199. Order, 192, 195, 196, 197, 199,
206, 213. Ordinance, 196. Orleance, 78. Ormond, 41, 44, 70, 75, 79, 144, 146,
148, 165, 193, 202. Osborn, 84, 87, 90. Ossory, 59, 61, 90, 117, 120, 125.
Overbury, 5. Oughtred, 40. Owen, 31. Oxford, 7, 19, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31,
54, 55, 74, 75, 133. Oxly, 106.
P.
Packer, 157. Packet-Boat, 164. Padbury, 22. Pr. Palatine, 4, 6, 42, 99, 125,
126. Pamphlet, 121, 131, 150, 158, 159, 160, 162, 163, 169, 170, 178. Paper,
185. Papillion, 151, 162. Papists, 114, 127, 130, 141. Pardon, 39, 177, 194.
Paris, 70. Parliament, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
27, 32, 33, 37, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54,
55, 56, 57, 61, 62, 63, 65, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81,
84, 86, 87, 90, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105,
106, 107, 108, 109, 111, 114, 116, 119, 120, 121, 124, 125, 127, 130, 131, 133,
1^0, 168, 170, 171, 173, 175, 176, 177, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 211,
212, Parma, 127, 129. Parre, 11. Paston, 194. Patrick, 212. St. Patrick, 63.
St. Paul's, 10. Payton, 115, 117, 122, 130, 131, 132. Peak, 80. Pedlars, 159,
181. Pierce, 78. Pemberton, 117, 149. Pembroke, 9, 31, 124. Pen, 37, 49.
Pendennis, 25. Pennington, 15. Penny-Post, 148. Penruddock, 37. Pensioners, 10.
Pepys, 108, 109, 117. Peterborough, 47, 93, 113, 135, 150, 167. Petition, 15,
114, 115, 116, 131, 195. Petitioners, 14. Pett, 67, 125. Philipsburgh, 96.
Phipps, 186. Picture, 140. Pilkington, 145, 201, 203. Pitcher, 33. Plague, 1,
2, 7, 50, 62. Plate-Fleet, 205. Player, 94. Playhouse, 4. Plymouth, 26, 65,
149, 198, 206, 207, 209. Plot, 3, 100, 101, 112, 115, 128, 129, 152, 153.
Poland, 10, 112. Pollexfen, 200. Pontefract, 27, 28, 32, 34. Pope, 6, 113, 129,
210. Portland, 23, 36, 51, 202. Portsmouth, 19, 192, 204, 205, 206, 207.
Portugal, 28, 108, 109, 113, 138, 212. Post Office, 154, 172. Powle, 198.
Powys, 113, 117, 122. Poyer, 32. Prance, 102, 105, 178. President, 201.
Preston, 173, 198. Prin, 12, 15. Prince, 59. Pritchard, 147, 155, 194.
Privy Seal, 175, 184. Prizes French, 206, 212. Proclamation, 118, 191, 192,
194, 195, 198, 199, 200, 201, 204, 205, 206, 208, 209, 211, 212. Protestation,
16. Purbeck, 102. Purse, 35. Pirates, 3.
Q.
Queen, 7, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 47, 53, 54, 167, 189, 193, 194.
Queen Mother, 12. Q. Dowager, 197. Q. Mary, 201, 203. Q. Christiana, 202.
R.
Rabble, 196. Radcliff, 154. Radley, 124. Radnor, 30, 109, 112. Ragland, 31.
Rainsborough, 33. Rainsford, 138. Rawleigh, 5. Rawlinson, 199. Raymond, 116.
Read, 199. Reading, 21, 106. Rebellion, 17. Receiver-General, 201. Recusants,
69. Redwood, 105. Regicides, 41. Reresby, 143. Resolution, 68. Revenue, 199.
Reynolds, 34. Rich, 147. Richards, 201. Richardson, 104. Richmond, 88, 91, 193.
Rioters, 151. Rippon, 14. Roberts, 74. Robinson, 40, 62, 92. Rochell, 9.
Rochellers, 8, 17. Rochester, 4, 86, 161, 165. Roehampton, 71. Romans, 12.
Rome, 202. Rosewell, 162. Rosse, 201. Rossiter, 27. Rouse, 136, 138, 153.
Routon Heath, 29. Roxborough, 12. Royston, 18, 31. Rumbold, 169. Rumsey, 152.
Rundway Down, 23. Rupert, 12, 19, 24, 25, 26, 27, 30, 49, 52, 56, 58, 59, 61,
75, 148, 149. Ruthen, 29. Russell, 153, 154. Russia, 46. Rye-House, 152, 153.
S.
Sackvile, 105. Sacrament, 197. Salisbury, 36, 53, 103. Saltash, 20, 29.
Saltpeter, 209. Salt Water fresh, 151. Sandal, 29. Sandwich, 56, 58, 68, 73,
86, 200. Sanguine, 4. Saniein, 93. Sarum, 197, 198, 200. Savile, 126. Saunders,
150. Savoy, 44, 56, 96, 110, 195, 141. Sawyer, 132. Saxon, 178. Scanderoon,
207. Scarborough, 28, 193. Schomberg, 202, 206, 209. Scilly, 31. Scotland, 10,
17, 28, 29, 35, 42, 47, 62, 64, 108, 109, 116, 119, 122, 124, 125, 128, 136,
138, 141, 160, 163, 166, 198, 201. Scots, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 23, 27, 28, 30,
31, 32, 35, 108. Scroggs, 116, 136. Seamen, 98, 206. Secretary, 206. Sedgmoor,
198. Sedley, 200. Seely, 63. Seneff, 93. Serle, 208. Sergeants, 121, 156, 177,
193, 204. Seymour, 89, 105, 129, 131. Shadwell, 79. Shaftesbury, 87, 88, 111,
136, 137, 138, 139. Shafto, 192. Shandois, 132. Sharp, 107. Sheerness, 66, 71,
75. Sheers, 114. Sheppard, 152. Sheppey, 126. Sherbourn, 28. Sheriffs, 161,
201. Ship Money, 11, 12, 15. Shipton, 127. Shorter, 194. Shovell, 205.
Shrewsbury, 27. Shudley, 20. Shute, 145. Sidney, 113, 155, 203. Silkworms, 3.
Sindercomb, 37. Sion, 31. Skeleton, 194. Skinners-Hall, 121. Slawell, 150.
Slingsby, 37. Smith, 52, 56, 57, 67, 96, 99, 114, 116, 134, 145. Smyrna, 83.
Soldiers, 179, 184. Solicitor General, 200, 205. Sommerset, 4. Southampton, 2,
43, 64, 88. Southold-Bay, 61. Southwell, 30. Spain, 2, 4, 7, 10, 41, 69, 84,
96, 124. Spalato, 5, 6. Spaniards, 1, 5, 6. Speak, 157. Speech, 199, 200, 208.
Speak, 181. Spensor, 188. Sports, 5. Sprag, 52, 65, 78, 83, 91. Stafford, 122,
130. Stamford, 18, 176, 177. Stapleton, 137. Stately, 101. Statue, 35.
Staunton, 165. Stetin, 98. Stevins, 180. Stillingfleet, 212. Stopford, 25,
Stow, 29. Stowell, 30, 45, 117. Strafford, 13, 15, 16, 17, 94. Straights, 74,
78. Stratford, 5. Stratton, 21. Street, 162. Strickland, 192. Stuart, 19, 25.
Sturton, 3. Stutcomb, 25. Suffolk, 198. Summers, 205. Sunderland, 24, 93, 104,
147, 150, 175, 195. Suns three, 26. Supremacy, 208. Surrey, 32. Swansie, 98.
Sweeden, 7, 10, 60, 63, 69, 87, 104. Sweepstakes, 56. Sylvius 118. Synod, 5, 6,
14.
T
Tabago, 96. Tadcaster, 19. Talbot, 57. Tamworth, 22, 28. Tangier, 45, 46, 106,
109, 113, 123, 127, 128, 130, 131, 135, 156. Tasborough, 105, 122. Taunton, 21.
Tempest, 118. Temple, 71, 125. Term, 33, 40, 55. Texell, 51. Teys, 206. Thames,
37, 68. Thanksgiving, 205. Theater, 74. Theobalds, 13, 18. Throne, 198, 201.
Thwing, 118. Thynne, 141. Tichbourn, 122. Tiddiman, 52. Tide, 71, 111, 142,
145. Tiltyard, 62. Tinmouth, 32. Tirconnell, 180, 183. Tiroen, 3, 114, 130,
131, 139. Tiveot, 48. Toleration, 205. Tomkins, 23. Tompson, 34, 128. Tongue,
25, 99, 100, 127, 140. Torbay, 65, 195, 207. Torrington, 29, 207. Tower, 38,
106, 114, 200. Tower Hill, 44. Tower-street, 34. Townesend, 149. Trade, 68, 95,
132. Traquare, 13. Treaty, 2. Treason, 122, 138, 139, 146, 152, 153, 170, 174,
175. Treasurer, 64, 88, 134, 182, 201. Treasury, 106, 202. Treby, 131, 200,
205. Trenchard, 205. Trevor, 71, 73, 85, 168. Tripoly, 46, 94. K's Trial, 33.
Tunis, 46. Turbervile, 128, 140. Turkey, 120, 132. Turner, 5, 48, 80, 152.
Tuscany, 74. Tweddell, 74. Twine, 48. Tyburn, 26, 42, 44, 45, 77, 101, 104.
V.
Valentiennes, 96. Vane, 70, 102. Venetians, 5. Venice, 72. Venner, 42. Vere,
77. Vernatti, 176. Vienna, 153, 154. Villiers, 32. Viner, 85, 194. Virginia, 3,
95, 156, 204. Vivonne, 95. Volunteers, 206. Votes, 32. Vratz, 141, 142. Usher,
37. Utbert, 63. Uxbridge, 27.
W.
Wakefield, 20, 21. Wakeman, 100, 109. Walcot, 153, 155. Wales, 161, 193, 194,
195. Waller, 23, 25, 26, 119, 129. Wallingford, 30. War, 196, 205. Warcup, 163.
Ward, 198. Warder, 25. Warder Castle, 21. Warspight, 59. Warwick, 34.
Wentworth, 9. West, 152. West India, 37, 88. Westminster, 197, 198. Weston,
116. Weymouth, 23. Whitaker, 102, 136, 148, 181. Whitehall, 13. Whitfield, 117.
Wiche, 141, 203. Wightman, 4. Wildman, 45. K. William, 201, 204, 207, 208, 211,
212. Williams, 7, 111, 132. Williamson, 83, 94. Willoughby, 60, 200. Wilmore,
137, 144. Wilson, 138. Winchelsea, 74. Winchester, 202. Wind, 45. Windebank,
15, 27, 28. Windsor, 17, 33, 34, 193, 194, 196. Windsor Chapel, 23. Wine, 154.
Winton, 33. Wiscomb, 209. Witherley, 162. Witness, 120, 121, 132. Wood, 114.
Woodmongers, 68. Woodstock, 30, 202. Wool, 187. Woolcards, 99. Woollen, 177.
Worchester, 19, 25, 30, 35. Wormleyton, 29. Wright, 159, 162, 206. Writs, 33.
Wymondley, 149.
Y.
Yarmouth, 100, 183. Yarum, 20. York, 2, 11, 13, 14, 17, 18, 26, 30, 32, 45,
47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 58, 60, 66, 71, 72, 73, 75, 78, 79, 80, 81, 85,
92, 93, 97, 107, 110, 111, 112, 117, 118, 119, 126, 127, 142, 143, 146, 195.
BOOKS lately Printed.
1. BRitain's Glory, and England's Bravery: Wherein is showed the degrees of
Honor, from the Prince to the Peasant, with the Honor of the Nobles, and
Privilege of the Commons; the proper Places, and the Precedence of all Persons
from the Throne to the Bondsman; as also the Honor of Arms, the Power of
Heralds, Significations of Charges and Coat Armor, a Dictionary explaining
the Terms of Heraldry, and an account of the Orders of Knighthood all
Christendom over, etc. price bound, 1 s. 6 d.

2. A Discourse of Schism, for the use of humble Christians. By Thomas Wight of
Little Henden in Berkshire, in 4o. price 6 d.

3. A Discourse of Prayer. By G. Budgell, Rector of Symondbury in Dorsetshire,
in 4o. price 6 d.

4. Peppa, a new Novell, with the Songs all exactly set to two Voices, in 12o.
price bound 1 s. 6 d.

5. Family Herbal, or the Treasure of Health; showing how to preserve Health,
and long Life, by the rules to be observed in eating and drinking, in 12o.
price bound 1 s. 6 d.

6. A Modern view of such parts of Europe that have lately been, and now are
the places of great Transactions, viz. Italy, France, Germany, Lorrain, Spain,
etc. with Curious Remarks of Antiquity, in 8o. price bound 2 s. 6 d.

7. Compendium Geographicum, or a more exact, plain, and easy Introduction to
Geography than any yet extant, after the latest discoveries, and alterations;
with an Alphabetical Table of the Ancient Names of Places, and another of the
Modern. By P. Chamberlain, of the Inner Temple, price 1 s.

8. The Buccaniers of America, in 2 Volumes complete, in 4o. price 10 s.

FINIS.

