THE ENGLISH CHRONOLOGY: BEING A brief Chronological Account of the most
considerable Public Occurrences that have happened in these Kingdoms, and
other adjacent Parts, since King William the Third's Accession to the Crown.

From 1688, to 1696.

-- Forsan and Haec olim meminisse juvabit. Virg. Aen. lib. 1. OXFORD: Printed
by L. Lichfield, for John Howell Bookseller, 1696.

Advertisement.
THE Author of this Chronology does design to go on with it, and make Yearly
Additions to it.

ERRATA.
Page 36. May 13. should be June 14. Page 37. June 4. should be June 14. Page
49. lin. 2. De^^ry, should be Bishopric. Page 52. Blot out, Slig^ surrendered.
Page 53. Sept. 16. should be 15. Page 54. Oct. 27. January should be December.
Page 55. Jan. 1. Robert Boil Esquire died: and on the 7th. -- Page 88. December. 27.
should be December. 21. Page 98. Oct. 4. Blot out -- The French demolisht etc.
Page 116. Mar. 7. should be 16. And -- Town and -- should be blotted out. Page
116. Mar. 11. should be Mar. 16. Page 117. lin. 3. -- Town and -- should be
blotted out. Page 11^. Put in Mar. 11. Chernock, King, and Keys Executed 18th.
Page 19. lin. 23. Atkinson, should be Atkins. Page 60. lin. 15. Put 22d Day to
Captain Heath. Page 80. lin. 2. Worshipful, should be Honorable. Page 102.
lin. 13. Blot out Innocent XII. Page 104. lin. 20. After Quality, put in --
Being present.
Note, That in the 5 last Pages the Contents of each assigned Page are, by the
Table, to be sound in its preceding Page.

THE ENGLISH Chronology.
1688
Orange set Sail (with 50 Capital Men of War, 26 smaller, 25 Fireships, 300
Fly-boats, Pinks etc.) for England, but by a Storm that Night was driven back
again. Wales was examined before the Privy Council. Sunderland put out of the
Council, and Secretary of State. Preston made Secretary in his room. Orange set
Sail with the Fleet, that he had put out on the 19th of October. with about 100
small Ships more than was then, so here was 500. Orange's Manifesto. Dutch
Fleet Sailed by Dover, and lost a small Vessel of about 100 Men. Orange Landed
at Torbay, nigh Dartmouth, in Devon shire, with the Dutch Army, about 15000
Men. Lovelace, and 13 of his Party, were Taken at Cirencester, as they were
going to the Prince of Orange. Lamplugh Bishop of Exeter, having left Exeter on
the Prince of Orange's coming, came up to London, and King James made him
Archbishop of York. James for a Parliament. The King went to Windsor, in order
to his Journey to Sarum. James came from Sarum to Whitehall. Col. Bevile
Skeleton made Lieutenant of the Tower. James for a Parliament to sit Jan. 15.
The French King's Ordinance for a War with the Dutch came out. James's the
Countess Dowager of Ossory. London, which Allarm spread over all England. The
Rabble up in several places for several days, pulling down Mass-houses, and
Papist's houses; (among others,) great Mischief done to the Spanish
Ambassador's: It ceased December. 13. The Lord Chancellor Jeffreys taken in
Wapping, and sent Prisoner to the Tower of London. London and Middlesex quiet.
The Lords and Citizens waited on the Prince of Orange at Henley with an
Address. James, seeing the whole Nation sided with the Prince of Orange, and
that his Royal Highness's Army increased daily, disguises himself and goes on
board a Vessel bound for France, but being forc'^ back on the English Coast,
near Feversham, he is seized by some Country Men, who mistook him for a Jesuit.
There were likewise with him at the same time the Earl of Peterborough, Sir
Edward Hales, and Others. Four Coaches were sent for him, and on the 16th he
came to Whitehall; and on the 18th he left Whitehall, and went to Sir Richard
Head's, nigh Rochester; on the 23d he withdrew for France. The Prince of
Orange came to Windsor. The Duke of Grafton assaulted in the Strand at the Head
of his Regiment: The person shot Dead that assaulted him. The Lords publish an
Order for the quieting of the Irish. James to London. James returns thither,
where he exercises for a short while a Regal Authority. James leaves London and
goes to Rochester, and thence to France, whereby he Abdicates his Kingdom.
Orange came to St. James's, and his Forces to Land. Orange visited the Queen
Dowager at Sommerset-House. And this day the Prince and Princess of Denmark
came to Whitehall. London waited on the Prince of Orange at St. James's. Orange
published an Order to return the Arms into the Public Store, and an Order
about Quartering of Soldiers. Westminster, and ordered F. Guine, Esquire to sign
such Orders as were made by them. Orange ordered the French Ambassador to
leave England. Orange two Addresses; the first of Thanks, etc. and to desire
his Highness to Accept the Government till Jan. 22d next; the second, to issue
out Letters to the Coroners to choose Convention-men to sit Jan. 22. London
agreed to the said Addresses. Orange gave his Answer to the said Addresses.
Orange put out his Declaration, authorizing Sheriffs, Justices, etc. to act.
The same day his Highness received the Sacrament at St. James's, by the Hands
of the Bishop of London. Orange put out a Declaration, for the better
Collecting the Public Revenue. Dartmouth, with the Fleet, came into the Downs.
Orange published an Order for regular Election of Convention-men. Seth Ward,
Bp. of Sarum, died John Darcy, Heir to the Earl of Holderness, died. James
Howard, E. of Suffolk, died. The Prince of Orange published a Declaration
against Quartering Soldiers in Private-houses. l. in the Treasury. The City of
London agreed to lend his Highness 100000 l. but being raised by Subscriptions
it amounted to above 150000 l. Scotland Address the Prince of Orange, to take
their Government upon him till March next. Westminster. The upper House chose
the Marquess of Hallifax for their Speaker, and the Commons chose H. Powle, Esquire
then they desired the Prince of Orange to take on him the Administration of the
Government for a farther time; also ordered a Thanksgiving-day to be kept Jan.
31. at London, etc. and Feb. 14 in all England. James the Second having
endeavored to subvert the Constitution of this Kingdom, by breaking the
original Contract between King and People; and by the Advice of Jesuits, and
other wicked Persons, having violated the Fundamental Laws; and having
withdrawn himself out of this Kingdom, has Abdicated the Government, and that
the Throne is thereby vacant. Orange with the Regal Authority, his Royal
Highness being acquainted with their Design, sends a Squadron of 12 Men of War
to fetch over his Princely Consort. Orange to the Crown of England. Orange goes
from the Hague, and embarks at the Brill, the people by redoubled Acclamation
expressing their Joy at the Occasion of her Journey; and She is attended by
Five of the Deputies of the Admiralty. London. The two Houses in Parliament
fully agreed, that the late K. James did endeavor to extirpate the Protestant
Religion, and to overthrow the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, and having
Abdicated the Government, that the Throne thereby became vacant; and that the
Prince and Princess of Orange ought to be King and Queen. The same day her
Royal Highness arrived in the River of Thames in the Afternoon. Orange
Proclaimed King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, and in diverse places
of England in this Month. l. to enable him to repay to the States the Sums
which they had laid out for the fitting out of the Fleet that came with him
from Holland, and 600000 l. besides to begin the War in Ireland. William made a
Speech to the Lords and Commons at Westmin. London and the Clergy of the City
waited on King William at Whitehall. William's Declaration to order the Irish
to lay down their Arms by April following. William signed the Act for the
sitting of the Parliament, and after the King and Queen went to Hampton Court.
Herbert with 30 Men of War to cruise on the Irish Coasts, to hinder the French
from landing. Brent. Another for bringing in Arms imbezell'd. Serj. Maynard,
Serj. Rawlinson, and Sir Anthony Keck, are made Commissioners of the great Seal
of England: Henry Pollexfen, Esquire Attorney General: Sir G. Treby,
Sollicitor-General: Lord Willoughby, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster:
Lord Lovelace, Captain of the Band of Pensioners: Lord Lucas, chief Governor
of the Tower of London. Sandwich his Funeral. William Harbord, Esquire sworn of the
Privy Council. The Brandenburghs got a Victory over the French at Nuis. The
Lords and Commons present an Address to stand by K. William with their Lives
and Fortunes K. William desires their care of the Dutch, Ireland, and the
Fleet. Arthur Herbert, Esquire John Earl of Carbury, Sir Michael Wharton, Bar. Sir
Tho. Lee, Bar. Sir John Chichesly, Sir John Lowther, Bar. of White-haven, and
Will. Sacheveril, Esquire Commissioners for the Admiralty. Gilbert Burnet elected
Bishop of Sarum (in the place of Dr. Seth Ward, deceased) and consecrated at
Fulham, March 31. by the Bps. of London, Lincoln, Landaff, St. Asaph, and
Carlisle. Charles Sedly, Esquire of Southfleet in Kent, Knighted. K. James arrived
at Kingsale in Ireland, and on the 24th entered Dublin, and the next day
published 3 Proclamations. The Parliament present his Majesty with 420000 l.
William made a Speech in the House of Lords, and passed Two Acts. The Sheriffs
of all Counties of England were appointed by K. Will. The Convention of
Scotland return their Thanks to the King for the Protection he had allowed 'em.
A Proclamation for Crowning King William and Queen Mary, and proclaimed at
London on the 20th for the Coronation to be on the 11th of April next. The
Convention of Scotland met, and chose Duke Hamilton Speaker, and on the 23d
sent their Answer to King William's Letter, by the Lord Rosse. John Chapman,
Lord Mayor of London, died. John Berry came into the Downs with a squadron of
Men of War. England appointed by K. William. Pilkington chose Lord Mayor of
London for the remainder of the Year. K. William signed the Act for a present
aid of 412000 l. Coot made Treasurer and and Receiver General to Q. Mary. Geo.
Lockhart was shot dead as he came from Church at Edinburgh; he was Lord
President of the Sessions of Scotland.
1689
Scotland voted the Throne vacant; and on the 4th voted to settle the Crown on
King William and Queen Mary; and on the 11th of April, the same day that they
were Crowned in England, they were Proclaimed at the Market-Cross in Edinburgh
with all the Joy that could be expressed. William passed 3 Acts of Parliament at
Westminster. Coll. Cunningham and Coll. Richards Shipped their Regiments at
Liverpool, in Lancashire, for Ireland. Duke Frederick Marshall de Scomberg,
and William Earl of Devonshire made Knights of the Garter; Dr. Burnet, Bishop
of Sarum, sworn Chancellor of that ORder. Ormond installed Knight of the
Garter. Admiral Herbert sailed with his Fleet from Spithead. d'Avaux, the
French Ambassador, made his public Entrance into Dublin, and had his Audience
of K. James II. at the Castle. Irish beat by a Sally made by the Protestants
out of Colerain. Charles, Viscount Mordant, (since Earl of Monmouth,) Henry
Lord de la Mere, Sidney Lord Godolphin, Sir Henry Capell, Ric. Hambden, sen.
Esquire made Commissioners for the Treasury. Jonathan, Lord Bishop of Bristol, made
Bishop of Exeter. King William passed the Act for the Coronation Oath, and Two
Acts more. Dyed at Rome Queen Christiana of Sweedland. George of Denmark made
Baron of Ockingham, Earl of Kendale, and Duke of Cumberland. The Marquess of
Winchester made Duke of Bolton. William Bentineck, Esquire made Baron of
Cirencester, Viscount Woodstock, and Earl of Portland. Viscount Faulconberg,
made Earl of Faulconberg. Viscount Mordant made Earl of Monmouth. Lord
Mountague made Visc. Mounthermer, and Earl of Mountague. Lord Churchill made
Earl of Marlborough. Henry Sidney, Esquire made Baron of Milton, Viscount Sidney,
of Sheppy in Kent. Lord Lumley made Viscount Lumley of Lumley-Castle in Durham.
Lord Cholmondly, made Baron of Cholmondly, of Wich-Malbanch, alias Nantwich in
Cheshire. Thomas Pilkington, Esquire Lord Mayor of London, Knighted. Sir George
Hewit made Baron of James-Town, and Viscount Goran in Ireland. William and Q.
Mary Crowned at Westminster, by the Bishop of London, and the day kept with
great Ceremony in most of the chief Towns in England. Westminster to Whitehall,
to congratulate their Majesty's on their Coronations. The House of Commons
humbly request his Majesty, That he would declare War against the French King;
and promise to stand by him, and to assist him in the carrying on the War, to
the utmost of their power. Scotland sends the Earl of Argyle, Sir James
Montgomery and Sir Joh. Dalrimple to offer the Crown of Scotland to his
Majesty, and take the Oaths of Allegiance, etc. as their Representatives. Six
Hundred Medals of Gold, worth 3 l. a piece, are distributed, each Member of the
House of Commons being presented with one* They had the King and Queen's
Effigies on one side, and on the other a Phaeton, struck with Thunder by
Jupiter, with this Inscription, Ne totus absumatur Orbis. Herbert arrived at
Kingsale in Ireland. James with his Army before Londonderry. George Jeffereys,
Baron of Wemm and late Lord Chancellor of England, died in the Tower of London,
and was there buried privately the Sunday-night following, by an Order his
Relations got from K. William. The Sieur de Schmittan, Envoy extraordinary from
the Duke of Brandenburgh, had Audience of the King and Queen at Hampton Court.
Geo. Booth, Esquire Sir Rich. Temple, Sir John Worden, Sir Rob. Southwel, Sir Rob.
Clayton, Sir Patience Ward, made Commissioners of the Customs. William to
support the Church of England, and to call a Convocation. Sir Henry Fane, Sir
Henry Ashurst, Sir Hum. Edwin, Tho. Frankland Esquire Fran. Perry Esquire John Danvers
Esquire and John Wilcox Jun. Esquire made Commissioners for the Excise. Danby made
Marquess of Caermarthen. King William passed Six Acts of Parliament. William
for a War with France, and the King's Answer to it. The Baron de Schutz, Envoy
Extraordinary from the Duke of Luxenburgh, etc. had Audience of their Majesty's
at Hampton Court. Two Proclamations came out: 1. To encourage French
Protestants. 2. For prohibiting French Goods. The Estates of Scotland, Named
the Earl of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery, and Sir John Dalrimple, to go
Commissioners for England, to offer the Crown of Scotland to K. William and Q.
Mary, which was done accordingly on the 11th of May, in great Solemnity, in the
Banqueting House at Whitehall, to which Place the Commissioners came by Post.
Portsmouth the Wolf, from Virginia, having on Board, the Lord Howard of
Effingham, Governor of Virginia. William put out Two Proclamations for
prohibiting Seamen to serve Foreign Princes, etc. William passed (at
Westminster) the Poll-Act, and Two more. A Fight betwixt Admiral Herbert and
the French at Bantry Bay in the N. W. of Ireland. Scotland Adjourned to the
21st Instant. viz. Sir Hen. Pollexfen, Nich. Lechmore, Tho. Rookesby, Joh.
Thurburn, Will. Wogan, Will. Pawlet, Nath. Bond, Gyles Eyres, Henry Hatsell,
John Blencow, Peyton Ventris, John Powel, Roger Belwood, John Tremain, John
Trenchard, and John Turton, Esqs The same day the Judges were Constituted, viz.
Sir John Holt, Chapter Just. Sir Will. Dolben, Sir Will. Gregory, and Gyles Eyres,
Esquire of the King's Bench, Sir Hen. Pollexfen Chapter Just. Sir Joh. Powell, Tho.
Rookesby, and Peyton Ventris, Esqs of the Common Pleas; Sir Robert Atkinson Chapter
Baron, Sir Ed. Nevile, Nic. Lechmore and John Turton, Esqs of the Exchequer;
John Trenchard Esquire Chapter Just. of Chester; Sir Geo. Treby Attorney General. John
Summers Esquire Solicitor General. Downs richly laden. His Majesty was pleased to
send to the Convention in Scotland, which was converted into a Parliament. His
Majesty declares War against France. France came out. Scotland, for their
Deliverance from Popery and Slavery. William gave his Royal Assent to 5 Acts at
Westminster. The Deputies sent by the Convention of Scotland, arrive at London,
and discharge their Trust, by presenting the Crown of their Kingdom to his
Majesty, and taking the Oaths. William came to Portsmouth, and on Board the
Elizabeth Frigot, dined with Adm. Herbert, where he declared his Royal
Intention to make Admiral Herbert an Earl; and there Knighted Captain Joh.
Ashby, and Capt. Clouds. Shovell, and the King returned that Evening to
Hampton Court, after giving 2600 l. amongst the Wounded, etc. Seamen. A great
Sally by Londonderry Men, with success. George Lord Melvill made sole
Secretary of State in Scotland Frederick Count de Schomberg, made General of
all his Majesty's Forces, Master General of the Ordinance, and of his Majesty's
Privy Council, Baron of Teys, Earl of Brantford, Marquess of Harwich, and Duke
of Schomberg. Robert Wright, late Lord Chief Justice, died in Newgate.
Plymouth with the Body of the late Duke of Albemarle. William's Proclamation
for a Fast to be kept about London on the 5th of June, on the 19th all England
over. William gave his Royal Assent to the Act for Toleration of Dissenters,
and Two Acts more on 28th. The King makes the Estates of Scotland a Convention.
Almonde arrived at Portsmouth with part of the Dutch Fleet. Albemarle arrived
at Plymouth, from Jamaica. The Duke of Somerset, installed Chancellor of
Cambridge. Kirk set Sail from High-Lake with his Forces for Londonderry.
Herbert created Earl of Torrington, and Baron Herbert of Torbay. John
Ashburnham, Esquire created Baron Ashburnham of Ashburn-Hall in Sussex. The Dutch
Ambassadors had Audience. Spit-head. Edward Mosely, Esquire of Lancashire,
Knighted. Edinborough Castle delivered up by the Duke of Gourdon. Spithead.
Kirk came to the Lough before Londonderry. Keyseawreart surrendered by the
French to the Duke of Brandenburgh. London went in a Body to take the Oaths of
Allegiance at Westminster Hall. The Parliament of Scotland met and passed an
Act to ascertain K. William's Authority. K. William went to the Parliament at
Westminster, and passed Ten Acts. William's Proclamation to offer 100 l. to
discover either Sir Adam Blair, or Dr. Robert Gray, for dispersing King James's
Declaration. John Studor was Executed at Kingston, for deserting his Majesty's
Service. Sweden's Envoy had Audience. Mr. Baker, Governor of Londonderry,
dies very much lamented. Scotland to take away the Supremacy over
Ecclesiastical Affairs. A Plot discovered to have Fired Edinburgh, and to have
destroyed the Estates, on the 8th instant, on which Discovery about Forty
persons were secured. Irish in Argile-shire in Scotland from Carrickfergus.
William called, by Writ, to sit as Barons in the House of Lords, Charles Lord
Dursley, and Robert Lord Viscount Lisle, who took their Places. The Protestants
at Inniskilling by a Sally beat a Convoy of 400, and took 2 Firkins of Money,
and 15 Wagons of Ammunition and Provisions. l. to discover any High-way-man.
Rob. Serle Esquire appointed to be Conful of Leghorne. Schomberg left Whitehall in
order to his Journey to Chester, toward the relief of Ireland. Scotland.
Schomberg came to Chester. Scotland, was touched with the Scepter. Spanish
Ambassador had his public Audience. Ann brought to Bed of a Son, and on the
27th was Christened by the Name of William, by the Bishop of London at Hampton
Court, where his Majesty declared him Duke of Gloucester. William passed Nine
Acts of Parliament. Derry Men made a Sally, and killed 300 of the Enemy,
besides Officers. The Garrison is reduced to 4456 Men, and in great Extremity.
Kirk broke the Boom, and so relieved them to their unexpressible Joy, for they
only reckoned on Two Days Life, having only 9 Horses left; and of 7500 Men
Regimented, they had but 4300 left. On the last of July the Enemy ran away in
the Nighttime, robbed and burnt all before them for several miles. Thus after
105 days being close besieged, by near 20000 Men, God delivered them. The Enemy
lost about 9000 Men, and 100 of their best Officers: From April 24th to July
22. 587 Bombs were thrown into the City. Col. Woolsely, with 2000 Inniskilling
Men, Fights Mac-Carty's Army of 6000, gives them a total Rout, takes Mac-Carty
Prisoner, with all their Artillery, Arms, etc. and 400 Prisoners, with the loss
of but 20 Men, and 50 wounded. Scotland betwixt General Mackay, and the Lord
Dundee, wherein the latter was killed. Scotland adjourned to the 8th of
October. Pope Innocent XI. died in the 79th Year of his Age. Torrington, with
the Fleet near the Isle of Silly, designed for the Coast of Ireland. High-lake
to Londonderry. Launceston in Cornwall, did present an Address to K. William,
being the first of any County in Engl. Schomberg set Sail from Highlake, and on
the 13th landed at Bangor (in the North of Ireland) with the English Forces.
Waldeck, with the English and Dutch Forces, and Marshall d'Humieres, with the
French, where near 2000 of the latter were killed. Antrim in Ireland taken. The
Enemy quit Belfast. Drunkell in Scotland. William Forrester, and James Forbes
Esqs and Clerks of the Greencloth, were Knighted at Hampton Court. Fran. Blake,
of Ford-Castle, Knighted at Hampton Court. Carrickfergus in Ireland surrendered
to Duke Schomberg, after 4 days Siege. Walker of Londonderry waited on their
Majesty's at Hampton Court, where the King presented him with 5000 l. as a
Reward. The Earl of Levins is made a Governor of Edinburgh Castle. The Earl of
Torrington with the Fleet at Torbay. d. in the Pound. Hamilton sworn of his
Majesty's Privy Council at Whitehall. Schomberg, upon the Burning of Newry,
sends a Trumpet to the Duke of Berwick, to let him know, That if they went on
to Burn in this barbarous manner, he would not give any Quarter, hereupon the
Irish abandoned Dundalk without doing any harm to the Town. Edw. Smith, Esquire
appointed Conful for the Canary Islands. October. 19. following. Lloyd, with his
Inniskilling Forces, in all about 1000 Horse and Foot, killed 700, took 300
Prisoners, and O-Kelly their Commander, and 40 Officers, 8000 Head of Cattle,
etc. John Holt, Lord Chief Justice of England, sworn of the Privy Council.
Ireland, carried on by some French Papists. Du-Plissy and Five more were
Executed. 150 Papists were secured and sent into England. Tho. Pilkington
continued Lord Mayor of London for the ensuing Year. The Fleet under the Earl
of Torrington sailed out of Torbay to the Spithead. Lloyd with a Party of
Inniskilling Men, took the Castle of Dramnasna and James-Town. Great Mortality
in the Irish Camp, of which 15000 died. Cambridge waited on King William, at
New Market. Bonn taken by the Duke of Brandenburgh after 55 Days being blocked
up, and 26 Days close Siege. William returned from Cambridge and New Market to
Hampton Court. Stillingfleet, Bishop of Worcester, Dr. Patrick, Bishop of
Chichester, Dr. Ironside, Bishop of Bristol, were Consecrated at the Bishop of
London's Chapel at Fulham, by the Bishop of London, Bishop of St. Asaph, and
Bishop of Rochester. Westminster, where K. William made a Speech to them. l.
more, to carry on the War in Ireland. Queen of Portugal was brought to Bed of a
Son. London by the Irish Protestants. William was made Free of the Grocer's
Company, and on the presenting of his Freedom Ralph Box, Esquire was Knighted.
George Davis was made Consul of Naples. Irish Seaport Towns under his
Obedience. Schomberg. Richard Lord Coot made Earl of Earls of Bellomont in
Ireland. Coll. Lloyd defended Sligoe against all Sarsfield's Forces, till all
their Ammunition was spent, and then in the Night made a handsome Retreat,
Falmouth a French Vessel, taken going to Ireland, with 4000 Arms and Powder,
and Officers. Thomas Kirk, Esquire made a Consul of Genoua. l. for apprehending of
Edm. Ludlow. Lambert Blackwell, Esquire made Consul of Leghorne. Walter Doleman,
Esquire made Consul of Alicant in Spain. l. to discover the Person that offered an
Indignity to K. William's Picture in Guild Hall. Irish defeated at the Newry,
by Brigadeer Steward, 30 killed, and 7 taken Prisoners. Don Stantiago del
Castillo Knighted. Tho. Papillion, Simon Macne, John Agur, Humphrey Ayls and
James How, appointed Commissioners for the Victualing their Majesty's Navy.
Woolsely marched out with a small Party of the Inniskilling Forces in the Night
to Belturbet: upon the first Summons they yielded. Ireland and made Excursions
into the Enemies Quarters, and brought away several Thousand Head of
Black-Cattle, Sheep, and small Horses, or Garrons. Deal. His Majesty gave his
Royal Assent to an Act of 2 s. in the Pound for one Year; and an Act for
settling the Succession of the Crown, etc. Tho. Miller of Chichester Knighted.
etc. Henry Goodrick, Knight. and Baron. sworn of his Majesty's Privy Council. Will.
Cheney, Esquire Sir John Knatchbull, Bar. and Sir William Pultezey, Knight, his
Commissioners for executing the Office of the Keeper of the Privy Seal.
Ireland, to be observed on March 12th. and so on the Third Wednesday in every
Month. London, and offer to serve as Volunteers in his Majesty's Army in
Ireland. Danes Landed at Belfast, and the next day the Prince of Wirtenburgh
their General landed with many more. Kingsale, with 2 Generals, the Count de
Lauzun, and the Marquess de Lery; in exchange for these, the late K. James sent
King Lewis, sometime after, 5000 Irish, under the Command of General Mac-Carty.
Scotland grant his Majesty a Subsidy of 200000 l. Right to the Crown of Engl.
John Lowther, of Lowther, Bar. Vice-Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household.
Richard Hambden, Esquire (who is made Chancellor of the Exchequer) Tho. Pelham, Esquire
and Sir Steph. Fox, Lords Commissioners of the Treasury. His Majesty appointed
Henry Guy, Esquire to be one of the Commissioners of their Majesty's Customs, in
the Place of Mr. Pelham. Westminster pursuant to their Majesty's Writs of
Summons.
1690
PUry Cust of Stamford, Esquire was Knighted. Clovesly Shovel arrived at Belfast,
with Men, Arms and Ammunition, and Money to pay the Army. Waldeck arrived at
Mastricht. Scotland met. Rich. Viscount Lumley created Earl of Scarbrough in
the County of York. Lord de la Mere created Earl of Warrington in the County of
Lancaster. Henry Lord de Gray of Ruthen. created a Viscount of this Kingdom, by
the Name and Style of Viscount de Longueville. William Hussy Esquire appointed his
Majesty's Ambassador at the Ottoman-Court, and at the same time Knighted.
Clovesly Shovel ventured into the Bay of Dublin; King James and many Thousand
People were Spectators. English Kitch, and a French Privateer. James I. and the
Duties which K. Charles and K. James II. enjoyed; and moreover, allow him to
dispose of all the Subsidies as he shall think fit, for the space of 4 Years.
Willoughby of Eresby, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, introduced into
the House of Peers. Chester, where he was to embark for Ireland, and is
received with all possible Expressions of the Affection, Honor and Respect
which Subjects owe to so glorious a Prince. Chester for Ireland. The Garrison
of Charlemont in Ireland surprised by an Ambuscade in the Night; and on the
Carrickfergus, whence he goes by Land to Belfast, and finds his Army consisting
of 62 Squadrons of Horse, and 54 Battalions, which might make up in all about
40000 Men. Tin Farthings given forth by his Majesty's Authority. The Parliament
adjourned to the 7th, of July next. Moleneaux, Tildesly, Townly, Standish,
Butler, Goodwin a Romish Priest, etc. Ralph de la Val, Knighted. Tho.
Pilkington Knight. elected Lord Mayor for the remaining part of this Year. Charles,
Marquess of Winchester, Lord Chamberlain to the Queen, was sworn one of the
Lords of their Majesty's Privy Council. Sir John Trever Knight. Speaker of the
House of Commons, Sir William Rawlinson Knight. and Sir George Hutchins Knight. were
sworn Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of England. Ireland; on the 16th he
arrived at Belfast. White-house 2500 Horse from Scotland. Dondalk. the River
Ade^ in Ireland, to find out a Place for his Army to encamp in. William encamps
within sight of the Irish Army: Is wounded with a Canon-Ball, viewing the
Enemies Camp, it took away a piece of his Coat, Wastcoat and Shirt, raised the
Skin on the blade of his right Shoulder and drew a little Blood; his Majesty,
after a Plaster applied, continued on Horseback without the least concern,
till 4 in the Afternoon. Peace between the Great Mogul, and and the English
East India Company, more fully concluded. Schomberg Headed the Dutch
Foot-Guards, and the King the Inniskilling Horse, telling them they should be
his Guards that Day. In passing the Boyne Dr. Walker was killed; and in a
little Village Duke Schomberg was killed with a Carbine-shot in the Neck, and
three Cuts over the Head, and one on his Face. But K. William quickly defeated
the whole Irish Army. K. James fled to Dublin with about 200 Horse, all in
disorder. There was not above 1600 killed on both sides. Dublin opened her
Gates to her Victorious Monarch. Wexford Declared for his Majesty. L --, Earl
of A -- Lord M --, Earl of C -- Viscount P -- etc. Dublin. French in Torbay,
and they landed a 1000 Men at Tinmouth, and Fired it. The Empress delivered of
a Princess: The Names given it were Maria-Margarita-Gabriella
Magdalena-Josepha-Antonia. Waterford, though defended by 25 big Canons, and a
strong Garrison, who had yet 300 Bushels of Wheat to subsist on. Torbay.
Torbay. Limerick besieged. Ric. Haddock, Henry Killigrew Esquire and Sir John Ashby
were appointed Joint-Admirals of their Majesty's Fleet. The King ventures
within Canonshot of Limerick, to take a Survey of that Place. Monsieur Catinat
advanced toward the City of Salusses. Duke of Savoy fought him, but was forced
to retreat. The 19th day the Governor and Garrison of Salusses marched out of
the Town, and the French took Possession of it. After this Catinat made himself
Master of Savilliana, which is a large Town, 15 Miles from the former. The
Venetians conquered Neapol^ di Malvatia, the only remaining strong Hold which
the Infidels held in the Morea. Ireland to his Obedience, takes Ship at
Doncanon for England. William arrived at Kingsweston not far from Bristol, and
on the 10th day came to Kensington. He Prorogued the Parliament to the 2d of
October. Limerick. London from the Campaign in Ireland, and is received with
all possible Expressions of Joy for the great Victories he gained in Ireland.
Scotland confirm the Oath of Allegiance, which all the Inhabitants of the
Kingdom, especially those in Places of Trust, were to take. Sidney, and Tho.
Coningsby Esquire took the Oaths of chief Governors of Ireland. The Marquess de
Herbeville, Governor of Pignerol, made himself Master of the Town and Castle
of Villa-Franca. It lies midway between Pignerol and Carmagnola. Savoy is
reduced under the Obedience of the King of France, only the Fortress of
Montmelian holds out still. Count Guido de Staremburgh Governor of Nissa
surrendered the Town to the Turks upon Articles concluded the 8th of the last
Month. Ireland. Holyhead, and several Miles distant, but did no hurt.
Barnstable. The Parliament return their Thanks to her Majesty, for her wise
man-agement of Affairs during the King's absence in Ireland. France. James
Campbel, and Archibald Montgomery did forcibly seize, and carry away Mrs. Mary
Wharton, an Heiress. 100 l. Reward offered for the first, 50 l. for the other.
Tetau took the City of Cork. Tho. Baker Esquire appointed his Majesty's Consul at
Argiers. Princess of Denmark delivered of a Daughter, who lived but 2 hours.
Kinsale surrendered. France. etc. for one Year. de la Tour, who was come with
the Character of Envoy Extraordinary from the Duke of Savoy, to congratulate
his Majesty's happy Accession to the Crown. Belgrade taken by the Turks. l. for
the Building of 30 Men of War. Cutts created Baron of the Kingdom of Ireland,
by the Style of Baron Cutts, or Gowran. Lippa taken by the Turks. London, who
spent a vast Sum of Money on that Occasion. etc. John Johnson Executed at
Tyburn for stealing of Mrs. M. Wharton. Henry Lord Viscount Sidney one of his
Principal Secretaries of State. Suza, the most convenient Passage out of France
into Italy, taken from the Duke of Savoy. The Duke of Lorrain died suddenly.
John Trevor Knight. Speaker of the House of Commons was sworn of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council. Several Conspiracies discovered against the
Government, and the Person of his Majesty, one in Scotland, and one in London,
to bring in King James. The Lord Preston was one of the Actors, and Ashton
another. etc. for 4 Years, and for doubling the Excise upon them for a Year;
then the Parliament adjourned to March 31st. London. with a design to go over
into Holland to confer with several Confederate Princes; but is put back by
contrary Winds. Kensington. Holland, attended by the Dukes of Ormond and
Norsolk, and Earls of Portland, Devonshire and Dorset, the Bishop of London,
and several other English Noblemen. Sir Ric. Grahme Bar. Vise. Preston, John
Ashton and Edm. Elliot were Arraigned at Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey for
Treason. and ready to be cast away; at last through many hazards, he Lands at the
Goree. Hague: which was the first time, since His happy Accession to the Crown
of England, that he came there to Honor the States with His Royal Presence;
and though he came as incognito, yet he is received with the noise of all the
Canon, Ringing of Bells, etc. Alexander the Eighth dies. Aged 81. Having sat
15 Months and 22 Days; being Elected on the 6th of October. 1689. Will. Pen and
James Grahme. Bavaria and Bran denburgh, the Marquess of Castanaga, Governor
of the Low Countries, the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel, and several other Persons
of Eminent Quality, came to the Hague to negotiate some Business concerning the
League; so that there was at that time an appearance of 50 Princes, Counts,
General Ossicers, and Persons of the first Rank, 14 English Lords, above 30
Ambassadors, and a great number of Princesses and Ladies. Dutch Commonwealth,
and royally entertained all the Princes, Lords and Ladies, who had waited on
him at the Hague, goes to Breda at the Head of his Army, with a design to
relieve Mons. The French became Masters of Villa-Franca, and the Fort of St.
Auspice, and Montalban near Nice. Edw. Villers created Baron and Viscount of
this Kingdom, by the Style of Baron Villers of Hoo, and Viscount Villers of
Dartford in the County of Kent.
1691
MOns Besieged, on the 8th Capitulated: Had they held out 3 or 4 days longer
they had been relieved; but the Burghers being terrified by the Bombs, forced
the Governor to surrender. Zel with the most noble Order of the Garter at the
Hague. Whitehall, and burnt down some Lodgings before it came near the King and
Queen's Apartments. London to provide for the safety of his Subjects; and there
he receives advice of the great Victory the Earl of Athlone had obtained over
the French in Ireland. Tillotson, Dean of St. Paul's, is promoted to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury; Dr. Patrick Bishop of Chichester, is translated
to the Bishopric of Ely; Dr. Cumberland is promoted to Peterborough, Dr. Moor
to Norwich; Dr. Grove to Chichester. Dr. Sherlock to the Deanery of St. Paul's;
Dr. Comber to the Deanty of Durham; Mr. Talbot to the Deanery of Worcester; Dr.
Woodward to the Deanery of Sarum; Dr. Fowler to the Deanery of Gloucester. Sir
Bevile Ganvill Knight. had a Patent for the Office of Master of their Majesty's
Swans over all England, also Keeper of the Water, or Mere of Whittlesmore. Nice
surrendered to the French. Harwich: the next day he embarks for Holland, and
the 3d he arrives at Oranje Polder, whence he goes to the Hague, where every
body is surpised at the speed he had made. Loo, to divert himself with
Hunting. Lamplugh late Archbishop of York, their Majesty's nominated Dr.
Sharp, Dean of Canterbury to succeed. Jo. Tillotson elected Archbishop of
Canterbury. J. Moor elected Bishop of Norwich. Geo. Hooper the Deanery of
Canterb. John Tillotson consecrated at St. Mary-le-bow in London, etc. de
Boufflers disappointed in his design against Liege. Ballymore was taken by
General Ginkle. Sharp elected Archbishop of York Ginkle does, after some
resistance, make himself Master of the English City of Athlone, a strong Place
on the River Shannon. Ireland lay Siege to the Irish of Athlone, which was
defended by a strong Castle, and infinitely better Fortified than the other.
August. Ginkle storms the City of Athlone, to the cost of above 1000 Slain, and
300 taken Prisoners on the Enemies side. John Sharp, Dr. John Moor, Dr. Richard
Cumberland, Dr. Fowler, were Consecrated at St. Mary-le-bow, by the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury. Pignatelli chosen Pope by 53 Voices of 61 that
composed the Conclave: he is called Innocent the XII. Irish beaten at Agrim:
about 5000 killed, 500 private Soldiers Prisoners, and above 100 Commanders,
etc. Jacova taken by the Imperialists. Galloway surrendered to our Army. Don
Pedro de Ronguillo Conde de Gramedo, Ambassador from the King of Spain.
October. Beaumont (a small walled Town) was wonderfully preserved from a Ball
that fell near the Tree whence the King had not been gone 2 minutes. Sligo
surrendered. Barcelona Bomb'd by d'Estrees. Alicant ruined by the French.
Tyrconnel died at Limerick for Grief (as some think) to see the bad Condition
of his Master's Affairs: Buried the next Day. Vaudemont with 40000 Florins, and
a Palace in Brussels richly furnished. The King made General Kirk, Sieur
Douglas, and Sieur Mackay, Lieutenant Generals of his Army, Brigadier Trelawny,
Major General. French to Fight him, blows up the Fortifications of Beaumont
before the Duke of Luxemburgh's Face; and then leaves his Camp, to divert
himself at Loo. de Luxemburgh, who had so carefullyavoided the Fight while the
King was with the Army, no sooner hears that he is gone, but he falls on our
Rear with all his Horse, but is so vigorously repulsed by the Prince de
Waldeck, that he loses many of his Men, and comes short of his Design. Breda,
and thence goes to Loo. Ireland takes the City of Slego. Loo, and on the 3d of
October came to the Hague, where he was present at the Council of State; and
having entreated the States, that they would increase their Fleet, and hasten
their Preparations against the next Campaign, and disposed of several vacant
Places in the Netherlands, he set out the 18th for England. Lewis encamped
before great Waradin. Limerick surrendered. Cutts took Possession of it.
William happily Landed at Marigate, in the mouth of the River Thames. He took
Coach for London, the Coach over-turned by the way, though without any harm to
his Royal Person. Great joy in the City for his safe Return. Tho. Stamp was
elected Lord Mayor of London. Montmelian: and in January it was surrendered.
Dr. Barlow died: Dr. Tennison succeeded him. Lord Dartmont (King James's
Admiral) died of an Apoplexy in the Tower of London, where he was Prisoner.
John Powel Esquire was Knighted. Will. Hussy (his Majesty's late Ambassador at
the Ottoman-Port) his Majesty appointed Will. Harbord Esquire to succeed him. Turks
defeated before Great Waradin: 3000 killed, 24 Colors, and 2 Kettle-Drums
taken, which it is believed will hasten the Surrender of that Place. Majesty's
Palace at Kensington, which burnt down the Stone-Gallery, but stopped before it
reached their Majesty's Apartments. Ireland, in reducing it. Waradin is closely
blocked up. Montmelian surrendered to the French. His Majesty assented to an
Act for granting their Majesty's certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, etc. for
one Year; and other Acts. An Act granting an aid to their Majesty's of 165
170052 l. 18 s. Mr. Boil died: on the 17th Bishop of Salisbury preached his
Funeral Sermon. A great Snow this Month. John Goldsborough Knighted. Ginkle
created Earl of Athlone in the County of Roscoman, and Baron of Aghram in the
County of Galloway in Ireland. and several other Acts. The Parliament adjourned
themselves to the 12th of April. Laurence Earl of Rochester, Ric. Earl of
Ranelagh, Charles Lord Cornwallis, and Sir Edw. Seymour Bar. were sworn of
their Majesty's Honorable Privy Council. The Right Honorable Will. Earl of
Bedford took the usual Oath as Lord Lieutenant of the County of Middlesex. His
Majesty was pleased to Constitute Earl of Pembroke Lord Keeper of their
Majesty's Privy Seal. The Right Honorable Charles Lord Cornwallis is appointed
by His Majesty to be Commissioner of the Admiralty in the place of the Earl of
Pembroke. The Right Honorable Edward Seymour Bar. and Charles Montague Esquire are
Constituted, by his Majesty, Commissioners of their Majesty's Treasury, in the
places of Sir John Lowther of Lowther Baronet, Vice-Chamberlain of His
Majesty's Household, and Thomas Pelham Esquire who have resigned the same. Henry
Lord Viscount Sidney, one of their Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State,
their Majesty's Major Lieutenant General, and General Governor of the Kingdom
of Ireland. Kensington for Holland. Anthony Lord Viscount Faulkland, and Robert
Lord Lexington, were sworn of their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
April to the 24th of May. Tho. Coningsby Esquire one of the Lord Justices of
Ireland, created a Baron of that Kingdom. Blessington, created Viscount of
Ireland, by the Name and Style of Viscount Gallway, and sworn of their
Majesty's Privy Council at Dublin. John Dyve Esquire sworn Clerk of the
Privy Council. Apr. 8th. and from that time on the Second Wednesday in every
Month. Sommerset-House, and lies at Rochester, to morrow at Canterbury, and on
Friday at Dover, and so for Calis, and from thence to Portugal.
May. Sion-House, and sell in Labor, near Two Months before her time, of a
Son, who was immediately Christened George, and died an Hour after. His Majesty
has been graciously pleased to create by Patent the Right Honorable Sir Henry
Capell, Baron of Tewkesbury in the County of Gloucester. Diep. Geo. Treby,
their Majesty's late Attorney General, was sworn before the Lords Commissioners
of the Great Seal, Lord Chapter Justice of the Common Pleas. Also Sir John Summers
was sworn their Majesty's Attorney General, and Tho. Trevor Esquire Solicitor
General. And this day my Lord Chapter Justice took his Place in the Court of
Common Pleas. S --, E. of L -- E. of M --, E. of D --, etc. June, by
Proclamation. Oneglio burnt by the French: The Militia of the County relieved
it. An English Protestant Gentleman belonging to the late K. James's Family,
dying at St. Germain's, after he was buried in the Field, was dug up, and
dragged about the Streets, and torn in Pieces by the Rabble. De la Val burnt,
under Cape de Wyke near the Shore, the Royal-Sun, carrying 104 Guns; as also
the Admirable of 102 Guns and the Fort of 80 Guns, with 2 Frigates, and 3 of
lesser Rank. Russel sent in Vice Admiral Rook to burn the French Ships which he
had forced ashore near La Hogue; he burnt 21 of the biggest Ships, besides 2
Frigates, and other small Vessels. The English lost only some Fireships which
were spent upon Action; and besides Rear-Admiral Carter and Colon. Hastings, we
have not lost one Commission Officer. The Admiral ordered a Thanksgivingday on
the 27th Instant throughout the Fleet for this great Victory. Capt. Heath burnt
Tourville's Ship, the Royal-Sun; Capt. Greenway burnt the Conquerant; the
Admirable was burnt by our Boats. Three Hundred French perished. June next.
Jamaica. Vienna of Great Waradin's being surrendered to the Imperialists. July
next. Namur Castle surrendered to the French. Upon the Death of Dr. Tho. Wood,
Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, William Lloyd, Lord Bishop of St. Asaph was
by his Majesty nominated to that See. A Camp near Portsmouth, in order to a
Descent on France. John Lanier died of his Wound that he received in the late
Action near Enguien. Genesis Mackay, and Lord Angus, and Douglas killed. de
Granval being found Guilty, by the Court Martial, of Conspiring against the
King's Life, was Executed this Morning in the Camp, being Hanged, Drawn and
Quartered: He confessed he was set on work by some of the chief Men at the
Court of France, especially by Monsieur Barbesieux. Harbord died at Belgrade,
after six Days Sickness. Ambrune surrendered to the Duke of Savoy. Scleyn: 500
against 1000. Gammen, about a quarter past Two a-clock, there happened an
Earthquake, and was very sensible to the whole Camp; the King was at Dinner, in
an old decayed House, which shaking very much, his Majesty was prevailed with
to rise from the Table and go out of the House; but the Surprise was soon over.
The Earthquake was felt in most places of this Province. An. Dom. 1580 There
was an Earthquake in Holland, and also in the Year 1640. London, which lasted
about a minute, and was felt very sensibly; and at the same time it was felt at
Sheerness, and at Sandwich, and at Deal, and at Portsmouth, etc. John Fleet
chosen Lord Mayor for the next Year. On the 28th Sir Tho. Lane, and Sir Tho.
Cook Sheriffs. William III. is owned as True, Lawful and Rightful King of
Ireland, by the Parliament of that Kingdom. Turks, congratulating his happy
Accession to the Crown of England, and desiring his Mediation between him and
the Emperor of Germany. William Brodrick Esquire their Attorney General of the
Island of Jamaica, in the Place of Simon Musgrave Esquire lately deceased.
Yarmouth. Nov. next. John Fleet Lord Mayor went to Westminster. The King and
Qudin'd with the Lord Mayor. Will. Beeston (Commander in Chief of Jamaica)
Knighted. Negroes of Barbados to destroy the English was discovered, and many
of 'em Executed for it. Westminster. Genoua, with 18 Galleys commanded by Don
Bertran de Gu^rvarra, and 16 Men of War, under the Command of Don Perdo di
Corbetto, and 3 Fireships. 28, 29, 30. A dreadful Storm in Ireland. France.
The last Week an Earthquake was felt in several places of the Kingdom of
Naples. Capt. Richard Hill killed Mr. Will. Mountford, about Midnight, and
fled. 20 l. offered to him that apprehends him. A great Storm of Wind, at S.W.
for 24 Hours. Portsm robbed. The French besiege Huy, also the Castle of
Rhinsfolden, and the Town of St. Goar. Portsmouth. John Trevor, Speaker of the
House of Commons, and First Lord Commissioner of the Great Seal, the Office of
the Master of Rolls, in the place of Hen. Powle Esquire Deceased. His Majesty
passed an Act for 4 s. in the Pound. Mr. Henry Killigrew, Sir Ralph de la Val,
and Sir Clovesly Shovel, Entrusted with the Fleet, for the next Summer's
Expedition. Another Act his Majesty passed for Excise upon Beer, and other
Liquors. Rhinfelt, did so discourage them, that they durst not venture to make
any more. They retired toward Mont-Royal. We lost about 4 or 500 Men, the
French above 3000. Lymn they had such violent Storms, as have not been known in
many Years, much Wreck along the Coast. At Malta an Earthquake. Another on the
11th. A Bushel of Corn at Mons is sold for a Pistol. Furnes surrendered to
them. The Queen Dowager of England arrived at Lisbon. William Bridgman Esquire was
sworn one of the Clerks of their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, in the
Place of John Dyer Esquire deceased. Westminster. Christopher Greenville of Preston
in Lancashire, Knighted. Gourdon is brought Prisoner from Constantz to the
Hague. Messina, destroyed 73680 Persons. On the 11th of the last Month 37
Cities, Towns and large Villages, and about 130000 People destroyin Naples.
Charles Lord Mohun being indicted for the Murder of Will. Mountford, was tried
by his Peers in Parliament, and acquitted. Robert Young tried at King's Bench
upon an Information of Forgery, and Subornation of Perjury, and for
Counterfeiting an Association under the Hands of several Lords, for which he
was sentenced to stand in the Pillory at 3 several places of the City, and pay
a 1000 l. Fine. John Hartstongue (Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Ormond)
kissed their Majesty's Hands for the Bishopric of Ossory in Ireland, void by
the Death of Dr. Thomas Otway. An Act for the review of the Quarterly Poll etc.
and then the Parliament Prorogued to the 2d. of May. John Summers, their
Majesty's Attorney General, who was sworn Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, and one of their Majesty's Privy Council. His Place was supplied by
Edw. Ward. John Trenchard Knight. was sworn one of their Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State, and of their Majesty's Privy Council. His Majesty ordered
a new Commission to pass under the Great Seal, to Constitute Sir John Lowther
of White haven, Baronet. Henry Priestman Esquire Anthony Ld. Viscount Faulkland,
Rob. Austen Esquire Sir Rob. Rich Bar. Hen. Killigrew Esquire and Sir Ralph de la Val
Knight. to be Commissioners for Executing the Office of Ld. High Admiral of
England. And Edw Russel Esquire the Officer of Treasurer of their Majesty's
Chamber. Kensington for Harwich, and so for Holland, but hindered by contrary
Winds, till the last of March. Ed. Southwell Esquire was sworn Clerk of the Council
in Extraordinary. Edward Ward of the Inner Temple Esquire had the place of Attorney
General; and was sworn, etc.
1693
Switzerland, and had implored his Protection, to go and settle in Ireland.
John Lord Cutts, the Office of Captain, and Governor of the Isle of Wight, in
the place of Sir Robert Holmes deceased. Count d'Estree is returned with some
of his Ships to Toulon, the rest being separated from him by a Storm. Tho. Lord
Coningsby sworn of the Privy Council. May the 10th, and afterward on the 2d
Wednesday of every Month About this time Sir Francis Wheeler (Commander of
their Majesty's Ships in the West Indies) landed at Martinigo, and destroyed
many Houses and Plantations: Thence he went to Bay of Port St. Pierre. On the
23d Instant he came to Dominica. And on the 4th of May to St. Christophers. by
Commission till Sept. the 19th. Anderton, a Printer, who kept a private Press
at Hogsdon in May 1692, was apprehended in St. James's-Street with a Press and
Letter. He lived there by the Name of Williams. Many pernicious Pamphlets and
Libels were found upon him. English and Dutch Fleet set sail out of the Downs
for Spithead: The first Blew Squadron commanded by Admiral Lord Berkley; the
Second by Sir John Ashby Admiral, since deceased; the Third by Rear-Adm.
Mitchel. The Red Squadron consists also of 3 Divisions: First under Sir George
Rook; the Second under Admiral Killigrew Esquire Sir Ralph De la Val, and Sir
Clovesly Shovel; and the Third under Rear-Admiral Aylmer. The whole Fleet,
English and Dutch, consists of 75 Men of War, 33566 Men, and 5575 Guns.
Hiedelburgh, and took both it and the Castle in 2 days time, and destroyed the
Town; as they had done formerly to Spire Manheim, Frankendal, and other Places
in the Palatinate. Roses surrendered to the Count de Estrees, within 8 days
after the opening of the Trenches. Hussars met with a French Party, and cut
them all in pieces, except Two, whom Prince Lewis sent back to the French Army,
to let them know it was because they burnt Heidelburgh, and Massacred the
Inhabitants, and likewise broke the Cartel settled between the Two Armies.
General Heidesdorfe late Governor of Heidelburgh was degraded, and his Sword
broke over his Head by the Hangman, who threw the Point of it in his Face, and
carrying him beyond the Neckre, there left him. Capel, Sir Cyril Wych, and
Will. Duncomb Esquire were constituted Lords Justices of Ireland. George Rook,
dated June 21. How he and the Merchants with him escaped the French Navy, and
got into the Bay of Cadiz. Sidney, Master General of the Ordnance. Luxemburgh
advanced toward our Army, encamped near to Neer-Helpen, to attack us: K.
William engaged him. Count Solms had his Leg shot off with a Canon-Bullet; the
King met with a slight Contusion in his side with a Musket-Bullet. The Army
made a Retreat to Louvain, there was above 3000 slain and wounded: the Enemy
lost double the Number of ours. The King changed his Clothes twice during the
Fight; a piece of his Scarff was carried away with a Musket-Bullet. Anthony
Wood censured in the Chancellor's Court of the University of Oxford, for
reflecting upon the Earl of Clarendon: His Book Athenae-Oxonienses, Vol. 2.
burnt, and himself Expelled the said University. Sweden to Copenhagen. Lauden
we had 214 Officers killed, and 296 wounded, 6005 Private Soldiers killed and
taken Prisoners: And of the French 1460 Officers wounded, 800 slain outright;
and 20000 Soldiers, Horse and Foot, killed and wounded. Parliament prorogued
till the 3d of October. Charleroy, by Marshall de Villeroy, Monsieur Vauban,
etc. London, Tho. Abney Esquire and Sir Will. Hodges. A Proclamation by the Queen,
for the Parliament to meet on the 26th of October next. William Ashurst chosen
Lord Mayor. Piedmont, in the Corpse de Battle, where the Duke of Schomberg was
wounded in the Thigh. The French were Ten Thousand stronger than the D. of
Schomberg: so that it is only to their Number that their Victory is to be
attributed; they lost as many as we. Charleroy having stood out 26 days, at
last yielded to the French upon Honorable Terms. About this time there was a
Fight near Orbassan; the French Army consisted of 36000 Men, and ours but of
22000: We lost 5500 men, the Enemy lost about 6 or 7000. The Vaudois's
surpised, and took 300 Mules laden with Meal, as they were going from France
to Pignerol. Schomberg died. The Parliament met, and prorogued till the 7th of
Nov. Harwich. Abrah. Stacy, a notorious Burglar and High-way-man, committed to
Newgate. Captain Hinton a notorious Highway-man-committed to Newgate. Russel
Esquire appointed to be Admiral of their Majesty's Fleet. Marsh, Archbishop of
Dublin. Benbow burnt many Houses in St. Malo's. Abington the Office of Chapter
Justice of Air on this side Trent, vacant by the Death of the Ld. Lovelace.
Lord Visc. Sidney made Colonel of their Majesty's First Regiment of
Foot-Guards, in the place of the Duke of Schomberg. Charles Lloyd Esquire Knighted.
Gallway to Command his Forces in Piedmont, in the D. of Schomberg's place.
Falmouth. Duval, the French Spy, was hanged at the Hague. Col. Fran. Nicholson
nominated by his Majesty to be Governor of Maryland, in the place of Col.
Copley lately deceased. Lewis of Baden arrived at Gravesend. Charles Butler
(Brother to the Duke of Ormond) was created a Baron of England, Baron of
Weston; and a Baron, Visc. and Earl of Ireland. James Montgomery, Charles
Mackallough, and Tho. Smith, for High Treason. Christian-Prize, in the County
of Holstein, is almost ruined by a strange Irruption of Water, caused by a
violent Storm, and the breaking in of the Sea, with great Mounts of Ice, etc.
viz. By Excise on Beer and Ale, etc. Lewis took his leave of their Majesty's at
Kensington. Dublin, called the Key-Tower, suddenly fell, wherein were 218
Barrels of Powder, with by the striking of the Stones, one against another, took
Fire, and blew up, and very much shattered the Town, and wounded 24 Soldiers;
there were of the Townsmen about 100 killed and hurt. Sam. Eyres Sergeant at
Law, to be one of the Judges of King's Bench, in the Room of Mr. Justice Dolben
deceased. Charles Earl of Shrewsbury Principal Secretary. Tho. Jones, and John
Golden convicted of High Treason, were Executed near Redriff-Stairs. Cadiz
arose a violent Storm with Thunder, Lightning, and a great deal of Rain; the
Storm continued all Day, and the Night following; several Men of War much
damaged thereby. Edw. Carteret Esquire appointed to be Bailiff of their Majesty's
Island of Jersey.
1694
Narcissus Lord Archbishop of Cashell in Ireland, to the Archbishopric of
Dublin, vacant by the Death of Dr. Marsh. And William Lord Bishop of Cloyne to
the Archbishopric of Cashell. France. etc. Elector of Cologne elected Bishop
of Liege. Hamilton died about Five in the Morning. The Rebels in the Basse in
Scotland desire to Capitulate. John Smith of Issleworth, in the County of
Middlesex, Esquire created Baronet of this Kingdom. Basse in Scotland was
surrendered this day in the Evening, upon Articles. Charles Earl of Shrewsbury
elected Knight. of the Order of the Garter. John Earl of Mulgrave created a
Marquess of this Kingdom, by the Name and Style of Marquess of Normanby. His
Majesty likewise created Henry Herbert of Ribbesford in the County of
Worcester, Esquire a Baron of this Kingdom, by the Title of Baron Herbert of
Chirbury in the County of Salop. His Majesty appointed the Right Honorable
Edward Russel Esquire Sir John Lowther of White-haven Bar. Henry Priestman, Sir
George Rook, and Sir John Houblon, Kts. Commissioners for Executing the Office
of Lord High Admiral of England and Ireland. His Majesty, upon the Death of Sir
Tho. Duppa, Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, Conferred that Place upon
Fleetwood Sheppard Esquire and also Knighted him. His Majesty's Royal Assent to an
Act for Duties upon Vellum, Parchment, Paper etc. for 4 Years: and other Acts.
And then his Majesty departed for Holland. His Majesty created Thomas Lord
Marquess of Carmarthen, President of their Majesty's Council, a Duke of this
Kingdom, by the Name and Title of D. of Leeds. Also the Right Worshipful
William Earl of Bedford, a Marquess and Duke of this Kingdom, by the Title of
Marquess of Tavistock, and Duke of Bedford. The Right Honorable William Earl
of Devonshire, Ld. Steward of their Majesty's Household, a Marquess and Duke of
this Kingdom, by the Name of Marquess of Hartington, and Duke of Devonshire.
The Right Honorable John Earl of Clare, a Marquess and Duke of this Kingdom,
by the Name of the Marquess of Clare, and Duke of Newcastle. The Right
Honorable Francis Ld. Viscount Newport, Treasurer of their Majesty's Household,
an Earl of this Kingdom, by the Title of Earl of Bradford in the County of
Salop. Charles Montague Esquire one of the Lords Commissioners of their Majesty's
Treasury, had granted to him by his Majesty, the Offices of Chancellor, and
Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer. Sidney, Ld. Godolphin, Sir Stephen Fox Knight.
Charles Montague Knight. and John Smith Esquire Lords Commissioners of the Treasury.
John Lord Marquess of Normanby, and Charles Viscount 'Dursley were sworn of
their Majesty's Privy Council. Gravesend. Holland. Died John George the Fourth
Elector of Saxony, of the Smallpox; the next his Brother Prince Frederick
Augustus was proclaimed Elector. His Majesty created the Right Honorable Henry
Lord Viscount Sidney, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Master General of
the Ordnance, and Earl of this Kingdom, by the Name and Style of Earl of Rumney
in the County of Kent. June. Russel burnt and sunk 35 Merchant-Ships, in
Bartaume. Bay laden with Corn and Bread for the French Army in Flanders, and
took six of them. Palamos Besieged by the French. George's Chapel at Windsor,
his Electoral Highness Frederick the Third, Marquess of Brandenburgh, Prince
Elector etc. and diverse others. Palamos Stormed: All put to the Sword, 300
Young and Old, 600 Prisoners. Russel stood in the Camaret Bay; General Talmash
Landed with 3 or 400 Men, and in this Action was shot in the Thigh, of which he
Died the 12th instant. Venetians and the Turks began, and lasted till it was
dark. The Turks were 14000 Horse and Foot; the Venetians 10000. Of the Turks
1600 were killed upon the place, and near as many wounded: Of the Venetians not
above 4 or 500 killed and wounded. Which Victory secures the Morea. Mehomet-Bey
has re-taken from the Algerines, all the Places they had made themselves
Masters of the last Year, within the Territories of Tunis, except the Castle
near the City of Tunis. Savoy put forth an Edict in favor of the Vaudois.
Gironne invested by the French. Toulon, having sailed in much haste from before
Barcelona, upon the News that Admiral Russel was coming into the Streights.
Berkley came before Havre de Grace, and Fired it in several places; half the
Town is destroyed, and Two Men-of-War burnt. Letters came from the Lord Berkly
of his Firing Diep, half the Town consumed; he had not above 4 or 5 Men killed
and wounded. Diep wholly consumed. Ostalric, a little City, invested by the
French, and on the 21st instant taken. The Vaudois have, within these two or
three Months, taken from the French 700 Horses and Mules. Berkly sailed from
Havre de Grace, toward La Hague and Cherbourg, allarming the Enemy all along
their Coast. Casal is Blocked up by the Duke of Savoy. Jo. Parker for
High Treason, who made his escape out of the Tower upon the 11th of this Month.
Several Persons have been taken up, suspected to have had no good Designs,
against the Government. Bavaria, with the Princess of Poland, was solemnized.
Sep. George surrendered to the Confederates at Discretion. In this Action the
Duke of Savoy had not above 10 Soldiers killed and wounded. The taking of this
place shuts up Casal on every side. Warwick Burnt in the Nightime. 25th day
of October next. A Machine Fired near the Molehead at Dunkirk, by Sir Clovesly
Shovel, the Spring-Tides being spent, he left that place. Calais, and threw
some Shells into the Town, which (as the French report) Burnt between 30 and 40
Houses, and ruined some more. The Confederates attackt Huy, and in an
hours-time made themselves Masters of it. 27. The Castle was surrendered.
Colbuch Fortress taken by the Venetians, after a Siege of 9 days. The War that
broke out this Summer between Shaban-'Dey of Argiers, and Mehomet-Bey of Tunis,
goes on with great success on the former's side. Lewis since his passing the
Rhine, has put most of Lower Alsace under Contribution. Thus the French are
totally expelled out of the Diocese of Liege. John Sweetaple, and Will. Coals
Esqs were sworn Sheriffs of London. Naples; several Churches and Houses much
shattered, and diverse killed. Also at Sicily, and many other places. Cutts the
Command of the Second Regiment of Foot Guards, vacant by the Death of
Lieutenant General Talmash. Several Thousand Tartars drowned in passing the
River Theysse. Turks drew off from Ciclut. The Turks retreat from
Peter-Waradin. Scio attacked, and taken by the Venetians, after a Siege of 16
days. Found there 230 pieces of Canon, 200 of which were Brass, great store of
Arms, and 6 Magazines full of all sorts of Ammunition. Rochester. I think I may
say that this Year a Stop has been put to the Progress of the French Arms; and
our sending so great a Force into the Mediterranean, has disappointed their
Designs, and leaves us a Prospect of further Success. John Sweetaple, and Sir
William Cole Knighted. Dec. 16. The Princess of Waldeck died at her House at
Cuylenburg. Tillotson Archbishop of Canterbury died. Thomas Day Esquire Mayor, and
Will. Danes Esquire Sheriff of Bristol, Knighted. Joseph Bradshaw, who assaulted
John Swift, Marshall and Keeper of the Prison in Savoy, etc. 200 l Reward for
him that apprehends him. Thomas Tennison (Lord Bishop of Lincoln) to be Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury. Poundage, and other Sums of Money payable upon
Merchandises and imported. Kensington, at 9 in the Morning, the Queen was taken
ill of the Smallpox. Mary of Blessed Memory died at Kensington. James
Gardener, Sub-Dean of the Cathedral Church of Lincoln, nominated by his Majesty
Bishop of that See. Killigrew killed in a Fight with Two French Ships, Men of
War. Will. Dorrington made his Escape out of the Tower: 300 l. Reward for that
him takes him. At Paris the Weather is much colder than it used to be. His
Majesty gave his Royal Assent to an Act for Four Shillings in the Pound, for
one Year. About this time a Party of 21 Vaudois met by 200 Dragoons: The
Vaudois's defended themselves a long time, but at last demanded Quarter, which
was granted; but so soon as the French had disarmed them and stripped them, they
put them all to the Sword. This is the greatest Loss they suffered since the
War. The News from Turkey of the Death of Sultan Achmet, and of Sultan Solyman's
succeeding of him, is confirmed. Will. Standish of Standish-hall, in the County
of Lancaster, Esquire 500 l. Reward promised to him that takes him. Benbow gave an
Allarm to St. Malo, chased in 2 Privateers, and went ashore near Granville,
and made himself Master of a small Fort, where were 4 Guns, which he brought
away. Ceuta is still besieged by the Moors.
1695
Venetians quitted Scio, having first blown up the Fortifications. The French
being resolved to abandon Blanse, a good Garrison, set the Castle and Town on
fire. etc. An Act against profane Swearing. etc. His Majesty declared, That he
had appointed Thomas Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir John Summers Knight. Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, William Duke of Devonshire Lord Steward of his
Majesty's Household, Charles Duke of Shrewsbury One of his Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State, Charles Earl of Dorset Ld. Chamberlain of his Majesty's
Household, and Sidney Lord Godolphin First Commissioner of his Majesty's
Treasury, to be Lords Justices of England, for the Administration of the
Government during his Majesty's absence. Sir Will. Trumbul Constituted one of
his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State. His Majesty declared, that he
thought fit to appoint the Right Honorable Henry Lord Capel to be Ld. Deputy
of Ireland. His Majesty created the Right Honorable Will. de Nassau, Signeur
de Aubestein a Baron, Viscount and Earl of this Kingdom, etc. Likewise he
created the Right Honorable Lord Gray of Werk a Viscount and Earl of this
Kingdom, by the Name and Style of Viscount Glendale, and Earl of Tankerville.
Schomberg, Earl of Tankerville, and Peregrine Berty Esquire were sworn of his
Majesty's Privy Council. A Proclamation to secure Monsieur John Robart.
Holland. Casal blocked up. John Smith Esquire sworn one of the Privy Council, and
Christopher Musgrave sworn Clerk of the Council in Extraordinary. A
Proclamation for a General Fast to be observed June 19th. William Thompson was
set upon by a French Privateer, near Purbeck, having with him only one Man and
a Boy; he had but two small Guns, and some small Arms: He so acted his part,
that the Captain and Lieutenant of the Sloop, with six more of the French
Mariners were wounded; upon this they bore away. Mr. Thompson gave Chase to the
Privateer, and fired upon her for 2 hours, till at last they cried for Quarter.
The said Privateer had two Patereroes, several small Arms and Grenades, and
sixteen Men. All yielded themselves Prisoners. Berkley, with the Fleet under
his Command, as also Cap. Benbow, battered La Couchee. The 5th the Lord Berkley
attackt St. Malo's, threw 900 Bombs and Carcasses into the City, whereby the
greatest part of the Town was reduced to Ashes. Richards attackt Granville a
large Town, and in an Hour's time set it all on fire. Edward Ward received a
Writ to be Sergeant at Law, took his Oaths, etc. Thomas Trevor sworn
Attorney General. Hawles of Lincoln's Inn is declared his Majesty's
Solicitor-General. Namur invested. Casal Capitulated after 13 days opening the
Trenches. And is to be demolished by the consent of all Parties. The Earl of
Selkirke standing near the King, was hurt by a Stone that was raised by the
grasing of a Canon-Ball. Mr. Godfrey standing near his Majesty at Namur, was
killed by a Canon Bullet, and Mons. Ecklien, Col. of the Dutch Troop of Guards,
had his Arm taken off by the same shot. Villeroy, who had failed of his Design
upon Vaudemont, and against Newport, laid Siege before Dixmude. Major Genesis
Ellenbergh, a Dane, who commanded in the Town, Capitulated, though there had not
been above 30 Bombs thrown against the Place. Upon the 28th he delivered the
Town to Villeroy. After this the French marched to Deinse, where Brigadier
Offarel, who Commanded in Chief, surrendered himself a Prisoner of War,
together with his Garrison. The Fortifications of both razed. Follit demolisht
by the French. Poissy: see M. Merc. page 367. Russel was before Barcelona with
his whole Fleet. Parliament met, and prorogued to Sept. 7th. The like happened
to the Caimacan. Edward Walkington is made Bishop of Down and Connor. Brussels,
and continued till the 15th, and then drew off. The lower Town has suffered
much. John Robart: 200 l. Reward promised to him that takes him. Richards began
to Bombard Calais: He fired their Magazine in the Ricebank, and the Town in
several places. Capt. Osborne was killed by a Canonshot from the Enemies
Galley. Selwyn, and Lord Hamilton made, by his Majesty, Brigadiers General of
Foot, for their good Service at the Siege. The Moors thinking to surprise the
Spaniards, sealed the Forts of St. Peter, and St. Paul; but the Spaniards soon
beat 'em off, and killed 2000 of the Meors. Ireland was opened. Namur taken in
the sight of an Army of 100000 Men, which the French had brought to relieve it.
Turkey Fleet set sail for the River. Namur surrendered. There were left behind
in the Castle 69 pieces of Canon, 281000 weight of Powder, 2000 ordinary Bombs,
1000 lesser, 750 Grenades of 24 pound weight. 40000 ordinary Grenades fixed,
150 Barrels of Canon-Ball, 15 Tun of Saltpeter and Brimstone, and 800 spare
Muskets. A Proclam. for a public Thanksgiving to be observed on the 22 d. day
of this Month, for the taking of Namur. Ceuta supplied with Men from Gibralter:
and no fear of Cadiz. The Spaniards drew off from before Palamos. Ottoman Army
came before Lippa, and took it, and put the whole Garrison to the Sword, except
the Governor and some other Officers, whom they made Prisoners. The Turks lost
2000 Men in this Action, and afterward burnt and abandoned the Town. Veterani,
with an Army of between 30 and 40000 Men, the General Veterani having not above
8000. He repulsed the Infidels thrice, till himself was wounded. In this
Engagement the Enemy lost 6000 Men: see Oct. 4. Venetian and Turkish Fleets: in
which Action the Venetians lost the Noble Angelo Bembo, Commander of the Golph,
with 100 Soldiers. The Turks made themselves Masters of the Counterscarp of
Titul; after which the Garrison surrendered upon Conditions; but the Turks
broke their Promises, and carried them away Prisoners, and burnt the Town. Aeth
surpised the Enemies great Guard killed several of them, and brought 2
Officers, and 30 private Soldiers to Aeth. The Parliament met this day, and
was by Commission prorogued to the 8th of October. Venetian and Turkish Fleets:
In which the Venetians lost the Noble Giovanno Zeno, Commander of the St.
Andrew, with about 90 Soldiers. Monsieur de Boufflers departed for Dinant. The
Garrison of Casal marched out, being 2200 Men, besides 300 Sick they left
behind. The Parliament of Ireland voted, That the Favor the Irish had in the 2
late Reigns, was the cause of all the Calamities of that Nation. The Parliament
passed an Act for taking away the Benefit of the Clergy from him that stabbs
another. As also an Act for prevention of Frauds and Perjuries. Edward Willis,
and Owen Buckingham Esqs made Sheriffs for London. Sir John Houblan elected
Mayor for the Year ensuing. Loo of Foreign Ministers, and other Persons of
Quality, to wait on his Majesty. Palamos, and quitted the Town. General
Veterani was killed by a Turkish Horseman, who struck off his Head in his
Calash, and carried it to the Grand Vizier, who caused it to be Interred with
his Body. Deinse and Dixmude returned. Margate: the next day he arrived at
Kensington, where after he had called a Council, a Proclamation was ordered to
be issued forth for the dissolving of the present Parliament, and calling a new
One to meet upon the 22 d of November ensuing. George Rook sailed from St.
Helen's with the Merchant-Ships to the Streights. New Market, where he was met
by the principal Members of the University of Cambridge. Here he staid till the
21st. Shaban Dey of Algiers Deposed, and another chosen that confirmed Peace
with the English. The Imperialists are going to Refortify Titul, Lippa, and
Caransebes. The Castle of Tunis surrendered by the Algerines. Althorp. Palamos
demolisht by the French. The Spaniards Re-fortify Ostalrick. John Combs
Esquire(his Majesty's Chief Justice of Chester) at Althorp. Stamford. Joh.
Brownlow's at Belton near Grantham. The same day he was pleased to appoint Sir
Tho. Rokesby, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, to succeed Sr G. Eyres
lately deceased. And Sir John Powel, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, is
made one of the Justices of the Common Pleas; and Sir Littleton Powis,
Serjeant-at-Law, and one of the Justices at Chester, comes into his Place in
the Exchequer. The King came to Lincoln about 7 at Night, with a great Train of
Nobility and Gentry. Welbeck:(the Duke of New Castle met him 7 miles off at
Dunham-ferry) where he Knighted Gilbert Metcalf Esquire the Lord Mayor of York.
Kingston's. Stamford's. Warwick. Burford: in the way thither he dined with the
Duke of Shrewsbury at Eyfort. Russel landed at Dover, and went to London.
Woodstock, having seen in his way Cornbury-house. Oxford about 10 in the
Morning. He was met by the Duke of Ormond the Chancellor, the Vice Chancellor
and Mayor; then the Doctors, Masters, Aldermen and Citizens proceeded in great
Order through the High Street, to the Eastgate of the Schools. The King
alighting, passed directly to the Theater, where a splendid Banquet was
provided, with great variety of excellent Music. Mr. Codrington of All Souls
expressed the Public Thanks of the University in a very elegant Oration. The
Chancellor, on his Knees, presented his Majesty with a large English Bible, a
large Common Prayer Book, and the Cutts of the University, all richly Bound:
With a Pair of Gold-fringe Gloves. His Majesty went from Oxford to Windsor, and
staid there the 10th being Sunday. Kensington, and in the Evening was pleased
to see the Fireworks in St. James's- Square, prepared by Order of the Earl of
Romney, Master-General of the Ordnance. N. S. The Archbishop of Paris,
Innocent XII. took Possession of his Arch Bishopric. Eugene, Commander of the
German Forces, is gone to Vienna. John-Anthony Ellenbergher, late Governor of
Dixmude, being condemned by a Council of War on the 4th day of this Month, was
this day Beheaded. Likewise Francis Fergus de Offarel, late Governor of
Deinse, was Condemned to be cashiered with Infamy, and to be Imprisoned during
the King's Pleasure, for surrendering himself and Garrison to the French. The
House of Commons present their Address of Thanks to his Majesty. December next.
The Elector of Saxony continues still at the Court of Vienna. N. S. The French
King made 20 Captains of Men-of-War. The States of Languedoc gave the French
King 3 Millions, and 14 Hundred Thousand Livers for Poll-Tax: Seventeen Hundred
Thousand to be freed from New Creation of Officers. Monsieur Wolson returned
from Portugal to the Hague, having been there 20 Years on behalf of the States.
Marquess Doria, Envoy from Genoua, had Audience of Leave of his Majesty. Cadiz
the New found land Convoy. N.S. Count Straatman, Envoy Extraordinary from the
Emperor, arrived at Frankfort. N.S. The Archbishop of Rome opened a Jubilee:
Which was done by a solemn Procession of all the Cardinals, with a great Number
of other Prelates, and all the Clergy both Secular and Regular: But the Pope
himself was not there, as not being able to undergo the Fatigue of so long a
Ceremony. N.S. A Marriage being concluded between the Duke of Modena and the
Princess, Eldest Daughter of Frederick late Duke of Hanouer, the Ceremony of
the Espousals was performed this day at Hanouer, the Duchess Dowager of
Hanouer, and other Persons of Quality. N. S. This day 15 French Deserters came
to Brussels from Tournay, who say the want of Pay was the reason of their
Deserting. N. S. A Party of 300 French belonging to Pignerol came to Vigone to
raise Contributions, and carried away several Hostages for Payment of the same.
West Indies, under 2 Men-of-War from Kings-Road. Pr. Lewis of Baden gave Orders
to oppose the Excursions of the French. N. S. The French King made a Promotion
of Gally Officers. N. S. The Pope held a Consistory this Day, and made a
Promotion of 12 Cardinals; who are, Seignior Tanara of Bologne, at present
Nuncio at Vienna; Seignior Caccia of Milan, Nuncio at the Court of Spain;
Seignior Cavallarini, a Roman, Nuncio in France; Seign. Spinola of Genoua,
Governor of Rome; Seignior del Verne of Piacenza, Bishop of Fano; Seign.
Tarugi of Orvieto, Auditor of the Rota; Seign. Sacripaute of Narni,
Under-Datary; Father Ferrari, Dominican of Milan, Master of the Pope's Palace;
Seig. Sfrondati, a Benedictine of Milan, and Abbot of St. Gal in Switzerland;
Father Noris Augustine of Verona; Seignior Buon-Compagno of Bologne, and
Archbishop there; and the Marquess d' Arquin, the Qu. of Poland's Father.
Commandore del Been, Envoy Extraordinary from the Great Duke of Tuscany, had
his Audience-of-leave of his Majesty. N. S. This Day the States of Holland had
another Meeting. The Parliament of Ireland adjourned till the 28th of March.
Gustraw, who is Married to the Prince Royal of Denmark, arrived the 11th
Instant at Jagersburgh, having been received at some distance from thence by
the Prince, and on this Day made their public Entrance into Copenhagen. N. S.
This Day the Sieur Elias de Filhouz, Eldest Usher to the French-King's Chamber,
Died in the 150th Year of his Age: And the Sieur Charles de Fieure no less than
102 Years Old. The Commons of Ireland Voted an Address to his Majesty. N. S.
This Day the Count De la Torre, who has Resided at Venice 17 Years as
Ambassador from the Emperor, Died. Mons, Burnt some Houses of Dielbecke, and
St. Anne, about a League from Brussels. Hailbron, and Eppingen, and have good
Garrisons in both. N. S. The States of Holland separate for a Fort-night, by
reason of the Holidays. O. S. This Day Colonel Cunningham (who was sent over by
the Lord Deputy of Ireland, with the Address of the House of Commons, of that
Kingdom, to His Majesty of Great Britain) presented the same; and His Majesty
received it very Graciously. Flanders, sailed down the River. N. S. Count
Straatman (the Emperor's Minister) Arrived at the Hague. N. S. This Evening
Count Caunitz Arrived at the Hague from Liege, where he has been to discourse
with the Elector of Cologne, about the Business of the 9th Electorate.
Gloucester was Elected into the most Noble Order of the Garter, being first
Knighted. Hope-wel and Speed-wel, Transport-ships, brought over 360 Seamen from
France. George Hamilton Earl of Orkney in the Kingdom of Scotland. John Lord
Murray, Eldest Son to the Marquess of Athol, One of the Principal Secretaries
of State for the Kingdom of Scotland, in the place of the Lord Stairs. Moudon
to Versailles. Robert Fielding, 200 l. Reward promised to him that takes him.
N. S. The Ministers of the several Princes at the Hague renewed the Alliance.
N. S. The States of Holland met. Royal-Sovereign laid up at Gillingham, not fit
for Sea, was set on Fire by Negligence, and Burnt without hurt to any of the
Ships near her. Venice, Seignior Loranzo, and Seignior Venier, with a great and
noble Train of Young, Noble Venetians, did set out for England. The Duke of
Medina-Celi (Ambassador from Spain, to Rome) made Viceroy of Naples. Pignerol.
Willoughby, Chamberlain of Barbados, for his good Service in the said Island.
Spain has appointed 12 Persons to examine the Extent of the Tribunal of
Inquisition. An Ambassador from Portugal Arrived this Month at Vienna, and will
have Audience in a short time. Tweedale Chancellor, the Duke of Queensbury, E.
of Argile, E. of Annandale the Lord Rath, Sr. John Maxwel of Pollock,
Constituted Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury in Scotland. Roderick
Mackeney, Evidence against the Scotch East India Company. The King passed an
Act for 4 s. in the Pound, and an Act to prevent double Returns of Members to
serve in Parliament; and 7 private Bills. Holstein-Gollorp sent an Envoy to the
King of Sweden; he returned satisfied. N.S. The States of Holland met. O. S.
Princess Anne of Denmark's Regiment of Foot, under Colonel Web, sailed out of
the River of Thames for Flanders. Stepney, Envoy from K. William, came to
Franckfort; and after few days will go to other Courts. The Hamburgh Home-ward
bound Fleet came out of the River there. The Ozar of Muscovy goes into the
Field this Year with a great Army against the Tartars. The Poll-Tax goes on
heavily in France. Lieutenant General Fagel took the Castle of Dunkirk, having
200 in Garrison. Lorain will serve Voluntier in the Emperor's Army this
Campaign. William, to encourage an Invasion from France, which was to be
assisted by an Insurrection here at home. London and Harwich; after which his
Majesty acquainted both Houses with the Plot against his Sacred Person, and
Government, in a most excellent Speech. The same day was presented an humble
Address of both Houses to his Majesty, upon the Discovery, full of Loyalty; to
which his Majesty made a most Gracious Answer. A Proclamation issued out
against the Conspirators, viz James D. of Berwick, Sir George Barclay, Major
Lowick, George Porter, Captain James Courtney, Lieutenant Sherburn, Brice
Blair, -- Dinant, -- Chambers, -- Boise, George Higgins, and his two Brothers,
Sons to Sir Thomas Higgins, -- Davis, Cardel Goodman, -- Cranburn, -- Keys, --
Pendergrass, -- Bryarly, -- Trevor, Sir George Maxwell, -- Durance a Fleming,
Christopher Knightly, Lieutenant King, -- Holmes, Sir William Parkyns, and
Rookwood: with a Reward of 1000 l to whomsoever shall discover the said
Persons, or any of 'em. Russel came to Deal, to make ready the Fleet. An
Association drawn up by the House of Commons, in manner following: Whereas
there has been a Horrid and Detestable Conspiracy, Formed and Carried on by the
Papists, and other wicked and traitorous Persons, for Assassinating his
Majesty's Sacred Person, in order to Encourage an Invasion from France, to
Subvert our Religion, Laws and Liberty: We whose Names are hereunto Subscribed,
do Heartily, Sincerely and Solemnly Profess, Testify and Declare, That his
present Majesty, King William, is Rightful, and Lawful King of these Realms.
And we do mutually Promise and Engage to Stand by and Assist each other, to the
utmost of our Power, in the Support and Defense of his Majesty's most Sacred
Person, and Government, against the late K. James, and all his Adherents. And
in case his Majesty come to any violent or untimely Death (which God forbid) we
do hereby further Freely and Unanimously oblige our selves, to Unite, Associate
and Stand by each other, in Revenging the same upon his Enemies, and their
Adherents; and in Supporting and Defending the Succession of the Crown,
according to an Act made in the First Year of King William and Queen Mary,
Entitled, An Act declaring the Right and Liberties of the Subject, and settling
the Succession of the Crown. Russel sailed out of the Downs with his Fleet
toward the French Coast, joined with Sir Clovesly Shovel, with several Men of
War from the Westward. Russel was at Anchor off Grevelin. Lord Bercley lay half
way between him and Dunkirk. Our Fleet sailed along the French Coast near
Calais, where lay 3 or 400 Vessels of all sorts crowded together. There lay 17
or 18 French Men of War among the Sands of Dunkirk in the Flemish Road. The
late K. James parted from St. Germain's (the French King having the Night
before taken his leave of him) and went in a Post-Calash to Calais; being come
to St. Dennis, he signed and Instrument or Deed in the presence of a public
Notary, and sent it afterward to the French Court, by which ('it is said) he
obliges himself to repay the French King the Expenses he has put him to.
Marshall de Boufflers drew Forces from the French Frontier-Garrisons of
Flanders and Picardy toward Dunkirk and Calais. They were to Embark for
England. James came to Calais. Monsieur Gabaret had the Command of the
Men-of-War for the Expedition, being 17 or 18, and went on Board the 28th past.
The Garrison of Centa sprung a Counter-mine by which and with their Sallies
they destroyed many Moors. Givet destroyed by the Allies. The stores consisted
of Four Millions of Rations. The Action performed by the Earl of Athlone, and
Lieutenant General Coehorne. James went from Calais to see Dunkirk. If the
Invasion of England had succeeded, the French King should have gone with an
Army of 100000 Men to Flanders. England, on the Coast of Holland. Three
Guernsy-Privateers have taken 17 or 18 French Prizes laden with Wine, Salt, and
Brandy. Wirtenburgh arrived with Forces from Flanders. The Earl of Athlone
burnt the Town and Magazine of Givet, consisting of all manner of Stores for an
Army of 100000 Men for Three Months. The place is put under Contribution, part
paid, and for the rest Hostages given. James came from Dunkirk to Calais. l.
for each. At the same time a Proclam. for the Discovery of the Lord Montgomery,
and Sr. Joh. Fennick: 500 l. for either of them. John Friend was brought to his
Trial at the Old Bailey, and found Guilty. William Parkyns came to his Trial at
the same Place, and sound Guilty. Nassau, State-holder of Friseland, died at
Leewarden; leaving behind him one Son Eight Years old, and 7 Daughters.
Clovesly Shovel came into the Downs with several of his Majesty's Ships, having
left a Squadron of Men-of-War on the Coast of France.
1696
Sir William Parkyns, and Sir John Friend were Executed at Tyburn. Venice
arrived at London. Solomon Buluc Bachi, Envoy from the Divan of Algier, had his
Audience of the King of France. Stamford, Lord Lieutenant, Custos Rotulorum,
and Vice Admiral of Devonshire, together with the City and County of Exeter,
and the Right Honorable the Earl of Radnor Lord Lieutenant, Custos Rotulorum,
and Vice Admiral of Cornwall; and has appointed Major Genesis Trelawny Governor of
the Town and Citadel of Plymouth: All which places were formerly held by the
Right Honorable the Earl of Bath. Robert Lowick, Ambrose Rookwood, and Charles
Cranburn, Tried and Condemned. Geo. Rook arrived in the Downs with his
Majesty's Ships, and a great Fleet of Merchantmen from Cadiz, in all 190 Sail.
The Parliament in Ireland prorogued to September next. June next. Soranzo, and
Seignior Veniers, Ambassadors Extraordinary from Venice, made their public
Entry. Robert Lowick, Ambrose Rookwood, and Charles Cranburn Executed at
Tyburn. Corna, a City taken by the Arabians, who cut off 6000 Janisaries that
were in Garrison. Thomas Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir John Summers Knight.
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal. Thomas Earl of Pembroke, and Montgomery Lord of
the Privy Seal, William Duke of Devonsh. Lord Steward of his Majesty's
Household, Charles D. of Shrewsbury One of his Majesty's principal Secretaries
of State, Charles Earl of Dorset and Middlesex Ld. Chamberlain of his Majesty's
Household, and Sidney Lord Godolphin First Commissioner of his Majesty's
Treasury, to be Lords Justices of England for the Administration of the
Government during his Majesty's Absence. His Majesty has been pleased to create
Sir John Lowther of Lowther Bar. a Baron and Viscount of this Kingdom, by the
Style and Title of Baron Lowther of Lowther, and Viscount of Longsdale in the
County of Westmorland. His Majesty has been also pleased to create Sir John
Thompson Bar. a Baron of this Kingdom, by the style and Title of Baron of
Haversham in the County of Bucks. His Majesty has been pleased to constitute
Sir Thomas Littleton Bar. one of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury. His
Majesty has been pleased to give to Christopher Musgrave Esquire the Office of
Clerk of the Ordnance, and to James Lowther Esquire that of Clerk of the Delivery
of the Ordnance in this Kingdom. His Majesty couserr'd the Honor of Knighthood
upon Theodore Janssen Esquire for his good Service to his Majesty. Clancey, a
Peruk-maker in Covent Garden, and Captain Donolow, both Irish-Men, persuaded
Cap. Porter to go over to France, promising him King James's Pardon, and a
Pension of a 1000 l. per annum, and 600 Guineas in hand: He met them according
to Appointment at the Dog-and- Partridge in Drury Lane, where they gave him 300
Guineas, and Billets for the rest; and then Capt. Porter gave the singal to the
Messengers that were ready to seize on them: and they were committed to
Newgate. Spain died. His Majesty has been pleased to confer the Honor and
Dignity of a Baronet of this Kingdom upon upon Thomas Wheat of Glympton in the
County of Oxford, Esquire Holland. Peter Cook, Son of Sir Miles Cook, was brought
to his Trial at the Old Bailey, for High Treason, and found Guilty. Corby in
Lincolnshire had a Storm of Hail, in some places a Yard deep, and some
Hailstones 5 or 6 inches thick. Ireland prorogued to the 28th of July.
Alexander Knightly, who was Arraigned the 30th of the last Month, was tried at
King's-Bench-Bar, and confessed the Indictment. June the 26th. Thoulon-Fleet
arrived at Breast, being 47 Men-of-War. Bembo, with 13 Men-of-War, arrived in
our Roads from before Dunkirk. Will. Gregory, one of the Justices of the
King's Bench died, as did J. Matthews Esquire Clerk of the Privy Seal, in the 81
Year of his Age. A dreadful Fire happened near Wapping-stairs, which burnt the
Gun-Tavern, with 14 or 15 Houses, and a Ship at the Key. The Coroner's Inquest
have sat upon Horden the Comedian, and brought in their Verdict against all
the Six who were in Company, but none of them are yet taken, except Captain
Burges. Lord Polwarth is made High-Chancellor of Scotland. One Jane Smithers,
alias Cox, who for Clieats exceeds the German Princess, committed to Bridewell.
Ireland died: Upon which a Council being summoned, the Lord Chancellor was
elected to be Ld. Justice, and Chief Governor of the Kingdom, till the King's
Pleasure should be further known. James, with his Queen, and pretended Son,
being at the Abbey of La-Trapp, to pray for the Success of the French King's
Arms, a Fire broke out in the Hostelry belonging to the Convent, which made
them leave their Prayers. The French ruin the Country in a most barbarous
manner, and will scarce leave a House standing in the Chateline of Audenard.
Three Thousand French Deserters have past Audenard in a little time. (viz) Lord
Cutts, Brigadier Stewart. Brigadier Levison, Brigadier Earl, Colonel Collier,
and Monsieur le Tongue: And 7 Brigadier, Generals, (viz.) Prince of Wirtenberg,
Col. Cunningham, Col. Ingoldsby, Col. Fairfax, Col. Trelawny, Col. Maitland,
and Col. Tiffin. The Lord Chancellor Porter was chosen by the Council, to be
the next in Office upon the Death of the Lord Lieutenant in Ireland. Sir John
Fenwick was taken with one Webber an Attorney in New-Rumney. Cap. Waugh was
taken at Canterbury. Catinat burnt Gruiasco, within three quarters of a League
of Turin, because he found 70 of his Soldiers there with their Hands and Feet
cut off, occasioned by M. Catinat's severity toward the Boors. Poland died of
an Apoplexy at his Pleasure-house in Villa-Nova. Falmouth, and in the adjacent
places. Torbay to put the concerted Designs in Execution on the French Coast.
Two Spanish Galleys took 25 French Vessels laden with Meal and other Provisions
for Roses. Sir Leonard Robinson elected Chamberlain for London. Sir John
Turton, One of the Barons of the Exchequer, to be One of the Justices of the
Court of King's Bench, in the room of Mr. Justice Gregory, lately Deceased. The
Duke of Savoy and the French gave Hostages for the performance of the Truce
they agreed on for Thirty days, to commence on this First instant. Powis Died
at St. Germains. George Berkley Bomb'd St. Martins in the Isle of The, Firing
2230 Bombs and Carcasses. From the Isle of The he went to Ollonne, and Fired
there 1996 Bombs and Carcasses, which had all the effect that could be
expected. At the same time he Bomb'd Bell-Isle; the Cardinals Hodick and Gray,
Burned on these several Islands above 1500 Houses, killed and brought away at
least 1300 Head of Black-Cattle and Horses. and taken 20 Boats and small
Vessels. Charles Porter Lord Chancellor of Ireland, Charles Earl of Montrath,
and Henry Earl of Drogheda to be Lords Justices, and General Governors of the
Kingdom of Ireland. William Duke of Gloucester was Installed Knight of the most
noble Order of the Garter. Henry Every a common Pyrate: 500 l.. Reward for him
that takes him. Ireland met according to their last Adjournments, where all
things continue in great Tranquillity.
A TABLE.
A.
ADmiral Herbert, 9. 13. 22. 16. Vice-Adm. Almon, 21. Adm. of the Fleet, 40.
High Admiral of England, 68. 79. Adm. Russel, 68. 74. 113. 81. 82. 101. 114.
115. Admiral Rooke, 99. French Ambass. 5.14. Ambassad. from the D. of
Brandenburg. 17. Ambass. from the Duke of Luxenburgh, 18. Dutch-Amb. 22. 103.
Ambass. from the King of Sweeden, 23. 111. Ambass. at Ott. Court, 35. 54.
Genoua Ambass. 103.
A.
Ambass. from the Emperor, 103. 108. Ambass. from the D. of Tuscany, 106. Amb.
of Venice, 109. 118. Amb. from Spain, 110. Amb. from Savoy, 43. Aids granted,
12. 32. 55. Throne Abdicated, 7, 8 Poll-Act, 18. Acts of Parliam. 14. 17. 20.
23. 25. 36. 67. 76. 77. 79. 88. 90. 111. 112. Address, 3. 5. 7. 10. 17. 26.
107. Pr. Ann's Son, 24. Capt. Ashby, 20. Duke of Albem. 21. 22. Ashburnham, 22.
Antrim, 27. Act of 12 d. in the pound, 27. Acts of 2 s. in pound, 32. Acts for
4 s. in pound, 65.88. Apprehend, 37. 39. 46. 59. 76. 84. 87. 89. 109. 110. 126.
E. of Abington, 75. Archbishop, 49. 50. False Allarm, 3. Athlone taken, 50.
Agrim, 51. Alicant, 52. Angus, 61. Ambrune, 61. Lower Alsace, 85. Audenard,
123. Aeth, 97. Association, 113. 118.
B.
Bishop of London, 9. Mr. Brent, 10. Dr. Burnet, 11. 13. Berry, 12. Bishop of
Exeter, 14. Duke of Bolton, 14. Bentineck, 14. Mr. Baker, 23. Barons in
Parliam. 24. Blake, 27. Bonn, 29. King's Birthday, 31. Belturbet, 32. Belfast,
36, 37. Boyne, 38. Belgrade, 43. Bishops promoted, 29, 48, 49, 50. Boufflers
baulkt, 50. 97. 115. Ballimore, 50. Barcelona, 52. 94. Beaumont, 52. King at
Breda, 53. Dr. Barlow died, 54. Boil died, 55. Bedford, 56. Blessington, 57.
Bishop Lloyd, 61. Beeston, 63. Bridgman, 66. Benbow, 75. Pr. Lewis of Baden,
75. 76. 105. Butler, 76. Basse in Scotland, 78. Bedford, 80. M. of Brandenb.
82. Berkley, 84. 125. Cap. Benbow, 89. Blanse, 90. Brussels, 94.
C.
Convention-men, 6, 7. Convent. of Scotland, 11, 12, 13. Chapman, 12. Lord
Coot, 12. 30. Commissioners for the Treas. 14. 34. 56. 81. 110. Com. of the C.
17. 34. Com. of the Gr. Seal, 10. 37. 67. Com. for the Admir. 11. Com. for
Exch. 17. Com. for Vict. 31. Com. for Pr. Seal, 92. Chanc. of Cambr. 22. Lord
Churchill, 15. Ld. Cholmondly, 15. K. and Q. Crowned, 15. Crown of Scotland,
16. 18. 20. Consuls, 24.30, 31. Conspiracy, 24. 28. 30. 44. 63. 112.
Carrickfergus, 27. Canary-Islands, 28. Cambridge, 29. Cust, 34. Customs and
Duties, 35. Chester, 36. Charlemont, 36. Cork taken, 43. Commerce with Fr. 43.
Cutts, 43. 86. Cornwallis, 56. Coningsby, 57. 69. Capel, 58. Camp, 61. Corn
dear in France, 65. 78. Charleroy, 73, 74. Christian-prize, 76. Archbishop of
Cashel 78. Carmarthen, 79. Clare, 80. Casal, 84. 91. 93. 98. Calais, 85. 95.
Colbuch Fort, 85. Cole, 87. Ceuta, 89. 96. 115. La-Couchee, 92. Caimacan, 94.
Cook, 121. Catinat, 124. Chamberlain, 124. Combs, 100. Captains, 103.
Contributions, 104. Cardinals, 105. Regulating Coin. 109. Confederates, 109.
D.
Prince and Princess of Denmark, 5. 14. 111. Declaration, 6. 7. 9. Ld.
Dartmouth, 6. Danby, 17. Derry-men, 25. Danes, 33. 87. Dublin, 35. 39. Dondalk,
37. Dean of Cant. 50. Dyve, 57. Douglas, 61. Duval, 75. Arch-B. of Dubl. 78.
Dursley, 81. Diep, 83. Dunkirk, 85. Day, 87. Dorrington, 88. Deputy of Ireland,
91. Dixmude, and Deinse, 93. 94. 102. Deserters, 104. 107. Died, 3.106, 107.
Dunkirk, 111. Prisoners for Debt, 117.
E.
Episcop. abolisht, 24. Empr. a Daughter, 39. Earthquake, 42. 60. 62. 64, 65,
66. 85. 124. Exemption, 30. Excise upon Beer, 43. 45. 55. 66. Ecklieu, 93.
Prince Eugene, 102. Edinburgh Castle, 22.
F.
Dutch Fleet, 2. 22. English Fleet, 10. 29. 111. 124. 105. 115. Plate Fleet,
20. French Fleet, 83.122. Turkey Fleet, 95. Faulconberg, 14. French Protest.
18. French Goods, 18. Fight, 19.26, 27.35.72, 73, 74.82.97. War against France,
20. Fast, 21. 33. 48. 69. 84. 92. 58. 81. 121. 103. Fr. Vessels, 31. 124.
French Foot, 33. Fire, 48. 52. 55. 39. 122, 123. Fr. Ships burnt, 59. French
beaten, 61. Follit Castle, 94. Fenwick, 124. Friend, 117, 118.
G.
Duke of Grafton, 4. Knights of the Garter 13. 108. 126. Grocers Company, 30.
Galloway surrend. 51. Generals, 52. 95. 123. 108. Goldsborough, 55. Genesis
Ginkle, 55. Chapter d'Granval, 61. Goar, 64. Greeville, 66. Gourdon, 66. Galway,
75. Guy, 34. Gray, 35.91. Gironne, 83. Fort St. George, 84. Dr. Gardener, 88.
Godfrey, 93. Gregory, 122. Garrisons, 99. Gally-Officers, 105. Pr. of Gustraw,
106. Givet, 115.117.
H.
Harbord, 10.61. Hewit, 15. High-way-men, 24. Hamilton, 27. 78. 108. Holt, 28.
K. at the Hague, 46. 49. 53. King for Holland, 57. 79. 81. 91. 121. Hill, 64.
Huy, 64. 85. Hartstongue, 67. Heidelburgh, 70. Hussars, 71. Heidesdorfe degrad.
71. Hinton, 74. Herbert, 79. Hartington, 80. Havre d'Grace, 83. Hawles, 93.
Horden, 122.
I.
K. James, 2, 3, 4. 11. 23, 115, 116, 117. Jefferies, 3.16. Ireland, 13, 14.
Judges constitut. 19. Irish Landed, 23. Inniskilling-men, 24. Irish defeated,
31. Govern. of Ireland, 41. 57. 122, 123. Johnson executed, 44. Vict. in
Ireland, 48. Jacova, 51. Ireland submit. 62. At. Genesis of Jamaica, 63 Lords
Justices of Ireland, 71. Judge Eyres, 77. Bailiff of Jersey, 77. Janssen, 121.
Jubilee, 104. Inquisition, 110. Invasion, 116.
K.
General Kirk, 22. Keyseawreart, 22. King returned, 29. 41. 54. 99. King's
Right asserted, 33. Kinsale-Fort sur. 43. King in danger, 46. 51. 72.
Key-Tower, 76. K. and Q. at Grave. 81. Killigrew, 88. Knightly, 121. King's
Progress, 99.
L.
Lovelace, 2. Lamplugh, 2. Lds. Lieutenants, 12. Lockhart, 12. Lumley, 15.
Londonderry, 16. 21. 25, 26. Levins, 27. Lloyd, 28, 29. 75. Ludlow, 31. Lippa
taken, 44. London entertain. 44. D. Lorrain, 44. 112. The League, 46. King at
Loo, 49. Luxemburgh, 52. Limerick surrend. 53. Lanier, 61. Lowther, 68. 34.
120. Bp. of Liege, 78. Lumley, 34. Lds. Justices for Engl. 90. 120. Lippa, 96.
Littleton, 100. 121. Lords Justices of Ireland, 125. Court at Loo, 98.
M.
Monmouth, 15. Mountague, 15. 80. Medals, 16. Melvill, 21. Mosely, 22.
Mac-Carty, 26. Mortality, 29. Money, 30. 107. Massacre, 30. Miller, 32. Mons,
47. Montmelian, 44, 45. Lord Mayor, 12. 15. 28. 37. 54. 62. 37. 98. Mont-Royal,
65. Mohun, 66. Marsh, 75. Gov. of Maryland, 75. Mulgrave, 78. Mere, 34.
Mehomet-Bey, 83. Marriage, 84. 104. 107. Musgrave, 91. 121. St. Malo's, 92.
Moors, 95. Matthews, 122. Murray, 109.
N.
Nuis, 10. Newry burnt, 28. Nissa surrend. 42. Nice surrend. 49. Namur-Castle,
61. Newport, 80. Normanby, 81. Nassau, 91. 11^. Namur, 93. 95.
O.
Pr. of Oran. 1. 4, 5, 6. 8. Ordinance, 3. Ossory, 3. Order, 3, 4. D. of
Ormond, 13. Oaths of Alleg. 22. 41. Oneglio, 59. Genesis of Ordnance, 72.
Ostalric, 83. 100. Osborne, 95. Ozar of Muscov. 111.
P.
Preston, 1. 45. Proclamation, 2. 9. 12. 13. 55. 117. Parliament, 2. 9. 11. 28,
29. 34. 36. 39, 40. 50. 58, 59, 60. 63. 70. 73, 74, 75. 84. 86. 93, 94. 121.
124. Portsmouth, 20. Plot discovered, 23. Pope Innoc. XI. 26. Q. of Portugal,
30. King's Picture, 31. Plunder, 32. Act of Pardon, 36. 39. Peace betw. Mogul,
38. Pope Alex. VIII. 46. Pope Inn. XII. 51. 102. Powel, 54. Privy Council, 56,
57. 91. Pembroke, 56. Printer, 70. Palamos, 82. 96. 98. 99. Pope's Birthday,
89. Parliament of Ireland, 95. 98. 106. 126. Porter, 121. King of Poland, 124.
Powis, 125. Powel, 100. Poll-Tax, 32. 55. 78. 103. Parkyns. 117, 118. Papist's
Horses, 117.
Q.
Regency in Queen, 35 Q. Dowager, 58. 65. Q. Mary, 88. Q. of Sweden, 72. Q.
Dow. of Spain. 121.
R.
Rabble, 59. Reinsfolden Castle, 64 Rhinfelt, 65. Russel, 68. Roses, 71. Rook,
71. Robart, 61.
S.
Sunderland, 1. Skeleton, 2. Suffolk, 6. Sandwich, 10. Sedley, 11. Sheriffs, 11.
73. 85. 98. Q. of Sweedland, ^^. Sidney, 15. 44. 75. 8^. Prohib. Seamen, 18.
Estates of Scotl. 1^. Sergeants at Law, (...). Parliament of Scotl. 20. 21. 26.
34. Schomberg, 21. 24. 26. 74. Supremacy over Eccl. 23. Sligoe, 30. 53.
Stantiago, 31. Storms, 32. 64, 65. 75. 77. 94. 121. Subsidy, 33. 36. 42, 43.
Shovel, 34, 35. 118. Horse from Scotl. 37. Salusses, 40. Savoy reduced, 42.
Suza taken, 44. Master of the Swans, 49. Proclamation against Swearing, 51.
Sligo surrend. 52. Great Snow, 55. Summers, 59. Southwel, 68. Solms, 72. Staey,
74. Shrewsbury, 77, 78. Smith, 78. Sh^ppard, 79. Elector of Saxony, 81. 103. D.
Savoy's Edict, 83. King's Speech, 86. Sweetaple, 87. Sultan Achmet, 89.
Selkirke, 93. Smithers, 122. Chapter of Scotland, 122. Shaban Dey, 99. States of
Holl. 106. 107. 109. 111. Transport-Ship, 107, 108.
T.
Torbay, 2. 40. The Treasury, 6. Thanksgiving, 20. 42. 55. 63. 74. 87. 96. 117.
Toleration of Dissenters, 21. Torrington, 26, 27. Tin Farthings, 36. Trevor,
44. 59. 64. 93. Traitors, 45. 77. Places of Trust, 49. Tyrconnel, 52. Treby,
58. Turks congrat. 63. Trenchard, 68. Toulon, 69. Tunis, 85. Tartars, 86.
Turks, 86. A.B. Tillotson, 87. A.B. Tennison, 87. Scio, 86. 89. Trumbal, 91.
Thompson, 92. 121. Turton, 125. Truce, 125. Titul, 97. 99. Tunis, 99.
V.
Volunteers, 33. Ralph de la Val, 37. King's Venture, 40. Villa-Franca, 41. 47.
Villers, 47. Pr. Vaudemont, 52. Vaudois, 83. 88. 110.
W.
Winsor, 2. Dr. Ward, 6. Mr. Walker, 27. Pr. Waldeck, 34. 87. Willoughby, 35.
110. M. of Winchester, 37. King Wounded, 38. Wexford, 39. Wright, 21. Wight,
69. Waterford, 39. Wheeler, 69. Duties on Wines, 44. Wharton, 43. Gr. Waradin,
53, 54. 60. Warwick, 84. Weather Cold, 88. Wirtenburg, 116. Waugh, 124. Pr. of
Wales, 1.
Z.
Duke of Zel, 47.

