LIFE IN DEATH, OR The living Hope of a dying Saint, HANDLED IN A SERMON
Preached at the Funeral of that Eminently Virtuous, and Religious Gentlewoman,
Mris. MARY MORLEY, Late wife to Colonel Harbert Morley, Esquire and Daughter to Sr.
JOHN TREVOR Knight.

By Zachary Smith, Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of the Church at Glynde
in Sussex, Sept. 18. 1656.

Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

Prove. 10.28. The hope of the righteous shall be gladness; but the expectation
of the wicked shall perish.

1 Cor. 15.19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable.

Polani Syntagma, page 342. Mors electis and credentibus non est pro peccatis
satisfactio, sed peccati abolitio, and transitus in vitam aeternam.

(...)

Greg. Nazianzen Orat. 21.

London, Printed by W. Bentley for Andrew Crook, at the sign of the green
Dragon, in Paul's Churchyard. 1656.

To the Honorable Sr. JOHN TREVOR Knight, And to his virtuous Consort the Lady
ANNE TREVOR As also to the Honorable Colonel HARBERT MORLEY Esquire
HONORABLE,
I Make bold to prefix your names to this plain ensuing Sermon, not that I
conceive it worthy of your Patronage, but because none had sadder hearts than
your selves at the occasion of it, nor any Persons on earth greater Interest
in, or nearer Relation to that precious Gentlewoman, at whose Funeral it was
preached. If my heart deceive me not, it is not desire of vainglory that makes
me willing to publish this Sermon; but rather these motives: First, a desire
that God may have the glory of the Sovereignty of his grace ascribed unto him,
who can so deeply implant his fear in the hearts of his people, that they shall
never depart from him, and can keep alive those sparks of heavenly fire, which
he casts into the bosoms of his Children in the midst of the Sea of worldly
encumbrances, or enjoyments. Many waters cannot quench love; a proof whereof
was evident in her, she lost not her first love to Christ, and his Truth in
these times of Libertinisme and Error; neither did the Cares, or Profits, or
Pleasures, or Honors of the world (whereof she might have her hands full)
choke the good seed of Gods word in her, but still she kept the best room of
her heart free for Christ and heavenly things. Many of my reverend brethren
have of late years born public testimony to the Truth of Christ, I take this
occasion to give in my testimony to the Truth of his grace maintained and
manifested to the last in this blessed Saint. Though Paul tells us, that not
many wise, not many mighty, not many rich, not many Noble are chosen and
called, yet one such at least was in this little Parish, whiles she continued
among us, who gloried more in the Lord, than in riches, or honor, or all
worldly enjoyments: and I hope, some yet remain among us, looking toward
Christ and heaven, much provoked thereunto, and bettered by her example.
Another motive that induced me hereunto was an earnest inclination in my spirit
to testify that honorable respect that I did bear toward her. I am not
afraid to tell the world, that she was a Gentlewoman, whom I did as much
honor, and as highly esteem as any one living of her sex and quality, in
regard of the virtues and graces which I observed shining forth in her
carriage, whereby she did very much beautify and adorn her profession of
Religion. I find, Matthew. 26.13. that our Savior takes care that a Memorial of
Mary's Piety and Beneficence toward him in anointing his head and feet with
precious Ointment, Joh. 12.3. might be published, and perpetuated in
after-ages, and I am much emboldned by that instance of Christ, to take some
care that this Mary's Memorial also, (who delighted to sit at Christ's feet and
hear his word, and who often anointed his head with the sweet Ointment of Piety
and Devotion, glorifying him as God, and his feet with the Ointment of Charity
and Compassion, relieving his poor Members, and so ministering to Christ of her
substance may be published, and transmitted to posterity. In hope also that the
Readers hereof may, through the blessing of God, be edified, and provoked to
walk in the way to eternal life, and follow after righteousness, so as they
also may have hope in their death: I have adventured to commit this Sermon to
public view, to give people warning, not to go on in their sins, lest they be
driven away in their wickedness; nor to content themselves with the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, lest they come short of the Kingdom
of Heaven; nor to rest in a bare, groundless, lazy conjectural Hope, lest
their hope make them ashamed: and exhorting them to use all diligence to make
their calling and election sure, by making sure their interest in Christ by
faith, considering that such as are without Christ are without hope, Ephesians.
2.12. whereas such as have Christ framed in them, have learned a rich and
glorious mystery; Christ in us being the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. For if (with
Paul) we resolve and endeavor, that Christ shall be magnified by us, whether
by life, or death, he will be unto us both in life and death advantage, Phil.
1.20, 21. And when Christ who is our life shall appear, we shall also appear
with him in glory, Col. 3.4.

I shall not trouble you further with any Apology for my boldness in
mentioning your names, and addressing my self to you in the Dedication hereof;
assuring you, it is not with any desire, or intent to revive, or increase your
sorrow, or aggravate your grief, who had the greatest share in that great loss
which we have of late sustained; but rather to assuage and allay it, by minding
you of that great gain and advantage which she has gotten by death. Our
Savior tells his Disciples when comfortless at the thought of his departure
from them: If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I go unto the Father, John
14.28. I know you loved her dearly, as a dutiful Child to you her Parents,
and as a tender affectionate faithful spouse, and true Christian yoke fellow
to you her Husband; let your love to her be now expressed rather in rejoicing,
that she is gone to her heavenly Father, and that she is at rest in the bosom
of her Spiritual Bridegroom, than in mourning for her departure from (...) of
this Vale of misceries; considering that to be with Christ is far better and in
the presence of her heavenly relations she may enjoy fullness of bliss and
pleasures for ever more.

If the Poet spoke truth when he said,

Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris;

That it is a comfort to the afflicted to have companions of their grief; you
may take some comfort in considering, you had many, who did sympathize and
condole with you at her death; yea, very many of the Children of Sion did mourn
and make bitter lamentation, so that this place was a Bochim, Judge. 2.5. yea,
as Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon, where the Inhabitants of Judah and
Jerusalem mourned for the death of Josiah, Zach. 12.11. 2 Chronicles. 35.25. I dare
say, there has not been a Gentlewoman living in this County so few years,
whose death has been more generally bewailed and lamented over all Sussex. But
I know, you make use of better considerations and grounds of comfort than this;
And that you are thoroughly apprehensive of the Lords hand in this sad stroke,
whose will has been done by him in this event, and quiet submission of our
wills to his ought to be yielded by us, the examples of Aaron, Levit. 10.3, 4.
of Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. of David, 2 Samuel 15.26. and of Job 1.21. are worthy of
your observation and imitation herein. The Lord knows how to cause all things
to work together for good unto his people; and he is the God of all comforts,
who can comfort you in all your tribulations, and fill your hearts with joy and
peace in believing, so that you may abound in hope by the power of the Holy
Ghost; that Christ may be in you the hope of glory; and that his love being
shed abroad in your hearts by his spirit given unto you, you also may have hope
in your death. Thus prays

Glynde, October 4. 1656. Your Honors Humbly devoted to serve you in all
Gospel-duties Zachary Smith.

LIFE in DEATH, OR The living hope of a dying Saint.
Proverbs 14.34. The righteous has hope in his death.


IN this verse Solomon shows the different state and contrary condition of the
righteous and the wicked, (1) of the good and bad; of such as fear God, and
such as fear him not, when they come to die: and that in two distinct
Propositions.

1. The wicked is driven away in his wickedness, as Chafe driven away by the
wind. Ps. 1.4.


2. The Righteous has Hope in his Death.

I shall insist only upon this latter Proposition, as the Doctrine to be
handled at present, and speak something of the former, when we come to make
Application.

The Righteous has hope in his death.

IN handling this Point these Particulars are to be considered.
1.Who is to be understood by the subject of this Hope here spoken of? [The
Righteous] 2.What is here affirmed of the Righteous? [hath Hope] where consider
1. the Nature of this Hope. 2. the Object of it. 3. When, the time of actuating
this Grace [in his Death] 4. Proofs that it is so. 5. Grounds and Reasons why
it is so, and then Apply it.
[The Righteous] who is he? 1. Who?
The righteous is sometimes understood Civilly, Morally, for one that is just
in his dealings with men: sometimes 2. Theologically, for one that orders the
whole course of his life according to the will of God, which is the rule of
righteousness. So again in a Scripture-sence, one may be said to be righteous,
1. Legally, so Adam was righteous before the fall, Eccles. 7.29. and Christ
since, a righteout branch, Jer. 23.5. who sulfilled all righteousness, and is
called the Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. Rom 3.10.
but none else among the Children of men can be said of themselves to be
perfectly righteous according to the righteousness of the Law. 2.
Evangelically righteous; so believers are said to be righteous, in regard of a
twosold righteousness, 1. of Justification, 2. of Sanctification, the former
by imputation, the latter by infesion and inchoation, Romans 10.4. Christ is the
end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 4.5, 6. To
him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness: Even as David also describes the
blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works.
This is that righteousness which Paul so highly esteemed, and desired to
partake of, Phil. 3.9. the righteousness which is of God by faith. Believers
are also made partakers of inherent righteousness by the infusion of
sanctifying Graces into their hearts, and the renewing of the holy Ghost, Act.
15.9. purifying their hearts by faith; and thus they that were unrighteous may
become righteous, 1 Cor. 6.9, 11. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? -- And such were some of you, but ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
by the spirit of our God: so they are said to be righteous who walk in their
unrightnes, Isa. 57.1, 2. Job 27.5, 6. till I die, I will not remove my
integrity from me, my righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go, Tit.
2.12. so that by the righteous in the Text we are to upderstand such as
believing in Christ walk uprightly, doing just and righteous things, though
impersectly, 1 John 3.7. he that does righteousness is righteous, thus Noah is
said to have been a just man, and perfect, or upright in his generation,
walking with God, Genesis 6.9, and God gave him this testimony, Genesis 7.1. Thee
have I found righteous before me.

What? what is here affirmed of the Righteous? 2.
[He has Hope] here consider 1. the nature of Hope; 2ly. the object of his
Hope:

Hope in commonspeech signifies a bare likelihood, a probable conjecture, a
groundless fancy, but in scripture phrase an undoubted certainty.

Hope is a patient expectation of the accomplishment of that good whereof we
receive assurance by faith, Romans 8.24, 25. We are saved by hope, but hope that
is seen is not hope, for what a man sees, why does be yet hope for? But if we
hope for that we see hot, then do we with patience wait for it, Gal. 5.5. we
through the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith

There is the Hope of the Hypocrite, 1.
and the hope of the Righteous, Job. 8.13.14. Bildad tells Job, the hypocrites
hope shall perish, whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a
spiders web. First the object of his hope shall fail him, (i.e.) those
benefits, blessings, accommodations, and comforts, which he looked for in the
Profession of Religion, these shall fail him, and prove false hopes. He shall
not enjoy the things hoped for. Secondly the Act of his Hope shall fail, his
hope shall die, being so long deferred. Hypocrites may be full of hope for a
time, but their Hope will deceive them at last; and to lose our Hope is the
Utmost of Evils, Mr. Caryl on Job. 8.13, 14.
as Mr. Caryll well observes on Job. 8.13, 14. All that an hypocrite hops for
or expects, shall be utterly taken away, and cut off from him, his worldly
comforts will be gone, and heavenly comforts will never come, he shall find,
that he has been in a golden dream, as one that is hungry, who dreams that he
is eating, but when he awaketh, his Soul is empty, Job. 27.8. What is the Hope
of the hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his soul? Their
hope is a groundless fancy, whereby they expect some good, but have no warrant
for it, presuming that all is well with them, and that God will take them to
himself, and show them mercy when they die, though they regarded not to take
the Lord for their Portion, nor his word for their guide while they lived,
Sperando pereunt.
a livelesse lazy conceit, building castles in the air, casting Anchor among
Quicksands, their hope will make them ashamed.

There is the Hope of the Righteous, upright, 2.
Christian Hope; which is an undoubted expectationof all promised good things to
come, being freely given us of God through Jesus Christ. Heb. 6.18, 19. that we
might have strong consolation who have fled for Refuge, to lay hold on the hope
set before us, which Hope we have, as an Anchor of the soul, sure and
steadfast, and which enters into that within the veil. [Hath Hope] Tremelius
renders it thus, Recipit se etiam in morte sua justus with this annotation upon
it. Recipit se a malo, adeo vt ne mors quidem ipsa sit ipsi mala: (i.e.) He
recovers and delivers himself from evil; so that Death it self cannot be evil
or hurtful to him; so Mr. Cleaver explains it; The righteous has not only
confidence and good expectation, but refuge and deliverance in greatest
extremities, yea, in the very danger and torment of death it self, yea, then
especially, and more than ever at any time before.

The Object of the Righteous persons Hope is, God himself. Ps. 39.7. And now
Lord, what wait I for, my hope is in thee. 1. Tim. 1.1. And Lord Jesus Christ
which is our hope. Ier. 14.8. Ier. 17.18. And all those future good things
which God has graciously promised in his word both for soul and body. Col.
1.5. for the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, verse. 27. Christ in you
the hope of Glory, Titus 1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot
lie promised before the world began, Tit. 3.7. that being justified by his
grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. The Hope
of a Christian is in another world; no man has better, surer, greater hopes
than a Christian: a Worldlings Motto is a Bird in the hand, but a Christians,
is spero meliora. I hope for better things. The Philosopher could say, Toll
coelum and nullus ero. Much better and surer ground has a true Christian to
rejoice in hope of the glory of God, and to glory in tribulation for the hope
that is laid up in heaven for him; which hope makes not ashamed, Romans 5.2, 3,
5. Pro. 10.28. The hope of the righteous shall be gladness, but the expectation
of the wicked shall perish, yea, when the hope of the wicked shall be cut off,
then shall the righteous have a vigorous, lively, or a living hope, 1 Pet 3.
an hope that shall not fail, even in death they have hope of life, and by
death they come to be partakers of the object of their Hope, and so I come to
the 3. particular. When. 3. When.
The time when the Righteous has hope, in his [ Death] in the evil day, in
time of greatest disconsolation, when friends stand weeping and wringing their
hands, when speech, sight, senses, strength fail, when riches will not profit a
man, when Physicians are of no value, when all Creatures prove miserable
comforters, and when all human helps fail, then is a Christians soul full of
hope, and may comfortably use this motto spero meliora, though I leave a fair
house, pleasant gardens, and loving friends, and dear Relations, yet I hope to
enjoy and inhabit an house not made with hands eternal in the heavens, whose
builder is God, to dwell with my heavenly father in his Mansion house: I hope
to enjoy better friends, more dear Relations; Communion with such as are of a
more holy society: I hope now by death to come unto Mount Sion, and unto the
City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company
of Angels. To the General Assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are
written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men
made perfect. And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12.22, 23,
24.

4 Proofs
To prove that the Righteous (i e.) true beleivers who walk uprightly,
following after Righteousness) have this Hope in their [ Death] consider some
testimonies of scripture, and some examples. Isa. 57.1, 2. The righteous
perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away,
none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. He
shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his
uprightnes. Where we have a sad complaint of the Cursed security of most
people, not regarding, nor laying to heart the sad tokens of Gods displeasure,
nor their own danger approaching, threatened by the Lords taking away his
righteous servants from among them, and secondly a Relation of the blessed
security, and happy estate of Gods people at and after their death, however
they may seem to perish from the earth, yet they are taken away from the evil
to come, and enter into peace; etc. The Lord in that Scripture gives us a
Description and Character of his own people, and of Others, of worldlings that
lived among them.

His own people are described. 1. By their Disposition and behavior while they
live here. 1. Righteous. 2. Merciful. 3. Walking in uprightnes, as Micah. 6.8.
2. By their state and condition at and after [ Death.] 1. They are taken from
the evil to come. 2. They enter into peace. 3. They rest in their beds. The
Description of worldlings and carnal people that lived among them by their
disposition and behavior, is partly in the end of the former chapter, eagerly
and inordinately pursuing worldly profits and sensual pleasures, presuming
upon long life and plenty, c. 56.11, 12. and in the first verse of this
chapter, they are said to be inconsiderat, senseless, stupid, dead-hearted,
not laying things to heart, not regarding to hear the rod, and who has
appointed it, nor to behold the Majesty of the Lord, when his hand is lifted
up. Their Dangerous state and condition, when Gods servants are taken away from
among them, is there also hinted at, its a sad omen and forerunner of evil
coming upon them. That which I specially quoted this foregoing scripture for,
was to prove, that the Righteous have hope in their death, and here it is
clearly and fully affirmed, that by death they are taken from the evil to
come, and enter into a state of blessed peace and sweet security. Another
proof here of is Revelation 14.13. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying
unto me, write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth,
yea, says the spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works
do follow them. This testimony John received by a voice from heaven, and
therefore its of undoubted truth, and asserted by the spirit of Truth, that
Gods people are in a blessed condition after death. Not only such as die for
the Lord, who were put to cruel torments, and to suffer death by Antichristian
Persecutors for not complying with them in their idolatrous worship, but such
as die in the Lord are blessed, (i.e.) such as were effectually called unto
fellowship with Jesus Christ, and united to him by faith as members of his
mystical body, are happy in their death. Death puts a period to all their
troubles and labors, and brings them to the enjoyment of rest and peace, and
to receive the reward of their works. Here are no purgatory-torments mentioned
to be endured by them after death, but a perfect cessation from all labor, and
a full enioyment of rest and bliss.

To give instance in some examples of Gods people, who have had hope in their
death; we find that Jacob, when he lay on his Deathbed, professed his hope of
salvation and enjoying a better life, Genesis 49.18. I have waited for thy
salvation, O Lord, so Abel, Enock, Noah, Abraham, Sarah, Heb. 11.13. These all
died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them a far
off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they
were strangers on earth, declaring plainly that they expected a better
Country, that is an heavenly. Thus Moses chose rather to suffer affliction
with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season;
Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt,
for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward, -- and endured, as seeing
him, who is invisible, verse. 25, 26, 27.

Job's spirit was upheld from sinking into despair under all his pressures,
losses, and afflictions, and he professes his hope even in death; Though he
slay me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13.15. as if he had said, if God should
take away my life, yet would I in the midst of death expect a better life from
him: So David, Psalm. 23.4. Though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil. And Psalm. 73.26. my flesh and my heart fails, but
God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever; his hope of being
received into glory after death, encouraged him to go on in the ways of
righteousness, whatever afflictions he underwent in his life time. Paul in
time of his imprisonment at Rome, lest the Philippians should be discouraged at
his sufferings, professes his earnest expectation and hope of salvation, and
that he was not any way afraid of death, but rather desirous of it, in regard
of the gain and benefit he should reap by it, Phil. 1.21. for to me to live is
Christ, and to die is gain; that is, Christ is my life here by grace, and
hereafter by glory; he is both the Author and end of my life, and if I be put
to death, that shall no way endamage me, but rather bring me great advantage,
in regard that thereby I shall exchange, and gain Heaven for Earth, and an
happy eternal life, for this miserable and mortal life, and verse. 23, I am in a
strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is
far better. And again, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8 giving notice of his approaching death,
and that the time of his Martyrdom was now at hand, he professes his hope in
his death. -- I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at
hand, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but
unto them also that love his appearing; and again, 1 Cor. 15.19. If we have
hope in Christ in this life only, we are of all men most miserable.

Cyprian speaking of the nature of death to believers, says: It is Janua
vitae, victoria belli, portus maris. The gate of life, the victory of war, the
haven of the Sea; death to Gods people is as the Angel was to Peter, to fetch
him out of prison, and set him at liberty; Act. 12.7. etc. and as Pharaohs
Messenger was to Joseph to remove him out of the Dungeon into Pharaohs Court,
Genesis 41.14. where he was highly advanced to Honor and Dignity.

The benefits which believers hope to be made partakers of by death, are either
such as concern their Souls, or their bodies. The Souls of believers are at
their death made perfect in holiness, Heb. 12.23. and brought to the spirits
of just men made perfect. Death abolisheth sin and corruption in believers, and
brings finalem gratiam, the perfection of grace that may make them capable of
glory: as sin brought death into the World, so death drives sin out of Gods
peoples natures, Romans 6.7. he that is dead is freed from sin, there is not so
much as any remnant of sin that cleaves to a believing Soul after death, but it
is presented unto Christ without spot, or wrinkle, void of all sinful
infirmities. Here the best of Gods Saints groan under the burden of their
corruptions, 2 Cor. 5.4. and cry out with Paul, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! before death the best
Christians complain, the good that I would, I do not, but the evil that I would
not, that I do, Romans 7.19. but now after death, the least in the Kingdom of
Heaven says, the evil that I would not, I do not, and the good that I would I
do: 1. By death they have full discharge from all possibility of offending God.
Death is a loosening to the Children of God; here they are, as it were, tied to
a stake, to be baited by Satan and his instruments, death is the breaking of
the Chain, and the Soul escapes as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowler, as
the fire burnt the bonds of the three Children, and so procured their liberty,
so death is a Jail-delivery to the Children of God. That one happy pang which
pulls away the Soul from the body, does also pull away sin, both from the Soul
and body: Greenham, Byfield. Hieron. Hildersam, etc.
to this purpose many of our English Divines have written excellently to
comfort the surviving friends of deceased Saints, and to cure them of the fear
of death. So Polan. Syntagm 342. Mors electis and credentibus non est pro
peccatis satisfactio, sed peccati abolitio, and transitus in vitam aeternam. By
death believers are freed from all occasions of sin. Temptations to sin. Power
and dominion of it; yea, from all dregs and remainders of sin. This made the
Martyrs so willing to endure any kind of death that Tyranny could devise, that
they might be rid of their sinful bands, and this corruptible burden which
presses down the Soul that looks after Christ. M. Marshal.
It was an expression of that excellent Preacher and holy mann, ow with God,
Mr. Marshal. The weakest Saint in articulo mortis has more grace than Paul had
in his life time, 1 Cor. 13.10. And this consideration should make Christians
willing to die, that they may be rid of sin, and be made perfectly holy. Mr.
Hildersam in the close of his 65 Lecture, on Psalm. 51. has a solemn Speech
worth our serious consideration; which is this: Certainly, he that desires
not, that striveth not to be willing to die, even upon this ground, because
death (and nothing but death,) will perfect the work of mortification in him,
has just cause to suspect, that there is no truth of saving grace in him, no
sense of the vile corruption of his nature, it is no bondage to him.

Another benefit which the Souls of believers partake of by death, is this:
They do immediately pass into glory, Phil. 1.23. For I am in a strait between
two, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far better. In
which words we have Paul's strait, and his own inclination expressed rather to
die than to live here; and the ground of this his desire; because its far
better for the Soul to be with Christ, than to abide in the body, where also he
implies two things in the death of the Saints. 1. There is a dissolution of the
Soul from the body. 2. That there is a conjunction of the Soul with Christ. He
expected not by death to be utterly extinguished, but translated hence some
other where; not an annihilation, but a dissolution, and he makes no
intermission of time, or interposition of place, between his dissolution, and
his being with his Savior; he speaks of his being with Christ, as the
immediater, and certain consequent of his dissolution. Death should be to him
but as a Portal opening to give him speedy admittance into the presence of the
Lord; in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. And this he speaks of as a Privilege, not only
peculiar to himself as an Apostle, or a Martyr, but common to all true
believers, 2 Cor. 5.1, 4, 6, 8. Heb. 12.23. Luke 23.43. Act. 7.59 Luke
16.22.23, 25. The Angels are ministering Spirits attending on them that are
Heirs of salvation to receive their Souls at death, and to carry them into
Abraham's bosom, (i.e.) a state of rest and happiness, where they are
comforted, where they behold the face of God, and see him as he is, and know
him as they are known of him, 1 Cor. 13.12. and where they behold Christ's
glory, Joh. 17.24. so that you see that death is exceeding gainful to
believers, and that the righteous have hope in their death, that their Souls
being made perfect in holiness shall immediately pass into glory, and enjoy
rest, and bliss in Communion with Christ.

Further, the righteous has hope in his death, in the behalf of his body,
Psalm. 16.9. my flesh also shall rest in hope; that is, as Aynsworth renders,
and explains it, shall dwell in confidence, or abide with hope, (i.e.) boldly,
safely, and securely, meaning that his body should abide, or rest in the grave,
with sure hope of rising again from the dead. The bodies of believers, being
still united to Christ, do rest in their graves until the Resurrection, 1
These. 4.14. -- them also, which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him,
tanquam membra cum capite. The grave is but a withdrawing room for the bodies
of the Saints, a sleeping room where they rest as in their beds, Isa. 57.2.
Act. 7.60. Joh. 11.11, 13, 1. The bodies of believers after death remain still
united to Christ, though death cause a separation betwixt their Souls and
bodies, yet not betwixt Christ and their dead bodies. The union wrought in
effectual calling is betwixt Christ and the believers whole man, and it is an
inseparable, indissoluble and eternal union; they are joined to Christ as their
husband, 1 Cor. 6.13. the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and
the Lord for the body, verse. 15. know ye not that your bodies are Members of
Christ, etc. Yea, temples of the holy Ghost, which is in you, verse. 19.20. Yea,
the spirit of Christ dwells in believers, Romans 8.9, 10, 11. Ioh. 6.37, 39, 40.
The Union betwixt Christ and believers holds firm in and after death, so that
their dead ashes are part of the Members of Christ in the grave; and Gods
Covenant is still of force with them in the dust, Mat. 22.31, 32, etc.

Mr. Consule Zanch. in 1 These. 4.14.
Perkins in his Cases of Conscience, 1. Book, 9. Chap. 3. Sect. expresses
himself thus: -- There is a mystical union and conjunction between Christ and
every believer, and that not only in regard of Soul, but of body also; which
being once knit, shall never be dissolved, but is eternal; whereupon the
dying, dead, rotten and consumed body remains still a member of Christ,
abides within the Covenant, and is and shall be ever a Temple of the holy
Ghost: and by virtue of their Conjunction with Christ shall be raised to glory
at the last day.

2. As the Bodies of Beleivers after death remain still united to Christ, so
they rest in their Graves as in their Beds, they rest from all labor and toil,
from all trouble and pain, yea, from all the motions of sin, and drudgery of
Satan: Musculus in Psalm 16.9. Observandum est, mortem carnis interpretatur
esse quietem, non interitum; ergo carni piorum sepulchrum non est fovea, sed
lectulus quieti destinatus. The Bodies of the Saints at Death are only fallen
asleep, Act. 7.60. We know, that natural sleep is not perpetual, we sleep and
awake again in the morning; so its but a certain time that their bodies shall
lie at rest in the Grave, they shall be awakened and raised again in the
morning of the Resurrection; and again the body being asleep can easily be
awakened, and roused up by being jogged, or called upon with a loud voice; so
the dead bodies of saints shall be much more easily raised and awakened by the
power of Christ's voice, Joh. 5.28. And as sleep is a great refreshing to sick
and weary bodies, so that they are more vigorous and lively, when they awake;
so when beleivers bodies shall be awakened out of the sleep of death, and
raised out of their Graves, as from their Beds, they shall be more active and
nimble for God than ever they were before, 1. Cor. 15.42, 43. it is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption, it is sown in dishonor, it is raised
in glory, it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. So that the bodies of
beleivers after death do not only rest in their graves, but they rest in Hope,
even in hope of a glorious resurrection, which is a 3. privilege of the
righteous in their death in regard of their bodies. The Righteous has hope in
his death, that his dead body shall be again united to his Soul, and 3. raised
up in glory, 1. Cor. 15.43. Yea, our vile bodies shall then be changed, and
fashioned like unto the glorious body of Christ, Phil. 3.21. Col. 3.4.

The Glory of beleivers bodies at the Resurrection will appear in these 5.
particulars.

1. They will be perfect and entire in regard of Parts, limbs, or senses,
however they might be maimed or defective before.

2. They will be fair, beautiful and illustrious, full of splendor and
brightness, what ever blemishes or deformityes they were disfigured withal
before, Matthew. 13.43. then shall the Righteous shine forth as the sun in the
Kingdom of their Father. The most beautiful body on earth is but like Carrion
sullyed with smoke and foot in respect of the glorified body of poor Lazarus at
that day.

3. They shall be immortal (i.e.) in such a condition, that they can never die
again. This mortal shall put on immortallity, and so Death shall be swallowed
up in victory, 1. Cor. 15.53, 54.

4. Incorruptible (i.e.) not only free from putrefaction, but also from all
weakness both of infirmity and deformity, such as cannot again be corrupted with
sin. Now our bodies are corruptible, and so mutable, subject to manifold
infirmityes, but then they shall be strong and powerful, 1. Cor. 15.42, 43. It
is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption, it is sown in weakness,
it is raised in power.

5. Spiritual Bodies, not that our bodies shall vanish into Ghosts or spirits,
but they shall be so admirably glorified and perfected, that they shall be able
to subsist without meat, drink, physike, sleep, etc. wherewith natural
bodies are sustained, Rev. 7.16. they shall hunger no more, nor thirst any
more, Matthew. 22.30.

This hope of a glorious Resurrection of his Body at the latter day comforted
and refreshed Jobs spirit in the depth of his misery under Bodily boiles and
distempers, and all his other pressures: This was an Article of that Christian
faith which he made Confession of Job 19.25, 26, 27.

Thus have I proved and cleared the truth of this Doctrinall Proposition, viz:
The Righteous has hope in his Death. I shall proceed now to lay down some
Reasons and Grounds hereof.

Reasons.
Reason. Because the Lord has made many rich and precious Promises to the
Righteous concerning the life to come, as well as for this life, 1. Tim. 4.8.
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is,
and of that which is to come. Beleivers have heard of future good things
promised in the Gospel to be bestowed upon them after this life, and this is a
ground of their hope in death, Psalm. 130.5. I wait for the Lord, my Soul does
wait, and in his Word do I hope. Paul speaking of the fruits of faith and
love, which abounded among the Colossians, mentions a motive whereby they were
incited and provoked thereunto, Col. 1.5. for the hope which is laid up for you
in heaven (i.e.) for those glorious things, which your hope assures you, are
laid up for you in heaven; Hope being there taken by a Metonymy for the thing
hoped for. But how came they to hope, that there were good things laid up for
them in heaven? He shows the ground of their hope in the next words to be the
Word of God, whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of the Gospel,
so Titus 1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised
before the world began, but has in due time manifested his word through
preaching. Beleivers are heirs of promise, unto whom God being abundantly
willing to show the immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an oath, that
by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might
have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us.

2. Reas. Because of Christ's Resurrection from the dead, 1. Cor. 15.17, 18, 19,
20. if Christ be not raised, then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ
are perished, if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable, but now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first
fruits of them that slept. Christ's Resurrection is a pledge of ours: hence
Peter's Benediction, 1. Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again unto
a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, (i.e.)
confirmed in us a living hope, or hope of life in and after death, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, because God raised him up, that we might believe
and hope in God for our Resurrection unto Glory, Verse. 21.

3. Reas. Because of Christ's Ascension, Heb. 6.19, 20. which hope we have as an
Anchor of the Soul both sure and steadfast, and which enters into that within
the vail, whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus. Hope is as the
Anchor cast out of the ship on firm ground, when tossed and driven with wind
and waves, this anchor of the Soul is cast within heaven, though a believer be
yet as a ship at sea, tossed with troubles and tempations in this world, yet
all is safe, the soul is sure, the anchor of hope being cast within heaven,
taking hold on Christ the rock of our salvation, who is entered, and ascended
into heaven as our forerunner, to prepare mansions for us, Job 14.2, 3.

4. Reas. Taken from Christ's Intercession, that is another ground of a
believers hope in death, Joh. 17.24. Father I will that they also whom thou
have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou
have given me. Christ having prayed that believers may be with him in eternal
Glory and happiness after death, they have good ground to hope and expect that
they shall be with him, and behold his Glory, for the Father hears him
always, and never denies him in any suit that he makes in the behalf of his
People, Joh. 11.42.

5. Reas. Because God has not only delivered up his Son Christ to die for
them, and to purchase life and salvation for them, but has also given Christ
unto them, and revealed and framed him in them, and given them his spirit as an
earnest in their hearts, 2. Cor. 1.22. whereby God assures them that he will
pay, as it were, the whole sum of his promises; for an earnest is as a pledge
whereby we confirm a bargain, or a piece of money whereby we assure the payment
of the whole, the first gift therefore of the spirit and of life is a pledge of
their whole inheritance which they hope to enjoy after death; so Ephesians. 1.13,
14. Col. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of Glory, and Romans 5.5. Hope makes not
ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost
which is given unto us; yea, the experience of Gods goodness and faithfullnes
toward them, which they have had in time of their life, confirms their hope
of obtaining what good things he has promised them after death, Verse. 4.
experience works Hope. So that believers in greatest straits may argue, as
David against Goliath 1. Sam. 17.37. The Lord that delivered me out of the Paw
of the Lion, and out of the Paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand
of this Philistine, and as Paul 2. Cor. 1.9, 10. We had the sentence of death
in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises
the dead, who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver, in whom we
trust that he will yet deliver us.

6. Lastly, Because of Gods bounty toward others in this life. The Lord
bestows liberal portions of outward blessings upon many that regard not to
serve and honor him, but go on in ways of Rebellion: wicked men prosper and
abound in worldly comforts sometimes, when good men want them: surely then this
argues that he has reserved better things in store for his own Children after
death, Psalm 31.19. O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for
them that fear thee! This consideration David made use of as a ground to
confirm his hope in death of enjoying happiness after this life, Psalm. 17.14,
15. the men of the World have their portion in this life, whose belly thou
fillest with thy hid treasure; As for me, I will behold thy face in
righteousness, I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness: he
professes his resolution to go on in the ways of God, expecting a gracious,
yea, a glorious issue out of all his dangers and persecutions. q.d. I will not
live wickedly, as they do, but righteously, and then I shall enjoy thy favor
here, and Heaven hereafter; I shall view thy face, and see thee plainly and
perfectly, and stand in thy presence, where is fullness of joy: when I awake
(i.e.) from the sleep of death, when I am raised out of the dust, I shall be
satisfied with thy likeness, having thine image upon me, and thy glory fully
manifested unto me in Heaven, this beatifical Vision shall so abundantly
satiate and solace my Soul, that it shall say, I have enough. So Ps 49. when in
death worldly men leave their wealth to others, and are like the beasts that
perish (i.e.) dying without hope of any further happiness, yea, in a worse
condition; for death shall feed on them, verse. 14. yea, the second death shall
have power over them, and they shall lie in Hell Torments; then says the
righteous even under the pangs of death, verse. 15. But God will redeem my Soul
from the power of the grave, for he shall receive me, Selah. Where Selah is
added, not only as a bare Musical Note for raising of the voice, etc. but it
calls for elevation of mind, and more than ordinary attention, pointing at a
clear Testimony for the immortality of the Soul, and for a better life after
this the hope whereof fills the hearts of the godly with comfort, and
triumphant joy, even under the pangs of death. [For he shall receive me]
whenever the fatal hour shall come, that body and Soul must part, God will
receive my spirit into Heaven. So again, Psalm. 73.24.26. against all the
discouragements which he met with in the ways of God, from the present
prosperity which the wicked enjoyed, and the manifold afflictions that himself
under-went, he comforts himself in certain hope of eternal life, and being
received up into glory; and hereupon resolves still to follow the conduct and
direction of Gods word and spirit: Thou shall guide me with thy counsel in this
life, and after this life ended, wilt receive me to that glory, which thou have
promised me.

Thus have I made good the truth of the Doctrinal Proposition. The righteous
has hope in his death, and confirmed it by showing you several grounds and
reasons, and should now come to make application of it; but I desire first to
remove one objection that seems to lie in the way.

Quest. If the righteous have such hope in their death, how comes it to pass,
and why is it that some good Christians are so fearful of death, and so
unwilling to die? Why are they not rather desirous to die, having such hope of
future glory and happiness?

Answ. It is true, there may be in the dearest of Gods Children an
unwillingnesse and fear to die, Jeremy petitioned King Zedekiah, that he might
not be sent again to the house of Jonathan the Scribe, lest he should die
there, Jer. 37.20. if he were shut up close prisoner in that nasty stinking
Dungeon: so our Savior forewarning Peter of the manner of his death, tells
him, he should be carried whither he would not, Ioh. 21.18. and some of the
Martyrs have sometimes found fear and unwillingnesse in themselves to die.
Latymer in a Letter to B. Ridley writes thus: Pray for me, I say, pray for me,
for I am sometimes so fearful, that I would creep into a Mous-hole, etc. as
Lot lingered, when God would take him out of Sodom, so there is some
backwardness and unwillingnesse in the Saints of God to leave this world, and
to die. And the reasons of it may be, 1. Death causes a parting of two most
dear, inward, and ancient friends; the dissolution of Soul and body one from
the other is unpleasing to nature, old friends are loath to part: when David
and Jonathan were to depart one from another; O how grievous was their parting,
1 Samuel 20.41. But the Soul and body have been more inward and ancient friends
than Jonathan and David were no marvel therefore though they part so
unwillingly. The untying of the Marriage-knot between Soul and body is
unwelcome to nature, though grace may bid it welcome, which suggests another
reason. 2. The best of Gods Children believe but in part, and are not perfectly
rid of sin and corruption till death. They have flesh remaining in them as well
as spirit, Gal. 5.17. and though the spirit be willing, yet the flesh is weak,
Matthew. 26.41. The spirit says to death as to Christ, Come but the flesh says,
Go; The flesh says, its good being here; though the spirit says, its better
being in Heaven: and it may be, believers do not stir up their graces, nor read
over their Evidences, nor consider seriously of their Privileges by, and after
death. Yet lastly, I answer, Though there be some unwillingnesse in the best to
die, yet they know, it is their fault and sin to be unwilling; and they chide
themselves for it, and overcome this unwillingnesse in the end; many who in
their lifetime have seemed unwilling to die, and afraid of death, yet when it
has come to the point, have been suddenly strengthened beyond expectation,
willingly and cheerfully to lay down their heads on the block; yea, to yield up
their bodies to the flames, and have bid death welcome, though it has seized
upon them with instruments of cruelty, and tormenting pains; as old Hilarion
encouraged himself to die, Egredere, anima mea, noli timere; go forth, O my
Soul, be not afraid to die. However, though some let the aqua vitae Bottle hang
by, and use it not when a qualm comes, yet such as actuate their faith, and
renew their repentance daily, and exercise themselves in having a good
conscience, may rejoice in hope of the glory of God, and be above dismaying
fears, though they walk in the Valley of the shadow of death.

I hasten now to the Application of the Doctrine; seeing the Righteous have
Hope in their Death.

The uses hereof may be of 1. Confutation. 2. Information. 3. Examination. 4.
Exhortation.

Use. 1.
Use 1. Of Confutation, of that gross cursed opinion of the Mortalists, who
deny the immortality of the Soul, and hold that man's Soul dies with the body,
and that whole man is a compound wholly mortal; and that the present going of
the Soul to Heaven, or Hell, is a mere fiction, with much more such unsavory
stuff, which has been published of late, better becoming Professors of
Epicurisme, than of Christianity: whereas the Scripture teaches us, that the
Soul of Man is the spirit of life, breathed in by God, and made immortal; that
it cannot die at the separation from the body, Genes. 2.7. Math. 10.28. And
that the spirits of believers and just men in their separation from their
bodies pass immediately to Heaven, to be and live with the Lord, Math. 22.32.
2 Cor. 5.4, 8. Phil. 1.23. In that 22. of Matthew. 31, 32. Christ proves against
the Sadduces, the Resurrection of the body, by an argument drawn from the
immortality of the Soul, and maintains it, that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were
then living in regard of their Souls, though their bodies were in the dust.
They, whose God the Lord is, must needs be in being and living: But the Lord
said long after their death, Exodus 3.6. I am the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob: It is well observed in our English Annotations, on
Math. 22.32. He does not say, the Lord of Abraham, for he is Lord of livelesse
things also, Math. 11.25. the Lord of Heaven and Earth; but the God of Abraham,
i.e. in Covenant with him. Now seeing this Covenant of God was with the bodies
of these three Patriarcks, as well as with their Souls, as appears by their
Circumcision, it follows, that as their Souls were then alive, so their bodies
must needs be raised from the dead, and be made eternally happy. Mr. Buroughs
in the beginning of his Gospel-Conversation notes, that Phil. 1.23. is a
notable Scripture to prove the immortality of the Soul, for certainly if the
Soul did die with the body, it could not have been better for Paul to have been
dead than to live, it were better that Paul had lived even to the day of
Judgment, than to have died, and so to be nothing, and turned into dust; but
he says, that when he died, he should be with Christ, which was better for
him: therefore he knew the Soul does not die with the body.

So Zanchy observes two arguments in that desire, or wish of Paul, Phil. 1.23.
to prove the immortality of the Soul. 1. in that expression to depart, be
dissolved, or loosed; Death is no destruction, but a dissolution only, or
taking asunder the parts of which we are composed, that is a separation of the
Soul from the body. Solutio a corpore declarat animam esse substantiam per se
subsistentem. 2. to be with Christ; which cannot be, unless the Soul be a
substance, subsisting by it self, Animae sanctorum exutae corporibus migrant in
coelum and sunt cum Christo.

So Psalm. 49.15. is a clear testimony for the immortality of the Soul, and for
a better life after this; without which assurance we might say with the Apostle
in the language of Epicures, 1 Cor. 15.32. Let us eat and drink for to morrow
we die, which Athiestical speech of theirs the Apostle reproves in the words
following, and fully confutes their Opinion in that chapter.

2. Use.
Of Information in 2. Branches.

1. It informs us of the Gain of Godliness, if the Righteous have such hope in
their death, then surely the mystery of Christianity is a most rich and
gainful Profession, if it be followed and improved by us aright, 1. Tim. 4.8.
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come: so 1. Tim. 6.6, 7. Godliness with contentment
is great gain. Death will plunder and bereave us of all our worldly gain, and
prove a trapdore to let our souls drop down into hell, if we have busied our
selves in the pursuit of worldly riches, with the neglect of godliness, as the
Apostle shows, verse. 9.10. and therefore he calls off Timothy, from following
after worldly gain too greedily; yea, he bids him flee these things, and
exhorts him to follow after Righteousness, Godliness -- that so he may lay hold
on eternal life, verse. 11.12. and Paul tells us Phil. 1.21. for to me to live
is Christ, and to die is gain. Death is gainful to such as live to Christ, so
Solomon Prove. 11.4. shows us what is more profitable and gainful than Riches,
namely Righteousness, and when and also wherein it will appear so, even in
the day of wrath, and hour of death, when riches will not profit, then
Righteousness will stand us in greatest steed, and prove most advantageous to
us. Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but Righteousness delivers from
death. Death is the King of terrors, Hells stalking horse; the fear of it
keeps men in bondage, most men look upon it as their greatest enemy, not to be
resisted nor avoided by them. But now Righteousness delivers from it: The
righteous has a wonderful victory over it, and receives wonderful gain by
it, as I have showed at large before, therefore Righteousness is better than
Riches.

2. I hasten now to the 2. Branch of the use of Information, which is to show
us the truth of that Proverb. The Righteous is more excellent then his
neighbor, Pro. 12.26. and wherein it does appear viz: in this, that the
Righteous has hope in his death. Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold
the upright, for the end of that man is peace. However the wicked and ungodly
may vilify and despise Gods people, counting them as the filth of the world,
and the offscouring of all things, while they live, thinking meanly of them,
as a company of silly fools and mad men; yea, speaking evil of them, because
they will not run with them to the same excess of riot: yet when believers
come to die, then it will appear that they are the excellent of the earth, in
so much that even Balaam wished that he might die the death of the Righteous,
and let my last end be like his, Numb. 23.10. Yea, as the saints are the most
precious and excellent in the account of God, while they live, so that he
reckons them as his Jewels, and peculiar treasure, so also their death is
precious in the sight of the Lord, Psalm. 110.15. But as for the wicked it is
not so with them, Psalm. 34.21. Evil shall slay the wicked (i.e.) they shall
perish in their sins; the vulgar Latin translates it, Mors peccatorum p^ssima,
the death of sinners and wicked men is worst of all, and Bellarmin glossing
upon it gives this reason, quid initium erit cruciatuum aeternorum, because
death to wicked men is the beginning of eternal torments, an inlett to
endless woe and misery. However for a while wicked men may seem to flourish
as the green Bay tree, and the proud may be counted happy; they that work
wickedness may be set up, and they that tempt God may be even delivered, yet
there will come a time when the Lord will make up his Jewels, and then we
shall discern between the righteous and the wicked between him that serves
God, and him that serves him not. Yea, the day comes that shall burn as an
oven and all the proud, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble. But unto
you that fear my name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his
wings, Mal. 3.17, 18. Chap. 4.1, 2. David having in the first Psalm described
the Righteous by his Properties, and mentioned some of his Privileges, and
pronounced him blessed, puts a difference verse. 4. etc. between the righteous
and the wicked, and tells us the ungodly are not so, but are like the Chafe,
which the wind drives away, and as Solomon tells us in the words before my
Text, the wicked is driven away in his wickedness: Having considered the state
of the righteous in his death, and shown it to be very hopeful and
comfortable, that it may more fully appear that the righteous is more excellent
than his neighbor, viz. his wicked neighbor that is set so near him in the
Text, let us a little consider what becomes of him at his death, what is said
of him here. [He is driven away,] thrust at, chased as chafe before the wind.
Here let us enquire into these, 4 particulars, 1. the manner how, 2. the place
whence, and from what he is driven 3. whither, 4. by whom he is driven, by what
Drivers.

How is the wicked driven away? 1. suddenly, 2. violently, 3. desperately.
First suddenly and unexpectedly, Psalm. 73.18, 19. surely thou did set them in
slippery places, thou castedst them down into destruction, how are they brought
into Desolation as in a moment! they are utterly consumed with terrors, Job
21.13. in a moment they go down to the grave.

Secondly violently, forcibly against his will, Job 27.20, 21. Terrors take
hold on him as waters, a tempest steals him away, in the night the east wind
carries him away, and he departs, and as a storm hurleth him out of his
place, the troubles and terrors which befall wicked men at their death are
here set out by similitudes taken from a deluge of waters, or storm of wind,
which come suddenly, and prevail irresistibly, overturn all in their way, like
a whirle-winde. Death takes them away suddenly, spite in their teeth, Luke
12.20. Thou fool this night shall thy Soul be required of thee, Eccles. 9.12.
as fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in
the snare, so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falls
suddenly upon them.

Thirdly, desperately driven away in his wickedness, dying either in the act of
sin, or under the guilt and bondage of sin, Joh. 8.21. it was a dreadful doom
threatened by our savior against the unbelieving Jews, ye shall die in your
sins, its better to die in a ditch, or in prison, or on the gallows, than to
die in sin: to be driven away in ones wickedness, is a desperate driving away;
to die without hope, opposite to the righteous man's case in his death, Prove.
11.7. when a wicked man dies his expectation shall perish, and the hope of
unjust men perishes, (i.e.) his affection of hope, and happiness hoped for, and
strongest means to attain to his hope, shall end with his life, and die at his
death, and vanish away at the time of his destruction. So Job 8.13, 14. Thus
for the manner how the wicked is driven away.

Secondly, from whence and from what? He is driven from all earthly friends,
Comforts enjoyments, hopes, habitation, Job 18.14. his confidence shall be
rooted out of his Tabernacle, and it shall bring him to the King of terrors,
verse. 18, he shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the
world, from all means of Grace, Eccles. 9.10. from all further society with
Gods people; yea, from Gods gracious presence and protection, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.

3.
Whither? into darkness, his body into the slimy valley, into the pit of
corruption, and his Soul into the pit of destruction, Psalm. 9.17. the wicked
shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God. Death to wicked
men is Hells pale stalking-horse; or the Riden on that pale horse, with whom
Hell followed after, Rev. 6.8.

4.
By what Drivers?By sword, diseases, Death, sin, satan, etc. The Prophet
Ezekiel denouncing Gods vengeance against the Ammonites, Moabites and other
Enemies for their insolency and insulting over the Jews in their Calamity,
says Ezekiel. 35.6. Blood shall pursue thee, since thou have not hated blood,
blood shall pursue thee, as Abels blood pursued Cain with Hue and Cry for
vengeance, Prove. 13.21. Evil pursues sinners; Pro. 11.19. As righteousness
tends to life, so he that pursues evil, pursues it to his own death, 2.
Pet. 2.1. wicked men, eagerly pursuing their own lusts, bring upon themselves
swift destruction. The Psalmist speaks of a driving Angel, that shall chase and
pursue wicked men. Psalm. 35.5, 6. let them be as the Chafe before the wind,
and let the Angel of the Lord chase them; -- yea, let the Angel of the Lord
persecute them. Thus you see there want not Drivers to chase away the wicked
out of the world, and to hurry them into the pit of destruction, whereby the
second branch of the Use of Information has been fully and clearly made good,
that the Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor. Death is so far from
putting an end to the miseries of wicked men, that its the beginning of their
sorrows, an entrance into endless woe and misery; it puts an end to their
joys and troubles too in this world, but it brings them to a world of
everlasting troubles, Revel. 2.23. they shall be killed with death. Death is
killing to the wicked; but its mors vitalis, quickening, curing, and very
gainful to the Godly, it puts them into possession of eternal life, the
Righteous has hope in his death. Therefore let none be discouraged from the
ways of God, because of the flowrishing of the wicked, or the troubles and
afflictions of the righteous in this life: let them not fret, nor envy at the
prosperity of the ungodly; nor repine at their own present adversity, but wait
patiently on the Lord, and humble themselves under his potent hand, and he will
exalt them in due time, Isa. 3.10. say to the righteous, that it shall be well
with him; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings, woe unto the wicked, it
shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him. I shall
add a word of counsel to them before I proceed, and it shall be such as Daniel
gave to Nebuchadnezzar; after he had considered of his dream, and given the
interpretation; that they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be
with the beasts of the field, Dan. 4.25. he advises him in these words, verse.
27. wherefore, O King, let my counsel be acceptable to thee, and break off thy
sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, if
it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity. So say I, that ye may not be driven
away in your wickedness from men by death, and that your dwelling may not be
with worse company than the beasts of the field, even with Devils in Hell, let
my counsel be acceptable to you; Drive away your sins, and Satan's suggestions,
as Abraham did the Birds and Fowls from his Sacrifices, Genesis 15.11. yea,
ferret out and chase away all your lusts, those factors for Satan out of your
hearts, as our Savior drove all those Chap-men out of the Temple, Ioh. 2.15.
or in the words of Ezekiel, cap. 18.30, 31. Repent and turn your selves from
all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin; cast away from
you all your transgressions whereby you have transgressed -- for why will ye
die? Yea, why will ye die without hope, by dying in sin? The Lord has no
pleasure in the death of him that dies, wherefore turn your selves, and live
ye; there is yet hope in Israel concerning the Remission of your sins, and the
salvation of your Souls, if ye harden not your hearts, but hearken to the Lords
voice, whiles it is called to day. But lest any that seem to be righteous in
their own eyes, and full of hopes, should be deceived, and frustrated of their
expectation when they come to die, it will be requisite that we proceed to
another Use.

Use. 3.
3. Use. Of Trial, and Examination, both of our Hope and of our Righteousness.
Most men feed themselves with Hope now while they are at ease, in health, and
while they live peaceably and securely; but its an harder thing to have hope in
our death when we come to die, when our consciences are awakened, and our sins
with all their aggravations come fresh into our minds, then many are full of
perplexity, and horror, as Pope Adrian, who cried out Animula vagula,
blandula, qua nunc abibis in loca? Ah poor silly Soul whither art thou now
going? and that Emperor, Dubious vixi, anxius morior, nescio quo vadam. I lived
doubting, I die perplexed, and know not what will become of me after death. But
there may be carnal presumption, or a mere groundless conjecture which some
may be mistaken in, as if it were true sound hope. Therefore try,

1. Trials.
Have ever been hopeless in thy life, and in a despairing condition in thy
self, in regard of thy sin and misery? Were ever convinced of thy corrupt and
cursed estate by reason of sin; and of the insufficiency of all thy own duties
and performances; and how helpless all Creatures will be found toward thy
relief? Romans 7.9.10, 11. Paul was alive without the Law once, but when the
Commandment came, sin revived, and Paul died, etc. He thought himself in a good
condition, and had hope in himself, before the Law was brought home to his
conscience; he knew not his malady, but thought himself fish-whole, and in a
safe way, though he pursued his lusts, till he was spiritually enlightened, and
saw that the Law of God forbids and condemns lust, and the first motions of
evil concupiscence: Have thou been thoroughly convinced and humbled, so as to
disclaim and renounce all confidence in the flesh? as Phil. 3.3. have thou laid
thy mouth in the dust? Lam. 3.26, 29. It is good that a man should both hope,
and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord; but the way hereunto is by
sitting alone and keeping silence, and by putting his mouth in the dust, he
puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope. Gracious hope is
seated in a broken heart.

2. Is Christ in you? Col. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of glory, while people
are without Christ, they are without hope, Ephesians. 2.12. Is Christ thy life? The
principle of thy life? The pattern of thy life; the scope and end of thy life?
If so; thou may well hope to appear with him in glory, Col 3.4.

3. Art thou Evangelically righteous, walking in thy uprightness and
integrity* following after righteousness. Godliness -- having respect to all
Gods Commandments? Without which, thou may come short of laying hold of
eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.11, 12. Psalm 15. Isa. 33.15, 16, 17. he that walks
righteously, and speaks uprightly -- he shall dwell on high -- thine eyes
shall see the King in his beauty. Its only the righteous, who has hope in his
death, its called the hope of righteousness, every one that has this hope
purifieth himself.

4. Do thou patiently wait for what thou hopest to enjoy? Romans 8.25. if we
hope for what we see not, then do we with patience wait for it: as faith is the
Root of Hope, so patience is the fruit of it. Its the nature of hope to breed
patience; if we hope for life hereafter, we must be patient, till we possess
it. Hope is a grace of God whereby we expect good to come, patiently waiting
till it come, or a certain expectation of eternal life with patience. The
Merchant in hope or gain endures the water. The husbandman in hope of a
plentiful Crop at Harvest endures the cold and the wet. He waits, and has
long patience for it, Iam. 5.7, 8. Job 14.14. all the days of my appointed
time will I wait, till my change come, Heb. 10.34, 36. The Christian Jews took
joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves that in Heaven they
had a better, and an enduring substance, and the Apostle tells them, they had
need of patience, that after they had done the will of God, they might receive
the promise, Romans 12.12. such as rejoice in hope, are patient in tribulation.

5. Is thy hope lively, active, vigorous to put thee upon mortifying thy
corruptions, purifying thy heart and life? Does it produce Gospel-fruits, and
provoke thee to be zealous of good works? 1 Pet. 1.3. its called a lively hope,
or a living hope, every one that has this hope purifieth himself, even as he
is pure, 1 John 3.3. All that rightly hope for salvation by Christ, besides the
righteousness imputed by God, seek to be inherently holy, Col. 1.5, 6. for the
hope which is laid up for you in Heaven, whereof ye heard before in the Gospel,
-- which bringoth forth fruit in you, etc. verse. 27.28. So Col. 3.1, 2, 4, 5
from the consideration of their hope of future glory with Christ, he exhorts
them to heavenly mindedness, and to mortify their earthly Members, etc. So
Titus 2.11, 12, 13, 14. The grace of God teaches us that denying ungodliness,
and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present World, looking for that blessed hope, etc. Try by these marks whether
your hope be such as will not make you ashamed, but stand you in stead to
afford you comfort in the hour of death, or whether you be in the number of
those that are in danger of being driven away in their wickedness, and so
apply comfort, or terror accordingly, but I must hasten to one Use more, and
so conclude.

4. Use.
Of Exhortation, in 2. Branches.

1. To the surviving friends and relations of dying and deceased Saints, to
moderate their grief and sorrow for their Christian friends when they die,
seeing the righteous has hope in his death, and by death is made partaker of
so many privileges, and enjoyes the possession of what we yet desire and hope
for; let not Christians sorrow as men without hope, for them which are asleep
in Jesus, 1 These. 4.13, 14. He forbids not Christian sorrow for the dead, but
Heathenish; not moderate, but excessive and immoderate, either in respect of
time, or measure of our grief; we may water our Plants for our deceased friends
(as one expresses it,) but not drown them. It is good that we should lay to
heart the death of the righteous, and take notice of Gods hand in it, and our
loss and danger thereby, so as to mourn and be affected with sorrow for it;
the Lord blames them for their stupidity and regardlesnesse, who laid it not to
heart when the righteous were taken away, Isa. 57.1. but we should not suffer
our hearts to be overwhelmed with grief; but moderate our sorrow, considering
their gain and benefit by death; they are taken away from evil to come, and
enter into peace. Our Savior, perceiving the hearts of his Disciples sadded at
the thoughts of his departure from them, tells them, Joh. 14.28. if ye loved me
ye would rejoice, because I go unto the Father. See how David moderated and
assuaged his grief and sorrow, when he understood that his Child was dead, by
considering that God had now revealed his will by his work, whereunto his
people must patiently submit their wills; and that it would be bootlesse, 2 Samuel 12.23.
and in vain for him to afflict his Soul further with grief in regard of his
Child, whom he could not restore to life, being now dead: and further he
considered his own mortality, and his Childs happy estate by death, which
David also comforted himself in hope of attaining unto. I shall go to him, etc.
Consider how willing and ready Barzillai was to part with Chimham, and glad to
have him preferred in the Court of King David, 2 Samuel 19.37. and shall not we
be content and willing to part with our dearest friends and relations for their
good, when the King of Heaven sends for them to live in his Court, and to stand
in his presence? where is sulnesse of joy, and pleasures for ever more?

The 2. Branch of this Use of Exhortation is of more general concernment; to
exhort all, so to redeem their time, and to improve their talents whilst they
live, that they may have hope in their death; and that their hope may not be
cut off, and make them ashamed; to this purpose observe and practice these 8.
Directions.

1. Renounce all confidence in the flesh, and lay your mouths in the dust; sit
alone, consider your ways, look into the glass of the Law to discover and
take a view of your spiritual spots, blemishes, and deformities, so as to loath
and abhor your selves, yea, to despair in your selves, by reason of your sin
and misery, Lam. 3.28.29.

2. Close in with Christ, get interest in him by faith, Col. 1.27. Christ in
you the hope of glory, but without Christ without hope, Ephesians. 2.12. Fides est
fundamentum spei. Faith is the foundation of true hope, Gal 5.5. John 11.25,
26. Jesus said unto Martha. I am the Resurrection, and the life, he that
believes in me, though he were dead yet shall he live and whosoever lives,
and believes in me shall never die.

3. Renew thy repentance daily, 1 John 3.3. Every one that has this hope must
purify himself, they that hope to appear with Christ in glory, must mortify
their earthly Members, Col. 3 4, 5. Die daily to sin lest thou die in sin, and
so perish for ever. The wicked is driven away in his wickedness: such as look
for that blessed hope must deny ungodliness. Tit. 2.12, 13. sin deadens and
destroys hope.

4. Follow after righteousness, 1 Timothy 4.8 6.11, 12. seek righteousness -- it
may be, ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords wrath, Zeph. 2.3. saving hope
is called the hope of righteousness, Gal. 5 5. Walk uprightly, Isa. 57.2. Add
to your faith virtue etc. for ^o an entrance shall be ministered to you
abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2
Pet. 1.5 11. Be abundant in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know that
your labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. Ult. This consideration
afforded succor and relief to the drooping spirit of Hezekiah, when he
received the sentence of death from the Lord against himself, that he had
walked before the Lord in truth, and done that which was good in his sight,
Isa. 38.3.

5. Sit loose from the World in your hearts and affections, and be
heavenly-minded, having your conversation in Heaven. Paul tells the Philippians
that their end is destruction who mind earthly things, and they that look for
the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, to come from Heaven to change their vile
bodies, and that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, have their
conversation in Heaven, Phil 3.19.20, 21. So 1 Timothy 6.8, 9, 10, 11. directing
them how to lay hold on eternal life, he advises them to moderate their
affections toward the good things of the World; and to be content with
necessaries, because of the danger of covetousness, and inordinate desire of
riches, whereby men have been drowned in destruction and perdition, and have
pierced themselves through with many sorrows.

6. Be well grounded in the knowledge of the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. Col. 3.16.
Psalm. 130 5. I wait for the Lord, my Soul does wait, and in his word do I hope.
Study the Promises, the Tenor of them, and to whom they are made, that so thou
may be ready to give a reason of the hope that is in thee, 1 Pet. 3.15.

7. Labor for a patient submissive frame of spirit in every condition, to
undergo what he inflicts, and to wait his leisure, for deliverance out of all
straits, Heb. 10.36. ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will
of God, ye may inherit the promises, they that would rejoice in hope must be
patient in tribulation, Romans 12.12. Romans 8.25.

7. Lastly be much in prayer unto the Lord, who is the God of hope, that ye may
abound in hope, through the power of the holy Ghost, Romans 15.13. and that your
hearts may be filled with all joy and peace in believing: and that you may be
made partakers of the righteousness of God, both imputed unto justification,
and infused by his spirit unto sanctification, that as becomes Trees of
righteousness of the Lords planting, ye may be filled with fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God; so
shall ye have hope in your death, and lay hold on eternal life; for they which
abound in such fruits of righteousness, shall abound also in the sure and
certain hope of eternal life.

I should now conclude, and forbear to speak any thing of the dead, knowing
that to say much in commendation of the dead is sometimes more offensive than
profitable to the living: but that some Scripture examples encourage me
hereunto, Act. 9.36.39* Luke being guided by the spirit of God makes mention of
a certain Disciple at Joppa named Tabitha, and publishes it after her death,
that she was a woman full of good works and Alms deeds which she did; and
tells us of many mourning Widows, showing the Coats and Garments which Dorcas
made while she was with them. See what ample commendations are given of that
good King Josiah, 2 King 23 25. like unto him was there no King before him,
that turned unto the Lord with all his heart, and with all his Soul, and with
all his might, neither after him arose there any like him, and Heb 11. that
whole Chapter is an Encomium setting forth the commendations of men and women,
famous in their generations for manifesting the life of their faith by their
works. And in Matthew. 26.7, 13. the Lord Christ takes care that the memorial of
that woman that showed so much respect and good affection to him as to bestow a
box of costly Ointment upon him, should not be buried with her Corpse But
wherever the Gospel shall be preached in the whole World, there shall also this
that this woman has done, be told for a memorial of her. However some of his
Disciples might censure her rashly, as being too lavish and wastfull, Christ
the most absolute pattern of temperance, defends this expense in respect of
the circumstances, and tells them, that she was so far from being blameworthy,
that the memory of this act of her piety, and good affection to him should live
to all ages.

The best actions of good men and women may be sometimes misconstrued by
Christ's own Disciples, as we see there; Yet Christ, who knows the intentions
of his people, sets a price on their good works, and defends them, though men
misinterpret and condemn them. The memory of ought done for Christ, or any of
his, God will not suffer to perish.

This woman's Name was Mary, the sister of Lazarus and Martha, as you may see,
Joh. 12.3. she delighed to sit at Jesus feet and hear his word, Luke 10.39. to
whom Christ gives Testimony, that she had chosen that good part, which shall
never be taken from her, verse. 42. she bestowed much costly ointment upon the
feet of Jesus, as well as upon the head, and the house was filled with the
odor of the ointment; such another Mary was this, so affectionately desirous
to sit at Jesus feet, and to hear his word; and so ready to any act of love
and beneficence to Christ the Head or any of his members, that she made and
bestowed much costly ointment and other precious cordialls even upon the feet
of Christ, the poorest and meanest Christians, when in their sickness,
lamenesse, or other infirmityes, she was made acquainted with their conditions.
The odor of her sweet Ointments did not only fill that house where she made
them, but the benefit and virtue of them has been felt to the refreshing of
very many in other families of this Country, where her memory is and will be
honored. For me to speak much in Commendation of that precious Gentlewoman
(the (...) of whose Corpse has occasioned this Concourse of people and
solemnity,) would be but as if I should hold forth a Candle to show you the
sun, she was such a bright shining light, and the Graces of Gods spirit did
so eminently and illustriously sparkle forth in her speeches and behavior, to
the observation of such as had any acquaintance or occasion to converse with
her that the Lord has caused a great Ecclypse, and Darkness to obscure the
glory of that family, and this whole Neighborhood, in taking her from us; Yea,
and much sadness and heavines to seize upon all our spirits, at our being
deprived of so choice a blessing as we enjoyed in her. I am confident, the
praise and properties of a virtuous woman mentioned by Solomon, Pro. 31.10.
etc. might as warrantably without flattery, be attributed and applied to her,
as to any Gentlewoman in this whole County, without disparagement to any other.
She was a woman that truly feared the Lord, therefore she shall be praised,
verse. 30. she was very diligent and solicitous about making her Calling and
Election sure, and with tears trickling down her cheeks has she often in
private Conference propounded doubts, and desired Resolutions and directions
from me tending thereunto, such as lived in that family, or rosorted thither,
knew her to be very conscionable in observing and sanctifying the Lords day,
and provoking others thereunto, calling her servants as well as her children to
account what they could remember of the sermons they heard: she began betimes
like Timothies Mother Eunice, and Solomon's Mother Bathsheba to justruct her
children in the knowledge of the scriptures, and to drop and instill into her
little ones the Principles of Christianity, and to train them up in the way
that they should go; she was not only careful that duties of Religion might
be attended on daily by those of her family, but was also conscionable and
frequent in closet-dutyes. She was adorned with a meek and a quiet spirit,
which in the sight of God is of great price. And in her behavior to her
Hushand, her chaste conversation was coupled with Reverence, Love and Obedience;
a true Christian Yoke Fellow, helpful to him in bearing the yoke of Christ,
and tenderly regarding the good of his Soul, as well as discreetly managing the
affairs of the family. She was of a sweet, winning, courteous, affable
disposition to all, very ready to succor and relieve any that were poor or
sick, whose wants were made known to her, whether strangers or neighbors: she
was so far from placing any confidence in the flesh, or resting upon any
thing in her self, or her own performances, that though she was in high esteem
among us for her adorning the Gospel with an holy and unblameable
Conversation, yet she was very vile in her own eyes, and groned much under the
sense of her own corruptions; her Soul panted so earnestly after Jesus Christ,
that she counted all but loss and dung that she might win Christ, and be found
in him. In my last conference with her, after the discovery of some conflicts
betwixt faith and doubting, it pleased the Lord so sweetly to come in to the
releife of her drooping spirit, Nehem. 1.11.
and the quieting and satisfying of her Conscience after some musings, on Mal.
4.2 that he enabled her to glorify his free Grace, and to set her seal to his
Testimony concerning Christ, in so much that with much vigor and alacrity of
spirit she expressed her Resolution in these words. I am resolved through Gods
Grace to cast my self into the arms of Jesus Christ, and rely wholly upon him,
who I trust, will not suffer me to perish. Indeed that family and this Parish
was adorned with a very precious Jewel, whiles that we enjoyed her, but the
Lord judging us all unworthy of her, has taken her hence to wear in his own
bosom in heaven, whereby we are all deprived of a singular spur to Piety and
help to Devotion: I shall add no more concerning her but make one request to
you all that you will not only learn by this sad warning of our Mortality to be
prepared for death, by following after Righteousness; that you may have hope
in your death, and follow her into Glory; but that you will express your love
and respect to her sorrowful and disconsolate (...) fellow and motherlesse
Children; in praying, that (...) improovement may be made by him of this sad
(...) him and his family; and that the children may (...) Gra^e as (...) years.
They being now deprived of any furth^^ (...) of their mother, let me desire you
to be in (...) much in prayer with the Lord, that Christ may be framed in them;
and that they may hereafter be blessings to that family and their Country, and
that this Ancient family of the Morleyes may continue to be eminent for
yielding good Patriots, and men of public spirits, ready to honor God and
serve their Country in succeeding Generations.

FINIS.

