A Brief ANSWER Unto a Book Entitled SHETINAH, OR, A Demonstration of the
Divine Presence in places of Religious Worship; Published by John
Stillingfleet, who styles himself M. A. Rector of Beckingham in Lincolnshire,
and late Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge. In which Book he has
declared many perverse things against the people of God (called Quakers,) and
for so much as is considerable, wherein that people are any way concerned, it
is in the power of God here Answered, By one who is set for the defense of the
Gospel, WILLIAM SMITH.

But the wicked are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose waves cast
up mire and dirt, Isai. 57. 20. Printed in the Year, 1664.

To the READER*
Reader,
IT is my love to Gods precious Truth and People, that does engage me to this
undertaking, for I am not a man of strife, though at this time constrained to
make a just defense against the force of an open enemy: and though the battle
has been long, and enemies many, that has appeared against us, and that the
Answers which has been given to several opposers might be sufficient on our
behalf, yet seeing that they still rise up against us in open view, we have
strength in the Lord to fight the good fight of faith, for the trutb of God
has ever met with many and great oppositions in every manifestation through
all ages, and it has always been opposed as error and delusion, and such as
have lived in it as heretics and seducers, and so the truth not being known as
it is, it has been censured by strangers to be the greatest delusion, who in
darkness and blindness has always oppressed and persecuted the birth born
of it, and so it is at this day, as by the great opposition, oppression, and
persecution of those that live in it, does clearly manifest; and whereas John
Stillingfleet has endeavored to cloud the Sun in a clear day, yet his
darkness cannot remain upon the glorious truth, but with the light and power
of God is removed as airy vapors, therefore Reader be equal in thy judgment,
and let Gods witness determine the matter, and though many answers be but
short, yet if thou reads with that of God in thee, thou will find them full to
the matter stated, and if thou by diligent reading reap any profit to thy soul,
the end of my labor will be answered, who am a lover of all souls.

W. S.

READER, thou may take notice that John Stillingfleet's Book was Answered
more at large in the 10. Month, 1662. but through miscarriage at the Press,
some part of it was lost, and the remaining part is but lately come to my
hands, which is the reason that this came no sooner to view.

Given forth the second time in the 11. Month, 1663.
A Brief Answer, etc.
John Stillingfleet, I shall collect some heads out of thy Book, wherein the
truth and people of God are most concerned, and briefly answer them.
THou have directed an Epistle to one whom thou calls Right Honorable Anthony
Lord Ashbie, one of his Ma^esties most Honorable Privy Counsel, and thou
acknowledges his goodness and favors, and upon such considerations thou
say, thou prostrates the Treatise of thy Book at his Honors feet, not with
any hopes to equallize his worth, or merit his patronage with so slender an
Essay as it is.

Answ. Such gratuities for favors, manifest but little kindness, and if well
considered, will not be found worthy of any acceptance; for it being a
Treatise against the truth and people of God, it is not to be received or
entertained as a seasonable gift, and being but a slendour Essay, it is in the
lowest and weakest manner offered in thy own way, and so altogether unworthy of
reception by him, at whose feet thou have prostrated it.

Thou say, the Majestic Shetinah, and the divine presence in Gospel worship
fills both pages of thy ensuing discourse.

Answ. The majesty and glory of God is in himself, and cannot be engraven or
printed in pages, and as for thy matter with which thou have filled thy pages,
it does not savor of the divine presence, as presently will appear, but thy
pages are filled with thy own conceptions, and thou offers them as divine
truths.

Thou say, all thy ambition is, by this slender Essay, to act the part of
Socrates his staff.

Answ. Socrates staff, and the divine presence is not alike, and thou have
soon forgotten that thou said thy pages were filled with the div^ne presence,
but it is here manifested what thou fills them withal, and what thy Essay
tends to, and what thy ambition is to act, which indeed is more like a
heathen then a Christian.

Thou say, too too many want such a staff to correct them for their
errors, and that the Ministers of the Gospel are looked upon as the Pursivants
of the great whore of Babylon, and are set at open defiance.

Answ. Would thou be correcting error with thy staff before thou have showed
what error is, and who they are that live in it, and did ever Gospel Ministers
correct errors with a staff, though too too many have lived in manifest
errors, and if errors be so to be corrected, then I am sure the staff would
fall to thy own share, who calls truth error, and would be correcting it with
a staff, which manifests that thou art a Pursivant of the great whore indeed,
and we cannot but pity thee, though we set thy staff at open defiance, but
Gospel Ministers are owned and honored, and that in love unfeigned.

Thou say, the Spirit of life, the light within, the everlasting word, the
everlasting Gospel, are the choice Rarieties that will relish only in the
curious pal^ates of our Quakers, and in the mean time, thou say the Church
of God lies destitute and forlorn.

Answ. Yes, these are the things indeed which is choice food unto us, and
therein we relish the sweetness of the heavenly virtue, by which our souls
are abundantly refreshed, and this is our wine and milk without money or price,
and therefore we cannot buy and trade with thee, and can the Church of God lie
destitute where these things are loved, and would thou be accounted a Gospel
Minister, and would not have people to love and feed upon the everlasting word,
and the everlasting Gospel. What Gospel do thou preach if it be not
everlasting, but with the light of the Gospel thou art comprehended, and art
found out of the Spirit of life, and light within, and so thou preachest thy
own words, and not the word everlasting.

Thou say, they cry down all stipends of preachers as the hire of the great
whore of Babylon, and the legal maintenance by tithes as an introduction to
Antichristianisme.

Answ. Yes, we do so, for the whore has set them up, and they are nourished in
her lap, and we say that legal maintenance by tithes are not only an
introduction to Antichristianism, but is practiced in Antichrists Kingdom, and
would thou be a Gospel Minister, and art pleading for stipends and tithes,
thy doctrine demonstrates thy principle, and thy practice does manifest that
Christ never sent thee, for none of his Ministers ever took stipends or tithes
for their labor in the Gospel: and therefore thou art found out of their way
and practice, for which cause thy ministry is denied.

Thou also have directed a Preface to the Reader, wherein thou say, the main
scope and design of thy present undertaking is to vindicate the public worship
of God, and his sacred ordinances from that undervaluing contempt which has
been thrown upon them by Quakers, etc.

Answ. Thy scope, and design, and undertaking is for desolution, and as for the
Quakers, they neither undervalue nor contemn the public worship of God nor his
sacred ordinances, for they have not so learned Christ; but thy undertaking is
to vindicate those things which God has not appointed nor ordained, and such
things we do deny, but we worship God in the Spirit, which is the public
worship, for it is without limitation, and it is thy worship which is private,
who creeps into a house made with hands, and would limit the holy One unto it
to be worshipped; and thus thou ravines about in thy own way, and calls evil
good, and undertakes to vindicate it.

Thou say, Heretics are the greater foxes, and the lesser foxes, and
hunting and taking of such are not only a noble recreation (adaequate) indeed
for the vast ability of the most generously spirited Christians, but also a
very charitable undertaking for the Church of God in those that can but any way
help forward so serviceable a design.

Answ. Thou thirsts to have thy design promoted, and so presents it to others
as a noble recreation, and a charitable undertaking for Christians, but true
Christians did never recreate themselves after that manner, nor never were
found in such an undertaking, for Paul says, after some admonitions a Heretic
is to be rejected, if he refuse to hear, but he does not say hunt them, and
take them, and destroy them, and Paul was a good Christian, but thou art
promoting thy design against the innocent, and under the name of foxes would
have them hunted and taken, by which it is seen what is in thy heart, if thy
hands had power, for it is to be understood, that a lamb never hunted a fox,
but it is the nature of a fox to hunt the lambs, and if he can come to his prey
he devours and destroys them, and a fox has his hole for the day, and ravines
in the night (mark that) and that is the hunter and devourer which is thy
secret design, but thou art chained, and the lambs preserved.

Thou say, where could we find the proverb more fully verefied then in the
subtle deluding Schismatics of our age, and for bloody cruelty can we find a
parallel of these where they get power, and is it not high time, say thou, to
endeavor the reclaiming and reformation of those whose main intendment is, to
ruin the Church of God, and deny the precious Truths and Ordinances of the
Gospel.

Answ. These things are certainly thy own, and it is high time for thee to
reclaim and reform thy unruly spirit, which is found in the highest degree of
enmity and cruelty, which the Quakers were never guilty of, for their principle
leads them in love and peace, and good will to all men, and that line does not
parallel with bloodthirsty men, who are destroying one another, about their
worships and Religion, and it is high time that such were reclaimed and
reformed from their iniquity, of which the Quakers were never guilty.

Thou faist, the Wolves were destroyed out of the Land by a victorious Prince;
oh! say thou, that we could see the like deliverance from the Foxes.

Answ. Here the bottom of the pit is come up, and a murderer is seen, which
would destroy the innocent as Foxes, and would have the help of a Prince to do
it, by which thou show the nature of a Wolf, and the Land is spread over
with too many such as thou art, that the Lambs can hardly find an outward place
to lie down quietly amongst you.

Thou say, for Justice, that puts thee upon looking well about thee at home,
since in that little spot of ground divine providence and goodness has called
thee to be resident upon in the work and calling of a Minister of the Gospel,
thou have found many, even too many, say thou, of these little Foxes to have
their fixed abode, being sadly perverted by the gross and strong delusions of
the Quakers.

Answ. Thou have already manifested thy Justice, and it is seen to be in the
enmity and thy residence in that place, as a Gospel Minister was never so
ordered by Gods providence and goodness, but a great Living called thee, and
in it man has placed thee, and it is for thy gain that thou looks so well
about thee, and if such as thou calls Foxes could put into thy mouth willingly,
as thou takes it from them unlawfully, then it is like thou would blot out
the name of Foxes, and give them the name of Christians; and in this stands thy
Justice, to feed upon the fat, and to live at ease in thy residence, and for
such whose fixed abode is there, whom thou calls Foxes, they was converted to
the faith of Christ before thou came to be resident amongst them, and it is the
truth of God which they have received, by which they are turned from error and
delusions, and their fixed abode is their natural right, and they are a people
whom I very well know, and I know that they live peaceably and soberly, and are
of an honest conversation, and thou have nothing against them justly, saving
this one thing, that they worship the God of their Fathers, after the manner
which thou calls heresy.

Thou say, they are hurried to a high degree of contempt of public prayers,
preaching, sacraments, etc. and these by right, say thou, are part of my
charge, though they have withdrawn themselves from being any part of my flock.

Answ. They are established in the truth, and public prayer, and preaching in
the spirit of God they never denied, and they are not by right any part of thy
charge, for since thy coming among them they have denied thy practice, and
therefore they are not withdrawn from thee, for they never belonged unto thee,
and if it should be granted, that some of them were part of thy charge, and of
thy flock, then have not thou been a careless shepherd to let thy flock go
astray and be lost, how can thou say, if it be so, that thou have kept all
thy flock together, which is the care of a good shepherd?

Thou say, to attempt the best means, and to use the most likely ways and
method for their recovery, seems not only truly charitable, but highly just,
and equitable.

Answ. Thy attempts and means are far unlikely to recover them, if they was in
error, for thou attempts to be delivered from them and destroy them, and so
thy words are wind and confusion, first crying out for help to be de^ive^ed
from them, and then saying thou attempts the best means to recover them, but
that which a man seeks to be delivered from* he ^o^h not attempt to recover and
regain, and so thy justice, charity and equity, stands in the ground of enmity.

Thou say, considering therefore how industri^^^ the little Foxes are, and
how studiously diligent seducers all along has been, by continual prating in
their canting language, and by publishing unintelligible fancies, out of a deep
sense of that dangerous and ruinous course, many say thou, not only in my
own parish, but throughout the whole Nation are seduced into, have I adventured
the publication of this small Treatise, as an antidote, through Gods blessing,
against that corroding and spreading Gangreen of heretical and diabolical
delusion.

Answ. An industrious Christian is commendable, and to be diligent in that
which is good, is worthy of encouragement, and herein we labor in the work of
the Gospel, and we speak in an intelligible language to that of God in all, and
here thou have uttered confusion again, first saying, they are deluded, and
then saying the language is unintelligible, and so it is plain that thou
understands not our principle, for nothing can be understood but by true
intelligence, and though thou understand it not, but in thy ignorance calls it
delusion, yet we know that it is the truth of God, and spreads abroad to the
glory of God, and the comfort of many souls, and by it the serpents poison is
expelled out the heart, but thy antidote is unwholesom and unsavory, and where
it is received, it will infect with deadly poison.

Thou say, what remains, shall be only to implore an effectual blessing from
heaven upon these weak endeavors of mine, that they may promote piety, prevent
apostasy, raise th^se that are fallen, confirm those that stand upright in the
ways of God, and contribute somewhat or other to the furtherance of souls in
their progress toward the new Jerusalem.

Answ. God blesses his own seed, and it is blessed for ever, but the breath of
his mouth blasts thy endeavors, for thy voice is in the apostasi^ and (...)
thou labors to prevent people for coming out of the apo^^a^^^, and to keep
them in the fall, where none can stand upright in the ways of God, and thy
endeavors are weak indeed to promote piety, but strong in subtilty, to pervert
the right way of God, if it was possible, and so thou art not a furtherer of
souls toward the new Jerusalem, but keeps them (...) Jerusalem below, where
they are in bondage.

Thou have divided thy Books into fourteen Chapters, which would enlarge a
volume to answer every particular matter, for thou have drawn such long
discourses touching one and the same thing, that by answering one part may
fully answer the whole. The first part of thy Book is generally composed
Philosophically, and though thou have stated their sayings hiddenly, and so
would pass them for thy own, yet I well know their language, and with the
light of Christ can see a thief at midnight.

In the first Chapter thou states two things more generally, self-reflection,
and divine revelation, and thou say, man's rational reflection upon himself,
if faithfully improved, would with convincing evidence secure him both against
atheism and irreligion.

Answ. This is a false assertion, for as people lies in the fall they neither
know God, nor believe in him, and however they may improve any rational
faculty, yet they cannot thereby work their own security, for it is not
possible that man should secure himself by any thing of himself, or that he
should know God, and believe in him from such a principle, for it is self that
sins, and that which sins does never reflect upon a man for sin, but all
such reflections are by the principle of God, in which there is no sin, and
thereby man comes to see himse^f in the fall, and if that principle be
faithfully improved, it will redeem out of atheism and irreligion, and bring
to Christ Jesus the sure foundation of the pure religion.

Thou say, that self-reflection may easily discover that there is a God.

Answ. This is false again, for none knows the Father but the Son, and he to
whom the Son reveals him, and thou not knowing by what way God discovers
himself, thou art not fit either to speak or write of him.

Thou say, if the soul be immaterial, it cannot be generated or made by any
material production, it remains, say thou, it must have its being
immediately raised out of nothing.

Answ. No supposition is a good ground for a conclusion, and thou first say,
if the soul be immaterial, by which supposition it is manifest that thou have
no certain knowledge what the soul is, and yet thou draws a conclusion, saying,
it must have its being immediately raised out of nothing, so that by what thou
have declared concerning the discovery of God, and the production of the soul,
it is evident that thou art a stranger to the things of God, for God is the
chiefest good, and the only fountain from whence all good things are produced,
and man became a living soul by the breath of his life, not immediately raised
out of nothing, but breathed from the nature of life and immortality, and this
might fully answer all thy Book.

Thou say, the chief matter is Gods omnipotency, and immensity, or
omnipresence, and bids consider these jointly, so they are a sollid foundation,
say thou, for that religious worship that is due to God.

Answ. Neither thy imaginations nor stolen words will make a sollid foundation
for that religious worship that is due to God, but his own foundation is sure,
and the true worshippers are built upon it, and his almighty power and presence
is with them and they bow before him.

Thou say, if we do again consider the manner of discoveries of these two
forementioned attributes (viz.) that it is by the very light of nature, and by
the improvement of right reason, and understanding that common benefit, that
Christ enlightens every man that comes into the world, and thou margins the
name Quakers, and says, this may let that fond Generation of people know, who
are so highly enamoored with, and do so superficially dote upon their so much
adorned and adored notion of a light within, that there is other work that God
has designed that inward light for them by its native strength, luster, and
radiancie, infallibly to guide us, if faithfully followed, as they, no less,
say thou, profanely then ignorantly do imagine, to the place of bliss and
happiness.

Answ. Thou art proved to want the knowledge of God and his attributes, and so
art improving thy own wisdom against him, and by the discovery thou makes of
the light of Christ, that enlightens every one that comes into the world, and
it does appear that thou remains in darkness, and thou should have
distinguished, if thou could, between the nature of man in the fall, and the
nature of Christ that never fell, for we own the light which is manifest from
the nature of Christ to be the true light which enlightens every one that comes
into the world, but they that rebel against it, can never come to the place of
blis^ and happiness by it, but we are in love with it, and knows the work
which God has designed for it, which is to destroy the work of the Devil, and
to be salvation unto the ends of the earth unto all that in it believe, and its
narive strength, luster, and rad^ancie is an infallible guide if faithfully
followed, to bring to the place of bliss and happiness, and though thou be in
the unbelief, yet this is our report concerning the true light, and we know it
is neither profaneness, ignorance, imaginations, nor notions.

Thou satst, this inward light, which the wise man's styles the candle of the
Lord, and at the best* say thou, burns but in the socket of a corrupt mind
with very ^^ch dimnesse, should ever discover the right and ready way to the
new Jerusalem, is the product only of men's foolish fancies, their pride and
ignoran^^.

Answ. The inward light which the wise man styles the candle of the Lord, is
broken forth of the socket of a corrupt mind in many, and now shines upon the
house top and what would thou have to discover the right and ready way to new
Jerusalem, if not the candle of the Lord, which is his light within, but this
is not thy guide, and so thou remains in Jerusalem below, where Hagars seed
rules, but we have found the right and ready way to Jerusalem above, the City
of the great King, and are set down under his Government in peace.

Thou now comes to speaek of divine Revelation, and says, that God is every
where present, filling all places and spaces both real and imaginary by his
immensity.

Answ. Then stand thou in his fear, for he is near thee as a sw^ft witness
against thee, and however God is present with other things in their kind, yet
he does not reveal himself unto man by any other way, or by any other thing
then the light of Christ, and we know how God manifests himself in every
particular place, according to man's present state and condition, and what his
hot displeasure is revealed against, and what his loving kindness and mercy is
revealed unto.

Thou say, but though God be every where present, and so with every creature
equally in regard of his infinite essence, and of his emmensity, yet as to the
special and peculiar efficacy of his presence he is not with all, either
things, or places, or persons after the same manner present.

Answ. If God be equally present with every Creature, in regard of his infinite
Essence, then all things have the same proportion of it, but all things have
not the same proportion of Gods infinite Essence, therefore not with every
creature equally, for an equal proportion is the same to all, and does not
admit of any thing special, but his infiniteness is in himself, and he
measures forth so much as his pleasure is to give, and it is an equal
proportion unto all according to his pleasure, yet some have more and some
less, but all some, and that measure so manifested in man, has a peculiar
efficacy as to its operation, through the obedience unto it, and this is equal
in it self, and special by it self, and yet in the infiniteness of Essence
without any distinction.

Thou say that God is present with all his creatures as the preserver,
guider, and governor of them.

Answ. Whosoever sins are not preserved, guided, nor governed by God, but
some do sin, therefore God is not so present with all, but they that come to
the effectual working of his power, they know an immortal birth quickened and
raised, with which the preserving, guiding, and governing power of God is
present.

Thou say, thy design mainly intended is against those, who because they are
wise in their own conceit, do neglect public Sermons and Sacraments.

Answ. Thy main intendment and design is against those that God has redeemed
from the earth, and from all false ways and worships, and gathered them into
the public worship of his spirit, where they hear Christ's voice and follows
him, and cannot own thy Church, or Sermons, or Sacraments.

In the second Chapter, thou seems to hold forih a general presence of God with
all thing, and more especially with some things, but has not showed what those
things are, though thou intend it to the worship now generally practifed, but
have never come close to the matter thou aims at, but have multiplied thy own
words and thoughts about the Saints worship in times past, which according to
the Scripture we own in t^eir dispensations, but thou have not proved that the
place which thou calls a Church, or the worship that is there observed is
either of them true or warrantable according to any Scripture precept or
president, or the mind of God at this day, so that thy whole Book may silence
it self as to the matter thou aims at, for where a thing is not rightly stated,
and truly proved, it is a sufficient proof against it self; yet I shall briefly
answer a few things more.

Thou say, had there not been a peculiar people, a royal seed, even the
Church of God, to be raised out of the ruins of fallen man by the interposing
of Christ, first proffered and propounded for the worlds reparation in that
fundamental promise the seed of the woman shall break the serpents head.

Answ. Thou have confessed that the Church of God is the royal seed, then it is
such as are born of the seed that are Gods peculiar people, and true members of
his Church; therefore mark thy own words, for if the royal seed be the Church,
as thou have confessed, and in it self is true, then neither wood, nor stone,
nor people in the fall can be the Church, and the seed is known in which the
Church flourishes in this day of her restitution out of the wilderness, and
the promise is unto us fulfilled who are born of God.

Thou say, but among all the manifestations of Gods presence and favors,
there are none more remarkably signal for constant reviving and comforting the
hearts of his people, then those that have been truly experienced in his
ordinances, enjoyed by his servants in those places which either by divine
appointment, or at least by divine approbation have been separated and set
apart for religious worship, and the service of God.

Answ. This is a place in which thou have come as near the matter thou aims at,
as any place in thy book, therefore I shall speak more fully to it, thou have
so stated the matter in general terms, as that it may lie which way any will
bend it, and is it reasonable to state things in general terms, as to what has
been, and not to discover the things that are, which is the matter thou
undertakes to vindicate, for as to the appointment, or at least approvement of
God concerning the sanctuary, tabernacle, temple, and synagogues, we do not
deny but Christ is come the fulfiller of all figures, and he says, neither at
Jerusalem, nor at this mountain shall men worship the Father, but the true
worshippers shall worship him in spirit and truth: and thou say, it was but
the ceremonial part that was abolished, but thou may know that it was the very
place in which their worship was performed in that dispensation, for Christ
said concerning the temple, that there should not be left one stone upon
another which should not be thrown down, which thing came to pass, so that the
place once appointed of God was thrown down, and he did not command that it
should be set up again for a place of worship, and the true worshippers that
followed Christ, they worshipped in the spirit, and they was not bound to time,
place or person, but as they was ordered in the spirit, so they was instant to
serve God and worship him* without regarding either p^ace or time, so that it
may be understood, that there was never any particular place appointed or
approved of God since that time as a place set apart only for a place of
worship; and as for those places which are now called Churches, they were never
set apart by divine appointment for any such service as is practiced in them;
and therefore the hearts of such as waits to be revived and comforted with the
refreshings of Gods presence, must turn away from them, and turn to the light
of Christ within, where the streams of life runs sweetly, for God is no other
way known in that place which thou would have to be a Church, nor in that
worship which is there observed but by manifesting himself against them, and
when thou comes to be truly awakned in thy conscience, thou will know that
neither thy Church, worship, or ministry are either appointed, approved or
ordained of God.

Thou say, do you count it your privilege, your perfection to throw off
Gods public ordinances, with an admiration of your silent and dumb
congregations in private, must it not needs argue, said thou, a very sleepy,
not to say a benumbed and besotted conscience, thus to throw away the wholesome
milk of the word in a disdainful pet, and yet never complain of the hunger and
thirst of your souls.

Answ Our privilege and perfection is in Christ, whom God has ordained to be
our salvation, and he gives us the milk of his word, and feeds us with meat in
due season, and that is our food in silence, by which we are kept fresh and
living unto God, whilst all false worshippers are asleep in the first Adam,
and benumbed and besotted in the earthly nature, where they have no sense nor
feeling of the virtuous springs, and our tongues are not our own, nor our wills
at liberty, and yet the Gospel is unto us committed, and in the word of life we
publish the glad tidings of it, and though we do not speak words, yet we feel
the presence of God with us, and that satisfies our hunger, and refreshes our
thirst, and he answers all our complainings in secret, but thou would have us
complain to such as thee, and to buy thy words for food, and to receive them
for satisfaction which we turn away from, knowing it is but a dry breast in
which there is no virtue at all

Thou say, a Quaker once told thee, he got more good by their silent
meetings, then ever he got by hearing the Ministers in public.

Answ. As to thy public Ministry, his words might be true, yet who are sent
of God, and preaches the Gospel of God, we do get much good by their public
Ministry, for thereby we are informed into the life and power of God, which in
silent waiting upon him we taste and feel, and all our fresh springs are in him.

Thou seist, God ordains not our immediate address to Heaven, we must live by
faith, and not by vision, but he commands us to use ordinary means.

Answ. God does ordain our immediate address to heaven, and that in the work
of our faith, and we live by it, and have the holy visions of God opened in it,
and by this means we find comfort to our souls, and whether would thou have
people to make their address, if not to Heaven, would thou not have them
address themselves upto Christ, and is not Christ in Heaven, and what faith
would thou have them to live by, and what means would thou have them to use, if
they must not address themselves to Heaven, for true faith and means goes to
Heaven, and all that lives by the faith ^f ^he Son of God, and uses those means
that he appoints them (...) a^dresse (...) selves immediately to heaven, and in
all their distresses and afflictions, they find grace to help them in their
need, and by this faith we live in the power of an endless life.

Thou say, well, however Sampsons foxes may have their heads looking diverse
ways, yet they are joined together with firebrands in their tails; and
howsoever those that desert the public means, may tend some of them to
profaneness, others to a schismatical, not to say an heretical separation,
many heresies going currently for new lights, yet, say thou, this is the
firebrand, or rather the Devils dead coal.

Answ. We are gathered in the unity of the Spirit of God, in which our faces
are turned Sion-ward, and looks all one way, and after the manner which thou
calls heresy, so worship we the God of our Fathers, and thy words belongs to
thy self, and the sons of Adam in the fall, who are looking, some to one thing,
and some to another, and yet the firebrand joins your tails, with which you
would burn up the fruitful field, and consume Gods heritage from the earth; and
this is a coal of Cains nature, which the Devil blows up sometimes into a heat,
and sometimes into a flame, and so thou may read the next Chapter (which is the
third) to be thy own state, in which thou speaks of Cains going forth from the
presence of the Lord, and say, They which voluntarily leave Gods instituted
worship, and his commanded ordinances, put themselves into a wandering
condition.

Answ. Yes, they do so, and therefore it must needs follow, that they that
forsakes the will worships, and vain worships, and comes to Gods instituted
worship in his Spirit, that they come into a stayed and settled condition; and
so it is, thou and old Adam, sons in the fall, that are in Cains country,
sometimes wandering after one invention, sometimes after another, and this is
your worship which God never instituted, but the children of light are in
covenant with God, and rests in peace.

In the fourth Chapter thou say, the sons of men which are of a mixed nature,
partly spirit, and partly body, are by their very being determined both to time
and place, in their rendering actual worship unto God.

Answ. The mixture is in the fall, but who are regenerated and born again, they
live in the spirit, and knows both time and place to render actual worship unto
God in the order of his spirit, and yet are not determined to time or place by
limittation.

Thou say, if the God of this world would have all Professors enjoy a total
immunity from the Law of God, and all manner of licentiousness allowed without
check of conscience, let him then make an every day Sabbath.

Answ. Christ is Lord of the Sabbath, and Christians enjoyes an every day
Sabbath in Christ, of whom the Jews Sabbath was a figure, and they are in his
righteousness, and does not allow any licentiousness, for their rest is holy,
and they lie down in it without check of conscience.

Thou say, public worship speaks a joint concurrence of several worshippers
for the performance of the same action of religious worship, so that the very
light of nature, say thou, gives it clear suffrage for the necessity of
convenient places of meeting for the performance of the public worship and
service of God.

Answ. Christians do jointly concur in the spirit in which they have unity, and
that in the same action of religious worship, but Apostates cannot do so, and
though they meet together in one place, yet not having unity in the spirit,
they cannot jointly concur in the woiship of God, and so the place and
worship (which thou calls public) being set up in the apostasy, and not after
Christ, the Christians cannot own them, for light and darkness has no
communion together.

Thou say, is not this to cry up inward light, and yet plainly to live in
darkness?

Answ. This is to cry up inward light, and to live in it, and therefore it is
that we deny all false worships which is set up and practiced in the darkness.

Thou say, I have neither faith to believe, nor any reason to see that there
is any Separated, I add, and Consecrated places for divine worship, any such
legal or ceremonial kind of holiness, which renders duties performed there
more acceptable unto God, then if performed by the same persons, and in the
like manner in any other places.

Answ. Thou have all this while been pleading for that separated place to be
the Church, and have been holding forth a special presence of God in that
worship which is there performed, and now thou says, that duties performed
there are no more acceptable unto God, then if performed in any other places,
and if thou have neither faith to believe it, nor reason to see it, as thou
say, then thou might have spared thy pains in writing thy Book, for thy chief
aim is to bring people to conform to the worship there observed, as the worship
of God in his Church, which if duties be no more acceptable unto God which is
there performed, then if performed in any other place, then such as withdrawes
from it may perform duties as acceptable unto God in other places, according to
thy own faith and reason, and so it is not a true Church, nor a true worship,
for the worship and duties performed in the true Church which is in God are
only accepted of God, and in no other place or places whatsoever, and here thou
have pulled down thy own building with thy own hands.

Thou say, here then arises that ample provision that Christ has made for
his special presence in the places of religious worship, (viz.) from the
Communion of Saints meeting in convenient separated places for public worship,
and from the promise annexed thereto, and not from any peculiar holiness, in
those places where they thus meet to worship God.

Answ. The Communion of Saints is in the light of Christ, and so says John, If
we walk in the light as he is in the light, then have we fellowship one with
another; and this is not the state of Adam in the fall, neither can his Sons
and Daughters perform a religious worship unto God, and so no Church either by
Communion of Saints, or the place it self, and therefore such worshippers have
not the promise annexed.

In the fifth Chapter, thou seems to hold forth the special presence of God in
public worship, by his Train or Retinue of Angels, to which I answer generally.

Answ. That God is present in his public worship which is performed in his
spirit, was never yet denied by us, but thou have not proved thy worship to be
the worship of God, and therefore we say that Gods presence is not in it to the
comfort of the worshipper, and this may answer all thy Jumblings about the
Angels, for thou art not come to the Angelical Ministration.

In the sixth Chapter thou seems to hold forth the practical inferences drawn
from the presence of angels in the places of public worship.

Answ. When he brings forth his only-begotten Son into the world, he says,
and let all the angels of God worship him, and this is a full answer to this
whole Chapter.

In the seventh Chapter thou seems to hold forth Gods presence in public
worship by his word, with some other particulars relating to that matter, which
I might mention and answer, if I did intend largeness, but finding the whole
matter of thy Book to lie chiefly as to Church, worship, ministry, and
practice, as they generally now stand, I shall not make needless repetitions,
by answering the same thing over and over, yet this I say unto this Chapter,
that Gods presence by his word is in his worship, and all that worship him
aright he teaches them by his word, but that thy preaching is the word of God,
or that the word of God is in thy preaching, or his presence by his word in
that public worship, through they preaching, that thou have not any where
proved, and therefore it falls of it self.

In the eighth Chapter thou seems to hold forth practical inferences, that
teachers of the word must not corrupt the word of God, and that it must be
owned as Gods word, and received and mingled with faith, and practiced in
obedience.

Answ. I answer generally, that they who are born of the word which is
immortal, they do not corrupt it, but are true and faithful ministers of it,
and many have received it as it is indeed the word of God, and they mingle it
with faith, and practices it in obedience, and such are doers of the word, and
are blessed, but thy tongue must learn silence, and thou must know a new birth,
and a new tongue, before thou can truly minister the word of God.

In the ninth Chapter thou seems to hold forth the presence of God in his
worship by his ministers, and that the truths of God must be heard, though from
ungodly preachers, and that ministers are Gods Ambassadors, and stewards of
the mysteries of God, and that God and man works together in the conversion of
souls, and production of saving faith.

Ans. Thou said even now, that teachers of the word must not corrupt the word,
then how can an ungodly man preach it, and not corrupt it, and this matter
being reduced out of thy general terms, and stated particularly into such as it
does properly belong, then we can truly say, that Gods presence is in his
worship by his ministers, and that they are his Ambassadors and Stewards of
his mysteries, but we dare not say, that so it is with ungodly men, or that the
ministry of ungodly men does work to the conversion of souls, or production of
saving faith. Some few particulars of this Chapter I shall answer.

Thou say, it is so certain a truth, that if the minister be bad, yet if he
preach the pure word of God, we must receive the word, because we are not so
much to regard the man preaching, as the word preached.

Answ. No lie is of the truth, for it is as possible that the East and West
should join together; as for a bad man, or an ungodly man to preach the pure
word of God, for God does not make use of such men to be his Ambassadors or
Stewards, neither can such work together with God in any service for him,
because it is inconsistent with the pure nature of God, to be a co-worker with
an ungodly man, for an ungodly man is against God, and God is against all his
ungodliness; and these cannot possibly work together in man, being that they
are contrary in nature, one to the other; and yet thou fears not to go about to
prove this ungodly assertion from the ministry of Judas, and says, that of all
of them Christ said, he that receives you, receives me, and yet one of them
was Judas Iscariot who also betrayed him. Then thou say, we may plainly see
by Christ's own words, we may receive Christ by the ministry of Judas a traitor,
nay, say thou, I might say a Devil.

Answ. Thou art gotten into high profaneness, for when Judas was sent forth
with the rest, he had part in the ministry, but when treacherous thoughts did
rise in him, and that the Devil stirred him up to act his treachery, he was
never a minister of Christ after that, and it may be read in the first of Acts,
where the Disciples prayed, and said, show which of these two thou have chosen,
that he may take part of this minis^^y and Apostleship, from which Judas by
transgression fell, mark it, and consider thy assertion.

Thou say, that every Saint should have their garments died white in the
blood of the Lamb, much more Christ's Stewards, they should be clothed with the
white robes of sincerity to act unfeignedly for God.

Answ. These are only words, as if one proud man should bid another be humble,
or one drunkard bid another be sober, and tell them it should be so, but view
thy self, and the rest which thou looks upon to be stewards, and see if thou
can find it so indeed, and if not, then you are not as you should be by thy own
confession, and if Christ's Stewards should have their garments so died, then
surely no bad man, or ungodly man, can stand in that office, neither is it
possible, that any such should act unfeignedly for God, but who are his
Stewards indeed, through the sanctification of the Spirit, they are clothed
with his righteousness, and are approved in his sight.

In the tenth Chapter thou seems to hold forth practical deductions from Gods
presence with his ministers, and says, God is affronted by any indignities
that are offered to his ministers, and how can any have so impudent a face,
say thou, as to pretend they are sent of God, who makes railing and reviling
of others to be their work.

Answ. This is the work which thou art found to be in, who calls the
ministration of the Spirit canting language, and Christ's Ministers Foxes and
Heretics, which surely are great indignities, and in the highest manner of
railing and reviling by which thy practical deduction is found to be out of
Gods presence, and railing and reviling of others were never our work, though
we do give righteous judgment against the Seed of the evil doer.

In the eleventh Chapter, thou seems to hold forth Gods presence in his worship
by the holy spirit, and say, the word and the spirit goes together, and thou
say, thou shall begin with the Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, As for me, this is
my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my spirit which is upon thee, and my
words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor
out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the mouth of thy Seeds Seed, says the
Lord, from henceforth, and for ever.

Answ. This was the word of the Lord unto the Prophet, and he had the spirit in
the word, my spirit which is upon thee, (mark) here was the spirit upon him,
and the word spoke in the spirit, and the word put words into his mouth, (mark
again) and the word said, my words shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out
of the mouth of thy Seed, (mark again) the word was in the Seed, and was not to
depart out of the mouth of the Seed, nor out of the mouth of the Seeds Seed,
from henceforth and for ever, says the Lord; and this is the word that lives
and abides for ever, and it is in the mouth of the Seed, and from the Seed are
the words of the word spoken, and there is the true ministry, if thou have an
ear to hear; and here is the word and the spirit joined together, which is the
word of the Gospel that we preach.

Thou say, all Gods children shall be clearly taught by the spirit of God.

Answ. Then is man laid wholly aside in that work, and why art thou so offended
at silent meetings, when thou say all Gods children shall be clearly taught
by his spirit; and if clearly, then it does not admit of any conjunction in its
teaching.

Thou say, man's preaching may fill the head full of notions, but the spirits
teacbings must fill the heart with real motions of grace and goodness toward
God.

Answ. Then let all flesh be silent, that notions may die and wither, and that
the heart may come to be exercised toward God in his spirit, and then people
will not be always learning, as now they are amongst notions, but will come to
the knowledge of the truth in the spirit, and so come to the joy of Gods
salvation.

Thou say, take a Christian without faith, and you unchristian him.

Answ. Every true Christian lives in the faith, and therefore cannot be taken
without it, and so cannot be unchristianed, as being without it.

In the twelfth Chapter, thou seems to hold forth the spirits teaching five
ways, 1. by removing impediments, 2. by suggesting Gospel truths to the soul,
3. by enlightening the mind, 4. by strengthening the soul, 5. by raising truths.

Ans. Thou art quite beside the matter, for these particulars do not so belong
to the spirits teaching, as to its working, only the third particular is as to
its manifestation, for to remove, suggest, strengthen, and raise, is a work of
the spirit, but the teachings of the spirit is in checking, reproving, and
convincing, and as the obedience is yielded to it, so it teaches to deny the
evil which it does convince of, and reprove for, and teaches to live in that
which is good that comes from God, and so it teaches to deny ungodliness, and
teaches to live soberly, mark it well.

Thou say, concerning the enlightening of the mind, that all the lights in the
world is never able to make us see divine truths savingly, till we are
enlightened of the Lord.

Answ. Then why art thou contending against the light of the Lord, seeing thou
say that none can see divine truth savingly, till they be enlightened by him;
would thou keep people from that which will let them see divine truths, but
divine truths may be seen in the light, and yet not savingly, for salvation is
not in the sight of truth, but in the union with it, for there may be much seen
to be truth, and yet the error not forsaken.

Thou say, none are truly enlightened but those that are in Christ.

Answ. The light of Christ does enlighten every one that comes into the world,
and yet every one that comes into the world is not in Christ, but as the light
which is manifest from Christ is obeyed, so it works death upon the old man,
and raise up life and immortality, and regenerates man into the nature of it,
where he becomes a new creature in Christ, and is light in the Lord.

Thou say, There is no true light that leads to salvation, but what comes
from Christ the Son of righteousness.

Answ. Then to preach that light is neither canting nor delusion as thou had
termed it, for it is the light which comes from Christ the Sun of
righteousness which we preach, and we know that there is not another name
given under heaven by which any can be saved.

Thou say, let others therefore sit down and embrace that so much mired
darling of an inward natural, yet saving light in all, we know, say thou,
that it is but a changeling, and not the genuine offspring of the spirit.

Answ. Thou have said, no light for salvation but from Christ, and now says
the light within is a changeling, and this is not agreeable with the Apostles
doctrine who said, the light that shines in our hearts, gives us the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, and thou cries
inward natural, yet saving light in all, and that it is but a changeling, but
we say, the inward natural as it is of man is not saving to any, but the inward
spiritual light as it comes from the nature of Christ, is saving to all that
believe in it, but the condemnation of such as believe not, and therefore we
say, that the light of Christ within, is not a changeling, but the Alpha and
Omega, yesterday and to day, and the same for ever.

In the thirteenth Chapter thou seems to hold forth the qualification of the
spirits teachings, by teaching fully, pleasantly, seasonably, certainly, and
profitably, and that it brings in no new lights objective; and thou say, what
makes souls to quit their comforts in this life, their friends, their estates,
their liberties, yea their lives themselves rather then part with those truths
the spirit has taught them.

Answ. Why this is the reason that makes them do all those things, because they
love Christ more then all, and prizes the truth which he has taught them more
then all the world, but that thou art of the number of those that are so given
up to God, and loves his truth, does not any way appear, for thou enjoyes thy
friends, thy estate, and liberty, and life, thou have fullness, and art at
ease, thou art not come to travel in hunger, and cold, and perils, to make
known the glad tidings of the Gospel, thou art not in bonds and prisons for the
truth of God and the testimony of a good conscience, these things comes not
near unto thee, but thou art reviling the innocent, who have received the
teachings of Gods spirit, and loves the truth above all the world, or the
enjoyments of it, for which cause we suffer as to our liberty and estates, and
our lives are in jeopardy, yet in the comfort of truth we have our rejoicing,
though thou add afflictions to our sufferings.

Thou say, we have no foundation for such gradual teachings as to expect the
spirit should teach more truths afterward, then are written in the word of God.

Answ. The spirit of God is not limited, as to what may, or may not be in man's
expectation, for God manifests the truth by his spirit according to his own
pleasure, and in his own time, and the spirit opens the Scripture in fulfilling
of them, and also manifests the mind of God in what he will further reveal and
make known.

Thou say, though the spirit teaches in the word, that there can be no
absolute perfection in this life, telling us in the words of S. John, that if
we say we have no sin, etc. and yet say thou, the spirit teaches the soul
gradually to breathe after perfection.

Answ. The word and the spirit is perfect, and all born of the spirit are
perfect, and the words of John in that Scripture does not relate to the birth
born of God, for when he comes to speak of that birth, he says, whosoever is
born of God sins not, etc. and that which sins not is perfect, and what
good does thy ministry if thou do not bring people to that which is perfect, or
where would thou have people to be perfect, if they die imperfect? surely thy
message is sad to that which breathes after perfection, and thou have not
received the gift from Christ, which is for perfecting of the Saints, and so
thou art teaching another doctrine, then the true Ministers teaches, who
labors that they may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

I now come to thy last Chapter, wherein thou seems to hold forth practical
deduction from Gods presence by his spirit; and thou say, coming unto God, in
a way that God never owned nor prescribed, is a direct turning away from him.

Answ. Christ is the way unto the Father, and there is none can come unto him
by any other, and they that walk in this way are preserved (...) all by paths,
but they that walks in their own way, they turn directly from God, and if thou
truly try thy self thou may find it so to be with thee.

Thou say, Gods Spirit teaches none to continue in the practice of known
sins, he does not allow them to sin, and then teach them that is to be
spiritual to deem nothing sin that we possibly can commit.

Answ. The Spirit of God teaches to deny all sin, and all that obeys the Spirit
they come to the Cross which crucifies to the death the sinning nature, and so
brings into righteousness and holiness of life, for the birth of the spirit
sins not, neither does the birth of the flesh work righteousness, and so he
that commits sin, is of the devil, and does not yield himself a servant to the
Spirit of God.

Thou say, he that is taught by the Spirit, by that knowledge is carried out
to purify himself, and that the office of the Spirit is to sanctify the soul;
impurity of life, say thou, is no livery for the disciple of Christ to wear.

Answ. He that purifies himself from sin by the power of the Spirit, he does
not live in sin, and he that does not live in sin, is perfect, but thy livery
has not the show of a true disciple of Christ, but the children of light are
clothed with his righteousness, and follows him in the daily Cross.

Thou say, we may hear how excellent a thing it is to hear no ministers at
all, but to sit still in silence, and to expect heavenly raptures, as if all
were possessed with a dumb devil.

Answ. We hear Christ's ministers, and yet are taught of God to wait upon him in
silence, where we feel his presence with joy, and are gathered into the
heavenly raptures of peace and blessedness, but thy tongue is unbridled, by
which we know wha^ is at liberty in thee, who shoots thy arrows against the
righteous.

Thou say, the martyrs that submitted their necks to the block, and their
bodies to the flames, yet never suffered for those things, which th^s^
^bstinately m^^^tain, who have f^llen from hearing the word, and h^ve left the
o^^^nan^es, which we h^ve good ground, say thou, from the word of God, (...)
bra^d as e^ro^^^ and gross delusions.

Answ. The martyrs of Jesus have ever suffered for his names sake, for they
have always ^ad a s^re testimony in the truth, against all deceit and false
worsh^^ for which they suffered, and for the same and no other thing do ^^b^nds
and afflictions betide us this day, so that we have good ground to brand the
persecuting spirit, as a spirit of error, and gross delusion.

Thou say, that they that are taught of the Spirit of God, are taught love
both to God and men, they then love God for himself, and men for Gods sake; it is
true say thou, love, (not envy, nor malice, nor reviling, nor hatred, nor
backbiting and slandering others that are not just of our opinion,) that is the
fruit of the Spirit of God.

Answ. Then behold from what spirit thy fruit is made manifest, for thy own
work bears witness against thee, that thou art not in the love of God, without
which none can truly love him, nor men for his sake, for thou that calls the
light of Christ within delusion, thou loves not God, and thou that would have
men hunted, and taken, and destroyed, thou do not love them, but art in envy,
and hatred, and malice against them, and thou that calls them foxes and
heretics, thou rails and reviles them, and all this because they are not just
of thy opinion, but we are in the love of God, and have fervent love to him,
and one another, and we do pity all people that abides in darkness, and though
by such we be evil entreated, yet we cannot render evil for evil, but overcomes
the evil with good, and herein we bear good will to all men, as our lives do
sufficiently manifest, and so having briefly cleared the truth, and the
innocent, I shall shut thee up in thy own conclusion, desiring that thou
henceforth may be warned, and do so no more, for certainly the hand of the Lord
has dealt gently with thee, and his love has covered a multitude of faults;
and for what thou have done amiss, I desire thou may be truly humbled before
the Lord for it, and come to repentance, that he may pardon it, and remit it,
who still waits that he may be gracious; and herein my love is to thy soul,
though I have borne a clear testimony against thy spirit, and in the power of
God do judge it and condemn it, and shakes it off as a wanderer in the earth,
and so in the seed immortal of God I go over it, for the Lamb reigns in his
dominion, and the glory is his for ever.

W. S.

THE END.
Some few faults escaped the Reader is desired to correct. page 9. line 19 read
of after out. p. 11. l. 22. for them r. then. p. 12. ^2. for narive r. native,
l. 26. read swift for swft.


