A POEM On the famous Ship CALLED The Loyal London.

Begun at the charge of the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Commoners of the City of London, in the year 1665. and Lauched June 10. 1666.
which they presented to His Majesty as a testimony of their Loyalty and dutiful
affection; And built at Deptford by Captain Tailor.

By WILLIAM SMITH.

DOMINE DIRIGE NOS

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Nath: Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill, 1666.

Committee appointed to take care for the building of the Ship LOYAL LONDON.
15. March 1664.
Alder.
Sir John Lawrence Sir Tho: Adams Sir Rich: Brown Sir John Frederick Sir John
Robinson Sir An: Bateman Sir Tho: Bludworth Sir Will. Turner Sir R: Ford Sir R:
Ryves
Com.
Sir Tho: Chambrelan Sir Will: Bateman Sir A: Ingram Captain Ryves Col. Nevile
Deputy Tivill Mr. N: Pening Deputy Canham Deputy Jefferies Major Stroud Sam:
Foot Esquire. Hen: Bainbrigg Esquire. mort. Col. Clegat Mr. Tho: Pilkington Deputy
Warren Deputy Throckmorton Tho: Culling Esquire. Captain Birkin Deputy Lluellin and
Mr. Jonathan Ash mort.
Licensed

June 15. 1666. Roger L'estrange.

A POEM ON The Loyal London.
WHen envious Fate, or Error had dissolved
The former London, and her self involved,
Her Men, her Guns, her Tackling in a cloak
Of sudden lightning and sulphurous smoke,
She roared out thus. Another (though I burn)
Shall blossom from, and grace my watery Vrne;
A LOYAL LONDON, who shall long proclaim
Her Princes greatness, and her CITYS fame.
This mightier Phaenix now at length we have,
The greater birth of her great Mother's grave.
The Escurial of the Deep, whose State may bear
As well as Titus Amphitheater,
The name of Wonder; and deserves a room
Above the ruins of the Carian Tomb.
Her bulk's for use, her beauty strength does hide;
Those were the effects of Luxury and Pride.
Yet e're kind Zephyr with officious gales
Salutes her Canvas, or employs her sails;
Before the wondering Nereides shall discern
Her threatening Lion, or her gilded Stern;
On the admiring Surges floating ere
Among her Sister-wonders she appear,
(Cathedrals high-aspiring heads at land
Thus lift, and over the humbler Churches stand.)
Her mighty timbers, and her large-siz'd beams.
Thames first receiv's on his transparent streams,
Glad to behold and bear this pompous load,
His reed-environ'd head from's moist abode
He now advanced, and thus begins to say,
Whilst silver-footed Nymphs about him play.
I Am He, whom the Ocean most of all his Sons
Does court; my crystal current gently runs,
And sends such winged fortresses abroad
As awe the world, and Thetis shoulders load.
Iberian Pagus slight thy golden Oar;
My fertile banks exceed thy barren shore.
And Nereus knows my force over him prevails;
His arms my Cables press, his back my Sails.
To Pibers awful Fasces yielding place,
So once the Ocean did submit his Mace.
Surrounding Drake about the vast globe rowls,
Viewing the Artick and Antartick Poles,
Yet his small Pinnace coasting did but show
A vain Ludibrium on rough Neptunes brow.
Built over the subdued billows to give Law,
Both to encompass, and the world to awe,
Here Is SHE, whom uncontrolled Fates have chose
To check the boldness of our Neighboring foes;
Whose solid planks, when on rude waves they pass,
Contemn the fury of the thundering Brass.
No Sea-exciting gusts or Storms she fears;
Much louder tempests in her self she bears:
Through foaming Neptunes boiling waves she glides,
Aetnas enclosed in her armed sides;
And trembling Holland her more dreadful finds
Then raging storms raised by Autumnal winds:
From out each Port-hole a Vesuvius roars
In massy Iron, and not in Cinder showers,
Whose unperceived speed leave far behind
Strong Corus over the slower Eastern Wind;
Like wrathful Angels her loud Guns do breath
On obvious Mortals unexpected Death;
And She, as Sinon's Horse, bears armed men,
Not by close plots, but open force to win;
Whose Sterling valor in true worth does shine
Without the base allay of Brandy-wine.
To move revenge, and to incite our rage
What hood-winked rashness did the Dutch engage?
Deprived of Herrings (but our slighted store)
Soon they will be so despicably poor,
As when they made their Idolized thing,
And first took Arms against their Catholic King;
In whose Dominions Heaven's bright Cohorts have
Their rise and set, their cradle and their grave.
With equal folly, and with equal fate
Mistaken Carthage urged the Roman State.
Oh may I still the Loyal London see
Triumphant over our foes return from Sea,
A living Monument and a lasting story
Of her great Masters and his Citie's glory!
He having spoke in this, or such a strain,
His aged head his floods receive again.
Slightly encamped the Ancient Consuls lie,
Their Evocati and Triarij nigh,
Secured with treble fosses armed with stakes,
Whilst at each port an ordered Cohort wakes
Our better fenced Isle, which Thetis laves,
Entrenched by Nereus with unconquered waves;
A liquid Rampire of fierce surges arms,
And we encamped within secure from harms.
Defended thus by careful Nature's hand,
Sole Umpiers of the Western world we stand;
When with extended Sails rough Seas we sweep,
Our sturdy Oaks re-florish in the deep.
On tumid billows tossed with furious winds
Our warlike SEAMAN steady footing finds,
With Roman courage, Roman constancy,
Intends to conquer, or intends to die;
Protests that Quagmire Holland now does quake,
Fearing our arms will to one Chaos shake,
Butter and Cheese, united Boors and Bogs,
And pickle up Mijnhere with Eeles and Frogs;
His sober brain provoked, contemns vain fear,
Nor needs the fury of the Grape or Beer;
He without Brandy his true valor shows,
Engaged heats, still fighting fiercer grows;
His daring heart and good success alike
Over the Dutch sinews a chill Ague strike;
The great Augustus once affrighted thus
The weaker Angel of Antonius.
We floating Forts (our Guardian Angels) send
Our foe to vanquish, or assist our friend;
Vainly the Friar his Brazen Head invokes,
For Brazen walls we have brass-armed Oaks;
Swift Oaks, whose flame-wink'd thunder can with ease
Command the Ocean and the narrow Seas;
And our successful Red Cross still did come
From Sea victorious, and triumphant home.
With equal courage and with equal fate,
Our ancient TITLE we at land debate;
Whilst our Victorious Armies twice advance
The English Standard through the heart of France;
France, on whose face our Swords have left more scarrs
Then mighty Caesar in his ten years wars.
And Monseur, if you question this report,
Read Crescy, Poictiers, Vernoil, Agincourt:
They Are your own Chronicles will tell you who
On one poor Rump often supped and dined too.
Great Julius Eagles fixed their ravenous claws,
When under various Princes, various Laws;
We did our Conquest to a period bring,
When France was subject to one Potent King.
Majestic Rome did back his conquering cause,
Rome to the wealthy East which then gave Laws;
The French provoked Scotch with hostile rage,
And sudden fury did our backs engage;
His were old Soldiers, ours had seen no foe;
And that Mercurial, aerie Nation know,
Our civil broils were the unhappy chance,
Not Joan nor Charles, which thrust us out of France;
It was our selves, our selves that overthrew!
None could our Arms, but our own Arms subdue.
'Twas our Black Edward, shak'd the Iberian Crown,
And dispossessed Pedro did enthrone;
It Was our stout Richard won the Holy Land,
Both Prince and Victor did in Cyprus stand.
To the King.
BUt You, Great Prince, from whom do blossom forth
All former virtues, and all former worth,
Have propagated more the British powers
Then our old Monarchs, your great Ancestors.
Our ancient Saxon King did sometime please
Over smaller limits of the narrow Seas
To sit triumphant, view the neighboring shoares,
Whilst Captive Kings tug'd at his laboring oars.
The Earth-environing Ocean does obey
The mild commands of your diffusive sway.
How do our Annals Edward's fame advance
For worsting once the Naval Force of France?
Far higher must your great renown appear,
Who worsted, and triumphed over Her,
Whose avaritious domineering rage,
You standing Neuter, might the world engage.
In our Terrestrial Sphere long may you move,
Your Subjects safety, and your Subjects love!
Your watchful thoughts, and your unwearied care,
Succeeding ages will with joy declare;
Tell, how without the expense of their own blood,
Or sweat, You wisely have contrived their good;
Cry out, oh Happy Age! even then alone
Both Arms and Arts in full perfection shone!
Then did the Sacred Nine sing in a strain
Not much exceeded in Augustus reign.
To the City.
I Know, oh stately City, my low praise,
Nor disproportioned verse thy glory raise:
If of thy Arms, or of thy Arts I sing,
Or neighboring fields blessed with perpetual Spring;
When Jove to seasons turned the fleeting year,
He left that ancient privilege only here;
Or if I say, the rarest things thou have
To feed the eye, or to provoke the taste;
Yea, if Lucullus had but seen thy store,
He must have thought's Luxurious Kitchen poor;
Or of thy wholesome site for air and health,
Or mighty trafick, or abundant wealth;
Or thy old splendour, power, and great renown;
Paulinus did see thee a famous Town;
Or of thy River, which such Fleets does bear,
As Lumbardstreet shows us both Indies here;
Or should I say, thou always were the great
Emporeum of our Kings, and regal Seat.
To complete all, and now to serve thy King,
Thou did at last to full perfection bring
This mighty Ship, this work of many days,
To thy great credit and eternal praise;
Although begun when scarce thou drew thy breath,
In a sad night of horror and of Death;
And she (I hope) will recompense alone
The former London and the Prince, that is gone.
The Prince, which (if the Muses can divine)
May prove a Phaenix too; one shall outshine
Her, built by the brave Liberality,
And forward hearts of our Nobility;
Whose worthy service shall for many years
The Honor tell and Splendor of our Peers.
That in their veins, this resolution shows,
The ancient blood of their great Fathers flows.
FINIS.

